 = = = Training and doctrine = = = 
 In November 1906 , Douglas Haig was appointed Director of Staff Duties at the War Office , and took up the task of providing a new training doctrine for the Army . The Esher Report had suggested a new scheme for two sets of training manuals , but these had not been fully implemented . In 1907 , the new provisional " Field Service Pocket Book " was produced , revised the following year , and finally standardised as " Field Service Regulations , Part I - Operations " in 1909 . This was to serve as the training manual for all branches of the service , and was the synthesis of the generally agreed tactical and strategic principles which had emerged from the South African War . 
 Part II , " Administration " , however , was more contentious . Haig was strongly in favour of an entirely new system , where the manual would cover the whole organisation of a field army , including base and lines @-@ of @-@ communication troops as well as field units . This was strongly opposed by the Adjutant @-@ General and Quartermaster @-@ General staff , who felt that it was unnecessary , and resented such an imposition on their ' territory ' by what they saw as an outsider . However , with Haldane 's support , Haig was able to push this through and ensure its adoption . 
 = = = Officer Training Corps = = = 
 One issue that was foreseen as a potential problem was the supply of skilled officers to the Army in wartime , and a committee was established in 1906 under Sir Edward Ward to study the matter . It issued two reports , one focusing on university and school corps , and one on the Special Reserve . The main recommendation of the former was to reorganise the existing school Cadet Corps and university Rifle Corps , which had been formed on an ad @-@ hoc basis as part of the broader Volunteer movement , into a uniform force , administered and supported by the War Office . 
 Under Army Order 160 of 1908 , contingents of the " Senior Division " were established in universities , and contingents of the " Junior Division " in public schools . Army Order 178 , later the same year , provided a standard set of regulations , stating that the scheme was intended to provide " a standardized degree of elementary military training with a view to providing candidates for commissions " . 
 The scheme was popular ; by the end of 1910 , there were 19 contingents of the " Senior Division " and 152 of the " Junior Division " , and one year later , at the start of 1912 , this had risen to 55 and 155 respectively . A total of 23 @,@ 700 cadets were enrolled as of 1 January 1912 , with 630 officers , and 830 former cadets had already gone on to take commissions in the auxiliary forces . 
 = = = Imperial General Staff = = = 
 In the later part of the nineteenth century , the emphasis of Imperial defence policy had shifted from a single centralised Army and Navy to an approach whereby the self @-@ governing Dominions began to provide forces for their own defence , and to begin to take responsibility for strategic interests and bases in their own geographic areas . The culmination of this was the South African War , where contingents from the Dominion militaries had played a significant role . 
 However , whilst the forces were developing locally , the goals of a comprehensive Imperial defence policy remained constant . A proposal was made to a conference of Dominion leaders in 1907 , which recommended that all Imperial forces be organised along a standard model , similar to the recent divisional reorganisation of the British Army and the Army in India ( the combined British Army units in India and the Indian Army units ) . The conference approved this concept , but carried the idea further , and recommended the creation of a general staff drawn from the forces of the entire Empire . This Imperial General Staff would serve as a common link between the national forces , and could oversee the development of a single uniform defence scheme . It would also be able to help ensure greater consistency between the forces , though it was carefully laid down that the Imperial General Staff could only offer " guidance " to the local government and General Staff , and would not have any binding authority over the national forces . 
 The new system was approved by an Imperial conference in July 1909 , which confirmed the support for the new structure , and the principle of standardisation , as well as emphasising that it was not to limit " the autonomy of the self @-@ governing Dominions " . 
 = = World War I = = 
 The outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 saw the bulk of the changes put to the test ; the Expeditionary Force of six divisions was quickly sent to the Continent , whilst a Territorial Force of 14 divisions and Reserves were mobilised as planned to provide a second line . The mobilisation was carried out punctually and the divisions were armed . 
 = To Autumn = 
 " To Autumn " is a poem by English Romantic poet John Keats ( 31 October 1795 – 23 February 1821 ) . The work was composed on 19 September 1819 and published in 1820 in a volume of Keats 's poetry that included Lamia and The Eve of St. Agnes . " To Autumn " is the final work in a group of poems known as Keats 's " 1819 odes " . Although personal problems left him little time to devote to poetry in 1819 , he composed " To Autumn " after a walk near Winchester one autumnal evening . The work marks the end of his poetic career , as he needed to earn money and could no longer devote himself to the lifestyle of a poet . A little over a year following the publication of " To Autumn " , Keats died in Rome . 
 The poem has three eleven @-@ line stanzas which describe a progression through the season , from the late maturation of the crops to the harvest and to the last days of autumn when winter is nearing . The imagery is richly achieved through the personification of Autumn , and the description of its bounty , its sights and sounds . It has parallels in the work of English landscape artists , with Keats himself describing the fields of stubble that he saw on his walk as being like that in a painting . 
 The work has been interpreted as a meditation on death ; as an allegory of artistic creation ; as Keats 's response to the Peterloo Massacre , which took place in the same year ; and as an expression of nationalist sentiment . One of the most anthologised English lyric poems , " To Autumn " has been regarded by critics as one of the most perfect short poems in the English language . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the spring of 1819 , Keats wrote many of his major odes : " Ode on a Grecian Urn " , " Ode on Indolence " , " Ode on Melancholy " , " Ode to a Nightingale " , and " Ode to Psyche " . After the month of May , he began to pursue other forms of poetry , including the verse tragedy Otho the Great in collaboration with friend and roommate Charles Brown , the second half of Lamia , and a return to his unfinished epic Hyperion . His efforts from spring until autumn were dedicated completely to a career in poetry , alternating between writing long and short poems , and setting himself a goal to compose more than fifty lines of verse each day . In his free time he also read works as varied as Robert Burton 's Anatomy of Melancholy , Thomas Chatterton 's poetry , and Leigh Hunt 's essays . 
 Although Keats managed to write many poems in 1819 , he was suffering from a multitude of financial troubles throughout the year , including concerns over his brother , George , who , after emigrating to America , was badly in need of money . Despite these distractions , on 19 September 1819 he found time to write " To Autumn " . The poem marks the final moment of his career as a poet . No longer able to afford to devote his time to the composition of poems , he began working on more lucrative projects . Keats 's declining health and personal responsibilities also raised obstacles to his continuing poetic efforts . 
 On 19 September 1819 , Keats walked near Winchester along the River Itchen . In a letter to his friend John Hamilton Reynolds written on 21 September , Keats described the impression the scene had made upon him and its influence on the composition of " To Autumn " : " How beautiful the season is now – How fine the air . A temperate sharpness about it [ ... ] I never lik 'd stubble fields so much as now [ ... ] Somehow a stubble plain looks warm – in the same way that some pictures look warm – this struck me so much in my sunday 's walk that I composed upon it . " Not everything on Keats 's mind at the time was bright ; the poet knew in September that he would have to finally abandon Hyperion . Thus , in the letter that he wrote to Reynolds , Keats also included a note saying that he abandoned his long poem . Keats did not send " To Autumn " to Reynolds , but did include the poem within a letter to Richard Woodhouse , Keats 's publisher and friend , and dated it on the same day . 
 The poem was revised and included in Keats 's 1820 collection of poetry titled Lamia , Isabella , the Eve of St. Agnes , and Other Poems . Although the publishers Taylor and Hessey feared the kind of bad reviews that had plagued Keats 's 1818 edition of Endymion , they were willing to publish the collection after the removal of any potentially controversial poems to ensure that there would be no politically motivated reviews that could give the volume a bad reputation . 
 = = Poem = = 
 Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness 
 Close bosom @-@ friend of the maturing sun 
 <unk> with him how to load and bless 
 With fruit the vines that round the thatch @-@ eves run ; 
 To bend with apples the moss 'd cottage @-@ trees , 
 And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core ; 
 To swell the gourd , and plump the hazel shells 
 With a sweet kernel ; to set budding more , 
 And still more , later flowers for the bees , 
 Until they think warm days will never cease , 
 For Summer has o 'er @-@ brimm 'd their clammy cells . 
 Who hath not seen thee oft amid thy store ? 
 Sometimes whoever seeks abroad may find 
 Thee sitting careless on a granary floor , 
 Thy hair soft @-@ lifted by the winnowing wind ; 
 Or on a half @-@ reap 'd furrow sound asleep , 
 Drows 'd with the fume of poppies , while thy hook 
 Spares the next swath and all its twined flowers : 
 And sometimes like a <unk> thou dost keep 
 Steady thy laden head across a brook ; 
 Or by a cider @-@ press , with patient look , 
 Thou <unk> the last <unk> hours by hours . 
 Where are the songs of Spring ? Ay , where are they ? 
 Think not of them , thou hast thy music too , – 
 While barred clouds bloom the soft @-@ dying day , 
 And touch the stubble @-@ plains with rosy hue ; 
 Then in a <unk> choir the small gnats mourn 
 Among the river sallows , borne aloft 
 Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies ; 
 And full @-@ grown lambs loud bleat from hilly <unk> ; 
 Hedge @-@ crickets sing ; and now with treble soft 
 The red @-@ breast whistles from a garden @-@ croft ; 
 And gathering swallows twitter in the skies . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " To Autumn " describes , in its three stanzas , three different aspects of the season : its fruitfulness , its labour and its ultimate decline . Through the stanzas there is a progression from early autumn to mid autumn and then to the heralding of winter . Parallel to this , the poem depicts the day turning from morning to afternoon and into dusk . These progressions are joined with a shift from the tactile sense to that of sight and then of sound , creating a three @-@ part symmetry which is not present in Keats 's other odes . 
 As the poem progresses , Autumn is represented metaphorically as one who conspires , who ripens fruit , who harvests , who makes music . The first stanza of the poem represents Autumn as involved with the promotion of natural processes , growth and ultimate maturation , two forces in opposition in nature , but together creating the impression that the season will not end . In this stanza the fruits are still ripening and the buds still opening in the warm weather . Stuart Sperry says that Keats emphasises the tactile sense here , suggested by the imagery of growth and gentle motion : swelling , bending and <unk> . 
 In the second stanza Autumn is personified as a harvester , to be seen by the viewer in various guises performing labouring tasks essential to the provision of food for the coming year . There is a lack of definitive action , all motion being gentle . Autumn is not depicted as actually harvesting but as seated , resting or watching . In lines 14 – 15 the personification of Autumn is as an exhausted labourer . Near the end of the stanza , the steadiness of the <unk> in lines 19 – 20 again emphasises a <unk> within the poem . The progression through the day is revealed in actions that are all suggestive of the drowsiness of afternoon : the harvested grain is being winnowed , the harvester is asleep or returning home , the last drops issue from the cider press . 
 The last stanza contrasts Autumn 's sounds with those of Spring . The sounds that are presented are not only those of Autumn but essentially the gentle sounds of the evening . <unk> wail and lambs bleat in the dusk . As night approaches within the final moments of the song , death is slowly approaching alongside the end of the year . The full @-@ grown lambs , like the grapes , gourds and hazel nuts , will be harvested for the winter . The twittering swallows gather for departure , leaving the fields bare . The whistling red @-@ breast and the chirping cricket are the common sounds of winter . The references to Spring , the growing lambs and the migrating swallows remind the reader that the seasons are a cycle , widening the scope of this stanza from a single season to life in general . 
 Of all of Keats 's poems , " To Autumn " , with its catalog of concrete images , most closely describes a paradise as realized on earth while also focusing on archetypal symbols connected with the season . Within the poem , autumn represents growth , maturation , and finally an approaching death . There is a fulfilling union between the ideal and the real . 
 Scholars have noted a number of literary influences on " To Autumn " , from Virgil 's Georgics , to Edmund Spenser 's " <unk> Cantos " , to the language of Thomas Chatterton , to Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's " Frost at Midnight " , to an essay on autumn by Leigh Hunt , which Keats had recently read . 
 " To Autumn " is thematically connected to other odes that Keats wrote in 1819 . For example , in his " Ode to Melancholy " a major theme is the acceptance of the process of life . When this theme appears later in " To Autumn " , however , it is with a difference . This time the figure of the poet disappears , and there is no exhortation of an imaginary reader . There are no open conflicts , and " dramatic debate , protest , and qualification are absent " . In process there is a harmony between the finality of death and hints of renewal of life in the cycle of the seasons , paralleled by the renewal of a single day . 
 Critics have tended to emphasize different aspects of the process . Some have focused on renewal ; Walter Jackson Bate points to the theme of each stanza including " its contrary " idea , here death implying , though only indirectly , the renewal of life . Also , noted by both Bate and Jennifer Wagner , the structure of the verse reinforces the sense of something to come ; the placing of the couplet before the end of each stanza creates a feeling of suspension , highlighting the theme of continuation . 
 Others , like Harold Bloom , have emphasized the " exhausted landscape " , the completion , the finality of death , although " Winter descends here as a man might hope to die , with a natural sweetness " . If death in itself is final , here it comes with a lightness , a softness , also pointing to " an acceptance of process beyond the possibility of grief . " The progress of growth is no longer necessary ; maturation is complete , and life and death are in harmony . The rich description of the cycle of the seasons enables the reader to feel a belonging " to something larger than the self " , as James O 'Rourke expresses it , but the cycle comes to an end each year , analogous to the ending of single life . O 'Rourke suggests that something of a fear of that ending is subtly implied at the end of the poem , although , unlike the other great odes , in this poem the person of the poet is entirely submerged , so there is at most a faint hint of Keats 's own possible fear . 
 According to Helen Vendler , " To Autumn " may be seen as an allegory of artistic creation . As the farmer processes the fruits of the soil into what sustains the human body , so the artist processes the experience of life into a symbolic structure that may sustain the human spirit . This process involves an element of self @-@ sacrifice by the artist , analogous to the living grain 's being sacrificed for human consumption . In " To Autumn " , as a result of this process , the " rhythms " of the harvesting " artist @-@ goddess " " permeate the whole world until all visual , tactile , and kinetic presence is <unk> into Apollonian music for the ear , " the sounds of the poem itself . 
 In a 1979 essay , Jerome McGann argued that while the poem was indirectly influenced by historical events , Keats had deliberately ignored the political landscape of 1819 . Countering this view , Andrew Bennett , Nicholas Roe and others focused on what they believed were political allusions actually present in the poem , Roe arguing for a direct connection to the Peterloo Massacre of 1819 . Later , Paul Fry argued against McGann 's stance when he pointed out , " It scarcely seems pertinent to say that ' To Autumn ' is therefore an evasion of social violence when it is so clearly an encounter with death itself [ ... ] it is not a politically encoded escape from history reflecting the coerced betrayal [ ... ] of its author 's radicalism . McGann thinks to rescue Keats from the imputation of political naïveté by saying that he was a radical browbeaten into quietism " . 
 In his 1999 study of the effect on British literature of the diseases and climates of the colonies , Alan Bewell read " the landscape of ' To Autumn ' " as " a kind of biomedical allegory of the coming into being of English climatic space out of its dangerous geographical alternatives . " Britain 's colonial reach over the previous century and a half had exposed the mother country to foreign diseases and awareness of the dangers of extreme tropical climates . Keats , with medical training , having suffered chronic illness himself , and influenced like his contemporaries by " colonial medical discourse " , was deeply aware of this threat . 
 According to Bewell , the landscape of " To Autumn " presents the temperate climate of rural England as a healthful alternative to disease @-@ ridden foreign environments . Though the " clammy " aspect of " fever " , the excessive ripeness associated with tropical climates , intrude into the poem , these elements , less prominent than in Keats 's earlier poetry , are counterbalanced by the dry , crisp autumnal air of rural England . In presenting the particularly English elements of this environment , Keats was also influenced by contemporary poet and essayist Leigh Hunt , who had recently written of the arrival of autumn with its " migration of birds " , " finished harvest " , " cyder [ ... ] making " and migration of " the swallows " , as well as by English landscape painting and the " pure " English idiom of the poetry of Thomas Chatterton . 
 In " To Autumn " , Bewell argues , Keats was at once voicing " a very personal expression of desire for health " and constructing a " myth of a national environment " . This " political " element in the poem , Bewell points out , has also been suggested by Geoffrey Hartman , who expounded a view of " To Autumn " as " an ideological poem whose form expresses a national idea " . 
 Thomas McFarland , on the other hand , in 2000 cautioned against overemphasizing the " political , social , or historical readings " of the poem , which distract from its " consummate surface and bloom " . Most important about " To Autumn " is its concentration of imagery and allusion in its evocation of nature , conveying an " interpenetration of <unk> and <unk> as contained in the very nature of autumn " . 
 = = Structure = = 
 " To Autumn " is a poem of three stanzas , each of eleven lines . Like others of Keats 's odes written in 1819 , the structure is that of an odal hymn , having three clearly defined sections corresponding to the Classical divisions of strophe , antistrophe , and epode . The stanzas differ from those of the other odes through use of eleven lines rather than ten , and have a couplet placed before the concluding line of each stanza . 
 " To Autumn " employs poetical techniques which Keats had perfected in the five poems written in the Spring of the same year , but departs from them in some aspects , dispensing with the narrator and dealing with more concrete concepts . There is no dramatic movement in " To Autumn " as there is in many earlier poems ; the poem progresses in its focus while showing little change in the objects it is focusing on . There is , in the words of Walter Jackson Bate , " a union of process and stasis " , " energy caught in repose " , an effect that Keats himself termed " stationing " . At the beginning of the third stanza he employs the dramatic Ubi sunt device associated with a sense of melancholy , and questions the personified subject : " Where are the songs of Spring ? " 
 Like the other odes , " To Autumn " is written in iambic pentameter ( but greatly modified from the very beginning ) with five stressed syllables to a line , each usually preceded by an unstressed syllable . Keats varies this form by the employment of Augustan inversion , sometimes using a stressed syllable followed by an unstressed syllable at the beginning of a line , including the first : " Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness " ; and employing spondees in which two stressed syllables are placed together at the beginnings of both the following stanzas , adding emphasis to the questions that are asked : " Who hath not seen thee ... " , " Where are the songs ... ? " 
 The rhyme of " To Autumn " follows a pattern of starting each stanza with an ABAB pattern which is followed by rhyme scheme of <unk> in the first verse and <unk> in the second and third stanzas . In each case , there is a couplet before the final line . Some of the language of " To Autumn " resembles phrases found in earlier poems with similarities to Endymion , Sleep and Poetry , and <unk> . Keats characteristically uses monosyllabic words such as " ... how to load and bless with fruit the vines that round the thatch @-@ eves run . " The words are weighted by the emphasis of bilabial consonants ( b , m , p ) , with lines like " ... for Summer has o 'er @-@ brimm 'd their clammy cells . " There is also an emphasis on long vowels which control the flow of the poem , giving it a slow measured pace : " ... while barred clouds bloom the soft dying day " . 
 Between the manuscript version and the published version of " To Autumn " Keats tightened the language of the poem . One of Keats 's changes emphasised by critics is the change in line 17 of " Drows 'd with red poppies " to " Drows 'd with the fume of poppies " , which emphasises the sense of smell instead of sight . The later edition relies more on passive , past participles , as apparent in the change of " While a gold cloud " in line 25 to " While barred clouds " . Other changes involve the strengthening of phrases , especially within the transformation of the phrase in line 13 " whoever seeks for thee may find " into " whoever seeks abroad may find " . Many of the lines within the second stanza were completely rewritten , especially those which did not fit into a rhyme scheme . Some of the minor changes involved adding punctuation missing from the original manuscript copy and altering capitalisation . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical and scholarly praise has been unanimous in declaring " To Autumn " one of the most perfect poems in the English language . A.C. Swinburne placed it with " Ode on a Grecian Urn " as " the nearest to absolute perfection " of Keats 's odes ; Aileen Ward declared it " Keats 's most perfect and untroubled poem " ; and Douglas Bush has stated that the poem is " flawless in structure , texture , tone , and rhythm " ; Walter Evert , in 1965 , stated that " To Autumn " is " the only perfect poem that Keats ever wrote – and if this should seem to take from him some measure of credit for his extraordinary enrichment of the English poetic tradition , I would quickly add that I am thinking of absolute perfection in whole poems , in which every part is wholly relevant to and consistent in effect with every other part . " 
 Early reviews of " To Autumn " focused on it as part of Keats 's collection of poems Lamia , Isabella , the Eve of St. Agnes , and Other Poems . An anonymous critic in the July 1820 Monthly Review claimed , " this writer is very rich both in imagination and fancy ; and even a superabundance of the latter faculty is displayed in his lines ' On Autumn , ' which bring the reality of nature more before our eyes than almost any description that we remember . [ ... ] If we did not fear that , young as is Mr K. , his peculiarities are fixed beyond all the power of criticism to remove , we would exhort him to become somewhat less strikingly original , — to be less fond of the folly of too new or too old phrases , — and to believe that poetry does not consist in either the one or the other . " Josiah Conder in the September 1820 Eclectic Review mentioned , " One naturally turns first to the shorter pieces , in order to taste the flavour of the poetry . The following ode to Autumn is no unfavourable specimen . " An anonymous reviewer in The Edinburgh Magazine for October 1820 added to a discussion of some of Keats 's longer poems the afterthought that " The ode to ' Fancy , ' and the ode to ' Autumn , ' also have great merit . " 
 Although , after Keats 's death , recognition of the merits of his poetry came slowly , by mid century , despite widespread Victorian disapproval of the alleged " weakness " of his character and the view often advanced " that Keats 's work represented mere sensuality without substance " , some of his poems began to find an appreciative audience , including " To Autumn " . In an 1844 essay on Keats 's poetry in the Dumfries Herald , George <unk> placed " To Autumn " among " the finest of Keats ' smaller pieces " . In an 1851 lecture , David Macbeth Moir acclaimed " four exquisite odes , — ' To a Nightingale , ' ' To a Grecian Urn , ' ' To Melancholy , ' and ' To Autumn , ' — all so pregnant with deep thought , so picturesque in their <unk> , and so suggestive . " In 1865 , Matthew Arnold singled out the " indefinable delicacy , charm , and perfection of [ ... ] Keats 's [ touch ] in his Autumn " . John Dennis , in an 1883 work about great poets , wrote that " the ' Ode to Autumn ' , ripe with the glory of the season it describes — must ever have a place among the most precious gems of lyrical poetry . " The 1888 Britannica declared , " Of these [ odes ] perhaps the two nearest to absolute perfection , to the triumphant achievement and accomplishment of the very utmost beauty possible to human words , may be that to Autumn and that on a Grecian Urn " . 
 At the turn of the 20th century , a 1904 analysis of great poetry by Stephen Gwynn claimed , " above and before all [ of Keats 's poems are ] the three odes , To a Nightingale , On a Grecian Urn , and To Autumn . Among these odes criticism can hardly choose ; in each of them the whole magic of poetry seems to be contained . " Sidney Colvin , in his 1917 biography , pointed out that " the ode To Autumn [ ... ] opens up no such far @-@ reaching avenues to the mind and soul of the reader as the odes To a Grecian Urn , To a Nightingale , or On Melancholy , but in execution is more complete and faultless than any of them . " Following this in a 1934 analysis of Romantic poetry , Margaret Sherwood stated that the poem was " a perfect expression of the phase of primitive feeling and dim thought in regard to earth processes when these are passing into a thought of personality . " 
 Harold Bloom , in 1961 , described " To Autumn " as " the most perfect shorter poem in the English language . " Following this , Walter Jackson Bate , in 1963 , claimed that " [ ... ] each generation has found it one of the most nearly perfect poems in English . " Later , in 1973 , Stuart Sperry wrote , " ' To Autumn ' succeeds through its acceptance of an order innate in our experience – the natural rhythm of the seasons . It is a poem that , without ever stating it , inevitably suggests the truth of ' ripeness is all ' by developing , with a richness of profundity of implication , the simple perception that ripeness is fall . " In 1981 , William Walsh argued that " Among the major Odes [ ... ] no one has questioned the place and supremacy of ' To Autumn ' , in which we see wholly realized , powerfully embodied in art , the complete maturity so earnestly laboured at in Keats 's life , so persuasively argued about in his letters . " Literary critic and academic Helen Vendler , in 1988 , declared that " in the ode ' To Autumn , ' Keats finds his most comprehensive and adequate symbol for the social value of art . " 
 In 1997 , Andrew Motion summarised the critical view on " To Autumn " : " it has often been called Keats 's ' most ... untroubled poem ' [ ... ] To register the full force of its achievement , its tensions have to be felt as potent and demanding . " Following in 1998 , M. H. Abrams explained , " ' To Autumn ' was the last work of artistic consequence that Keats completed [ ... ] he achieved this celebratory poem , with its calm acquiescence to time , transience and mortality , at a time when he was possessed by a premonition [ ... ] that he had himself less than two years to live " . James Chandler , also in 1998 , pointed out that " If To Autumn is his greatest piece of writing , as has so often been said , it is because in it he arguably set himself the most ambitious challenge of his brief career and managed to meet it . " Timothy Corrigan , in 2000 , claimed that " ' To Autumn ' may be , as other critics have pointed out , his greatest achievement in its ability [ ... ] to redeem the English vernacular as the casual expression of everyday experience , becoming in this his most exterior poem even in all its bucolic charm . " In the same year , Thomas McFarland placed " To Autumn " with " Ode to a Nightingale " , " Ode on a Grecian Urn " , " The Eve of St. Agnes " and Hyperion as Keats 's greatest achievement , together elevating Keats " high in the ranks of the supreme makers of world literature " . In 2008 , Stanley <unk> wrote , " history , posterity , immortality are seeing ' Ode to a Nightingale , ' ' Ode on a Grecian Urn , ' and ' To Autumn ' as three of the most anthologized lyric poems of tragic vision in English . " 
 = French ironclad Armide = 
 The French ironclad Armide was a wooden @-@ hulled armored corvette built for the French Navy in the mid @-@ 1860s . Placed into reserve after completion , she was first mobilized for the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 . She spent the rest of her career in the Mediterranean and then in the Far East as flagship of the French squadrons there , until her decommissioning in 1880 . Armide was use as a target for gunnery trials in 1886 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Alma @-@ class ironclads were designed as improved versions of the armored corvette Belliqueuse suitable for foreign deployments . Unlike their predecessor the Alma @-@ class ships were true central battery ironclads as they were fitted with armored transverse bulkheads . Like most ironclads of their era they were equipped with a metal @-@ reinforced ram . 
 Armide measured 68 @.@ 9 meters ( 226 ft 1 in ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 14 @.@ 06 meters ( 46 ft 2 in ) . She had a mean draft of 6 @.@ 43 meters ( 21 ft 1 in ) and displaced 3 @,@ 692 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 634 long tons ) . Her crew numbered 316 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had a single horizontal three @-@ cylinder return connecting @-@ rod steam engine driving a single four @-@ bladed propeller . Her engine was powered by four Creusot oval boilers . On sea trials the engine produced 1 @,@ 585 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 182 kW ) and the ship reached 10 @.@ 48 knots ( 19 @.@ 41 km / h ; 12 @.@ 06 mph ) . Armide carried 250 metric tons ( 250 long tons ) of coal which allowed the ship to steam for 1 @,@ 310 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 430 km ; 1 @,@ 510 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She was barque @-@ rigged and had a sail area of 1 @,@ 454 square meters ( 15 @,@ 650 sq ft ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Armide mounted her four 194 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) Modèle 1864 breech @-@ loading guns in the central battery on the battery deck . The other two 194 mm guns were mounted in barbettes on the upper deck , sponsoned out over the sides of the ship . The four 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns were also mounted on the upper deck . She may have exchanged her Mle 1864 guns for Mle 1870 guns . The armor @-@ piercing shell of the 20 @-@ caliber Mle 1870 gun weighed 165 @.@ 3 pounds ( 75 @.@ 0 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 7 @.@ 83 long tons ( 7 @.@ 96 t ) . The gun fired its shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 739 ft / s ( 530 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 12 @.@ 5 inches ( 320 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Armide had a complete 150 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) wrought iron waterline belt , approximately 2 @.@ 4 meters ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) high . The sides of the battery itself were armored with 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) of wrought iron and the ends of the battery were closed by bulkheads of the same thickness . The barbette armor was 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick , backed by 240 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) of wood . The unarmored portions of her sides were protected by 15 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) iron plates . 
 = = Service = = 
 Armide was laid down at Rochefort in 1865 and launched on 12 April 1867 . The ship began her sea trials on 5 October 1867 and was put into reserve at Brest immediately after their completion . She was commissioned on 20 July 1870 to serve with the Baltic Squadron during the Franco @-@ Prussian War . The squadron was ordered to lift its blockade of the Prussian Baltic ports on 16 September and return to Cherbourg . Armide was decommissioned on 1 November , but was recommissioned on 12 January 1871 to blockade the Prussian corvette Arcona in Lisbon for the duration of the war . Afterward she was transferred to the Mediterranean where she remained until 1873 . 
 Armide was decommissioned on 28 October 1873 at Toulon and had her armament reduced to six guns . She was recommissioned as the flagship of the Levant Squadron on 25 August 1874 . On 19 September 1875 Armide was in Algiers . The ship was reduced to reserve in December 1875 at Brest . She was recommissioned in 1877 as the flagship of the China Squadron under Rear Admiral <unk> and departed Brest on 17 January 1878 . She was relieved by her sister Thétis on 22 January 1880 at Singapore . She was decommissioned at Toulon on 17 March 1880 and condemned on 25 October 1882 . Armide was used in gunnery trials in March 1886 and filled with watertight barrels to keep her from sinking . She was set adrift and fired at by a group of French ironclads at ranges up to 5 @,@ 000 meters ( 5 @,@ 500 yd ) ; she was towed back to port to examine the effects of the shells . 
 = 2011 – 12 Sheffield United F.C. season = 
 Sheffield United Football Club ( known as the Blades ) participated in League One , the third level of English football for the first time in 23 years having been relegated from the Championship at the end of the previous season . It was also their first appearance in both the Football League Trophy and the first round proper of the FA Cup for a similar length of time , as well as being the first season under new manager Danny Wilson . United began the season well , recording consistently sound results in Football League One and nearing the position required for an immediate return to the Championship . By the turn of the year , the squad was well positioned for promotion . 
 Reasonable progress was made in the cup competitions , reaching the second round of the League Cup , the fourth round of the FA Cup and the regional quarter finals of the Football League Trophy . With only a handful of games left to play in the league , United looked set to finish in second place in the table but in the aftermath of leading scorer Ched Evans being jailed , results declined , and United slipped to third place in the final week of the season . Although reaching the Play @-@ off Final the team were beaten on penalties by Huddersfield Town at Wembley Stadium , thus failing to achieve promotion and being destined to spend the following season in League One . 
 = = Team kit = = 
 The team kit for the 2011 – 12 season was produced by Macron for the third successive year . The home kit consisted of the club 's traditional red and white stripes and was based on the kit worn by the team in the early 1970s , chosen following a poll of fans the previous year . As the pre @-@ season programme got under way the club also revealed a new all yellow away kit . By mid July the club announced that they had struck a joint sponsorship deal with cross @-@ city rivals Sheffield Wednesday which would see both teams sponsored by the same two local companies . The Blades home kit was sponsored by Westfield Health and the away kit by local car dealers <unk> Group ( with Sheffield Wednesday 's kit 's having the reverse ) . The club later announced that a new secondary sponsor , Nexis , would appear on the back of the home shirts for the coming season . 
 = = Season overview = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ season = = = 
 Following relegation from the Championship at the end of the previous season , company chairman Kevin McCabe sacked manager Micky Adams , insisting that the club needed a new start to take them forward . After a few weeks of speculation , McCabe appointed former Sheffield Wednesday manager Danny Wilson as Adams ' successor . This appointment was met with outrage by sections of the Blades support due to Wilson 's perceived lack of managerial success and his links with the club 's bitter cross @-@ city rivals . Despite these protests , the club pressed ahead with the appointment and Wilson began to assemble his back room team , appointing former United defender Frank Barlow as his number two , fellow former Blade Billy Dearden as chief scout and Dave Morrison as fitness coach . 
 Wilson stressed that he intended to bring a better style of play to the team in the coming season but admitted that players would have to be sold to balance the books . Deals were already in place to sell Jamie Ward to Derby County for an undisclosed fee , and sign Danny Philliskirk from Chelsea on a free transfer , but Wilson also added to the squad in June by signing <unk> Jean @-@ François from his former club Swindon Town , also on a free transfer . After much speculation , and with the players about to return for pre @-@ season training , Darius Henderson was sold to Millwall for an undisclosed fee in order to free up money on the wage bill . 
 The club announced a low key series of friendlies for July , while Wilson continued to reshape his squad , allowing young defenders Kingsley James and Phil Roe , both products of the Blades Academy , to leave and rejoin former boss Micky Adams at Port Vale on free transfers . A youthful team were held to a draw by Sheffield FC but overcame Worksop Town a few days later . With the team about to leave for a training camp in Malta , Mark Yeates was sold to Watford for an undisclosed fee , Ryan Flynn was signed from Falkirk for a similarly undisclosed fee and Chris Porter arrived on a free transfer having been released by Derby County . Once in Malta , United took on local sides Sliema Wanderers and Hibernians in friendly games , beating both sides . Upon returning to England , the Blades completed their pre @-@ season schedule with two home fixtures , losing to Doncaster Rovers and drawing with Blackpool . With their pre @-@ season schedule completed the Blades signed young winger Nathaniel Mendez @-@ Laing from Wolverhampton Wanderers on a six @-@ month loan deal . 
 Unfortunately the latter half of July also saw the club hit the national headlines for the wrong reasons . Firstly the club was identified by a Channel 4 undercover investigation as being offered for sale as part of an illegal ownership deal although the Blades themselves were not implicated in any wrongdoing . A fortnight later striker Ched Evans was arrested and charged with rape following an incident in May . 
 = = = August – September : Early season optimism = = = 
 The Blades won the opening game of the season away from home , outclassing Oldham Athletic , but a strong side needed penalties to overcome Hartlepool United at Victoria Park in the first round of the League Cup a few days later . Midfielder Kevin McDonald was added to the squad on a free transfer after a lengthy trial period , before the Blades resumed their league campaign , beating Brentford at home , and overturning a two @-@ nil deficit to overcome Walsall at Bramall Lane . Having spent the previous season on loan at United , Argentinian Elian <unk> returned to South Yorkshire on a one @-@ year deal from Estudiantes de La Plata , after which the Blades embarked on a four match run of away games in the space of eleven days . They dropped their first league points of the season as they were held to a draw by Tranmere Rovers , before suffering their first defeat of the season on a quick return to Merseyside , allowing the lead to slip once more as they crashed out of the League Cup at the hands of Premiership Everton . The team returned to league action and winning ways with an away trip to Yeovil , the first ever competitive meeting between the two clubs , after which they despatched Burton Albion to progress into the second round of the Football League Trophy . 
 With Danny Wilson still needing to raise money and trim the wage bill the Blades had a relatively busy transfer deadline day , allowing Jordan Slew to join Blackburn Rovers for £ <unk> , and Daniel Bogdanović to join Blackpool for an undisclosed fee , but turning down another offer from the Seasiders for Stephen Quinn . The Blades also agreed a deal to take two young midfielders , John Fleck and Kyle Hutton on loan from Rangers for the remainder of the season , but the deal subsequently fell through due to issues with the paperwork involved . The team kicked off September by crushing Bury 4 – 0 at Bramall Lane , and then travelled to Scunthorpe United where they maintained their unbeaten start after coming from behind to grab a 1 – 1 draw . Off the field the restructuring of the club continued with the appointment of former Blades player Julian Winter as Chief Executive to replace the departing Trevor Birch . Danny Wilson added to his defensive options by signing Marcus Williams on a months loan from Reading , with the defender making his début only hours later , although he was unable to prevent the Blades from crashing to their first league defeat of the season as they were trounced 3 – 0 at home by Huddersfield Town . Despite this setback the Blades quickly returned to winning ways , reversing the previous scoreline to crush Colchester United 3 – 0 at Bramall Lane . The month ended on a low note however as the team suffered a shock defeat at struggling Wycombe Wanderers , although they still managed to hold onto second place in the table . 
 = = = October – November : Important points dropped = = = 
 October started no better for the Blades as they were easily beaten 2 – 0 at home by league leaders Charlton Athletic and needed a last second goal to progress in the Football League Trophy as they struggled against League Two side Rotherham United . Meanwhile , Danny Wilson boosted his squad ahead of the Steel City derby , with Marcus Williams agreeing to stay on loan for a further two months and Matt Phillips and Billy Clarke arriving for a month each from Blackpool . The new arrivals failed to halt the disappointing run of results however as the Blades let a 2 – 0 lead slip to end up drawing with their cross – city rivals . Despite this disappointment the team bounced back to score an emphatic away win at Preston a few days later with both new signing Matt Phillips and old hand Lee Williamson netting two goals apiece . With increased competition for first team places , youngsters Danny Philliskirk and Corey Gregory were allowed to go out on loan to Oxford United and Hucknall Town respectively ; swiftly followed by Connor Brown who joined Eastwood Town on a months deal . Back in the league , the disappointing results continued as United threw away a lead once again , allowing ten @-@ men Leyton Orient to snatch a draw with the last kick of the game . Once again the Blades quickly responded to the setback by beating fellow promotion rivals MK Dons 2 – 1 at Bramall Lane , but then conspired to throw away yet more points , allowing Exeter City to come from behind twice in the closing minutes of the next game to snatch a 4 – 4 draw . 
 Into November and back on the road , yet another late goal was handed Stevenage all three points , leaving United fifth in the table going into FA Cup week . With Phillips and Clarke playing the final game of their loan spell , United tamely exited the Football League Trophy , losing on penalties to League Two strugglers Bradford City . There was a more positive result in the FA Cup however as a brace from Ched Evans helped the Blades ease past Oxford United . By mid – November , and with Danny Wilson still seeking to add to his attacking options , it was reported that former striker and fans favourite James Beattie had returned to training with the club and could be handed a contract depending on match fitness , and a short term deal was duly signed a few days later . Back in League action United saw out a victory over Carlisle United despite seeing a Richard Cresswell spot – kick saved in the second half , and a week later Ched Evans scored his fifth goal in four games to beat Chesterfield by the same scoreline . The month ended on a sombre note however as former player and manager Gary Speed was found dead at his home after having taken his own life less than a year after leaving his post at Bramall Lane . 
 = = = December – January : Maximum points for Christmas = = = 
 December started with the second round of the FA Cup and despite conceding another late goal , the Blades progressed into the third round at the expense of Torquay United , thanks to another brace from in Ched Evans , who then scored for the fifth game in succession in the next game , netting twice more in a league victory over Rochdale . The team 's impressive form continued with an away win at <unk> thanks to two own goals , Notts County making a similar gift of an own goal to contribute to their own defeat on Boxing Day , before the Blades rounded the year off by crushing Hartlepool United on New Year 's Eve ; meaning that the Blades ended 2011 in second place in the table following eight victories in a row in all competitions . 
 With the transfer window reopening in January , Danny Wilson 's first signing was the return of former loan player Marcus Williams who agreed a two and a half year deal . The New Year started disappointingly as the Blades crashed to their first defeat since the beginning of November as they were beaten 3 – 2 at Carlisle United . Following Danny Wilson being awarded ' League One Manager of the Month ' for December , United soon got back to winning ways when they returned to home soil . The team saw off Salisbury City 3 – 1 in the third round of the FA Cup , the first meeting ever between the two clubs , and then outclassed Yeovil Town a few days later , hitting four without reply including a brace from Lee Williamson and a first ever club goal from captain Michael Doyle . With Danny Wilson looking to freshen up his squad United rewarded four of its younger players with contract extensions , with Erik Tønne and David McAllister set to remain with the club until the summer of 2014 , and youth team players Jordan <unk> and Jack Adams agreeing new deals until the end of the season . In a busy day the club saw the departure of Elian <unk> as his short term deal came to an end , and then allowed McAllister to join League Two club Shrewsbury Town on a months loan , with manager Danny Wilson bemoaning a lack of reserve games under the current system . The following week Wilson continued to overhaul the squad with reserve keeper <unk> <unk> leaving the club on mutual terms , but was boosted by ' fans favourite ' James Beattie agreeing a deal to remain at Bramall Lane until the end of the season . Meanwhile , back in the league the Blades then continued their fine run of form , completing their second league double of the week , as they hit three without reply away at Bury , but that form deserted them for a top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ table trip to Charlton Athletic where a bad tempered match resulted in both teams being reduced to ten men and a 1 – 0 loss for United . Seven days later United suffered their first back @-@ to @-@ back defeats of the season as they crashed out of the FA Cup at the hands of Birmingham City . With the transfer window about to close Bramall Lane was relatively quite on deadline day ; Danny Philliskirk was handed an extended deal , and striker Will Hoskins signed on loan from Brighton & Hove Albion until the end of the season , whilst youngster Erik Tønne was allowed to join Yorkshire neighbours York City , also until the end of the season . The club also gave a trial to experienced Scottish defender David Weir with a view to a potential short term contract . 
 = = = February – March : Promotion charge takes shape then falls apart = = = 
 After various match postponements due to a spell of bad weather and the various cup competitions United finally returned to league action in mid February with new signing Hoskins scoring on his début as the Blades ran out 3 – 0 victors over Wycombe Wanderers . After a successful spell , midfielder David McAllister opted to extend his loan deal at Shrewsbury until the end of March , whilst young keeper George Long agreed a new long – term deal at Bramall Lane . Meanwhile , on Valentine 's Day , the Blades beat Yorkshire and promotion rivals Huddersfield Town 1 – 0 at the Galpharm Stadium as defender Neill Collins scored his first ever goal for the club , before coming from behind to beat Preston North End at home a few days later , despite Ched Evans missing a penalty . With <unk> <unk> having departed , United agreed a two and a half year deal with keeper , and free agent , Mark Howard to provide cover for Steve Simonsen , before the club met their cross @-@ city rivals in the second Steel City derby of the season where United suffered a narrow defeat . Looking for a quick bounce – back , United were forced to come from behind to beat Scunthorpe United at home , to leave them in second place , five points clear of third , in the table at the start of March . 
 Despite their form , United suffered a catastrophic start to March as they lost at home to Oldham Athletic having had a two @-@ goal lead only to see both Matthew Lowton and Harry Maguire sent off and the team subsequently collapse . With the entire back four unavailable , United were forced to draft in Matt Hill and John Egan on emergency loans , but this was not enough to prevent them slipping to their third defeat in four games as they capitulated at Walsall . Danny Wilson remained keen to find first team experience for the younger members of the squad and as such allowed Seamus <unk> to join Alfreton Town on loan before United returned to winning ways with two goals from Ched Evans being enough to defeat Brentford at Griffin Park . Unfortunately the Blades failed to take advantage of their game in hand , being held to a draw by Colchester United , before once again allowing a lead to slip as they drew with Tranmere Rovers at Bramall Lane . With the transfer deadline for loans approaching , the Blades ' longest serving player and vice @-@ captain Nick Montgomery was allowed to join Millwall until the end of the season due to an absence of first team football , allowing Danny Wilson to bring in winger Michael O 'Halloran on loan from Bolton Wanderers . Meanwhile , on the pitch , United put their recent poor form behind them as they outclassed Notts County 5 – 2 at Meadow Lane , before putting four goals past Chesterfield at Bramall Lane , including a hat – trick from in – form striker Ched Evans . Despite a low – key team performance , a second Ched Evans penalty in as many games was enough to finish the month with a third straight victory , with the Blades defeating Hartlepool United at Victoria Park . 
 = = = April – May : The final straight ends in disappointment = = = 
 With loan defender John Egan returning to his parent club at the start of April , Nick Montgomery 's loan at Millwall was all but cut short after only two substitute appearances when he sustained a calf injury likely to sideline him until the end of the season . David McAllister also saw his loan spell at Shrewsbury cut short shortly after receiving a red card , with the resulting three game ban ruling him out for the remainder of his time at the New Meadow . Back in the league a nervy display saw the Blades edge out Bournemouth at Bramall Lane , before a much more emphatic performance saw them bury Rochdale at the Spotland Stadium . With the Blades now in a straight fight with local rivals Sheffield Wednesday for the second automatic promotion spot they came from behind to beat Leyton Orient at Bramall Lane to open up a four @-@ point gap on third placed Wednesday . The next week however their campaign was dealt a crushing blow as star striker and top scorer Ched Evans 's case came to trial where he was found guilty of rape and sentenced to five years in prison . Without Evans and missing his injured strike partner Richard Cresswell , United slipped to a damaging defeat at MK Dons . Worse was to come as United could only resister a draw with Stevenage in a dramatic final home game at Bramall Lane , meaning they slipped out of the automatic promotion places for the first time since February . United went into the final league fixture with Exeter City requiring to win and hope that rivals Sheffield Wednesday were beaten to secure promotion ; a combination that failed to materialise as Wednesday registered a victory and the Blades could only draw meaning they were consigned to the play @-@ offs . 
 = = = Another trip to Wembley = = = 
 With James Beattie unavailable for the playoffs following a red card in the final game of the season against Exeter City , manager Danny Wilson was faced with a selection crisis ahead of the critical games against Stevenage . With only one senior striker available a patched up side contested a dour first @-@ leg where neither team created many chances . United did manage to keep a clean sheet however and took the tie back to Bramall Lane with the scores level at 0 – 0 . 
 The Blades entered the second leg still bereft of forwards , with Richard Cresswell having contracted an illness on the morning of the game , so were forced to play with just Chris Porter as a lone striker once more . An even first half saw few opportunities for either side but following the break United began to attack with more purpose . Despite chances for both sides the game looked to be heading for another draw until Porter scored an 85th @-@ minute winner to put the Blades through to the final at Wembley . 
 Richard Cresswell was passed fit for the final against Huddersfield but influential midfielder Kevin McDonald was left out through injury so the Blades were forced to make changes once more . The game was played under blistering heat and neither side created many chances . It remained 0 – 0 after ninety minutes and so extra – time was played but there was still no breakthrough . Ultimately the game went to penalties , which saw every player for both sides take a spot kick only for United to lose 8 – 7 when goalkeeper Steve Simonsen missed the final kick , consigning the Blades to another season in League One . 
 = = = Academy and Reserve teams = = = 
 = = = = Reserves = = = = 
 Sheffield United Reserves played in the Central League : Central Division in the nearby Derbyshire town of Dronfield at the Coach and Horses ground , which was also the home of Sheffield FC during the season . Experienced defender Chris Morgan was appointed reserve team coach at the start of the season and given the responsibility of developing the young players which made up the bulk of the side . With many teams now opting not to enter a reserve side into an organised competition the Central Division consisted of just seven sides meaning fixtures were irregular throughout the season . In January 2012 Danny Wilson expressed the need to reform the reserve team structure due to this infrequent amount of matches citing that experienced players don 't gain much from them and the cost of staging the fixtures as issues . 
 Despite this United 's side ended the season as Champions , finishing one point ahead of nearest rivals Derby County who had won the division in the previous season , ironically by one point from The Blades who had finished second . Following a nine match unbeaten run the title was clinched with the final game of the season as United held a strong Nottingham Forest side to a 1 – 1 draw at the coach and Horses ground . Danny Philliskirk ended the season as top scorer , having netted six goals , whilst he was also the joint leading appearance maker along with Matty Harriott and Shane Murray . 
 = = = = Academy = = = = 
 Sheffield United Academy U18s played in the FA Premier Academy League U18s Group D at the <unk> ground at <unk> Crescent . Under the management of John Pemberton , the side were seeking to replicate the success of the previous season when they had reached the final of the FA Youth Cup final . Shorn of a number of key players ( who had either graduated to the first team or left the club ) , the team completed a solid but unspectacular season . Results fluctuated with impressive victories over the likes of Everton , Bolton and Sunderland being mixed with heavy defeats to Leeds United , Coventry City and West Ham United . Eventually finishing fifth ( out of ten teams ) in their division , manager John Pemberton described the season as " another successful one for everyone associated with the Academy . We have five players becoming professionals who will all be linking up with the first team next season and that is what we are judged on – producing players . " 
 United 's hopes of repeating the previous season 's success in the FA Youth Cup did not come to fruition however . After a victory in the first round over Tranmere Rovers , they required penalties to see off Port Vale in the next round before finally being eliminated in round three when Southampton recorded a 7 – 0 victory over the Blades . 
 = = Squad = = 
 As of the end of the season 
 = = = Squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Out on loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Players leaving before the end of the season = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = Transfers and Contracts = = 
 = = = In = = = 
 = = = = Summer = = = = 
 = = = = Winter = = = = 
 = = = = Loan in = = = = 
 = = = Out = = = 
 = = = = Summer = = = = 
 = = = = Winter = = = = 
 = = = = Loan out = = = = 
 = = = Contracts = = = 
 New contracts and contract extensions . 
 = = League Table = = 
 = = Season firsts = = 
 = = = Player début = = = 
 Players making their first team Sheffield United début in a fully competitive match . 
 = = = Début goal = = = 
 Players scoring their first goal for Sheffield United in a competitive fixture . 
 = = = Competitive fixture = = = 
 First ever meeting of the two clubs in a competitive fixture . 
 = = = Stadia = = = 
 First ever visit to a stadium for a competitive fixture 
 = = Squad Statistics = = 
 = = = Appearances and goals = = = 
 As of 26 May 2012 
 = = = Top Scorers = = = 
 Five additional own goals scored during the season , three in The Football League and two in the FA Cup . 
 = = = Disciplinary Record = = = 
 = = = = Suspensions = = = = 
 Date of start of suspension assumed to be the date of the game during which the disciplinary incident occurred . 
 = = = International Call @-@ ups = = = 
 = = Matches = = 
 = = = Key = = = 
 Win Draw Loss 
 = = = Football League One = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 = = = Football League Cup = = = 
 = = = Football League Trophy = = = 
 = = = Pre – season and friendlies = = = 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 = = = PFA League One Team of the Year = = = 
 Ched Evans 
 Harry Maguire 
 Stephen Quinn 
 = = = League One Manager of the Month = = = 
 December : Danny Wilson 
 = = = League One Player of the Month = = = 
 March : Ched Evans 
 = = = Football League Young Player of the Month = = = 
 August : Harry Maguire 
 = = = Sheffield Star Young Player of the Year = = = 
 Harry Maguire 
 = = = League One Team of the Week = = = 
 = = = Fans Player of the Month = = = 
 = = = Club end of season awards = = = 
 Player of the Year : Harry Maguire 
 Young Player of the Year : Harry Maguire 
 Goal of the Season : Nick Montgomery ( v Tranmere Rovers ) 
 = Yao Ming = 
 Yao Ming ( born September 12 , 1980 ) is a Chinese retired professional basketball player who played for the Shanghai Sharks of the Chinese Basketball Association ( CBA ) and the Houston Rockets of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He was selected to start for the Western Conference in the NBA All @-@ Star Game eight times , and was named to the All @-@ NBA Team five times . At the time of his final season , he was the tallest active player in the NBA , at 2 @.@ 29 m ( 7 ft 6 in ) . He is also the only player outside of the US to lead the NBA All @-@ Star voting . 
 Yao , who was born in Shanghai , China , started playing for the Shanghai Sharks as a teenager , and played on their senior team for five years in the Chinese Basketball Association ( CBA ) , winning a championship in his final year . After negotiating with the CBA and the Sharks to secure his release , Yao was selected by the Houston Rockets as the first overall pick in the 2002 NBA draft . He reached the NBA Playoffs four times , and the Rockets won a first @-@ round series in the 2009 postseason , their first playoff series victory since 1997 . In July 2011 , Yao announced his retirement from professional basketball because of a series of foot and ankle injuries which forced him to miss 250 games in his last six seasons . In eight seasons with the Rockets , Yao ranks sixth among franchise leaders in total points and total rebounds , and second in total blocks . 
 Yao is one of China 's best @-@ known athletes , with sponsorships with several major companies . His rookie year in the NBA was the subject of a documentary film , The Year of the Yao , and he co @-@ wrote , along with NBA analyst Ric Bucher , an autobiography titled Yao : A Life in Two Worlds . 
 On April 4 , 2016 , Yao was elected into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame , alongside Shaquille O 'Neal and Allen Iverson . 
 = = Career in China = = 
 = = = Early life and CBA career = = = 
 Yao is the only child of 6 ft 7 in ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) Yao <unk> and 6 ft 3 in ( 1 @.@ 90 m ) Fang <unk> , both of whom were former professional basketball players . At 11 pounds ( 5 @.@ 0 kg ) , Yao weighed more than twice as much as the average Chinese newborn . When Yao was nine years old , he began playing basketball and attended a junior sports school . The following year , Yao measured 5 feet 5 inches ( 1 @.@ 65 m ) and was examined by sports doctors , who predicted he would grow to 7 feet 3 inches ( 2 @.@ 20 m ) . 
 Yao first tried out for the Shanghai Sharks junior team of the Chinese Basketball Association ( CBA ) when he was thirteen years old , and practiced ten hours a day for his acceptance . After playing with the junior team for four years , Yao joined the senior team of the Sharks , where he averaged 10 points and 8 rebounds a game in his rookie season . His next season was cut short when he broke his foot for the second time in his career , which Yao said decreased his jumping ability by four to six inches ( 10 to 15 cm ) . The Sharks made the finals of the CBA in Yao ’ s third season and again the next year , but lost both times to the Bayi Rockets . When Wang Zhizhi left the Bayi Rockets to become the first NBA player from China the following year , the Sharks finally won their first CBA championship . During the playoffs in his final year with Shanghai , Yao averaged 38 @.@ 9 points and 20 @.@ 2 rebounds a game , while shooting 76 @.@ 6 % from the field , and made all 21 of his shots during one game in the finals . 
 = = = Entering the NBA draft = = = 
 Yao was pressured to enter the NBA draft in 1999 by Li <unk> , the deputy general manager of the Shanghai Sharks . Li also influenced Yao to sign a contract for Evergreen Sports Inc. to serve as his agent . The agreement entitled Evergreen to 33 % of Yao 's earnings , but the contract was later determined to be invalid . 
 When Yao decided to enter the 2002 NBA draft , a group of advisers was formed that came to be known as " Team Yao " . The team consisted of Yao ’ s negotiator , Erik Zhang ; his NBA agent , Bill Duffy ; his Chinese agent , Lu Hao ; University of Chicago economics professor John Huizinga ; and the vice president for marketing at BDA Sports Management , Bill Sanders . Yao was widely predicted to be picked number one overall . However , some teams were concerned about Yao 's NBA eligibility because of uncertainty over whether the CBA would let Yao play in the United States . 
 Shortly after Wang Zhizhi refused to return to China to play for the national team and was subsequently banned from playing for China , the CBA stipulated that Yao would have to return to play for the national team . They also said they would not let him go to the United States unless the Houston Rockets would take him first overall . After assurances from Team Yao that the Rockets would draft Yao with their number one pick , the CBA gave permission on the morning of the draft for Yao to play in the U.S. When the Rockets selected Yao with the first pick of the draft , he became the first international player ever to be selected first overall without having previously played U.S. college basketball . 
 = = NBA career = = 
 = = = Beginning years ( 2002 – 2005 ) = = = 
 Yao did not participate in the Rockets ' pre @-@ season training camp , instead playing for China in the 2002 FIBA World Championships . Before the season , several commentators , including Bill Simmons and Dick Vitale , predicted that Yao would fail in the NBA , and Charles Barkley said he would " kiss [ Kenny Smith 's ] ass " if Yao scored more than 19 points in one of his rookie @-@ season games . Yao played his first NBA game against the Indiana Pacers , scoring no points and grabbing two rebounds , and scored his first NBA basket against the Denver Nuggets . In his first seven games , he averaged only 14 minutes and 4 points , but on November 17 , he scored 20 points on a perfect 9 @-@ of @-@ 9 from the field and 2 @-@ of @-@ 2 from the free @-@ throw line against the Lakers . Barkley made good on his bet by kissing the buttock of a donkey purchased by Smith for the occasion ( Smith 's " ass " ) . 
 In Yao 's first game in Miami on December 16 , 2002 , the Heat passed out 8 @,@ 000 fortune cookies , an Asian cultural stereotype . Yao was not angry with the promotion because he was not familiar with American stereotypes of Chinese . In an earlier interview in 2000 , Yao said he had never seen a fortune cookie in China and guessed it must have been an American invention . 
 Before Yao ’ s first meeting with Shaquille O 'Neal on January 17 , 2003 , O 'Neal said , " Tell Yao Ming , Ching chong @-@ yang @-@ wah @-@ ah @-@ <unk> " , prompting accusations of racism . O 'Neal denied that his comments were racist , and said he was only joking . Yao also said he believed O 'Neal was joking , but he said a lot of Asians would not see the humor . In the game , Yao scored six points and blocked O 'Neal twice in the opening minutes , and made a game @-@ sealing dunk with 10 seconds left in overtime . Yao finished with 10 points , 10 rebounds , and 6 blocks ; O 'Neal recorded 31 points , 13 rebounds , and 0 blocks . O 'Neal later admitted that he regretted how he hazed Yao early in his career . 
 The NBA began offering All @-@ Star ballots in three languages — English , Spanish and Chinese — for fan voting of the starters for the 2003 NBA All @-@ Star Game . Yao was voted to start for the West over O 'Neal , who was coming off three consecutive NBA Finals MVP Awards . Yao received nearly a quarter million more votes than O 'Neal , and he became the first rookie to start in the All @-@ Star Game since Grant Hill in 1995 . 
 Yao finished his rookie season averaging 13 @.@ 5 points and 8 @.@ 2 rebounds per game , and was second in the NBA Rookie of the Year Award voting to Amar 'e Stoudemire , and a unanimous pick for the NBA All @-@ Rookie First Team selection . He was also voted the Sporting News Rookie of the Year , and won the Laureus Newcomer of the Year award . 
 Before the start of Yao 's sophomore season , Rockets ' head coach Rudy Tomjanovich resigned because of health issues , and long @-@ time New York Knicks head coach Jeff Van Gundy was brought in . After Van Gundy began focusing the offense on Yao , Yao averaged career highs in points and rebounds for the season , and had a career @-@ high 41 points and 7 assists in a triple @-@ overtime win against the Atlanta Hawks in February 2004 . He was also voted to be the starting center for the Western Conference in the 2004 NBA All @-@ Star Game for the second straight year . Yao finished the season averaging 17 @.@ 5 points and 9 @.@ 0 rebounds a game . The Rockets made the playoffs for the first time in Yao 's career , claiming the seventh seed in the Western Conference . In the first round , however , the Los Angeles Lakers eliminated Houston in five games . Yao averaged 15 @.@ 0 points and 7 @.@ 4 rebounds in his first playoff series . 
 In the summer of 2004 , the Rockets acquired Tracy McGrady from the Orlando Magic in a seven @-@ player trade that also sent Steve Francis and Cuttino Mobley to Orlando . Although Yao said that Francis and Mobley had " helped [ him ] in every way [ his ] first two seasons " , he added , " I 'm excited about playing with Tracy McGrady . He can do some amazing things . " After the trade , it was predicted that the Rockets would be title contenders . Both McGrady and Yao were voted to start in the 2005 NBA All @-@ Star Game , and Yao broke the record previously held by Michael Jordan for most All @-@ Star votes , with 2 @,@ 558 @,@ 278 total votes . The Rockets won 51 games and finished fifth in the West , and made the playoffs for the second consecutive year , where they faced the Dallas Mavericks . The Rockets won the first two games in Dallas , and Yao made 13 of 14 shots in the second game , the best shooting performance in the playoffs in Rockets history . However the Rockets lost four of their last five games and lost Game 7 by 40 points , the largest Game 7 deficit in NBA history . Yao 's final averages for the series were 21 @.@ 4 points on 65 % shooting and 7 @.@ 7 rebounds . 
 = = = Injury @-@ plagued seasons ( 2005 – 2011 ) = = = 
 After missing only two games out of 246 in his first three years of NBA play , Yao endured an extended period on the inactive list in his fourth season after developing osteomyelitis in the big toe on his left foot , and surgery was performed on the toe on December 18 , 2005 . Despite missing 21 games while recovering , Yao again had the most fan votes to start the 2006 NBA All @-@ Star Game . 
 In 25 games after the All @-@ Star break , Yao averaged 25 @.@ 7 points and 11 @.@ 6 rebounds per game , while shooting 53 @.@ 7 % from the field and 87 @.@ 8 % at the free @-@ throw line . His final averages in 57 games were 22 @.@ 3 points and 10 @.@ 2 rebounds per game . It was the first time that he ended the season with a so @-@ called " 20 / 10 " average . However , Tracy McGrady played only 47 games in the season , missing time because of back spasms . Yao and McGrady played only 31 games together , and the Rockets did not make the playoffs , winning only 34 games . With only four games left in the season , Yao suffered another injury in a game against the Utah Jazz on April 10 , 2006 , which left him with a broken bone in his left foot . The injury required six months of rest . 
 Early into his fifth season , Yao was injured again , this time breaking his right knee on December 23 , 2006 , while attempting to block a shot . Up to that point he had been averaging 26 @.@ 8 points , 9 @.@ 7 rebounds and 2 @.@ 3 blocks per game , and had been mentioned as an MVP candidate . Yao was unable to play in what would have been his fifth All @-@ Star game ; he was medically cleared to play on March 4 , 2007 , after missing 32 games . 
 Despite Yao 's absence , the Rockets made the playoffs with the home court advantage against the Utah Jazz in the first round . The Rockets won the first two games , but then lost four of five games and were eliminated in Game 7 at home ; Yao scored 29 points — 15 in the fourth quarter . Although he averaged 25 @.@ 1 points and 10 @.@ 3 rebounds for the series , Yao said afterwards " I didn 't do my job " . At the end of the season , Yao was selected to the All @-@ NBA Second Team for the first time in his career , after being selected to the All @-@ NBA Third Team twice . 
 On May 18 , 2007 , only weeks after the Rockets were eliminated from the playoffs , Jeff Van Gundy was dismissed as head coach . Three days later , the Rockets signed former Sacramento Kings coach Rick Adelman , who was thought to focus more on offense than the defensive @-@ minded Van Gundy . 
 On November 9 , 2007 , Yao played against fellow Chinese NBA and Milwaukee Bucks player Yi Jianlian for the first time . The game , which the Rockets won 104 – 88 , was broadcast on 19 networks in China , and was watched by over 200 million people in China alone , making it one of the most @-@ watched NBA games in history . In the 2008 NBA All @-@ Star Game , Yao was once again voted to start at center for the Western Conference . Before the All @-@ Star weekend , the Rockets had won eight straight games , and after the break , they took their win streak to 12 games . On February 26 , 2008 , however , it was reported that Yao would miss the rest of the season with a stress fracture in his left foot . He missed the 2008 NBA Playoffs , but he did not miss the 2008 Summer Olympics at Beijing , China in August . After Yao 's injury , the Rockets stretched their winning streak to 22 games , at the time the second @-@ longest such streak in NBA history . Yao underwent a successful operation on March 3 , which placed screws in his foot to strengthen the bone , and recovery time was estimated at four months . Yao 's final averages in 55 games were 22 @.@ 0 points , 10 @.@ 8 rebounds , and 2 @.@ 0 blocks a game . 
 The next season , Yao played 77 games , his first full season since the 2004 – 05 season , and averaged 19 @.@ 7 points and 9 @.@ 9 rebounds , while shooting 54 @.@ 8 % from the field , and a career @-@ high 86 @.@ 6 % from the free throw line . Despite McGrady suffering a season @-@ ending injury in February , the Rockets finished with 53 wins and the fifth seed in the Western Conference . Facing the Portland Trail Blazers in the first round , Yao finished with 24 points on 9 of 9 shooting in the first game , and the Rockets won 108 – 81 , in Portland . The Rockets won all their games in Houston , and advanced to the second round of the playoffs for the first time since 1997 , and the first time in Yao 's career . 
 The Rockets faced the Lakers in the second round , and Yao scored 28 points , with 8 points in the final four minutes , to lead the Rockets to a 100 – 92 win in Los Angeles . However , the Rockets lost their next two games , and Yao was diagnosed with a sprained ankle after Game 3 . A follow @-@ up test revealed a hairline fracture in his left foot , and he was ruled out for the remainder of the playoffs . In reaction , Yao said the injury , which did not require surgery , was " better than last year " . However , follow @-@ up analysis has indicated that the injury could be career threatening . The Yao @-@ less Rockets went on to win Game 4 against the Lakers to even the series 2 – 2 . The Rockets eventually lost the series in seven games . 
 In July 2009 , Yao discussed the injury with his doctors , and the Rockets applied for a disabled player exception , an exception to the NBA Salary Cap which grants the injured player 's team money to sign a free agent . The Rockets were granted the exception , and used approximately $ 5 @.@ 7 million on free agent Trevor Ariza . After weeks of consulting , it was decided that Yao would undergo surgery in order to repair the broken bone in his left foot . He did not play the entire 2009 – 10 season . 
 For the 2010 – 11 season , the Rockets said they would limit Yao to 24 minutes a game , with no plan to play him on back @-@ to @-@ back nights . Their goal was to keep Yao healthy in the long term . On December 16 , 2010 , it was announced that Yao had developed a stress fracture in his left ankle , related to an older injury , and would miss the rest of the season . In January 2011 , he was voted as the Western Conference starting center for the 2011 All @-@ Star Game for the eighth time in nine seasons . Injured All @-@ Stars are usually required to attend the All @-@ Star functions and to be introduced at the game , but Yao was not in Los Angeles because of his rehabilitation schedule after his surgery . Yao 's contract with the Rockets expired at the end of the season , and he became a free agent . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On July 20 , 2011 , Yao announced his retirement from basketball in a press conference in Shanghai . He cited injuries to his foot and ankle , including the third fracture to his left foot sustained near the end of 2010 . His retirement sparked over 1 @.@ 2 million comments on the Chinese social @-@ networking site Sina Weibo . Reacting to Yao 's retirement , NBA commissioner David Stern said Yao was a " bridge between Chinese and American fans " and that he had " a wonderful mixture of talent , dedication , humanitarian aspirations and a sense of humor . " Shaquille O 'Neal said Yao " was very agile . He could play inside , he could play outside , and if he didn 't have those injuries he could 've been up there in the top five centers to ever play the game . " 
 Yao was nominated by a member of the Chinese media for the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame as a contributor to the game . He would have been eligible for induction as early as 2012 , but Yao felt it was too soon and requested that the Hall of Fame delay consideration of the nomination . The Hall granted Yao 's request , and said it was Yao 's decision when the process would be restarted . He would be renominated in 2015 . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = 2000 and 2004 Olympics = = = 
 Yao first played for China in the Summer Olympics at the 2000 Olympics Basketball Tournament , and he was dubbed , together with 7 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) teammates Wang Zhizhi and <unk> <unk> , " The Walking Great Wall " . During the 2004 Athens Olympics , Yao carried the Chinese flag during the opening ceremony , which he said was a " long dream come true " . He then vowed to abstain from shaving his beard for half a year unless the Chinese national basketball team made it into the quarter @-@ finals of the 2004 Olympics Basketball Tournament . After Yao scored 39 points in a win against New Zealand , China lost 58 – 83 , 57 – 82 , and 52 – 89 against Spain , Argentina and Italy respectively . In the final group game , however , a 67 – 66 win over the reigning 2002 FIBA World Champions Serbia and Montenegro moved them into the quarterfinals . Yao scored 27 points and had 13 rebounds , and he hit two free throws with 28 seconds left that proved to be the winning margin . He averaged 20 @.@ 7 points and 9 @.@ 3 rebounds per game while shooting 55 @.@ 9 % from the field . 
 = = = Asian championships = = = 
 Yao led the Chinese national team to 3 consecutive FIBA Asian Championship gold medals , winning the 2001 FIBA Asian Championship , the 2003 FIBA Asian Championship , and the 2005 FIBA Asian Championship . He was also named the MVP of all three tournaments . 
 = = = 2006 World championships = = = 
 Yao ’ s injury at the end of the 2005 – 06 NBA season required a full six months of rest , threatening his participation in the 2006 FIBA World Championship . However , he recovered before the start of the tournament , and in the last game of the preliminary round , he had 36 points and 10 rebounds in a win against Slovenia to lead China into the Round of 16 . In the first knockout round , however , China was defeated by eventual finalist Greece . Yao 's final averages were 25 @.@ 3 points , the most in the tournament , and 9 @.@ 0 rebounds a game , which was fourth overall . 
 = = = 2008 Olympics = = = 
 After having surgery to repair his fractured foot , Yao stated if he could not play in the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , " It would be the biggest loss in my career to right now " . He returned to play with the Chinese national team on July 17 , 2008 . On August 6 , Yao carried the Olympic Flame into Tiananmen Square , as part of the Olympic torch relay . He also carried the Chinese flag and led his country 's delegation during the opening ceremony . Yao scored the first basket of the game , a three @-@ pointer , in China 's opening game against the eventual gold medal @-@ winning United States . 
 " I was just really happy to make that shot " , Yao said after the Americans ’ 101 – 70 victory . " It was the first score in our Olympic campaign here at home and I ’ ll always remember it . It represents that we can keep our heads up in the face of really tough odds . " 
 Following an overtime defeat to Spain , Yao scored 30 points in a win over Angola , and 25 points in a three @-@ point win against Germany , which clinched China 's place in the quarterfinals . However , China lost to Lithuania in the quarterfinals by 26 points , eliminating them from the tournament . Yao 's 19 points a game were the second @-@ highest in the Olympics , and his averages of 8 @.@ 2 rebounds and 1 @.@ 5 blocks per game were third overall . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = CBA statistics = = = 
 = = = NBA statistics = = = 
 = = = = Regular season = = = = 
 = = = = Playoffs = = = = 
 = = Awards and achievements = = 
 Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame : Class of 2016 
 8 × NBA All @-@ Star : 2003 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2011 
 5 × All @-@ NBA Team : 
 Second Team : 2007 , 2009 
 Third Team : 2004 , 2006 , 2008 
 NBA All @-@ Rookie First Team : 2003 
 NBA Rookie All @-@ Star Game : 2004 
 Gold medal winner with Team China at the 2001 , 2003 , 2005 FIBA Asian Championship 
 MVP of the 2001 , 2003 , 2005 FIBA Asian Championship 
 All @-@ Tournament Team , FIBA World Championship : 2002 
 Chinese Basketball Association Champion : 2001 – 02 
 Rebounding leader in CBA in 2001 – 02 
 2003 Sporting News Rookie of the Year 
 2003 Laureus Newcomer of the Year 
 = = Off the court = = 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Yao met Chinese female basketball player Ye Li when he was 17 years old . Ye was not fond of Yao at first , but finally accepted him after he gave her the team pins he had collected during the 2000 Summer Olympics . She is the only woman he has ever dated . Their relationship became public when they appeared together during the 2004 Olympics closing ceremony . On August 6 , 2007 , Yao and Ye married in a ceremony attended by close friends and family and closed to the media . On May 21 , 2010 , the couple 's daughter Yao <unk> ( whose English name is Amy ) was born in Houston , Texas . 
 In 2004 , Yao co @-@ wrote an autobiography with ESPN sportswriter Ric Bucher , entitled Yao : A Life in Two Worlds . In the same year , he was also the subject of a documentary film , The Year of the Yao , which focuses on his NBA rookie year . The film is narrated by his friend and former interpreter , Colin Pine , who stayed with Yao during Yao 's rookie year , and interpreted for him for three years . In 2005 , former Newsweek writer Brook Larmer published a book entitled Operation Yao Ming , in which he said that Yao 's parents were convinced to marry each other so that they would produce a dominant athlete , and that during Yao 's childhood , he was given special treatment to help him become a great basketball player . In a 2015 post on the website <unk> , Ming stated that this was not true and that he started playing basketball for fun at age 9 . In 2009 , Yao provided the voice for a character of a Chinese animated film The Magic Aster , released on June 19 . 
 Yao enrolled at the Antai College of Economics & Management of Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2011 . He is taking a tailored degree program with mostly one @-@ on @-@ one lectures to avoid being a distraction on campus . 
 = = = Public life = = = 
 Yao is one of China 's most recognizable athletes , along with Liu Xiang . As of 2009 , he had led Forbes ' Chinese celebrities list in income and popularity for six straight years , earning US $ 51 million ( CN ¥ 357 million ) in 2008 . A major part of his income comes from his sponsorship deals , as he is under contract with several major companies to endorse their products . He was signed by Nike until the end of his rookie season . When Nike decided not to renew his contract , he signed with Reebok . He also had a deal with Pepsi , and he successfully sued Coca @-@ Cola in 2003 when they used his image on their bottles while promoting the national team . He eventually signed with Coca @-@ Cola for the 2008 Olympics . His other deals include partnerships with Visa , Apple , Garmin , and McDonald 's . 
 Yao has also participated in many charity events during his career , including the NBA ’ s Basketball Without Borders program . In the NBA 's offseason in 2003 , Yao hosted a telethon , which raised 300 @,@ 000 U.S. dollars to help stop the spread of SARS . In September 2007 , he held an auction that raised 965 @,@ 000 U.S. dollars ( 6 @.@ 75 million yuan ) , and competed in a charity basketball match to raise money for underprivileged children in China . He was joined by fellow NBA stars Steve Nash , Carmelo Anthony , and Baron Davis , and movie star Jackie Chan . After the 2008 Sichuan earthquake , Yao donated $ 2 million to relief work , and created a foundation to help rebuild schools destroyed in the earthquake . 
 Yao has also been a dedicated supporter of Special Olympics . He serves as Global Ambassador and member of the International Board of Directors . 
 On July 16 , 2009 , Yao bought his former club team , the Shanghai Sharks , which were on the verge of not being able to play the next season of the Chinese Basketball Association because of financial troubles . 
 In August 2012 , Yao started filming a documentary about the northern white rhinoceros . He is also an ambassador for elephant conservation . Yao has filmed a number of public service announcements for elephant and rhino conservation for the " Say No " Campaign with partners African Wildlife Foundation and <unk> . 
 = Frost Bank Tower = 
 The Frost Bank Tower is a skyscraper in Austin , Texas , United States . Standing 515 feet ( 157 m ) tall with 33 floors , it is the third tallest building in Austin , behind The <unk> and the 360 Condominiums . It was developed by Cousins Properties from November 2001 to December 2003 as a class A office building with 525 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 48 @,@ 774 m2 ) of leasable space . It was the first high @-@ rise building to be constructed in the United States after the 9 / 11 attacks . The building was officially dedicated in January 2004 . 
 The Frost Bank Tower was designed by Duda / Paine Architects , LLP and HKS , Inc . It carries the highest logo in the city at 420 ft ( 128 m ) . This advertises the San Antonio @-@ based Frost National Bank , whose Austin headquarters and insurance division are in the building . Offices in the building besides Frost Bank include the Austin offices of Morgan Stanley and Ernst & Young , as well as the headquarters of the University of Texas Investment Management Company ( <unk> ) , managers of the Permanent University Fund . The silvery blue color glass facade was first used on the Reuters Building in New York City . Cousins sold the building in 2006 to Equity Office Properties Trust for $ 188 million before they sold the building to Thomas Properties the same year . In 2013 ownership of the building transferred to Parkway Properties . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1998 , <unk> & Associates consolidated tracts of land at the building site , at the time a vacant lot , and sold it to Cousins Properties in 2001 . Their original plan called for a 352 ft ( 107 m ) building with 27 floors , but the final plan called for a 515 ft ( 157 m ) tall building with 33 floors . As the building began construction on November 27 , 2001 , it became the tallest building in the United States of America to be constructed after the September 11 attacks . Construction was finished about 2 years later in 2003 , and the tower was officially dedicated in 2004 . It became the tallest building in Austin , Texas , and the fourth tallest building outside of Dallas and Houston , Texas ( excluding the Tower of the Americas in San Antonio ) . In August 2003 cost of the building was estimated at $ 137 million . 
 After Austin 's skyscraper construction boom , which began in 2007 , Frost Bank Tower was soon surpassed in height by the 360 Condominiums at 581 ft ( 177 m ) in 2008 . As of March 2011 , it is the 54th tallest building in Texas . In 2006 , Cousins Properties decided to sell the building for $ 188 million to Equity Office Properties , whom eventually sold it to Thomas Properties . Currently , there are many notable tenants in the building , including Frost Bank , Morgan Stanley , Ernst & Young , <unk> , and Heritage Title Co . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Designed by Duda / Paine Architects , LLP with HKS , Inc. as the Architect of Record , the Frost Bank Tower is considered one of the most recognizable buildings in Austin . The building starts with a rectangular shape on the ground that eventually becomes a square point in the crown . The base of the building is expressed in honed finish limestone while the main superstructure of the building is a blue low @-@ e glass skin , which is a thicker type of glass , that covers the entire tower . The Frost Bank Tower is one of only two places in the world with blue low @-@ e glass skin , the other being the Reuters Building in New York City , which was the earlier structure . The folded panes of the building step back to create a segmented pyramidal form . Lighting covers the crown , where a section of the building 150 ft ( 46 m ) lights up , and sometimes changes color for special occasions , such as the 2006 Rose Bowl , when the Austin @-@ based University of Texas Longhorns defeated the USC Trojans . More than 200 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 60 @,@ 960 sq m ) of glass was used for the facade of the building alone and 45 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 13 @,@ 716 sq m ) of glass was used in the crown . The building also contains an 11 level parking garage with spaces for more than 1 @,@ 400 vehicles . 
 = = = Critics ' responses = = = 
 There have been many critics and other people who have stated their comments on the building . John Kelso , a local newspaper columnist , says that the building resembles an enormous set of nose hair trimmers . Austin Chronicle readers voted the Frost Bank Tower as the " Best New Building ( Past Five Years ) " in 2004 , 2006 , 2007 , and 2008 . It was also voted for best architecture in 2004 and 2005 . The newspaper also says that the " owl face of the Frost Bank Tower " helps keep Austin " characteristically weird " , meaning that it makes Austin unique . The tower was awarded the 2005 International Association of Lighting Designers ( <unk> ) Award of Merit for lighting design by Cline <unk> Bernstein Lighting Design Inc. for its " second set of narrowly focused accent lights that showcase the vertical mullions at the setback near the building top " and " monumental custom sconces that add scale and create a welcoming frame around the opening portals of the lobby " . The building also won the 2003 Texas Construction Magazine Award of Merit . 
 = = = Amenities = = = 
 The Frost Bank Tower contains a wide variety of amenities . Such amenities in the building include conference facilities , building concierge , 24 @-@ hour <unk> access , fully equipped fitness center , state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art telecommunication systems , tenant controlled HVAC , upscale restaurants , deli / carry @-@ out restaurants , a coffee shop , and a dry @-@ cleaner . Following tradition , a tin Christian cross was embedded into the concrete of each floor during construction , with the last being added on May 27 , 2003 . Also , a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) cedar tree was hoisted to the top of the mechanical penthouse during the topping out ceremony . 
 = = Position in Austin 's skyline = = 
 Frost Bank Tower is the third tallest building in Austin at 515 ft ( 157 m ) , behind 360 Condominiums and The <unk> in height . The building covers most of its block , which is located near the center of downtown at 4th Street and Congress Avenue . Its location in the skyline , matched with its height , excited <unk> and was known as a centerpiece to the skyline . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Neil Aspinall = 
 Neil Stanley Aspinall ( 13 October 1941 – 24 March 2008 ) was a Welsh @-@ born English music industry executive . A school friend of Paul McCartney and George Harrison , he went on to head the Beatles ' company Apple Corps . 
 The Beatles employed Aspinall as their road manager and personal assistant , which included driving his old Commer van to and from shows , both day and night . After Mal Evans started work for the Beatles , Aspinall was promoted to become their personal assistant , later becoming chief executive of their company , Apple Corps . 
 On behalf of Apple , Aspinall was involved in notable court cases against Allen Klein , EMI and Apple Computer . He supervised the marketing of music , videos and merchandising , as well being a director of Standby Films , which was run from his home in Twickenham , London . On 10 April 2007 , Aspinall retired from Apple Corps and died of lung cancer in New York in 2008 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Aspinall was born in Prestatyn , North Wales , after his mother had been evacuated from the family home in Liverpool because of the air @-@ raids on Liverpool during the Second World War , while Aspinall 's father was away at sea with the Royal Navy . Aspinall and his mother returned to Liverpool later in 1942 after the bombing had subsided . Aspinall later attended West Derby School , where he passed his 11 @-@ Plus exams . When he was twelve years old , Aspinall gained a place at the Liverpool Institute in Mount Street , and was in the same class as Paul McCartney for English and Art lessons . 
 Aspinall later commented about his first meeting with George Harrison , who also attended the Liverpool Institute : " My first encounter with George was behind the school ’ s air @-@ raid shelters . This great mass of shaggy hair loomed up and an out @-@ of @-@ breath voice requested a quick drag of my Woodbine . It was one of the first cigarettes either of us had smoked . We <unk> our way through it bravely but gleefully . After that the three of us did lots of ridiculous things together .... By the time we were ready to take the GCE exams we added John Lennon to our ' Mad Lad ' gang . He was doing his first term at Liverpool College of Art which overlooks the Liverpool Institute playground and we all got together in a students coffee bar at lunchtime . " Aspinall took nine <unk> at the Institute and passed eight of them , but failed the French exam . He left school in July 1959 , and studied accountancy . Aspinall worked for a Liverpool company for two years , receiving a wage of £ 2 @-@ 10s – 0d . ( £ 2 @.@ 50 decimal equivalent ) per week as a trainee accountant . 
 = = The Beatles = = 
 The Beatles played at the opening of the Casbah Coffee Club on 29 August 1959 , which was in the cellar of Mona Best 's house . Aspinall later rented a room in the house and became very good friends with then @-@ Beatle Pete Best . The Beatles had previously used public transport to get to local gigs , but by February 1961 , they were playing two or three concerts per night at different locations and needed someone to drive them . Best asked Aspinall to be a part @-@ time road manager for the band , so Aspinall bought an " old , grey and maroon Commer van " for £ 80 , and charged each of the group five shillings ( 25p ) per concert . Harrison later said : " Our early van became the centre of attention every time it pulled up . It was brush @-@ painted red and grey and from head to foot was covered in graffiti – girls ' names , and things like ' I love you , John ' . It looked interesting , but the moment anybody saw it they would feel free to write all over it . ” The Beatles returned from their second trip to Hamburg in July 1961 , and Aspinall left his job to become their permanent road manager , as he was earning more money driving them around than he was earning by being an accountant . 
 The Beatles were driven down to London by Aspinall on New Year 's Eve in 1961 , for the now @-@ famous Decca audition , but Aspinall lost his way , and the trip took ten hours . They arrived at 10 o 'clock at night , and John Lennon said that they arrived " just in time to see the drunks jumping in the Trafalgar Square fountains . " In 1963 , he was joined by Mal Evans , who also helped set up the Beatles ' equipment ( and acted as a bodyguard ) which freed Aspinall to concentrate on other duties , like arranging appointments or buying things for them , such as suits , boots , meals , or drinks . 
 Best was sacked from the Beatles on 16 August 1962 , by manager Brian Epstein acting on behalf of Lennon , McCartney and Harrison . Accounts vary of Aspinall during this event . According to <unk> editor Bill Harry , Aspinall was waiting downstairs in Epstein 's NEMS record shop , and was the first one to talk to the by then ex @-@ Beatle in the Grapes pub , across from the Cavern . Aspinall was furious and said that he would stop working for the band as well , but Best strongly advised him not to . Aspinall asked McCartney and Lennon at the next concert why they had fired Best and was told , " It ’ s got nothing to do with you . You ’ re only the driver . " However , in a 2007 interview , Aspinall provided Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn with a distinctly different version of events , saying that he was physically present when Epstein sacked Best , that he told Best unprompted that he planned to continue working for the band , and that on his first subsequent encounter with the other band members , their first question to him was how Best had taken being sacked . At any rate , Aspinall stayed with the band , but he ended his affair with Best 's mother , a relationship that had led to the birth of baby Vincent " Roag " Best . Aspinall denied the story for years before publicly acknowledging that he was indeed Roag 's father . 
 Aspinall worked closely with Epstein , who provided weekly notes for Aspinall to give to the group 's stage act , their concert appearances , and the fees they would receive . The Beatles had to travel in Aspinall 's van along with their equipment , but British roads in the early 1960s were notoriously pot @-@ holed and slow to navigate . Ringo Starr remembered that the travelling never seemed to stop during the early tours of Britain in Aspinall 's van , as they would be driven up and down Great Britain with one of the group in the passenger seat , but with the other three on a hard bench seat in the back . 
 = = = Personal assistant = = = 
 Aspinall 's job as personal assistant consisted of driving to concerts and meetings , but mostly meant just being there whenever someone needed something . Aspinall went on the first trip to America , and when George Harrison became ill with a fever and had a temperature of 102 ° F ( 39 ° C ) , he was ordered to stay in bed , so Aspinall stood in for him for The Ed Sullivan Show camera rehearsals . ; however , Harrison was back in time for the final shooting . Before the cover of Sgt. Pepper 's could be completed by Peter Blake , Aspinall was sent out to find photographs of all of the people that were to be shown on the front cover . Aspinall suggested the idea of Sergeant Pepper being the compere , who would introduce the group , and the reprise of the title song near the end of the album . 
 After recording sessions , Lennon , Harrison and Starr would be chauffeured back to their houses in the ' stockbroker belt ' of Southern England , but Aspinall would often drive McCartney and Evans in an Austin Princess limousine to a late @-@ night club to eat . The Bag O 'Nails nightclub was one of their favourites , at 8 Kingly Street in Soho , London , as it also presented live music . They would eat steak , chips and mushy peas , but Aspinall would always take out a torch from his pocket ( in the dimly lit club ) to inspect the portions on each of their plates . This was to make sure that the portions were exactly as they had ordered , which McCartney always found amusing . Whilst Harrison , McCartney and Starr passed their driving tests , Lennon didn 't pass his driving test until 1965 ; however , he rarely drove himself due to being a notoriously bad driver by poorly navigating roads and failing to notice other traffic , and as a result , he was usually chauffeured to and from recording sessions and appointments by his own personal chauffeur . 
 = = = Musical contributions = = = 
 Although not a musician , Aspinall made minor contributions to a handful of the Beatles ' recordings . He played a tamboura on " Within You Without You " , harmonica on " Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite ! " , some percussion on " Magical Mystery Tour " , and was among the many participants singing on the chorus of " Yellow Submarine " . 
 = = = Manager = = = 
 Following the death of Epstein in August 1967 , there was a vacuum in the management of the Beatles ' affairs . The Beatles asked Aspinall to take over the management of Apple Corps in 1968 , which had been founded in April of the same year . Aspinall later said that he only accepted the position after being asked , but did not want to do it full @-@ time , and would only do it " until they found somebody else . " George Martin ( The Beatles ' record producer ) was against the idea , as he thought that Aspinall did not have the necessary social qualifications to be able to speak to the upper class executives at EMI . Aspinall accompanied McCartney and Lennon to New York on 11 May 1968 , to announce the formation of Apple to the American Media . Apple Corps had five divisions : electronics , film , publishing , records and retailing . Aspinall later spoke of the Beatles ' business arrangements : 
 We did not have one single piece of paper . No contracts . The lawyer , the accountants and Brian , whoever , had that . The Beatles had been given copies of various contracts , maybe , I don 't know . I didn 't know what the [ recording ] contract was with EMI , or with the film people or the publishers or anything at all . So it was a case of building up a filing system , find out what was going on while we were trying to continue doing something . 
 Derek Taylor ( Apple 's press officer ) said that Aspinall hated being stuck in the Apple office ( at 3 Savile Row ) all through the recording of The White Album and Let It Be album . Life in the Apple office , however , was improved by having a chef and various assistants at hand : " The liquor bill was £ 600 per month and the food bill was close to that . " This was mostly due to Aspinall 's and Peter Brown 's four @-@ course lunches with expensive wines in the dining room at Apple . After Allen Klein was brought in to be the Beatles ' manager Aspinall was dismissed , but reinstated after complaints from the group , and because Klein realised that Aspinall was no threat to his control of the company . Klein lost a High Court action in 1971 ( started by McCartney ) but lawsuits between Klein and Apple kept Aspinall busy until 1977 . 
 = = = Apple Corps executive = = = 
 In 1978 , Aspinall instigated the first of three lawsuits on behalf of Apple Corps against Apple Computer , Inc . ( now known as Apple , Inc . ) for trademark infringement . The first suit settled in 1981 with an amount of £ 41 @,@ 000 being paid to Apple by Apple Computer . As a condition of the settlement , Apple Computer was allowed to use its logo as long as it did not enter the music business . The second suit with Apple Computer arose in 1989 , when Apple Corps sued Apple Computer over its Apple IIGS ( which included a professional synthesiser chip ) claiming violation of the 1981 settlement agreement . In 1991 , a settlement of £ 13 @.@ 5 million was reached . McCartney praised Aspinall for trademarking the Apple name worldwide , and called Aspinall " Mr. X " in the Apple Corps organisation . 
 In September 2003 , Apple Computer , Inc. was again sued by Apple Corps , this time for the introduction of the iTunes Music Store and the iPod , which Aspinall and Apple Corps believed was a violation of the previous agreement for Apple Computer to not distribute music . The trial began on 27 March 2006 in the UK , and ended on 8 May 2006 in a victory for Apple Computer ; the judge ruled the company 's iTunes Music Store did not infringe on the trademark of Apple Corps . Aspinall was also involved in several court cases in which Apple Corps took action against EMI : 
 We have tried to reach a settlement through good faith negotiations and regret that our efforts have been in vain . Despite very clear provisions in our contracts , EMI persist in ignoring their obligations and duty to account fairly and with transparency . The Beatles and Apple are , once again , left with no choice but to sue EMI . 
 In the early 1990s , Aspinall became the executive producer for The Beatles Anthology ; he , producer George Martin , and press officer Derek Taylor are the only non @-@ Beatles seen in new footage for the documentary . He continued to advise the surviving Beatles , as well as Lennon 's and Harrison 's estates , and to supervise the marketing of music , music videos and merchandising . On 10 April 2007 , it was announced by Apple that Aspinall had " decided to move on " and Jeff Jones — a longtime VP at Sony Legacy — was hired as CEO to oversee the back @-@ catalogue . One of Aspinall 's final tasks at Apple was to oversee the remastering of The Beatles ' back @-@ catalogue for an anticipated 2008 release . 
 = = Personal life and death = = 
 In 1961 and 1962 , Aspinall had become good friends with Pete Best and subsequently rented a room in the house where Best lived with his parents . During one of the extended business trips of Best 's father , the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Aspinall became romantically involved with Best 's mother , Mona Best , who was 17 years his senior . As a result , during this period , Aspinall fathered a child by Mona : Vincent " Roag " Best . Roag Best was born in late July 1962 , and just three weeks later , on 16 August 1962 , Best was dismissed from the Beatles . 
 On 30 August 1968 , Aspinall married Suzy Ornstein at the Chelsea Register Office , London , with Magic Alex as best man . McCartney , Starr and his wife attended , and were also at a surprise party held later in the King 's Road , London . Suzy Aspinall is the daughter of Bud Ornstein , the late chief executive of United Artists Pictures ( UK ) . Aspinall had met her during 1964 / 1965 when her father was the United Artists representative overseeing the production of the first two Beatles ' films : A Hard Day 's Night and Help ! . They went on to have four children : daughters Gayla , Dhara , Mandy and son Julian . As well as his work for Apple Corps , Aspinall and his wife were the sole directors of their own Standby Films Ltd. company , which is run from their home in Twickenham , London . In 1999 , Standby Films released a film about Jimi Hendrix , called Hendrix : Band of Gypsys . 
 Aspinall died of lung cancer in New York City in 2008 . His funeral was at the Church of St Mary the Virgin in Twickenham . Stella McCartney , Yoko Ono , Barbara Bach ( wife of Starr ) , George Martin , Pete Best and Pete Townshend attended the funeral , with Townshend playing Bob Dylan 's " Mr. Tambourine Man " as a tribute . The private service was followed by Aspinall 's burial at Teddington Cemetery . Aspinall left a sum of nearly £ 7 million in his will in a trust , with the income going to Suzy , his wife of 40 years . After her death it will be inherited by his five children : Roag , Gayla , Dhara , Julian and Mandy Aspinall . 
 = John William Pitt Kinau = 
 John William Pitt Kīnaʻu , sometimes called <unk> ( December 21 , 1842 – September 9 , 1859 ) was a prince of the Kingdom of Hawaii and the only surviving son of High Chief William Pitt Leleiohoku I and Ruth Keʻelikōlani . As a descendant of King Kamehameha I , he was chosen to attend the Chiefs ' Children 's School ( later renamed Royal School ) taught by the American missionary Amos Starr Cooke and his wife , Juliette Montague Cooke , alongside fifteen of his royal cousins . At a young age , he inherited the landholdings of his father and his adoptive grandfather including Huliheʻe Palace , but the prince died under mysterious circumstances before his seventeenth birthday . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Kīnaʻu was born December 21 , 1842 . His father was High Chief William Pitt Leleiohoku I ( 1821 – 1848 ) and his mother was High Ruth Keʻelikōlani ( 1826 – 1883 ) . Through his mother he was Kamehameha I 's great @-@ great grandchild . His mother 's parentage was disputed , but she was a member of the House of Kamehameha through her own mother Pauahi . Through his father , he descended from King <unk> of Maui . His father was the biological son of Prime Minister Kalanimoku , who was called The Iron Cable of Hawaii because of his political savvy and military prowess . His name " William Pitt " , shared by his father and grandfather , was originally chosen by Kalanimoku in honor of Prime Minister William Pitt of England . His Hawaiian name Kīnaʻu was given in honor of the Kuhina Nui , Kīnaʻu , Keʻelikōlani 's stepmother and childhood guardian . She in turn was named after High Chief <unk> Kīnaʻu . He had a younger brother who died in infancy . During his infancy , he was raised in a large <unk> pili ( thatched house ) named <unk> , which stood outside the Huliheʻe Palace , the principal residence of Leleiohoku 's hānai ( adoptive ) father Kuakini , who was the Governor of Hawaii Island . 
 From 1842 until his death in 1844 , Governor Kuakini served as a grandfather figure to the child . In 1928 Lucy <unk> <unk> Peabody , a hapa @-@ haole ( part Caucasian ) chiefess , recalled a scuffle between her and Kīnaʻu in their youth during a visit she and her grandmother paid to the Governor : 
 One day when we were living at <unk> my grandmother went to <unk> to see Kuakini , who was not well . I went with her and when Kinau saw me he chased me as he always did . I think he did not like me . I ran to my grandmother and she protected me . Kuakini saw me and said to my grandmother to let the haole go and told us to " <unk> " ( fight ) . She did and we fought . I beat him . Kuakini made fun of Kinau who was about six years old then . 
 = = Education and career = = 
 Kīnaʻu entered the Chiefs ' Children 's School on February 26 , 1844 at the age of two as its sixteenth and last pupil . He was the youngest with Victoria Kamāmalu and Lydia Kamakaʻeha , both being four years older . He was chosen by Kamehameha III to be eligible for the throne of the Kingdom of Hawaii . He was taught in English by American missionaries Amos Starr Cooke and his wife , Juliette Montague Cooke , alongside his royal cousins . During their Sunday procession to church it was customary for boys and girls to walk side by side , Kīnaʻu would walk beside Lydia Kamakaʻeha , the future Queen <unk> of Hawaii . In <unk> 's memoir , he is mentioned as John Kīnaʻu Pitt . The boarding school discontinued in 1850 , and his family sent him to the day school ( renamed Royal School ) ran by Reverend Edward G. Beckwith along with his former classmates Victoria Kamāmalu and Lydia Kamakaʻeha and new classmates Gideon <unk> , Nancy Sumner , Jane and Martha Swinton , and Mary Waterhouse . During his youth , the prince was often found on the parade ground of the old Honolulu Fort , instructing his friends while they were drilling as boy scouts . Kīnaʻu was considered to be a promising young man with an extremely bright mind and leadership qualities . 
 In 1848 his father died of measles , followed by his classmate Moses <unk> . Leleiohoku , the sixth @-@ largest landholder after the Great <unk> , had inherited the estates of his biological father Kalanimoku and his hānai ( adoptive ) father Kuakini , two of the most power chiefs in the kingdom . Leleiohoku had received thirty @-@ six <unk> ( land parcels ) , mainly on the island of Hawaiʻi and Maui from King Kamehameha III . Thus after Leleiohoku 's death , Kīnaʻu became the heir to all his father 's property , including Huliheʻe Palace in Kailua @-@ Kona . His ample inheritance made him one of the wealthiest people in the kingdom . He was popularly called the " Prince of Kona " during his lifetime . On his sixteen birthday , the ambitious young prince asked his former classmate King Kamehameha IV to award him with all the lands whose names started with " Wai " ( Hawaiian for " water " ) such as Waimea , <unk> , <unk> , Wailuku , <unk> , Waialua , Waikane and so on , a request that the King refused . After completing his education , Kīnaʻu served as aide @-@ de @-@ camp to King Kamehameha IV , and in his lifetime , he was considered " a very handsome young man " . 
 = = Death and burial = = 
 Kīnaʻu died on September 9 , 1859 in the Kohala district on the island of Hawaiʻi . The cause of his death was said to be an accident , although the details are unknown . An accusation of poisoning was forwarded by a noted priest and the whole of Kona became outraged over the rumors . One source claimed he was killed in a riding accident . While his obituary in the The Pacific Commercial Advertiser claimed it was consumption . 
 Heartbroken over the loss of her husband and son , Keʻelikōlani kept his lead coffin in her house for weeks , with mourners chanting and reciting the <unk> ( poetic dirges ) night and day . His funeral service was held at <unk> Church on Sunday , November 6 , and attended by thousands of natives and foreign residents and visitors including John Henry Anderson and Aleksei <unk> ; the latter wrote down a detail account of the events in <unk> <unk> i <unk> , iz <unk> <unk> ( Sketches in Pen and Pencil from a Voyage around the World ) . Initially buried in the Pohukaina Tomb , located on grounds of ʻIolani Palace , his remains were later transported along with those of his father 's and other royals in a midnight torchlight procession on October 30 , 1865 , to the newly constructed Royal Mausoleum at Mauna <unk> in the <unk> Valley . His mother 's remain were also buried here after her death in 1883 . In 1887 , after the Mausoleum building became too crowded , the coffins belonging to members of the Kamehameha Dynasty including Kīnaʻu 's were moved to the newly built Kamehameha Tomb . The name " W. P. Kinau " was inscribed on the <unk> ( <unk> ) side of the monument above his final resting place . 
 His landholdings and properties along with Huliheʻe Palace were inherited by his mother ; beside his estates , Keʻelikōlani also inherited much of her son 's debt . These lands along with subsequent inheritances that Keʻelikōlani would receive over her lifetime later became part of the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Estate which funds the Kamehameha Schools to this day . 
 Historian Albert Pierce Taylor , calling him by the name of " <unk> " , gave this posthumous description of the prince : 
 He was one of the most ambitious and promising of the young princes of the Kamehameha realm . It is believed by old Hawaiians today that had he lived he would have become a real and constructive leader of the Hawaiian people . He had a splendid physique and a magnetic personality . The glance of his eyes made him friends everywhere . 
 = 1978 American League East tie @-@ breaker game = 
 The 1978 American League East tie @-@ breaker game was a one @-@ game extension to Major League Baseball 's ( MLB ) 1978 regular season , played between the rival New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox to determine the winner of the American League 's ( AL ) East Division . The game was played at Fenway Park in Boston , Massachusetts , on October 2 , 1978 . The tie @-@ breaker was necessitated after the Yankees and Red Sox finished the season tied for first place in the AL East with identical 99 – 63 records . The Red Sox were the home team by virtue of a coin toss . The playoff was counted as a regular @-@ season game for statistical purposes . In baseball statistics , the tie @-@ breaker counted as the 163rd regular season game for both teams , with all events in the game added to regular season statistics . 
 Ron Guidry started for the Yankees , while Mike Torrez started for the Red Sox . The Yankees fell behind 2 – 0 , with a home run by Carl Yastrzemski and a run batted in single by Jim Rice . The Yankees took the lead on a three run home run by Bucky Dent . The Yankees defeated the Red Sox 5 – 4 , with Guidry getting the win , while Goose Gossage recorded a save . With the victory , the Yankees clinched the AL East championship , en route to winning the 1978 World Series . As of 2016 , the ' 78 Yankees remain the last team to have won the World Series after playing a tiebreaker . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Yankees and Red Sox had combined to win the past three American League ( AL ) pennants . The Red Sox lost the 1975 World Series . The Yankees lost the 1976 World Series , and then won the 1977 World Series . The Yankees and Red Sox were both seen as contenders for the AL East . The Yankees , Red Sox , and Baltimore Orioles , who competed for the AL East championship in 1977 , all expected that they would compete for the AL East in 1978 . The Orioles and Red Sox tied for second place in 1977 , 2 1 ⁄ 2 games behind the Yankees . The young Detroit Tigers , with Lou Whitaker and Alan Trammell , also appeared ready to challenge for the AL East . 
 The Red Sox signed Mike Torrez , who won two games in the 1977 World Series for the Yankees , as a free agent during the offseason . Before the season , the Red Sox acquired Dennis Eckersley to join Torrez , Bill Lee , and Luis Tiant in their starting rotation . The Yankees acquired Goose Gossage and <unk> Eastwick to join Sparky Lyle , 1977 's AL Cy Young Award winner , in their bullpen during the offseason . Both teams placed five players on the AL squad for the 1978 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game : Gossage , Ron Guidry , Graig Nettles , Thurman Munson , and Reggie Jackson represented the Yankees , while Carl Yastrzemski , Fred Lynn , Rick Burleson , Carlton Fisk , and Jim Rice represented the Red Sox . 
 The Red Sox had once led by 10 games ; the Milwaukee Brewers were in second place at the time , while the Yankees were in third . The Yankees experienced injuries to Don Gullett , Willie Randolph , Catfish Hunter , Bucky Dent , and Mickey Rivers , and fell to fourth place in the division . After a shake up engineered by owner George Steinbrenner , with Munson moving from catcher to right field , the Yankees fired their combustible manager Billy Martin , replacing him with Bob Lemon . The Yankees trailed Boston by 14 games by mid @-@ July . However , New York finished the season 53 – 21 in their last 74 games ( a <unk> winning percentage ) , while the Red Sox went 38 – 36 ( .514 ) over the same time frame . This included a four @-@ game sweep of Boston in Fenway Park in early September . The Yankees outscored the Red Sox by a composite score of 42 – 9 , and the series was dubbed " The Boston Massacre " by the sports press . By the end of the four games , the two teams were tied for first place . 
 The Yankees took the AL East lead three days later , and did not lose it until the final Sunday of the season . Holding a one @-@ game lead with seven games to play , New York finished on a 6 – 1 run . However , Boston was a perfect 7 – 0 , enabling them to tie the Yankees at season 's end . After New York lost to the Cleveland Indians on October 1 , the Fenway Park video screen flashed the happy news : " <unk> YOU <unk> <unk> , GAME <unk> . " 
 = = The game = = 
 The tie @-@ breaker game was the first in the AL since 1948 , when the Cleveland Indians defeated the Red Sox , and the first in MLB since the advent of the division system in 1969 . Guidry , who won 24 games in the 162 @-@ game regular season , started on three days of rest , less rest than usual . Torrez started the game for the Red Sox . He started for the Red Sox on Opening Day and had a 16 – 12 record , but contributed to the Red Sox struggles late in the season with six consecutive losses . 
 Carl Yastrzemski hit a home run in the second inning , and Jim Rice drove in Rick Burleson with a single in the sixth inning . Meanwhile , the Yankees had been held to two hits through six innings . With one out in the seventh inning , Chris Chambliss and Roy White of the Yankees both singled off of Torrez , and pinch hitter Jim Spencer flied out . Dent then hit a fly ball that cleared the Green Monster wall in left field to give the Yankees a 3 – 2 lead . 
 Torrez was removed from the game after walking Mickey Rivers . Reliever Bob Stanley came in , and after Rivers stole second Thurman Munson drove him in with a double . In the eighth inning , a home run by Reggie Jackson made the score 5 – 2 in favor of the Yankees . The Red Sox cut New York 's lead to just one run in the bottom of the eighth against closer Goose Gossage on RBI singles by Fred Lynn and Yastrzemski . But the Yankees would hold off the Red Sox , thanks in part to a heads @-@ up defensive play by right fielder Lou Piniella with one out in the bottom of the ninth . With Burleson on first base , Jerry Remy hit a line drive to Piniella in right field , but Piniella was blinded by the late afternoon sun and could not see the ball . However , he pretended to field the play normally , pounding his glove as though he would easily catch the ball . This prevented Burleson from advancing to third base . When Jim Rice followed with a deep fly to the outfield , Burleson could only move up to third base instead of scoring the tying run . 
 Batting with two out and two men on , Yastrzemski popped out to third baseman Graig Nettles in foul territory for the game 's final out , and New York won the game , 5 – 4 . Guidry improved his record to 25 – 3 , while Torrez took the loss . Gossage recorded his 27th save . 
 = = Line score = = 
 = = Box score = = 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 This game was televised regionally by the respective teams ' rights holders , WSBK @-@ TV in Boston and WPIX in New York City . ABC Sports picked up the contest for national viewers , thus providing alternate coverage of the game on its New York and Boston affiliates . Keith Jackson , Howard Cosell and Don Drysdale narrated the action in the ABC booth . 
 On radio , the CBS Radio Network offered national coverage of the game , with Ernie Harwell doing play @-@ by @-@ play and Win Elliot working as an analyst . Locally in the home markets , <unk> in New York City and <unk> in Boston fed the game to the teams ' respective radio networks . 
 In the Red Sox ' broadcast booth , Dick Stockton and Ken " Hawk " Harrelson worked the television side while Ned Martin and Jim Woods were heard on radio . In the Yankees ' booth , Phil Rizzuto , Bill White and Frank Messer alternated play @-@ by @-@ play on both radio and television , and were backed up on radio by Fran Healy . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 For the third straight year , the Yankees went on to face the Kansas City Royals in the 1978 American League Championship Series . The Yankees won the best @-@ of @-@ five series for their third consecutive pennant . New York defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers in the World Series to win their second consecutive championship , and 22nd overall . 
 The loss of the Red Sox was seen as a manifestation of the Curse of the Bambino , long thought to be the reason behind all things bad that ever happened to the Red Sox . Described as a " shocking blast " by the Sporting News , Dent 's home run silenced the Fenway Park crowd . For the light @-@ hitting Dent , it was just his fifth home run of the 1978 season . It sealed Dent 's reputation among Yankee fans , while inspiring the permanent nickname " Bucky Fucking Dent " in New England . Dent , later the manager of the Yankees , was fired during a series in Boston in 1990 . Twenty @-@ five years later , in Game 7 of the 2003 American League Championship Series , Aaron Boone received similar treatment by Red Sox fans after he hit the home run in the bottom of the 11th inning that clinched the pennant for the Yankees , but the Yankees would later lose to the Florida Marlins in the World Series , which went six games . 
 Guidry and Rice were considered candidates for the AL Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) Award for their strong seasons . Rice was named MVP , with Guidry finishing second in the voting . Guidry won the AL Cy Young Award . Lemon was named AL Manager of the Year . 
 = Danny Shay = 
 Daniel Charles Shay ( born Daniel Shea , November 8 , 1876 – December 1 , 1927 ) was a professional baseball player . He played all or part of four seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) , for the Cleveland Blues in 1901 , the St. Louis Cardinals from 1904 to 1905 , and the New York Giants in 1907 , primarily as a shortstop . Even during his playing days , Shay owned a cigar shop , several race horses and a minor league baseball team . One of Shay 's fingers had to be amputated after a 1905 injury . His playing career made a brief comeback two seasons later . 
 After retiring as a player , Shay served as a manager in minor league baseball . By 1917 , Shay was managing the Milwaukee Brewers of the American Association . On May 3 , 1917 , Shay shot a black waiter at a hotel cafe in an argument stemming from a request for sugar ; he claimed self @-@ defense and was acquitted of murder charges . In subsequent media coverage , the verdict was criticized as an injustice . Shay worked as a scout in his last role in baseball . Late in his life , he suffered a stroke and lost the use of his right arm and hand . Ten years after he was acquitted in the murder trial , he was found dead in a hotel room with a gunshot wound to the head . Authorities could not definitively rule out either suicide or murder . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Shay was born in Springfield , Ohio , on November 8 , 1876 to Irish immigrants . Around the time of Shay 's birth , Springfield was a town characterized by tense race relations . Large numbers of black settlers arrived in the city from Kentucky in the wake of the Civil War . Black residents soon outnumbered whites , and they competed for jobs with working class white citizens like Shay 's parents . Schools were integrated in Springfield when Shay was nine years old . He left Springfield by 1895 to begin his career in minor league baseball . 
 Shay 's first recorded minor league appearances came in 1897 with three teams in the Interstate League and the Ohio @-@ West Virginia League . Statistics are sparse until 1899 , when he hit for a .288 batting average in 100 total games for four minor league teams . While playing minor league baseball for the 1900 Youngstown Little Giants , Shay was fined for leaving the team and for using improper language with the team 's manager . 
 Shay made a brief appearance in the major leagues with the Cleveland Blues in 1901 . During the 1902 season , he hit a combined .239 in 167 minor league games . He was arrested in June 1902 after leaving the St. Paul Saints for another team in San Francisco . He was charged with running up an unpaid bill with St. Paul ; he was assessed a $ 25 fine and agreed to repay $ 138 . Shay played in 193 games for the 1903 San Francisco Seals , registering 721 at @-@ bats and a .243 batting average . 
 = = MLB career = = 
 In late 1903 , a baseball column suggested that the Detroit Tigers were interested in Shay , but he was said to be happy playing in California . During Shay 's tenure in San Francisco , he got married . Shay went to spring training with the St. Louis Cardinals before the 1904 season . He impressed the team , prompting speculation that shortstop Dave Brain would move to third base and third baseman Jimmy Burke would serve as a utility infielder . Shay played 99 games for the Cardinals in 1904 . 
 Shay sustained an injury to his pinky finger during the 1905 season . The finger did not heal properly and it required amputation . He sat out of major league baseball in 1906 , refusing to play in St. Louis . Shay was a successful businessman during his early career ; he owned a cigar shop in Stockton , California , purchased an outlaw baseball team and owned several race horses . As Shay prepared to return to baseball after a year away , an article in The Pittsburgh Press said , " There have been many ball players who have quit the game and became wealthy on the turf , but Shay is the only specimen living who was wealthy on the turf and quit the game to play professional baseball . " 
 In December 1906 , Shay announced that he was excited about the possibility of playing for the New York Giants . He was making plans to leave the tobacco business so that he could be available to join the team for 1907 . Giants manager John McGraw secured Shay 's release from St. Louis in January 1907 , but he was unable to sign Shay during initial negotiations with him . Shay signed with the team the next month . Reporting on the signing , The New York Times described Shay as " a trustworthy batsman , and a good fielder ... a splendid baserunner , cool at all times , and a player of considerable judgment . " The article said that Shay was one of three candidates to play second base . He appeared in 35 games for the Giants that season . 
 = = Post @-@ MLB career = = 
 In January 1908 , newspaper reports held that Shay would not return to the Giants and that McGraw would meet with him to begin arranging a trade that would send him to another team . That year he played for the Stockton Millers of the California League , an independent minor league . Stockton won the 1908 league championship . During the 1909 season , he became a player @-@ manager for the Kansas City Blues of the American Association . 
 While Shay was managing at Kansas City in early 1910 , American Association president Thomas <unk> imposed new conduct rules for the league . The new system emphasized fines for players and managers rather than simply ejecting them when they behaved poorly . After Shay was ejected from three games in a four @-@ game span , a Minnesota newspaper article questioned whether his behavior would be subject to additional disciplinary action . The next month , Shay released 48 @-@ year @-@ old Jake Beckley , prompting his retirement after one of the longest careers in professional baseball history . The first baseman had tried to make the Kansas City team after 20 years in the National League . 
 In the spring of 1911 , Shay was riding in a taxi that collided with a dray and he sustained severe cuts to his face . Shay was suspended indefinitely in late June 1911 after a fight with an umpire . In October 1911 , Shay abruptly resigned as the manager in Kansas City . He declined to say what prompted his resignation and said that he might not be permanently finished with baseball , but he said that he was finished with the Kansas City club . When asked about the possibility of a major league managing job , Shay responded , " There is nothing to be said now , but there may be something later . " 
 When the Columbian Baseball League was forming in 1912 , The New York Times named Shay as one of two candidates to manage the league 's Kansas City team . The president of the new league , John T. Powers , said that the league would not serve as a third major league , but he noted that many players were eager to sign with the league after their contracts had expired in 1911 . The league never materialized . One of its main investors , brewer Otto Stifel , withdrew his support of the league before play began . 
 Shay managed the 1913 Helena Senators in a minor league known as the Union Association . His wife was killed in a car accident in 1914 , and their two children were sent to live with relatives . Shay sat out of baseball that year . In 1915 , Kansas City manager Bill Armour was promoted to vice president , and the team rehired Shay as its manager . Late in the 1916 season , Shay was dismissed as manager . He had not been on the bench recently , and his absence was attributed to poor health . Art Phelan had been managing the team on an interim basis and was named as Shay 's replacement for the rest of the season . 
 Shay was signed to manage the Milwaukee Brewers of the American Association in 1917 . His contract included a clause prohibiting him from drinking alcohol , though he was still known to visit bars and order Dubonnet , a liquor that Shay said was " soft as a milk shake . " Shay 's predecessor in Milwaukee , Harry " Pep " Clark , resigned in the middle of the 1916 season . Clark had led the team to league championships in 1913 and 1914 , but he experienced difficulty by the next year when the club 's ownership refused to sign new players to replace aging veterans . 
 = = Shooting and trial = = 
 On May 3 , 1917 , the Brewers traveled to Indianapolis and defeated the team there to improve their win @-@ loss record to 7 – 8 . Shay visited a local tavern that night and had some drinks . The tavern owner took Shay to a beauty parlor and introduced him to its owner , Gertrude Anderson . Anderson gave Shay a manicure and accompanied him to the Hotel English . Shay complained to busboy Eugene Jones about the placement of sugar bowls at his table . Clarence Euell , a black waiter at the cafe , came to address Shay 's concern . An argument ensued during which Shay pulled out a gun and shot Euell in the abdomen . Euell wrestled Shay to the ground , pressing his foot down on Shay 's head . 
 Euell was taken to a hospital and died about an hour after the shooting . He was never able to formally identify Shay as the shooter . When Shay was arrested in his hotel room that night , police officers said that he appeared to be intoxicated . He refused to make any statements . He was held without bail and charged with second @-@ degree murder . A conviction carried the possibility of life imprisonment . A few days after the shooting , American Association owners were collecting funds to assist in Shay 's criminal defense . As the case was about to go to trial , one of the attorneys became ill , so the proceedings were delayed for several weeks . The trial was reset for November 12 , 1917 . 
 At a coroner 's inquest , several witnesses had testified that they saw Shay shoot Euell after an argument over a sugar bowl . Anderson said that she did not see much after the initial verbal exchange because she fled the dining area as soon as the argument escalated . At trial , Anderson said that Shay had two drinks at the cafe . She said that Euell had been staring at her , was rude to them and lunged toward Shay before the shooting . The cafe 's manager said that Euell had not been rude to Shay . Two waiters denied that Euell had lunged at Shay . A cashier testified that when Shay asked for sugar , Euell pointed out that there was already some on his table , but he brought two more bowls . She said that Shay called Euell " <unk> " and confronted Euell with the gun while the waiter was walking away . Shay denied being drunk and said that Euell hit him and threatened to kill him before the shooting . 
 At 11 p.m. on November 21 , the case was sent to the jury . At 9 : 20 a.m. the next day , a not guilty verdict was announced . There was applause in the courtroom when Shay was cleared . An editorial in the local newspaper denounced the verdict the next day . Regarding Shay 's self @-@ defense assertion , the editorial said , " The only testimony that even tends to sustain that theory was his own . " Black newspapers also criticized the outcome of the case . 
 = = Later life = = 
 From the time of Shay 's arrest through the end of the 1918 season , the Brewers went through four more managers . Clark returned to the team in 1922 , spending several more years as manager . Shay ended his baseball career as a scout for Columbus of the American Association . 
 Shay was found dead in a Kansas City hotel room on December 1 , 1927 . He was found with a gunshot wound to the head . Police officials initially said that the manner of death could have been either suicide or murder . Shay stayed in his room on the day that he died . A porter went to check on him that evening and found him on the floor with a pistol a few inches from his right hand . When physicians examined Shay 's body , they found that a bullet had entered the right ear and exited the back of the head . Shay had lost the use of his right arm and hand after a stroke . Police said that if Shay were holding the gun in his left hand , it would not have been easy for him to shoot himself in the right side of the head . 
 After his death , sportswriter Manning Vaughan described Shay as a " fire eating , umpire hating player and just as hard when he became a manager . " He said that Shay was a " polished gentleman – with his friends . But he was everything else with people he did not like . He would fight at the least provocation , and as it was generally known he packed a gun the gentlemen involved never stuck around very long to argue . " 
 = 1975 Australian constitutional crisis = 
 The 1975 Australian constitutional crisis , also known simply as " the Dismissal " , has been described as the greatest political and constitutional crisis in Australian history . It culminated on 11 November 1975 with the dismissal from office of the Prime Minister , Gough Whitlam of the Australian Labor Party ( ALP ) , by Governor @-@ General Sir John Kerr , who then appointed the Leader of the Opposition , Malcolm Fraser of the Liberal Party , as caretaker Prime Minister . 
 Whitlam 's Labor government had been elected in 1972 with a small majority in the House of Representatives , but with the Opposition controlling the Senate . Another election in 1974 resulted in little change . While the Whitlam Government introduced many new policies and programs , it was also rocked by scandals and political miscalculations . In October 1975 , the Opposition used its control of the Senate to defer passage of appropriation bills , which finance governmental operations and which had been passed by the House of Representatives . The Opposition stated that they would continue to do so unless Whitlam called an election for the House of Representatives and urged Kerr to dismiss Whitlam unless he agreed to their demand . Whitlam believed that Kerr would not dismiss him , and Kerr did nothing to disabuse Whitlam of this notion . 
 On 11 November 1975 , Whitlam intended to call a half @-@ Senate election in an attempt to break the deadlock . When he went to seek Kerr 's approval of the election , Kerr instead dismissed him as Prime Minister and shortly thereafter installed Fraser in his place . Acting quickly before all ALP parliamentarians became aware of the change of government , Fraser and his allies were able to secure passage of the appropriation bills , and Kerr dissolved Parliament for a double dissolution election . Fraser and his government were returned with a massive majority in the election held the following month . 
 The events of the Dismissal led to only minor constitutional change . The Senate retained its power to block supply , and the Governor @-@ General the power to dismiss government ministers . However , these powers have not since been used to force a government from office . Kerr was widely criticised by ALP supporters for his actions , resigned early as Governor @-@ General , and lived much of his remaining life abroad . Though Whitlam and Fraser later reconciled , Kerr , who died in 1991 , continues to be reviled by some . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Constitutional = = = 
 As established by the Constitution of Australia , the Parliament of Australia is composed of two houses , the House of Representatives and the Senate , together with the Queen . The monarch is represented through the Governor @-@ General , who has executive powers granted in the Constitution , as well as rarely exercised reserve powers . The reserve powers are the legal authorities remaining in the Crown after most of its historic powers were transferred to Parliament or to officials . The Governor @-@ General ordinarily acts only upon the advice of the government , but can act independently and against advice in exercising the reserve powers . The Governor @-@ General is removable by the Queen on the advice of the Australian Prime Minister . As Liberal Party leader Malcolm Fraser , who would play a large part in the crisis , put it , " The Queen has tenure , and she couldn 't be sacked . But a Governor @-@ General holds office at pleasure , and if he ceases to please then he can be removed by a Prime Minister . " 
 As in most Westminster system parliaments , Australia 's government is formed by the party enjoying the confidence of the lower House of Parliament , the House of Representatives . However , Australia 's Parliament also has a powerful upper house , the Senate , which must pass any legislation initiated by the House of Representatives if it is to become law . The composition of the Senate , in which each state has an equal number of senators regardless of that state 's population , was originally designed to attract the Australian colonies into one Federation . The Constitution forbids the Senate to originate or amend a money bill , but places no limitation on the Senate 's ability to defeat one . In 1970 , Gough Whitlam , as Leader of the Opposition , had stated of a budget bill , " Let me make it clear at the outset that our opposition to this Budget is no mere formality . We intend to press our opposition by all available means on all related measures in both Houses . If the motion is defeated , we will vote against the Bills here and in the Senate . Our purpose is to destroy this Budget and destroy the Government which has sponsored it . " 
 Prior to the 1975 crisis , the Governor @-@ General 's power to dismiss a Prime Minister against the incumbent 's will under Section 64 of the Constitution had never been exercised . Twice since Federation , conflicts between state premiers and state governors , who perform analogous functions to the Prime Minister and Governor @-@ General at the state level , had resulted in the departure of one or the other . In 1916 , New South Wales Premier William Holman was expelled from the Australian Labor Party for supporting conscription . He managed to hold on to power with the aid of opposition parties and consulted the Governor , Sir Gerald Strickland , proposing to pass legislation to extend the term of the lower house of the state legislature by a year . When Strickland objected , stating that such a course was unfair to Labor , Holman had him replaced . In 1932 the New South Wales Labor Premier , Jack Lang , refused to pay moneys owing to the Federal government , which froze the state 's bank accounts , causing Lang to order that payments to the state government be only in cash . The governor , Sir Philip Game , wrote to Lang , warning him that ministers were breaking the law , and that if they continued , he would have to obtain ministers who could carry on government within legal bounds . Lang replied that he would not resign , and Game dismissed his government and commissioned the Leader of the Opposition , Bertram Stevens , to form a caretaker government pending a new election , in which Labor was defeated . 
 Among the powers granted to the Governor @-@ General is the power to dissolve both houses of Parliament under Section 57 of the Constitution in the event that the House of Representatives twice passes a bill at least three months apart and the Senate will not agree to pass the bill . In both instances where those circumstances arose prior to the Whitlam Government , in 1914 and 1951 , the Governor @-@ General dissolved Parliament for a " double dissolution " election on the advice of the Prime Minister . 
 = = = Political = = = 
 Gough Whitlam 's Labor government was elected in 1972 after 23 years of rule by a coalition formed by the Liberal and Country parties . The ALP Government enjoyed a nine @-@ seat majority in the House of Representatives , but did not control the Senate . In accordance with pre @-@ election promises , it instituted a large number of policy changes , and offered much legislation . The Opposition , which still controlled the Senate , allowed some Government bills to pass the Senate , and blocked others . 
 In April 1974 , faced with attempts by the Opposition to obstruct supply ( appropriation bills ) in the Senate , Whitlam obtained the concurrence of the Governor @-@ General , Sir Paul Hasluck , to a double dissolution . Labor was returned at the election on 18 May with a reduced House majority of five seats . The Coalition and Labor each had 29 Senate seats , with the balance of power held by two independents . 
 Hasluck had been Governor @-@ General since 1969 , and his term was shortly due to expire . Whitlam wanted him to remain a further two years , but Hasluck declined , citing his wife 's refusal to remain at Yarralumla longer than the originally agreed five years . Whitlam offered the post to businessman Ken Myer , who turned it down . Whitlam then turned to Sir John Kerr , the Chief Justice of New South Wales . Kerr was reluctant to give up the Chief Justiceship , in which he intended to remain another ten years , for the Governor @-@ General 's post , which traditionally lasted five years . At Kerr 's request , Whitlam informally agreed that if both men were still in office in five years , Kerr would be reappointed . Whitlam also secured legislation to address Kerr 's financial concerns about the position , including authorising a pension for the Governor @-@ General or his widow . The Leader of the Opposition , Billy Snedden , was enthusiastic about the appointment and also agreed to reappoint Kerr in five years , were he Prime Minister at the time . Kerr then agreed to take the post , was duly appointed by Queen Elizabeth II , and was sworn in on 11 July 1974 . 
 Six of the bills that had been the subject of the double dissolution were introduced in Parliament a third time and , as expected , were again rejected by the Senate . Section 57 of the Constitution provides that , after a double dissolution election , if bills that had been rejected twice by the Senate in the previous parliament were again passed by the House and again rejected by the Senate , they could then be put to a joint sitting of both houses . On 30 July , Whitlam gained Kerr 's agreement for a joint sitting , which was set for 6 – 7 August 1974 . The joint sitting , the only one in Australia 's history under Section 57 , passed all six bills , including the enabling legislation for Medibank . 
 = = = Controversy and vacancies = = = 
 In December 1974 , Whitlam was anxious to find new sources of money to finance his development plans . After a meeting at the Prime Minister 's residence , The Lodge , Whitlam and three of his ministers ( Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Jim Cairns , Attorney @-@ General Senator Lionel Murphy , and Minister for Minerals and Energy Rex Connor ) signed a letter of authority for Connor to borrow up to US $ 4 billion . This letter was described by author and journalist Alan Reid as the " death warrant of the Whitlam ALP government " . 
 Connor and other ministers had made contact with a hitherto obscure Pakistani financier , <unk> Khemlani , as early as November 1974 . Khemlani was said to have contacts in the newly enriched Arab oil nations . None of the efforts to secure a loan , whether through Khemlani or by other routes , bore fruit but , as information about the " Loans Affair " trickled out , the government lost support . 
 In February 1975 , Whitlam decided to appoint Senator Murphy a justice of the High Court of Australia , even though Murphy 's Senate seat would not be up for election if a half @-@ Senate election were held . Under proportional representation , Labor could win three of the five New South Wales seats , but if Murphy 's seat was also contested , it was most unlikely to win four out of six . Thus , appointing Murphy would almost certainly cost the ALP a Senate seat at the next half @-@ Senate election . Whitlam appointed Murphy anyway . By convention , senators appointed by the state legislature to fill casual vacancies were from the same political party as the former senator . The New South Wales premier , Tom Lewis , felt that this convention only applied to vacancies caused by deaths or ill @-@ health , and arranged for the legislature to elect Cleaver Bunton , former mayor of Albury and an independent . 
 By March 1975 , many Liberal parliamentarians felt that Snedden was doing an inadequate job as Leader of the Opposition , and that Whitlam was dominating him in the House of Representatives . Malcolm Fraser challenged Snedden for the leadership , and defeated him on 21 March . At a press conference after winning the leadership , Fraser stated : 
 The question of supply — let me deal with it this way . I generally believe if a government is elected to power in the lower House and has the numbers and can maintain the numbers in the lower House , it is entitled to expect that it will govern for the three @-@ year term unless quite extraordinary events intervene ... Having said that ... if we do make up our minds at some stage that the Government is so reprehensible that an Opposition must use whatever power is available to it , then I 'd want to find a situation in which Mr. Whitlam woke up one morning finding the decision had been made and finding that he had been caught with his pants well and truly down . 
 Whitlam 's original deputy prime minister , Lance Barnard , had been challenged and defeated for his post by Cairns in late 1974 . Whitlam then offered Barnard a diplomatic post ; in early 1975 Barnard agreed to this . If the appointment went through , Barnard 's resignation from the House of Representatives would trigger a by @-@ election in his Tasmanian electorate of Bass . ALP officials felt that , given the party 's weakened state , Barnard should remain in Parliament and be given no preferment if he resigned ; party president and future Prime Minister Bob Hawke described the decision to appoint Barnard as " an act of lunacy " . Barnard had been losing support over the last several elections , and a swing of 4 % against Labor would be enough to defeat it . The Liberals had a candidate who had been nursing the electorate ; Labor had no candidate selected and a bitter preselection in the offing . Barnard resigned , and was appointed ambassador to Sweden . The election on 28 June proved a disaster for Labor , losing the seat with a swing against it of 17 % . 
 The next week , Whitlam fired Cairns for misleading Parliament regarding the Loans Affair amid innuendo about his relationship with his Principal Private Secretary , Junie Morosi . He was replaced as deputy by Frank Crean . At the time of Cairns ' dismissal , one Senate seat was vacant , following the death on 30 June of Queensland ALP Senator Bertie Milliner . The state Labor party nominated Mal Colston , who was the highest unelected candidate on the party 's Queensland list in 1974 . This resulted in deadlock in Brisbane ; the unicameral Queensland legislature twice voted against Colston , and the party refused to submit any alternative candidates . Queensland Country Party Premier Joh Bjelke @-@ Petersen had evidence that Colston , a schoolteacher by trade , had set a school on fire during a labour dispute , though the police had refused to prosecute . After the legislature voted Colston down a second time , Bjelke @-@ Petersen instructed his majority in the legislature to elect a low @-@ level union official , Albert Field , who had contacted his office and expressed a willingness to serve . In interviews , Field made it clear he would not support Whitlam . Field was expelled from the ALP for standing against Colston , and Labor senators boycotted his swearing @-@ in . Whitlam argued that because of the vacancies being filled as they were , the Senate was " corrupted " and " tainted " , with the Opposition enjoying a majority they did not win at the ballot box . When Labor learned that Field had not given the required three weeks ' notice to the Queensland Department of Education , it challenged his appointment in the High Court , arguing that he was still technically a public <unk> thus ineligible to serve in the Senate . With Field on leave throughout the remainder of the crisis , the Coalition refused to provide a " pair " to account for his absence , giving it an effective majority of 30 – 29 in the Senate . 
 = = Deadlock = = 
 = = = <unk> of supply = = = 
 On 10 October , the High Court ruled that the act passed at the joint sitting that gave the Australian Capital Territory ( ACT ) and the Northern Territory two senators each was valid . A half @-@ Senate election needed to be held by June 1976 ; most senators @-@ elect would take their seats on 1 July but the territorial senators , and those filling Field 's and Bunton 's seats would take their places at once . The ruling meant that it was possible for the ALP to gain a temporary majority in the Senate , at least until 1 July 1976 . To do so , the ALP would have to win Field 's and Bunton 's seats , and one seat in each territory , and have the second ACT seat fall to either a Labor candidate or an independent , former Liberal Prime Minister John Gorton , now estranged from his party . If this happened , Labor would have an effective 33 – 31 margin , would be able to pass supply if that was still an issue , and also could pass electoral redistribution laws ( which had been passed by the House , though twice defeated by the Senate ) that would give it an advantage at the next election . 
 The journalist and author Alan Reid described the position of the Government and Opposition as the crisis became acute in mid @-@ October : 
 While it was possibly an overstatement to describe the 1975 position as a choice between evils , neither of the two major political groupings reached the 15 October 1975 crunch position with completely clean hands . Fraser and the Liberal @-@ CP senators ... lacked the numbers to defer the Budget until the arrival in the Senate of Albert Patrick Field , whose arrival was not due to any decision by the Australian voters but to a decision by one of the rulers , the Whitlam @-@ hating Bjelke @-@ Petersen ... Whitlam for his part had decided even before the Budget was deferred to embark upon the bold , Cromwellian project of changing the Australian Constitution , not through the vote of the mass electorate ... but through prodigious personal exertions backed by the support of his parliamentary followers . 
 In the wake of the High Court ruling , and with the appropriation bills due to be considered by the Senate on 16 October , Fraser was undecided whether to block supply . His biographer , Philip Ayres , contends that , had there been no further government scandals , he would not have done so . Khemlani , however , had alleged - contrary to government statements - that Connor had never revoked his authority to obtain loans and had been in regular contact with him even into mid @-@ 1975 . On 13 October , the Melbourne Herald printed documents in support of Khemlani 's allegations , and on the following day , Connor resigned . Fraser determined to block supply , convened a shadow cabinet meeting and received the unanimous support of the Coalition frontbench . At a press conference , Fraser cited the poor state of the economy and the continuing scandals as reasons for his decision . Without the passage of fresh appropriations , supply would be exhausted on 30 November . 
 The Governor of Queensland , Sir Colin Hannah , gave a speech denigrating the Whitlam Government on 15 October , in violation of the convention that state governors remain neutral . Hannah held a dormant commission as Administrator of the Commonwealth to act as Governor @-@ General in the event of Kerr 's death , resignation , or absence from Australia . Whitlam immediately contacted Buckingham Palace to arrange for Hannah 's dormant commission to be revoked , a process which took ten days to complete . Although Whitlam later alleged that he never contemplated dismissing Kerr during the crisis , on 16 October , while speaking with Kerr and visiting Malaysian Prime Minister Tun Abdul Razak , he told Kerr that if the crisis continued , " It could be a question of whether I get to the Queen first for your recall , or whether you get in first with my dismissal " . Kerr saw the statement as a threat ; Whitlam later stated the comment was " flippant " and designed to turn the conversation to another subject . 
 On 16 and 17 October , the Senate , with the unanimous support of the Coalition majority , deferred the appropriation bills . The Coalition took the position that Kerr could dismiss Whitlam if the Government could not secure supply . Whitlam 's former solicitor @-@ general Bob Ellicott , now a Liberal member of the House , issued a legal opinion on 16 October stating that the Governor @-@ General had the power to dismiss Whitlam , and should do so forthwith if Whitlam could not state how he would obtain supply . Ellicott indicated that Whitlam was treating Kerr as if he had no discretion but to follow prime ministerial advice , when in fact the Governor @-@ General could and should dismiss a ministry unable to secure supply . Ellicott stated that Kerr 
 should ask the Prime Minister if the Government is prepared to advise him to dissolve the House of Representatives and the Senate or the House of Representatives alone as a means of assuring that the disagreement between the two Houses is resolved . If the Prime Minister refuses to do either , it is then open to the Governor @-@ General to dismiss his present Ministers and seek others who are prepared to give him the only proper advice open . This he should proceed to do . 
 = = = Consultations and negotiations = = = 
 Kerr rang Whitlam on Sunday 19 October , asking permission to consult with the Chief Justice of the High Court , Sir Garfield Barwick , concerning the crisis . Whitlam advised Kerr not to do so , noting that no Governor @-@ General had consulted with a Chief Justice under similar circumstances since 1914 , when Australia was at a much earlier stage of her constitutional development . On 21 October , Kerr phoned Whitlam regarding the Ellicott opinion , and asked , " It 's all bullshit , isn 't it ? " . Whitlam agreed with Kerr 's view . Kerr then requested that the Government provide him with a written legal opinion rebutting Ellicott 's views . Kerr would receive no written advice from the Government until 6 November . Journalist and author Paul Kelly , who wrote two books on the crisis , paints this delay as a major mistake by Whitlam , given Kerr 's judicial background . Kerr also asked on 21 October for Whitlam 's permission to interview Fraser , which the Prime Minister readily granted , and the two men met that night . Fraser told Kerr that the Opposition were determined to block supply . Fraser indicated that the Opposition 's decision to defer the appropriation bills , rather than defeating them , was a tactical decision , since then the bills would remain in the control of the Senate and could be passed at any time . He stated that the Coalition agreed with the Ellicott opinion , and proposed to continue deferring supply while it awaited events . The media were not told of the substance of the conversation , and instead reported that Kerr had reprimanded Fraser for blocking supply , causing the Governor @-@ General 's office to issue a denial . 
 Throughout the crisis , Kerr did not tell Whitlam of his increasing concerns , nor did he suggest that he might dismiss Whitlam . He believed nothing he said would influence Whitlam , and feared that , if Whitlam perceived him as a possible opponent , the Prime Minister would procure his dismissal from the Queen . Accordingly , though Kerr dealt with Whitlam in an affable manner , he did not confide his thinking to the Prime Minister . Labor Senator Tony Mulvihill later related that " Whitlam would come back to each caucus meeting and say , ' I saw His Excellency ... No worry . He 's got to do it his way . ' ... at no time did he hint that the Governor @-@ General was frowning . " 
 There was intense public interest and concern at the stalemate , and Fraser and his Liberals acted to shore up support . Liberal frontbenchers worked to build unity for the tactic in state organisations . The former longtime Premier of South Australia Sir Thomas Playford was speaking out against the blocking of supply , causing South Australia Senator Don Jessop to waver in his support for the tactic . Fraser was able to co @-@ ordinate a wave of communications from party members which served to neutralise both men . Fraser sought the backing of the retired longtime Liberal Prime Minister , Sir Robert Menzies , and went to see Menzies in person , taking with him a 1947 statement by Menzies supporting the blocking of supply in the upper house of the Victorian Parliament . He did not have to use the paper ; Menzies stated that he found the tactic distasteful , but in this case necessary . The former Prime Minister issued a statement in support of Fraser 's tactics . 
 Kerr invited Whitlam and Minister for Labour Senator Jim McClelland to lunch on 30 October , immediately preceding an Executive Council meeting . At that meal , Kerr proposed a possible compromise . If the Opposition were to allow supply to pass , Whitlam would not advise a half @-@ Senate election until May or June 1976 , and the Senate would not convene until 1 July , thus obviating the threat of a possible temporary Labor majority . Whitlam , who was determined to destroy both Fraser 's leadership and the Senate 's right to block supply , refused any compromise . 
 = = = Decision = = = 
 Fraser chaired a summit of leaders of the Coalition parties on 2 November . The resulting communiqué urged the Coalition senators to continue deferring supply . It also threatened , should Kerr grant Whitlam a half @-@ Senate election , that the Coalition state premiers would advise their governors not to issue writs , thus blocking the election from taking place in the four states with non @-@ Labor premiers . After the meeting , Fraser proposed a compromise : that the Opposition would concede supply if Whitlam agreed to hold a House of Representatives election at the same time as the half @-@ Senate election . Whitlam rejected the idea . 
 On 22 October , Whitlam had asked the Attorney @-@ General , Kep Enderby , to have a paper drafted rebutting the Ellicott opinion for presentation to Kerr . Enderby delegated this task to the Solicitor @-@ General , Maurice Byers , and other officials . On 6 November , Enderby was to see Kerr to give him a legal opinion regarding the Government 's alternative plans in case supply ran out . <unk> were to be issued to Commonwealth employees and contractors instead of cheques , to be redeemed from banks after the crisis ended — transactions which were to be rejected by major banks as " tainted with illegality " . Enderby decided to present Kerr with the rebuttal to Ellicott . When Enderby reviewed the document , he found that , while it argued for the Government 's position , it recognised both that the Senate had the constitutional right to block supply , and that the reserve powers were still extant — matters with which Enderby did not agree . He presented Kerr with the rebuttal , but crossed out Byers ' signature on it and told Kerr of his disagreement . Enderby told Kerr that the Byers rebuttal was " background " for formal written advice , to be presented by Whitlam . Later that day , Kerr met with Fraser again . The Opposition leader told him that if Kerr did not dismiss Whitlam , the Opposition planned to criticise him in Parliament for failing to carry out his duty . 
 Kerr concluded on 6 November that neither Government nor Opposition would yield , and that supply would run out . The Governor @-@ General decided that , as Whitlam could not secure supply , and would not resign or advise an election for the House of Representatives , he would have to sack him . As Kerr feared that Whitlam might advise the Queen to dismiss him , he considered it important that Whitlam be given no hint of the impending action . Kerr later stated that were Whitlam to seek his dismissal , it would involve the Queen in politics . Seeking confirmation of his decision , he contacted Chief Justice Barwick , met with him and asked for his views of a dismissal of Whitlam . Barwick furnished him with written advice containing his view that a Governor @-@ General could and should dismiss a Prime Minister who was unable to obtain supply . Barwick specified that the Prime Minister should also not have refused either to resign or to advise a general election , with which Kerr agreed . Another member of the High Court and a friend of Kerr , Sir Anthony Mason , gave Kerr similar advice privately on 9 November . But Mason added that the Governor @-@ General needed to notify the Prime Minister of his intention to proceed to dismissal . 
 On 9 November , Fraser contacted Whitlam and invited him to negotiations with the Coalition aimed at settling the dispute . Whitlam agreed , and a meeting was set for 9 am on Tuesday 11 November , at Parliament House . That Tuesday was also the deadline for an election to be called if it were to be held before Christmas . Both Government and Opposition leaders were in Melbourne on the night of 10 November for the Lord Mayor 's banquet . To ensure the Opposition leaders could reach Canberra in time for the meeting , Whitlam brought them back in his VIP aircraft , which arrived in Canberra at midnight . 
 = = Dismissal = = 
 = = = Meeting at Yarralumla = = = 
 At 9 a.m. on 11 November , Whitlam , together with deputy prime minister Frank Crean and Leader of the House Fred Daly , met with the Liberal and Country party leaders . No compromise could be reached . Whitlam informed the Coalition leaders that he would be advising Kerr to hold a half @-@ Senate election on 13 December , and he would not be seeking interim supply for the period before the election . Thinking it unlikely that Kerr would grant the election without supply , Fraser warned Whitlam that the Governor @-@ General might make up his own mind about the matter . Whitlam was dismissive and after the meeting broke , telephoned Kerr to tell him that he needed an appointment to advise him to hold a half @-@ Senate election . Both men were busy in the morning , Kerr with Remembrance Day commemorations , and Whitlam with a caucus meeting and a censure motion in the House which the Opposition had submitted . The two discussed a meeting for 1 : 00 p.m. , though Kerr 's office later called Whitlam 's and confirmed the time as 12 : 45 . Word of this change did not reach the Prime Minister . Whitlam announced the request for a half @-@ Senate election to his caucus , which approved it . 
 After hearing from Whitlam , Kerr called Fraser . According to Fraser , Kerr asked him whether he , if commissioned Prime Minister , could secure supply , would immediately thereafter advise a double @-@ dissolution election , and would refrain from new policies and investigations of the Whitlam Government pending the election . Fraser stated that he agreed . Kerr denied the exchange took place via telephone , though both men agree those questions were asked later in the day before Kerr commissioned Fraser as Prime Minister . According to Kerr , Fraser was supposed to come to Yarralumla at 1 @.@ 00 pm . 
 Whitlam was delayed in leaving Parliament House , while Fraser left slightly early , with the result that Fraser arrived at Yarralumla first . He was taken into an anteroom , and his car was moved . Whitlam maintained that the purpose in moving Fraser 's car was to ensure that the Prime Minister was not tipped off by seeing it , stating , " Had I known Mr. Fraser was already there , I would not have set foot in Yarralumla . " Kelly doubted Whitlam would have recognised Fraser 's car , which was an ordinary Ford LTD from the car pool . According to Fraser biographer Philip Ayres , " A white car pulled up at the front would signify nothing in particular — it would simply be in the way " . 
 Whitlam arrived just before 1 : 00 p.m. and was taken to Kerr 's office by an aide . He brought with him the formal letter advising a half @-@ Senate election , and after the two men were seated , attempted to give it to Kerr . In their accounts of their meeting , both men agree that Kerr then told Whitlam that his commission as Prime Minister was withdrawn under Section 64 of the Constitution , and handed him a letter and statement of reasons . Kerr later wrote that at this point , Whitlam got to his feet , looked at the office 's phones , and stated , " I must get in touch with the Palace at once . " Whitlam , however disputed this , and stated that he asked Kerr if he had consulted the Palace , to which Kerr replied that he did not need to , and that he had the advice of Barwick . Both accounts agree that Kerr then stated that they would both have to live with this , to which Whitlam replied , " You certainly will . " The dismissal concluded with Kerr wishing Whitlam luck in the election , and offering his hand , which the former Prime Minister took . 
 After Whitlam left , Kerr called in Fraser , informed him of the dismissal , and asked if he would form a caretaker government , to which Fraser agreed . Fraser later stated that his overwhelming sensation at the news was relief . Fraser left to return to Parliament House , where he conferred with Coalition leaders , while Kerr joined the luncheon party that had been waiting for him , apologising to his guests and offering the excuse that he had been busy dismissing the Government . 
 = = = Parliamentary strategy = = = 
 Whitlam returned to the Prime Minister 's residence , The Lodge , where he had lunch . As his aides arrived , he informed them of his sacking . Whitlam drafted a resolution for the House , expressing confidence in his Government . No ALP Senate leaders were at The Lodge , nor did Whitlam and his party contact any when they drove back to Parliament House , confining their strategy to the House of Representatives . 
 Prior to Whitlam 's dismissal , the Labor leadership decided to introduce a motion that the Senate pass the appropriation bills . With ALP senators unaware of Whitlam 's sacking , that plan went ahead . Senator Doug McClelland , manager of the ALP Government 's business in the Senate , informed Coalition Senate leader Reg Withers of Labor 's intent at about 1 @.@ 30 . Withers then attended a leadership meeting and learned of Fraser 's appointment ; he assured the new Prime Minister he could secure supply . When the Senate convened , the ALP Senate leader , Ken Wriedt , made the motion . Even as Wriedt did so , he was told that the government had been sacked , which he initially refused to believe . Authoritative word did not reach Wriedt until 2 @.@ 15 pm , by which time it was too late to withdraw the motion and instead obstruct his party 's appropriation bill to hinder Fraser . At 2 @.@ 24 pm , Labor 's appropriation bills passed the Senate , fulfilling Fraser 's first promise . 
 In the House , desultory debate on Fraser 's censure motion ended with it being amended by the ALP majority into a condemnation of Fraser and passed . By 2 @.@ 34 pm , when Fraser rose and announced that he had been commissioned as Prime Minister , word of the dismissal had spread through the House . Fraser announced his intent to advise a double dissolution , and moved that the House adjourn . His motion was defeated . Fraser 's new government suffered repeated defeats in the House , which passed a motion of no confidence in him , and asked the Speaker , Gordon Scholes , to urge the Governor @-@ General to recommission Whitlam . Scholes was initially told that an appointment might not be possible that day , but after stating that he would reconvene the House and tell them of the refusal , was given an appointment with Kerr for 4 @.@ 45 pm . 
 = = = Dissolution = = = 
 With the appropriation bills approved by both Houses , they were sent over to Yarralumla where Kerr gave them Royal Assent . With supply assured , he then received Fraser , who advised him that 21 bills ( including the electoral redistribution bills ) which had been introduced since the last election fulfilled the double dissolution provisions of Section 57 . Fraser asked that both Houses be dissolved for an election on 13 December . Kerr signed the proclamation dissolving Parliament , and sent his Official Secretary , David Smith , to proclaim the dissolution from the front steps of Parliament House . 
 At 4 @.@ 45 , Kerr received Scholes , and informed him of the dissolution . Kerr wrote that " nothing else of relevance " took place between the two men , but by Scholes 's account , he accused Kerr of bad faith for making an appointment to receive the Speaker , and then not waiting to hear from him before dissolving Parliament . Whitlam later stated that it would have been wiser for Scholes to take the appropriation bills with him , rather than having them sent ahead . 
 Even as Scholes and Kerr spoke , Smith reached Parliament House . The dismissal was by then publicly known , and an angry crowd of ALP supporters had gathered , filling the steps and spilling over both into the roadway and into Parliament House itself . Many of the demonstrators were ALP staffers ; others were from the Australian National University . Smith was forced to enter Parliament House through a side door and make his way to the steps from the inside . He read the proclamation , though the boos of the crowd drowned him out , and concluded with the traditional " God save the Queen " . Former Prime Minister Whitlam , who had been standing behind Smith , then addressed the crowd : 
 Well may we say " God save the Queen " , because nothing will save the Governor @-@ General ! The Proclamation which you have just heard read by the Governor @-@ General 's Official Secretary was countersigned Malcolm Fraser , who will undoubtedly go down in Australian history from Remembrance Day 1975 as Kerr 's cur . They won 't silence the outskirts of Parliament House , even if the inside has been silenced for a few weeks ... Maintain your rage and enthusiasm for the campaign for the election now to be held and until polling day . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 The news that Whitlam had been dismissed spread across Australia during the afternoon , triggering immediate protest demonstrations . On 12 November , Scholes wrote to the Queen , asking her to restore Whitlam as Prime Minister . The reply from the Queen 's Private Secretary , Sir Martin Charteris , dated 17 November 1975 , stated : 
 As we understand the situation here , the Australian Constitution firmly places the prerogative powers of the Crown in the hands of the Governor @-@ General as the representative of the Queen of Australia . The only person competent to commission an Australian Prime Minister is the Governor @-@ General , and The Queen has no part in the decisions which the Governor @-@ General must take in accordance with the Constitution . Her Majesty , as Queen of Australia , is watching events in Canberra with close interest and attention , but it would not be proper for her to intervene in person in matters which are so clearly placed within the jurisdiction of the Governor @-@ General by the Constitution Act . 
 On 12 November 1975 , the First Fraser Ministry was sworn in by Kerr . By some accounts , Kerr sought reassurance at that meeting that the Coalition senators would not have given in before supply ran out , " The Senate would never have caved in , would it ? " According to those accounts , Senator Margaret Guilfoyle laughed and said to a colleague , " That 's all he knows . " Guilfoyle later stated that , if she did make such a remark , it was not meant to imply that the Coalition senators would have broken . However , Kelly lists four Coalition senators who stated , in subsequent years , that they would have crossed the floor and voted for the appropriation bills . 
 Labor believed it had a chance of winning the election , and that the dismissal would be an electoral asset for them . However , some Labor strategists believed the party was heading for a disaster , with few economic accomplishments to point to and an electorate whose emotions would have cooled before polling day . Nonetheless , Whitlam , who began campaigning almost immediately after the dismissal , was met with huge crowds wherever he went ; 30 @,@ 000 people <unk> the Sydney Domain for the official campaign launch on 24 November . That evening , Whitlam made a major speech at Festival Hall in Melbourne before 7 @,@ 500 people and a national TV audience , calling 11 November " Fraser 's day of shame — a day that will live in infamy " . 
 Polls were released at the end of the first week of campaigning , and showed a nine @-@ point swing against Labor . Whitlam 's campaign did not believe it at first , but additional polling made it clear : the electorate was turning against the ALP . The Coalition attacked Labor for the economic conditions , and released television commercials " The Three Dark Years " showing images from the Whitlam government scandals . The ALP campaign , which had concentrated on the issue of Whitlam 's dismissal , did not begin to address the economy until its final days . By that time Fraser , confident of victory , was content to sit back , avoid specifics and make no mistakes . There was little violence in the campaign , but three letter bombs were placed in the post ; one wounded two people in Bjelke @-@ Petersen 's office , while the other two , addressed to Kerr and Fraser , were intercepted and defused . 
 During the campaign , the Kerrs purchased a Sydney apartment , as Sir John was prepared to resign in the event that the ALP triumphed . In the 13 December election , the Coalition won a record victory , with 91 seats in the House of Representatives to the ALP 's 36 and a 35 – 27 majority in the expanded Senate . 
 = = = Royal involvement = = = 
 In 2015 , political historian Jenny Hocking revealed an exchange between Kerr and Prince Charles , who in 1975 was being mooted as a future Governor @-@ General . In Kerr 's private papers from September 1975 , a month before the dismissal , Kerr had informed Prince Charles that he was considering dismissing Whitlam , and was concerned that his commission might be revoked by Whitlam to prevent it . According to Kerr , Charles had responded : " But surely , Sir John , the Queen should not have to accept advice that you should be recalled at the very time when you were considering having to dismiss the government " . This information was also shared with Buckingham Palace because the Queen 's Private Secretary , Sir Martin Charteris , wrote to Kerr that should this " contingency " arise , the Queen would try to delay things for as long as possible . It has been suggested that the consultation between Kerr , Charteris and Charles was maintained to ensure that the Queen and UK Parliament were not part of the discussion . Assistant Private Secretary to the Queen in 1975 , Sir William Heseltine , who along with Charteris informed her of the dismissal , has maintained that it came as a surprise to all three of them ; that he considered Kerr 's actions imprudent ; and that he believed that this opinion was shared by Charteris . A memorandum by Sir Paul Hasluck of his conversation with Charteris supports this suggestion , and that disillusionment with Kerr 's character led the Palace to apply pressure for his resignation . The Queen 's opinion is unknown , but Heseltine has stated : " I think she is an old and wily bird about her own views ... to the extent that I could divine what she felt , I think she felt the same ... I ’ m reasonably confident myself that she thought it could have been handled better . ” After the dismissal Prince Charles wrote a letter to Kerr conveying his moral support . He urged Kerr “ not to lose heart ” in the face of domestic hostility . 
 = = = Alleged CIA involvement = = = 
 During the crisis , Whitlam had alleged that Country Party leader Anthony had close links to the US Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) . Subsequently , it was alleged that Kerr acted on behalf of the United States government in procuring Whitlam 's dismissal . The most common allegation is that the CIA influenced Kerr 's decision to dismiss Whitlam . In 1966 Kerr had joined the Association for Cultural Freedom , a conservative group that was later revealed to have received CIA funding . Christopher Boyce , who was convicted for spying for the Soviet Union while an employee for a CIA contractor , claimed that the CIA wanted Whitlam removed from office because he threatened to close US military bases in Australia , including Pine Gap . Boyce said that Kerr was described by the CIA as " our man Kerr " . According to Jonathan <unk> of the Wall Street Journal , the CIA " paid for Kerr ’ s travel , built his prestige . . . Kerr continued to go to the CIA for money " . In 1974 , the White House sent as ambassador to Australia Marshall Green , who was known as “ the <unk> ” for his central role in the 1965 coup against Indonesian President Sukarno – which cost up to a million lives . 
 Whitlam later wrote that Kerr did not need any encouragement from the CIA . However , he also said that in 1977 United States Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher made a special trip to Sydney to meet with him and told him , on behalf of US President Jimmy Carter , of his willingness to work with whatever government Australians elected , and that the US would never again interfere with Australia 's democratic processes . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In his survey of the events of the crisis , November 1975 , Kelly places blame on Fraser for initiating the crisis and on Whitlam for using the crisis to try to break Fraser and the Senate . However , he places the most blame on Kerr , for failing to be candid with Whitlam . According to Kelly , 
 [ Kerr ] should have unflinchingly and courageously met his responsibility to the Crown and to the Constitution . He should have spoken frankly with his Prime Minister from the start . He should have warned wherever and whenever appropriate . He should have realised that , whatever his fears , there was no justification for any other behaviour . 
 Former Governor @-@ General Sir Paul Hasluck , believed that the fundamental reason for the crisis was the lack of trust and confidence between Whitlam and Kerr , and that the role of the Governor @-@ General to provide counsel , advice and warning . 
 The dismissal has been considered the greatest political and constitutional crisis in Australia 's history . In 1977 , the Fraser Government proposed four constitutional amendments via referendum , three of which passed — the last time that the Australian Constitution has been amended . One of the amendments requires that a senator appointed to fill a casual vacancy be from the same party as the former senator . The Senate retains the power to block supply ; the Governor @-@ General retains the power to dismiss ministers ( including the Prime Minister ) . However , these powers have not since been used to force a government from office . 
 In the wake of the dismissal , the ALP turned its anger on Kerr . Demonstrations marked his appearances , while the remaining ALP parliamentarians boycotted his opening of the new Parliament . Whitlam , now Leader of the Opposition , refused all invitations to events at Yarralumla , which the Kerrs continued to extend until his refusal of an invitation during the Queen 's 1977 visit caused them to feel that no further efforts need be made . Whitlam never spoke with Kerr again . Even ALP parliamentarians who had been friends of Kerr broke off their relationships , feeling Kerr had betrayed the party and had ambushed Whitlam . Lady Anne Kerr stated that she and her husband confronted a " new irrational scene swarming with instant enemies " . 
 Whitlam resigned as ALP leader after the party suffered its second successive electoral defeat in 1977 . Fraser served over seven years as Prime Minister , and left the Liberal leadership after the Coalition was defeated in the March 1983 election . 
 Whitlam repeatedly castigated Kerr for his role in the dismissal . When Kerr announced his resignation as Governor @-@ General on 14 July 1977 , Whitlam commented , " How fitting that the last of the Bourbons should bow out on Bastille Day " . In 1991 , Whitlam stated that no future Governor @-@ General was likely to act as Kerr did lest he also become the subject of " contempt and isolation " . In 2005 , Whitlam called Kerr " a contemptible person " . Country Party leader and deputy prime minister Doug Anthony said , " I can 't forgive Gough for crucifying him " . Sir Garfield Barwick was not spared Whitlam 's invective ; the former Prime Minister described him as " evil " . 
 However , Whitlam and Fraser put aside their differences ; Whitlam wrote in 1997 that Fraser " did not set out to deceive me " . The two campaigned together in support of the 1999 referendum that would have made Australia a republic . According to Whitlam speechwriter Graham Freudenberg , " the residual rage over the conduct of the Queen 's representative found a constructive outlet in the movement for the Australian Republic " . 
 After Kerr resigned as Governor @-@ General , he still sought a government position , reasoning that it had been his intent to remain for ten years as Governor @-@ General . However , Fraser 's attempt to appoint Kerr as ambassador to UNESCO ( a position later held by Whitlam ) provoked such public outcry that the nomination was withdrawn . The Kerrs spent the next several years living in Europe , and when he died in Australia in 1991 , his death was not announced until after he was buried . 
 Freudenberg summed up Kerr 's fate after the dismissal : 
 The beneficiaries of the Dismissal scarcely bothered to defend Kerr and in the end abandoned him . In the personal sense , Sir John Kerr himself became the real victim of the Dismissal , and history has accorded a brutal if poignant truth to Whitlam 's declaration on the steps of Parliament House on 11 November 1975 : " Well may we say ' God Save the Queen ' – because nothing will save the Governor @-@ General . " 
 = Italian cruiser Amalfi = 
 Amalfi was a Pisa @-@ class armored cruiser of the Italian Royal Navy ( Italian : Regia Marina ) built in the first decade of the 20th century . During the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , Amalfi operated with the Italian fleet off Tripoli in September 1911 and participated in the amphibious landings at Derna in October . In April 1912 , Amalfi and sister ship Pisa led the way in attacks on Turkish forts in the Dardanelles . After the rest of the fleet retired later in the month , the pair of armored cruisers remained in the area to attack Turkish communications facilities . After the Treaty of Lausanne signed in October 1912 ended the war , Amalfi escorted the Italian king and queen on the royal yacht to Germany and Sweden during a 1913 visit . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Italy declined to join her Triple Alliance partners , Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary . The country was eventually persuaded to side with the Entente Powers and declared war on neighboring Austria @-@ Hungary in May 1915 . After the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy raided the Italian coast with relative impunity in May and June , Amalfi , Pisa , and two other armored cruisers were sent to Venice to thwart future sorties by the Austrians . Shortly after their arrival , the ships were sent — in a show of force — to patrol near the main Austrian naval base at Pola on the night of 6 / 7 July 1915 . During Amalfi 's return from that mission , she was torpedoed by Austria @-@ Hungarian submarine U @-@ 26 ( in fact SM UB @-@ 14 flying the Austro @-@ Hungarian flag , since Germany and Italy were not yet at war ) and sunk with the loss of 67 men . Amalfi 's loss caused the Italians to keep the other armored cruisers at Venice in port for most of the next year before they were eventually relocated . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 As built , Amalfi was 461 feet ( 140 @.@ 5 m ) long overall by 68 feet 11 inches ( 21 @.@ 01 m ) abeam , with a draft of 22 feet 8 inches ( 6 @.@ 91 m ) . She had twin propeller shafts powered by two vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines . The steam engines were fed from 22 coal @-@ fired Belleville boilers . The projected output of her power plant was 20 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 15 @,@ 000 kW ) , but in service Amalfi was able to produce 20 @,@ 260 indicated horsepower ( 15 @,@ 110 kW ) — some 600 indicated horsepower ( 450 kW ) less than her sister ship , Pisa — which was enough to give a <unk> speed of 23 @.@ 6 knots ( 43 @.@ 7 km / h ; 27 @.@ 2 mph ) . 
 The main armament of the Pisa @-@ class ships consisted of four Cannone da 254 / 45 V Modello 1906 guns in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The ships mounted eight Cannone da 190 / 45 V Modello 1906 in four twin @-@ gun turrets , two in each side amidships , as their secondary armament . For defense against torpedo boats , they carried 16 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) Cannone da 76 / 40 V Modello 1908 guns and eight QF Cannone da 47 / 40 V Modello 1908 guns . They were also equipped with three submerged 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . During World War I , Pisa 's 76 and 47 mm guns were replaced by twenty 76 / 40 guns ; six of these were anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 Amalfi was protected by a main belt of armor 200 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick . The 10 @-@ inch gun turrets were protected by 160 millimetres ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) of armor plate , and the 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch gun turrets by 130 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) . The conning tower had armor 180 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) thick , while the thickness of the deck armor was 130 millimeters . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Work began on the pair of Pisa @-@ class ships in August 1904 , nearly a year before the keel of Amalfi , named after the eponymous city , was laid down on 24 July 1905 at the Cantieri navali Odero shipyard in Sestri Ponente . It was nearly three years before Amalfi was launched on 5 May 1908 . The ship was completed on 1 September 1909 , just over four years after her keel was laid . 
 = = = Italo @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 Amalfi and sister ship Pisa both entered service in 1909 , but there is little information in sources on their activities until the 1911 Italo @-@ Turkish War . On 24 September 1911 , five days before Italy declared war against the Ottoman Empire to start the conflict , Amalfi departed from Syracuse for Tripoli as part of a squadron that included battleships Roma and Napoli ; armored cruisers Pisa , Giuseppe Garibaldi , Varese , and Francesco Ferruccio ; and two flotillas of destroyers . Five days later , Amalfi and several of the other ships were seen taking on coal at Malta , before heading on to blockade Tripoli . 
 On 2 October , a division headed by the battleship Benedetto Brin relieved Amalfi 's groups in blockade duty , allowing them to proceed to the east to join the main Italian fleet . Napoli , Amalfi , and Pisa were joined by the recently commissioned armored cruiser San Marco , three destroyers , and two torpedo boats . The group escorted several Italian transports that arrived off Derna on 15 October . After negotiations for a surrender of the town fell apart , Pisa shelled the barracks and a fort . There was no return fire from Derna , so a boat with offers of a truce was sent in . When it was greeted by a volley of rifle fire Amalfi and the other armored cruisers opened fire on the town with their 190 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) guns and , according to a contemporary account , " completely destroyed " the town in 30 minutes time . A landing party dispatched at 14 : 00 was unable to reach the shore because of rough seas and gunfire from the shore . Amalfi and company then shelled the beach until 16 : 00 . Weather conditions prevented a landing until the 18th , when 1 @,@ 500 men took possession of the Derna . 
 On 13 April 1912 , Amalfi sailed from Taranto as part of the Italian 1st Squadron , which consisted of the battleships Vittorio Emanuele ( the squadron flagship ) , Roma , and Napoli ; fellow armored cruisers Pisa , San Marco , and Vettor Pisani . The squadron was initially destined for Tripoli , but was diverted to the Aegean Sea to bombard the Turkish coast . The 2nd Squadron — consisting of battleships Regina Margherita ( squadron flagship ) , Benedetto Brin , Ammiraglio di Saint Bon , and Emanuele Filiberto ; and armored cruisers Francesco Ferrucio , Varese , and Giuseppe Garibaldi — sailed from Tobruk and Augusta at the same time . The two squadrons rendezvoused at Stampalia on 17 April . At 06 : 30 , Pisa and Amalfi steamed into the Dardanelles in advance of the Italian fleet in an attempt to draw out the Turkish fleet . Four Turkish shore batteries , outfitted with 18 Krupp guns ranging from 8 to 11 inches ( 200 to 280 mm ) in size fired on the Italian fleet . The Italians , firing at a range of 8 @,@ 000 metres ( 8 @,@ 700 yd ) , returned fire in an exchange that lasted more than two hours . Official Italian reports claimed that no ships were hit and specifically rebutted Turkish claims that Varese had been set on fire , but a summary in The New York Times reports that Varese was hit twice . On 19 April , the Italian fleet departed for home , but left Amalfi , Pisa , and an assortment of smaller craft to continue destroying telegraph stations and cutting cables . 
 One other action of note involving Amalfi occurred on 28 April when a party of 250 men recruited from her complement and that of Pisa took the Turkish garrison on the island of <unk> . The 1912 Treaty of Lausanne that ended the war was signed on 18 October . 
 = = = Interwar period = = = 
 In the period between the end of the Italo @-@ Turkish War in 1912 and Italy 's entry into the First World War in 1915 , Amalfi is mentioned in several news accounts that offer hints of her peace @-@ time activities . In June 1913 , Amalfi escorted King Victor Emmanuel III and his wife , Queen Elena , on the royal yacht Trinacria to the annual regatta at Kiel , Germany . While there , Victor Emmanuel met with Kaiser Wilhelm II , to discuss — it was speculated in a contemporary news report — the ongoing Balkan War . After departing from Kiel , Amalfi escorted the King and Queen on Trinacria to their next stop at Stockholm . 
 By November , Amalfi was back in Italian waters when Admiral Cattolica , the former Italian Minister of the Marine , and the captains of Amalfi and the battleship Emanuele Filiberto greeted United States Navy Admiral Charles J. Badger at Naples on his flagship , USS Wyoming . During the Wyoming 's stay , one stop on the battleship 's 1913 Mediterranean tour , Badger returned the visits and toured Amalfi as part of his courtesy calls . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 At the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 , Italy declined to join its Triple Alliance partners Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary when they declared war against the Entente Powers , opting instead to remain neutral . Pressure from the United Kingdom and France swayed Italy to sign the secret Treaty of London on 26 April 1915 . In the agreement , Italy promised to leave the Triple Alliance and declare war against its former allies within a month in return for territorial gains after the end of the war . 
 At the beginning of May , Amalfi was part of the squadron headquartered at Brindisi that included six pre @-@ dreadnought battleships — Regina Elena , Vittorio Emanuele , Roma , Napoli , Benedetto Brin , and Ammiraglio di Saint Bon — and four armored cruisers — Pisa , San Marco , San Giorgio , and Amalfi herself . 
 After Italy 's declaration of war against Austria @-@ Hungary on 23 May , Admiral Anton Haus , the fleet commander of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy sortied his fleet to bombard the Italian coast on the night of 23 / 24 May in an attempt to disrupt the Italian mobilization . Of the many targets , Ancona was hardest hit , with disruptions to the town 's gas , electric , and telephone service ; the city 's stockpiles of coal and oil were left in flames . All of the Austrian ships safely returned to port , making it seem that they had been able to attack with impunity , putting political pressure on the Regia Marina from Rome . When the Austrians resumed attacks on the Italian coast in mid @-@ June , Italian Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel responded by sending Amalfi and the other armored cruisers at Brindisi — the navy 's newest — to Venice to supplement the older ships already there . Historian Lawrence Sondhaus argues that the arrival of the four fast armored cruisers in Venice should have been a major deterrent against future Austrian coastal raids , but concedes that they ended up becoming more inviting targets for Austrian U @-@ boats instead . 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 Shortly after the arrival of the quartet of cruisers at Venice , Amalfi participated in a " reconnaissance in force " mission near the Austro @-@ Hungarian port of Pula on the night of 6 / 7 July 1915 . After completion of the mission , the cruiser was about 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ; 23 mi ) from Venice when she was torpedoed by the Austrian submarine U @-@ 26 at dawn on 7 July . U @-@ 26 — in actuality the German submarine UB @-@ 14 , marked as an Austrian vessel and flying the Austrian flag since Italy and Germany were not at war — was under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Heino von Heimburg , and on her first patrol . 
 Amalfi immediately began listing to port and , after initial damage control efforts proved fruitless , her commander ordered the ship evacuated . The cruiser sank less than 30 minutes after she was torpedoed . Distress calls were answered by other ships of the division which rescued a large number of the ship 's complement . The loss of men was reported as about 200 at the time , but later reports list only 67 fatalities . Amalfi was among the largest ships sunk by U @-@ boats during the war . As a result of Amalfi 's sinking , sister ship Pisa and the other pair of armored cruisers at Venice rarely ventured out of port for most of the next year , and were eventually transferred to Valona in April 1916 . 
 = Johngarthia lagostoma = 
 Johngarthia lagostoma is a species of terrestrial crab that lives on Ascension Island and three other islands in the South Atlantic . It grows to a carapace width of 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) on Ascension Island , where it is the largest native land animal . It exists in two distinct colour morphs , one yellow and one purple , with few intermediates . The yellow morph dominates on Ascension Island , while the purple morph is more frequent on Atol das Rocas . The species differs from other Johngarthia species by the form of the third maxilliped . 
 Johngarthia lagostoma lives in burrows among vegetation , at altitudes of up to 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) , emerging at night to feed on plant matter and occasionally on animals . From January to March there is an annual migration to the sea to release the planktonic larvae . The species was first described ( as Gecarcinus lagostoma ) by Henri Milne @-@ Edwards in 1837 from material sent to him by the naturalists Jean René Constant Quoy and Joseph Paul Gaimard , collected by the French ship Astrolabe . 
 = = Distribution and biogeography = = 
 Johngarthia lagostoma is found on Ascension Island , Ilha Trindade , Fernando de Noronha and Atol das Rocas . On Ascension Island , J. lagostoma is restricted outside the breeding season to the slopes of Green Mountain , where there is sufficient moisture and vegetation , the rest of the island being too arid for the crab to survive . All the land above 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) is suitable habitat for the crabs , as is much of the land above 200 m ( 660 ft ) . They are occasionally found at lower altitudes , including the well @-@ watered gardens of Georgetown , and the sooty tern breeding colony in the south @-@ west of the island ( known as the Wideawake Fairs ) . On Ilha Trindade , J. lagostoma is abundant wherever plants grow , included the highest parts of the island . 
 The geographic distribution of J. lagostoma across a small number of islands in the southern Atlantic Ocean is very unusual , and difficult to explain by planktonic dispersal . Its nearest relatives are the other species of Johngarthia , two of which ( J. <unk> and J. <unk> ) inhabit islands in the Pacific Ocean off Central America , and one ( J. <unk> ) is found on islands in the Gulf of Guinea . Some authors have suggested the existence of former islands , now submerged , which could have acted as " stepping stones " for the colonisation of Ascension Island ; the isolation of Ascension Island from any other land mass makes transportation of either larvae or adults difficult . 
 = = Description = = 
 Mature specimens of J. lagostoma are typically 70 – 110 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 – 4 @.@ 3 in ) wide across the carapace on Ascension Island ; individuals from Atol das Rocas are somewhat smaller . In the family Gecarcinidae , species are normally separated by the form of the first pleopod ( gonopod ) , which is used by males during mating , but there is no difference in the gonopod between J. lagostoma and J. <unk> . Instead , J. lagostoma differs from other species in the genus by the form of the third maxilliped ; it has a fissure which is a narrow slit , but which gapes open in other species . The third maxilliped is also larger , covering the epistome and the antennules in J. lagostoma but not in other species . 
 Within the species , two distinct colour morphs can be seen . The " yellow " morph has a bright yellow or orange exoskeleton , with white patches on the underside of the walking legs and claws . The " purple " morph has a dark purple exoskeleton , but with the same white patches as on the yellow morph . A few intermediate individuals occur , which are predominantly yellow , but with purple patches on the carapace . On Ascension Island , the yellow morph is the more frequent one , while on Atol das Rocas , the distribution is more equal . Darker individuals are thought to be better concealed from predators , but more prone to heat stress during long migrations ; Atol das Rocas is much smaller than Ascension Island , and the migration routes are therefore shorter , which may explain the difference in frequency of the two morphs . 
 = = Ecology and conservation = = 
 Before Ascension Island was colonised by Europeans in the 19th century , Johngarthia lagostoma was the only large land animal on the island . Since then , many species of mammal have been introduced to Ascension Island , and now compete with J. lagostoma ; they include mice , rats and rabbits . 
 J. lagostoma is active at night and after rain , when it emerges from its burrows , which can be up to 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) deep . In 1915 , H. A. Baylis reported that it feeds on " decaying vegetation and perhaps a certain amount of excreta from sea @-@ birds " ; most of its diet is thought to be made up of plant matter , but can also include animals . In the Wideawake Fairs , J. lagostoma feeds on chicks and eggs of the sooty tern , and they have been proposed as a limiting factor in the breeding of petrels on Ascension Island . In May , green sea turtles ( Chelonia mydas ) hatch , and J. lagostoma is one of several predators to target the emerging hatchlings , alongside the Ascension frigatebird ( Fregata aquila ) and feral cats . The crabs find water on and under rocks , especially after condensation has begun to form on their cool surfaces at night . 
 In the late nineteenth century , a bounty was levied on J. lagostoma in order to reduce its numbers . Hunters were paid 6 pence ( alternatively paid in rum ) for every hundred claws collected . In 1879 , the total bag for the island comprised 66 cats , 4 @,@ 013 mice , 7 @,@ 683 rats and 80 @,@ 414 land crabs ; in the eight years to 1887 , bounties were collected on more than 330 @,@ 000 crabs . The current population is much smaller , and the low level of recruitment and lack of juveniles suggests that the species may become endangered . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Although juvenile and adult J. lagostoma are almost exclusively terrestrial , the larvae are marine and planktonic . In order to release their offspring , the adults therefore have to migrate to the sea , as seen in other land crabs , such as the Christmas Island red crab , Gecarcoidea natalis . In most members of the family Gecarcinidae , migration coincides with the rainy season , which reduces the risk of desiccation ; migration in J. lagostoma occurs from January until March , while the period of highest rainfall is from March to May . 
 The crabs travel approximately 450 m ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) per day , and mating can take place anywhere along the route . The proportion of males on the migration therefore decreases as the migration continues . The eggs are larger than in other <unk> species and consequently fewer in number ; females with a carapace width of 94 mm ( 3 @.@ 7 in ) had a mean fecundity of 72 @,@ 000 . Spawning occurs in the last quarter of the lunar cycle , during neap tides , on rocky shores . 
 = = Taxonomy and history = = 
 Johngarthia lagostoma was first described by Henri Milne @-@ Edwards in 1837 , under the name Gecarcinus lagostoma . The specific epithet lagostoma means " hare @-@ lip " , from the Greek <unk> ( lagos , " hare " ) and <unk> ( stoma , " mouth " ) ; Milne @-@ Edwards also named the species in French <unk> bec @-@ de @-@ <unk> ( " hare @-@ lipped land crab " ) . Milne @-@ Edwards erroneously gave the type locality as " l <unk> " ( Australasia ) ; he had been given the material he used for the description by Jean René Constant Quoy and Joseph Paul Gaimard , who were working on the molluscs collected on the Astrolabe excursion , which had visited Australasia and stopped at Ascension Island in 1829 . G. lagostoma was placed in the subgenus Johngarthia by Michael <unk> in 1970 , who raised the subgenus to the rank of genus in 1987 . 
 Many subsequent voyages halted at Ascension Island , and many visitors commented on the land crabs they found there , including William Dampier , Charles Darwin and Charles <unk> Thomson . Bernard Stonehouse reported on an expedition by the British Ornithologists ' Union to Ascension Island , stating : 
 We met land crabs , too , and were sadly disappointed . They were small , no larger than an ordinary edible crab , with bloated shells and moderately long pincers . Some were of beetroot purple , others yellow or orange , apparently two colour @-@ phases of the same species . They were shy , freezing with pincers erect when alarmed , usually to be found within a short distance of their burrows and ready to scuttle down at the drop of a hat . In rainy weather they <unk> more freely , sometimes appearing at the side of road with arms waving like diminutive but aggressive hitch @-@ hikers . Fringed mandibles [ third maxillipeds ] suggest a permanently turned @-@ down mouth , giving them a disgruntled , unhappy expression ; they were disagreeable rather than sinister and fell far short of their reputation . The first land crab I met was sitting in a prickly pear bush , sadly munching one of the brilliant red fruits and dribbling juice . I could never take them seriously after that . 
 The closely related crabs from the islands of the Gulf of Guinea were formerly included in Gecarcinus lagostoma , but are now treated as a separate species , Johngarthia <unk> . 
 = Tropical Storm Debby ( 1994 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Debby was a weak but costly tropical cyclone that affected the Lesser Antilles in September 1994 . It was the fourth named tropical storm of the 1994 Atlantic hurricane season ; it developed on September 9 east of Barbados . Debby made landfall on Saint Lucia early on September 10 , producing heavy rainfall and tropical storm @-@ force wind gusts . The rains caused flooding and landslides , damaging about half of the island 's banana plantations . Several villages were isolated after roads and bridges were damaged . Damage totaled about $ 103 million ( 1994 USD ) . On nearby Dominica , Debby damaged crops and fisheries . 
 While Debby was crossing Saint Lucia , its strongest thunderstorms were located north and east of the center due to wind shear . A station in Martinique reported hurricane @-@ force winds , and about 20 @,@ 000 people on the island lost power . After entering the eastern Caribbean Sea , Debby attained peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , although continued wind shear caused the storm to dissipate on September 11 . In Puerto Rico , one person died due to high waves . The storm caused power outages and flooding in the Dominican Republic . Throughout its path , Debby killed nine people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Tropical Storm Debby were from a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on September 4 . By September 6 , satellite images indicated a vigorous tropical wave with intense convection about midway between Africa and the Lesser Antilles . Encountering northwesterly vertical wind shear , convection markedly decreased and weakened on the following day , only to redevelop on September 8 after the shear dropped . Post @-@ analysis indicate that the sixth tropical depression of the season developed on September 9 at 1200 UTC , about 185 mi ( 300 km ) east of Barbados ; however , it was not operationally classified as Tropical Depression Six until almost 24 hours later . Early on September 10 , satellite imagery indicated a surface circulation just north of Barbados , around which time the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) initiated advisories . 
 The increasing organization of the tropical depression prompted a reconnaissance aircraft investigation , which reported flight @-@ level winds of around 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) in an intense rainband northeast of the center . The same flight estimated surface winds of 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) , which indicated that the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Debby . However , ongoing wind shear removed all thunderstorms from the circulation . At 0300 UTC on September 10 , the storm made landfall on Saint Lucia with winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . Although Debby was not very well @-@ organized on satellite imagery , stations on Martinique and nearby ships reported that the storm intensified further in the eastern Caribbean Sea to a peak strength of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) at 0600 UTC . Such winds were not known while the storm was active , and around the time of Debby 's peak intensity , the NHC operationally estimated winds of only 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . The storm continued quickly to the west @-@ northwest , affected by strong wind shear while maintaining strong winds . A reconnaissance flight on September 12 did not observe a closed circulation ; as a result , it is estimated that Debby dissipated at around 0600 UTC that day to the south of Puerto Rico . The remnants of Debby continued to the west and diminished over Mexico on September 15 , although residual clouds spread into the Gulf of Mexico . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 When the first advisory was issued for Debby , the governments of Barbados , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent , and Dominica issued tropical storm warnings . In addition , the Saint Lucia Meteorological Service issued a flood warning before Debby developed . Although the NHC recommended a tropical storm warning to be issued in Martinique , government officials there issued a heavy rain warning instead . Debby first affected Barbados as it passed the island to the north , producing winds of 27 mph ( 43 km / h ) . In Saint Vincent to the southwest of Barbados , there was minor roof damage . In Dominica to the north , the storm damaged roads and caused power outages . Across Dominica , the combination of winds and heavy rains damaged 2 @,@ 800 acres of bananas , 143 acres of plantains , 355 acres of root crops , and 355 acres of tree crops . Damage to crops and fisheries were estimated at EC $ 30 million ( $ 12 million 1994 USD ) . After the storm , Windward Islands Crop Insurance ( WINCROP ) paid <unk> claims in the country , amounting to EC $ 1 @.@ 6 million ( $ 660 @,@ 000 1994 USD ) . 
 Tropical Storm Debby struck Saint Lucia , and wind gusts on the island reached 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) in <unk> . Damage throughout Debby 's path was heaviest on this island , and the storm affected most of Saint Lucia . Debby produced heavy rainfall and thunderstorms over a six @-@ hour period , which caused flooding along rivers and in low @-@ lying areas . High rainfall totals wrecked houses on hillsides , forcing about 150 people to evacuate to shelters . Roadways were washed out or covered by landslides , and 10 bridges were destroyed or severely damaged . This limited access to villages across the island . Landslides also affected the town of Pont Saint @-@ Jacques . Heavy rains covered Hewanorra International Airport with 2 in ( 51 mm ) of silt , and in Anse La Raye , floods reached waist @-@ deep levels . In that town , residents had to be rescued by boat . The storm damaged about half of the banana plantations on the island . Several towns lost access to their water supplies , which prompted the governments of Martinique and Saint Vincent to provide fresh water to the country . Overall , there were 24 injuries and 4 deaths across Saint Lucia ; all of the deaths were from two landslides . During the storm , nine prisoners escaped the jail in Castries , and there were also reports of looting . In the capital city of Castries , the storm damaged a ward of an evacuated hospital ; it had been scheduled for reconstruction , and the effects from Debby provided a new assessment for the rebuilding . Damage on Saint Lucia was estimated at EC $ 250 million ( $ 103 million 1994 USD ) . After the storm , WINCROP paid 5 @,@ 802 claims for insured crop damage in the country , totaling EC $ 7 @.@ 8 million ( $ 3 @.@ 2 million 1994 USD ) . As of 2008 , Debby was the largest event in WINCROP 's 20 year history of insurance claims for disasters . The Saint Lucia government responded to the damage from Debby by repairing damaged buildings and bridges , diversifying crops , and removing silt from major rivers . 
 While Debby was moving across Saint Lucia , a station in Le Vauclin in southeastern Martinique reported 10 minute sustained winds of 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) , with a gust to 97 mph ( 156 km / h ) ; the observation provided the basis for Debby 's peak intensity . When the storm was active , however , the strongest winds known at the time were a 10 minute wind of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) , and a gust of 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) at Martinique Aimé Césaire International Airport . About half of the island experienced 4 in ( 100 mm ) of precipitation , and the highest rainfall total on the island was 7 @.@ 24 in ( 184 mm ) in Saint @-@ Joseph . High rains caused flooding across the island , and one woman drowned when a flooded river washed away her car . High winds downed trees and covered some roads , and there was damage to the banana crop . About 20 @,@ 000 people lost power during the storm . 
 When Debby was still active , a NASA satellite fired lasers at the storm to measure cloud heights , the first such experiment . As Debby moved into the Caribbean Sea , a tropical storm warning was issued for Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands . High winds spread across Puerto Rico ; Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport reported a peak wind gust of 44 mph ( 71 km / h ) . The winds downed trees and power lines across the island and caused isolated roof and house damage . High seas entered several coastal homes and prevented ferry passage from Culebra . In Cabo Rojo , Puerto Rico , high waves swept away two men fishing from the coast ; one was injured and the other was killed . Later , a tropical storm warning was issued for the southern coasts of the Dominican Republic and Haiti . After Debby dissipated , its remnants maintained strong winds , and a station in the Dominican Republic reported a gust of 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) on September 11 . The storm downed power lines , leaving hundreds of homes without electricity and contributing to three deaths . An expressway and some rivers also flooded in the country . 
 = New York State Route 101 = 
 New York State Route 101 ( NY 101 ) is a 3 @.@ 58 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 76 km ) long state highway in northwestern Nassau County , New York , in the United States . It runs north – south as Port Washington Boulevard from NY 25A in Flower Hill , west of Roslyn and north of Manhasset , to Astor Lane in Sands Point . It continues south along Searingtown Road to Shelter Rock Road ( County Route 8 or CR 8 ) and north on Middle Neck Road to a dead end at Long Island Sound as the unsigned County Route 101 . 
 NY 101 was assigned c . 1931 while the county route continuations were assigned in 1958 . CR 101 was initially signed ; however , signage for the route was removed in 1973 . In the 1950s and 1960s , a proposal was made to construct a freeway in western Nassau County . The Western Nassau Expressway , as it was known , would have extended from NY 27 to NY 101 and utilized the NY 101 corridor north of NY 25A . The proposal was shelved in the 1970s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Southern segment of CR 101 = = = 
 CR 101 's southern segment begins at an intersection with Shelter Rock Road ( CR 8 ) and Herricks Road near Herricks High School . The route heads eastward as Searingtown Road , passing to the south of the high school and to the north of a small pond . One block east of Herricks Road , CR 101 intersects with Old Searingtown Road , a former alignment of the current CR 101 alignment . At this point , the highway curves to the northeast and passes through a small area of trees nestled amongst a large , residential area bordering Williston Park . Old Searingtown Road rejoins CR 101 at the northern edge of the forested area . 
 The route continues north , serving as the boundary between Searingtown and Albertson as it proceeds past side streets lined by homes . At <unk> Willets Road , CR 101 serves Henry <unk> School and enters Searingtown . Just inside of the community , CR 101 intersects <unk> Drive and Dogwood Road , two local streets connecting to Herricks Middle School . The route continues on through Searingtown into the village of North Hills , where the homes give way to trees as it turns to the northeast and passes under the Northern State Parkway . A short distance after the Northern Parkway overpass , CR 101 meets the Long Island Expressway ( Interstate 495 ) by way of Nassau Boulevard — the southern service road — and North Service Road . 
 North of the Long Island Expressway , CR 101 passes by the Christopher Morley Park and Golf Course to the east and residential neighborhoods to the west . Past the park , CR 101 enters an area with more residential development as it begins to run along the western boundary of Roslyn Estates and the eastern edge of Manhasset . The homes give way to commercial developments as the highway approaches Flower Hill and NY 25A ( Northern Boulevard ) . Searingtown Road becomes Port Washington Boulevard and CR 101 becomes NY 101 upon intersecting NY 25A . 
 = = = NY 101 = = = 
 NY 101 continues north from NY 25A as a four @-@ lane , undivided highway , passing homes , businesses and small patches of trees situated near the junction with NY 25A . At an intersection with Park Avenue North , NY 101 becomes a divided highway with two lanes in each direction . The highway continues north through Flower Hill to St. Francis Hospital , where it curves to the northwest to serve the center of Flower Hill . Here , NY 101 passes east of Flower Hill Park and west of North Hempstead Country Club before curving back to the north and entering Port Washington . 
 In Port Washington , NY 101 passes Nassau Knolls Cemetery and narrows to become a four @-@ lane undivided highway as it enters the center of the hamlet . It proceeds north – south through downtown , passing several blocks of commercial buildings and Paul D. Schreiber Senior High School ahead of a junction with Main Street . North of this point , the surroundings of NY 101 become more residential as the route narrows to two lanes and passes into the village of Sands Point . NY 101 ends shortly afterward at an intersection with Astor Lane , at which point Port Washington Boulevard is continued by Middle Neck Road and designated as CR 101 . 
 = = = Northern segment of CR 101 = = = 
 The northern segment of CR 101 heads northward along Middle Neck Road , passing local residences and local commercial buildings to the west and the Village Club of Sands Point to the east . North of the club , the highway curves to the northwest and becomes surrounded by several blocks of residential homes to the southwest and patches of trees to the northeast as it heads deeper into the village . 
 From this point west to the highway 's end on Long Island Sound , CR 101 follows a mostly east – west alignment through Sands Point . Along this last stretch , the route passes to the south of Sands Point County Park and north past Sands Point Golf Club as the surroundings around the route become increasingly forested and undeveloped . At Tibbits Lane , the route turns to the northwest and continues to the road 's end at a dead end on the southern shore of Long Island Sound . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , several of the routes assigned during the 1920s were renumbered or modified . At the same time , hundreds of state @-@ maintained highways that did not yet have a route number were assigned one . One of these highways was Port Washington Boulevard , a roadway connecting NY 25A ( Northern Boulevard ) in Flower Hill to Astor Lane in Sands Point , which was designated as NY 101 by the following year . In 1959 , the Nassau County Department of Public Works created a numbered highway system as part of their " Master Plan " for the county highway system . This plan marked CR 101 along its current alignment . 
 Since 2005 , the traffic counts contained within the annual New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) Traffic Data Report have indicated that the northern terminus of NY 101 is at an intersection with Beacon Hill Road . However , other documents produced by NYSDOT , such as their official description of routes in New York , give the highway 's northern terminus as Astors [ sic ] Lane . 
 In 1952 , the New York State Department of Public Works laid out plans for a six @-@ lane expressway in western Nassau County . The proposed highway would begin at Atlantic Avenue in Freeport and head north to an intersection with NY 25A ( Northern Boulevard ) in Roslyn . Local residents opposed the plan , stating that the area was being developed too quickly . The proposed expressway was cancelled , and the $ 45 million that would have been used for the 11 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 18 @.@ 5 km ) expressway went to extending the Meadowbrook State Parkway northward instead . 
 Although the original plan was shelved , the need for a highway in western Nassau County still existed . In 1963 , the Department of Public Works revived the project ; however , the routing was altered to extend from the Sunrise Highway ( NY 27 ) north to an intersection with CR 101 ( Middle Neck Road ) in Sands Point . Part of the route would use modern NY 101 and the right @-@ of @-@ way of an abandoned Long Island Rail Road line . In 1971 , several proposed crossings of the Long Island Sound were studied . One crossing , a bridge connecting Sands Point to New Rochelle to Westchester County , may have become a northward extension of the highway if it was constructed . By 1971 , though , hopes had begun to fade on the highway 's prospects of becoming reality . Even if construction had begun in that year , the highway would not be open to traffic until 1975 . The project was eventually shelved . 
 = = CR 101A = = 
 CR 101A was a designation for the 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) portion of Middle Neck Road between NY 25A and NY 101 . The highway was a spur of CR 101 in name only as it never connected to CR 101 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Nassau County . 
 = Rhinemaidens = 
 The Rhinemaidens are the three water @-@ nymphs ( Rheintöchter or " Rhine daughters " ) who appear in Richard Wagner 's opera cycle Der Ring des Nibelungen . Their individual names are Woglinde , Wellgunde and Flosshilde ( <unk> ) , although they are generally treated as a single entity and they act together accordingly . Of the 34 characters in the Ring cycle , they are the only ones who did not originate in the Old Norse Eddas . Wagner created his Rhinemaidens from other legends and myths , most notably the Nibelungenlied which contains stories involving water @-@ sprites ( <unk> ) or mermaids . The key concepts associated with the Rhinemaidens in the Ring operas — their flawed guardianship of the Rhine gold , and the condition ( the renunciation of love ) through which the gold could be stolen from them and then transformed into a means of obtaining world power — are wholly Wagner 's own invention , and are the elements that initiate and propel the entire drama . 
 The Rhinemaidens are the first and the last characters seen in the four @-@ opera cycle , appearing both in the opening scene of Das Rheingold , and in the final climactic spectacle of Götterdämmerung , when they rise from the Rhine waters to reclaim the ring from Brünnhilde 's ashes . They have been described as morally innocent , yet they display a range of sophisticated emotions , including some that are far from guileless . Seductive and elusive , they have no relationship to any of the other characters , and no indication is given as to how they came into existence , beyond occasional references to an unspecified " father " . 
 The various musical themes associated with the Rhinemaidens are regarded as among the most lyrical in the entire Ring cycle , bringing to it rare instances of comparative relaxation and charm . The music contains important melodies and phrases which are reprised and developed elsewhere in the operas to characterise other individuals and circumstances , and to relate plot developments to the source of the narrative . It is reported that Wagner played the Rhinemaidens ' lament at the piano , on the night before he died in Venice , in 1883 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Alone of the Ring 's characters , the Rhinemaidens do not originate from the Poetic Edda or Prose Edda , the Icelandic sources for most of Norse mythology . Water @-@ sprites ( German : <unk> ) appear in many European myths and legends , often but not invariably in a form of disguised malevolence . Wagner drew widely and loosely from those legends when compiling his Ring narrative , and the probable origin of his Rhinemaidens is in the German Nibelungenlied . In one part of the Nibelungenlied narrative Hagen and Gunther encounter certain " wise women " ( thereafter described as water @-@ sprites ) , bathing and refreshing themselves in the waters of the Danube . Hagen creeps softly towards them , but he is seen , whereupon the sprites retreat and mock him from a distance . Hagen then steals their clothes . To obtain the return of these , one of the sprites , <unk> , promises falsely that Hagen and Gunther will find honor and glory when they enter Etzel 's kingdom . After their clothes are returned , another sprite , <unk> ( a name Wagner would adopt again for use elsewhere ) , tells Hagen that her sister has lied . If they go to Etzel 's land , they will die there . 
 This story , itself unrelated to the Ring drama , is echoed by Wagner both in the opening Das Rheingold scene and in the first scene in Act III of Götterdämmerung . Wagner first adapted the story for use in his early libretto of Siegfried 's Death ( which eventually became Götterdämmerung ) , introducing three unnamed water @-@ maids ( <unk> ) , and locating them in the Rhine , where they warn Siegfried of his impending death . Later these water @-@ maids became Rhinemaidens ( Rheintöchter ) , and were given individual names : Flosshilde , Wellgunde , and <unk> . As Wagner continued working on his reverse chronology from Siegfried 's death , he arrived at what he determined was the initial act of the drama — Alberich 's theft of the Rhine gold . Believing that a simple abduction of the unguarded gold would lack dramatic force , Wagner made the Rhinemaidens the guardians of the gold , and he introduced the " renunciation of love " condition . <unk> became Woglinde , probably to avoid confusion with Brünnhilde . 
 Wagner may also have been influenced by the Rhine River @-@ based German legend of Lorelei , the lovelorn young maiden who drowns herself in the river and becomes a siren , luring fishermen onto the rocks by her singing . Further possible sources lie in Greek mythology and literature . Similarities exist between the maiden guardians in the Hesperides myth and the Rhinemaidens of Das Rheingold ; three females guard a highly desired golden treasure that is stolen in the telling of each tale . Wagner was an enthusiastic reader of Aeschylus , including his Prometheus Bound which has a chorus of Oceanids or water nymphs . One author , Rudolph Sabor , sees a link between the Oceanids ' treatment of Prometheus and the Rhinemaidens ' initial tolerance of Alberich . Just as in Greek myth the Oceanids are the daughters of the titan sea god Oceanus , in Norse mythology — specifically the Poetic Edda — the jötunn ( similar to a giant ) sea god Ægir has nine daughters . The name of one of these means " wave " ( Welle in German ) and is a possible source for Wellgunde 's name . 
 Wagner 's operas do not reveal where the Rhinemaidens came from , or whether they have any connection to other characters . Whereas most of the characters in the cycle are inter @-@ related , through birth , marriage , or sometimes both , the Rhinemaidens are seemingly independent . The identity of their father who entrusted them with the guardianship of the gold is not given in the text . Some <unk> scholars have suggested that he may be a " Supreme Being " who is the father of Wotan and all the gods — indeed , of all creation . Others take the German Rheintöchter literally and say that they are the daughters of the Rhine River . Whatever is surmised , the Rhinemaidens are in a different category from Wotan and the other gods , who are destroyed by fire at the end of Götterdämmerung , while the Rhinemaidens swim happily away in the river , bearing their recovered treasure . 
 = = Nature and attributes = = 
 The Rhinemaidens have been described as the drama 's " most seductive but most elusive characters " , and in one analysis as representatives of " seduction by infantile fantasy " . They act essentially as a unity , with a composite yet elusive personality . Apart from Flosshilde ’ s implied seniority , demonstrated by occasional light rebukes and illustrated musically by awarding the role to a deeper @-@ voiced contralto or mezzo , their characters are undifferentiated . In The Perfect Wagnerite , his 1886 analysis of the Ring drama as political allegory , George Bernard Shaw describes the Rhinemaidens as " thoughtless , elemental , only half @-@ real things , very much like modern young ladies " . The attributes most apparent initially are charm and playfulness , combined with a natural innocence ; their joy in the gold they guard derives from its beauty alone , even though they know its latent power . However , this veneer of childlike simplicity is misleading ; aside from proving themselves irresponsible as guardians , they are also provocative , sarcastic and cruel in their interaction with Alberich . When the demigod Loge reports that the Rhinemaidens need Wotan 's help to regain the gold , Fricka , the goddess of marriage , calls them a " watery brood " ( <unk> ) and complains about the many men they have lured away with their " treacherous bathing " . They are beguiling and flirtatious with Siegfried , but finally wise as revealed by the undisclosed counsel which they give to Brünnhilde . Sabor sees the personality of the Rhinemaidens as a blend of the " good hearted nature " of the Oceanids and the " austerity " ( including the willingness to drown people ) of the daughters of Ægir . 
 The first lines sung by Woglinde in the Ring are dominated by wordless vocalisations . <unk> ! Waga ! ... <unk> <unk> ! <unk> <unk> <unk> ! This attracted comment both at the 1869 premiere of Rheingold and the 1876 premiere of the entire Ring , with Wagner 's work being dismissed as " <unk> @-@ Musik " . In a letter to Nietzsche dated 12 June 1872 , Wagner explained that he had derived <unk> from old German and that it was related to <unk> , meaning holy water . Other words were intended as parallels to those found in German nursery lullabies ( ' Eia <unk> ' , ' <unk> <unk> ' and ' <unk> <unk> ' are common forms ) . Thus Woglinde 's lines portray both the childish innocence of the Rhinemaidens and the holiness of Nature . 
 The Rhinemaidens ' sorrow in the loss of the gold is deep and heartfelt . As the gods are crossing the rainbow bridge into Valhalla at the end of Das Rheingold , Loge ironically suggests that , in the absence of the gold , the maidens should " bask in the gods ’ new @-@ found radiance " . The maidens ' lament then becomes a stern reproof : " Tender and true are only the depths " , they sing ; " False and cowardly is all that rejoices up there " . In the final Götterdämmerung scene they show ruthlessness as , having recovered the ring , they drag the hapless Hagen down into the waters of the Rhine . 
 The Rhinemaidens are the only prominent characters seen definitely alive at the end of the drama ; the fates of a few others are ambiguous , but most have certainly perished . Despite the relative brevity of their roles in the context of the four @-@ opera cycle , they are key figures ; their careless guardianship of the gold and their provocation of Alberich are the factors which determine all that follows . Wagner himself devised the " renunciation of love " provision whereby the gold could be stolen and then used to forge a ring with power to rule the world . Since the ring is made from the stolen gold , only its restoration to the Rhinemaidens ' care in the waters of the Rhine will lift the curse on it . Hence , the return of the stolen property provides a unifying thematic consistency to Wagner 's complex story . 
 = = Role in the Ring Operas = = 
 = = = Das Rheingold , Scene 1 = = = 
 As the musical prelude climaxes , Woglinde and Wellgunde are seen at play in the depths of the Rhine . Flosshilde joins them after a gentle reminder of their responsibilities as guardians of the gold . They are observed by the Nibelung dwarf Alberich who calls out to them : " I 'd like to draw near if you would be kind to me " . The wary Flosshilde cries : " Guard the gold ! Father warned us of such a foe " . When Alberich begins his rough wooing the maidens relax : " Now I laugh at my fears , our enemy is in love " , says Flosshilde , and a cruel teasing game ensues . First , Woglinde pretends to respond to the dwarf 's advances but swims away as he tries to embrace her . Then Wellgunde takes over , and Alberich 's hopes rise until her sharp retort : " Ugh , you hairy hunchbacked clown ! " Flosshilde pretends to chastise her sisters for their cruelty and feigns her own courtship , by which Alberich is quite taken in until she suddenly tears away to join the others in a mocking song . Tormented with lust , Alberich furiously chases the maidens over the rocks , slipping and sliding as they elude him , before he sinks down in impotent rage . At this point the mood changes : as a sudden brightness penetrates the depths , a magical golden light reveals , for the first time , the <unk> on its rock . The maidens sing their ecstatic greeting to the gold , which rouses Alberich 's curiosity . In response to his question Woglinde and Wellgunde reveal the gold 's secret : <unk> power would belong to the one who could forge a ring from it . Flosshilde scolds them for giving this secret away , but her concerns are dismissed — only someone who has forsworn love can obtain the gold , and Alberich is clearly so besotted as to present no danger . But their confidence is misplaced ; in his humiliation Alberich decides that world mastery is more desirable than love . As the maidens continue to jeer his antics he scrambles up the rock and , uttering a curse on love , seizes the gold and disappears , leaving the Rhinemaidens to dive after him bewailing their loss . 
 = = = Das Rheingold , Scene 4 = = = 
 As Wotan , Fricka and the other gods start to cross the rainbow bridge leading to Valhalla , they hear a melancholy song from the depths of the Rhine — the maidens , mourning the loss of the gold . Embarrassed and irritated , Wotan tells Loge to silence the maidens , but as the gods continue across the bridge the lament rises again , now with bitter words of reproach to the gods for their heartlessness . 
 = = = Götterdämmerung , Act 3 Scene 1 = = = 
 Some time has passed ( at least two generations ) . In a remote wooded valley where the Rhine flows , the ageless Rhinemaidens continue to mourn for the gold , pleading with the " Sun @-@ woman " to send them a champion who will return the gold to them . Siegfried 's horn is heard , and he soon appears , having lost his way while hunting . The maidens greet him with their old playfulness and offer to help him , for the price of the ring on his finger . After a flirtatious exchange , Siegfried offers , apparently sincerely , to give them the ring . But instead of wisely simply accepting his offer , the mood of the naive , formerly flirtatious Rhinemaidens suddenly becomes solemn : they warn <unk> he will be killed that very day unless he delivers the ring to them . But brave Siegfried will never submit to any such implied threat and declares : " By threatening my life and limb , even if it weren 't worth as much as a finger , you won 't get the ring from me ! " The maidens are scornful of his folly : " Farewell , Siegfried . A proud woman will today become your heir , scoundrel ! She 'll give us a better hearing " . Siegfried is not aware that it is to Brünnhilde that they refer . They swim off , leaving a puzzled Siegfried to ponder their words and to admit to himself that he could happily have seduced any one of them . 
 = = = Götterdämmerung , Act 3 Scene 3 = = = 
 In her final soliloquy , Brünnhilde thanks the Rhinemaidens for their " good advice " . They have apparently told her the full story of Siegfried 's <unk> and betrayal , and advised that only the return of the ring to the waters of the Rhine can lift its curse . Brünnhilde sings : " What you desire I will give you : from my ashes take it to yourselves . The fire ... will cleanse the curse from the ring " . She exhorts the Rhinemaidens to " carefully guard it " in the future , then leaps into the flames of Siegfried 's pyre . The fire blazes up to fill the stage , representing the destruction of the gods . As the Rhine overflows its banks the Rhinemaidens appear , making for the ring . Hagen , who covets the ring , shouts to them " Get back from the ring ! " ( <unk> vom Ring ! ) , the last words of the drama . He is seized by Woglinde and Wellgunde and dragged into the Rhine 's depths , as Flosshilde grabs the ring , holds it aloft , and joins her sisters swimming in circles as the waters of the Rhine gradually subside . 
 = = Rhinemaidens ' music = = 
 The music associated with the Rhinemaidens has been portrayed by the Wagner commentator James Holman as " some of the seminal music in the Ring " ; other descriptions have noted its relative charm and relaxation . 
 In Woglinde 's opening song to the Rhine : " <unk> ! Waga ! <unk> , du Welle , ... " ( Das Rheingold , Scene 1 ) the melody is pentatonic , using the notes E flat , F , A flat , B flat and C. The song begins with a two @-@ note falling step ( F followed by E flat ) , a figure which recurs in many musical motives throughout the Ring . The melody itself is reprised during Fricka 's denunciation of the Rhinemaidens in Das Rheingold , Scene 2 and , dramatically , at the end of Götterdämmerung when , after Brünnhilde 's immolation , the Rhinemaidens rise from the river to claim the ring from Siegfried 's funeral pyre . Its first five notes , with an altered rhythm , become the motive of the sleeping Brünnhilde in Die Walküre , Act 3 . A variant of the tune becomes the <unk> 's greeting " Hei ! Siegfried " in Act 2 of Siegfried . The Rhinemaidens and the <unk> , in Deryck Cooke 's analysis , are related through nature , as " fundamentally innocent allies of the natural world " . 
 The " Rhinemaidens ' joy and greeting to the gold " : " <unk> , <unk> ! <unk> <unk> ! Rheingold ! Rheingold ! ... " ( Das Rheingold Scene 1 ) is a triumphant greeting song based on two elements , which are developed and transformed later in the Ring and put to many uses . For example , the joyful " <unk> " cries are converted , in Rheingold Scene 2 , into a dark minor version as Loge reports the theft of the gold to the gods and the consequent rising power of the Nibelungen . The " Rheingold ! " repetition is sung by the Rhinemaidens to the same falling step that marked the start of Woglinde 's song . This figure recurs constantly in the later stages of the drama ; in Das Rheingold Scene 3 a minor key version is used as a motive for the evil power of the ring that Alberich has forged from the gold . It comes to represent the theme of servitude to the ring ; in Götterdämmerung , enslaved to the ring by his desire for it , Hagen utters his " Hoi @-@ ho " call to his vassals using the same minor two @-@ note figure . 
 The lament " Rheingold ! Rheingold ! Reines Gold ! ... " ( Das Rheingold Scene 4 ) is sung by the maidens at the end of Das Rheingold , as the gods begin to cross the Rainbow Bridge into Valhalla . It begins with the music from the greeting , but develops into what Ernest Newman describes as a " haunting song of loss " , which becomes increasingly poignant before it is drowned by the orchestral fortissimo that ends the opera . A slow version of the lament is played on the horns in Siegfried , Act 2 , as Siegfried enters <unk> 's cave to claim the gold — the lament , says Cooke , serves to remind us of the gold 's true ownership . The lament is played <unk> during the Götterdämmerung prologue , as part of the orchestral interlude known as Siegfried 's Rhine Journey , before a shadow falls across the music as it descends into the minor key of the " servitude " motive . 
 Newman describes the Rhinemaidens ' scene with Siegfried " : Frau Sonne ... " and " <unk> <unk> ... " ( Götterdämmerung , Act 3 Scene 1 ) , as a " gracious woodland idyll " . The musical elements associated with the Rhinemaidens in this scene have not previously been heard ; Holman describes them as alluding to the maidens ' seductive nature , as well as conveying a sense of nostalgia and detachment , as the drama approaches its conclusion . 
 = = On stage = = 
 From the first complete production of the Ring , at the Bayreuth Festspielhaus in 1876 , it was established that the Rhinemaidens should be depicted in conventional human form , rather than as mermaids or with other supernatural features , notwithstanding Alberich 's insult to Wellgunde : " Frigid bony fish ! " ( Kalter , <unk> Fisch ! ) . The staging of their scenes has always been a test of ingenuity and imagination , since Wagner 's stage directions include much swimming and diving and other aquatic gymnastics . Traditionally , therefore , much use has been made of backdrops and lighting to achieve the necessary watery effects . Until the Second World War , under the influence of Cosima Wagner and her ( and Wagner 's ) son Siegfried , a policy of " stifling conservatism " was applied to Bayreuth stagings of the Ring operas . Although there had been some innovation in productions staged elsewhere , it was not until the postwar revival of the Festival in 1951 that there were any significant changes in Bayreuth 's presentation of the Ring operas . Since 1976 , in particular , innovation at the Festival and elsewhere has been substantial and imaginative . 
 In the original 1876 production , the Rhinemaidens were wheeled around on stands behind semi @-@ transparent screens . The stage machinery and the lighting effects were designed by Carl Brandt , who was the foremost stage technician of the time . One innovation which Cosima did eventually approve was the replacement of the wheeled stands with giant , invisible " fishing rods " on which the Rhinemaidens were dangled . Wires continued to be used in the Bayreuth productions of Siegfried Wagner and , later , those of his widow Winifred , who ran the Bayreuth Festival until the end of the Second World War . Similar techniques have been used in more modern productions . In the 1996 Lyric Opera of Chicago Ring cycle , repeated in 2004 – 05 , the Rhinemaidens were suspended on bungee cords anchored in the fly space above the stage , enabling them to dive up and down , as intended by Wagner . The Rhinemaidens were played on @-@ stage by gymnasts , mouthing words sung by singers standing in a corner of the stage . 
 The 1951 Festival production , by Siegfried 's and Winifred 's son Wieland , broke with tradition and featured an austere staging which replaced scenery and props with skilful lighting effects . The Rhinemaidens , along with all the other characters , were plainly dressed in simple robes , and sang their roles without histrionics . Thus the music and the words became the main focus of attention . Wieland was influenced by Adolphe Appia , whose Notes sur l <unk> du Nibelungen ( 1924 – 25 ) had been dismissed by Cosima : " Appia seems to be unaware that the Ring was performed here in 1876 . It follows that the staging is definitive and sacrosanct . " However , Wieland and his brother Wolfgang praised Appia : " ... the stylised stage , inspired by the music and the realisation of three @-@ dimensional space – constitute the initial impulses for a reform of operatic stagings which led quite logically to the ' New Bayreuth ' style . " 
 The innovative centenary Bayreuth Ring , directed by Patrice Chéreau , did away altogether with the underwater concept by setting the <unk> scenes in the lee of a large hydro @-@ electric dam , as part of a 19th @-@ century Industrial Revolution setting for the operas . For the scene with Siegfried in Götterdämmerung , Chéreau altered the perpetual youth aspect of the Rhine Maidens by depicting them as " no longer young girls merrily <unk> themselves ; they have become tired , grey , careworn , and ungainly " . Since this production " the assumption of unrestricted interpretive license has become the norm " . For example , Nikolaus <unk> , in his 1987 Bayerische Staatsoper production , placed the Rhinemaidens in a salon and had their lament at the end of Rheingold played on a gramophone by Loge . 
 Peter Hall directed the Bayreuth Ring after Chéreau . His version , staged 1983 – 86 , portrayed the natural innocence of the Rhinemaidens in the simplest of ways ; they were naked . Keith Warner adapted this feature in his Ring production for the Royal Opera House Covent Garden , first staged 2004 – 06 . A Covent Garden spokesman explained " The maidens are children of innocence , a vision of nature – and as soon as someone appears they hastily throw on some clothes to protect their modesty . " While Warner relies on lighting to achieve an underwater effect , Hall used a Pepper 's ghost illusion : mirrors at a 45 ° angle made the Rhinemaidens appear to swim vertically when the performers were in fact swimming horizontally in a shallow basin . 
 Although the roles of the Rhinemaidens are relatively small , they have been sung by notable singers better known for performing major roles in Wagnerian and other repertoire . The first person to sing the part of Woglinde in full was Lilli Lehmann at Bayreuth in 1876 . In 1951 , when the Bayreuth Festival re @-@ opened after the Second World War , the same part was taken by Elisabeth Schwarzkopf . Other Bayreuth Rhinemaidens include Helga <unk> who sang Wellgunde there between 1965 and 1967 . Lotte Lehmann played Wellgunde at the Hamburg State Opera between 1912 and 1914 and the Vienna State Opera in 1916 . Recorded Rhinemaidens have included Sena <unk> for Furtwängler and RAI , Lucia Popp and Gwyneth Jones for Georg Solti , and Helen Donath and Edda Moser for Karajan . 
 = 4 ( Beyoncé album ) = 
 4 is the fourth studio album by American singer Beyoncé , released on June 24 , 2011 , by Parkwood Entertainment and Columbia Records . Following a career hiatus that reignited her creativity , Beyoncé was inspired to create a record with a basis in traditional rhythm and blues that stood apart from contemporary popular music . Her collaborations with songwriters and record producers The @-@ Dream , Tricky Stewart , and Shea Taylor produced a mellower tone , developing diverse vocal styles and influences from funk , hip hop , and soul . 
 <unk> professional ties with father and manager Mathew Knowles , Beyoncé eschewed the music of her previous releases in favor of an intimate , personal album . 4 's lyrics emphasize monogamy , female empowerment and self @-@ reflection , a result of Beyoncé considering a maturer message to contend artistic credibility . The album was praised by critics for its fusion of various genres and for Beyoncé 's vocals ; many publications included it on their year @-@ end lists . 
 In May 2011 , Beyoncé submitted seventy @-@ two songs to Columbia Records for consideration , twelve songs of which appeared on the standard edition . 4 was promoted in mid @-@ 2011 by television performances and festival appearances , such as Beyoncé 's headlining Glastonbury Festival set . It was her fourth consecutive album to debut at number one on the US Billboard 200 , and it also reached number one in Brazil , France , Ireland , South Korea , Spain , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . 4 spawned the international singles " Run the World ( Girls ) " , " Best Thing I Never Had " , " Party " , " Love on Top " and " Countdown " . " Love on Top " won the Grammy Award for Best Traditional R & B Performance at the 55th annual ceremony . As of December 2015 , 4 has sold 3 @.@ 3 million copies worldwide and 1 @.@ 5 million copies in the United States . 
 = = Development = = 
 Following the release of her third album I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) and a world tour , Beyoncé took a career hiatus in 2010 " to live life [ and ] to be inspired by things again " . During her hiatus , she " killed " Sasha Fierce , the alter @-@ ego used in her previous album , as she felt she could now merge her two personalities . She severed professional ties with father and manager Mathew Knowles , who had guided her career since the 1990s with Destiny 's Child , noting that the decision made her feel vulnerable . 
 In an interview for Complex , Beyoncé expressed dissatisfaction with contemporary radio . She intended 4 to help change that status , commenting , " Figuring out a way to get R & B back on the radio is challenging ... With 4 , I tried to mix R & B from the ' 70s and the ' 90s with rock ' n ' roll and a lot of horns to create something new and exciting . I wanted musical changes , bridges , <unk> , live instrumentation and classic songwriting . " On her website she wrote , " The album is definitely an evolution . It 's bolder than the music on my previous albums because I 'm bolder . The more mature I become and the more life experiences I have , the more I have to talk about . I really focused on songs being classics , songs that would last , songs that I could sing when I 'm 40 and when I 'm 60 . " Beyoncé also sought to make more artistic music , rather than purely commercially oriented songs . 
 Although much of 4 's inspiration came from " touring , travelling , watching rock bands and attending festivals " , the album 's early musical direction was influenced by Nigerian Afrobeat musician Fela Kuti , whose passion for music motivated Beyoncé . She worked with the band from Fela ! , the Broadway musical based on Kuti 's life . DJ Swivel , one of 4 's engineers , later described how Kuti 's use of percussion and horns influenced the track " End of Time " . In 2015 , The @-@ Dream revealed that he and Beyoncé had composed a whole album based on Kuti 's music , although this was scrapped in favor of creating 4 , therefore explaining how " End of Time " became so heavily influenced . 
 She also found additional influences in Earth , Wind & Fire , The Stylistics , Lauryn Hill , Stevie Wonder , and Michael Jackson . She used hip hop for a " broader sound " and looked to bring soul singing back , stating , " I used a lot of the brassiness and grittiness in my voice that people hear in my live performances , but not necessarily on my records . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 Three months into her hiatus in March 2010 , Beyoncé began recording at Jay @-@ Z 's Roc the Mic Studios in New York City . One song — " Party " — was recorded because she wanted to see what working relationship would develop with engineer DJ Swivel . Kanye West assisted the production of " Party " after Beyoncé was impressed by his work on My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ( 2010 ) . André 3000 , the only featured artist on 4 , contributed a rap verse to the song , which he recorded in Georgia , US . 
 Six weeks later , in May 2010 , she asked Swivel to work on the entire project . Concerning his working relationship with Beyoncé , he commented , " There was no ' We 're doing this today . ' It was a very kind of open project , where whatever she felt like recording at that time was what we 'd work on . It was based on how she felt , her mood , and also her listening to the demos that writers would give us . " With Swivel , she experimented with horns , drums , guitars and percussion instruments . Mostly inspired by the Fela ! sessions , Swivel began to formulate beats using their own recordings and those from Fela ! The project was moved to KMA Studios for a week and a half because Roc the Mic was not large enough . There they began recording " I Care " , " Best Thing I Never Had " and " Rather Die Young " , and completed " Party " . They recorded the songs " Schoolin ' Life " , " 1 + 1 " and " Start Over " at Jungle City Studios in New York . 
 MSR Studios was the final New York City @-@ based studio used , and where most of 4 was recorded — only " Party " and " I Was Here " were recorded entirely at other studios . At MSR , Beyoncé emphasized the use of live instruments on songs such as " I Care " and " End of Time " . Consequently , most of the instruments , including drums , keyboards , guitar and bass work , were recorded there and performed by Jeff Bhasker and Shea Taylor . Beyoncé asked Frank Ocean to write and record " I Miss You " at MSR , saying to Complex , " [ Jay @-@ Z ] had a CD playing in the car one Sunday when we were driving to Brooklyn . I noticed his tone , his arrangements , and his storytelling . I immediately reached out to him — literally the next morning . I asked him to fly to New York and work on my record . " 
 After listening to each song , Beyoncé would often request the addition of specific instruments , leaving her production team to make the sounds cohesive . Her vocals were recorded through an Avalon Design 737 preamp and compressed in a 1176 Peak <unk> with a 4 : 1 ratio . After recording the lead vocals for a track , Swivel cut them in different ways and he and Beyoncé picked the best , then recording the backing vocals . Beyoncé composed her own vocal arrangements and harmonies for each song . Her microphones were carefully placed to achieve a blend of sounds with a clear quality . Swivel spoke of her work ethic in an interview for Sound on Sound : 
 She 's so fast and good at what she does that you can 't afford to waste time on anything , so if we ’ re ready to record drums , for example , we ’ re going to work with whatever we have available right there and then . That 's why we worked in such great studios , because we know they have great gear , and we don 't need to worry about renting gear . Part of my job as an engineer is to make sure the sessions are not only moving along , but moving along at her pace . 
 After the move to MSR , Beyoncé and her production team began travelling . In the United Kingdom , they worked at Peter Gabriel 's Real World Studios in Wiltshire — particularly using Gabriel 's multi @-@ instrument room — to create " Love on Top " . Soon after , Beyoncé joined Jay @-@ Z in a Sydney mansion , as he was working on his collaboration album Watch the Throne ( 2011 ) with Kanye West . There they created a " primitive studio " using a microphone , a rig out and Pro Tools software to record . Sessions were also held in Las Vegas , Los Angeles , Atlanta and Honolulu . 
 In February 2011 , MTV reported the project was nearing completion . 4 was mixed mostly at MixStar Studios in Virginia and mastered at Sterling Sound in New York City . The audio mastering was delayed by a week following the unexpected recording of " I Was Here " . Diane Warren had played the song to Jay @-@ Z during a telephone conversation , leading him to put Warren and Beyoncé in contact . In May 2011 , Beyoncé submitted seventy @-@ two songs in preparation for the album 's release . According to Swivel , an eclectic range of songs were recorded , including ballads , " weird ethereal things " and 1990 's R & B and Afrobeat @-@ inspired songs . Columbia Records were reportedly overwhelmed with the " sheer volume of material she presented to them " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The final cut of 4 comprises twelve tracks on the standard edition and eighteen on the deluxe edition — three of which are remixes of " Run the World ( Girls ) " . Critics viewed 4 as a major departure from Beyoncé 's previous catalogue , with a distinctive mellower sound . The album consists mostly of mid @-@ tempo R & B songs , with 1970s funk , 1980s pop and 1990s soul influences . The second half was more eclectic , exploring a variety of genres including hard rock , reggae and adult contemporary . The Guardian complimented the album 's divergence from the " layering [ of ] Euro @-@ synths on pop @-@ step <unk> " that characterize the music of Beyoncé 's contemporaries . 
 The balladry of the first half of 4 combines diverse vocal styles with the use of live instrumentation . " 1 + 1 " demonstrates Beyoncé 's vocal @-@ flexing over " magnificent guitar bombast " and a soft backing beat , while " Start Over " , a mid tempo R & B ballad , uses a futuristic beat with electric elements and synthesizers . " I Miss You " , with its " layers of atmospheric keyboards " , ambient synthesizers and tinny 808 drums was sung in a half @-@ whisper to exhibit intense emotion . " I Was Here " , an understated pop @-@ R & B ballad with indie rock inflections , primarily concerns self @-@ reflection with dramatic vocals . 
 On other songs , Beyoncé explores womanhood . " Best Thing I Never Had " , 4 's fourth track , was described as a moment of self @-@ realization and a " female call to arms " . With vocals that allude to a " wounded bird turned resilient lioness " , the song is built on a " <unk> piano riff and beefy bass drums " . " Dance for You " conveys a more sexual tone through breathy vocals and blaring electric guitars . It forgoes her typical empowerment themes in favor of sensual imagery and comfort with one 's partner . " Run the World ( Girls ) " , a female empowerment anthem reminiscent of Beyoncé 's more contemporary work on I Am ... Sasha Fierce , uses an energetic sample of Major Lazer 's " Pon de Floor " . The song incorporates " layered <unk> " , most prominently a military marching drumbeat , while Beyoncé 's near @-@ chanted delivery encompasses her full vocal range . 
 The tracks " Countdown " and " End of Time " were distinguished by their musical and lyrical experimentalism . " Countdown " was described as " everywhere on the genre map " , although predominantly dancehall @-@ led with a " bristling brass arrangement " . Its chorus describes a relationship by counting backwards from ten , using a sample from Boyz II Men 's " Uhh Ahh " . " End of Time " ' s pulsating , brass sound — reminiscent of a marching @-@ band — was heavily influenced by Afrobeat musician Fela Kuti . Kuti 's use of horns and percussion instruments was recreated and combined with elements of electronic music and synthesizers . " Lay Up Under Me " is also built on retro horns , featuring upbeat vocals , a sound Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork associated with Michael Jackson 's 1979 album Off the Wall . 
 Other tracks were noted for their retro stylization . " Rather Die Young " is a throwback to 1960s doo @-@ wop and Philadelphia soul , with a slow tempo and modern drums . " Party " achieves a vintage aesthetic through minimalistic production , replete with heavy synthesizers and a 1980s smooth @-@ funk groove . The song is unique for its conversation @-@ like structure , in which Beyoncé and guest @-@ vocalist André 3000 sing verses that allude to socialization at parties . Elements of Prince 's style was found on " Schoolin ' Life " and " I Care " . " Schoolin ' Life " is an uptempo funk song , with lyrics that advise the listener to live life to the fullest while cautioning them about the consequences of excess . The chorus of " I Care " was compared to " Purple Rain " , with themes of sadness and resentment , the song uses soft background vocals and dense percussion . " Love on Top " was noted for its energetic key changes with a joyful tone , evoking the work of Michael and Janet Jackson . Its retro sound is marked by a melding of horns as well as sweet backing harmonies that are most prominent on its bridge and chorus . 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 On May 18 , 2011 , 4 's release date in the United States was confirmed on to be June 28 . On June 7 , the album was leaked onto the Internet in full ; Beyoncé 's legal representatives issued warnings to infringing websites and leaked tracks were soon removed from such sites . On June 9 , Beyoncé responded to the leak through Facebook , commenting , " My music was leaked and while this is not how I wanted to present my new songs , I appreciate the positive response from my fans . When I record music I always think about my fans singing every note and dancing to every beat . I make music to make people happy and I appreciate that everyone has been so anxious to hear my new songs . " Following the leak , reports circulated that Columbia Records executives hoped to cover their assets in fear that the album may be a commercial failure . Rumors had suggested that the label requested from Beyoncé to make changes to the record and reunite Destiny 's Child , claims Columbia denied . In August 2013 , NME reported that Sony Music were suing a forty @-@ seven @-@ year @-@ old man from Gothenburg for US $ 233 @,@ 000 concerning the leak of 4 . The deluxe version was released simultaneously with the standard edition in several countries . In the United States , it was available exclusively through Target stores . 
 In an interview for Billboard , Beyoncé stated that despite having another concept for the album , she was ultimately influenced by her fans to name the album 4 . She described the number four as being " special " to her , as her and Jay @-@ Z 's birthday , several other family and friends ' birthdays , and her wedding anniversary fall on the fourth day of the month . The cover of the standard edition was revealed on Beyoncé 's website on May 18 , 2011 . Shot on the rooftop of the Hôtel Meurice in Paris , Beyoncé is looking into the distance with her arms raised over her head , wearing smokey eye makeup , thick gold cuffs and a fox @-@ fur stole by cult French designer Alexandre Vauthier , embellished with Swarovski crystals by the Lesage embroidery house . The cover of the deluxe version was shown on June 16 , where Beyoncé is dressed in a tight @-@ fitting blue @-@ purple dress by French designer Maxime <unk> , holding her hands in her hair . For its artwork , she opted for clothing made by lesser @-@ known designers . The promotional and interior @-@ package images for 4 were shot at the same time . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Beyoncé made several appearances on television and in live shows to promote 4 . She performed " Run the World ( Girls ) " for the first time on May 17 , 2011 , on Surprise Oprah ! A Farewell Spectacular at the United Center in Chicago . She also performed the song at the 2011 Billboard Music Awards . On May 25 , " 1 + 1 " was made available for download through the iTunes Store in the United States . The same day , " 1 + 1 " was performed at the American Idol final ; she introduced it as her favorite song . In June , she performed at the Palais Nikaia in Nice , Zénith de Lille , and the Galaxie in <unk> . On June 26 , Beyoncé was the closing act at the Glastonbury Festival 2011 in the United Kingdom . She was the first solo female artist to headline the Pyramid stage at the Glastonbury Festival in more than twenty years . A pre @-@ taped performance of " Best Thing I Never Had " and " End of Time " at the Glastonbury Festival was broadcast during the 2011 BET Awards . The following day , Beyoncé 's exclusive hour @-@ long interview with Piers Morgan in London was broadcast on Piers Morgan Tonight . She also appeared on the finale of France 's The X Factor to perform " Run the World " and " Best Thing I Never Had " . An MTV television special , Beyoncé : Year of 4 , premiered on June 30 , documenting Beyoncé 's life during 4 's production . 
 On July 1 , Beyoncé appeared on Good Morning America as part of its " Summer Concert Series " in New York City . She also projected images from 4 on a number of London 's landmarks , including Madame Tussauds and Battersea Power Station . She then traveled to Scotland to perform at the T in the Park Festival on July 10 , 2011 . The next day , she performed at the Oxegen Festival in Ireland . On July 28 , 2011 , Beyoncé performed " 1 + 1 " and " Best Thing I Never Had " on The View ; the latter was also performed on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon the same day . From August 16 – 19 , Beyoncé held the 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé concerts at the Roseland Ballroom to a standing room only audience . Subsequently , the Live at Roseland : Elements of 4 DVD was released in November . " Love on Top " was sung at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards on August 28 , Beyoncé finished the performance by unbuttoning her blazer and rubbing her stomach to confirm her pregnancy . A live performance of " Countdown " recorded in July was broadcast on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon in November . 
