 = = = Singles = = = 
 4 was Beyoncé ' first album that yielded no number one singles in the United States , as no song from 4 reached the top ten on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Run the World ( Girls ) " was released internationally as the lead single from 4 on April 21 , 2011 . It reached number twenty @-@ nine on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and number eleven on the UK Singles Chart . " Best Thing I Never Had " followed on June 1 , 2011 . It fared much better on national charts , reaching number sixteen in the United States , number five in New Zealand and number three in the United Kingdom . 
 " Party " was released as an urban contemporary single in the US on August 30 , 2011 ; its remix , featuring J. Cole , was released in the United States , Canada and some European countries on October 24 , 2011 . " Love on Top " was released in Australia as a contemporary hit radio single in September 2011 ; it was released in Italy , Belgium and the United States later . It topped the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart for seven consecutive weeks . " Countdown " was released in the United States and parts of Europe , beginning October 4 , 2011 . " I Care " was released in Italy only on March 23 , 2012 , while " End of Time " was released in the UK only on April 23 , 2012 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 4 received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 73 , based on 36 reviews . Michael Cragg of The Observer called it Beyoncé 's " most accomplished album yet " . Slant Magazine 's Eric Henderson believed 4 succeeds vocally as an album of mostly intimate and slow @-@ tempo ballads . Mikael Wood of Spin magazine applauded its ballads , mid @-@ tempo songs , and evocations of late 1970s and early 1980s pop @-@ soul . In his review for Rolling Stone , Jody Rosen wrote that Beyoncé eschews contemporary production styles for a more personal and idiosyncratic album . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times viewed it as a good showcase for Beyoncé as a torch singer , because she convincingly sings about heartbreak and the strong emotional effect of love . Pitchfork Media critic Ryan Dombal found it easygoing , retro @-@ informed , and engaging because it shows " one of the world 's biggest stars exploring her talent in ways few could 've predicted " . AllMusic 's Andy Kellman said that the quality of Beyoncé 's singing and the songwriting compensate for the assorted arrangement of the songs . Uncut viewed it is an exceptional album in spite of occasionally trite lyrics . 
 In a less enthusiastic review , Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly said the first @-@ half of 4 is marred by boring ballads and the songwriting in general are not on @-@ par with Beyoncé 's vocal talent . In his review for The Guardian , Alexis Petridis was ambivalent towards the album 's 1980s influence and argued that , despite well written songs , it is not very consequential . Time magazine 's Claire Suddath said the songs lack lyrical substance , even though they are performed well . Greg Kot , writing in the Chicago Tribune , called 4 inconsistent , short , and unfinished . NME magazine 's Hamish MacBain felt Beyoncé did not progress from her past work and that " even the OK bits here " sounded " uninspired " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 4 was included on various publication 's year @-@ end lists . It was ranked as the best album of the year by The New Yorker , and came in the runner @-@ up spot on lists produced by Spin and Amazon . The album was ranked within the top 10 by MSN , where it came in at number three , The Guardian and MTV , which placed it at number four , and the Chicago Sun Times , which placed it at number six . The BBC ranked it at number seven , while The New York Times listed it as the 10th best album of the year . The album had strong showings on other lists , where it was placed number 13 by Consequence of Sound , number 18 by Stereogum , number 25 by Rolling Stone , and number 27 by Pitchfork . 4 was included in NPR 's Top 50 Favorite Albums of 2011 , and was ranked at number 26 in the Pazz & Jop 's critics poll . It was listed at 37 on Rolling Stone 's Women Who Rock : 50 Greatest Albums of All Time . Pitchfork Media ranked the album at 39 on their list of the Top 100 Best Albums of the decade thus far , Kyle Kramer wrote that 4 " avoided the trappings of safe , later @-@ career bids , instead setting up the perfect platform for Beyoncé as the pop star , a queen for all the people . " The album was included on Consequence of Sound 's list of The 10 Best Summer Albums of All Time with Kenneth Partridge writing that " whether she 's hopelessly heartbroken or crazy in love , Queen Bey works damn hard to make you feel exactly what she 's feeling " . 
 4 won R & B Album of the Year at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards and received nominations at the 2011 American Music Awards , the 2011 Soul Train Music Awards , the 38th People 's Choice Awards , the 43rd NAACP Image Awards and the 2012 Grammis . At the 55th Annual Grammy Awards , " Love on Top " won the Best Traditional R & B Performance Award . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On its first day of release , 4 sold around 32 @,@ 000 copies in the United Kingdom . According to the Official Charts Company data , this was more than the combined sales of its three nearest challengers : Adele 's 19 ( 2008 ) and 21 ( 2011 ) and Lady Gaga 's Born This Way ( 2011 ) . After a week of sales , 4 debuted atop the UK Albums Chart on July 4 , 2011 , with first @-@ week sales of 89 @,@ 211 copies , staying there for a second week with sales of 44 @,@ 929 copies . By May 2013 , it had sold 603 @,@ 548 copies in the UK . 4 opened at number two on the Australian ARIA Charts , giving Beyoncé her highest chart debut there . 4 debuted at number three on the Canadian Albums Chart , selling 8 @,@ 700 copies in its first week . It debuted at number one in France , selling 12 @,@ 393 copies in its first week . According to the Japanese music charting site Oricon , the album debuted at number ten , selling 18 @,@ 984 copies for the week ending July 11 , 2011 . 
 In the United States , 4 debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , with first @-@ week sales of 310 @,@ 000 copies . This gave Beyoncé her fourth consecutive solo album to debut at number one on The Billboard album chart , making her the second female artist and third artist overall to have her first four studio albums debut atop the Billboard 200 . 4 's first @-@ week sales became Beyoncé 's lowest sales start with a studio album to date . Keith Caulfield of Billboard magazine noted that the album was not released during the festive season and that Beyoncé was so far lacking a hit single , which could help explain the album 's softer entry . It marks the third @-@ largest sales week of the year , after the number one bows of Lady Gaga 's Born This Way and Adele 's 21 . " 4 became the ninth numerically titled album to top the chart since 1956 . In its second week , the album remained at number one on the Billboard 200 , despite a 63 % sales decrease , selling 115 @,@ 000 copies . It hence became the first album by Beyoncé to top the Billboard 200 albums chart for more than one week ; an effort succeeded by her fifth album Beyoncé ( 2013 ) that remained there for three weeks . On August 1 , 2011 , the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , having shipped 1 million copies to retail stores . As of 2015 , 4 had sold 3 @.@ 8 million copies worldwide , and by December 2015 , reached sales of 1 @.@ 5 million copies in the US . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ b signifies an additional producer 
 ^ c signifies a vocal producer 
 ^ d signifies a remixer 
 The deluxe edition contains an exclusive version of the music video for " Run the World ( Girls ) " . 
 " Party " samples " La Di Da Di " as performed by Doug E. Fresh and the Get Fresh Crew featuring MC Ricky D. and written by Douglas Davis and Ricky Walters . 
 " Countdown " samples " Uhh Ahh " as performed by Boyz II Men and written by Michael Bivins , Nathan Morris and Wanya Morris . 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " samples " Pon de Floor " as performed by Major Lazer and written by Afrojack , Vybz Cartel , Diplo and Switch . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following people are credited on the album : 
 Managerial 
 Performance credits 
 Visuals and imagery 
 Instruments 
 Technical and production 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Moving On ( The Office ) = 
 " Moving On " is the sixteenth episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office and the 192nd episode overall . The episode was written by Graham Wagner . It was directed by Jon Favreau . It originally aired on NBC on February 14 , 2013 . The episode guest stars Bob Odenkirk , Mary Gillis , Collette Wolfe , and Andy Buckley . The episode also features the return of former series regular Zach Woods as Gabe Lewis . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) interviews for a job in Philadelphia , but her potential manager Mark ( Bob Odenkirk ) reminds her of her former boss , Michael Scott . Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) acquires the help of Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) in order to give his elderly Aunt Shirley ( Mary Gillis ) a bath . Meanwhile , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) attempts to make Pete Miller ( Jake Lacy ) and Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) feel uncomfortable by hiring their ex @-@ lovers . 
 On February 8 , 2013 , NBC announced that the episode would be expanded to fill a one @-@ hour television block , although it still counts as one official episode . The episode received largely positive reviews , although many were critical of the episode 's extended length , which they argued felt padded . The episode was viewed by 4 @.@ 06 million viewers and received a 2 / 6 percent rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode ranked third in its timeslot , and it was the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) learns that Pete Miller ( Jake Lacy ) and Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) are dating each other , which they 've been holding in secrecy from him in order to make his breakup with Erin easier . Andy attempts to fire Pete , but Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) points out that he can 't do this since Pete and Erin already disclosed their relationship . Erin and Pete then both lecture Andy about moving on , claiming that working alongside one 's ex @-@ lover doesn 't have to be awkward . To refute this claim , Andy hires both Pete 's ex @-@ girlfriend Alice ( Collette Wolfe ) and Erin 's ex @-@ boyfriend Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) . After giving Pete and Erin time to appreciate how uncomfortable this is , he holds a meeting with them and their ex @-@ lovers , leading the two couples to argue with each other . Andy tells the camera that seeing Erin and Pete unhappy has made him feel better . 
 Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) interviews for a job in Philadelphia , where she finds her potential manager , Mark ( Bob Odenkirk ) , is remarkably like her former Dunder Mifflin regional manager Michael Scott . While this initially amuses her , Pam gradually realizes that the prospect of working under another Michael Scott is abhorrent , and her horror increases when Mark reveals that she is interviewing for a glorified receptionist 's job . During a romantic dinner , Pam finally admits to Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) that even had the prospective job and boss been perfect she would not have wanted to take it , since she does not really want to move to Philadelphia , despite Jim having started his own business there . 
 Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) requests the help of Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) in caring for his ailing Aunt Shirley . Angela initially refuses , but gives in when Dwight begins describing her ailments in grotesque detail . At the house , Angela is horrified by Dwight 's treatment of his Aunt : he consistently speaks to her in a condescending tone , proposes to cut off her worn @-@ out clothing with a utility knife , and " bathes " her by spraying her with a high @-@ pressure water hose like a cow . After subduing Dwight by spraying him with the hose , Angela insists on washing and grooming Shirley in a more dignified manner . Through the process , Dwight and Angela begin to remember their feelings for each other . At the end of the day , Angela and Dwight begin kissing , but Angela reminds Dwight that she is married and says she won 't leave her husband even though he does not care for her . Dwight admits that he 'd want that same blind loyalty from her if she were his wife . 
 Toby had been discussing the details of the Scranton Strangler case with Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) for some time . Having grown weary of the subject , she snaps at him that he should do something about it , or stop talking . Toby accordingly goes to the local prison to talk to the person convicted of being the notorious local murderer and tell him he believes he is innocent . The convict begins strangling Toby for his part in the conviction . However , he does have his spirits lifted after Nellie gives him a lift from the hospital and commends him for his bravery . 
 Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) queues up a television show on his computer , and while the ad loads , he does gravity boot sit @-@ ups . While he is struggling to get down , the camera zooms in on an upcoming television guide on Oscar 's computer screen that reveals that the in @-@ series documentary — called The Office : An American Workplace — will air in May . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Moving On " was written by series producer Graham Wagner , making it his second episode for the series after the earlier ninth season episode " The Target " . The episode was directed by filmmaker Jon Favreau , marking his first directing credit for the series and the first time he has directed for a television comedy since Fox 's Undeclared . Fischer noted that , because Favreau got his start as an actor in " quiet , character based comedies " , his directing of The Office was a " return to that " type of comedy . On February 8 , 2013 , NBC announced that the episode would be expanded to fill a one @-@ hour television block , although it still counts as one official episode . 
 The episode guest stars Bob Odenkirk — who had previously been considered for the role of Michael Scott — as Pam 's potential employer , Mary Gillis as Aunt Shirley , and Andy Buckley as David Wallace . The episode also features the return of former series regular Zach Woods as Gabe Lewis . Woods was introduced in the sixth season episode " Sabre " and was added to the series as a regular with the premiere of the seventh season . Woods 's contract was not renewed at the beginning of the ninth season , but series showrunner Greg Daniels revealed that Woods would be returning ; he noted " It ’ s kind of a neat story turn [ ... ] He ’ s going to come back and we ’ re all excited to see him back " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When he is being yelled at by Wallace , Andy references American rapper Vanilla Ice and musician Jon Bon Jovi . Andy gives Clark ( Clark Duke ) various nicknames , including <unk> Posey ( a reference to American actress Parker Posey ) , <unk> Orange ( a reference to the novel A Clockwork Orange and the film of the same name ) , and Zero Clark Thirty ( a reference to the film Zero Dark Thirty ) . At the Philadelphia office , Mark alludes to pop culture , with references to the 2011 film Horrible Bosses and the 2012 film Django Unchained . He also sings the K @-@ pop hit " Gangnam Style " by Psy , and reads Pam 's resume as if he were Bob Dylan . Mark also makes a reference to the Spanish Inquisition sketch from Monty Python , but <unk> it to the Canadian sketch comedy group The Kids in the Hall . Near the end of Pam 's interview , Mark questions her on whether she enjoys the HBO series Curb Your Enthusiasm . The title of the in @-@ series documentary , The Office : An American Workplace , is the name given to the series itself when it was broadcast in the UK to differentiate it from the British version of the show . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Moving On " originally aired on NBC on February 14 , 2013 . In its original American broadcast , the episode was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 06 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 0 rating / 6 percent share . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 0 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a slight decrease in the ratings from the previous episode , " Vandalism " . The Office ranked third in its timeslot , being beaten by an episode of the CBS police procedural Person of Interest which received a 3 @.@ 0 / 8 percent rating , and an entry of the ABC series Grey 's Anatomy which received a 2 @.@ 8 / 8 percent rating . The ratings for " Moving On " were the best for NBC in the 9 @-@ 10 pm Thursday timeslot since November 8 , 2012 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Jeff Alexander of Television Without Pity awarded the episode an " A – " . Damon Houx of Screen Crush called the episode the " highlight " of the season . In particular , he was pleased with the way Pam and Jim 's strife was portrayed ; he wrote that " tonight the [ ... ] drama felt earned in a way it hadn 't previous " and that " Jim and Pam were used well " . Houx was also extremely pleased with Odenkirk 's performance , writing that , " Even if Odenkirk is doing an impression of Steve Carell 's character , not only is it great for the non @-@ comedy comedy , but you can totally see a parallel universe where Odenkirk played Michael Scott and nailed it as well as Carell did . " He concluded that , with Odenkirk 's presences , " In about twenty seconds this became the best episode of the season . " Kelly West of Cinema Blend gave a moderately positive review , noting that the entry " dealt with some of the ongoing issues among the staff of Dunder Mifflin . With the exception of a pretty great guest appearance by Breaking Bad 's Bob Odenkirk ( Better call Saul ! ) and some interesting developments in the relationship department for some of the characters , the episode was fairly standard . And then came the very end , which offered an interesting reveal and a teaser of something big . " 
 IGN writer Roth Cornet awarded the episode a 6 @.@ 9 , denoting a " okay " episode . She called the episode " the real beginning of the end " . Cornet , however , was critical of the episode 's length , specifically pin @-@ pointing the Philadelphia scenes , noting that they " went on too long " . She concluded that " I feel for the writers , who I honestly believe were forced to stretch their content this season " , as well as for the episode . Nick Campbell of TV.com was unhappy that the episode did not show or comment on Pam and Jim 's fight in the previous episode . He felt that the beginning of the dinner scene was nice , due to the two 's banter . However , he felt that the end pretended as if they had not discussed the move in any previous episodes . Campbell felt that Odenkirk was used in a good way , but that was " a waste of amazing talent at the real estate office " . He also felt that Dwight and Angela 's kiss was a good progression for their story . 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode " C – " , and criticized its extended nature . He said that it was " both brimming with narrative yet straining to fill its allotted time . " Adams argued that elements , like Toby 's visit to the prison , seemed like tacked on codas intended to increase the length of the show . He also felt that Odenkirk 's performance was humorous , but dragged on too long and played the joke too far . Adams , however , was complimentary towards Angela and Dwight 's subplot , calling it the most " daring " of the episode 's various subplots , and saying it provided momentum for the episode . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix called the episode " unpleasant ' , largely due to Andy 's presence ; he felt that the character " continues to dominate the action and crush all the goodwill generated earlier in the season " . However , he was very pleased with Odenkirk 's performance , calling his acting " a pretty spot @-@ on recreation of the early years [ of The Office ] " . Bob Odenkirk 's performance was later submitted by the producers of The Office for an " Outstanding Guest Actor in Comedy Series " Emmy consideration . 
 = Hurricane Darby ( 1992 ) = 
 Hurricane Darby was the fourth named storm of the 1992 Pacific hurricane season . The origins of Darby were from a tropical wave which moved off the coast of Africa on June 19 . It traversed the Atlantic , and moved across Mexico , where it re @-@ emerged in the Pacific on June 29 and became a tropical depression on July 2 , a tropical storm on July 5 , and a hurricane on July 6 . The storm remained well offshore , although it killed three people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Darby can be traced back to a tropical wave that emerged off the African coast on June 19 . The wave tracked westward across the Atlantic Ocean without further development , eventually passing over the Caribbean Sea and tracked over Mexico . The wave reached in the Pacific on June 29 , as its organization began to improve . The system was designated Tropical Depression 5 @-@ E on July 2 while moving southwest as it continued to organize . On July 4 , the depression attained tropical storm status and was named " Darby " . The tropical storm intensified to hurricane status as it brushed by the southern tip of Baja California . Although the storm remained well offshore , it contained a large circulation which produced tropical storm force winds extending up to 300 miles ( 480 km ) away from the center . As Darby passed by , Socorro Island recorded a minimum pressure of 974 hPa . The storm then reached its peak intensity of 968 hPa before beginning a weakening trend due to colder waters . 
 The hurricane , now as a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , was moving to the northwest near 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) . Darby continued on a northwest track as it moved away from the Baja California on July 6 . As the storm moved over cooler waters , deep convection decreased , and Darby was downgraded to a tropical storm on July 7 . Darby , now losing tropical characteristics , was downgraded to a tropical depression on July 9 . Darby soon dissipated , and moved into the southwest United States producing light rainfall . By July 10 , Darby had lost all of its tropical characteristics . As the remnant low pressure meandered across the southwest United States it moved north , and tracked offshore of California , where it persisted as a remnant low and produced shower activity to parts of California . 
 = = Preparations and Impact = = 
 Although Darby remained well offshore , the large size of the hurricane 's circulation prompted the government of Mexico to issue tropical storm warnings for the southern tip of Baja California . 
 The United States Coast Guard reported two separate boating accidents in Los Angeles , which were directly related to Darby . The first was a boat that experienced engine failure off the California coast . The seven people on board abandoned the boat , and were rescued . The second report was a boat that reported to be taking on water off the coast of California , on July 8 . A news source also reported that a tuna fishing boat experienced technical difficulties , but this is not official . 
 The effects from Darby were mostly minor , with three deaths reported by a Mexican newspaper . Four fishermen were reported missing , and onshore , 180 small stores were damaged along the Acapulco city port . Rainfall was mainly light , although some locations picked up 5 inches ( 125 mm ) . In California , Darby 's remnants produced overcast skies around the Edwards Air Force Base . This caused the landing of the Space Shuttle Columbia to be postponed for a day at the conclusion of STS @-@ 50 , as well as the landing happening at Kennedy Space Center . Darby produced high humidity , fog , and heavy rain around Los Angeles . A .5 in ( 13 mm ) fell in San Diego , setting daily records . 
 = Complicated ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Complicated " is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna from her fifth studio album Loud ( 2010 ) . It was written and produced by Tricky Stewart and Ester Dean . " Complicated " is a dance @-@ pop , hip hop and trance music song , which also displays elements of pop , dance @-@ pop and R & B. It contains lyrical content explaining how two people in a relationship can find one another complicated at times . The song was acclaimed by critics , as the majority of reviewers concluded that it was one of the best tracks to be included on Loud . Reviewers also praised Rihanna 's vocal performance in the song . Upon the release of the album in November 2010 , the song charted at number 50 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 " Complicated " was written and produced by Tricky Stewart and Ester Dean , for Rihanna 's fifth studio album , Loud . The song was recorded in 2010 at Westlake Recording Studios , and Larrabee Sound Studios , both located in Los Angeles , California . In an interview with Sway Calloway for MTV , Rihanna explained the meaning behind " Complicated " and how it is applicable for both men and women , saying : 
 [ Complicated is ] not a sex thing . It 's not like only women can sing this song or only women can relate to this song , ' cause it 's an individual thing and sometimes , sometimes [ sic ] men are just too complicated and then again , men can find women complicated . But it all depends on the individual , because not all women think love is complicated and not all men think that , but there are some women and some men who strongly believe that love is just too complicated . Women , they 're the first to say , ' It 's your fault , ' but most of the time it is [ the man 's ] fault . But men are also great at turning that [ shit ] around on us and making us believe that we 're wrong for something that we didn 't even do . At the end of the day , love is [ fucking ] complicated . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Complicated " is dance @-@ pop , hip hop and trance song , which lasts for 4 : 17 ( four minutes , 17 seconds ) . It also displays elements of pop , dance @-@ pop and R & B. Emily Mackay of NME described the song as " a clean , sharp <unk> number , backed by a dark and shuffling hip @-@ hop beat . " According to the digital sheet music published by EMI , " Complicated " is written in the key of A minor and is set in common time with a moderate electro @-@ ballad groove . The instrumentation of " Complicated " consists of synth beats and " crackling outbursts " of percussion and drums . 
 It also makes use of piano keys and guitar strings . Rihanna 's vocal range in the song spans from the lower note of G3 to the higher note of C5 . Mackay noted that the singer adopts a " melancholic pop vocal " for the duration of the song . Chad Grischow of IGN stated that Rihanna appears to be screaming the vocals during the hook , citing the key of the " jittery dance beat " as the reason for oversinging . However , Grischow commented that the singer sounds more pleasant to listen to during the verses , writing : " The song actually sounds great when the light , plucky verses are quietly building to the hook , allowing her to sing rather than shout . " Rihanna sings about the complications of a relationship , as well as how the protagonist can experience mood swings , whereby his or her feelings frequently change toward their lover . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Complicated " garnered critical acclaim from music critics . Colin Gentry of 4Music named the song the highlight of the album , continuing to write that Rihanna pours her heart out to the listener as she sings about the intensity of her " despair " . Jon Parales of The New York Times described " Complicated " as being one of the more " emotional " songs on Loud . Emily Mackay of NME noted that the lyrics " Why do you make it so hard to love you ? / I hate it " were reminiscent of songs by English pop girl group , Sugababes . Steve Jones of USA Today observed that Rihanna 's opinions of men are not just present on " Complicated " , but rather that it is a recurring theme on Loud , writing " On more than one occasion , she makes it clear that she likes her men complicated and that they can expect her to be the same . " Jones also listed it as one of his top songs to download from the album . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly commented that the " spiraling dance @-@ floor siren " persona Rihanna adopted on the lead single from Loud , " Only Girl ( In the World ) " , was carried through onto " Complicated " . Greenblatt continued to praise Rihanna 's vocal performance , writing : " Even while telling a recalcitrant man how hard he is to love , she sounds almost buoyant , her newly expanded vocals eager to scale the song 's high @-@ altitude house beat . " 
 Nima Baniamer of Contactmusic.com praised Rihanna 's vocal performance and liked it to single track from Loud , " California King Bed " , writing : " Taking a seat back from the thumping club classics , tracks like California King Bed and Complicated are both emotional singles that reveal Rihanna 's surprisingly brilliant vocals . " Baniamer also expressed that it would be a " travesty " if the song was not chosen as a single from the album . Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club was complimentary of the song , as well as single track " What 's My Name ? " , writing : " Her bubbly patois and soaring <unk> elevate the generic R & B and Euro @-@ dance flavors of ' What 's My Name ' and ' Complicated , ' respectively . " However , Bill Lamb of About.com was critical of the song , labeling it as " cluttered " and the album 's " low @-@ point " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California and Larrabee Sound Studios , Los Angeles , California . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Loud , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Loud , " Complicated " debuted and peaked at number 50 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart for the issue dated November 14 , 2010 . 
 = Conquest of the Western Turks = 
 The conquest of the Western Turks , known as the Western Tujue in Chinese sources , was a military campaign in 657 led by the Tang Dynasty general Su Dingfang against the Western Turkic Khaganate ruled by Ashina Helu . The Chinese war against the Western Turks began in 640 with the annexation of the Tarim Basin oasis state Gaochang , an ally of the Western Turks . Several of the oasis states had once been vassals of the Tang Dynasty , but switched their allegiance to the Western Turks when they grew suspicious of the military ambitions of the Tang . Tang expansion into Central Asia continued with the conquest of Karasahr in 644 and Kucha in 648 . Su Dingfang commanded the main army dispatched against the Western Turks , while the Turkic generals Ashina Mishe and Ashina Buzhen led the side divisions . The Tang troops were reinforced by cavalry supplied by the Uyghurs , a tribe that had been allied with the Tang since their support for the Uyghur revolt against the Xueyantuo . Su Dingfang 's army defeated Helu at the battle of <unk> River . 
 The victory strengthened Tang control of the Western Regions , now modern Xinjiang , and brought the regions formerly ruled by the Khaganate into the Tang empire . Puppet qaghans , the Turkic title for ruler , and military garrisons were installed to administer the newly acquired territories . The Tang Dynasty achieved its maximum extent as China 's western borders reached the eastern frontier of the Arabic Umayyad Caliphate . Later on , Turkic revolts ended Chinese hegemony beyond the Pamir Mountains in modern Tajikistan and Afghanistan , but a Tang military presence remained in Dzungaria and the Tarim Basin . Central Asia absorbed cultural influences from the conflict . Turkic culture and language spread into Central Asia , as did artistic and political influences from the Tang Dynasty . Many of the Tang generals and soldiers stationed in the region were ethnically Turkic , and the prevalence of Indo @-@ European languages in Central Asia declined with acceleration of Turkic migration . The Turks , Tibetans , and the Tang competed for control over Central Asia for the next few centuries . 
 = = Background = = 
 The empire of the Tang Dynasty ( June 18 , 618 – June 1 , 907 ) , successor of the Sui Dynasty , was a cosmopolitan hegemon that ruled one of China 's most expansive empires . Raids by the nomadic Khitans and Turks challenged Tang rule , and Tang rulers responded by pursuing strategies of divide and conquer , proxy warfare , tributes , and marriages . 
 Hostilities between the Tang and the Western Turks had existed since the founding of the dynasty . Emperor Gaozu , the first emperor of the Tang Dynasty , aided the assassination of a Western Turk qaghan in November 2 , 619 . Facing the threat of both the Western and Eastern Turkic <unk> , Gaozu 's successor Emperor Taizong formed an alliance with the Western Turks against the Eastern Turks , adopting a policy of allying " with those who are far away to fight those who are close . " 
 The westward expansion of the Tang Dynasty began with their wars against the Eastern Turks , Eastern Tujue in Chinese . Taking advantage of the political discord in the Eastern Turkic Khaganate , Taizong annexed the territory of the Eastern Turks in 629 , beginning a period of rule that would last for the next fifty years . The nomads were driven out of the Ordos region and southern Mongolia and Taizong was declared a Great Khan by the defeated tribes , who surrendered and submitted to Tang rule . 
 = = = Battles in the Western Regions = = = 
 Several of the Tarim Basin oasis states switched their allegiance from the Tang Dynasty to the Western Turks . The oasis states Kashgar and Khotan surrendered to the Chinese in 632 , as did the kingdom of Yarkand in 635 . Tang military campaigns expanded further west against the remaining kingdoms of the Tarim Basin in southern Xinjiang beginning in 640 . The king of Gaochang refused to submit to the Tang Dynasty as a suzerain . In 638 , Emperor Taizong ordered a campaign led by general Hou Junji to invade Gaochang . Tang troops arrived in 640 and annexed the kingdom . A Western Turk army , sent to support Gaochang , retreated as the Tang forces approached . 
 The nearby kingdom of Karasahr grew wary of the Chinese troops stationed at Gaochang , now under Tang domination . It refused to send tribute to the Tang court and formed an alliance with the Western Turks . A Tang campaign led by commander <unk> Ke captured the kingdom in 644 and installed a Tang loyalist as ruler . Military assistance by the Western Turks failed to deter the Tang forces . With the support of the Western Turks , the puppet ruler was later deposed , and another military campaign , led by the Tang general Ashina She 'er , a member of the Turkic Ashina royal family , arrived in 648 to re @-@ establish Tang control . 
 After conquering Karasahr , She 'er led his forces to the kingdom of Kucha . The army of Kucha , comprising 50 @,@ 000 soldiers , lost to She 'er . The king of Kucha fled with his soldiers to the kingdom of Aksu . After a forty @-@ day siege , the king was captured and the Kucha forces surrendered on 19 January 649 . Tang military garrisons were installed in the region to administer the annexed oasis states . These garrisons , known as the Four Garrisons of Anxi , were located in Kucha , Kashgar , Khotan , and Karasahr . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 Ashina Helu , a member of the Ashina royal family , was previously a general under Emperor Taizong commanding Tang forces in Gansu . He led a revolt against the Tang and migrated westward , declaring himself <unk> Qaghan and ruler of the Western Turkic Khaganate . Helu 's rise to power unified the divided Turkic tribes under a single leader . 
 After he established himself as qaghan , Ashina Helu led repeated raids on Tang settlements to the east . He also attacked the Tarim Basin , bringing the territory under Turkic rule for the next six years . Emperor Gaozong , the successor of Taizong , responded by sending Tang forces consisting of a main division led by Su Dingfang , and another led by Ashina Mishe and Ashina Buzhen , Western Turk rivals of Ashina Helu . 
 Su Dingfang was a commander from south @-@ central Hebei who , earlier in his career as an officer , was responsible for leading the attack against the military camp of <unk> Qaghan , qaghan of the Eastern Turks . He also gained military experience as a leader of a regional militia during the civil war fought between the transition from Sui to Tang . Su was a general with military experience in Central Asia , and was familiar with the culture of the steppes . He had been in contact with military leaders from the region . He was one of nine multi @-@ ethnic commanders invited by Emperor Gaozong to a military event in 655 . The Turkic general Ashina Zhong , second cousin of Ashina She 'er , was another commander in attendance . 
 Su Dingfang 's forces comprised Tang soldiers and 10 @,@ 000 Uyghur horsemen . The Uyghur troops were provided by <unk> , son of the Uyghur leader <unk> <unk> and enthroned by Taizong . The Uyghurs were allied with Tang China , who had supported their revolt against the reign of the Xueyantuo , a tribe of Tiele people . <unk> joined Su Dingfang as a vice commander of the Uyghur cavalry in the military campaign against the Western Turks . The commanders of the Uyghur cavalry were the <unk> Protector @-@ General and Vice Protector @-@ General , administrators of the <unk> Protectorate near the Tang <unk> military garrison . 
 Su 's army marched through the Central Asian steppes from Ordos , Inner Mongolia to the Altai Mountains region . His troops left Ordos in March and arrived in Kyrgyzstan in November , a journey spanning 3 @,@ 000 miles across steppes and desert . Su avoided stopping at the resource rich oasis states , and historian Jonathan Karam Skaff speculates that the Chinese troops may have relied on livestock for food instead of a supply train , a tactic used by the steppe nomads . The campaign continued through the winter , when the steppes were covered in snow . Describing the journey 's ordeal , Su Dingfang is reported to have said : " The fog shed darkness everywhere . The wind is icy . The barbarians do not believe that we can campaign at this season . Let us hasten to surprise them ! " 
 Commanders in the Tang army were familiar with the political culture of nomadic empires . Nomadic alliances were formed through distributing war plunder and ensuring the security of tribal property , and grew tenuous when rulers failed to deliver their promises . The Chinese understood that disaffected tribes were vulnerable to switching allegiances , and used this to their advantage . 
 Su Dingfang recruited tribes to side with Tang , and these former tribal vassals of the Western Turks contributed additional soldiers . The tribe <unk> offered their support after they were defeated by Su , and the tribe <unk> aided Su after their children and wives , originally captured by Helu , were returned along with gifts offered by the Tang . 
 The battle was fought along the <unk> River near the Altai Mountains . Helu 's forces , consisting of 100 @,@ 000 cavalry , were ambushed by Su as Helu chased decoy Tang troops that Su had deployed . Helu was defeated during Su 's surprise attack , and lost most of his soldiers . Turkic tribes loyal to Helu surrendered , and Helu escaped to Tashkent in modern Uzbekistan . The retreating Helu was captured the next day after residents of Tashkent handed the qaghan over to the Tang . On the way back to the Tang capital , Helu is reported to have written : 
 I am a defeated and ruined war captive , that 's it ! The former emperor [ Taizong ] treated me generously , but I betrayed him . In my present defeat , Heaven has vented its fury at me . In the past I have heard that Han law stipulates that executions of men be carried out in the city marketplace . When we arrive in the capital , I request to <unk> [ the tomb of the previous Tang emperor Taizong ] to atone for my crimes to the former emperor . This is my sincere desire . 
 Gaozong received Helu 's plea and agreed to his request , despite a Tang law ordering the execution of captured rebel generals and kings . In accordance with Confucian rituals , he was sent to Taizong 's tomb where Gaozong spared his life , and then to the capital 's Ancestral Temple where the captive was presented again , mirroring ancient rituals celebrating victorious armies . Helu felt disgraced by Taizong and committed suicide a year later while still in captivity . He was buried in a mound decorated with a stele outside the emperor 's park . The tomb served as a military trophy , visible to the emperor 's visitors entering the park , symbolizing the loyalty of the qaghan to the emperor and the Tang military victories against the Western Turks . 
 = = Historical significance = = 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The conquest strengthened Tang rule over modern Xinjiang , administered by the Anxi Protectorate , and led to Tang suzerainty over the regions previously under the control of the Western Turks . The fall of the Khaganate brought the Altai Mountain region under Tang control and the residing Three <unk> tribes were governed in newly established prefectures led by tribal chiefs , now commander @-@ in @-@ chiefs under the Tang . Another prefecture , the Jinman Bridle Prefecture , was created for the Chuyue tribes living in the southern Dzungar basin . The Amu Darya valley , the Tarim Basin , and the area beyond the Pamir Mountains , all former suzerains of the Western Turks , were placed under Tang control . 
 Su continued his career as military general , and later commanded Tang forces in a war against Baekje in 660 . The Tang Dynasty achieved its maximum extent following its conquest of the Khaganate . The inhabitants of the new territory did not become sinicized like many of the other kingdoms and tribes conquered by the Tang . Tang military activity in Central Asia brought in a wave of Turkic migrants serving in the Tang military as soldiers and generals , leading to the spread of Turkic language and culture . At the same time , the prevalence of Indo @-@ European languages in the Western Regions was on the decline . Central Asia also absorbed cultural influences from Tang China . Central Asian art incorporated Tang stylistic features , like the <unk> three color glaze used in pottery . Chinese coins remained in circulation in Xinjiang after the decline of the Tang . Cultural remnants of Tang architectural influence are still visible in the Buddhist architecture of Dunhuang , on the border between the Western Regions and the Hexi Corridor . 
 The sheer size of the newly conquered lands made it difficult to govern through the Tang military garrisons . The Tang emperor Gaozong appointed two puppet qaghans to rule over the Western Turks , who were later overthrown in a rebellion that began in 662 . The revolt reduced Tang 's western extent to <unk> , Dzungaria in northern Xinjiang and ended direct Tang control of Central Asia beyond the Pamir Mountains in modern Tajikistan and Afghanistan . The expansion of the Tibetan Empire from the south threatened China 's hold on southern Xinjiang . Tibet invaded the Tarim Basin in 670 , but Tang forces regained the area in 693 and Kashgar in 728 , restoring the Anxi Protectorate and Four Garrisons . The conflict between Tibet and the Tang continued for the remainder of the Tang Dynasty . 
 At its maximum extent , Tang expansion brought China into direct contact with the rising Umayyad Caliphate . China 's western borders reached the eastern frontier of the Caliphate . Following the Arab defeat of Sassanid Persia in 651 , the Caliphate began its expansion into Central Asia , competing with the Tang 's sphere of influence in the region . Chinese and Islamic troops finally clashed at the Battle of Talas in 751 . The Chinese lost against the Arabs , now under Abbasid rule , and the Arab army captured Chinese papermaking craftsmen . An Arabic record of the conflict claims that the battle led to the introduction of papermaking to the Islamic world . 
 = = = Puppet qaghans = = = 
 The Tang emperor Gaozong installed two puppet qaghans , the cousins Ashina Buzhen and Ashina Mishe , and controlled the region by proxy . Buzhen and Mishe were enemies of Helu who had aided Su Dingfang during his campaign against Helu and the Western Turkic Khaganate . Gaozong divided the ten tribes of the area among the two cousins . Buzhen governed half of the tribes located in the west , while Mishe governed the other half located in the east . 
 The son of Buzhen , Khusrau , and the son of Mishe , Yuanqing , resided in Chang 'an , the capital of Tang , while their fathers administered the former khaganate as qaghans . Empress Wu Zetian sent Yuanqing and <unk> westward in 685 to succeed their fathers as proxy rulers . 
 Neither of the qaghans were able to successfully exert control . Turkic tribes resisted Yuanqing 's rule , defeating the qaghan and forcing Yuanqing to return to Chang 'an . <unk> was able to bring the western tribes temporarily under his rule , but was defeated in 690 during an invasion by the Second Turkic Khaganate , and he too was forced to escape the region with his loyalists . Later attempts to install puppet qaghans failed , and the title was reduced to a symbolic position in the Tang court . 
 = HMS Crusader ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Crusader was a C @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the early 1930s . She saw service in the Home and Mediterranean Fleets and spent six months during the Spanish Civil War in late 1936 in Spanish waters , enforcing the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides of the conflict . Crusader was sold to the Royal Canadian Navy ( RCN ) in 1938 and renamed HMCS Ottawa . She was initially deployed on the Canadian Pacific Coast before World War II , but was transferred to the Atlantic three months after the war began . She served as a convoy escort during the battle of the Atlantic until sunk by the German submarine U @-@ 91 on 14 September 1942 . Together with a British destroyer , she sank an Italian submarine in the North Atlantic in November 1941 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Crusader displaced 1 @,@ 375 long tons ( 1 @,@ 397 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 865 long tons ( 1 @,@ 895 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Crusader carried a maximum of 473 long tons ( 481 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 145 officers and men . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Crusader had a single QF 3 @-@ inch 20 cwt AA gun between her funnels , and two 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk II AA guns mounted on the aft end of her forecastle deck . The 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) AA gun was removed in 1936 and the 2 @-@ pounders were relocated to between the funnels . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch torpedoes . Three depth @-@ charge chutes were fitted , each with a capacity of two depth charges . After World War II began this was increased to 33 depth charges , delivered by one or two rails and two throwers . 
 The ship was ordered on 15 July 1930 from Portsmouth Dockyard under the 1929 Naval Programme . Crusader was laid down on 12 September 1930 , launched on 30 September 1931 , as the second ship to carry the name , and completed on 2 May 1932 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Crusader was initially assigned to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla of Home Fleet and remained with this flotilla for the next four years . She received her first refit at Portsmouth from 30 July to 4 September 1934 . Following the Italian invasion of Abyssinia in August 1935 , Crusader was sent with the rest of her flotilla to reinforce the Mediterranean Fleet the following month . From October to March 1936 she was deployed in the Red Sea to monitor Italian warship movements . Upon her return in April , the ship was refitted at Portsmouth from 27 April to 30 May . During the beginning of the Spanish Civil War in August – September 1936 , the ship evacuated British nationals from Spanish ports on the Bay of Biscay . Crusader was assigned as the plane guard for the aircraft carrier Courageous from January 1937 to March 1938 , aside from a brief refit between 30 March and 27 April 1937 . The ship began a major refit at Sheerness on 28 April 1938 to bring her up to Canadian specifications that included the installation of Type 124 ASDIC . 
 = = = Transfer to the Royal Canadian Navy = = = 
 The ship was purchased for C $ 817 @,@ 500 by the Royal Canadian Navy and she was commissioned on 15 June as HMCS Ottawa . The ship was assigned to the Canadian Pacific Coast and arrived at Esquimalt on 7 November 1938 . She remained there until she was ordered to Halifax , Nova Scotia on 15 November 1939 where she escorted local convoys , including the convoy carrying half of the 1st Canadian Infantry Division to the UK on 10 December . Ottawa 's stern was damaged in a collision with the tugboat <unk> in April 1940 , and repairs took two months to complete . 
 On 27 August 1940 , Ottawa was sailed to Greenock , Scotland , and assigned to the 10th Escort Group of the Western Approaches Command upon her arrival on 4 September for convoy escort duties . In October , the ship 's rear torpedo tube mount was exchanged for a 12 @-@ pounder AA gun . On 24 – 26 September , she rescued survivors of two British merchant ships ; 55 from SS <unk> that had been sunk by German submarine U @-@ 43 and 60 from SS Eurymedon that had been sunk by U @-@ 29 . Ottawa assisted the British destroyer Harvester in sinking the Italian submarine Comandante Faà di Bruno on 7 November . By mid @-@ November , Ottawa had been fitted with a Type <unk> short @-@ range surface @-@ search radar , adapted from the Royal Air Force 's ASV radar . This early model , however , could only scan directly forward and had to be aimed by turning the entire ship . On 23 November , she rescued 29 survivors of the grain carrier SS <unk> which had been sunk by U @-@ 100 . 
 Ottawa returned to Canada in June 1941 and was assigned to the RCN 's Newfoundland Escort Force which covered convoys in the Mid @-@ Atlantic . She was transferred to Escort Group C4 in May 1942 . In early September , the ship 's captain refused to allow her director @-@ control tower and rangefinder to be removed in exchange for a Type 271 target indication radar . On 14 September , while escorting Convoy ON 127 500 nautical miles ( 930 km ) east of St. John 's , Newfoundland , Ottawa was torpedoed by U @-@ 91 . Ten minutes later , unable to manoeuvre , she was hit by a second torpedo . She sank ten minutes later ; 114 crewmen lost their lives , including the commanding officer , while nearby vessels rescued 69 survivors . 
 The armament changes undergone by the ship during the war are not entirely clear . Photographic evidence shows that four Oerlikon 20 mm AA guns were added , one pair to her searchlight platform and the other pair on the bridge wings , although Ottawa retained her 2 @-@ pounder guns even after the Oerlikons were added . ' Y ' gun was also removed to allow her depth charge stowage to be increased to at least 60 depth charges . 
 = = = Trans @-@ Atlantic convoys escorted = = = 
 = Rachel Barrett = 
 Rachel Barrett ( 12 November 1874 – 26 August 1953 ) was a suffragette and newspaper editor born in Carmarthen , Wales . After attending the University College of Wales in Aberystwyth she became a science teacher . In 1906 she quit her job after hearing Nellie Martel speak on women 's suffrage ; she then became a member of the Women 's Social and Political Union ( WSPU ) and moved to London . In 1907 she became an organiser for the WSPU and after Christabel Pankhurst fled to Paris , Barrett was asked to be the joint organiser of the national WSPU campaign . In 1912 , despite having no journalistic background , she was put in charge of the newly formed newspaper The Suffragette . Barrett was arrested on more than one occasion for activities linked to the suffrage movement and between 1913 and 1914 she spent time incognito avoiding re @-@ arrest . 
 In her later life she was in a relationship with the Australian author I. A. R. Wylie ; the two of them supported Radclyffe Hall during the obscenity trial of Hall 's book , The Well of Loneliness . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Barrett was born in Carmarthen in 1874 to Rees Barrett , a land and road surveyor , and his second wife Anne Jones , both Welsh @-@ speakers . She grew up in the town of Llandeilo with her elder brother Rees and a younger sister , Janette . By the 1881 Census , her mother Anne was the lone adult living at their address on Alan Road , her father having died in 1878 . Barrett was educated at a boarding school in Stroud , along with her sister , and won a scholarship to the University College of Wales , Aberystwyth . She graduated in 1904 with an external London BSc degree and became a science teacher . She taught in Llangefni , Carmarthen and Penarth . 
 = = Life as a suffragette = = 
 = = = Early activism with the WSPU = = = 
 Towards the end of 1906 Barrett attended a suffrage rally in Cardiff and was inspired by a speech from Nellie Martel to join the Women 's Social and Political Union ( WSPU ) at the end of the meeting . By the following year Barrett was active as a WSPU activist and helped organise Adela Pankhurst 's meetings in Cardiff and Barry that year , sharing the stage with her as one of the speakers . Barrett spoke on behalf of the WSPU at many meetings , often in Welsh , which conflicted with her role as a schoolteacher as her headmistress disapproved of the publicity , especially after news of Barrett being flour @-@ bombed at a rally in Cardiff Docks made the local papers . In July 1907 Barrett resigned as a teacher and enrolled at the London School of Economics , intending to study economics and sociology and to work towards her DSc . That August she was heavily active for the WSPU , campaigning at the Bury St Edmunds by @-@ election with <unk> Keevil , Nellie Martel , Emmeline Pankhurst , <unk> Lamb and Elsa <unk> . Barrett was also active with Adela Pankhurst at Bradford . With her campaign activities over Barrett was free to attend the LSE , which proved useful for attending WSPU activities in nearby Clement 's Inn . Over the Christmas period Barrett was again busy campaigning for the WSPU , this time in the lead up to the Ashburton by @-@ election . Shortly afterwards she was asked by Christabel Pankhurst to become a full @-@ time organiser of the WSPU , an offer which would see her leave her course at the LSE . Barrett regretted giving up her studies but accepted the position stating , " It was a definite call and I obeyed . " 
 Barrett spent 1908 first <unk> a campaign in Nottingham and then working on the by @-@ elections in both Dewsbury and Dundee . In June of that year she was the chairman of one of the platforms at the Hyde Park rally , but the work took its toll on her health and shortly afterwards she was forced to temporarily step down from her position to recuperate , which included a period of time at a sanatorium . After recovering she moved closer to home , volunteering for Annie Kenney in Bristol . She soon agreed to resume her role as a paid organiser for he WSPU and was sent to Newport in south @-@ east Wales to continue her duties . In 1910 Barrett was chosen to lead a group of women to talk to the Chancellor of the Exchequer , David Lloyd George , regarding the Liberal Party 's role in supporting the first Conciliation Bill . The meeting lasted two and a half hours , and by its end she was convinced that Lloyd George had been insincere over his support for equal voting rights and believed him to be against women 's suffrage . By the end of the year her post was changed to organising all WSPU activities in Wales and she was relocated to the country 's headquarters in Cardiff . According to Ryland Wallace , writing in 2009 , " No individual worked harder than Rachel Barrett to promote the campaign in Wales . " 
 = = = Editor of The Suffragette = = = 
 In 1912 Barrett was selected by Kenney to help run the WPSU national campaign , following the raid by police on Clement 's Inn and Christabel Pankhurst 's subsequent flight to Paris . Barrett moved back to London and within a few months she was given the role of assistant editor of the WSPU newspaper , The Suffragette , on its launch in October 1912 . Writing in her autobiography Barrett described becoming an editor as " an appalling task as I knew nothing whatever of journalism " . By taking on the job she also took on the risks connected with the increasingly militant WSPU . She travelled under cover to Paris to meet with Christabel Pankhurst , and when speaking to her on the phone she recalled how she " could always hear the click of Scotland Yard listening in . " 
 Over the next two years Barrett was a key figure in keeping the newspaper in print despite the Home Secretary 's efforts to suppress it . In April 1913 the offices of The Suffragette were raided by the police and the staff were arrested on charges of conspiring to damage property . Barrett was sentenced to nine months ' imprisonment at Holloway . She immediately went on hunger strike , was transferred to Canterbury Prison , and after five days she was released under the " Cat and Mouse Act " . She moved into " Mouse Castle " , 2 Campden Hill Square , home of the Brackenbury family who were sympathetic suffragists . After three weeks at the house , Barrett emerged and was re @-@ arrested . She went back on hunger strike and after four days was again released to " Mouse Castle " . This time she was smuggled out of the house in disguise to allow her to speak at meetings , before being re @-@ arrested for a second time . For the third time Barrett was released after a hunger strike , but this time she successfully eluded the authorities and fled to a nursing home in Edinburgh where she remained until December 2013 . On leaving Scotland she returned in secret to London ; she hid at Lincoln 's Inn House where she lived in a bedsit . Barrett continued to edit The Suffragette , but she travelled to Paris to discuss the future of the newspaper with Christabel Pankhurst after its offices were raided in May 1914 . The result of their meeting was the relocation of The Suffragette to Edinburgh where the printers were at less risk of arrest . Barrett moved to Edinburgh and assumed the pseudonym " Miss Ashworth " . Barrett continued to publish the paper until its final edition on the week after the First World War was declared . During the war Barrett was a vocal supporter of British military action , as were the majority of the suffragette movement . She was a contributor to the WSPU ' Victory Fund ' which was launched in 1916 to sponsor campaigns against " a compromise peace " and industrial strikes . 
 After the passing of the Representation of the People Act 1918 , in which some women within the United Kingdom were first given the right to vote , Barrett busied herself in continuing the fight for full emancipation . When full voting rights were won in 1928 she helped raise funds for commemorations and was an important figure in raising the money needed to erect a statue of Emmeline Pankhurst in Victoria Tower Gardens , near the Palace of Westminster in London . Barrett understood the international connections of suffrage and contacted important Canadian and American campaigners for financial support . In Barrett 's obituary in the Women 's Bulletin it read that the raising of the statue " ... stands as a permanent memorial to Rachel 's organising ability . " In 1929 Barrett was appointed secretary of the Equal Political Rights Campaign Committee , an organisation that sought equality between men and women in all political spheres . 
 = = Relationship with I. A. R. Wylie = = 
 During her time editing The Suffragette , Barrett struck up a friendship with the Australian author I. A. R. Wylie , who contributed to the paper in 1913 . The two of them started a relationship and became lovers . In 1919 both Barrett and Wylie travelled to the United States , where they bought a car and spent over a year travelling the country . They stayed in New York and San Francisco and were recorded in the 1920 census as living in Carmel @-@ By @-@ The @-@ Sea in California , where Wylie is classed as the head of the household and Barrett her friend . 
 The two women remained close for some time , and in 1928 were supporters of their close friend Radclyffe Hall , during the trial of The Well of Loneliness . When Barrett died she left the residue of her estate to Wylie . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In her later life Barrett joined the Suffragette Fellowship and was particularly close to Kitty Marshall who lived near by . She attempted to publish a memoir of Marshall in the late 1940s , but it was turned down for publication . Barrett moved to Sible Hedingham in Essex in the early 1930s and joined the Sible Hedingham Women 's Institute in 1934 , remaining a member until 1948 . There she lived at Lamb Cottage . 
 Barrett died of a cerebral haemorrhage on 26 August 1953 at the <unk> Nursing Home in <unk> , Sussex . She was seventy @-@ eight years old . She left Lamb Cottage to her niece Gwyneth Anderson , who lived there with her husband , the British poet , J. Redwood Anderson . 
 = = Further Reading = = 
 Cline , Sally ( 1999 ) . Radclyffe Hall : A Woman Called John . The Overlook Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Wylie , I. A. R. ( 2010 ) . My Life with George : An Unconventional Autobiography . Kessinger Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 = Ghost Stories ( magazine ) = 
 Ghost Stories was a pulp magazine which published 64 issues between 1926 and 1932 . It was one of the earliest competitors to Weird Tales , the first magazine to specialize in the fantasy and occult fiction genre . It was a companion magazine to True Story and True Detective Stories , and focused almost entirely on stories about ghosts , with many of the stories written by staff writers but presented under pseudonyms in a " true confession " style . These were often accompanied by faked photographs to make the stories appear more believable . Ghost Stories also ran original and reprinted contributions , including works by Robert E. Howard , Carl Jacobi , and Frank Belknap Long . Among the reprints were Agatha Christie 's " The Last <unk> " ( under the title " The Woman Who Stole a Ghost " ) , several stories by H.G. Wells , and Charles Dickens ' " The Signalman " . The magazine was initially successful , but began to lose readers , and in 1930 was sold to Harold Hersey . Hersey was unable to reverse the magazine 's decline , and Ghost Stories ceased publication at the start of 1932 . 
 = = Publishing history and contents = = 
 Fantasy and occult fiction had often appeared in popular magazines prior to the twentieth century , but the first magazine to specialize in the genre , Weird Tales , did not appear until 1923 . Ghost Stories , which was launched in July 1926 , was one of Weird Tales ' earliest competitors . The publisher , Bernarr Macfadden , also published true confession magazines such as True Story ; Ghost Stories followed this format , with the contents mostly written by the publisher 's staff writers , and attributed in print to a first @-@ person narrator . The magazine was initially printed on slick paper , which was sufficiently good quality to allow photographs to be used , and many of the stories had accompanied photographs purporting to be of their protagonists . These were replaced by line drawings when the magazine switched to a pulp layout in July 1928 . Ghost Stories did occasionally print contributions from outside writers , including " The Apparition in the Prize Ring " , by Robert E. Howard , under the pseudonym " John <unk> " . Frank Belknap Long , Hugh B. Cave , Victor Rousseau , Stuart Palmer , and Robert W. Sneddon all sold stories to Ghost Stories , and Carl Jacobi 's first published story , " The Haunted Ring " , appeared in the final issue , though this was not his first sale — " <unk> " , which he had sold to Weird Tales , did not appear in print until the following month . 
 In addition to original material , Ghost Stories included a substantial number of reprints , including well @-@ known Victorian ghost stories such as " The Signalman " by Charles Dickens , and " The Open Door " by Mrs. Oliphant . Agatha Christie 's " The Last <unk> " appeared in the November 1926 issue , under the title " The Woman Who Stole a Ghost " , and six stories by H.G. Wells were reprinted , including both ghost stories such as " The Red Room " and stories with less obvious appeal to Ghost Stories ' readership , such as " Pollock and the <unk> Man " . Arthur Conan Doyle 's " The Captain of the <unk> " appeared in the April 1931 issue , and he also contributed a non @-@ fiction piece , " Houdini 's Last Escape " , which appeared in March 1930 . An arrangement was set up by Macfadden with Walter Hutchinson , a U.K. publisher , to exchange suitable material with The Sovereign Magazine and Mystery @-@ Story Magazine , two of Hutchinson 's U.K. genre pulps , and many stories appeared on both sides of the Atlantic as a result . 
 The magazine was initially fairly successful , but sales soon began to fall . In March 1930 Harold Hersey bought the magazine from Macfadden and took over as editor , but he was unable to revive the magazine 's fortunes . In 1931 the schedule slipped to bimonthly , and three issues later the magazine ceased publication , probably because readers grew bored : the limited scope meant that the contents of the magazine eventually became predictable . The final issue was dated December 1931 / January 1932 . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Ghost Stories was published by Bernarr Macfadden , under the imprint Constructive Publishing Co . , of <unk> , New Jersey , until the March 1930 issue , after which it was taken over by Good Story Magazine Co. of New York , which was run by Harold Hersey , who had earlier edited The Thrill Book . The editorial director of Constructive Publishing during MacFadden 's ownership was Fulton Oursler ; his assistants , who worked on the magazine , were Harry A. Keller , W. Adolphe Roberts , George Bond , Daniel Wheeler , and Arthur B. Howland , who ( in that order ) each spent close to a year editing , though the dates of transition for each are not known . When Hersey took over , his assistant was Stuart Palmer . 
 The magazine began as a slick , in bedsheet format and switched to pulp layout with the July 1928 issue ; it remained as a pulp until the end of its run with the exception of eight issues in large pulp format from April to December 1929 . There were six issues per volume , with the last volume including only four issues . The price was 25 cents throughout ; it had 128 pages when it was pulp @-@ sized , and 96 pages when it was a bedsheet and when it was a large pulp . 
 No anthologies have selected their contents solely from Ghost Stories , but two magazines have done so : True Twilight Tales and Prize Ghost Stories , both published by League Publications , a subsidiary of the company which owned the rights to the original stories , MacFadden @-@ Bartell . Prize Ghost Stories published one issue , dated 1963 , and True Twilight Tales published two , dated Fall 1963 and Spring 1964 . Both magazines were in large pulp format , with 96 pages , and both were priced at 50 cents . The first issue of True Twilight Tales was edited by Helen Gardiner , who probably also was the editor of Prize Ghost Stories ; the second issue of True Twilight Tales was edited by John M. Williams . There may have been other issues of both titles , as neither was numbered . 
 = Uroš Drenović = 
 Uroš Drenović ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> ; 11 November 1911 – 29 May 1944 ) was a Bosnian Serb military commander in the Central Bosnia region of the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) during World War II . Following the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , he joined the Yugoslav Partisans and distinguished himself during the initial uprising against NDH authorities by capturing Mrkonjić Grad in August 1941 . 
 Drenović subsequently led Serb @-@ chauvinist agitation within the Partisan 3rd Krajina Detachment . After some vacillation , he eventually sided with the royalist Chetniks and became a Chetnik commander ( vojvoda ) . In April 1942 , he was defeated by the Partisans and fled to Banja Luka , where he concluded an alliance with the Ustaše to fight the Partisans . He continued to oppose the Partisans until his death during an Allied bombing raid on Banja Luka in May 1944 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Uroš Drenović was born in Sitnica , Ribnik near Mount Manjača in 1911 . He finished teachers ' college in Sarajevo , and became a schoolmaster in the Banja Luka area . Prior to the outbreak of the war , he was a reserve officer in the Royal Yugoslav Army ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Vojska Kraljevine Jugoslavije , VKJ ) . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Bosanska Krajina uprising = = = 
 A matter of months after the German @-@ led invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , uprisings began to occur throughout the newly created Axis puppet state , the Independent State of Croatia ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska , NDH ) . On 4 July , the Communist Party of Yugoslavia ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Komunistička partija Jugoslavije , KPJ ) decided to launch a general uprising against the occupying forces across Yugoslavia , and rebellion broke out in Bosnia on 27 July . This included local uprisings in southwest Bosnia , which spread across the NDH , but the KPJ organisation was initially swept along rather than leading the rebellion . 
 On 29 August , Drenović distinguished himself by planning and leading the capture of Mrkonjić Grad by the rebels , but when the town was recaptured by NDH forces four days later , the KPJ blamed him and his troops , citing their poor discipline and anti @-@ Muslim chauvinism . In September , four battalions of fighters were formed in the Ribnik , <unk> and Pliva region . One of these , the 3rd " Petar Kočić " Battalion , was commanded by Drenović , who , unlike the other battalion commanders in the region , did not allow the KPJ to appoint political commissars to his companies . In an area largely free of KPJ activity , but under the sway of the sectarian Serb elite of Mrkonjić Grad , Drenović arrested Muslim communists in the area , even confronting senior members of the Partisan staff for Bosanska Krajina . 
 On 26 September 1941 at Stolice in German @-@ occupied Serbia , the Partisan leadership decided to standardise its military organisation across occupied Yugoslavia . As result , during October and November , three detachments were formed in the Bosanska Krajina from existing units such as the 3rd " Petar Kočić " Battalion , and Drenović was appointed as deputy commander of the 3rd Krajina Detachment responsible for the territory of central Bosnia . This region had strong pro @-@ Chetnik currents , and of the 34 companies in the detachment , only 13 had KPJ organisations , only 11 had commanders that were members of the KPJ , and only 18 had a political commissar . Many KPJ activists in the region were Muslims or Croats , not easily accepted by the mass of the rank @-@ and @-@ file who were Serb @-@ chauvinist peasants . Drenović himself was the leading exponent of Chetnik ideology in Central Bosnia . He despised Muslims and Croats but , according to the historian Marko Attila Hoare , was " diplomatic enough to keep his feelings in check when necessary " . In October , the Staff of the 3rd Krajina Detachment attempted to win over the Muslim village of <unk> by gaining the agreement of the headman to contribute five armed men to the detachment . When the headman reneged on the deal , the bulk of the detachment attacked the village , but the rest of the detachment had to prevent Drenović 's battalion from burning and looting it . 
 On 26 November 1941 , at a meeting of the Staff of the 3rd Krajina Detachment , Drenović advocated collaboration with the Italian occupation forces on the basis that the Italians were protecting Serbs from the Ustaše . This was rejected by the senior KPJ members of the staff , but they were not in a position to force him to abandon the idea . At the same meeting , Drenović refused to commit the 3rd " Petar Kočić " Battalion to fight the Italians . Under pressure , he agreed to advise neighbouring battalions if the Italians moved through his territory . In return , the Staff of the 3rd Krajina Detachment agreed that Drenović could refer to his force as a " Military @-@ Chetnik Detachment " . On 10 December , the senior KPJ members of the 3rd Krajina Detachment concluded that 50 percent of their command staff did not support the leading role of the KPJ in the uprising . The Partisan staff for Bosanska Krajina later observed that the Staff of the 3rd Krajina Detachment had made no effort to remove Chetnik elements from its ranks or stop their Serb @-@ chauvinist agitation . In early February 1942 , Drenović took a leading role in a conference intended to bring the 7th Glamoč Battalion , which had declared itself as " Chetnik " , back into the Partisan structure . Drenović argued for the Chetnik side , and was expelled from the meeting along with his supporters , and the battalion returned to the fold . On 6 February , a meeting of the leaders of the 1st , 2nd and 4th battalions of the 3rd Krajina Detachment met and decided to bring Drenović back into the Partisan movement by organising an attack on the Italian and Ustaše garrison of Mrkonjić Grad . Under pressure from his own rank @-@ and @-@ file , Drenović formally participated in the attack , but he was able to prevent its success through allowing the Italians to move past his battalion and attack the Partisan rear . According to Partisan sources , he forewarned the Italians and Ustaše forces , and divulged the Partisan plan to them . 
 = = = Alliance with the NDH = = = 
 In response to highly effective pro @-@ Chetnik agitation from within , many Partisan units defected to the Chetniks . In the second half of April 1942 , the Partisans responded with aggressive military action against the defectors . The unit that led this offensive was the Grmeč Shock Anti @-@ Chetnik Battalion , formed earlier that month from wholly loyal and reliable troops . This offensive spelt the end of Drenović 's " Petar Kočić " Chetnik Detachment , and Drenović took refuge with the Ustaše in Mrkonjić Grad . On 27 April , he and other defeated Chetnik commanders signed an agreement with the NDH . The agreement had eight points , requiring that hostilities between the Ustaše and Drenović 's Chetniks come to an end , that NDH forces protect Serb villages from the Partisans and that Ustaše units assist the Chetniks in fighting the Partisans . The agreement also required the Ustaše to restore religious and civil rights to Serbs of the Krajina . In turn , Drenović issued a declaration in which he recognized the sovereignty of the NDH . Historian Enver <unk> argues that the agreement was reached out of military and political necessity . He writes : " The Ustaše – Chetnik accords were driven neither by a confluence of Serbian and Croatian national interests nor by mutual desire for acceptance and respect , but rather because each side needed to obstruct Partisan advances . The Ustaše and Chetniks , two long @-@ time foes , sought help from one another at a time when the Ustaše were facing national political disgrace among the Croats and the Chetniks were losing the support of the Serbs . " 
 The NDH authorities considered that the alliance would mean that the Chetniks could continue to subvert Partisan units . On 30 April , the NDH authorities recognised the rights of Drenović and his troops to remain armed in order to fight the Partisans . The agreement between the NDH and Drenović 's Chetniks was soon made public by the entire Ustaše press ; Serb public opinion remained divided . By May , Drenović had a force of about 350 Chetniks . At mid @-@ month , he signed an agreement with a Croatian general staff officer in Banja Luka agreeing to cooperate with the NDH in fighting the Partisans . Drenović soon emerged as one of the most important Chetnik leaders in western Bosnia . That summer , when order had been established in significant parts of the Italian occupation zone , Drenović and other Chetnik detachment leaders and their principal political spokesmen with Italian Second Army headquarters were recognized by the Italians as auxiliaries and early in the summer Italian commander Mario Roatta allowed for the delivery of arms , munitions , and supplies to the Chetniks . Other Chetnik leaders in Bosnia who had concluded alliances with the NDH by June 1942 included Mane <unk> , Branko <unk> , Stevo <unk> and Momčilo Đujić . Historian Sabrina P. Ramet observes that this co @-@ operation must be seen as a function of their mutual fear of the Partisans , and emphasizes the uncertainty and distrust that accompanied it . By June , Drenović 's Chetniks numbered about 600 men . 
 In 1943 , Drenović was awarded the Order of Karađorđe 's Star by King Peter , based on a recommendation by Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović . Following the Italian capitulation , Drenović agreed to all the actions of his Chetniks being performed in close cooperation with local German units , and was informed at the end of the year that Ustaše units would again be stationed in Serb @-@ inhabited areas . In October 1943 , a team from the 1st Battalion of the 4th Brandenburg Division under Oberleutnant Hermann Kirchner began working alongside Drenović 's Chetniks in northwest Bosnia , operating forward reconnaissance groups and developing contact with anti @-@ communist farmers to keep an eye on Partisan troop movements . There were about 950 Chetniks serving under Drenović that year , positioned around Manjača and Glamoč . Drenović had about 400 Chetniks under his command by the following year . His was the only Chetnik band that the Ustaše trusted fully during the war . According to BN Televizija , Drenović is considered a Chetnik vojvoda . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On 29 May 1944 , Drenović was killed in an Allied bombing raid on Banja Luka . The Ravna Gora Movement and Serbian Orthodox Church in <unk> organise a ceremony each year to commemorate Drenović 's actions in 1941 . In 2014 , the ceremony was not attended by any officials of the Republika Srpska entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina , or by any representatives of the Prijedor municipality . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Documents = = = 
 = = = News = = = 
 = Domingo Faustino Sarmiento = 
 Domingo Faustino Sarmiento ( February 15 , 1811 – September 11 , 1888 ) was an Argentine activist , intellectual , writer , statesman and the seventh President of Argentina . His writing spanned a wide range of genres and topics , from journalism to autobiography , to political philosophy and history . He was a member of a group of intellectuals , known as the Generation of 1837 , who had a great influence on nineteenth @-@ century Argentina . He was particularly concerned with educational issues and was also an important influence on the region 's literature . 
 Sarmiento grew up in a poor but politically active family that paved the way for much of his future accomplishments . Between 1843 and 1850 he was frequently in exile , and wrote in both Chile and in Argentina . His greatest literary achievement was Facundo , a critique of Juan Manuel de Rosas , that Sarmiento wrote while working for the newspaper El Progreso during his exile in Chile . The book brought him far more than just literary recognition ; he expended his efforts and energy on the war against dictatorships , specifically that of Rosas , and contrasted enlightened Europe — a world where , in his eyes , democracy , social services , and intelligent thought were valued — with the barbarism of the gaucho and especially the caudillo , the ruthless strongmen of nineteenth @-@ century Argentina . 
 While president of Argentina from 1868 to 1874 , Sarmiento championed intelligent thought — including education for children and women — and democracy for Latin America . He also took advantage of the opportunity to modernize and develop train systems , a postal system , and a comprehensive education system . He spent many years in ministerial roles on the federal and state levels where he travelled abroad and examined other education systems . 
 Sarmiento died in Asunción , Paraguay , at the age of 77 from a heart attack . He was buried in Buenos Aires . Today , he is respected as a political innovator and writer . 
 = = Youth and influences = = 
 Sarmiento was born in <unk> , a poor suburb of San Juan , Argentina on February 15 , 1811 . His father , José Clemente Quiroga Sarmiento y Funes , had served in the military during the wars of independence , returning prisoners of war to San Juan . His mother , Doña Paula Zoila de Albarracín e <unk> , was a very pious woman , who lost her father at a young age and was left with very little to support herself . As a result , she took to selling her weaving in order to afford to build a house of her own . On September 21 , 1801 , José and Paula were married . They had 15 children , 9 of whom died ; Domingo was the only son to survive to adulthood . Sarmiento was greatly influenced by his parents , his mother who was always working hard , and his father who told stories of being a patriot and serving his country , something Sarmiento strongly believed in . In Sarmiento 's own words : 
 " I was born in a family that lived long years in mediocrity bordering on destitution , and which is to this day poor in every sense of the word . My father is a good man whose life has nothing remarkable except [ for his ] having served in subordinate positions in the War of Independence ... My mother is the true figure of Christianity in its purest sense ; with her , trust in Providence was always the solution to all difficulties in life . " 
 At the age of four , Sarmiento was taught to read by his father and his uncle , José <unk> Quiroga Sarmiento , who later became Bishop of Cuyo . Another uncle who influenced him in his youth was Domingo de Oro , a notable figure in the young Argentine Republic who was influential in bringing Juan Manuel de Rosas to power . Though Sarmiento did not follow de Oro 's political and religious leanings , he learned the value of intellectual integrity and honesty . He developed scholarly and oratorical skills , qualities which de Oro was famous for . In 1816 , at the age of five , Sarmiento began attending the primary school La Escuela de la Patria . He was a good student , and earned the title of First Citizen ( Primer <unk> ) of the school . After completing primary school , his mother wanted him to go to Córdoba to become a priest . He had spent a year reading the Bible and often spent time as a child helping his uncle with church services , but Sarmiento soon became bored with religion and school , and got involved with a group of aggressive children . Sarmiento 's father took him to the Loreto Seminary in 1821 , but for reasons unknown , Sarmiento did not enter the seminary , returning instead to San Juan with his father . In 1823 , the Minister of State , Bernardino Rivadavia , announced that the six top pupils of each state would be selected to receive higher education in Buenos Aires . Sarmiento was at the top of the list in San Juan , but it was then announced that only ten pupils would receive the scholarship . The selection was made by lot , and Sarmiento was not one of the scholars whose name was drawn . 
 = = Political background and exiles = = 
 In 1826 , an assembly elected Bernardino Rivadavia as president of the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata . This action roused the ire of the provinces , and civil war was the result . Support for a strong , centralized Argentine government was based in Buenos Aires , and gave rise to two opposing groups . The wealthy and educated of the Unitarian Party , such as Sarmiento , favored centralized government . In opposition to them were the Federalists , who were mainly based in rural areas and tended to reject European mores . Numbering figures such as Manuel Dorrego and Juan Facundo Quiroga among their ranks , they were in favor of a loose federation with more autonomy for the individual provinces . 
 Opinion of the Rivadavia government was divided between the two ideologies . For Unitarians like Sarmiento , Rivadavia 's presidency was a positive experience . He set up a European @-@ staffed university and supported a public education program for rural male children . He also supported theater and opera groups , publishing houses and a museum . These contributions were considered as civilizing influences by the Unitarians , but they upset the Federalist constituency . Common laborers had their salaries subjected to a government cap , and the gauchos were arrested by Rivadavia for vagrancy and forced to work on public projects , usually without pay . 
 In 1827 , the Unitarians were challenged by Federalist forces . After the resignation of Rivadavia , Manuel Dorrego was installed as governor of Buenos Aires province . He quickly made peace with Brazil but , on returning to Argentina , was overthrown and executed by the Unitarian general Juan Lavalle , who took Dorrego 's place . However , Lavalle did not spend long as governor either : he was soon overthrown by militias composed largely of gauchos led by Rosas and Estanislao López . By the end of 1829 the old legislature that Lavalle had disbanded was back in place and had appointed Rosas as governor of Buenos Aires . 
 The first time Sarmiento was forced to leave home was with his uncle , José de Oro , in 1827 , because of his military activities . José de Oro was a priest who had fought in the Battle of Chacabuco under General San Martín . Together , Sarmiento and de Oro went to San Francisco del Monte , in the neighbour province of San Luis . He spent much of his time with his uncle learning and began to teach at the only school in town . Later that year , his mother wrote to him asking him to come home . Sarmiento refused , only to receive a response from his father that he was coming to collect him . His father had persuaded the governor of San Juan to send Sarmiento to Buenos Aires to study at the College of Moral Sciences ( Colegio de Ciencias Morales ) . 
 Soon after Sarmiento 's return , the province of San Juan broke out into civil war and Facundo Quiroga invaded Sarmiento 's town . As historian William Katra describes this " traumatic experience " : 
 At sixteen years of age , he stood in front of the shop he tended and viewed the entrance into San Juan of Facundo Quiroga and some six hundred mounted <unk> horsemen . They constituted an unsettling presence [ . . . ] . That sight , with its overwhelmingly negative associations , left an indelible impression on his budding consciousness . For the impressionable youth Quiroga 's ascent to protagonist status in the province 's affairs was akin to the rape of civilized society by incarnated evil . 
 Unable to attend school in Buenos Aires due to the political turmoil , Sarmiento chose to fight against Quiroga . He joined and fought in the unitarian army , only to be placed under house arrest when San Juan was eventually taken over by Quiroga after the battle of Pilar . He is later released , only to join the forces of General Paz , a key unitarian figure . 
 = = = First exile in Chile = = = 
 Fighting and war soon again resumed , but , one by one , Quiroga vanquished the main allies of General Paz , including the Governor of San Juan , and in 1831 Sarmiento fled to Chile . He did not return to Argentina for five years . At the time , Chile was noted for its good public administration , its constitutional organization , and the rare freedom to criticize the regime . In Sarmiento 's view , Chile had " Security of property , the continuation of order , and with both of these , the love of work and the spirit of enterprise that causes the development of wealth and prosperity . " 
 As a form of freedom of expression , Sarmiento began to write political commentary . In addition to writing , he also began teaching in Los Andes . Due to his innovative style of teaching , he found himself in conflict with the governor of the province . He founded his own school in <unk> as a response to the governor . During this time , Sarmiento fell in love and had an illegitimate daughter named Ana Faustina , who Sarmiento did not acknowledge until she married . 
 = = = San Juan and second and third exiles in Chile = = = 
 In 1836 , Sarmiento returned to San Juan , seriously ill with typhoid fever ; his family and friends thought he would die upon his return , but he recovered and established an anti @-@ federalist journal called El Zonda . The government of San Juan did not like Sarmiento 's criticisms and censored the magazine by imposing an unaffordable tax upon each purchase . Sarmiento was forced to cease publication of the magazine in 1840 . He also founded a school for girls during this time called the Santa Rosa High School , which was a preparatory school . In addition to the school , he founded a Literary Society . 
 It is around this time that Sarmiento became associated with the so @-@ called " Generation of 1837 " . This was a group of activists , who included Esteban Echeverría , Juan Bautista Alberdi , and Bartolomé Mitre , who spent much of the 1830s to 1880s first agitating for and then bringing about social change , advocating republicanism , free trade , freedom of speech , and material progress . Though , based in San Juan , Sarmiento was absent from the initial creation of this group , in 1838 he wrote to Alberdi seeking the latter 's advice ; and in time he would become the group most fervent supporter . 
 In 1840 , after being arrested and accused of conspiracy , Sarmiento was forced into exile in Chile again . It was en route to Chile that , in the baths of Zonda , he wrote the graffiti " On ne <unk> point les <unk> , " an incident that would later serve as the preface to his book Facundo . Once on the other side of the Andes , in 1841 <unk> started writing for the Valparaíso newspaper El Mercurio , as well working as a publisher of the Crónica <unk> de Latino América ( " Contemporary Latin American Chronicle " ) . In 1842 , Sarmiento was appointed the Director of the first Normal School in South America ; the same year he also founded the newspaper El Progreso . During this time he sent for his family from San Juan to Chile . In 1843 , Sarmiento published Mi Defensa ( " My Defence " ) , while continuing to teach . And in May 1845 , El Progreso started the serial publication of the first edition of his best @-@ known work , Facundo ; in July , Facundo appeared in book form . 
 Between the years 1845 and 1847 , Sarmiento travelled on behalf of the Chilean government across parts of South America to Uruguay , Brazil , to Europe , France , Spain , Algeria , Italy , Armenia , Switzerland , England , to Cuba , and to North America , the United States and Canada in order to examine different education systems and the levels of education and communication . Based on his travels , he wrote the book <unk> por Europa , África , y América which was published in 1849 . 
 In 1848 , Sarmiento voluntarily left to Chile once again . During the same year , he met widow Benita Martínez Pastoriza , married her , and adopted her son , Domingo Fidel , or Dominguito , who would be killed in action during the War of the Triple Alliance at <unk> in 1866 . Sarmiento continued to exercise the idea of freedom of the press and began two new periodicals entitled La Tribuna and La Crónica respectively , which strongly attacked Juan Manuel de Rosas . During this stay in Chile , Sarmiento 's essays became more strongly opposed to Juan Manuel de Rosas . The Argentine government tried to have Sarmiento extradited from Chile to Argentina , but the Chilean government refused to hand him over . 
 In 1850 , he published both <unk> and Recuerdos de Provincia ( Recollections of a Provincial Past ) . In 1852 , Rosas 's regime was finally brought down . Sarmiento became involved in debates about the country 's new constitution . 
 = = = Return to Argentina = = = 
 In 1854 , Sarmiento briefly visited Mendoza , just across the border from Chile in Western Argentina , but he was arrested and imprisoned . Upon his release , he went back to Chile . But in 1855 he put an end to what was now his " self @-@ imposed " exile in Chile : he arrived in Buenos Aires , soon to become editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the newspaper El Nacional . He was also appointed town councillor in 1856 , and 1857 he joined the provincial Senate , a position he held until 1861 . 
 It was in 1861 , shortly after Mitre became Argentine president , that Sarmiento left Buenos Aires and returned to San Juan , where he was elected governor , a post he took up in 1862 . It was then that he passed the Statutory Law of Public Education , making it mandatory for children to attend primary school . It allowed for a number of institutions to be opened including secondary schools , military schools and an all @-@ girls school . While governor , he developed roads and infrastructure , built public buildings and hospitals , encouraged agriculture and allowed for mineral mining . He resumed his post as editor of El Zonda . In 1863 , Sarmiento fought against the power of the caudillo of La Rioja and found himself in conflict with the Interior Minister of General Mitre 's government , Guillermo Rawson . Sarmiento stepped down as governor of San Juan , but ran unsuccessfully for president of the Argentine Republic in 1864 against General Mitre . He did , however , become the Plenipotentiary Minister to the United States where he was sent in 1865 , soon after the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln . Moved by the story of Lincoln , Sarmiento ended up writing his book Vida de Lincoln . It was on this trip that Sarmiento received an honorary degree from the University of Michigan . A bust of him stood in the Modern Languages Building at the University of Michigan until multiple student protests prompted its removal . Students installed plaques and painted the bust red to represent the controversies surrounding his policies towards the indigenous people in Argentina . There still stands a statue of Sarmiento at Brown University . While on this trip , he was asked to run for President again . He won , taking office on October 12 , 1868 . 
 = = President of Argentina , 1868 @-@ 1874 = = 
 Domingo Faustino Sarmiento served as President of the Republic of Argentina from 1868 – 1874 , becoming president despite the maneuverings of his predecessor Bartolomé Mitre . According to biographer Allison Bunkley , his presidency " marks the advent of the middle , or land @-@ owning classes as the pivot power of the nation . The age of the gaucho had ended , and the age of the merchant and cattleman had begun . " Sarmiento sought to create basic freedoms , and wanted to ensure civil safety and progress for everyone , not just the few . Sarmiento 's tour of the United States had given him many new ideas about politics , democracy , and the structure of society , especially when he was the Argentine ambassador to the country from 1865 to 1868 . He found New England , specifically the Boston @-@ Cambridge area to be the source of much of his influence , writing in an Argentine newspaper that New England was " the cradle of the modern republic , the school for all of America . " He described Boston as " The pioneer city of the modern world , the Zion of the ancient Puritans ... Europe contemplates in New England the power which in the future will supplant her . " Not only did Sarmiento evolve political ideas , but also structural ones by transitioning Argentina from a primarily agricultural economy to one focused on cities and industry . 
 Historian David Rock notes that , beyond putting an end to caudillismo , Sarmiento 's main achievements in government concerned his promotion of education . As Rock reports , " between 1868 and 1874 educational subsidies from the central government to the provinces quadrupled . " He established 800 educational and military institutions , and his improvements to the educational system enabled 100 @,@ 000 children to attend school . 
 He also pushed forward modernization more generally , building infrastructure including 5 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 100 mi ) of telegraph line across the country for improved communications , making it easier for the government in Buenos Aires and the provinces to communicate ; modernizing the postal and train systems which he believed to be integral for interregional and national economies , as well as building the Red Line , a train line that would bring goods to Buenos Aires in order to better facilitate trade with Great Britain . By the end of his presidency , the Red Line extended 1 @,@ 331 kilometres ( 827 mi ) . In 1869 , he conducted Argentina 's first national census . 
 Though Sarmiento is well known historically , he was not a popular president . Indeed , Rock judges that " by and large his administration was a disappointment " . During his presidency , Argentina conducted an unpopular war against Paraguay ; at the same time , people were displeased with him for not fighting for the Straits of Magellan from Chile . Although he increased productivity , he increased expenditures , which also negatively affected his popularity . In addition , the arrival of a large influx of European immigrants was blamed for the outbreak of Yellow Fever in Buenos Aires and the risk of civil war . Moreover , Sarmiento 's presidency was further marked by ongoing rivalry between Buenos Aires and the provinces . In the war against Paraguay , Sarmiento 's adopted son was killed . Sarmiento suffered from immense grief and was thought to never have been the same again . 
 On August 22 , 1873 , Sarmiento was the target of an unsuccessful assassination attempt , when two Italian anarchist brothers shot at his coach . They had been hired by federal caudillo Ricardo López <unk> . A year later in 1874 , he completed his term as President and stepped down , handing his presidency over to Nicolás Avellaneda , his former Minister of Education . 
 = = Final years = = 
 In 1875 , following his term as President , Sarmiento became the General Director of Schools for the Province of Buenos Aires . That same year , he became the Senator for San Juan , a post that he held until 1879 , when he became Interior Minister . But he soon resigned , following conflict with the Governor of Buenos Aires , Carlos <unk> . He then assumed the post of Superintendent General of Schools for the National Education Ministry under President Roca and published El Monitor de la Educación <unk> , which is a fundamental reference for Argentine education . In 1882 , Sarmiento was successful in passing the sanction of Free Education allowing schools to be free , mandatory , and separate from that of religion . 
 In May 1888 , Sarmiento left Argentina for Paraguay . He was accompanied by his daughter , Ana , and his companion Aurelia Vélez . He died in Asunción on September 11 , 1888 , from a heart attack , and was buried in Buenos Aires . His tomb at La Recoleta Cemetery lies under a sculpture , a condor upon a pylon , designed by himself and executed by Victor de Pol . Pedro II , the Emperor of Brazil and a great admirer of Sarmiento , sent to his funeral procession a green and gold crown of flowers with a message written in Spanish remembering the highlights of his life : " Civilization and Barbarism , Tonelero , Monte Caseros , Petrópolis , Public Education . Remembrance and Homage from Pedro de Alcântara . " 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 Sarmiento was well known for his modernization of the country , and for his improvements to the educational system . He firmly believed in democracy and European liberalism , but was most often seen as a romantic . Sarmiento was well versed in Western philosophy including the works of Karl Marx and John Stuart Mill . He was particularly fascinated with the liberty given to those living in the United States , which he witnessed as a representative of the Peruvian government . He did , however , see pitfalls to liberty , pointing for example to the aftermath of the French Revolution , which he compared to Argentina 's own May Revolution . He believed that liberty could turn into anarchy and thus civil war , which is what happened in France and in Argentina . Therefore , his use of the term " liberty " was more in reference to a laissez @-@ faire approach to the economy , and religious liberty . Though a Catholic himself , he began to adopt the ideas of separation of church and state modeled after the US . He believed that there should be more religious freedom , and less religious affiliation in schools . This was one of many ways in which Sarmiento tried to connect South America to North America . 
 Sarmiento believed that the material and social needs of people had to be satisfied but not at the cost of order and decorum . He put great importance on law and citizen participation . These ideas he most equated to Rome and to the United States , a society which he viewed as exhibiting similar qualities . In order to civilize the Argentine society and make it equal to that of Rome or the United States , Sarmiento believed in eliminating the caudillos , or the larger landholdings and establishing multiple agricultural colonies run by European immigrants . 
 Coming from a family of writers , orators , and clerics , Domingo Sarmiento placed a great value on education and learning . He opened a number of schools including the first school in Latin America for teachers in Santiago in 1842 : La Escuela Normal <unk> de Chile . He proceeded to open 18 more schools and had mostly female teachers from the USA come to Argentina to instruct graduates how to be effective when teaching . Sarmiento 's belief was that education was the key to happiness and success , and that a nation could not be democratic if it was not educated . " We must educate our rulers , " he said . " An ignorant people will always choose Rosas . " 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Major works = = = 
 Facundo - <unk> y Barbarie - Vida de Juan Facundo Quiroga , 1845 . Written during his long exile in Chile . Originally published in 1845 in Chile in installments in El Progreso newspaper , Facundo is Sarmiento 's most famous work . It was first published in book form in 1851 , and the first English translation , by Mary Mann , appeared in 1868 . A recent modern edition in English was translated by Kathleen Ross . Facundo promotes further civilization and European influence to Argentine culture through the use of anecdotes and references to Juan Facundo Quiroga , Argentine caudillo general . As well as being a call to progress , Sarmiento discusses the nature of Argentine peoples as well as including his thoughts and objections to Juan Manuel de Rosas , governor of Buenos Aires from 1829 to 1832 and again from 1835 , due to the turmoil generated by Facundo 's death , to 1852 . As literary critic Sylvia Molloy observes , Sarmiento claimed that this book helped explain Argentine struggles to European readers , and was cited in European publications . Written with extensive assistance from others , Sarmiento adds to his own memory the quotes , accounts , and dossiers from other historians and companions of Facundo Quiroga . Facundo maintains its relevance in modern @-@ day as well , bringing attention to the contrast of lifestyles in Latin America , the conflict and struggle for progress while maintaining tradition , as well as the moral and ethical treatment of the public by government officials and regimes . 
 Recuerdos de Provincia ( Recollections of a Provincial Past ) , 1850 . In this second autobiography , Sarmiento displays a stronger effort to include familial links and ties to his past , in contrast to Mi defensa , choosing to relate himself to San Juan and his Argentine heritage . Sarmiento discusses growing up in rural Argentina with basic ideologies and simple livings . Recuerdos discusses his Similar to Facundo , Sarmiento uses previous dossiers filed against himself by enemies to assist in writing Recuerdos and therefore fabricating an autobiography based on these files and from his own memory . Sarmiento 's persuasion in this book is substantial . The accounts , whether all true or false against him , are a source of information to write Recuerdos as he is then able to object and rectify into what he creates as a ' true account ' of autobiography . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Sarmiento was a prolific author . The following is a selection of his other works : 
 Mi defensa , 1843 . This was Sarmiento 's first autobiography in a pamphlet form , which omits any substantial information or recognition of his illegitimate daughter Ana . This would have discredited Sarmiento as a respected father of Argentina , as Sarmiento portrays himself as a sole individual , disregarding or denouncing important ties to other people and groups in his life . 
 <unk> por Europa , África , y América 1849 . A description and observations while travelling as a representative of the Peruvian government to learn more about educational systems around the world . 
 <unk> 1850 . A description of a future utopian city in the River Plate States . 
 <unk> sobre la <unk> 1852 . This is Sarmiento 's official account of his ideologies promoting civilization and the " <unk> " and " Americanization " of Argentina . This account includes dossiers , articles , speeches and information regarding the pending constitution . 
 <unk> sobre <unk> , 1856 . This report was the first official statistic report on education in Latin America includes information on gender and location distribution of pupils , salaries and wages , and comparative achievement . <unk> sobre <unk> proposes new theories , plans , and methods of education as well as quality controls on schools and learning systems . 
 Las <unk> , base de la <unk> y de la <unk> en los Estados Unidos 1864 . This work , along with the previous two , were intended to persuade Latin America and Argentines of the benefits of the educational , economic and political systems of the United States , which Sarmiento supported . 
 <unk> y <unk> de las <unk> en América 1883 , deals with race issues in Latin America in the late 1800s . While situations in the book remain particular to the time period and location , race issues and conflicts of races are still prevalent and enable the book to be relevant in the present day . 
 Vida de Dominguito , 1886 . A memoir of Dominguito , Sarmiento 's adopted son who was the only child Sarmiento had always accepted . Many of the notes used to compile Vida de Dominguito had been written 20 years prior during one of Sarmiento 's stays in Washington . 
 <unk> al <unk> , a compilation of letters written from 1870 to 1886 on the topic of improved education , promoting and suggesting new reforms such as secondary schools , parks , sporting fields and specialty schools . This compilation was met with far greater success than <unk> , Instrucción Publica and received greater public support . 
 El camino de <unk> , which impacted Argentina by influencing many Italians to immigrate by relating Argentinas history to that of Latium of the Roman empire . 
 <unk> y <unk> , a publication which led to mass immigration of Europeans to mostly urban Argentina , which Sarmiento believed would assist in ' civilizing ' the country over the more barbaric gauchos and rural provinces . This had a large impact on Argentine politics , especially as much of the civil tension in the country was divided between the rural provinces and the cities . In addition to increased urban population , these European immigrants had a cultural effect upon Argentina , providing what Sarmiento believed to be more civilized culture similar to North America 's . 
 On the Condition of Foreigners , which helped to assist political changes for immigrants in 1860 . 
 <unk> , Instrucción Publica , an example of Sarmiento 's passion for improved education . Sarmiento focused on illiteracy of the youth , and suggested simplifying reading and spelling for the public education system , a method which was never implemented . 
 <unk> <unk> , a three volume work , describing current political methods as well as propositions for new methodologies . 
 Presidential Papers , a history of his presidency , formed of many personal and external documents . 
 Travels in the United States in 1847 , ( Edited and translated into English by Michael Aaron Rockland . ) 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The impact of Domingo Faustino Sarmiento is most obviously seen in the establishment of September 11 as Panamerican Teacher 's Day which was done in his honor at the 1943 Interamerican Conference on Education , held in Panama . Today , he is still considered to be Latin America 's teacher . In his time , he opened countless schools , created free public libraries , opened immigration , and worked towards a Union of Plate States . 
 His impact was not only on the world of education , but also on Argentine political and social structure . His ideas are now revered as innovative , though at the time they were not widely accepted . He was a self @-@ made man and believed in sociological and economic growth for Latin America , something that the Argentine people could not recognize at the time with the soaring standard of living which came with high prices , high wages , and an increased national debt . 
 Today , there is a statue in honor of Sarmiento in Boston on the Commonwealth Avenue Mall , between Gloucester and Hereford streets , erected in 1973 . There is a square , Plaza Sarmiento in Rosario , Argentina . One of Rodin 's last sculptures was that of Sarmiento which is now in Buenos Aires . 
 = Malvern , Worcestershire = 
 Malvern is a spa town and civil parish in Worcestershire , England . At the 2011 census it had a population of 29 @,@ 626 . It includes the historic settlement and commercial centre of Great Malvern on the steep eastern flank of the Malvern Hills , as well as the former independent urban district of Malvern Link . Many of the major suburbs and settlements that comprise the town are separated by large tracts of open common land and fields , and together with smaller civil parishes adjoining the town 's boundaries and the hills , the built up area is often referred to collectively as The Malverns . 
 Archaeological evidence suggests that Bronze Age people had settled in the area around 1000 BC , although it is not known whether these settlements were permanent or temporary . The town itself was founded in the 11th century when Benedictine monks established a priory at the foot of the highest peak of Malvern Hills . During the 19th century Malvern developed rapidly from a village to a sprawling conurbation owing to its popularity as a hydrotherapy spa based on its spring waters . Immediately following the decline of spa tourism towards the end of the 19th century , the town 's focus shifted to education with the establishment of several private boarding schools in former hotels and large villas . A further major expansion was the result of the relocation of the Telecommunications Research Establishment ( TRE ) to Malvern in 1942 . QinetiQ , TRE 's successor company , remains the town 's largest local employer . 
 Malvern is the largest place in the parliamentary constituency of West Worcestershire and the district of Malvern Hills , being also the district 's administrative seat . It lies adjacent to the Malvern Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . The populous civil parish has a town council , Malvern Town Council , based in Great Malvern . 
 = = Toponymy = = 
 The name Malvern is derived from the ancient British or old Welsh <unk> @-@ <unk> , meaning " Bare or Bald Hill " , the modern equivalent being the Welsh <unk> ( bald hill ) . It has been known as <unk> ( 11th century ) , Malverne ( 12th century ) , and Much Malvern ( 16 – 17th century ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Bronze Age to monastic times = = = 
 Flint axes , arrowheads , and flakes found in the area are attributed to early Bronze Age settlers , and the " Shire Ditch " , a late Bronze Age boundary earthwork possibly dating from around 1000 BC , was constructed along part of the crest of the hills near the site of later settlements . The Wyche Cutting , a pass through the hills , was in use in prehistoric times as part of the salt route from Droitwich to South Wales . A 19th @-@ century discovery of over two hundred metal money bars suggests that the area had been inhabited by the La Tène people around 250 BC . Ancient folklore has it that the British chieftain Caractacus made his last stand against the Romans at the British Camp , a site of extensive Iron Age earthworks on a summit of the Malvern Hills close to where Malvern was to be later established . The story remains disputed , however , as Roman historian Tacitus implies a site closer to the river Severn . There is therefore no evidence that Roman presence ended the prehistoric settlement at British Camp . However , excavations at nearby Midsummer Hill fort , <unk> Hill , and Croft <unk> all show evidence of violent destruction around the year 48 AD . This may suggest that the British Camp was abandoned or destroyed around the same time . 
 A study made by Royal Commission in 2005 that includes aerial photographs of the Hills " amply demonstrates the archaeological potential of this largely neglected landscape , and provides food for thought for a number of research projects " . A pottery industry based on the Malverns left remains dating from the Late Bronze Age to the Norman Conquest , shown by methods of archaeological petrology . Products were traded as far as South Wales , via the River Severn . The Longdon and other marshes at the foot of Malvern Chase were grazed by cattle . " Woodland management was considerable " , providing fuel for the kilns . 
 = = = Monastic Malvern = = = 
 Little is known about Malvern over the next thousand years until it is described as " an hermitage , or some kind of religious house , for seculars , before the conquest , endowed by the gift of Edward the Confessor " . The additions to William Dugdale 's Monasticon include an extract from the Pleas taken before the King at York in 1387 , stating that there was a congregation of hermits at Malvern " some time before the conquest " . Although a Malvern priory existed before the Norman Conquest , it is the settlement of nearby Little Malvern , the site of another , smaller priory , that is mentioned in the Domesday Book . A motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle built on the top tier of the earthworks of the British Camp just before the Norman Conquest was probably founded by the Saxon Earl Harold Godwinson of Hereford . It was destroyed by King Henry II in 1155 . 
 The town developed around its 11th @-@ century priory , a Benedictine monastery , the remains of which make up some of the early parts of Great Malvern Priory , now a large parish church . Several slightly different histories explain the actual founding of the religious community . Legend tells that the settlement began following the murder of St. Werstan , a monk of Deerhurst , who fled from the Danes and took refuge in the woods of Malvern , where the above @-@ mentioned hermitage had been established . St Werstan 's oratory is thought to have been located on the site of St Michael 's Chapel which is believed to have stood on the site of Bello <unk> , a Victorian Villa . Bello <unk> was built on the site of Hermitage Cottage . The cottage was demolished in 1825 and ecclesiastical carvings were found within it . A Mediaeval undercroft , human bones and parts of a coffin were also uncovered . Although the legend may be monastic mythology , historians have however concluded that St. Werstan was the original martyr . 
 The first prior was Aldwyn , who founded the monastery on his bishop 's advice , and by 1135 the monastery included thirty monks . Aldwyn was succeeded by Walcher of Malvern , an astronomer and philosopher from Lorraine , whose gravestone inside the priory church records details that the priory arose in 1085 from a hermitage endowed by Edward the Confessor . An ancient stained glass window in the Priory church depicts the legend of St. Werstan , with details of his vision , the consecration of his chapel , Edward the Confessor granting the charter for the site , and Werstan 's martyrdom . 
 An 18th @-@ century document states that in the 18th year of William 's kingship ( probably 1083 ) , a priory was dedicated to St Mary the Virgin . Victoria County History describes how a hermit Aldwyn , who lived in the reign of Edward the Confessor , had petitioned the Earl of Gloucester for the original site ( of the Priory ) in the wood , and cites his source as " Gervase of Canterbury , Mappa Mundi ( Rolls ser . ) " . 
 Large estates in Malvern were part of crown lands given to Gilbert " the Red " , the seventh Earl of Gloucester and sixth Earl of Hertford , on his marriage to Joan of Acre the daughter of Edward I , in 1290 . Disputed hunting rights on these led to several armed conflicts with Humphrey de Bohun , 3rd Earl of Hereford that Edward resolved . Nott states that Gilbert made gifts to the Priory , and describes his " great conflict " with Thomas de Cantilupe , Bishop of Hereford , also about hunting rights and a ditch that Gilbert dug , that was settled by costly litigation . Gilbert had a similar conflict with Godfrey Giffard , Bishop and Administrator of Worcester Cathedral ( and formerly Chancellor of England ) . Godfrey , who had granted land to the Priory , had jurisdictional disputes about Malvern Priory , resolved by Robert Burnell , the current Chancellor . 
 A discussion in 2005 about the stained glass windows of the Priory Church in terms of the relationship between Church and Laity stresses the importance of Malvern in the development of stained glass . It refers to " the vast and strategically important estates of which Malvern was a part " in the 15th and 16th centuries , to a widespread awareness of Malvern Priory , to the likelihood of a pilgrimage route through the town . The discussion also mentions Thomas Walsingham 's view that Malvern was a hiding place of the Lollard knight Sir John Oldcastle in 1414 . Chambers wrote , in relation to the stained glass , " the situation of Malvern was so much admired by Henry VII , his Queen ( Elizabeth of York ) and their two Sons , Prince Arthur , and Prince Henry " that they made substantial endowments . 
 The area and the surrounding chase were subject to forest law , as a Royal forest . In the early period , this would have meant harsh punishments for residents that poached livestock or encroached on other Royal entitlements . By Tudor times , royal lands had become used as commons and forest law had fallen into disuse . 
 = = = Post dissolution = = = 
 During the Dissolution of the Monasteries the local commissioners were instructed to ensure that , where abbey churches were also used for parish worship , they should continue or could be purchased by parishioners . Accordingly , Malvern Priory survived by being acquired by a William <unk> and with it , much of the 15th century stained glass windows . The monastic buildings were taken apart and anything usable was sold off . With the exception of the church building ( of which the south transept adjoining the monastery 's cloisters was destroyed ) , all that remains of Malvern 's monastery is the Abbey Gateway ( also known as the Priory Gatehouse ) that houses today 's Malvern Museum . 
 An Elizabethan land grant of 1558 mentions Holy Well . A Crown grant of tithes in 1589 mentions lambs , pigs , calves , eggs , hemp and flax . Elizabeth made her Chancellor , Sir Thomas Bromley , the Lord of the Manor . The contemporary antiquary John Leland described the Malvern Hills and Hanley Castle . 
 King Charles I attempted to enclose and sell two thirds of the Chase , as part of a wider attempt to raise revenue for the Crown from the sale of Royal forests . The attempts to enclose the lands , used as commons , resulted in riots , part of a pattern of disturbances that ran across the <unk> royal lands . In 1633 , the Court of Exchequer Chamber of Charles I decreed the rights of the public to two thirds of the lands on the Malvern Hills , and rights of Sir Cornelius Vermuyden and his descendants , and the Crown , to one third ( quoted in the preamble to the Malvern Hills Act of 1884 ) . By that time , Malvern had become an established community and the major settlement in the Malvern Chase . 
 = = = Development as a spa ( 17th – 19th centuries ) = = = 
 The health @-@ giving properties of Malvern water and the natural beauty of the surroundings led to the development of Malvern as a spa , with resources for invalids and for tourists , seeking cures , rest and entertainment . Local legend has it that the curative benefit of the spring water was known in mediaeval times . The medicinal value and the bottling of Malvern water are mentioned " in a poem attributed to the Reverend Edmund Rea , who became Vicar of Great Malvern in 1612 " . Richard Banister , the pioneering oculist , wrote about the Eye Well , close to the Holy Well , in a short poem in his Breviary of the Eyes ( see Malvern water ) , in 1622 . In 1756 , Dr. John Wall published a 14 @-@ page pamphlet on the benefits of Malvern water , that reached a 158 @-@ page 3rd edition in 1763 . Further praise came from the botanist Benjamin Stillingfleet in 1757 , the poet Thomas Warton in 1790 , and William Addison , the physician of the Duchess of Kent ( mother of Queen Victoria ) in 1828 , all quoted in a review by the medical historian W.H. McMenemy . In his lecture about Malvern at the Royal Institution , Addison spoke of " its pure and invigorating air , the excellence of its water , and the romantic beauty of its scenery " . Similar views appeared in the press , Nicholas Vansittart brought his wife Catherine to Malvern for a rest cure in 1809 . Chambers , in his book about Malvern , praised Elizabeth , Countess Harcourt ( daughter @-@ in @-@ law of the 1st Earl Harcourt ) , whose patronage contributed to the development of hillside walks . 
 Bottling and shipping of the Malvern water grew in volume . In 1842 , Dr. James Wilson and Dr. James Manby Gully , leading exponents of hydrotherapy , set up clinics in Malvern ( Holyrood House for women and Tudor House for men ) . Malvern expanded rapidly as a residential spa . Several large hotels and many of the large villas in Malvern date from its heyday . Many smaller hotels and guest houses were built between about 1842 and 1875 . By 1855 there were already 95 hotels and boarding houses and by 1865 over a quarter of the town 's 800 houses were boarding and lodging houses . Most were in Great Malvern , the town centre , while others were in the surrounding settlements of Malvern Wells , Malvern Link , North Malvern and West Malvern . 
 Queen Adelaide visited St. Ann 's Well in September 1842 . " Throughout the 1840s and 1850s Malvern attracted a stream of celebrated visitors , including royalty . " Patients included Charles Darwin , Catherine , wife of Charles Dickens , Thomas Carlyle , Florence Nightingale , Lord Lytton , who was an outspoken advocate of the waters , Lord Tennyson and Samuel Wilberforce . The hydrotherapists came under heavy criticism from Sir Charles Hastings ( a founder of the British Medical Association ) and other physicians . 
 The extension of the railway from Worcester to Malvern Link was completed on 25 May 1859 . The following year , " Besides middle class visitors ... the railway also brought working class <unk> from the Black Country with dramatic effect ... At Whitsuntide ... 10 @,@ 000 came from the Black Country to the newly opened stations at Great Malvern and Malvern Wells . Throughout June to September , day trips were frequent , causing the " town to be crowded with ' the most curious specimens of the British shopkeeper and artisan on an outing ' " . Following Malvern 's new @-@ found fame as a spa and area of natural beauty , and fully exploiting its new rail connections , factories from as far as Manchester were organising day trips for their employees , often attracting as many as 5 @,@ 000 visitors a day . In 1865 , a public meeting of residents denounced the rising rail fares – by then twice that of other lines – that were exploiting the tourism industry , and demanded a limitation to the number of excursion trains . The arrival of the railway also enabled the delivery of coal in large quantities , which accelerated the area 's popularity as a winter resort . 
 The 1887 Baedeker 's includes Malvern in a London – Worcester – Hereford itinerary and described as " an inland health resort , famous for its bracing air and pleasant situation " and " a great educational centre " , with five hotels that are " well spoken of " , a commercial hotel , the Assembly Rooms and Gardens , and many excursions on foot , pony and by carriage . Other descriptions of the diversions mention bands , quadrilles , cricket ( residents vs visitors ) and billiard rooms . The Duchess of Teck stayed , with her daughter Mary ( later queen consort of George V ) , in Malvern in the Autumn of 1891 , joined by Lady Eva <unk> and the Duke of Teck . The Duchess was " perfectly enchanted with Malvern and its surroundings " and , with the Duke , visited Malvern College . The Duchess returned to open the new waterworks at Camp Hill in 1895 . In 1897 , the painter Edward Burne @-@ Jones came to Malvern for the " bracing air " , on the recommendation of his doctor , but stayed in his hotel for a week . The 7 @-@ year old Franklin D. Roosevelt visited in 1889 , during a trip to Europe with his parents . 
 By 1875 encroachment on Malvern 's wastelands by landowners had reached new heights and action was taken by the people of Malvern and the Commons Society to preserve the hills and common land and to prevent encroachment . Local lords of the manor indicated that they would like to give their rights to the wastes to the public . After preventing the enclosure of a common in 1882 , negotiations were initiated with the owners of the northern hills and the first Malvern Hills Act was secured in parliament in 1884 . Later Acts empowered the Malvern Hills Conservators to acquire land to prevent further encroachment on common land and by 1925 they had bought much of the manorial wastelands . 
 Towards the end of the 19th century , the popularity of the hydrotherapy had declined to the extent that many hotels were already being converted into private boarding schools and rest homes , and education became the basis of Malvern 's economy . By 1865 , the town already had 17 single @-@ gender private schools , increasing to 25 by 1885 . The area was well suited for schools due to its established attractive environment and access by rail . Children could travel unaccompanied with their trunks by rail to their boarding schools near the stations in Great Malvern , Malvern Wells , and Malvern Link . The Girls College , in a former hotel directly opposite Great Malvern railway station , has a dedicated ( now derelict ) tunnel to the basement of the building , which is clearly visible from both platforms of the station . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 Malvern began to develop into a modern town in the early 1900s , with a continuing strong agricultural presence . Modernisation continued , and the World War II years transformed the population and its activities , establishing the town as a centre of scientific research . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Malvern is a town and civil parish governed at the lowest tier of local government by Malvern Town Council , part of the Malvern Hills District of the County of Worcestershire ( a district comprising 68 civil parishes and 22 electoral wards ) . The ward boundaries were redefined from the wards of the former Malvern Urban District Council ( 1900 – 1974 ) . Through the many changes in local government infrastructure since the beginning of the 20th century , the importance and distinction by local boundaries of the historical areas of Great Malvern , Malvern Link , North Malvern , Cowleigh , and other neighbourhoods , have been lost . 
 The original parish of Great Malvern included the hamlet of Guarlford and the chapelry of Newland , and stretched from the River Severn on the east to the Malvern Hills on the west . Guarlford became a separate civil parish in 1894 when , under the Local Government Act of 1894 , urban district councils were created for Malvern and Malvern Link . The Guarlford parish covered much of eastern Malvern , including parts of Great Malvern , Pickersleigh , Poolbrook , Barnards Green , Hall Green and Sherrard 's Green . By 1900 however , the urban districts of Malvern and Malvern Link amalgamated , absorbing parts of neighbouring parishes to create a town of six wards under the Malvern Urban District Council . In 1934 the boundaries changed again , and those areas came under the control of the Malvern council . 
 Residents of Malvern Town in the six Malvern Town Council electoral wards are represented by 20 elected members . The council is supported by a team of senior executives that includes a Town Clerk , a Deputy Town Clerk , a PA to the Town Clerk and Chairman , an Operations and Events Officer , a Finance Officer , two Operations Managers , an Operations Supervisor , and eight Grounds Maintenance <unk> . The wards are based on the distribution of the population and generally ignore the names of the neighbourhoods and suburbs they contain , and use loaned names : 
 Chase — named after Malvern Chase — covering much of Barnards Green , the extensive Ministry of Defence property occupied by QinetiQ , the campus of The Chase School , the village of Poolbrook , and the largely rural south @-@ eastern area of the adjoining Poolbrook and Malvern commons . 
 Dyson Perrins , the northern part of Malvern adjacent to Link with the campus of Dyson Perrins School and the former MoD <unk> North Site , and the former hamlets of <unk> , <unk> , and Upper <unk> ; this ward includes a new neighbourhood of the town — Malvern Vale . 
 Link , that covers most of the area north of the Link Common between Link Top and Newland , and Upper and Lower <unk> . 
 North Malvern , an area between Link Top and West Malvern civil parish that includes the former village of Cowleigh . 
 Pickersleigh , that includes the part of the former Great Malvern boundaries east of the railway between Barnards Green and Malvern Link to Madresfield , the former hamlets of Hall Green and <unk> Green , and part of Barnards Green . 
 Priory , covering much of Great Malvern , including all the town centre , and otherwise areas west of the railway between North Malvern and Malvern Wells civil parish . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Town centre = = = 
 The town centre comprises two main streets at right angles to each other : the steep Church Street and Bellevue Terrace , a relatively flat north – south extension of the A449 which forms Malvern 's western extremity along the flank of the hills . In the heart of the town is a statue of the composer Edward Elgar , while other statuary is dedicated to Malvern water . Among the many shops are two large modern supermarkets , both in Edith Walk , formerly a steep and unmade lane that served the rear entrances of the shops in Church Street . Most of the traditional high street shops such as butchers , bakers , grocers etc . , are now health food shops , art and craft shops , charity shops , law firms , and estate agents . On the Worcester to Hereford railway line is the Victorian Great Malvern station , a listed example of classical Victorian railway architecture close to the nearby former Imperial Hotel by the same architect , E. W. Elmslie . 
 = = = Suburbs and neighbourhoods = = = 
 Malvern 's rapid urbanisation during the latter half of the 19th century spread eastwards and northwards from Great Malvern , the traditional town centre on the steep flank of the Worcestershire Beacon , and engulfed the manors and farms in the immediate area . It was often the farms , such as Pickersleigh ( now known as Pickersleigh Court and previously known as Pickersleigh House ) , near Great Malvern , and the <unk> in Malvern Link which merged with Great Malvern in 1900 that gave their names to many of the new neighbourhoods . The urban agglomeration continued to spread , and by the middle of the 20th century had reached the suburban parishes of West Malvern , Malvern Wells , Newland , Madresfield , and Guarlford . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Malvern lies in the Lower Severn / Avon plain affording it a degree of shelter caused by virtue of its nestling in between the Cotswold hills to the east , the Welsh Hills and Mountains to the west , and Birmingham plateau to the north . Although as with all the British Isles it has a maritime climate , the local topography means summer warmth can become emphasised by a slight foehn effect off the surrounding hills . The record maximum stands at <unk> ( <unk> ) set in August 1990 . Typically 17 @.@ 3 days of the year will reach <unk> ( <unk> ) or higher and the annual warmest day should reach <unk> ( <unk> ) according to the 1971 @-@ 00 observing period . 
 Winter temperature inversions can also occur given the correct conditions allowing very low minima to occur . Nonetheless , on average the region is one of the warmest non @-@ coastal areas in the UK , with overall night time minima in particular rivalling more urban areas . Indeed , despite the notable low absolute minima ( several weather @-@ observing sites nearby having fallen below − 20 ° C in the past ) the annual average frost ratio is a mere 33 days per year ( 1971 @-@ 00 ) , actually lower than more urbanised weather station locations such as London 's Heathrow Airport . A new absolute minimum of − 19 @.@ 5 ° C ( − 3 @.@ 1 ° F ) was recently set during the record cold month December 2010 . Prior to this the coldest nights were recorded in the winter of 1981 / 82 ; <unk> ° C ( − 0 @.@ 6 ° F ) in December 1981 , − 18 @.@ 0 ° C ( − 0 @.@ 4 ° F ) in January 1982 . 
 The sunniest year was 2003 , when 1776 hours of sunshine were recorded . Rainfall averages around <unk> per year with over 1mm being recorded on 123 days of the year . Snowfall is highly variable . When winter low pressure systems move from south west to north east the Malvern area is often on the northern flank , meaning heavy snowfall while areas further south and east receive rain or no precipitation at all . However , when snowfall arrives by means of convective showers driven by northerly , north westerly or north easterly winds the area tends to be one of the least snowy parts of the UK , owing to its sheltered positioning . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2011 UK census , the civil parish of Malvern had a population of 29 @,@ 626 . Together with the neighbouring parishes of West Malvern , Malvern Wells , Little Malvern and Newland ( the settlements of which largely unite with that of Malvern ) the population of the wider " Malverns " urban area is 34 @,@ 517 ( as of 2011 ) . 
 For the purposes of statistical reporting the Office for National Statistics groups the population of the North Malvern ward of the Malvern civil parish with that of the West Malvern civil parish . For every 100 females , there were 91 @.@ 7 males . The average household size was 2 @.@ 4 . Of those aged 16 – 74 in Malvern , 48 @.@ 1 % had no academic qualifications or one General Certificate of Secondary Education ( GCSE ) , above the figures for all of the Malvern Hills local government district ( 39 @.@ 7 % ) and England ( 45 @.@ 5 % ) . According to the census , 2 @.@ 3 % were unemployed and 35 @.@ 0 % were economically inactive . 19 @.@ 7 % of the population were under the age of 16 and 11 @.@ 5 % were aged 75 and over ; the mean age of the people of the civil parish was 41 @.@ 5 . 66 @.@ 8 % of residents described their health as " good " , similar to the average of 69 @.@ 1 % for the wider district . 
 = = = Ethnicity = = = 
 The 2011 census found the White British ethnic group to be by far the largest in Malvern with 93 @.@ 2 % identifying as such . The next largest ethnic group was White Other , which accounted for 3 @.@ 2 % of the population , followed by the Asian and Mixed Race categories , which made up 1 @.@ 9 % and 1 @.@ 2 % respectively . Black ethnic groups made up 0 @.@ 3 % and the Other group constituted 0 @.@ 2 % of the population . 
 = = = Population development = = = 
 The area remained a village and cluster of manors and farms until " taking of the water " in Malvern became popularised by Dr. Wall in 1756 . By the 1820s the Baths and the Pump Room were opened ; in 1842 Drs. James Wilson and James Manby Gully opened up water cure establishments in the town centre . By the middle of the 19th century , with the arrival of the railway , bath houses and other establishments catering for the health tourists flourished . By the early 20th century Malvern had developed from a small village centred on its priory to a town with many large hotels and Victorian and Edwardian country villas . 
 Malvern experienced a further population boost in 1942 when the Telecommunications Research Establishment ( TRE ) relocated to Malvern bringing 2 @,@ 500 employees to Malvern , increasing to around 3 @,@ 500 by 1945 . In the early 1950s , several large housing estates were built in Malvern to provide accommodation for the staff and their families . A significant proportion of the current population of Malvern are present and former employees of the facility ( now called QinetiQ ) , and its previously attached military contingent from REME and other units of all three British armed forces . 
 Malvern had already become an overspill for the nearby city of Worcester , and the new motorways constructed in the early 1960s brought the industrial Midlands within commuting distance by car . With this development came the construction of large private housing developments . The town continues to swell as increasingly more farmland , especially in the Malvern Link area between the villages of Guarlford and Newland , is turned over to housing projects creating new communities and suburbs . 
 Due to frequent merging of parishes and changes in boundaries , accurate figures based on specific areas are not available . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Research and development = = = 
 Since 1942 research and development into physics and electronics has been the major source of employment in Malvern when during World War II the Telecommunications Research Establishment ( TRE ) moved from Worth Matravers on the south coast for safety from enemy action . Its staff worked on airborne radar and other electronic warfare resources for the RAF . The Radar Research and Development Establishment ( RRDE ) , which worked on anti @-@ aircraft radar and searchlights for the Army , was moved to Malvern at the same time . Initially , TRE was housed at Malvern College . TRE and RRDE merged in 1953 to form the Radar Research Establishment ( RRE ) to be further renamed Royal Radar Establishment ( also RRE ) in 1955 . Further name changes took place according to shifts in operational focus until 2001 when the facility was partly transferred from public to private ownership and became QinetiQ . A small part was retained by the Ministry of Defence to become Dstl , the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory . Malvern 's Dstl contingent has since closed down with the remaining staff moving to other Dstl sites . 
 With the recognised science and technology developments in the Malvern area , Malvern Hills Science Park was built in 1999 , and is now home to over 30 science and technological businesses , including , UTC Aerospace Systems ( formerly Goodrich Corporation ) , and <unk> . 
 = = = Manufacturing = = = 
 The majority of Malvern 's manufacturing and service industries are grouped in the adjoining commercial areas of the Spring Lane Industrial Estate that was developed in the 1960s and the Enigma Business Park that was begun in the 1990s . Cars have been constructed in Malvern since 1910 by the Morgan Motor Company , one of the world 's longest @-@ existing private constructors of automobiles produced in series . The Morgan Motor Car is a traditional sports roadster and over the years has become a ' cult ' vehicle , exported all over the world from the factory in Malvern Link . Specialist glass tubing and microscope slides are produced by Chance Brothers in their factory in Malvern next door to the Morgan Motor works . Pipe organs have been built in Malvern since Nicholson Organs was founded by John Nicholson in 1841 . Nicholson organs can be found in Gloucester and Portsmouth Cathedrals , and Great Malvern Priory . 
 = = = Agriculture and horticulture = = = 
 Malvern is a centre for agricultural industry . The 70 @-@ acre ( 280 @,@ 000 m2 ) Three Counties Showground , operated by the Three Counties Agricultural Society , is a few miles to the south of Malvern on the road to Upton upon Severn . It has been the venue for the Three Counties Show , held each year in June , for over fifty years . Representing the counties of Worcestershire , Herefordshire and Gloucestershire , it is among the country 's most important agricultural shows , and can be traced back to 1797 . It attracts an average of 93 @,@ 000 visitors from all parts of the country over its three @-@ day event , and with around 600 trade stands and exhibitions it almost doubles the town 's local population . The showground also opens the horticultural season each year by hosting the Royal Horticultural Society 's Spring Gardening Show , followed by many other events throughout the year including other regular gardening shows . The Lobelia pioneers William Crump and Dr. Brent Elliott worked in Malvern and were awarded the Victoria Medal of Honour of the Royal Horticultural Society . A tea rose was named for the Malvern rose grower Mrs. Foley Hobbs in 1910 ( see page 119 of cited work ) . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The town centre and its environs contain many examples of Regency , Victorian and Edwardian villas and hotels . Many of the houses were built during the Industrial Revolution , and Malvern 's boom years as a spa town , by wealthy families from the nearby Birmingham area . Following the collapse of the spa industry , many of the hotels and villas became schools , and some have since been further converted to apartments , while some of the smaller hotels are now retirement homes . The Imperial Hotel in red brick with stone dressings , which later became a school , is one of the largest buildings in Malvern . It was built in 1860 by the architect E. W. Elmslie who also designed the Great Malvern railway station , and the Council House on the plot where Dr. Gully 's original house stood . The Grove in Avenue Road in 1867 , originally to be his private residence in 1927 became part of the Lawnside School for girls , and in 1860 <unk> Hall , a Grade II * listed building , in Herefordshire . The Imperial was the first hotel to be lit by incandescent gas . It was equipped with all types of baths and brine was brought specially by rail from Droitwich . 
 Much architecture and statuary in the town centre is dedicated to Malvern water , including the St Ann 's Well , which is housed in a building dating from 1813 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Sir Edward Elgar , British composer and Master of the King 's Musick , lived much of his life around Malvern and is buried in Little Malvern cemetery . His Pomp and Circumstance , March No. 1 , composed in 1901 and to which the words of Land of Hope and Glory were later set , was first performed in the Wyche School next to the church in the presence of Elgar . A sculpture group by artist Rose Garrard comprising the Enigma fountain together with a statue of Elgar gazing over Great Malvern stands on Belle Vue Terrace in the town centre . The Elgar Route , a 40 @-@ mile ( 64 km ) drive passing some key landmarks from Elgar 's life , passes through Malvern . Malvern Concert Club , founded in 1903 by Elgar , holds concerts held in the Forum Theatre , Malvern Theatres . Its programmes focus on renaissance , baroque , classical , romantic and contemporary music . 
 The Chandos Symphony Orchestra , under the professional direction of Michael Lloyd , has over 100 players . It specialises in performances of major works of the 19th and 20th Centuries . The Autumn in Malvern Festival is an annual event featuring performances of artists of music , poetry , writers and film makers held during October every year . The Colwell and other brass bands of the early century were part of the music of the town . The opera singer Jenny Lind lived and died in Malvern , and is buried in Great Malvern cemetery . The British violinist Nigel Kennedy had a home in Malvern . Julius Harrison ( 1885 – 1963 ) , who was a contemporary of Elgar and Professor of Composition at the Royal Academy of Music , lived in Pickersleigh Road for most of the 1940s . He was music director at Malvern College and director of the early Elgar Festivals in Malvern . 
 In the 1960s , 1970s and 1980s , the Malvern Winter Gardens was a major regional venue for concerts by popular rock bands , including The Rolling Stones , Dave Berry , T @-@ Rex , The Jam , AC / DC , Black Sabbath , The Undertones , and Joy Division . Many of the 1960s concerts were staged by Bannister promotions while later events were promoted by Cherry Red , a London @-@ based independent record label formed in 1978 . 
 Stephen Duffy and his folk pop group The Lilac Time were resident in the Malverns in the late 1980s , renting a house in West Malvern in which to write and rehearse the group 's first albums . His songs of that era reference Madresfield Court , the lanes of West Malvern , the locality of Cowleigh Park and renowned Upper Colwall tea rooms The Kettle Sings ( <unk> ) . Soon after this , Duffy collaborated on albums with - and toured with - Nigel Kennedy , also a one @-@ time resident of Malvern . 
 = = = Drama = = = 
 Malvern Theatres , housed in the Winter Gardens complex in the town centre , is a provincial centre for the arts . The first Malvern Drama Festival , which took place in 1929 , was dedicated to Bernard Shaw and planned by Sir Barry Jackson . A number of works have had their first performances at Malvern , six by Shaw including In Good King Charles 's Golden Days , the 1929 English première of The Apple Cart , and the world première of Geneva in 1938 . In 1956 Malvern held a Shaw centenary week . In February 1965 a Malvern Festival Theatre Trust was set up , and extensive refurbishment was undertaken . J B Priestley presided over the opening ceremony of the first summer season . In 1998 , a further £ 7 @.@ 2 million major redesign and refurbishment took place with the help of contributions from the National Lottery Distribution Fund ( <unk> ) , administered by the government Department for Culture , Media and Sport . 
 The Theatre of Small Convenience entered the Guinness Book of World Records in 2002 as the smallest theatre in the world . Located in a former Victorian public convenience in the centre of the town in Edith Walk in , the theatre has a capacity of 12 people . The theatre regularly hosts puppetry , professional and amateur actors , drama , poetry , storytelling and opera , and has become a regular venue of the Malvern Fringe Festival . 
 Malvern Fringe Festival , officially founded 1977 , takes place over three days in June as a fringe to the Elgar Festival . The Fringe also organise an annual May Day celebration , and various musical and other live events throughout the year . The Fringe aims to be inclusive ; bridging the generation gap by providing a varied programme of events for the local people of Malvern aimed at all ages . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 William Langland 's famous 14th @-@ century poem The Visions of Piers Plowman ( 1362 ) was inspired by the Malvern Hills and the earliest poetic allusion to them occurs in the poem And on a <unk> <unk> on Malverne <unk> . Langland , the reputed writer , was possibly educated at the priory of Great Malvern . Several roads and buildings in Malvern are named after him . 
 Malvern entered the writings and lives of several 17th – 19th century poets . These include 
 Michael Drayton : " While Malvern , king of hills , Severn overlooks " , ( Poly @-@ <unk> , 1613 , song 7 ) , 
 John Dyer : " By the blue <unk> of distant Malvern wall 'd " ( The fleece , 1757 , about sheep farming ) , 
 Thomas Warton : " Health <unk> the healing power her chosen fount / In ... Malvern 's ample mount " , ( 1790 , Ode on his Majesty 's birthday ) , 
 Thomas Gray visited in 1770 during his final travels , 
 Joseph Cottle : " As I climb ... One mass of glory ... A fairy vision ! " ( The Malvern Hills , 1798 ) , 
 William Wordsworth : church bells ring as " high as Malvern 's cloudy crest " ( 1835 , St. Catherine of Ledbury ) , 
 Patrick Tytler died in Great Malvern , in 1849 @,@ 
 Lord Macaulay : " Till twelve fair counties saw the blaze on Malvern ’ s lonely height " ( The Armada ) . 
 C. S. Lewis and J. R. R. Tolkien are among the authors that have frequented Malvern . Legend states that , after drinking in a Malvern pub one winter evening , they were walking home when it started to snow . They saw a lamp post shining out through the snow and Lewis turned to his friends and said " that would make a very nice opening line to a book " . The novel The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe by Lewis later used that image as the characters enter the realm of Narnia . J.R.R. Tolkien found inspiration in the Malvern landscape which he had viewed from his childhood home in Birmingham and his brother Hilary 's home near Evesham . He was introduced to the area by C. S. Lewis , who had brought him here to meet George Sayer , the Head of English at Malvern College . Sayer had been a student of Lewis , and became his biographer , and together with them Tolkien would walk the Malvern Hills . Recordings of Tolkien reading excerpts from The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings were made in Malvern in 1952 , at the home of George Sayer . The recordings were later issued on long @-@ playing gramophone records . In the liner notes for J.R.R Tolkien Reads and Sings his The Hobbit & The Fellowship of the Rings , George Sayer wrote that Tolkien would relive the book as they walked and compared parts of the Malvern Hills to the White Mountains of Gondor . 
 The poet W. H. Auden taught for three years in the 1930s at The Downs School , in the Malvern Hills . He wrote many poems there , including : This Lunar Beauty ; Let Your Sleeping Head ; My Love , Fish in the <unk> Lakes ; and Out on the Lawn I Lie in Bed . He also wrote the long poem about the hills and their views , called simply The Malverns . 
 In his 1941 novel Mr <unk> 's Freedom Halesowen @-@ born novelist Francis Brett Young describes sleeping out on the Malvern Hills and seeing the sunrise over the town . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 Works of art in Malvern include fountains , statues , and Malvern water spouts by the sculptor Rose Garrard . Among her sculptures are the statue of Sir Edward Elgar and the Enigma Fountain ( Unveiled by Prince Andrew , Duke of York on Belle Vue Terrace , Malvern on 26 May 2000 ) . and the drinking spout , Malvhina , also on Belle Vue Terrace , which was unveiled on 4 September 1998 . 
 Garrard 's Hand of Peace war memorial , a sculpture in Portland stone is located in the Barnards Green suburb of Malvern . 
 Paintings of Malvern include Little Malvern Church by Joseph Farington now held by the Royal Academy , and a squared drawing by the art historian Robert Witt in the collection of the Courtauld Institute , Joseph Powell 's Great Malvern Priory ... from the North East ( 1797 ) , now in the British Watercolours collection of the Victoria and Albert Museum . 
 David Prentice , artist and one of the founder members of Birmingham 's Ikon Gallery , has lived and worked in Malvern since 1990 . He started painting the Malvern Hills when he retired in 1983 . 
 A sculpture of two buzzards by Walenty Pytel was installed in Rosebank Gardens , Great Malvern to commemorate the Queen 's Diamond Jubilee in November 2012 . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Elgar , a drama documentary made in 1962 by the British director Ken Russell , was filmed on location in Malvern and Worcester . Several scenes were filmed in Malvern at locations including ' Forli ' in Alexandra Road , ' <unk> Lea ' in Malvern Wells and St Ann 's Well in Great Malvern . Made for BBC Television 's long @-@ running Monitor programme , it dramatised the life of the composer Edward Elgar . The film significantly raised the public profile of the composer . 
 The Malvern landscape forms the backdrop for Penda 's Fen , a 1974 British television play written by David Rudkin and directed by Alan Clarke for the BBC 's Play for Today series . It tells the story of Stephen , a vicar 's son who has visions of angels , Edward Elgar , and King Penda , the last pagan ruler of England . The final scene of the play , where the protagonist has an <unk> experience of King Penda and the " mother and father of England " and King Penda , is set on the Malvern Hills . 
 The Tank Quarry on North Hill and West of England Quarry on the Worcestershire Beacon were used as locations in the Doctor Who serial The Krotons , starring Patrick Troughton . The serial was broadcast in four weekly parts from 28 December 1968 to 18 January 1969 . 
 Great Malvern railway station featured in 1975 as the commuter @-@ belt railway station in the first episode of Survivors ( 1975 TV series ) , the post @-@ apocalyptic fiction drama television series created by Terry Nation and produced by Terence Dudley at the BBC . 
 = = = Malvern water = = = 
 Malvern spring water flows freely from a number of fountains or spouts throughout the Malvern area . Upkeep of these historical springs is funded by several organisations , including the Town Council , the Heritage Lottery Fund , The Malvern Spa Association , and the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . The water became famous for containing " nothing at all " . It was the reason for Malvern becoming a spa town and has formed a part of both local and national culture since Queen Elizabeth I made a point of drinking it in public in the 16th century , and Queen Victoria refused to travel without it . It is also a bottled water used by Queen Elizabeth II Until November 2010 when the plant was closed due to lack of profitability , millions of litres of Malvern water were bottled annually by Coca @-@ Cola Enterprises under the Schweppes brand in a factory near Malvern and distributed worldwide . Malvern water is still being bottled from the original source by a family run business under the name Holywell Spring Water . 
 = = = Twin town = = = 
 Malvern has since 2013 been twinned with <unk> <unk> , a spa town in the Czech Republic , and since 2016 also with Bagnères @-@ de @-@ Bigorre , a spa town in France . 
 = = = Malvern pudding = = = 
 = = Places of worship = = 
 In addition to the 12th century priory , during and shortly after Malvern 's expansion throughout the second half of the 19th century over twenty Christian churches were built . Many of these are reproductions of 13th and 14th century architecture including St Mathias , Malvern Link ( C of E ) <unk> , which has a full set of ten ringing bells on which the first full peal of <unk> Triples was rung on 1 June 1901 . One of the most recent buildings is St Mary 's Church ( C of E ) , in <unk> Green , a modern church built <unk> . 
 Pevsner mentions the following 19th and early 20th century churches in Malvern in his book on Worcestershire : All Saints , ( The Wyche ) , 1903 , by Nevinson and Newton ( or possibly <unk> Griffith ) ; St. Andrew in Poolbrook , 1885 , contains a font inscribed 1724 , by Blomfield ; Ascension ( Leigh Sinton Road ) 1903 , by Sir Walter Tapper , with a high metal screen by G. Bainbridge Reynolds ; Christ Church ( Avenue Road ) , 1875 @-@ 6 , by <unk> & Sons , with unexpected cross gable ; Chapel of the Convent of the Holy Name , ( Ranelagh Road ) , 1893 , by Comper , with wagon roof and stained glass ; St. Joseph ( Newtown Road ) , 1876 , by T.R. Donnelly ; St. Matthias ( Church Road ) , original by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott , 1844 – 46 , enlarged and altered by F.W. Hunt , 1880 – 81 , painted dado and stained glass ; Our Lady and St. Edmund ( College Road ) , 1905 , by P. P. Pugin ; St. Peter ( St. Peter 's Road ) , 1863 @-@ 6 , by G. E. Street , with crazy paving of Malvern granite ; Holy Trinity , ( Worcester Road ) , 1850 @-@ 1 , by S. <unk> , enlarged 1872 by Haddon brothers ; with plate and stained glass ; Congregational Church , ( Queen 's Drive ) , 1875 , by J. Tait of Leicester ; Emmanuel , ( Countess of Huntingdon 's Connexion ) , 1874 , by Haddon brothers . 
 = = Health and emergency services = = 
 Malvern has a community hospital in Malvern Link . The hospital was constructed on the grounds of a former independent school , <unk> Court , and began operation in 2010 . It was officially opened by The Princess Royal in March 2011 . Major health facilities are provided by hospitals in Worcester . The town has seven health centres , including a health complex in Malvern Link and a group practice on Pickersleigh Road . Malvern also has several nursing and retirement homes for the care of senior citizens . The Malvern area is covered by the Midlands Air Ambulance service , which has operated from the site of Strensham motorway services since 1991 . 
 Malvern is served by the West Midlands Ambulance Service operated by the NHS Trust . The ambulance station is located in Victoria Road , Great Malvern , near the town centre . 
 Other emergency services are provided by West Mercia Police from a station in Victoria Road , and the Hereford and Worcester Fire and Rescue Service that has a station in Worcester Road , Malvern Link . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Major road access to the area is provided by the A449 road that runs through the centre of Malvern , connecting it to Worcester and Ledbury . The M5 motorway ( West Bromwich near Birmingham to Exeter in Devon ) is accessible at junctions 7 and 8 to the east of Malvern . The M50 motorway ( Tewkesbury to Ross @-@ on @-@ Wye ) , also known as the Ross Spur to the south is accessed at junction 1 on the A38 road between Tewkesbury and Malvern . 
 Two railway stations approximately one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) apart at Great Malvern and Malvern Link , provide direct services to Worcester , Hereford , Birmingham , Oxford , Cheltenham , Gloucester , South West England and London Paddington . 
 Malvern bus services include several circular local routes connecting the main residential and commercial areas and out @-@ of @-@ town shopping malls . Other routes serve the surrounding towns and villages , Cheltenham , and the cities of Gloucester , Hereford , and Worcester , while long @-@ distance direct bus services connect Malvern with other cities in the country , including the National Express route 321 through eleven counties from Aberdare in South Wales via Birmingham and other major cities , to Bradford in West Yorkshire , and route 444 from Worcester to London ( Victoria ) . Operators include <unk> Coaches , Diamond Bus , DRM Coaches , and First Midland Red . 
 Air services operate from Birmingham Airport approximately one hour by road via the M5 and M42 motorways . Gloucestershire Airport located at <unk> , in the borough of Tewkesbury is a busy general aviation airport used mainly for private charter and scheduled flights to destinations such as the islands of Jersey , Guernsey , and the Isle of Man , pilot training , and by the aircraft of emergency services . 
 Taxi services are provided by numerous local firms . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Primary schools = = = 
 Elementary education is provided by thirteen primary schools in the town and its suburbs including eight Church of England , one Roman Catholic , and four non @-@ denominational state schools . With the exception of The Grove ( 1962 ) , Poolbrook Primary School ( 1977 ) , and <unk> ( 1991 ) that replaced the Cowleigh C of E school destroyed by arson in 1989 , all the Malvern primary schools were established between 1836 and 1916 , during and shortly after the town 's rapid development as a spa . 
 = = = High schools = = = 
 The Chase Technology College in Barnards Green is a secondary school with over 1700 pupils . It is a specialist Technology , Language and Science college under the specialist schools programme , and has been awarded Beacon School status . Its most recent OFSTED inspection , in February 2014 , described the school as " Requiring improvement " . 
 Dyson Perrins Church of England Academy in Malvern Link , a Church of England school with almost 1000 pupils , is a specialist Sports College . An OFSTED inspection in January 2015 rated the school as " Good " 
 Hanley Castle High School , with around 1000 pupils including its sixth form centre , is a specialist Language College and was founded in 1326 as a chantry school , making it one of the oldest schools in England . Although located in the village Hanley Castle about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from the town , a large number of its pupils are drawn from the Malvern area . 
 = = = Independent schools = = = 
 Two large independent ' public ' schools – Malvern College for boys and girls and Malvern St James for girls – now remain following mergers of Malvern 's many private primary and secondary schools . 
 Malvern College is a coeducational public school , founded in 1865 . Until 1992 , it was a school for boys aged 13 to 18 . Following a merger with Ellerslie School for Girls in 1992 it became coeducational . Further mergers with Hillstone and The Downs preparatory schools has created a coeducational school for pupils from 3 to 18 years old . Among its alumni are two Nobel Laureates ( James Meade and Francis William Aston ) , an Olympic Gold medalist ( Arnold Jackson ) , and leading politicians . 
 Malvern St James was formed in 2006 by the merger of Malvern Girls ' College and St. James 's School , West Malvern ( formerly St James 's and The Abbey ) and other mergers with local private schools over the last thirty years . It is now the last of the independent girls ' schools in the Malvern area . The main building of Malvern St James on the campus of the former Malvern Girls ' College is the former Imperial Hotel , built in the second half of the 19th century . 
 The Abbey College is an international boarding school providing education mainly for students from countries outside the United Kingdom . Founded in 1974 , it provides pre university preparation for mixed gender students aged 14 to 20 . 
 = = = Further education = = = 
 The Malvern campus of South Worcestershire College is a centre for further education providing government certificate vocational courses for adults and post 14 @-@ year @-@ old students . Malvern also has an active University of the Third Age that was founded at Malvern Hills College in 1995 . Its inaugural meeting was attended by around 150 members of the public , and by 2011 it had over 80 interest groups and 1 @,@ 100 members . 
 = = Leisure = = 
 The Priory Park with its adjoining Malvern Splash pool and Winter Gardens complex occupies a large area in the centre of the town . The Winter Gardens complex is home to the Malvern Theatres , a cinema , a concert venue / banqueting room , bars and cafeterias . For almost half a century , the Malvern Winter Gardens has also been a leisure centre and a major regional venue for classical music , and concerts by major rock bands of the 60s , 70s and 80s . The Splash Leisure Complex flanks the eastern boundary of Priory Park and has an indoor swimming pool and gymnasium . In the town centre is also an extensive public Library that includes access to the Internet and many community services . 
 The Worcestershire Way , a waymarked long @-@ distance trail located within the county of Worcestershire , runs 31 miles ( 50 km ) from Bewdley to Great Malvern . 
 = = Sport = = 
 The Manor Park Club multi @-@ sports complex , close to the town centre , provides the area with indoor and outdoor sports facilities including tennis , squash , indoor bowls , <unk> , archery and table tennis . It is assisted by grants from various bodies , including the Malvern Hills District Council , the Sport England Lottery , and the Lawn Tennis Association . In 2010 , a new indoor facility was unveiled at the club by tennis player Tim Henman . Traditional outdoor bowls is played on a green in Priory Park . Other public areas such as Victoria Park in Malvern Link provide space for field sports and tennis . Malvern Town FC has a football first team that plays in the West Midlands Regional League and which has twice reached the third qualifying round of the FA Cup . The Malvern Hills are a popular launching site for hang gliding and paragliding and Malvern has a local hang gliding club . Cricket is provided for at Barnards Green Cricket Club , a professional class ground . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 In addition to those born in Malvern , notable people came to the town to be cured ( mentioned above ) , to be educated or teach at the many independent schools : see articles on Malvern College , Malvern St James , the merger of St. James School and Malvern College for Girls , and Malvern College Prep . ( The Downs ) , or to work at TRE , RRDE , their merger RRE and its successor organisations leading ( as of 2011 ) to QinetiQ , The Hills have inspired poets and novelists . 
 Thomas Attwood , British economist and campaigner for electoral reform , died in Malvern , on 9 March 1859 . 
 William Algernon Churchill ( 1865 – 1947 ) British diplomat and art historian retired to <unk> House , Malvern in early 1920s . 
 Nigel Coates , architect and Emeritus professor of the Royal College of Arts grew up in Malvern and was educated at Hanley Castle Grammar School . 
 Anne , Charles Darwin 's daughter , is buried in the graveyard of Malvern Priory . 
 David Davis ( 1908 – 1996 ) BBC radio executive and broadcaster , was born and raised in Malvern . 
 Anne Diamond , television journalist and presenter , grew up in Malvern . 
 Stephen Duffy and his folk pop group The Lilac Time were resident in the Malverns in the late 1980s , renting a house in West Malvern in which to write and rehearse the group 's first albums . His songs of that era reference Madresfield Court , the lanes of West Malvern , the locality of Cowleigh Park and renowned Upper Colwall tea rooms The Kettle Sings ( <unk> ) . 
 Edward Elgar , composer , taught in Great Malvern . Elgar is buried at St. <unk> 's , Little Malvern . 
 Brigadier Hugh Gregory Fitton CB , DSO ( 1864 – 1916 ) , born in Malvern , buried at Lijssenthoek Military Cemetery 
 Basil Foster ( 1882 – 1959 ) , English cricketer who played 34 first @-@ class matches in the early 20th century , was born in Malvern . 
 Arthur <unk> Griffith , architect and friend of Elgar 
 Julius Harrison ( 1885 – 1963 ) , was a contemporary of Elgar , and Professor of Composition at the Royal Academy of Music . He was music director at Malvern College and director of the early Elgar Festivals in Malvern . He lived in Pickersleigh Road from most of the 1940s . 
 Charles Hastings , founder of the British Medical Association , spent his final years at Hastings House , Barnards Green . 
 Graeme Hick , cricketer , currently resides in the Malvern area , and coaches at Malvern College . 
 Elsie Howey , suffragette , lived most of her life and died in Malvern . 
 Nigel Kennedy , violinist and composer , and his Polish wife Agnieszka , have a home in Malvern . 
 William Langland 's allegorical narrative poem Piers Plowman ( written <unk> – 1387 ) begins on the Malvern Hills . 
 C. S. Lewis , novelist , was a pupil at the preparatory school Cherbourg House and Malvern College . He boarded at these two establishments between early 1911 and June 1914 . 
 Jenny Lind , opera singer , lived and died in Malvern , and is buried in Great Malvern cemetery . 
 Cher Lloyd , contestant and 4th place on The X Factor ( UK Series 7 ) , notable for having the most watched audition in history . 
 Ellen Marriage , Balzac translator , died in Malvern in 1946 . 
 Jamie <unk> , British comic book artist and writer . His work Suburban Glamour was set in a fictional version of Malvern 
 David Mitchell , author whose works include Cloud Atlas ( also a 2012 Hollywood movie ) and Black Swan Green , the latter taking place in Malvern . Mitchel was educated at Hanley Castle Grammar School . 
 Malcolm Nokes MC , ( 1897 – 1986 ) , teacher , soldier , Olympic medallist , nuclear scientist and <unk> official . 
 Charles William Dyson Perrins , ( 1864 – 1958 ) , art collector , philanthropist and local government office holder . 
 Charles Ranken , chess champion , lived in Malvern from 1871 until his death in 1905 . 
 Franklin D. Roosevelt , later President of the USA , stayed at the Aldwyn Tower Hotel while convalescing from an illness at the age of 7 . 
 George Sayer , biographer of C. S. Lewis . 
 Haile Selassie , emperor of Ethiopia , visited Malvern during his 1936 – 1941 exile , staying at the Abbey Hotel and attending the Holy Trinity Church . 
 Jacqui Smith , former British Home Secretary , was born and raised in Malvern . 
 Philip Woodward ( born 1919 ) , a British mathematician , who worked on radar and related topics at the government TRE / RRE laboratory in Malvern for forty years , and also made major contributions to horology . 
 = = Compass = = 
 = 1st Airlanding Brigade ( United Kingdom ) = 
 The 1st Airlanding Brigade was an airborne infantry brigade of the British Army during the Second World War and the only glider infantry formation assigned to the 1st Airborne Division , serving alongside the 1st Parachute Brigade and 4th Parachute Brigade . 
 The brigade was formed in late 1941 during World War II through the conversion of an existing infantry brigade previously stationed in India , the 31st Independent Infantry Brigade . Two of the initial four infantry battalions left in May 1943 to form the new 6th Airlanding Brigade of the 6th Airborne Division and were replaced by a single new battalion , thereby reducing the brigade 's strength by one quarter . 
 The brigade only saw action on two occasions during the Second World War , in Operation Ladbroke , as part of the Allied invasion of Sicily , in July 1943 and later in Operation Market Garden in September 1944 . During the second operation , in the fighting around Arnhem , 1st Airlanding Brigade along with the rest of 1st Airborne Division held out against overwhelming German odds , sustaining very heavy losses . Only around 20 percent of the brigade were evacuated south of the River Rhine . The rest had either been killed , were missing or became prisoners of war . 
 Following the German surrender in mid @-@ 1945 , 1st Airlanding Brigade were sent to Norway to disarm the German garrison . Later the same year the brigade was disbanded . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Under the command of Brigadier George F. Hopkinson , the 1st Airlanding Brigade Group was formed on 10 October 1941 through the re @-@ designation of the 31st Independent Infantry Brigade , which had just returned to the United Kingdom after training for mountain warfare in British India . Upon formation , the brigade consisted of the 1st Battalion , Border Regiment ( Borders ) , the 2nd Battalion , South Staffordshire Regiment ( Staffords ) , the 2nd Battalion , Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry ( OBLI ) , the 1st Battalion , Royal Ulster Rifles ( <unk> ) and supporting units . These were the brigade 's original infantry battalions and all remained part of its order of battle . Men in the battalions who were unsuitable for airborne service were weeded out and replaced by volunteers . 
 The strength of the airlanding brigade almost equalled that of an airborne division 's two parachute brigades . To support the four infantry battalions , the brigade also had its own artillery , engineer and reconnaissance units until 1942 , when they became divisional assets . Another change that affected the brigade occurred in May 1943 , when the <unk> and the OBLI left to form the 6th Airlanding Brigade , of the 6th Airborne Division . When the brigade returned to the United Kingdom , it was assigned the 7th Battalion , King 's Own Scottish Borderers ( KOSB ) in December 1943 , a 2nd Line Territorial Army unit , which had until then been on home defence duties , stationed in the Orkney and Shetland islands . 
 The brigade 's glider infantry battalions consisted of 806 men in four rifle companies , each with four platoons along with a support company consisting of two Anti @-@ tank platoons each with four 6 pounder guns , two mortar platoons armed with six 3 inch mortars , and two Vickers machine gun platoons . 
 Transport for the brigade was normally the Airspeed Horsa glider , piloted by two men from the Glider Pilot Regiment . With a wingspan of 88 feet ( 27 m ) and a length of 67 feet ( 20 m ) , the Horsa had a maximum load capacity of 15 @,@ 750 pounds ( 7 @,@ 140 kg ) — space for two pilots , a maximum of twenty @-@ eight troops or two jeeps , one jeep and an artillery gun or one jeep with a trailer . Sixty – two Horsa and one General Aircraft Hamilcar gliders were required to carry the airlanding battalion into action . The Hamilcar carried the battalion 's two Universal Carriers used to support the mortar and machine @-@ gun platoons . 
 = = Operations = = 
 = = = Sicily = = = 
 The 1st Airborne Division , including the 1st Airlanding Brigade left England for North Africa in June 1943 . The brigade now comprised only two battalions , the Borders and the Staffords , with Brigadier Philip " Pip " Hicks , in command , Brigadier Hopkinson having been promoted to major @-@ general and given command of the 1st Airborne Division . Once they arrived in theatre the brigade was based in the Oran area on the north @-@ western Mediterranean coast of Algeria . Now part of the British Eighth Army training for the invasion of Sicily , code @-@ named Operation Husky , started in earnest . 
 Major @-@ General Hopkinson had persuaded General Bernard Montgomery , commander of the Eighth Army , to include the 1st Airborne Division in the invasion of Sicily , against the wishes of both the commander of the British Airborne Forces , Major @-@ General Frederick Browning and the commander of the Glider Pilot Regiment , Lieutenant Colonel Chatterton . Both men were concerned that they had insufficient aircraft for the complete division to take part while British pilots and infantry were not familiar with the Waco CG @-@ 4 gliders that were to be used . Their concerns proved correct as there were only enough aircraft for two of the division 's four brigades to take part in the invasion . The 1st Parachute Brigade was assigned to Operation Fustian with orders to seize and hold the Primosole Bridge over the River Simeto . Prior to that , the 1st Airlanding Brigade was to take part in Operation Ladbroke , a glider assault on the Ponte Grande bridge across the <unk> river south of Syracuse . The brigade was to hold the bridge until relieved by the advance of the British 5th Infantry Division . The 1st Airlanding Brigade was allocated 136 Waco and eight Airspeed Horsa gliders for the operation . Six of the Horsas carrying two infantry companies were scheduled to land at the bridge at 23 : 15 on 9 July in a coup @-@ de @-@ main operation . The remainder of the brigade would arrive at 01 : 15 on 10 July using a number of landing @-@ zones between 1 @.@ 5 and 3 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 and 4 @.@ 8 km ) away , then converge on the bridge to reinforce the defence . 
 On 9 July , 2 @,@ 075 men of the brigade along with seven jeeps , six artillery guns and ten mortars , boarded their gliders in Tunisia and took off at 18 : 00 bound for Sicily . En route they encountered strong winds , poor visibility and at times were subjected to anti @-@ aircraft fire . To avoid gunfire and searchlights , pilots of the towing aircraft climbed higher or took evasive action . In the confusion surrounding these manoeuvres , some gliders were released too early and 65 of them crashed into the sea , drowning around 252 men . Of the remaining gliders only 12 landed at the correct landing @-@ zones . Another 59 landed up to 25 miles ( 40 km ) away while the remainder were either shot down or failed to release and returned to Tunisia . Only one Horsa with a platoon of infantry from the Staffords landed near the bridge . Its commander Lieutenant Withers divided his men into two groups then swam across the river with half of them to take up positions on the opposite bank . Thereafter the bridge was captured following a simultaneous assault from both sides . The platoon then dismantled demolition charges that had been fitted to the bridge and dug in to wait for reinforcement or relief . Another Horsa landed about 200 yards ( 180 m ) from the bridge but exploded on landing , killing all on board . Three of the other Horsas carrying the coup @-@ de @-@ main party , landed within 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of the bridge — their occupants eventually finding their way to the site . Reinforcements began to arrive at the bridge but by 06 : 30 they numbered only 87 men . 
 Elsewhere , about 150 men landed at Cape Murro di Porco and captured a radio station . Based on a warning of imminent glider landings transmitted by the station 's previous occupants , the local Italian commander ordered a counter @-@ attack but his troops failed to get the message . The scattered nature of the landings now worked in the brigade 's favour as they were able to cut all telephone wires in the immediate area . Forces at the bridge came under repeated attacks from the Italians while the expected 5th Infantry Division relief did not appear at 10 : 00 as planned . By 15 : 30 only 15 of men at the bridge remained fit to fight and they were out of ammunition , as a result the Italians then recaptured the bridge . The first unit from 5th Infantry Division arrived at the bridge at 16 : 15 and mounted a successful counter @-@ attack . The prior removal of demolition charges from the bridge had prevented the Italians from destroying it . The 1st Airlanding Brigade then took no further part in the fighting and was withdrawn back to North Africa on 13 July . During the landings in Sicily , the losses by 1st Airlanding Brigade were the worst of all the British units involved so far . They amounted to 313 killed and 174 missing or wounded . The accompanying glider pilots lost 14 killed moreover 87 were missing or wounded . 
 = = = Arnhem = = = 
 After service in the Mediterranean the brigade returned to Woodhall Spa in Lincolnshire , where it was reinforced by the arrival of the 7th Battalion , King 's Own Scottish Borderers in November 1943 . During the D @-@ Day landings of 6 June 1944 , the 1st Airlanding Brigade was part of the strategic reserve , on standby to deploy wherever they were needed to support the invasion . The division and brigade were next assigned to Operation Market Garden at Arnhem in the Netherlands . This entailed three airborne divisions capturing bridges to be used subsequently by the British Second Army . Prior to the operation , more than 15 planned airborne missions into France and Belgium had been cancelled due to the speed of the Allied advance . 
 A shortage of transport aircraft meant that it would take three days to transport the division to Arnhem . The plan called for the majority of the 1st Airlanding Brigade and the 1st Parachute Brigade to land on day one . The parachute brigade would head for Arnhem and capture the bridges over the Lower Rhine while the airlanding brigade secured drop zones for units arriving on the second and third days . When all the division 's units had arrived the brigade would take up defensive positions to the west of Arnhem . The 1st Airlanding Brigade units arriving on the second lift were to be two companies plus one mortar , one machine gun and one anti @-@ tank platoon of the Staffords , along with three platoons and sections from the mortar , machine gun and anti @-@ tank platoons of the KOSB . The Borders contingent amounted to a further eight platoons . 
 On 17 September 1944 , the first lift successfully carried the majority of the brigade to Arnhem — only 12 gliders failed to arrive due to technical problems . While the 1st Parachute Brigade headed for Arnhem the airlanding brigade dug in to secure the landing grounds . The Staffords dug in around landing zone ' S ' , the KOSB around drop zone ' Y ' and the Borders around landing zone ' X ' . Also under command of the brigade , co @-@ located with brigade headquarters at Wolfheze were the Glider pilots of No. 2 Wing , Glider Pilot Regiment , the equivalent of a small infantry battalion . 
 On the night of 17 – 18 September , divisional commander Major @-@ General Roy Urquhart was reported missing . Brigadier Hicks assumed command of the division while Colonel <unk> Barlow replaced Hicks as brigade commander . 
 On day two , problems in Arnhem forced Hicks to change the divisional plan . Only the 2nd Parachute Battalion had reached the road bridge — strong German defences had halted the other battalions so Hicks decided that the Staffords would link up with the 1st Parachute Brigade in an attempt to reach their objective . However , the Staffords also failed to break through the German defenders . Bad weather over England kept the planned second lift on the ground . The first troops did not arrive until 15 : 00 , a delay that gave the Germans time to approach the landing grounds and engage the KOSB in numerous probing attacks on the northern perimeter . At one stage KOSB commanding officer Lieutenant Colonel Payton @-@ Reid led a bayonet charge to clear the Germans from the area . Meanwhile , the Borders were repeatedly attacked from the south of landing zone 's ' X ' and ' Z ' , and were eventually forced to call on the 75 mm guns of the 1st Airlanding Light Regiment to break up the attacks . Hicks had previously decided to send the Staffords on the second lift to join their battalion fighting in Arnhem , while he also sent the 11th Parachute Battalion on the same lift to support 1st Parachute Brigade . The KOSB , until then responsible for defending the landing ground , were attached to 4th Parachute Brigade to replace the 11th Parachute Battalion . However they were still responsible for defending landing ground ' L ' , for the arrival of the Poles gliders on day three . This left only the Borders , No. 2 Wing GPR and the field ambulance under brigade command . 
 As day three dawned , the Staffords , and the 1st Parachute Battalion attacked at 04 : 00 , their first objective being to link up with the 3rd Parachute Battalion trapped around St Elizabeth 's Hospital . The attack failed but allowed Major @-@ General Urquhart to rejoin the division from a position where he had been trapped by the Germans . This allowed Brigadier Hicks to resume command of the brigade , whereupon Urquhart dispatched Colonel Barlow to take over command of 1st Parachute Brigade and co @-@ ordinate the attack in Arnhem . He left in a jeep and was killed in a mortar barrage just outside Arnhem . The 1st Airlanding Brigade , still holding landing zone ' L ' for the expected Polish and resupply gliders , then came under attack from the west and north @-@ west . During the night the KOSB had tried to take the high ground at <unk> , but were stopped by heavy machine gun fire and instead dug in . The remainder of 4th Parachute Brigade advancing north of the railway line also encountered a strong German defence line and were unable to progress any further . All three battalions were ordered to withdraw south of the railway line towards Wolfheze . Although the northern most battalion of the KOSB had thus far enjoyed a quiet morning , in the two hours it took them to advance south of the railway , two companies were now cut off and the entire battalion transport lost . Still under fire from the pursuing Germans , the battalions crossed landing zone ' L ' just as the third lift gliders were landing . While attempting to unload the gliders the Poles came under fire . Assuming the approaching men were Germans , they opened fire and caused some casualties . 
 With no one in command , around 100 men , the remnants of the Staffords , along with about 400 troops from the 1st Parachute Brigade , pulled back towards Oosterbeek . Here they were gathered together in an ad hoc formation known as the " Lonsdale Force " after Major Richard Lonsdale who was put in command . The Lonsdale Force deployed to the south @-@ east of Oosterbeek to defend the division 's artillery line . Here , as dusk approached , Lance Serjeant John Baskeyfield of the Staffords , although wounded and with the rest of his men dead or wounded , engaged three tanks as they emerged from the woods with his anti @-@ tank gun . He destroyed the first tank and disabled the second before his own weapon was destroyed . Moving to a nearby gun where the crew were already dead , he continued to fight the third tank alone . Shortly after he managed to disable it , he was killed a shell from a German tank . For his actions Baskeyfield received a posthumous Victoria Cross , the highest British military decoration . The KOSB had by now arrived at the perimeter being formed around Oosterbeek and took up positions south of the railway line just north of division headquarters . 
 By day four , the battalions of the 1st Airlanding Brigade were dispersed over a wide area . While the Borders were to the west on a line from the River Rhine east of <unk> to the <unk> road , the remaining KOSB companies lay to the north with the remnants of the Staffords forming part of Lonsdale Force in the east . Brigade headquarters was established on open ground at the centre of the divisional area . On day five ( 21 September ) , defence of the divisional area was divided between the two remaining brigade headquarters . The 1st Airlanding Brigade in the west now commanded the remaining three companies of Borders , the remnants of the KOSB , and what remained of the Royal Engineers , 21st Independent Company , Glider Pilots and Poles . Lonsdale Force Major Robert Henry Cain of the Staffords disabled a tank with a PIAT and then , although wounded by machine gun fire , positioned one of the division 's artillery guns and destroyed it . This was the first of a number of actions by Major Cain which led to the award of a Victoria Cross . This second medal for the Staffords meant it became the only British battalion to receive two Victoria Crosses in one battle during the Second World War . 
 The Germans did not mount an all @-@ out infantry assault on the divisional area , which was under continuous mortar and artillery attack . Instead , each sector was subjected to small scale assaults at times supported by tanks or self @-@ propelled guns . Enemy troops first attacked the Independent Company , then the Borders who were forced off the high ground overlooking the river , and finally the KOSB . The Germans mounted a strong assault following the landing of the 1st Polish Parachute Brigade south of the river beside Driel . This attack forced the KOSB out of their positions , which were only regained after a bayonet charge . Fighting was so fierce that first reports suggested the KOSB had been annihilated , although it turned out that the counter @-@ attack had in fact reduced the battalion 's strength to only 150 men . 
 By day six , 22 September , the battle had settled into a routine of mortaring and small probing attacks at times supported by armoured vehicles and sniper fire . The Poles , dug in south of the river , relieved part of the pressure on the division , as some German forces were diverted to confront them . The following day began in a similar way to previous days with a mortar and artillery bombardment , followed by infantry and armour trying to find a gap in the perimeter . The KOSB , Glider Pilots and the 21st Independent Company who were all defending the brigade area were repeatedly attacked . Furthermore , food and water shortages also took their toll on the men , with foraging parties subjected to sniper fire . On day eight , 24 September , although German attacks continued , the enemy were engaged by artillery of the XXX Corps south of the river and aircraft from the Royal Air Force . This broke up most assaults before they got started . 
 On 25 September Lieutenant @-@ General Brian Horrocks , commander of XXX Corps , decided not to reinforce the position north of the Rhine and instead prepare for the evacuation of all survivors in Operation Berlin . The evacuation took place on the night of 25 – 26 September . Of the 2 @,@ 526 men of 1st Airlanding Brigade that left England for Operation Market Garden , there were 230 killed , 476 evacuated and 1 @,@ 822 were missing or prisoners of war . 
 = = = Norway = = = 
 After Arnhem , replacements for the 1st Airlanding Brigade began to bring the brigade up to strength . Among the replacements was Brigadier Roger Bower who took the place of the injured Brigadier Hicks . However , the Germans surrendered before they were involved in further action . The 1st Airborne Division including the airlanding brigade , the Special Air Service Brigade and an ad hoc brigade formed from the divisional artillery were sent to disarm the German occupation forces in Norway in May 1945 . On entering Norway , the division would be responsible for maintaining law and order in the areas it occupied , ensuring that German units followed the terms of their surrender , securing and then protecting captured airfields , and finally preventing the sabotage of essential military and civilian structures . After landing nearby , 1st Airlanding Brigade occupied the Norwegian capital Oslo , where Brigadier Bower became Commander , Oslo Area for the duration of the division 's time in Norway . The city was chosen because as well as being the Norwegian capital it was also the centre of the Norwegian and German administration . The brigade returned to the United Kingdom in August 1945 , when the 1st Airborne Division was disbanded and the airlanding battalions returned to a conventional infantry role . 
 = = Brigade composition = = 
 = = = Commanding Officers = = = 
 Brigadier George F. Hopkinson 
 Brigadier Philip Hugh Whitby Hicks 
 Brigadier Roger Bower 
 = = = On formation 1941 = = = 
 1st Battalion , Border Regiment 
 2nd Battalion , South Staffordshire Regiment 
 2nd Battalion , Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry 
 1st Battalion , Royal Ulster Rifles 
 1st Airlanding Reconnaissance Squadron , Royal Armoured Corps 
 9th Field Company , Royal Engineers 
 223rd Anti @-@ Tank Battery , Royal Artillery 
 458th Light Battery , Royal Artillery 
 = = = From December 1943 = = = 
 1st Battalion , Border Regiment 
 2nd Battalion , South Staffordshire Regiment 
 7th ( Galloway ) Battalion , King 's Own Scottish Borderers 
 181st Airlanding Field Ambulance , Royal Army Medical Corps 
 = Conspiracy Encyclopedia = 
 Conspiracy Encyclopedia : The Encyclopedia of Conspiracy Theories is a non @-@ fiction reference book about conspiracy theories , with an introduction by editor Thom Burnett . It was published in 2005 by Chamberlain Bros. , and in 2006 by Collins & Brown . Contributors to the work include Thom Burnett , Nigel Cawthorne , Richard Emerson , Mick Farren , Alex Games , John Gill , Sandy Gort , Rod Green , Emma Hooley , Esther <unk> , and Kenn <unk> encyclopedia discusses 365 conspiracy theories , most of which are political . 
 The encyclopedia was positively reviewed in The Guardian , where it was referred to as a " beautifully @-@ produced tome " . It received both a positive and a negative review from two different writers in The Times . In 2008 the encyclopedia was listed as required reading in a course on conspiracy at Harvard University . 
 = = Background = = 
 Conspiracy Encyclopedia was published in 2005 by Chamberlain Bros. , and in 2006 by Collins & Brown . Contributors to the work include Thom Burnett , Nigel Cawthorne , Richard Emerson , Mick Farren , Alex Games , John Gill , Sandy Gort , Rod Green , Emma Hooley , Esther <unk> , and Kenn Thomas . 
 Burnett has written multiple other works on international politics , including Who Really Won the Space Race ? : Uncovering the Conspiracy That Kept America Second to the Russians ( 2005 ) , and Who Really Runs the World ? : The War Between Globalization and Democracy ( 2007 ) . Burnett is a pseudonym for an individual who first garnered security experience while a member of United Kingdom Special Forces . After his military service , he became a writer and pursued postgraduate education in Britain within the field of conspiracy theory . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Thom Burnett begins the encyclopedia by introducing the reader to the contents and concepts in the work . Burnett notes that the German term <unk> means " Conspiracy Myth " , and has value as a descriptive label . " Perhaps the conspiracy world is an updated version of ancient myths , where monsters and the gods of Olympus and Valhalla have been replaced by aliens and the Illuminati of Washington and Buckingham Palace , " writes Burnett . Three hundred and sixty @-@ five conspiracy theories are discussed in the work , the majority of which are political in nature . It contains many pictures to illustrate the points it makes . Topics discussed include the moon landing conspiracy theories , the Bilderberg Group , the Illuminati , the Warren Commission and the Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories , the views of David Icke , and <unk> . The encyclopedia has a section on assassinations , and those discussed include the deaths of Kenneth Bigley in 2004 , Danny <unk> in 1991 , John F. Kennedy in 1963 , and Tutankhamun in 1323 BC . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Bookseller called the book " the first comprehensive encyclopedia of its kind " . In a review of the encyclopedia for The Guardian , Andrew Mueller called it a " beautifully @-@ produced tome " and commented that the work " succeeds , as was probably intentional , in offering some fascinating tours of the byways of history and providing a tantalising alternative universe in which much of what you know may not be what it seems " . John Cooper reviewed the encyclopedia for The Times , and described it as " an entertaining compilation of ideas ranging from who was the ' real William Shakespeare ' to the BCCI case and al @-@ Qaeda " . Cooper noted , " The most fascinating section relates to ' Assassinations ' ... an unusual fairytale book for Christmas . " Martin Samuel gave a more critical review of the encyclopedia for The Times , commenting , " For all the encyclopedia 's pretence at sifting the evidence in search of a verdict , if the truth is out there , the authors are damned if they can find it . " 
 Conspiracy Encyclopedia was listed as required reading in a 2008 course on conspiracy at Harvard University . Writing in Conspiracy Theories & Secret Societies For Dummies , authors Christopher Hodapp and Alice Von Kannon comment that Burnett asserts " the spirit of our times has had the crap kicked out of it by global domination " . The encyclopedia is recommended for further reading by David Southwell and Sean Twist in their book Unsolved Political Mysteries . Writing for The Star , James Mitchell observed , " There 's a huge amount packed in here , simply presented . " Mitchell concluded , " Read the Conspiracy Encyclopedia , and you 'll either have your worst fears confirmed that there 's a grand , unified conspiracy affecting everything ... or less exciting , that most of the time , vanilla rules : What you see is what you get ! " 
 = Agapemonites = 
 The Agapemonites or Community of The Son of Man was a Christian religious group or sect that existed in England from 1846 to 1956 . It was named from the Greek : Agapemone meaning " Abode of Love " . The Agapemone community was founded by the Reverend Henry Prince in Spaxton , Somerset . The sect also built a church in Upper Clapton , London , and briefly had bases in Stoke @-@ by @-@ Clare in Suffolk , Brighton and Weymouth . 
 The ideas of the community were based on the theories of various German religious mystics and its primary object was the <unk> of the matrimonial state . The Church of England had dismissed Prince earlier in his career for his radical teachings . The Agapemonites predicted the imminent return of Jesus Christ . According to newspaper accounts Prince 's successor , John Hugh Smyth @-@ Pigott , declared himself Jesus Christ reincarnate . 
 The Agapemone community consisted mostly of wealthy , unmarried women . Both Prince and Smyth @-@ Pigott took many spiritual brides . Later investigations have shown that these " brides " were not solely spiritual , and some produced illegitimate children . In 1860 Prince lost a lawsuit brought on behalf of Louisa Nottidge by the Nottidge family , and the group vanished from the public eye . It finally closed in 1956 when the last member , sister Ruth , died . 
 = = Henry James Prince = = 
 The Reverend Henry James Prince ( 1811 – 99 ) studied medicine at Guy 's Hospital , obtained his qualifications in 1832 and was appointed medical officer to the General Hospital in Bath , his native city . Compelled by ill health to abandon his profession , he entered himself in 1837 as a student at St David 's College , Lampeter ( now the Lampeter campus of the University of Wales Trinity Saint David ) , where he gathered about him a band of earnest religious enthusiasts , known as the Lampeter Brethren . The vice principal of the college contacted the Bishop of Bath and Wells who , in 1846 , installed Prince as the curate of <unk> in Somerset , where he had sole charge during the illness and absence of the rector , the Reverend Samuel Starkey . 
 Attendances at the church were small until , during one of the services , Prince acted as if he was possessed , throwing himself around the church . Congregations grew each week as the " possession " was repeated . The congregation were then divided with separate services for men and women . Subsequently he separated them again into sinners and the righteous , which generally included females who were wealthy . The Bishop was summoned to investigate the practices . By that time Prince had contracted his first “ spiritual marriage ” , and had persuaded himself that he had been absorbed into the personality of God and had become a visible embodiment of the Holy Spirit . During his illness Starkey read one of his curate 's sermons , and was not only “ cured ” forthwith , but embraced his strange doctrines . Together they procured many conversions in the countryside and the neighbouring towns . In the end the rector was deprived of his living and Prince was defrocked . Together with a few disciples they started the <unk> Free Church , which had a very brief existence , meeting in a supportive farmer 's barn . 
 Prince used money inherited on the death of his first wife , Martha , to marry Julia Starkey the sister of the rector . They all moved to Stoke @-@ by @-@ Clare in Suffolk where Prince started again to build up a congregation , which grew over the subsequent one to two years . The Bishop of Ely then expelled them . Prince opened Adullam Chapel , which was also known as Cave Adullam , in the North Laine area of Brighton . Meanwhile Starkey established himself at Weymouth . Their chief success lay in the latter town , and Prince soon moved there . 
 = = Followers = = 
 A number of followers , estimated by Prince at 500 , but by his critics at one fifth of the number , were got together , and it was given out by “ Beloved ” or “ The Lamb ” ( the names by which the Agapemonites designated their leader ) that his disciples must divest themselves of their possessions and throw them into the common stock . This was done , even by the poor , all of whom looked forward to the speedy end of the present dispensation , and were content , for the short remainder of this world , to live in common , and , while not repudiating earthly ties , to treat them as purely spiritual . With the money thus obtained the house at Spaxton that was to become the “ Abode of Love ” was enlarged and furnished luxuriously , and the three Nottidge sisters , who contributed £ 6 @,@ 000 each , were immediately married to three of Prince 's nearest disciples . Agnes , the eldest of the Nottidge sisters , objected to the spiritual marriage which entailed a celibate life and , as one writer reports , became pregnant by another member of the community ; however , it is unlikely that she committed adultery because her husband never accused her , and she later gained sole custody of their child in 1850 , after proving herself of good moral character before a court . Agnes wrote to her younger sister Louisa warning her not to come to Spaxton . Despite this Louisa travelled to Somerset to join them . Her mother Emily feared the spiritual and financial influence that Prince had established over her daughters . Emily instructed her son Edmund , her nephew Edward Nottidge , and her son @-@ in @-@ law , Frederick Ripley , to travel down to Somerset and to rescue her unmarried daughter , Louisa after her arrival . The three men succeeded in removing Louisa against her will in November 1846 , and imprisoned her in 12 Woburn Place , a villa by Regents Park . 
 Following Louisa 's persistent claims regarding the divinity of Henry Prince , her mother enlisted medical aid and had Louisa certified insane , and then placed her in <unk> House Asylum , Hillingdon . Her treatment and forced incarceration in the asylum has remained of interest with respect to the rights of psychiatric patients ; Dr Arthur Stillwell , the presiding physician , made notes on Louisa 's condition and treatment , recorded in The Lancet . Louisa escaped from the asylum in January 1848 , travelling across London to meet the Reverend William Cobbe from The Agapemone at a hotel in Cavendish Square , but was recaptured two days later at Paddington railway station . Cobbe alerted the Commissioners in Lunacy , whose report by Bryan Procter led to her release in May 1848 . Louisa then sued her brother , cousin and brother @-@ in @-@ law , Frederick Ripley , for abduction and false imprisonment in Nottidge v. Ripley and Another ( 1849 ) ; the trial was reported daily in The Times newspaper . In 1860 Louisa 's brother , Ralph Nottidge , sued Prince to recoup the money that Louisa had given him as a result of his undue influence over her , in the case of Nottidge v. Prince ( 1860 ) . The <unk> won the case , with costs . After the cases were resolved Louisa Nottidge returned to Spaxton and spent the rest of her life as one of the Agapemonites . 
 In 1856 , a few years after the establishment of the “ Abode of Love ” , Prince and Zoe Patterson , one of his virginal female followers , engaged in public ceremonial sexual intercourse on a billiard table in front of a large audience . The scandal led to the secession of some of his most faithful friends , who were unable any longer to endure what they regarded as the amazing mixture of blasphemy and immorality offered for their acceptance . 
 The most prominent of those who remained received such titles as the “ Anointed Ones ” , the “ Angel of the Last Trumpet ” , the “ Seven Witnesses ” and so forth . 
 = = Spaxton = = 
 Extensive building work was undertaken to accommodate members and followers at Four Forks in Spaxton , to which Prince and his followers moved in the summer of 1846 . Behind 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) high walls were built a 20 @-@ bedroom house and attached chapel , as well as a gazebo , stables , and cottages , all set within landscaped gardens . The buildings were designed by William Cobbe . The buttressed chapel , with its pinnacles and stained glass , was completed in 1845 ; today , together with the attached house , it is a Grade II listed building . 
 Prince died in 1899 aged 88 . His followers buried Prince in the grounds of the chapel , with his coffin positioned vertically so that he would be standing on the day of his resurrection . 
 In the early 20th century several houses ( some in the Arts and Crafts style ) were built at Four Forks by members of the Agapemonites including Joseph Morris and his daughter Violet . 
 Since closure of the community , the chapel has been used as a studio for the production of children 's television programmes , including Trumpton and Camberwick Green . The complex of buildings became known as Barford Gables and was put on the market in 1997 . The chapel received planning permission for conversion into a residential house and was put on the market again in 2004 . 
 = = Upper Clapton = = 
 Between 1892 and 1895 the Agapemonites built the Church of the Good Shepherd in Upper Clapton , London . It was designed by Joseph Morris in a Gothic style . Although it is fairly conventional in floor plan , the outside of the church is a riot of statuary and symbolism . The main doorways sport large carvings of angels and the four evangelists symbolised by a man , an eagle , a bull and a lion . The same four figures , cast in bronze , look out over the four quarters of the Earth from the base of the steeple . The two flanking weather vanes show a certain symbolic debt to William Blake 's Jerusalem depicting , as they do , a fiery chariot and a sheaf of arrows ( presumably of desire ) , while the main steeple is clearly surmounted by a spear . The stained glass windows , designed by noted children 's book illustrator Walter Crane , and made by J S Sparrow , betray the unconventional nature of the sect as they illustrate the ' true station of womankind ' . The church was abandoned after 1956 and now is used by the Georgian Orthodox Church . 
 = = John Hugh Smyth @-@ Pigott = = 
 After Prince died in 1899 he was replaced by Reverend John Hugh Smyth @-@ Pigott . Around 1890 Smyth @-@ Pigott started leading meetings of the community again and recruited 50 young female followers to supplement the ageing population of Agapemonites . He took Ruth Anne Preece as his second wife and she had three children named Glory , Power and Hallelujah . By 1902 his fame had spread as far as India , from where Mirza Ghulam Ahmad warned him of his false teachings and predicted his miserable end . 
 The house which may have belonged to Smyth @-@ Pigott in St John 's Wood was visited by John Betjeman in his film Metro @-@ land . It is built in the neo @-@ gothic style . It is currently the home of the television presenter Vanessa <unk> and was previously the home of Charles Saatchi . 
 Smyth @-@ Pigott died in 1927 and the sect gradually declined until the last member , sister Ruth , died in 1956 . Her funeral in 1956 was the only time when outsiders were admitted to the chapel . 
 = = Books about the sect = = 
 The Abode of Love by Aubrey Menen – " an appallingly inaccurate popular account " according to one review – is a novelisation of the history of the Agapemonites under Prince 's leadership . 
 In 2006 Smyth @-@ Pigott 's granddaughter , Kate Barlow , published an account of life as a child with her family in the sect . The book includes family photographs and details of conversations she had as a child with the then elderly sect members . 
 = Kanhopatra = 
 Kanhopatra ( or <unk> ) was a 15th @-@ century Marathi saint @-@ poet , venerated by the Varkari sect of Hinduism . 
 Little is known about Kanhopatra . According to most traditional accounts , Kanhopatra was a courtesan and dancing @-@ girl . These accounts typically concentrate on her death when she chose to surrender to the Hindu god Vithoba — the patron god of the Varkaris — rather than becoming a concubine of the Badshah ( king ) of Bidar . She died in the central shrine of Vithoba in Pandharpur . She is the only person whose samadhi ( mausoleum ) is within the precincts of the temple . 
 Kanhopatra wrote Marathi ovi and abhanga poetry telling of her devotion to Vithoba and her struggle to balance her piety with her profession . In her poetry , she implores Vithoba to be her saviour and release her from the clutches of her profession . About thirty of her abhangas have survived , and continue to be sung today . She is the only female Varkari saint to have attained sainthood based solely on her devotion , without the support of any guru , male Varkari saint , or <unk> ( tradition or lineage ) . 
 = = Life = = 
 Kanhopatra 's history is known through stories passed down over centuries , making it hard to separate fact and fiction . Most accounts agree about her birth to Shama the courtesan and her death in the Vithoba temple when the Badshah of Bidar sought her . However , the characters of Sadashiva Malagujar ( her alleged father ) and Hausa the maid do not appear in all accounts . 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Kanhopatra was a daughter of a rich prostitute and courtesan named Shama or Shyama , who lived in the town of <unk> , near Pandharpur , the site of Vithoba 's chief temple . Apart from Kanhopatra , <unk> is also the birthplace of the Varkari saints Chokhamela and <unk> . Shama was uncertain about the identity of Kanhopatra 's father , but suspected that it was the town 's head @-@ man Sadashiva Malagujar . Kanhopatra spent her childhood in the palatial house of her mother , served by several maids , but because of her mother 's profession , Kanhopatra 's social status was <unk> low . 
 Kanhopatra was trained in dance and song from early childhood so that she could join her mother 's profession . She became a talented dancer and singer . Her beauty was compared to the apsara ( heavenly nymph ) Menaka . Shama suggested that Kanhopatra should visit the Badshah ( Muslim king ) , who will adore her beauty and gift her money and jewelry , but Kanhopatra flatly refused . Traditional tales narrate that Shama wanted Kanhopatra to marry , but Kanhopatra longed to marry a man who was more beautiful than her . Scholar Tara <unk> states that Kanhopatra 's marriage was forbidden , as it was not socially acceptable for a daughter of a courtesan to marry . 
 Most accounts declare that Kanhopatra was forced into the courtesan 's life , though she detested it , while some say that Kanhopatra firmly declined to become a courtesan . Some authors believe that she may have also worked as a prostitute . 
 = = = Path to devotion = = = 
 Sadashiva Malagujar , Kanhopatra 's supposed father , heard of Kanhopatra 's beauty and wished to see her dance , but Kanhopatra refused . Accordingly Sadashiva started to harass Kanhopatra and Shama . Shama tried to convince him that he was the father of Kanhopatra and thus should spare them , but Sadashiva did not believe her . As he continued his harassment , Shama 's wealth slowly depleted . Eventually , Shama apologised to Sadashiva and offered to present Kanhopatra to him . Kanhopatra , however , fled to Pandharpur disguised as a maid , with the help of her aged maid Hausa . 
 In some legends , Hausa — described as a Varkari — is credited for Kanhopatra 's journey to devotion . Other accounts credit the Varkari pilgrims who passed Kanhopatra 's house on their way to the temple of Vithoba in Pandharpur . According to one story , for example , she asked a passing Varkari about Vithoba . The Varkari said that Vithoba is " generous , wise , beautiful and perfect " , his glory is beyond description and his beauty surpasses that of Lakshmi , the goddess of beauty . Kanhopatra further asked if Vithoba would accept her as a devotee . The Varkari assured her that Vithoba would accept her as he accepted the maid <unk> , the sinful king <unk> and the so @-@ called " untouchable " saint Chokhamela . This assurance strengthened her resolve to go to Pandharpur . In versions of the legend where Sadashiva does not appear , Kanhopatra immediately leaves for Pandharpur — singing the praises of Vithoba — with the Varkari pilgrims or coaxes her mother to accompany her to Pandharpur . 
 When Kanhopatra first saw the Vithoba image of Pandharpur , she sang in an abhanga that her spiritual merit was fulfilled and she was blessed to have seen Vithoba 's feet . She had found the unparalleled beauty she sought in her groom in Vithoba . She " wedded " herself to the god and settled in Pandharpur . She withdrew from society . Kanhopatra moved into a hut in Pandharpur with Hausa and lived an ascetic 's life . She sang and danced at the Vithoba temple , and cleaned it twice a day . She gained the respect of the people , who believed her to be a poor farmer 's daughter maddened by the love of Vithoba . In this period , Kanhopatra composed ovi poems dedicated to Vithoba . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 During this same time , however , Sadashiva — who felt insulted by Kanhopatra 's refusal — sought the help of the Badshah ( king ) of Bidar . Hearing tales of Kanhopatra 's beauty , the Badshah ordered her to be his concubine . When she refused , the king sent his men to get her by force . Kanhopatra took refuge in the Vithoba temple . The soldiers of the king besieged the temple and threatened to destroy it if Kanhopatra was not handed over to them . Kanhopatra requested a last meeting with Vithoba before being taken . 
 By all accounts , Kanhopatra then died at the feet of the Vithoba image , but the circumstances were unclear . According to popular tradition , Kanhopatra merged with the image of Vithoba in a form of marriage — something that Kanhopatra longed for . Other theories suggest that she killed herself , or that she was killed for her rebelliousness . 
 Most accounts say that Kanhopatra 's body was laid at feet of Vithoba and then buried near the southern part of the temple , in accordance with her last wishes . In some accounts , the nearby Bhima river ( <unk> ) flooded , inundating the temple and killing the army that sought Kanhopatra . The next day , her body was found near a rock . According to all versions of the legend , a <unk> tree — which is worshipped by pilgrims in her remembrance — arose on the spot where Kanhopatra was buried . Kanhopatra is the only person whose samadhi ( mausoleum ) is in the precincts of the Vithoba temple . 
 = = = Dating = = = 
 Several historians have attempted to establish the dates of Kanhopatra 's life and death . One estimate places her life circa 1428 CE by relating her to a Bahamani king of Bidar who is often associated with the Kanhopatra story — although in most accounts , that king is never explicitly named . Pawar estimates that she died in 1480 . Others suggest dates of 1448 , 1468 or 1470 , or simply say that she lived in the 15th century — or in rare instances , the 13th or 16th century . According to Zelliot , she was a contemporary of saint @-@ poets Chokhamela ( 14th century ) and <unk> ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . 
 = = Literary works and teachings = = 
 Kanhopatra is believed to have composed many abhangas , but most were not in written form : only thirty of her abhangas or <unk> survive today . Twenty @-@ three verses of her poems are included in the anthology of Varkari saints called <unk> sant @-@ <unk> . Most of these verses are autobiographical , with an element of pathos . Her style is described as unadorned by poetic devices , easy to understand , and with a simplicity of expression . According to Deshpande , Kanhopatra 's poetry reflects the " awakening of the downtrodden " and the rise of female creative expression , ignited by the sense of gender equality enforced by the Varkari tradition . 
 Kanhopatra 's abhangas frequently portray her struggle between her profession and her devotion to Vithoba , the patron deity of the Varkaris . She presents herself as a woman deeply devoted to Vithoba , and pleads for him to save her from the unbearable bondage of her profession . Kanhopatra speaks of her humiliation and her banishment from society owing to her profession and social stature . She expresses disgust for the society which adored her as an object of beauty rather than as a human being , and abhorred her for profession . She describes how she has been the object of lustful thoughts . She worries that she was beyond the " scope of God 's love " . In Nako Devaraya Anta Aata — believed to be the last abhanga of her life — unable to bear the thought of separation from her Lord , Kanhopatra begs Vithoba to end her misery . In the abhanga <unk> tu <unk> , she acknowledges her Lord as the saviour of the fallen and asks him to save her as well : 
 Kanhopatra refers to Vithoba by names such as Narayana ( a name of Vishnu , who is identified with Vithoba ) , Krishna ( an incarnation of Vishnu , identified with Vithoba ) , <unk> ( " husband of goddess Sri , " an epithet of Vishnu ) and Manmatha ( a name of Kamadeva , the god of love , used by Vaishnava saints to describe Vishnu ) . She refers to Krishna @-@ Vithoba as the " champion of the low " , and as a mother . Kanhopatra also asserts the importance of repeating the names of God and reveals how chanting His names has helped her . She says that even Death would fear God 's name , which purified the sinner king <unk> – who ascended to heaven when he <unk> called to God at his death bed , the " robber " Valmiki – who was transformed into a great sage by utterance of God 's name – and even the prostitute Pingala . Kanhopatra says , she wears the garland of His names . She hoped that her chanting would ultimately lead her to salvation . Kanhopatra also extols the deeds of Dnyaneshwar — the first great saint of the Varkaris — and his siblings . 
 Kanhopatra 's abhangas also show her concern for her body , her sense of vulnerability and her will to " remain untouched in the midst of turbulence " . She compares herself to food being devoured by wild animals – an expression never used by male saints : 
 According to Ranade , this abhanga was composed by Kanhopatra when invited by the Bidar king . 
 Kanhopatra advises against seeking mere sexual pleasure ; she speaks of the evils of sexual attraction , citing mythological characters who suffered the consequences of sexual temptation : the demon @-@ king Ravana , the demon Bhasmasura , the god @-@ king of heaven Indra and the moon @-@ god Chandra . 
 = = Legacy and remembrance = = 
 Kanhopatra is formally included in the list of Sants , meaning saints in Marathi in the text Bhaktavijaya . Mahipati ( 1715 – 1790 ) , a traditional biographer of Marathi saints , devotes an entire chapter to her in his Bhaktavijaya extolling her devotion to Vithoba . In his <unk> Mahipati refers to Kanhopatra as one of the saints who sit surrounding Krishna ( identified with Vithoba in Maharashtra ) . Kanhopatra is cited by the <unk> saint @-@ poets as " an example of the real downtrodden and deserving people persons that are saved by the merciful God " . In one of his abhangas , the Varkari saint and poet Tukaram ( 1577 – c.1650 ) uses the example of Kanhopatra and other famous saints who were low in the social caste hierarchy , to illustrate that caste is irrelevant when compared with devotion and merit . Her death and her surrender to Vithoba is regarded as a " great legacy of self respect combined with spiritualism . " Kanhopatra is considered unique since she is the only prominent woman in Maharashtra who rose to fame without a traditional family backing . She was born in a household where devotion was unthinkable . She is the only woman Varkari saint , who is not associated with any male Varkari saint , who has no guru , nor any <unk> ( tradition or lineage ) . She is credited to have attained sainthood exclusively on the basis of her intense devotion to Vithoba , a devotion reflected in her abhangas . 
 Kanhopatra 's life has been recounted in a 1937 Marathi film Kanhopatra written and directed by <unk> <unk> . She was also the subject of the popular 1931 Marathi drama named Sant Kanhopatra , in which Bal Gandharva played the lead . Kanhopatra 's abhangas Aga <unk> Raya and <unk> tu <unk> ; and Nako Devaraya Anta Aata are used in that drama and in the 1963 Marathi film <unk> Manase respectively . A 2014 short film Katha Sant Kanhopatra by <unk> video featured Pallavi Subhash as Kanhopatra . 
 Kanhopatra 's abhangas are still sung in concerts and on radio , and by Varkaris on their annual pilgrimage to Pandharpur . The tree that rose at her burial spot in the Pandharpur temple is worshipped as her samadhi by devotees even today . A small shrine is also dedicated to her in her home town <unk> . 
 = Fire Emblem Awakening = 
 Fire Emblem Awakening ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> : Kakusei ) is a tactical role @-@ playing video game , developed by Intelligent Systems and Nintendo SPD and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo 3DS handheld video game console on April 2012 in Japan , and April 2013 outside Japan . It is the thirteenth game in the Fire Emblem series , and the first to be developed for the Nintendo 3DS . The gameplay , like previous Fire Emblem games , focuses on tactical movement of characters across a battlefield fighting enemy units . Other features include the ability to build relationships between the characters to improve their abilities , adjustable difficulty levels , a mode that disables the permanent death of characters , and multiple camera perspectives in battle . 
 The story is set on the continents of Archanea from the original Fire Emblem and Valentia from Fire Emblem Gaiden , focusing on a group of soldiers from the kingdom of Ylisse . The player controls a customized Avatar suffering from amnesia . The Avatar is taken in by Chrom , the prince of Ylisse , and his personal army . Over the course of the story , the Avatar aids Chrom 's army in defending Ylisse from monsters called the Risen , and attacks from the hostile nation of Plegia . 
 Development of Fire Emblem Awakening began in 2010 , with multiple veterans of the Fire Emblem series filling key development roles . Development was handled by Intelligent Systems with supervision from Nintendo . As the series had seen declining sales with previous installments , Awakening was designed as the possible last entry in the series , with elements from all previous Fire Emblem games incorporated . Due to the 3DS still being fine tuned by developers , the team 's decisions for content and graphics were made based on what they thought was feasible for what they had available to them . However , some gameplay options and proposals were met with mixed feelings , such as the option to disable permanent character death , a staple to the Fire Emblem franchise . 
 Upon release , the game received universal critical acclaim and achieved strong sales worldwide , with many critics praising the new additions to the traditional gameplay , and accessibility to newcomers of the series . After release , the game was nominated for multiple awards from video game publications , often being cited as one of the best games on the 3DS platform , and is also credited with boosting sales for the 3DS . Awakening 's commercial success ensured the continuation of the series . A new game by the same development team , Fire Emblem Fates , was released in Japan in June 2015 , and in Western territories in 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Fire Emblem Awakening , the player begins the game as one of the central characters , a customizable <unk> Avatar : the Avatar 's gender , hair color , feature types , and voice can all be customized . There are two modes of play : Casual Mode and Classic Mode . In Classic mode , characters defeated in battle are permanently dead , unable to be used for the rest of the game . Casual Mode enables the player to disable permanent character deaths . With permanent death disabled , fallen units are restored after the completion of the level . Should Chrom or the Avatar die in battle in any mode , the player receives a " Game Over " message and must restart the battle . The game has multiple difficulty levels : the three standard modes are Normal , Hard and Lunatic . A fourth difficulty level , Lunatic + , is unlocked after completing the game on Lunatic mode . The playing mode and difficulty level are selected at the beginning of a new game . 
 After the player is given access to a party of characters , they can travel across a world map both to new locations and revisit old locations . The time of day on the world map is synced to the player 's time zone and time of day . New locations can contain main story missions as well as side stories where new characters can be recruited . Previously visited locations have shops where the player can acquire new weapons . They also can contain random enemy skirmishes . Between missions , players can go to a customizable central base called the Barracks , where the player can watch scenes between characters and perform other activities . The player can recruit approximately forty characters , not including characters included in downloadable content . The game features multiple uses of the Nintendo 3DS @-@ exclusive <unk> and StreetPass functions via the world map . During navigation , the player can encounter other players and interact via StreetPass . The player can do battle with a party of up to ten characters from another player 's world . Whichever player wins the battle gains access to the party . Avatars can also be either befriended or defeated in battle , and loaned out to other players using this function . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 Awakening uses a turn @-@ based tactical role @-@ playing battle system . The terrain is displayed on the top screen of the 3DS , while unit information is displayed on the bottom screen . Before each battle , the player selects a limited number of characters from their roster for use in battle . The player can either control each unit manually or activate an auto @-@ battle option . Character movement is dictated by a tile @-@ based movement system . During combat , player @-@ controlled sprite characters and enemy units controlled by the game 's artificial intelligence ( AI ) each get one turn where they position their units . An additional turn is added when unaffiliated AI @-@ controlled units are in the field . Playable characters positioned next to each other in the field will support one @-@ another , granting buffs , and performing actions such as blocking attacks . Two characters can also pair up as a single mobile unit , enabling both units to attack at once . As the relationship between characters strengthens , they gain greater bonuses to their strength and effectiveness when paired up in battle . During combat , the perspective switched to a 3D scene between combatants . Optional camera angles , including a first @-@ person view through the eyes of playable characters , can be activated using the 3DS stylus . 
 During battles , characters earn experience points ( XP ) through successful actions during battle . When the character has reached 100 XP , their level is raised by one , increasing various stats including health and attack power . New skills are also learned by each character . The game includes a character class system , with approximately forty classes available . Each character , including the Avatar , has a starting class . When a unit reaches Level 10 , they can either upgrade or change their classes using special items called Master Seals and Second Seals . A Master Seal promotes the character 's class , improving character stats and giving access to new ability sets or weapons . A Second Seal allows a character to change class , or " reclass " , when they are either at Level 10 or have reached their current Advanced Class . Upon <unk> , a character 's experience level is reset to Level 1 while their stats and abilities are retained . The classes that most characters can reclass into are limited . The exception to this is the Avatar , who is able to reclass into any class available to their gender . Regardless of future changes , characters retain learned skills from earlier classes . A character 's class affects both their attack capabilities and their mobility on the battlefield : for example , mages and archers can attack at greater ranges than melee units , mounted units have more powerful attacks than foot units , while flying units have greater mobility and range . 
 Relationships between characters are built up through Support conversations between chapters . The normal rankings of relationships are C to A , with A standing for a close friendship . For characters of opposing genders , an additional S ranking is available , in which the characters fall in love , marry and have children . Relationships also have a direct impact during battles , with certain character pairings granting positive effects such as increased mobility or an automatic guarding action . A couple 's children can be found and recruited in optional chapters made available by the parent characters ' marriage , with their appearance and in @-@ game abilities varying depending on who their parents were . Most characters have a specific list of units which they can have Support conversations with ; the Avatar can build a relationship with all characters , and ( depending on their chosen gender ) marry any unit from any generation as long as they are not a direct descendant . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 The game takes place approximately 1000 years after the events of Fire Emblem : Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light . In ancient times , the Fell Dragon Grima attempted to destroy the world . To stop Grima , the Divine Dragon Naga chose the ruler of the <unk> of Ylisse ( known as the Exalt ) and granted them power through two magical objects : <unk> , a sword with the power to slay dragons ; and the Fire Emblem , a magical shield . Using these , the Exalt struck down Grima , sending it into a long slumber . In the intervening period , the continents of Archanea and Valentia became known as Ylisse and Valm . 
 By the present time , the land of Ylisse is divided between <unk> of Ylisse , which continues to worship Naga , and is ruled by Exalt Emmeryn and defended by her brother Chrom ; the kingdom of Plegia , which worships Grima ; and <unk> Ferox , a country whose rulers periodically compete for dominance . Fifteen years prior to Awakening , the last Exalt of Ylisse , Emmeryn 's father , waged a religious war against Plegia , which greatly damaged both countries and left bitterness on both sides . Ylisse has slowly recovered from the war thanks to Emmeryn 's peaceful actions . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 After dreaming of killing Chrom , the amnesiac Avatar wakes up in a field and is found by Chrom and members of his personal army , the Shepherds . The Avatar joins the Shepherds , after exhibiting the qualities of a tactician when they defend a nearby town from <unk> bandits . After gaining an alliance with <unk> Ferox , the Shepherds move to fight both Plegia 's forces and revenant monsters called the Risen ; they are helped by a masked woman calling herself " Marth " . After a confrontation between Plegia and the Shepherds , Emmeryn is almost killed by Validar and his minions . The assassination plot is foiled with aid from " Marth " , who has prior knowledge of the event . Soon after , <unk> forces capture Emmeryn as she goes to parley with King Gangrel , Plegia 's ruler , and prevent another war . Gangrel demands the Fire Emblem in exchange for Emmeryn 's life . Though Chrom almost accepts Gangrel 's terms , Emmeryn stops him by throwing herself over a cliff , becoming a martyr to both Ylisse and Plegia . Eventually , the Shepherds triumph over Plegia , defeating Gangrel and restoring peace to Archanea . 
 Two years after Gangrel 's defeat , Chrom inherits the throne of Ylisse , marries , and fathers a newborn daughter named Lucina . Chrom leads the Shepherds again when Emperor <unk> of Valm threatens to invade Archanea . During the campaign , " Marth " returns , and reveals that she is Lucina from an alternate timeline from more than 10 years in the future , where Grima has been resurrected . Lucina used a time traveling spell devised by Naga to return to the past and prevent the events leading to her future . To combat Grima , Chrom must perform the " Awakening " , a ritual that grants him Naga 's power , by combining the Fire Emblem with five magical gems divided among the nations . During and after the war in Valm , the Shepherds manage to retrieve four of the gemstones . They are then ambushed by Validar , the new king of Plegia and the Avatar 's father , after he offers them the last gemstone . Validar takes control of the Avatar and steals the Fire Emblem from Chrom . He also reveals that the Avatar was born as the ideal vessel for Grima . Lucina realizes that Grima used the Avatar to kill Chrom in her timeline , and attempts to execute them ; Chrom forces her to stand down , remaining confident the Avatar can overcome Grima 's control . The Shepherds manage to track down Validar , who uses the Avatar to attack Chrom , mirroring the events of their nightmare . However , the Avatar uses their foreknowledge to prevent Chrom 's death , allowing the Shepherds to kill Validar and recover the Fire Emblem . 
 At this point , the possessed Avatar from Lucina 's future appears , revealing that the present timeline Avatar 's amnesia was caused by Grima 's unsuccessful attempt to possess them . The future Avatar then uses the power gathered for Grima 's resurrection to restore its dragon form . In a race against time , Chrom performs the Awakening and summons Naga . Although Chrom now has the power to stop Grima , Naga reveals that she only has enough power to put Grima to sleep for another thousand years . Naga explains that the only way to truly destroy Grima is to have him destroy himself through the Avatar , which could come at cost of the Avatar 's life . Naga tells them that the Avatar will only survive if their bonds with Chrom and the Shepherds are strong enough . In the final battle , the Shepherds manage to weaken Grima . Chrom , already set against the sacrifice of the Avatar , offers to deliver the final blow to the fell dragon . Depending on the player 's final choice , the game will reach one of two different endings . If the player lets Chrom deal the final blow , Grima is put back to sleep for another thousand years , though the Avatar is left with regrets . If the player stops Chrom from dealing the final blow , the Avatar will kill Grima , causing both to vanish . Chrom and the Shepherds refuse to believe that the Avatar is dead , and vow to find them and bring them home . In a post @-@ credits scene , the Avatar wakes up in a field similar to the beginning of the game , where Chrom and Lissa find them and welcome them home . 
 = = Development = = 
 The original planning for Fire Emblem Awakening began in 2010 , when Nintendo SPD director Genki Yokota was finishing his work on Xenoblade Chronicles . The game was co @-@ developed by Nintendo and regular Fire Emblem developer Intelligent Systems . Among the staff members were veterans of the Fire Emblem series , including project manager Masahiro Higuchi , who had first worked on Fire Emblem : Genealogy of the Holy War , and Intelligent Systems producer Kouhei Maeda , who first worked as a scenario writer for Fire Emblem : The Binding Blade . The first proposals were made after the completion of Fire Emblem : New Mystery of the Emblem , a remake for the Nintendo DS of the third game . Development was very slow for the first year , during which time producer Hitoshi Yamagami organized the game 's development structure . Once this was completed , he handed the main production duties over to co @-@ director Genki Yokota . The art director was Toshiyuki Kusakihara . Character designs were done by Kusakihara and Yūsuke Kozaki . Kusakihara was brought on board to offer a fresh perspective on the Fire Emblem series and new ideas for the team , while Kozaki was brought in to help create a distinctive art style that would be well received overseas , as had his previous work for the Wii title No More Heroes . During development , Kusakihara and Kozaki had lengthy meetings about various aspects of the game . These meetings became so time @-@ consuming that Kusakihara compared his situation to the legend of Urashima Tarō . 
 Due to declining sales for the series , the developers were told by Nintendo that Awakening would be the last Fire Emblem game if it failed to sell above 250 @,@ 000 units . This caused panic for the team , with them considering including a high number of elements new to the game . Among the concepts were a modern @-@ day setting or using the planet Mars as a setting . Eventually , the team decided that these elements would alienate rather than attract players and stuck to the medieval setting and style of previous Fire Emblem titles . As a compromise , the team decided to make it the " culmination " of all the games in Fire Emblem series to that point , incorporating gameplay elements from multiple titles . This approach was approved by the team and the proposal was completed within a month , though the decision also created difficulties with choosing which elements to include , and how to balance them so they did not clash with one another . The game 's final title , " Awakening " , was born from this concept of an ultimate Fire Emblem game . It was initially just casually suggested by Yamagami when discussing ideas for a title with Yokota , and Yokota liked it . As development progressed , the team continued to come up with ideas that increased workload , but they maintained a positive attitude and pushed forward in spite of the consequent pressures . Internally , the game was known as Fire Emblem Fin : The Children from the Brink . 
 Maeda was mainly responsible for the original scenario , thinking out the rough outline before the team created the events of each chapter in detail . Some plot points , such as the true identity of " Marth " , were planned from an early stage , while many of the other plot twists came about during its development . Many of them were added at the suggestion of team members from both Intelligent Systems and Nintendo . Two key story themes while developing the game were the love for the characters , and the bonds characters developed over the course of the story . The latter theme was expressed in gameplay through the cooperative behavior of adjacent characters . While voice acting was included , it was limited to snappy lines meant to evoke a certain feeling . This was because the team had concerns about the amount of content in the game , which would increase a great deal with full voice acting , and its effect on the pacing . The team also used multiple well @-@ known Japanese voice actors for the characters . Special voice overs and visuals were created for the character " confession " sequences . All the main characters had a personalized back story , and appropriate personalities were chosen for them . The first one to be finalized was the child character Inigo , who was created by character planner Nami <unk> . A large team of writers were employed to create the character dialogue , and a story bible containing the characters ' personality traits was created for the writers to work from . While developing the playable and enemy characters , the team used feedback from fans saying they should name all the characters , including foot soldiers . Wanting to give the impression of every character having their own lives , they created full artwork for all characters . Creating the characters proved to be one of the hardest parts of development . While designing the characters , Kozaki took their backstories into account : for example , the thief character Gaius was drawn with a sack of sweets , as he had a love for them . Kozaki was also responsible for creating the 2D artwork which represented the characters during conversations . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Once Nintendo gave the go @-@ ahead for development , Intelligent Systems formed a small internal development team to handle the project . Awakening was the first Fire Emblem game for the Nintendo 3DS . The platform was as yet unreleased and still undergoing final development . Because of this , the team had a large number of ideas for features to include , but they also only had a limited idea of what the system was capable of . Consequently , they had difficulties deciding how the 2D sprites and 3D environments would interact with each other , and ensuring they did not clip through objects . One notable feature missing from in @-@ game character models was their feet . The original idea was to add a unique and uniform deformation to characters . As the team did not have much knowledge of the platform 's CPU strength , the amount of character bones they could include were intentionally limited . This meant that the bones needed for the operation of ankles and feet were omitted . Later , it was discovered that ankles and feet could be included , but the team decided to leave that for a future game if it came to pass . A different explanation given was that the team wanted players to focus on the top half of characters , so made their heads the largest part of their character models while shrinking their feet . 
 The concept for character graphics on the map underwent changes . Initially , some of the team felt that accurately displaying a character 's equipment and class would be enough , but later it was decided to give them all individual characteristics . They were also able to add more unique character expressions than previous Fire Emblem games , enabling a greater emotional range during scenes of drama . A different element was the environmental effects the team incorporated , such as dust clouds when characters performed actions in battle . For the full @-@ motion cutscenes , the team wanted to create a sense of grandeur and spectacle , using the openings of Taiga drama series as inspiration . Japanese animation company Kamikaze Douga was in charge of supervising the production and art assets of the game 's cutscenes . <unk> animation was handled by Studio Anima . According to team members , their request to Studio Anima was to make the world " come alive " during the full @-@ motion sequences , which were included at crucial moments in the plot . 
 The first part of the game to receive full attention from the team was the gameplay . As a test map , the team used the opening map for Mystery of the Emblem . One of the early options was switching between 16x16 and <unk> pixel characters depending on the camera 's overhead distance . In the end , the team used a hardware @-@ based scaling system instead of switching between graphic types so as to keep the frame rate consistent in battle . While designing the levels , the team created both maps with a plot @-@ driven structure and maps that allowed for player freedom . An aspect of the battle system new to the series was the inclusion of an optional first @-@ person viewpoint during battles . This was done with western players in mind , as developers wanted to both give players an option on their perspective in battle and demonstrate the platform 's 3D effects . The difficulty levels proved a point of debate amongst the team , ranging from the naming of difficulties to whether to include the ability to adjust it on the fly , which some felt was contrary to Fire Emblem traditions . There was also debate about both the inclusion and mechanics of the marriage system . While some aspects went smoothly , there was contention about the ability to marry any of the characters , and Kusakihara 's suggestion of having characters kissing at the conclusion of each romance was vetoed by the team . An effort was made to make the interface and graphics easy for players to understand . An example of this was the cursor , which in previous games had been a triangular shape and for Awakening was changed to a pointing hand . One of the more controversial ideas that made it into the final game was the " Casual Mode " , first introduced in New Mystery of the Emblem . Initially opposed by staff members at Nintendo and Intelligent Systems , Yamagami and others successfully defended the feature . Yamagami 's stance was that modern gamers would not be pleased with needing to invest extra time because a character had died . In another interview , team members said that Awakening was the first time the team conformed to the popular image of Nintendo games being easy to play and user @-@ friendly . 
 = = Release = = 
 The game was first announced in September 2011 as part of Nintendo 's 2012 lineup for the 3DS , alongside titles such as Monster Hunter 4 and Bravely Default . As part of its release , Nintendo created a limited edition Nintendo 3DS bundle with Awakening pre @-@ installed . The game 's localization and western release was planned from an early stage , hence the inclusion of multiple aesthetic and gameplay elements meant to appeal to a western audience . The localization process was handled collaboratively by independent video game localization company 8 @-@ 4 and Nintendo of America . The localization process took approximately one year . The game was first announced for release in Europe in February 2012 , with the stated release period being that year . In April of the same year , Nintendo of America registered a web domain for Fire Emblem Awakening . Its North American release was confirmed in June through Nintendo 's Twitter account . The release windows for western regions were announced in December . For its western release , the game included both the English and Japanese voice tracks . Like in Japan , a limited 3DS bundle with Awakening pre @-@ installed was created for North America and Europe , with Europe also receiving the 3DS XL model as part of the bundle . There was some confusion upon its release in North America : on the day of release , while it was available through Nintendo 's online store , multiple online retailers did not have it stocked . While Nintendo was fairly non @-@ committal on the incident , they did state that due to <unk> in shipping , retailers could received stocks on different days . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 Fire Emblem Awakening was the first packaged title released by Nintendo to receive downloadable content ( DLC ) after launch , taking the form of additional maps and characters from previous entries in the Fire Emblem series . The idea for DLC content came up when the game was close to completion . Due to this , the team could not do anything that would invalidate the main story . For the additional playable characters , the team focused on the main cast , picked out the most suitable , and left the final choice to Maeda . Starting from the game 's release , over twenty different playable maps were released over several months at the rate of one map per week . Nintendo decided to release downloadable content for the game in all available regions . After it becomes available , the DLC can be accessed using the game 's <unk> system : within the context of the game 's world , after a certain point in the game , the characters can access an area called the <unk> Gate , being transported to the DLC maps . Various artists have contributed illustrations for the downloadable characters , including those who have worked on previous titles , such as Senri Kita , and newcomers , such as Kimihiko Fujisaka . One of the DLC maps received censorship upon release in North America and Europe , with a shot of a female playable character altered to hide her knickers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Fire Emblem Awakening has received widespread critical acclaim , holding an aggregate score of 92 / 100 on Metacritic , based on 72 reviews . After its release , Awakening was placed on GameSpot 's list of the best games on the 3DS , and reached second place on a similar list by GameTrailers . IGN included the game on two different lists : it reached # 2 on their list of the top 25 Nintendo 3DS games , and # 21 on their list of the top 125 Nintendo games of all time . Slant Magazine 's staff ranked it the eleventh best video game of 2013 . 
 Famitsu said in its review that the game could be enjoyed by hardcore fans and newcomers alike , as it made accommodations for both , and particularly praised the new gameplay features . IGN 's Audrey Drake called Awakening " the most fluid and stunning strategy RPG experience available on a portable , and features the best storytelling and production value of any 3DS game to date . " Jeremy Parish , writing for 1UP.com , said that though the Fire Emblem series had changed little over the years while holding a place of respect within the genre , the changes Intelligent Systems implemented made Awakening " an engrossing title that should enjoy impressive shelf life . " His main criticism was against the enemy AI , which occasionally unbalanced the gameplay . Ray Carsillo of Electronic Gaming Monthly , while sharing Parish 's opinion on the lack of a restart option , called Awakening " probably the best Fire Emblem to come to the States yet . " While Eurogamer 's Rich Stanton , giving the game a perfect score , called it " a special game " , praising its story themes and how it made him care about his characters . 
 GameTrailers said that the game " takes positive strides forward with new additions like enhancements to the social system and battle mechanics , and the series ’ established formula is all the better for it . " Despite feeling mixed about the interface and multiplayer , GameSpot 's Heidi Kemps called Awakening the best installment in the series for some time . Alexa Ray Corriea , writing for Polygon , said that the development team had " added just enough to the time @-@ tested Fire Emblem formula to bolster its challenges without cutting away its roots . " Game Informer 's Kimberley Wallace said that " [ Awakening ] made me scratch and claw for victory , and I savored every moment . " Chris Carter of Destructoid , similar to Famitsu , recommended it to old and new players , saying : " If you 've been itching to get into a Fire Emblem game , this is a great place to start . If you 've been playing them all along , you 'll feel right at home . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Awakening was nominated for multiple awards after release . At the 2012 Famitsu Awards 2012 , Awakening was among the games awarded the magazine 's Excellence Award . In the west , it was nominated in the " Best RPG " category at the Spike Video Game Awards 2013 . It was nominated in multiple categories in Destructoid 's 2013 Game of the Year awards , including Game of the Year , Best Role @-@ Playing Game , Best Story , and Best Soundtrack . It was also nominated for GameSpot 's Game of the Year 2013 in the Nintendo 3DS category . In IGN 's Best of 2013 awards , it won in both the Best 3DS Strategy Game and Best 3DS Story categories . At the Game Developers Choice Awards 2014 , it was nominated in the Best Handheld / Mobile Game category . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The game 's Japanese version sold exceptionally well , with it being the fastest selling entry in the series since detailed weekly tallies began . During its opening week , the game managed to sell 242 @,@ 600 units , reaching the top of the sales charts and beating the debut sales of the previous two Fire Emblem releases . It sold through 81 @.@ 63 % of its initial shipment , causing sell @-@ outs in some stores . Japanese sales tracker Media Create attributed the initial high sales to Nintendo 's promotional campaign . Demand for the limited Japanese bundle also exceeded Nintendo 's expectations , as the pre @-@ order website crashed from the amount of people trying to buy it . As marketing the game as any product other than a limited edition would have violated a Japanese commercial law , Nintendo were unable to reopen the pre @-@ orders after the initial sales period despite complaints . By the beginning of 2013 , the game had sold 455 @,@ 268 units , placing it among the top 30 high @-@ selling titles for 2012 . In addition to the main game , Nintendo reported that 1 @.@ 2 million units of downloadable content had been sold by September 2012 , bringing in an additional 380 million yen ( about $ 4 @.@ 8 million ) . 
 Sales in the west were equally good . During its first month on sale in North America , the game sold 180 @,@ 000 units , with 63 @,@ 000 units of the total sales being eShop downloads . These figures gave Awakening the best ever first month sales for the franchise in North America . Sales of the title continued to rise in the coming months , with the total figure reaching 240 @,@ 000 units by April , including a further 20 @,@ 000 digital sales . By September , total sales in North America had reached 390 @,@ 000 units . In the UK , Awakening debuted in third place on the charts behind Injustice : Gods Among Us and BioShock Infinite . The game and the hardware bundle collectively boosted sales of the 3DS and 3DS XL by nearly 50 % over the previous week . As of December 2014 , the game had sold just over 1 @.@ 9 million copies worldwide , and has become the best @-@ selling Fire Emblem title in the west . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The game 's strong sales , well exceeding the figure set by Nintendo during development , saved the Fire Emblem series from cancellation . In January 2015 , a new Fire Emblem title created for the 3DS by the same team as Awakening , Fire Emblem Fates , was announced for a worldwide release . The success of Awakening has been credited with popularizing the 3DS platform among other Japanese RPG developers , such as Square Enix and Atlus . 
 Awakening 's success has also resulted in characters making appearances in other Nintendo games . Lucina and the Avatar , under their default character name " Robin " and using their default male and female appearance , were featured in the crossover fighting video game Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. Chrom was considered for the game , but was deemed too similar to other Fire Emblem characters in the game , so his appearance was relegated to a small non @-@ playable cameo . Lucina and the Avatar were also made available as playable characters in Code Name : S.T.E.A.M. for those who purchased their Amiibo figures and connected them to the 3DS . Costumes based on Chrom and Lucina are also available in Capcom 's Monster Hunter : Frontier G video game , in a cross @-@ promotion done with Nintendo . During promotion for Fates , a Fire Emblem @-@ themed trading card game was released . A set themed after Awakening includes a code to download Lucina as a playable character in Fates . Chrom & Lucina are both playable units in Project X Zone 2 , and multiple characters from Awakening feature in Tokyo Mirage Sessions ♯ FE , a crossover with the Megami Tensei series . 
 = Background of the Spanish Civil War = 
 The background of the Spanish Civil War dates back to the end of the 19th century , when the owners of large estates , called latifundia , held most of the power in a land @-@ based oligarchy . The landowners ' power was unsuccessfully challenged by the industrial and merchant sectors . In 1868 popular uprisings led to the overthrow of Queen Isabella II of the House of Bourbon . In 1873 Isabella 's replacement , King Amadeo I of the House of Savoy , abdicated due to increasing political pressure , and the short @-@ lived First Spanish Republic was proclaimed . After the restoration of the Bourbons in December 1874 , Carlists and anarchists emerged in opposition to the monarchy . Alejandro Lerroux helped bring republicanism to the fore in Catalonia , where poverty was particularly acute . Growing resentment of conscription and of the military culminated in the Tragic Week in Barcelona in 1909 . After the First World War , the working class , the industrial class , and the military united in hopes of removing the corrupt central government , but were unsuccessful . Fears of communism grew . A military coup brought Miguel Primo de Rivera to power in 1923 , and he ran Spain as a military dictatorship . Support for his regime gradually faded , and he resigned in January 1930 . There was little support for the monarchy in the major cities , and King Alfonso XIII abdicated ; the Second Spanish Republic was formed , whose power would remain until the culmination of the Spanish Civil War . Monarchists would continue to oppose the Republic . 
 The revolutionary committee headed by Niceto Alcalá @-@ Zamora became the provisional government , with Zamora as the President and Head of State . The Republic had broad support from all segments of society ; elections in June 1931 returned a large majority of Republicans and Socialists . With the onset of the Great Depression , the government attempted to assist rural Spain by instituting an eight @-@ hour day and giving tenure to farm workers . Land reform and working conditions remained important issues throughout the lifetime of the Republic . Fascism remained a reactive threat , helped by controversial reforms to the military . In December a new reformist , liberal , and democratic constitution was declared . The constitution secularised the government , and this , coupled with their slowness to respond to a wave of anti @-@ clerical violence prompted committed Catholics become disillusioned with the incumbent coalition government . In October 1931 Manuel Azaña became Prime Minister of a minority government . The Right won the elections of 1933 following an unsuccessful uprising by General José Sanjurjo in August 1932 , who would later lead the coup that started the civil war . 
 Events in the period following November 1933 , called the " black two years " , seemed to make a civil war more likely . Alejandro Lerroux of the Radical Republican Party ( RRP ) formed a government with the support of CEDA and rolled back all major changes made under the previous administration , he also granted amnesty to General José Sanjurjo , who had attempted an unsuccessful coup in 1932 . Some monarchists moved to the Fascist Falange Española to help achieve their aims . In response , the socialist party ( PSOE ) became more extreme , setting up a revolutionary committee and training the socialist youth in <unk> violence occurred in the streets of Spanish cities and militancy continued to increase right up until the start of the civil war , reflecting a movement towards radical upheaval rather than peaceful democratic means as a solution to Spain 's problems . In the last months of 1934 , two government collapses brought members of the Spanish Confederation of the Autonomous Right ( CEDA ) into the government , making it more right @-@ wing . Farm workers ' wages were halved , and the military was purged of republican members and reformed . A Popular Front alliance was organised , which won the 1936 elections . Azaña led a weak minority government , but soon replaced Zamora as president in April . Prime Minister Casares failed to heed warnings of a military conspiracy involving several generals , who decided that the government had to be replaced if the dissolution of Spain was to be prevented . They organised a military coup in July , which started the Spanish Civil War . 
 = = Constitutional monarchy = = 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The 19th century was a turbulent time for Spain . Those in favour of reforming Spain 's government vied for political power with conservatives , who tried to prevent reforms from taking place . Some liberals , in a tradition that had started with the Spanish Constitution of 1812 , sought to limit the power of the monarchy of Spain and to establish a liberal state . The reforms of 1812 did not last after King Ferdinand VII dissolved the Constitution and ended a short @-@ lived liberal government with French royalist military assistance . Twelve successful coups were carried out between 1814 and 1874 . There were several attempts to realign the political system to match social reality . Until the 1850s , the economy of Spain was primarily based on agriculture . There was little development of a bourgeois industrial or commercial class . The land @-@ based oligarchy remained powerful ; a small number of people held large estates ( called latifundia ) as well as all the important government positions . The landowners ' power was challenged by the industrial and merchant sectors , largely unsuccessfully . 
 In 1868 popular uprisings led to the overthrow of Queen Isabella II of the House of Bourbon . Two distinct factors led to the uprisings : a series of urban riots , and a liberal movement within the middle classes and the military ( led by General Joan Prim ) , who were concerned about the ultra @-@ conservatism of the monarchy . In 1873 Isabella 's replacement , King Amadeo I of the House of Savoy , abdicated due to increasing political pressure , and the First Spanish Republic was proclaimed . However , the intellectuals behind the Republic were powerless to prevent a descent into chaos . Uprisings were crushed by the military . The old monarchy returned with the restoration of the Bourbons in December 1874 , as reform was deemed less important than peace and stability . Despite the introduction of universal male suffrage in 1890 , elections were controlled by local political bosses ( caciques ) . 
 The most traditionalist sectors of the political sphere systematically tried to prevent liberal reforms and to sustain the patrilineal monarchy . The Carlists – supporters of Infante Carlos and his descendants – fought to promote Spanish tradition and Catholicism against the liberalism of successive Spanish governments . The Carlists attempted to restore the historic liberties and broad regional autonomy granted to the Basque Country and Catalonia by their <unk> ( regional charters ) . At times they allied with nationalists ( separate from the National Faction during the civil war itself ) , including during the Carlist Wars . 
 Periodically , anarchism became popular among the working class , and was far stronger in Spain than anywhere else in Europe at the time . Anarchists were easily defeated in clashes with government forces . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 In 1897 an Italian anarchist assassinated Prime Minister Antonio Cánovas del Castillo , motivated by a growing number of arrests and the use of torture by the government . The loss of Cuba , Spain 's last valuable colony , in the Spanish – American War of 1898 hit exports from Catalonia hardest ; there were acts of terrorism and actions by agents provocateurs in Barcelona . In the first two decades of the 20th century , the industrial working class grew in number . There was a growing discontent in the Basque country and Catalonia , where much of Spain 's industry was based . They believed that the government favoured agrarianism and therefore failed to represent their interests . The average illiteracy rate was 64 % , with considerable regional variation . Poverty in some areas was great and mass emigration to the New World occurred in the first decade of the century . 
 Spain 's socialist party , the Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party ( Spanish : Partido Socialista Obrero Español , PSOE ) and its associated trade union , the Unión General de Trabajadores ( UGT ) , gained support . The UGT grew from 8 @,@ 000 members in 1908 to 200 @,@ 000 in 1920 . Branch offices ( Casas del pueblo ) of the unions were established in major cities . The UGT was constantly fearful of losing ground to the anarchists . It was respected for its discipline during strikes . However , it was centrist and anti @-@ Catalan , with only 10 @,@ 000 members in Barcelona as late as 1936 . The PSOE and the UGT were based on a simple form of Marxism , one that assumed an inevitable revolution , and were isolationist in character . When the UGT moved their headquarters from Barcelona to Madrid in 1899 , many industrial workers in Catalonia were no longer able to access it . Some elements of the PSOE recognised the need for cooperation with republican parties . 
 In 1912 the Reformist Party was founded , which attracted intellectuals . Figures like its leader , Alejandro Lerroux , helped attract wide support from the working class . His advocacy of anti @-@ clericalism made him a successful demagogue in Barcelona . He argued that the Catholic Church was inseparable from the system of oppression the people were under . It was around this time that republicanism came to the fore . 
 The military was keen to avoid the break @-@ up of the state and was increasingly inward @-@ looking following the loss of Cuba . Regional nationalism , perceived as separatism , was frowned upon . In 1905 the army attacked the headquarters of two satirical magazines in Catalonia believed to be undermining the government . To appease the military , the government outlawed negative comments about the military or Spain itself in the Spanish press . Resentment of the military and of conscription grew with the disastrous Rif War of 1909 in Spanish Morocco . Lerroux 's support of the army 's aims lost him support . Events culminated in the Tragic Week ( Spanish : Semana <unk> ) in Barcelona in 1909 , when working class groups rioted against the call @-@ up of reservists . 48 churches and similar institutions were burned in anti @-@ clerical attacks . The riot was finally ended by the military ; 1 @,@ 725 members of such groups were put on trial , with five people sentenced to death . These events led to the establishment of the National Confederation of Labour ( Spanish : Confederación Nacional del Trabajo , CNT ) , an anarchist @-@ controlled trade union committed to anarcho @-@ syndicalism . It had over a million members by 1923 . 
 Increasing exports during the First World War led to a boom in industry and declining living standards in the industrial areas , particularly Catalonia and the Basque country . There was high inflation . The industrial sector resented its subjugation by the agrarian central government . Along with concerns about antiquated promotion systems and political corruption , the war in Morocco had caused divisions in the military . <unk> became popular , and the working class , industrial class , and the military were united in their hope of removing the corrupt central government . However , these hopes were defeated in 1917 and 1918 when the various political parties representing these groups were either appeased or suppressed by the central government , one by one . The industrialists eventually backed the government as a way to restore order . After the formation of the Communist International in 1919 , there was a growing fear of communism within Spain and growing repression on the part of the government through military means . The PSOE split , with the more left @-@ wing members founding the Communist Party in 1921 . The Restoration government failed to cope with an increasing number of strikes amongst the industrial workers in the north and the agricultural workers in the south . 
 Miguel Primo de Rivera came to power in a military coup in 1923 and ran Spain as a military dictatorship . He handed monopolistic control of trade union power to the UGT , and introduced a sweeping programme of public works . These public works were extremely wasteful , including hydroelectric dams and highways causing the deficit to double between 1925 and 1929 . Spain 's financial situation was made far worse by the pegging of the peseta to the gold standard and by 1931 the peseta had lost nearly half its value . The UGT was brought into the government to set up industrial arbitration boards , though this move was opposed by some in the group and was seen as opportunism by anarchist leaders . He also attempted to defend the agrarian – industrial monarchist coalition formed during the war . No significant reform to the political system ( and in particular the monarchy ) was instituted . This made forming a new government difficult , as existing problems had not been rectified . Gradually , his support faded because his personal approach to political life ensured he was personally held accountable for the government 's failings , and due to an increasing frustration over his interference in economic matters he didn 't understand . José Calvo Sotelo , his finance minister , was one person to withdraw support , and de Rivera resigned in January 1930 . There was little support for a return to the pre @-@ 1923 system , and the monarchy had lost credibility by backing the military government . Dámaso Berenguer was ordered by the king to form a replacement government , but his <unk> dictatorship failed to provide a viable alternative . The choice of Berenguer annoyed another important general , José Sanjurjo , who believed himself to be a better choice . In the municipal elections of 12 April 1931 , little support was shown for pro @-@ monarchy parties in the major cities , and large numbers of people gathered in the streets of Madrid . King Alfonso XIII abdicated to prevent a " fratricidal civil war " . The Second Spanish Republic was formed . 
 = = Second Republic = = 
 The Second Republic was a source of hope to the poorest in Spanish society and a threat to the richest , but had broad support from all segments of society . Niceto Alcalá @-@ Zamora was the first prime minister of the Republic . The wealthier landowners and the middle class accepted the Republic because of the lack of any suitable alternative . Elections to a constituent Cortes in June 1931 returned a large majority of Republicans and Socialists , with the PSOE gaining 116 seats and Lerroux 's Radical Party 94 . Lerroux became foreign minister . The government was controlled by a Republican – Socialist coalition , whose members had differing objectives . Some more conservative members believed that the removal of the monarchy was enough by itself , but the Socialists and leftist Republicans demanded much wider reforms . 
 The state 's financial position was poor . Supporters of the dictatorship attempted to block progress on reforming the economy . The redistribution of wealth supported by the new government seemed a threat to the richest , in light of the recent Wall Street Crash and the onset of the Great Depression . The government attempted to tackle the dire poverty in rural areas by instituting an eight @-@ hour day and giving the security of tenure to farm workers . Landlords complained . The effectiveness of the reforms was dependent on the skill of the local governance , which was often badly lacking . Changes to the military were needed and education reform was another problem facing the Republic . The relationship between central government and the Basque and Catalan regions also needed to be decided . 
 Effective opposition was led by three groups . The first group included Catholic movements such as the Asociación Católica de <unk> , who had influence over the judiciary and the press . Rural landowners were told to think of the Republic as godless and communist . The second group consisted of organisations that had supported the monarchy , such as the Renovación Española and Carlists , who wished to see the new republic overthrown in a violent uprising . The third group were Fascist organisations , among them supporters of the dictator 's son , José Antonio Primo de Rivera . Primo de Rivera was the most significant leader of fascism in Spain . The press often editorialised about a foreign Jewish – Masonic – Bolshevik plot . Members of the CNT willing to cooperate with the Republic were forced out , and it continued to oppose the government . The deeply unpopular Civil Guard ( Spanish : Guardia Civil ) , founded in 1844 , was charged with putting down revolts and was perceived as ruthless . Violence , including at <unk> in December 1931 , was usual . 
 Parties in opposition to Alcalá @-@ Zamora 's government gained the support of the church and the military . The head of the church in Spain , Cardinal Pedro Segura , was particularly vocal in his disapproval . Until the 20th century , the Catholic Church had proved an essential part of Spain 's character , although it had internal problems . Segura was expelled from Spain in June 1931 . This prompted an outcry from the Catholic right , who cited oppression . A series of church @-@ burning incidents occurred in major Spanish cities throughout May 1931 . When the government refused to call out the Guardia Civil , Minister for War Manuel Azaña came under heavy criticism from the rightist press . The military were opposed to reorganisation , including an increase in regional autonomy granted by the central government , and reforms to improve efficiency were seen as a direct attack . Officers were retired and a thousand had their promotions reviewed , including Francisco Franco , who served as director of the General Military Academy in Zaragoza , which was closed by Manuel Azaña . 
 = = = Constitution of 1931 = = = 
 A new constitution was approved on 9 December 1931 . The first draft , prepared by Ángel Ossorio y Gallardo and others , was rejected , and a much more daring text creating a " democratic republic of workers of every class " was promulgated . It contained much in the way of emotive language and included many controversial articles , some of which were aimed at curbing the Catholic Church . The constitution was reformist , liberal , and democratic in nature , and was welcomed by the Republican – Socialist coalition . It appalled landowners , industrialists , the organised church , and army officers . 
 As the government believed it was necessary to break the control the church had over Spanish affairs , the new constitution removed any special rights held by the Catholic Church . The constitution proclaimed religious freedom and a complete separation of Church and State . Catholic schools continued to operate , but outside the state system ; in 1933 further legislation banned all monks and nuns from teaching . The Republic regulated church use of property and investments , provided for recovery and controls on the use of property the church had obtained during past dictatorships , and banned the Vatican @-@ controlled Society of Jesus . The controversial articles 26 and 27 of the constitution strictly controlled Church property and prohibited religious orders from engaging in education . Supporters of the church and even Jose Ortega y Gasset , a liberal advocate of the separation of church and state , considered the articles overreaching . Other articles legalising divorce and initiating agrarian reforms were equally controversial , and on 13 October 1931 , Gil Robles , the leading spokesman of the parliamentary right , called for a Catholic Spain to make its stand against the Republic . Commentator Stanley Payne has argued that " the Republic as a democratic constitutional regime was doomed from the outset " , because the far left considered any moderation of the anticlerical aspects of the constitution as totally unacceptable . 
 In October 1931 Alcalá Zamora and his interior minister , Miguel Maura , resigned . Manuel Azaña became Prime Minister . Desiring the job for himself , Lerroux became alienated , and his Radical Party switched to the opposition , leaving Azaña dependent on the Socialists for support . The Socialists , who favoured reform , objected to the lack of progress . The reforms that were made alienated the land @-@ holding right . Conditions for labourers remained dreadful ; the reforms had not been enforced . Rural landowners declared war on the government by refusing to plant crops . Meanwhile , several agricultural strikes were harshly put down by the authorities . Reforms , including the unsuccessful attempt to break up large holdings , failed to significantly improve the situation for rural workers . By the end of 1931 , King Alfonso , in exile , stopped attempting to prevent an armed insurrection of monarchists in Spain , and was tried and condemned to life imprisonment in absentia . 
 Azaña declared that Spain had " ceased to be Catholic " ; although to an extent his statement was accurate , it was a politically unwise thing to say . An assault of a taxi driver supposedly due to his left @-@ wing views sparked a wave of anti @-@ clerical violence throughout south west urban Spain beginning on 11 May 1931 ; the government 's reluctance to declare martial law in response and a comment attributed to Azaña that he would " rather all the churches in Spain be burnt than a single Republican harmed " prompted many Catholics to believe that the Republic was trying to prosecute Christianity . Restrictions on Christian iconography in schools and hospitals and the ringing of bells came into force in January 1932 . State control of cemeteries was also imposed . Many ordinary Catholics began to see the government as an enemy because of the educational and religious reforms . Government actions were denounced as barbaric , unjust , and corrupt by the press . 
 In August 1932 there was an unsuccessful uprising by General José Sanjurjo , who had been particularly appalled by events in <unk> . The aims of the insurrection were vague , and it quickly turned into a fiasco . Among the generals tried and sent to Spanish colonies were four men who would go on to distinguish themselves fighting against the Republic in the civil war : the Duke of Seville , Martin Alonso , Ricardo <unk> <unk> , and Heli Rolando de Tella y Cantos . 
 The political left became fractured , whilst the right united . The Socialist Party continued to support Azaña but headed further to the political left . Gil Robles set up a new party , the Spanish Confederation of the Autonomous Right ( Spanish : <unk> <unk> de Derechas Autónomas , CEDA ) to contest the 1933 election , and tacitly embraced Fascism . The right won an overwhelming victory , with the CEDA and the Radicals together winning 219 seats . They had spent far more on their election campaign than the Socialists , who campaigned alone . The roughly 3 @,@ 000 members of the Communist Party were at this point not significant . 
 = = = The " two black years " = = = 
 Following the elections of November 1933 , Spain entered a period called the " two black years " ( Spanish : <unk> negro ) . Radicals became more aggressive and conservatives turned to paramilitary and vigilante actions . Official statistics state that 330 people were assassinated in addition to 213 failed attempts , and 1 @,@ 511 people wounded in political violence . Those figures also indicate a total of 113 general strikes were called and 160 religious buildings were destroyed , typically by arson . Immediately after the election , the Socialists alleged electoral fraud ; they had , according to the PSOE , needed twice as many votes as their opponents to win each seat . They identified the lack of unity in the left as another reason for their defeat . The Socialist opposition began to propagate a revolutionary ideal . The CEDA had won a plurality of seats , but not enough to form a majority . President Niceto Alcalá @-@ Zamora declined to invite the leader of the CEDA , Gil Robles , to form a government , and instead invited the Radical Republican Party 's Alejandro Lerroux to do so . The RRP , with the backing of CEDA , set about removing price controls , selling state favours and monopolies , and removing the land reforms — to the landowners ' considerable advantage . This created growing malnourishment in the south of Spain . The agrarian reforms , still in force , went tacitly unenforced . 
 The first anarchist protest came on 8 December 1933 , and was easily crushed by force in most of Spain ; Zaragoza held out for four days before the Spanish Republican Army , employing tanks , stopped the uprising . The Socialists stepped up their rhetoric , hoping to force Zamora to call new elections . Carlists and <unk> monarchists continued to prepare , with Carlists undergoing military drills in Navarre ; they received the backing of Italian Prime Minister Benito Mussolini . Gil Robles struggled to control the RRP 's youth wing , which copied Germany and Italy 's youth movements . Monarchists turned to the Fascist Falange Española , under the leadership of José Antonio Primo de Rivera , as a way to achieve their aims . Open violence occurred in the streets of Spanish cities . 
 Lerroux resigned in April 1934 , after President Zamora hesitated to sign an Amnesty Bill which let off the arrested members of the 1932 plot . He was replaced by Ricardo Samper . The Socialist Party ruptured over the question of whether or not to move towards Bolshevism . The youth wing , the Federation of Young Socialists ( Spanish : Federación de <unk> <unk> ) , were particularly militant . The anarchists called a four @-@ week strike in Zaragoza . Gil Robles ' CEDA continued to mimic the German Nazi Party , staging a rally in March 1934 , to shouts of " Jefe " ( " Chief " , after the Italian " Duce " used in support of Mussolini ) . Gil Robles used an anti @-@ strike law to successfully provoke and break up unions one at a time , and attempted to undermine the republican government of the Esquerra in Catalonia , who were attempting to continue the republic 's reforms . Efforts to remove local councils from socialist control prompted a general strike , which was brutally put down by Interior Minister Salazar Alonso , with the arrest of four deputies and other significant breaches of articles 55 and 56 of the constitution . The Socialist <unk> ' Federation ( Spanish : Federación Nacional da Trabajadores de la Tierra , <unk> ) , a trade union founded in 1930 , was effectively prevented from operating until 1936 . 
 On 26 September , the CEDA announced it would no longer support the RRP 's minority government . It was replaced by an RRP cabinet , again led by Lerroux , that included three members of the CEDA . A UGT general strike was unsuccessful in most of Spain . Lluís Companys ( leader of the Republican Left of Catalonia and the President of the <unk> of Catalonia ) saw an opportunity in the general strike and declared Catalonia an independent state inside the federal republic of Spain ; the Esquerra , however , refused to arm the populace , and the head of the military in Catalonia , Domingo <unk> , charged with putting down the revolt , showed similar restraint . In response , Lluís Companys was arrested and Catalan autonomy was suspended . This aggrieved Franco , who was directing the military from Madrid . Franco was put in informal command of the military effort against the revolt in Asturias , the only place where it had succeeded . Around 30 @,@ 000 workers were called to arms in ten days . Atrocities were carried out by both sides . Franco 's men , some brought in from Spain 's Army of Africa , killed men , women and children and carried out summary executions after the main cities of Asturias were retaken . About 1 @,@ 000 workers were killed , with about 250 government soldiers left dead . The failed rising in Asturias marked the effective end of the Republic . Months of retaliation and repression followed ; torture was used on political prisoners . Even moderate reformists within the CEDA became sidelined . The two generals in charge of the campaign , Franco and Manuel Goded Llopis , were seen as heroes . Azaña was unsuccessfully made out to be a revolutionary criminal by his right @-@ wing opponents . Gil Robles once again prompted a cabinet collapse , and five positions in Lerroux 's new government were conceded to CEDA , including one awarded to Gil Robles himself . Farm workers ' wages were halved , and the military was purged of republican members and reformed . Those loyal to Robles were promoted , and Franco was made Chief of Staff . 
 In 1935 Azaña and Indalecio Prieto started to unify the left and to combat its extreme elements . They staged large , popular rallies of what would become the Popular Front . Lerroux 's Radical government collapsed after two major scandals , including the <unk> affair . However , Zamora did not allow the CEDA to form a government , instead calling elections . The elections of 1936 were won by the Popular Front , with vastly smaller resources than the political right who followed Nazi propaganda techniques . The right began to plan how to best overthrow the Republic , rather than taking control of it . 
 The government was weak , and the influence of the revolutionary Largo Caballero prevented socialists from being part of the cabinet . The republicans were left to govern alone ; Azaña led a minority government . Pacification and reconciliation would have been a huge task . Largo Caballero accepted support from the Communist Party ( with a membership of around 10 @,@ 000 ) . Acts of violence and reprisals increased . By early 1936 , Azaña found that the left was using its influence to circumvent the Republic and the constitution ; they were adamant about increasingly radical changes . Parliament replaced Zamora with Azaña in April . Zamora 's removal was made on specious grounds , using a constitutional technicality . Azaña and Prieto hoped that by holding the positions of Prime Minister and President , they could push through enough reforms to pacify the left and deal with right @-@ wing militancy . However , Azaña was increasingly isolated from everyday politics ; his replacement , Casares Quiroga , was weak . Although the right also voted for Zamora 's removal , this was a watershed event which inspired conservatives to give up on parliamentary politics . Leon Trotsky wrote that Zamora had been Spain 's " stable pole " , and his removal was another step towards revolution . Largo Caballero held out for a collapse of the republican government , to be replaced with a socialist one as in France . 
 CEDA turned its campaign chest over to army plotter Emilio Mola . Monarchist José Calvo Sotelo replaced CEDA 's Gil Robles as the right 's leading spokesman in parliament . The Falange expanded rapidly , and many members of the <unk> de Acción Popular joined . They successfully created a sense of militancy on the streets to try to justify an authoritarian regime . Prieto did his best to avoid revolution by promoting a series of public works and civil order reforms , including of parts of the military and civil guard . Largo Caballero took a different attitude , continuing to preach of an inevitable overthrow of society by the workers . Largo Caballero also disagreed with Prieto 's idea of a new Republican – Socialist coalition . With Largo Caballero 's acquiescence , communists alarmed the middle classes by quickly taking over the ranks of socialist organisations . This alarmed the middle classes . The division of the Popular Front prevented the government from using its power to prevent right @-@ wing militancy . The CEDA came under attack from the Falange , and Prieto 's attempts at moderate reform were attacked by the Socialist Youth . Sotelo continued to do his best to make conciliation impossible . 
 Casares failed to heed Prieto 's warnings of a military conspiracy involving several generals who disliked professional politicians and wanted to replace the government to prevent the dissolution of Spain . The military coup of July that started the Spanish Civil War was devised with Mola as director and Sanjurjo as a figurehead leader . 
 = Carmarthenshire = 
 Carmarthenshire ( Welsh : Sir <unk> or Sir <unk> ) is a unitary authority in the south west of Wales and the largest of the thirteen historic counties . The three largest towns are Llanelli , Carmarthen and Ammanford . Carmarthen is the county town and administrative centre of Carmarthenshire but the most populous settlement is Llanelli . 
 Carmarthenshire has been inhabited since prehistoric times . The town of Carmarthen was founded by the Romans and the region was part of the Principality of Deheubarth during the High Middle Ages . It saw turbulent times during the invasion by the Normans in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries before it was subjugated , along with other parts of Wales , by Edward I of England . Further unrest occurred in the early fifteenth century when the Welsh rebelled under Owain Glyndŵr , and more strife occurred during the English Civil War in the seventeenth century . 
 Carmarthenshire is mainly an agricultural county , apart from the southeastern part which at one time was heavily @-@ industrialised with coal mining , steel @-@ making and tin @-@ plating . In the north of the county the woollen industry was very important in the eighteenth century . Nowadays the economy of the county depends on agriculture , forestry , fishing and tourism . With the decline in its industrial base and the low profitability of the livestock sector , Carmarthenshire is economically one of the worst @-@ performing regions in the United Kingdom . 
 As a tourist destination , Carmarthenshire is not as well known as some other parts of Wales , but does offer a wide range of outdoor activities . Much of the coast is fairly flat ; it includes the Millennium Coastal Park , which extends for ten miles to the west of Llanelli and the National Wetlands Centre , a championship golf course and the harbours of Burry Port and Pembrey . Further west are the sandy beaches at Llansteffan and Pendine , and Dylan Thomas ' boathouse at Laugharne . Further inland there are a number of medieval castles located in strategic positions , as well as hillforts and standing stones . 
 = = History = = 
 Humans have been living in Carmarthenshire since at least 40 @,@ 000 years ago as evidenced by stone tools found in <unk> Cave , near Laugharne . Before the Romans arrived in Britain , the land now forming the county of Carmarthenshire was part of the kingdom of the Demetae who gave their name to the county of Dyfed ; it contained one of their chief cities called <unk> , and is now known as Carmarthen . The Romans established two forts in South Wales , one at Caerwent to control the southeast of the country , and one at Carmarthen to control the southwest . The fort at Carmarthen dates from around 75 AD , and there is a Roman amphitheatre nearby , so this probably makes Carmarthen the oldest , continually @-@ occupied town in Wales . 
 Carmarthenshire has its early roots in the region formerly known as Ystrad Tywi ( Vale of [ the river ] Tywi ) and part of the Principality of Deheubarth during the High Middle Ages , with the court at Dinefwr . After the Normans had subjugated England they tried to subdue Wales . Carmarthenshire was disputed between the Normans and the Welsh lords and many of the castles built around this time , first from wood and then stone , changed hands several times during the conflicts that followed . Following the Conquest of Wales by Edward I , the region was reorganized by the Statute of Rhuddlan in 1284 into Carmarthenshire . Edward I made Carmarthen the capital of the new county of Carmarthenshire , establishing his courts of chancery and his exchequer there , and holding the Court of Great Sessions in Wales in the town . 
 The Normans transformed Carmarthen into an international trading port , the only staple port in Wales . Merchants imported food and French wines and exported wool , pelts , leather , lead and tin . In the late medieval period the county 's fortunes varied as good and bad harvests occurred , increased taxes were levied from England , episodes of plague occurred and recruitment for wars removed the young men . Carmarthen was particularly susceptible to plague because the disease was brought in by flea @-@ infested rats on board ships from southern France . 
 In 1405 , Owain Glyndŵr captured Carmarthen Castle and several other strongholds in the neighbourhood . However , when his support dwindled , the principal men of the county returned their allegiance to King Henry V. During the English Civil War , Parliamentary forces under Colonel Roland Laugharne besieged and captured Carmarthen Castle but later abandoned the cause , and joined the Royalists . In 1648 , Carmarthen Castle was recaptured by the Parliamentarians , and Oliver Cromwell ordered it to be dismantled . 
 The first industrial canal in Wales was built in 1768 to convey coal from the Gwendraeth Valley to the coast , and the following year , the earliest tramroad bridge was on the tramroad built alongside the canal . During the Napoleonic Wars ( 1799 – 1815 ) there was increased demand for coal , iron and agricultural goods , and the county prospered . The landscape changed as much woodland was cleared to make way for more food production , and mills , power stations , mines and factories sprang up between Llanelli and Pembrey . Carmarthenshire was at the centre of the Rebecca Riots which took place around 1840 , when local farmers and agricultural workers dressed as women and rebelled against the imposition of higher taxes and tolls . 
 On 1 April 1974 , under the terms of the Local Government Act 1972 , Carmarthenshire alongside Cardiganshire and Pembrokeshire , was absorbed into the new county of Dyfed ; Carmarthenshire was divided into three districts , District of Carmarthen , District of Llanelli and Dinefwr Borough Council . Twenty @-@ two years later this procedure was reversed when the Local Government ( Wales ) Act 1994 was enacted and the original county boundaries were replaced . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The county is bounded to the north by Ceredigion , to the east by Powys , Neath Port Talbot and Swansea , to the south by the Atlantic Ocean and to the west by Pembrokeshire . The surface generally is upland and mountainous . <unk> Fawr and Black Mountain extend into the east of the county and the Cambrian Mountains into the north . The south coast contains many fishing villages and sandy beaches . The highest point is Fan Brycheiniog , 2 @,@ 631 feet ( 802 m ) ( although the main summit is in Powys ) . Carmarthenshire is the largest historic county by area in Wales . 
 The county is drained by several important rivers which flow southwards into the Bristol Channel , especially the River Towy , and its several tributaries , such as the River <unk> . The Towy is the longest river flowing entirely within Wales . Other rivers include the Loughor ( which forms the eastern boundary with Glamorgan ) , the River Gwendraeth and the River Taf . The River Teifi forms much of the border between Carmarthenshire and Ceredigion , and there are a number of towns in the Teifi Valley which have communities living on either side of the river and hence in different counties . Carmarthenshire has a long coastline which is deeply cut by the estuaries of the Loughor in the east and the Gwendraeth , Tywi and Taf , which enter the sea on the east side of Carmarthen Bay . The coastline includes notable beaches such as Pendine Sands and Cefn <unk> sands , and large areas of foreshore are uncovered at low tide along the Loughor and Towy estuaries . 
 The principal towns in the county are Ammanford , Burry Port , Carmarthen , Kidwelly , Llanelli , Llandeilo , Newcastle Emlyn , Llandovery , St Clears , and Whitland . The principal industries are agriculture , forestry , fishing and tourism . Although Llanelli is by far the largest town in the county , the county town remains Carmarthen , mainly due to its central location . 
 Carmarthenshire is predominantly an agricultural county , with only the southeastern area having any significant amount of industry . The best agricultural land is in the broad Tywi Valley , especially its lower reaches . With its fertile land and agricultural produce , Carmarthenshire is known as the " Garden of Wales " . The lowest bridge over the river is at Carmarthen , and the <unk> Estuary cuts the southwesterly part of the county , including Llansteffan and Laugharne , off from the more urban southeastern region . This area is also bypassed by the main communication routes into Pembrokeshire . A passenger ferry service used to connect <unk> with Llansteffan until the early part of the twentieth century . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Agriculture , and to a lesser extent forestry , are the main sources of income over most of the county of Carmarthenshire . On improved pastures , dairying is important and in the past , the presence of the railway enabled milk to be transported to the urban areas of England . The creamery at Whitland is now closed but milk processing still takes place at Newcastle Emlyn where mozzarella cheese is made . On upland pastures and marginal land , livestock rearing of cattle and sheep is the main agricultural activity . The estuaries of the Loughor and Towy provide pickings for the cockle industry . 
 Llanelli , Ammanford and the upper parts of the Gwendraeth Valley are situated on the South Wales Coalfield . The opencast mining activities in this region have now ceased but the old mining settlements with terraced housing remain , often centred on their nonconformist chapels . Kidwelly had a tin @-@ plating industry in the eighteenth century , with Llanelli following not long after , so that by the end of the nineteenth century , Llanelli was the world @-@ centre of the industry . There is little trace of these industrial activities today . Llanelli and Burry Port served at one time for the export of coal , but trade declined , as it did from the ports of Kidwelly and Carmarthen as their estuaries silted up . Country towns in the more agricultural part of the county still hold regular markets where livestock is traded . 
 In the north of the county , in and around the Teifi Valley , there was a thriving woollen industry in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . Here water @-@ power provided the energy to drive the looms and other machinery at the mills . The village of Dre @-@ fach Felindre at one time contained twenty @-@ four mills and was known as the " Huddersfield of Wales " . The demand for woollen cloth declined in the twentieth century and so did the industry . 
 In 2014 , West Wales was identified as the worst @-@ performing region in the United Kingdom along with the South Wales Valleys . The gross value added economic indicator showed a figure of £ 14 @,@ 763 per head in these regions , as compared with a GVA of £ 22 @,@ 986 for Cardiff and the Vale of Glamorgan . The Welsh Assembly Government is aware of this , and helped by government initiatives and local actions , opportunities for farmers to diversify have emerged . These include farm tourism , rural crafts , specialist food shops , farmers ' markets and added @-@ value food products . 
 In 2015 , in an attempt to boost the local economy , Carmarthenshire County Council produced a fifteen @-@ year plan that highlighted six projects which it hoped would create five thousand new jobs . The sectors involved would be in the " creative industries , tourism , agri @-@ food , advanced manufacturing , energy and environment , and financial and professional services " . 
 = = Local government = = 
 Carmarthenshire became an administrative county with a county council taking over functions from the Quarter Sessions under the Local Government Act 1888 . Under the Local Government Act 1972 , the administrative county of Carmarthenshire was abolished on 1 April 1974 and the area of Carmarthenshire became three districts within the new county of Dyfed : Carmarthen , Dinefwr and Llanelli . Under the Local Government ( Wales ) Act 1994 , Dyfed was abolished on 1 April 1996 and Carmarthenshire was re @-@ established as a county . The three districts united to form a unitary authority which had the same boundaries as the traditional county of Carmarthenshire . In 2003 , the <unk> community council area was transferred to the administrative county of Pembrokeshire . 
