 = = Demography and the Welsh language = = 
 Before the Industrial Revolution , Carmarthen used to be the most populous town in Wales . In 1931 , the county 's population was 171 @,@ 445 and in 1951 , 164 @,@ 800 . At the census in 2011 , Carmarthenshire had a population of 183 @,@ 777 . Population levels have thus dipped and then increased again over the course of eighty years . The population density in Carmarthenshire is 0 @.@ 8 persons per hectare , as compared to 1 @.@ 5 persons for Wales and 3 @.@ 7 for England and Wales as a whole . 
 In terms of language however , the county has undergone a language shift in these decades from Welsh to English , Carmarthenshire having been the most populous of the five historic counties of Wales to remain majority Welsh speaking throughout the twentieth century . According to the 1911 Census , 84 @.@ 9 % of the county 's population were Welsh speaking with 20 @.@ 5 % of the overall population being <unk> Welsh Speakers . Meanwhile , only 43 @.@ 5 % of the population of Wales as a whole could speak Welsh In 1931 , 82 @.@ 3 % could speak Welsh and in 1951 , 75 @.@ 2 % . By the time of the 2001 census , only 50 @.@ 3 % of people living in Carmarthenshire could speak Welsh , with 39 % being able to read and write the language as well . The 2011 census showed only further decline , with only 43 @.@ 9 % speaking Welsh , making it a minority language in the county for the first time . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 With its strategic location and history , the county is rich in archaeological remains such as forts , earthworks and standing stones . Carn Goch is one of the most impressive Iron Age forts and stands on a hilltop near Llandeilo . The Bronze Age is represented by chambered cairns and standing stones on Mynydd <unk> , near <unk> . Castles that can be easily accessed include Carreg <unk> , Dinefwr , Kidwelly , Laugharne , Llansteffan and Newcastle Emlyn Castle . There are the ruinous remains of Talley Abbey , and the coastal village of Laugharne is for ever associated with Dylan Thomas . Stately homes in the county include <unk> House and Gardens , Golden Grove and Newton House . 
 There are plenty of opportunities in the county for hiking , observing wildlife and admiring the scenery . These include <unk> Forest , the Pembrey Country Park , the Millennium Coastal Park at Llanelli , the <unk> Llanelli Wetlands Centre and the Carmel National Nature Reserve . There are large stretches of golden sands and the Wales Coast Path now provides a continuous walking route around the whole of Wales . 
 The National Botanic Garden of Wales displays plants from Wales and from all around the world , and the Carmarthenshire County Museum , the Kidwelly Industrial Museum , the National Wool Museum , the Parc Howard Museum , the Pendine Museum of Speed and the West Wales Museum of Childhood all provide opportunities to delve into the past . Dylan Thomas Boathouse where the author wrote many of his works can be visited , as can the Roman @-@ worked Dolaucothi Gold Mines . 
 There are two heritage railways , the <unk> Railway and the Teifi Valley Railway , both using the track of the Carmarthen and Cardigan Railway that at one time ran from Carmarthen to Newcastle Emlyn , but never reached Cardigan . 
 = = Sports and leisure = = 
 Activities available in the county include rambling , cycling , fishing , kayaking , canoeing , sailing , horse riding , caving , abseiling and <unk> . Carmarthen Town A.F.C. plays in the Welsh Premier League . They won the Welsh Football League Cup in the 1995 – 96 season , and since then have won the Welsh Cup once and the Welsh League Cup twice . Llanelli Town A.F.C. play in the Welsh Football League Division Two . The club won the Welsh premier league and <unk> challenge cup in 2008 and won the Welsh Cup in 2011 , but after experiencing financial difficulties , were wound up and reformed under the present title in 2013 . Scarlets is the regional professional rugby union team that plays in the Pro12 , they play their home matches at their ground , Parc y Scarlets . Honours include winning the 2003 / 04 Pro12 . Llanelli RFC is a semi @-@ professional rugby union team that play in the Welsh Premier Division , also playing home matches at Parc y Scarlets . Among many honours , they have been WRU Challenge Cup winners on fourteen occasions and frequently taken part in the Heineken Cup . 
 Some sporting venues utilise disused industrial sites . <unk> Las racecourse was built on the site of an open cast coal mine after mining operations ceased . Opened in 2009 , it was the first racecourse built in the United Kingdom for eighty years and has regular race @-@ days . <unk> is a championship golf course opened in 2005 and built as part of the Llanelli Waterside regeneration plan . Pembrey Circuit is a motor racing circuit near Pembrey village , considered the home of Welsh motorsport , providing racing for cars , motorcycles , karts and trucks . It was opened in 1989 on a former airfield , is popular for testing and has hosted many events including the British Touring Car Championship twice . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Carmarthenshire is served by a main line railway service operated by Arriva Trains Wales which links London Paddington , Cardiff Central and Swansea to the county . The main hub is Carmarthen railway station where some services from the east terminate . The line continues westwards with several branches which serve Pembroke Dock , Milford Haven and Fishguard Harbour . The Heart of Wales Line takes a scenic route through mid @-@ Wales and links Llanelli with Craven Arms , from where passengers can travel on the Welsh Marches Line to Shrewsbury . 
 The only motorway in the county is the M4 motorway from London and South Wales , which extends as far west as the Pont Abraham services before continuing northwest as the A48 to Carmarthen . Llanelli is linked to the motorway by the <unk> . The A40 links Carmarthen to Llandeilo , Llandovery and Brecon to the east , and with St Clears , Whitland and Haverfordwest to the west . The <unk> links Llanelli with Carmarthen by a coastal route and continues northwards to Cardigan , and via the <unk> and A487 to Aberystwyth , and the <unk> links Carmarthen to Lampeter . There are local bus services between the main centres of population , and long distance services between Cardiff , Swansea , Carmarthen and beyond . A bus service known as " <unk> " operates in the north of the county , offering customised transport to rural dwellers . 
 = Tom Kinslow = 
 Thomas F. Kinslow ( January 12 , 1866 – February 22 , 1901 ) was a professional baseball player who played catcher in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) from 1886 until 1898 . He played for eight teams in his ten @-@ season career . Four of those seasons were with Brooklyn Bridegrooms of the National League ( NL ) . During his playing days , his height was listed at 5 @-@ foot @-@ 10 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) , his weight as 160 @-@ pound ( 73 kg ) , he batted and threw right @-@ handed , and had blonde hair . 
 He was a member of the Washington Light Infantry , a local Washington , D.C. militia , and played in many of their amateur baseball games throughout his life . When not playing , he tended to his bar . Noted for being a genial , friendly individual , he was quick to make friends , and was a fan @-@ favorite in his hometown of Washington , D.C. Kinslow was a heavy drinker however , which caused him to miss games and team movements on occasion . Late into his career , these alcohol issues were much less tolerated , eventually hastening his exit from the game . He died at the age of 35 , after a year @-@ long battle with tuberculosis . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Kinslow was born on January 12 , 1866 in Washington , D.C. ; his father Michael worked as a laborer and an ice dealer , later working in the oyster business . He began playing amateur baseball in the city 's first ward on a team known as the " <unk> " , as well as a team named the Falcons . He later became a member of the Washington Light Infantry , Company C , a local militia , and played as their catcher against the 5th Maryland Regiment on June 29 , 1885 ; a game won by Washington 11 – 7 . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Kinslow made his MLB debut with the Washington Nationals of the NL on June 4 , 1886 as their starting catcher . He injured his finger in the third inning trying to catch a bad pitch thrown by Bob Barr , and had to leave the game . On June 15 , he was again injured by a Barr pitch , and forced to leave the game with a dislocated finger . He played in three games for the Nationals in 1886 , collecting two hits in eight at bats . 
 In 1887 , he was signed by the Peanut Eaters of the Pennsylvania State Association , and played in 36 games before being sold to the Detroit Wolverines of the NL , along with Ed <unk> for $ 1 @,@ 000 on July 27 . Soon , the deal was put on hold by the NL , as the Cincinnati Red Stockings of the American Association ( AA ) also claimed they had a deal in place for these players . On September 6 , an arbitration board for the NL and AA leagues convened to render their findings . They found that Detroit 's contract with the players was dated on July 20 , which superseded Cincinnati 's contract that was signed on July 27 , and awarded Detroit the players . Detroit then sold their contracts with the players to the London Tecumsehs of the International Association . Though he did not play for London in 1887 , he did play in two games for the New York Metropolitans of the AA , going hitless in eight at bats . 
 = = = Brooklyn = = = 
 Kinslow played the next two seasons for the Tecumsehs , and had a batting average of .200 in 1888 , but improved it to .343 in 1889 . In 1890 , a new league was created , the Players ' League ( PL ) , and he signed with Ward 's Wonders of Brooklyn . During the season , he had a batting average of .264 , and caught 64 games . On June 28 , he hit the first home run of his career in a game against Henry Gruber and the Cleveland Infants . Later , on July 11 , he hit two home runs in the same game off of George Keefe of the Buffalo Bisons , the only time Kinslow would achieve this feat . 
 The PL folded following the 1890 season , and Kinslow stayed in Brooklyn by signing with the Brooklyn Bridegrooms of the NL . He followed John Montgomery Ward , who was hired as team 's new manager . Shortly afterwards , Kinslow 's services were kept exclusive as the team listed him among those players covered under the reserve clause . During the game on July 8 , Kinslow was benched by Ward for what was described as insubordination . Kinslow played in 61 games for Brooklyn in 1891 , being platooned primarily at catcher with Con Daily , and had a .237 batting average . 
 In 1892 , he continued to platoon with Daily and played in 66 games . He improved his batting average to .305 , and hit two home runs . With a third catcher , Tom Daly , no longer with the team in 1893 , Kinslow 's playing time increased slightly to 78 games . His batting average dropped to .244 , but he tied his career @-@ high with four home runs . Although he was popular player during his time in Brooklyn , Kinslow had caused trouble with the team at some point in the season , and had been restricted from playing in home games by owner Charles Byrne . Upon signing his contract with Brooklyn in 1894 , Kinslow wrote a letter to the owner apologizing for his conduct during the previous season , and vowed to improve significantly going forward . His batting average improved to .305 during the 1894 season while playing in 62 games , sharing time with Daily once again . 
 = = = Late career = = = 
 On January 26 , 1895 , Kinslow was traded by Brooklyn to the Pittsburgh Pirates for Ad <unk> . The Red Stockings quickly disputed the deal however , claiming that they had an earlier agreement with Pittsburgh 's manager Connie Mack that would have brought them <unk> and Buck Weaver in exchange for Billy Merritt . Despite the dispute , the Brooklyn deal went forward , and Kinslow joined the Pirates . With the catching duties being split between Merritt and Joe Sugden , there was little playing time allotted for Kinslow ; Kinslow 's behavior had become a problem for Mack and the Pirates . Once , he was fined for missing a game due to drinking , and in late May , he was suspended for failing to show up for a game in Washington , D.C. On June 22 , he failed to be ready for a road series , and was released from the team for disorderly conduct . Kinslow expressed sorrow and shock over getting released , claiming that while he drank too much , Brooklyn would issue fines for his behavior instead . In 19 games played for Pittsburgh , he had a <unk> batting average , Though he had received interest from Cincinnati and the Washington Senators , he claimed that he wanted to take the remainder the year off to be ready for the next season . 
 During the off @-@ season , Kinslow tended to the bar he owned in Washington , D.C. , mainly passing time opening oysters and clams , and playing games for the Washington Light Infantry . On May 21 , it was reported that he had agreed to play for the Louisville Colonels of the NL . In eight games for the Colonels , Kinslow collected seven hits in 25 at bats for a .280 batting average . After playing very little in 1896 , and not at all in 1897 , he signed with the Senators for the 1898 season . He admitted that his weight had increased to 225 lbs during the time off from the game , but would quickly drop his weight to 160 once he began playing . He appeared in three games for Washington until he was sold to the St. Louis Browns on August 18 . He played in an additional 14 games for St. Louis , and was released from the team at the conclusion of the season . In his 380 career games played , he had a .266 batting average , 12 home runs , and 222 runs batted in . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kinslow was known to have a genial , sunny disposition , and was quick to make friends . In the 1900 United States Census , he living with his father and working as an oyster dealer . He is listed as being married for ten years , but his wife was not living in the same home . He died in his hometown of Washington , D.C. after a year @-@ long battle with consumption ( tuberculosis ) , and is interred at Congressional Cemetery . 
 = Operation Mascot = 
 Operation Mascot was an unsuccessful British carrier air raid conducted against the German battleship Tirpitz at her anchorage in Kaafjord , Norway , on 17 July 1944 . The attack was one of a series of strikes against the battleship launched from aircraft carriers between April and August 1944 , and was initiated after Allied intelligence determined that the damage inflicted during the Operation Tungsten raid on 3 April had been repaired . 
 A force of 44 British dive bombers and 40 fighters took off from three aircraft carriers in the early hours of 17 July . German radar stations detected these aircraft while they were en route to Kaafjord , and Tirpitz was protected by a smoke screen by the time the strike force arrived . Few of the British airmen were able to spot the battleship , and their attacks did not inflict any significant damage . German losses were limited to a patrol craft , and three British aircraft were destroyed or damaged beyond repair by Kaafjord 's defenders . A group of German submarines attempted to intercept the carrier force as it returned to base , without success . Two U @-@ boats were sunk near the carriers by British patrol aircraft and several others were damaged . 
 Despite the failure of Operation Mascot , the Royal Navy attempted four further carrier raids against Tirpitz during August 1944 . These attacks were also unsuccessful , and the task of sinking the battleship was transferred to the Royal Air Force . 
 = = Background = = 
 From early 1942 Tirpitz posed a significant threat to the Allied convoys transporting supplies through the Norwegian Sea to the Soviet Union . Operating from fjords on the Norwegian coast , the battleship was capable of overwhelming the close @-@ escort forces assigned to the Arctic convoys or breaking out into the North Atlantic . To counter this threat , the Allies were forced to keep a powerful force of warships with the British Home Fleet , and capital ships accompanied most convoys part of the way to the Soviet Union . 
 Several air and naval attacks were launched against Tirpitz in 1942 and 1943 . On 6 March 1942 , torpedo bombers flying from the aircraft carrier HMS Victorious attacked the battleship while she was attempting to intercept Convoy PQ 12 but did not achieve any hits . Land @-@ based bombers from the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and Soviet Air Forces also attempted to strike Tirpitz in her anchorages on several occasions in 1942 and 1943 , but did not inflict any damage . On 23 September 1943 , two British X @-@ class midget submarines penetrated defences around the battleship at her main anchorage at Kaafjord in northern Norway during Operation Source , and placed explosive charges in the water beneath her . This attack caused extensive damage to Tirpitz , putting her out of service for six months . 
 As Tirpitz was still considered a major threat to Allied shipping , the British military sought to damage or destroy the battleship before she could re @-@ enter service . Another midget submarine attack was considered impractical due to improvements to Kaafjord 's defences , and the commander of the RAF 's Bomber Command refused to attempt heavy bomber raids against the battleship as he believed that such operations were unlikely to be successful and would result in heavy casualties . As a result , the Home Fleet 's aircraft carriers were considered the best means of attacking Kaafjord , and the Admiralty directed the fleet to begin planning such a raid in late 1943 . Following several months of preparations the Home Fleet 's first attack on Kaafjord , which was designated Operation Tungsten , was conducted on 3 April 1944 and involved five aircraft carriers . The two strike forces of 20 Fairey Barracuda dive bombers escorted by 40 fighters were not detected during their flights to Kaafjord , and the battleship was hit by 15 bombs . Tirpitz 's crew suffered heavy casualties , but the ship was not badly damaged . Nevertheless , the damage inflicted on Tirpitz 's superstructure , armament and engines was sufficient to put her out of service for several months while repairs were completed . The commander of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine , Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz , placed a priority on returning the battleship to service so that she could continue to tie down Allied naval resources . He and other senior German officers recognised at this time that the threat of further air attacks meant that Tirpitz could no longer operate against Allied convoys . 
 British intelligence assessed that Tirpitz could be repaired within six months , and the Admiralty ordered further carrier @-@ borne strikes against the battleship . First Sea Lord Andrew Cunningham did not believe that Barracudas could carry weapons capable of sinking Tirpitz , but he hoped that further attacks would increase the period the battleship was out of service and harm her crew 's morale . The commander of the Home Fleet , Vice Admiral Bruce Fraser , initially resisted this order on the grounds that further carrier raids on Kaafjord were unlikely to be successful as Tirpitz 's defences would have been reinforced and weather conditions were likely to be worse than those encountered during Operation Tungsten . Following an argument with Cunningham , Fraser eventually agreed to attack Kaafjord again . Despite the decision to make further attacks on Kaafjord , many of the Home Fleet 's airmen were posted to other units following Operation Tungsten . This hindered subsequent operations against German forces in Norway as the new aircrew were less experienced than the men they replaced . 
 Three raids against Tirpitz were cancelled after launch due to unfavourable weather during April and May 1944 . The first of these attacks , Operation Planet , began when the Home Fleet sailed from its base at Scapa Flow in the Orkney Islands on 21 April . This operation involved the same aircraft carriers as had taken part in Operation Tungsten , aside from the substitution of the escort carrier HMS Fencer with her sister ship Striker . The fleet reached the position where its aircraft were to be flown off three days later , but the raid was cancelled when Allied agents near Kaafjord reported bad weather over the target area . The fleet then sailed south , and attacked a German convoy near Bodø , sinking three merchant ships for the loss of six aircraft . The Home Fleet put to sea to attack Tirpitz again in mid @-@ May in what was designated Operation Brawn . A strike force of 27 Barracudas escorted by Vought F4U Corsair and Supermarine Seafire fighters took off from the carriers HMS Furious and Victorious on the afternoon of 15 May , but encountered heavy cloud over Kaafjord and returned without attacking . The next raid , Operation Tiger Claw , was launched in late May . The planned attack on Kaafjord — which would have also involved aircraft flying from Furious and Victorious — had to be cancelled due to bad weather on 28 May . Instead , the carriers sailed south in search of German convoys . In a raid conducted on 1 June , the carriers ' aircraft sank four merchant vessels near Ålesund . No further attacks were attempted during June as the ships of the Home Fleet were needed to support the Normandy landings that month . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Despite the lack of success , the Admiralty and Admiral Sir Henry Moore , who had assumed command of the Home Fleet on 14 June 1944 , remained committed to attempting further carrier raids against Tirpitz . During June , the Admiralty received a series of intelligence reports indicating that repairs to Tirpitz were generally progressing well and the battleship would soon be ready to put to sea . Late that month Allied spies spotted Tirpitz conducting steaming trials in Kaafjord , and reported that she was capable of sailing at up to 20 knots ( 37 km / h ) and could rotate her main gun turrets . As a result , in late June the Admiralty directed that another aircraft carrier raid be conducted against Kaafjord during mid @-@ July . It was intended that this attack would take place before the resumption of the Arctic convoys , which had been suspended since April 1944 to free up ships for the invasion of France . 
 As detected by the British , repairs to Tirpitz following Operation Tungsten progressed quickly . Work on repairing the battleship began in late April , and 157 shipyard workers and special equipment were transported from Kiel in Germany to Kaafjord to accelerate the project . Assisted by the long hours of daylight at Kaafjord 's latitude during summer , three shifts of personnel worked on Tirpitz each day . The battleship was capable of moving under her own power by 2 June , and ready to begin gunnery exercises at the end of that month . The repair works concluded in mid @-@ July , though the battleship 's starboard propeller shaft could only be used to drive her forwards . Captain Wolf Junge assumed command of the battleship in May 1944 , replacing Captain Hans Meyer who had been wounded during Operation Tungsten . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 As Victorious had been redeployed to the Indian Ocean in June , the carriers selected for Operation Mascot were the recently commissioned HMS Indefatigable as well as the veterans Formidable and Furious . The carriers were escorted by the battleship HMS Duke of York , four cruisers and twelve destroyers . Admiral Moore commanded the force from Duke of York , and the carrier group was led by Rear Admiral Rhoderick McGrigor on board Indefatigable . 
 The composition of the striking force was broadly similar to that used in the earlier operations targeting Tirpitz . Formidable embarked No. 8 Torpedo Bomber Reconnaissance Wing , whose 827 and 830 Naval Air Squadrons each operated 12 Barracudas , as well as 1841 Naval Air Squadron , which was equipped with 18 Corsairs . Indefatigable carried No. 9 Torpedo Bomber Reconnaissance Wing , which was also equipped with 24 Barracudas split between 820 and 826 Naval Air Squadrons , as well as the Seafire @-@ equipped 894 Naval Air Squadron and 1770 Naval Air Squadron 's 12 Fairey Firefly fighters . In a change from her role in the previous attacks , Furious did not embark any Barracudas during Operation Mascot , and instead operated 20 Grumman F6F Hellcat fighters from 1840 Naval Air Squadron , three Seafires assigned to 880 Naval Air Squadron and three 842 Flight Fairey Swordfish anti @-@ submarine aircraft . 
 The defences of Kaafjord were improved following Operation Tungsten . Prior to this raid they had comprised eleven batteries of anti @-@ aircraft guns , several anti @-@ aircraft warships and a system of smoke generators capable of hiding Tirpitz from aircraft . After the attack , additional radar stations and observation posts were established and the number of smoke generators located around the battleship was increased . The improved defences in place by the time of Operation Mascot included a cliff @-@ top observation post near Kaafjord , which was capable of directing the battleship 's anti @-@ aircraft guns if necessary . Tirpitz 's air defences were also strengthened during the period she was under repair by fitting additional 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) cannons , modifying the 150 mm guns so they could be used to attack aircraft , and supplying anti @-@ aircraft shells for her 380 @-@ millimetre ( 15 in ) main guns . 
 As well as the German forces located near Kaafjord , a patrol line of twelve submarines designated Group Trutz was also established around the island of Jan Mayen and assigned the task of intercepting any British carrier forces that ventured into the Norwegian Sea . The submarines assigned to this force at the time of Operation Mascot were U @-@ 347 , U @-@ 361 , U @-@ 365 , U @-@ 387 , U @-@ 636 , U @-@ 716 , U @-@ 742 , U @-@ 921 , U @-@ 956 , U @-@ 965 , U @-@ 992 , and U @-@ 995 . The German Luftwaffe ( air force ) had few fighters stationed at bases near Kaafjord , and their operations were constrained by a lack of fuel . 
 = = Attack = = 
 Rear Admiral McGrigor issued an operational memo to the air units selected for Operation Mascot on 4 July , outlining how the attack would be conducted and providing further orders for the raid eight days later . In accordance with these instructions , the flying squadrons assigned to the three carriers undertook training exercises from their ships and shore bases from 4 July onwards . Intelligence gained from decrypting German radio messages during early July , and photos taken by a RAF aircraft on 12 July , provided further evidence that the battleship was once again fully operational and possibly preparing to put to sea . The airmen were informed on 13 July that they would attack Kaafjord in four days time . 
 The British fleet left Scapa Flow as a single group on 14 July . During the voyage north , the airmen received detailed briefings on the attack plans and terrain around Kaafjord and were also issued with escape kits to use if they were shot down over Norway . Maintenance personnel also worked to ensure that as many aircraft as possible would be ready . The twelve German submarines in the Norwegian Sea did not make contact with the British force as it sailed north . The weather for much of the voyage was foggy , but the skies were clear when the fleet reached its flying off position to the north of Kaafjord in the evening of 16 July . 
 The carriers began launching their aircraft shortly after midnight on 17 July . The main striking force comprised 44 Barracudas , with the plan for the raid specifying that No. 8 Torpedo Bomber Reconnaissance Wing 's aircraft would attack before those of No. 9 Torpedo Bomber Reconnaissance Wing . All but two of the dive bombers were armed with powerful 1 @,@ 600 @-@ pound ( 730 kg ) armour @-@ piercing bombs ; the other aircraft each carried three 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) bombs . 1841 Naval Air Squadron 's 18 Corsairs were assigned to provide protection against German fighters , and the 20 Hellcats and 12 Fireflies operated by 1840 and 1770 Naval Air Squadrons respectively were given the task of suppressing anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 After forming up , the bombers and fighters began their flight to Kaafjord at 01 : 35 . The aircraft flew 50 feet ( 15 m ) above the sea to evade German radar until they reached a point ten minutes flying time from the Norwegian coast , at which time the Barracudas climbed to 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) and the fighters to higher altitudes . The weather was fine throughout the flight , but clouds were sighted as the aircraft neared the target area . 
 The British strike force was detected by German radar stations when it reached a point 43 miles ( 69 km ) from Kaafjord at 02 : 00 . It took four minutes to pass a warning to Tirpitz ; her protective smoke generators were in action by 02 : 13 and quickly covered the vessel in an artificial cloud . The battleship and anti @-@ aircraft batteries located on the shore began firing a barrage towards the British aircraft at 02 : 19 . German forces also began jamming the British aircraft 's radios once they came within 10 miles ( 16 km ) of the Norwegian coastline . The smokescreen frustrated the British attack , as the crews of only two of the Barracudas and a pair of fighters managed to spot Tirpitz during the raid . 
 The Hellcats and Fireflies were first to attack , and strafed anti @-@ aircraft positions as well as the destroyer Z33 and small patrol craft Vp <unk> . The patrol craft was forced aground and later declared a total loss . Due to the thick smoke , the fighter pilots were only able to locate targets by aiming at the sources of tracer gunfire . 
 The Barracudas were targeted by heavy , but inaccurate , anti @-@ aircraft gunfire as they arrived over Kaafjord . Aside from the two aircraft whose pilots sighted Tirpitz , the 35 other dive bombers attempting to attack the ship were forced to aim at her gun flashes . These bombing attacks took 25 minutes to complete ; seven near misses were achieved but no damage was inflicted on Tirpitz . One of the other Barracudas attacked an anti @-@ aircraft battery , another attempted to bomb a destroyer and a third scored a near miss on the tanker Nordmark . Three of the remaining four Barracudas did not find any targets and jettisoned their bombs into the sea ; the fourth was unable to drop its bombs due to a faulty release mechanism . 
 Although German gunners fired a heavy anti @-@ aircraft barrage throughout the attack , they achieved little success . Only one British aircraft , a Corsair , was shot down near Kaafjord ; its pilot survived and was taken prisoner . A damaged Barracuda was also forced to ditch near Indefatigable and its crew were rescued by the destroyer HMS Verulam . Several other Barracudas and five Hellcats were damaged during the raid and returned to their carriers . One of the damaged Hellcats was later written off after being judged beyond repair . 
 A second British raid , which had been scheduled to take off from 08 : 00 on 17 July , was cancelled two minutes before the aircraft were to begin launching when fog began to build up near the carriers , and the British fleet turned south to return to Scapa Flow . Swordfish and Seafire aircraft flew protective patrols over the Home Fleet throughout the morning 's operations . 
 = = Submarine actions = = 
 While the attack on Kaafjord was being conducted , the commander of the German submarines in the Norwegian sea ordered Group Trutz to take up new positions to the south @-@ east of Jan Mayen and intercept the British ships as they returned to Scapa Flow . The Admiralty had anticipated this redeployment , and maritime patrol aircraft from No. 18 Group RAF were directed to sweep the Home Fleet 's route back to its base . 
 The British patrol aircraft prevented Group Trutz from attacking the Home Fleet . At 21 : 48 on 17 July , a Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator assigned to No. 86 Squadron detected and sank U @-@ 361 ; none of the submarine 's crew were rescued . Eight minutes later a No. 210 Squadron Consolidated PBY Catalina piloted by Flying Officer John Cruickshank spotted U @-@ 347 on the surface . The submarine 's anti @-@ aircraft guns damaged the Catalina , killing the navigator and wounding Cruickshank as well as three other crewmen , but the pilot continued his attack and sank U @-@ 347 with depth charges . The Catalina managed to return to base , and Cruickshank was awarded the Victoria Cross for this action . That night the Home Fleet sailed through the gap in the German patrol line that had been opened by the sinking of the two submarines . 
 Attacks on the German submarines continued for the next six days . On the morning of 18 July a German reconnaissance aircraft spotted the Home Fleet , but the German Naval Command Norway assessed that it was heading north @-@ east to launch another attack . Accordingly , Group Trutz was ordered to sail north , and four more submarines sortied from Narvik to guard the approaches to Alten and Vest fjords . In the evening U @-@ 968 , one of the four boats that had sailed from Narvik , was attacked twice by Liberators ; she shot down the first attacker but was damaged by the second and had to return to port . U @-@ 716 also suffered severe damage from a Liberator attack at 19 : 15 on 18 July but managed to return to Hammerfest . At about 23 : 00 that day U @-@ 716 was seriously damaged by a Short Sunderland but also survived . Three other submarines were attacked on 20 July but only one suffered any damage . Following these actions the commander of submarines in the Norway area decided to dissolve Group Trutz as it was too vulnerable to air attack ; all but four of the surviving submarines returned to port and the remaining boats were ordered to sail north so that they were out of range of the British aircraft . The final attack on the submarines of the former Group Trutz was made on 23 July when a No. 330 Squadron Sunderland damaged U @-@ 992 near Vestfjord . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the attack on 17 July , the British learned from intercepted German radio transmissions and reports provided by Secret Intelligence Service agents that Tirpitz had not suffered any significant damage . Admiral Moore blamed the failure of Operation Mascot on the inexperience of the aircrew involved in the attack , and criticised the strike leader for not selecting alternative targets after it became clear that Tirpitz could not be accurately bombed . Moore also judged that further attacks on Kaafjord using Barracudas would be futile , as the dive bombers ' slow speed gave the Germans enough time to cover Tirpitz with smoke between the time raids were detected and their arrival over the target area . The Admiralty was hopeful that a strategy of repeatedly striking Kaafjord over a 48 @-@ hour period would wear down the defences , and Moore agreed to attempt another attack . Consideration was also given to flying fast and long @-@ ranged de Havilland Mosquito bombers off the carriers in an attempt to achieve surprise , but none of these land @-@ based aircraft could be spared from supporting the Allied bombing of Germany . 
 The next attack on Kaafjord took place in late August . During Operation Goodwood , aircraft flying from three fleet carriers and two escort carriers conducted four raids between 22 and 29 August . The attackers found Tirpitz covered in smoke on each occasion , and only managed to inflict light damage on the battleship . These unsuccessful attacks cost the British 17 aircraft and 40 airmen killed . The frigate HMS Bickerton was torpedoed and sunk by the submarine U @-@ 354 during the operation ; the same submarine also inflicted heavy damage on the escort carrier Nabob before being destroyed by a British aircraft . 
 The Admiralty accepted that Barracudas were too slow to be effective against the Kaafjord area following the failure of Operation Goodwood . As a result , the task of attacking the battleship was transferred to RAF Bomber Command . The first heavy bomber raid against Kaafjord ( Operation Paravane ) was conducted on 15 September 1944 , with the bombers flying from staging bases in northern Russia . This attack inflicted irreparable damage on Tirpitz , and she was transferred south to the Tromsø area to be used as an immobile coastal defence battery . The battleship was sunk there with heavy loss of life by another Bomber Command raid on 12 November . 
 = Kendrick Moxon = 
 Kendrick <unk> Moxon is an American Scientology official and an attorney with the law firm Moxon & Kobrin . He practices in Los Angeles , California , and is a lead counsel for the Church of Scientology . Moxon received a B.A. from American University in 1972 , and a J.D. degree from George Mason University in 1981 . He was admitted to the Washington , D.C. bar association in 1984 , and the State Bar of California in 1987 . Moxon 's early work for the Church of Scientology involved legal affairs , and he also held the title of " reverend " . He worked out of the Scientology intelligence agency known as the Guardian 's Office ( GO ) , and was named as an unindicted co @-@ conspirator after the Federal Bureau of Investigation 's investigation into criminal activities by Scientology operatives called " Operation Snow White " . An evidence stipulation in the case signed by both parties stated he had provided false handwriting samples to the FBI ; Moxon has since said that he did not " knowingly supply " false handwriting samples . 
 The bulk of Moxon 's legal work is Scientology @-@ related . He has served as Commissioner of the Scientology @-@ affiliated organization Citizens Commission on Human Rights ( CCHR ) . He represented the Church of Scientology in 1988 in a billion @-@ dollar class action lawsuit against the organization by former Scientologists which was dismissed in Los Angeles Superior Court . In 1990 Moxon represented the organization in a suit against the Internal Revenue Service in an attempt to gain access to information about Scientology held by the IRS . He assisted 50 Scientologists in filing separate lawsuits against the organization Cult Awareness Network ( CAN ) , which led to the bankruptcy of the organization . He represented the plaintiff in the Jason Scott case against CAN and cult deprogrammer Rick Ross . 
 A Scientology publication said Moxon had used church doctrine in bringing down CAN . Its assets were bought in bankruptcy court by a Scientologist and legal associate of Moxon 's . Moxon said he was proud of what he had done , referring to the old CAN organization as a " hate group " . Moxon represented the manager of the Scientology facility Golden Era Productions in a filing against Keith Henson , a critic of Scientology . Moxon filed an affidavit in 2000 in the case involving the criminal prosecution of the Church of Scientology in the death of Scientologist Lisa McPherson , and defended her treatment by Scientology staffers as part of a religious practice . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Moxon was born in Pennsylvania . He graduated from American University in 1972 with a B.A. degree in Anthropology . He received his J.D. degree from George Mason University in 1981 . He was admitted to the bar of Washington , D.C. on September 6 , 1984 , and the State Bar of California on June 17 , 1987 . 
 In 1979 , Moxon and Carla Smith had a daughter , Stacy Grove Meyer . Meyer died on June 25 , 2000 after she fell off a ladder and was electrocuted after touching a 7 @,@ 200 @-@ volt wire while working at Golden Era Productions . Golden Era Productions was cited by the California Division of Occupational Safety and Health for improper wiring precautions near a vault where Grove Meyer had been working . The California Occupational Safety and Health Administration investigated the incident , and determined that her death was not related to the safety violations at the facility . Grove Meyer had worked for two years at Golden Era Productions in landscaping and maintenance . 
 = = Guardian 's Office = = 
 In 1977 , Moxon served as an official of the Church of Scientology , and held the title of " reverend " . His role within the organization in 1977 was called " Director of the Ministry of Legal Affairs of the Founding Church of Scientology " . Along with Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard and nineteen other Scientologists , Moxon was named as an unindicted co @-@ conspirator after the Federal Bureau of Investigation 's investigation into criminal activities by Scientology operatives called " Operation Snow White " . At the time of the indictments and investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the Operation Snow White case , Moxon was working in the church intelligence agency then known as the Guardian 's Office ( GO ) . Operation Snow White was the name coined by Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard for a mission by the organization 's intelligence division to illegally obtain documents from the United States government . As part of Operation Snow White , members of the Guardian 's Office broke into U.S. government offices including those of the Internal Revenue Service , in order to steal documents relating to Scientology . 
 A 1979 stipulation of evidence signed by officials for Scientology states that Moxon provided false handwriting samples of GO operative Michael Meisner to the FBI . Both parties to the case were in agreement that Moxon responded to an October 14 , 1976 subpoena titled " Grand Jury subpoena for all original known handwriting exemplars of Michael Meisner and the employment application and personnel records of Mr. Meisner in the possession of the Church of Scientology " by providing " fake handwriting samples in lieu of Mr. Meisner 's true handwriting exemplars " to the United States government . The stipulation stated Moxon was " directed to supply the government with fake handwriting samples " . Nine Scientologists signed the stipulation as part of a plea bargain . According to a 1976 letter from the " District of Columbia Security Office " of the Guardian 's Office , " Rick Moxon " and four other individuals had either " full data or almost all of it " , about covert operations against the United States government . According to the Guardian 's Office letter , Moxon was prevented under penalty of a US $ 50 @,@ 000 fine from disclosing his knowledge of the church cover operations . The non @-@ disclosure agreement was titled " Covenant of Non @-@ Disclosure ; ' Doomsday Agreement ' " . The letter told an official for the Church of Scientology to instruct Moxon " if they do talk , then they will be expelled forever , hounded by the GO [ Guardian Office ] until doomsday , and left to rot in the Physical Universe " . 
 Moxon stated to the Phoenix New Times that the stipulation of evidence was written by FBI agents and signed by church officials . He asserted that he did not " knowingly supply " samples of false handwriting to the FBI , and said that he was investigated by bar associations for California and Washington , D.C. before being admitted to the respective bar associations . According to the Phoenix New Times , Moxon is " in good standing " with both bar associations . Former church intelligence operative Frank Oliver told the Phoenix New Times that in his work for the replacement to the Guardian 's Office , the Office of Special Affairs , his last assignment for the organization was to assist Moxon in setting up a special unit focused on the Cult Awareness Network . Oliver stated that the goal of his work with Moxon was to recruit individuals who would become plaintiffs in lawsuits against the Cult Awareness Network . 
 = = Church of Scientology attorney = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Moxon acted as attorney for the Church of Scientology in 1988 when former Scientologists sued the organization in a billion @-@ dollar class action lawsuit . According to Moxon the former Scientologists included some members who were subject to excommunication , and they requested the return of donations they had made to the organization , as well as payment for time working on its behalf . The case was dismissed by a Los Angeles Superior Court judge , and Moxon characterized the plaintiffs as " a few former members who apparently banded together for the purpose of making a monetary killing " . 
 In 1990 Moxon represented the Church of Scientology in a lawsuit against the Internal Revenue Service in an attempt to gain access to government documents on the organization . " The actions taken by the IRS in this case are typical of the agency 's <unk> treatment of religious groups , " said Moxon in a statement in The Fresno Bee . During the Church of Scientology 's battle with the IRS , Moxon 's law firm hired private investigators to investigate the government agency . Private investigator Michael L. Shomers said he set up a dummy operation called " Washington News Bureau " , posed as a reporter , and attempted to collection material on Scientology critics . Shomers also said he infiltrated IRS conferences in attempts to collect data on IRS employees that may have been skipping appointments , drinking or having affairs . Shomers said he was either paid in cash or by checks from Moxon 's firm Bowles & Moxon . According to The New York Times , Moxon said Shomers ' activities were legal , and that he and other Scientology attorneys used private investigators to counter falsehoods from " rogue government agents " . 
 = = = Cult Awareness Network litigation = = = 
 Moxon assisted Scientologists in filing 50 lawsuits against the Cult Awareness Network ( CAN ) , which eventually led to the bankruptcy of the organization . Moxon confirmed to the St. Petersburg Times that his firm assisted the Scientologists with their litigation against CAN for mostly no charge , and that Scientology churches " helped a little bit , but very little " with the case . Moxon asserted that his legal services were requested by individual Scientologists because of his religious discrimination litigation experience . " These were filed by [ individual ] Scientologists who were victimized by CAN . That ’ s the long and short of it , " said Moxon . Moxon stated to 60 Minutes " They didn <unk> didn 't spring up serendipitously . A number of Scientologists came to our firm and said , ' I 'm being discriminated against by CAN . ' " 
 Jason Scott of the Life Tabernacle Church in Bellevue , Washington was taken from his home in 1991 and subjected to " deprogramming " . <unk> Rick Ross had been referred to Scott 's mother by a local volunteer for CAN , and Moxon represented Scott in a lawsuit against Ross and CAN . Moxon took on Jason Scott 's case pro bono . According to a 60 Minutes report on Scientology 's actions against the Cult Awareness Network , two affidavits used by Moxon in the case were false . Scott won a jury judgment of US $ 5 million including $ 1 @.@ 8 million against CAN , and CAN later declared bankruptcy . After the CAN organization was purchased in bankruptcy court by a Scientology attorney , Scott fired Moxon and hired Graham Berry , a Los Angeles lawyer who had previously represented clients in suits against the Church of Scientology . Scott and Ross settled in 1996 for $ 5 @,@ 000 and 200 hours of time from Ross for his intervention services . 
 Scott stated that he felt he had been manipulated as part of the Church of Scientology 's plan to destroy CAN . According to the Chicago Tribune , Scott and his relatives felt Moxon was not paying enough attention to Scott 's financial judgment , and was instead focused on a " personal vendetta " against CAN . " Basically , Jason said he was tired of being the poster boy for the Scientologists . My son has never been a member of the Church of Scientology . When he was approached by Moxon , he was lured by his promises of a $ 1 million settlement , so he went for it , " said Scott 's mother Katherine Tonkin in a statement to the Chicago Tribune . 
 After Scott fired Moxon , Moxon filed emergency motions in two states and alleged Scott had been influenced by supporters of CAN to hire Berry as his lawyer . " He 's really been abused by CAN and disgustingly abused by this guy Berry , " said Moxon in a statement in The Washington Post . Moxon , who had argued in the case that Ross and associates had hindered a competent adult 's freedom to make his own religious decisions , immediately filed court papers seeking to rescind the settlement and appoint a guardian for Scott , whom he called " incapacitated . " That effort failed . Jason Scott stated he felt he had been a " pawn " in Scientology 's " whole game " . 
 Moxon was involved in the sale of CAN 's confidential files when the organization was in bankruptcy proceedings . Individuals that had confided in the prior version of the CAN organization expressed anxiety about their confidential files being sold to other groups , but Moxon stated : " People who have committed crimes don 't want them to be revealed . " Moxon 's former legal associate , Scientologist Steven Hayes , purchased the assets of the Cult Awareness Network in bankruptcy court . In 2000 , Moxon co @-@ authored a paper on the Cult Awareness Network with Anson D. <unk> and Susan E. Darnell . The paper , titled " CAN , We Hardly Knew Ye : Sex , Drugs , Deprogrammers ' <unk> , and Corporate Crime in the ( Old ) Cult Awareness Network " , was presented at the 2000 meeting of the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion in Houston , Texas . The old " CAN no longer exists because it was a hate group that destroyed families . I ’ m very proud of what I ’ ve done , " said Moxon in a statement in The American Lawyer . 
 According to a Scientology publication , Moxon utilized Scientology doctrine to bring about the demise of the Cult Awareness Network . The publication , authored by Scientology official Kurt Weiland , stated : " A civil case was filed by the victim against [ Rick ] Ross and the Cult Awareness Network . This time he had an attorney who knew what he was doing and understood PTS / SP tech ! The attorney was a Scientologist and OT [ Operating Thetan ] Rick Moxon . " " PTS / SP tech " is Scientology terminology referring to the organization 's founder L. Ron Hubbard 's prescribed tactics of handling enemies called " suppressive persons " ( <unk> ) and their associates , called " potential trouble sources " ( <unk> ) . The Cult Awareness Network was seen by Scientology as a " SP " organization . 
 = = = Subsequent legal efforts = = = 
 Moxon represented manager Ken <unk> of the Church of Scientology 's Golden Era Productions in February 1998 when he filed a restraining order against Keith Henson after Henson protested against Scientology in May 1997 and January 1998 outside the Golden Era film studios in Gilman Hot Springs , California . Moxon had argued that Henson was dangerous based on comments critical of Scientologists he had posted on the Internet , and his knowledge in the fields of cryonics and explosives . <unk> received a temporary restraining order against Henson , but the Riverside Superior Court judge refused to make the restraining order permanent . 
 In 1999 , Moxon represented members of the Seventh @-@ day Adventists and Unification Church in a lawsuit against a Maryland state task force which was investigating the effects of religious cults on college campuses . The Unification Church and Seventh @-@ day Adventists members claimed that their constitutional rights were violated and described the " Task Force to Study the Effects of Cult Activities on Public Senior Higher Education Institutions " as a " religious inquisition " . 
 With fellow Scientology attorney Helena Kobrin , Moxon filed an affidavit in Pinellas @-@ Pasco Circuit Court in March 2000 , complaining to the judge about the criminal prosecution of the Church of Scientology related to the death of Lisa McPherson . They claimed that the prosecution held an " extreme religious bias " and a " narrow @-@ minded concept of a church " . They defended the practice of the Scientology staffers that had kept Lisa McPherson at the Fort Harrison Hotel in Clearwater , Florida , asserting they had been involved in the " Introspection Rundown " , which they called an " entirely religious " practice developed by Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard . They wrote that " Forcing a Scientologist to receive psychiatric services would be like forcing an Orthodox Jew to eat pork or forcing a devoted Catholic to have an abortion . It is simply unacceptable and unthinkable to our religious faith and conscience . " Moxon said that the wrongful death lawsuit filed by members of McPherson 's family against the Church of Scientology was " nothing more than a vehicle to say bad things about the church " . The criminal prosecution in the Lisa McPherson case was dropped due to issues with record @-@ keeping by the medical examiner ; a wrongful death civil suit was settled in 2004 . 
 According to Scientology general counsel Elliot Abelson , the bulk of Moxon 's legal work is Scientology @-@ related . In addition to his office with his law firm , as of 1997 Moxon also kept a legal office in the Church of Scientology 's headquarters at Hollywood , Los Angeles , California . Moxon has also served as legal advisor to the Scientology @-@ affiliated organization Citizens Commission on Human Rights ( CCHR ) . According to a CCHR press release from 2001 , Moxon represented CCHR International as its Commissioner . 
 In 2014 , Moxon sought arbitration through the National Arbitration Forum to have the Internet domain name , <unk> , transferred from Donald Myers to Moxon 's ownership . Moxon successfully demonstrated to the Forum arbitrator that Myers " registered and used the domain name in bad faith " , and Moxon 's petition was granted . 
 = = Works = = 
 Papers 
 <unk> , Anson , Kendrick Moxon , and Susan E. Darnell . 2000 . " CAN , We Hardly Knew Ye : Sex , Drugs , Deprogrammers ' <unk> , and Corporate Crime in the ( Old ) Cult Awareness Network . " Paper presented at the 2000 meeting of the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion . Houston , Texas . 
 = Hard Boiled = 
 Hard Boiled ( Chinese : <unk> ) is a 1992 Hong Kong action film written and directed by John Woo , and starring Chow Yun @-@ fat as Inspector " Tequila " Yuen , Tony Leung Chiu @-@ Wai as Alan an undercover cop , and Anthony Wong as Johnny Wong , a leader of the criminal triads . The film features Tequila , whose partner ( Bowie Lam ) is killed in a tea house gunfight with a small army of gangsters . One of the mob 's high @-@ ranking assassins is the undercover cop Alan , who must team up with Tequila for their common pursuit of taking down Wong 's crime syndicate . The film leads up to a climax in a hospital , where the two must rescue innocent civilians and new born babies from the maternity ward while fighting off dozens of mob hitmen . 
 Hard Boiled was John Woo 's last Hong Kong film before his transition to Hollywood . After making films that glamorized gangsters ( and receiving criticism for doing so ) , Woo wanted to make a Dirty Harry styled film to glamorize the police . After the death of screenwriter Barry Wong , the film 's screenplay underwent constant changes during filming . New characters such as Mad Dog and Mr. Woo were introduced , while the original plotline of a baby poisoning psychopath was cut . 
 The film was released in Hong Kong in 1992 to generally positive audience reception , but it was not as commercially successful as Woo 's previous action films , such as A Better Tomorrow and The Killer . Reception from western critics was much more positive ; many critics and film scholars have come to proclaim its action scenes as among the best ever filmed . In 2007 , a video game sequel titled Stranglehold was released , which is in the process of being made into a film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a tea house in Hong Kong , Officer " Tequila " Yuen ( Chow Yun @-@ fat ) and his partner Benny ( Bowie Lam ) , attempt to arrest a group of gun smugglers while they are making a deal . After an ambush from another gang member , a fierce gun battle breaks out . The gangsters are defeated but with several police officers badly wounded , and Benny is killed . Tequila , seeking revenge , decides to kill the gangster who ambushed them , rather than arrest him . This angers his boss , Officer Superintendent Pang ( Philip Chan ) , who wanted the gangster alive to testify . Tequila is ordered off the case . 
 Elsewhere , a high @-@ ranking assassin , Alan ( Tony Leung Chiu @-@ wai ) , works for Triad boss " Uncle " Hoi ( Kwan Hoi @-@ Shan ) . Alan murders a fellow member of Hoi 's gang , who had been working for Johnny Wong 's ( Anthony Wong ) rival syndicate . Wong is impressed by Alan 's skill and attempts to recruit him . Alan reluctantly turns against Hoi when Wong conducts a raid on Hoi 's arsenal at a warehouse . At the warehouse , Wong 's men kill Hoi 's workers and destroy his stock . When Hoi arrives , Wong demands Alan kill Hoi , which he does , along with the rest of Hoi 's men . Just then , smoke grenades explode and Tequila attacks . Alan covers Wong 's escape as Tequila battles and kills most of the gangsters . In the end , Tequila finds himself confronting Alan face to face in the smoke , with guns to each other 's heads . Tequila tries to shoot Alan , but his .357 Ruger <unk> revolver is out of ammo . Although he is free to kill Tequila , Alan slowly lowers his gun and walks away , after which Tequila opens his revolver , and dumps all the shells , revealing them to apparently be blanks , although it is unclear if this is intentional or a mistake . 
 At the police station , Pang confirms that Alan is actually an undercover cop . Tequila tracks Alan down to his sailboat to try to make sense of the situation , but the two are ambushed by the remnants of Hoi 's gang . Tequila and Alan manage to kill their attackers just before Wong arrives , which allows Alan to keep his cover . Wong realizes that one of his gangsters named Foxy ( Tung Wei ) , is an informant for the police . Foxy is beaten at the docks by Wong 's henchman Mad Dog ( Philip Kwok ) in front of Alan and Wong . In front of Wong and Mad Dog , Alan then shoots Foxy in the chest , although he has secretly placed a cigarette lighter in Foxy 's breast pocket earlier to prevent the shot from being fatal . Foxy finds Tequila at a jazz bar and informs him that Wong 's armory is in the nearby Maple Group Hospital . As Tequila takes Foxy to the hospital , Wong finds out Foxy is alive and sends Alan to kill Foxy , as well as sending Mad Dog separately to cover Alan . At the hospital , Alan confronts Tequila , demanding to know the whereabouts of Wong 's arsenal . While Alan and Tequila are distracted , Foxy is killed by Mad Dog . 
 Alan and Tequila discover a hidden passage in the hospital leading to Wong 's arsenal . They are confronted by Mad Dog , who engages them . Wong arrives at the hospital and has all the patients , police officers and staff taken hostage . After fighting their way to the main lobby , Alan and Tequila liberate the kidnapped patients and police officers . Pang evacuates the lobby while police detective Teresa Chang ( Teresa Mo ) goes to the maternity ward to organize evacuating the babies . Alan and Tequila continue fighting gangsters until finding Mad Dog . While Tequila goes to assist Chang with the babies , Alan and Mad Dog find themselves in a standoff with a group of patients caught in the middle . They slowly put their guns down and offer the patients safe passage , until Wong appears and shoots them all . An enraged Mad Dog shoots Wong in the torso , but then runs out of ammo . Wong shoots and kills Mad Dog while Alan escapes . 
 Tequila finds the last baby in the maternity unit , and carries it to safety while fighting off the last of the gangsters . Alan and Tequila meet up again and are confronted by Wong , who has programmed bombs to blow up the building . Alan pursues Wong as Tequila escapes the hospital with the last baby , the hospital exploding around him . Outside , Wong suddenly appears holding Alan at gunpoint . After watching Wong humiliate Tequila , Alan grabs Wong 's 9mm Heckler & Koch P7 pistol . In a struggle , Alan shoots himself through the stomach giving Tequila enough time to shoot Wong dead with a .38 Taurus Model 85 revolver . Later at the police station , Pang and Tequila burn Alan 's police file . Alan sails away from Hong Kong in his boat . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Chow Yun @-@ fat as Inspector " Tequila " Yuen : A clarinet @-@ playing police officer whose partner is killed in a restaurant gunfight with a small army of gangsters . Chow had previously worked with director John Woo on several of his films , including A Better Tomorrow , The Killer and Once a Thief . 
 Tony Leung Chiu @-@ Wai as Alan : An undercover cop posing as a high @-@ ranking Triad assassin . He makes an origami crane every time he kills someone , a trait which was influenced by Woo 's daughter when he saw her making them . Tony 's character is shown as living alone and detached from others . Woo stated that this was influenced by Alain Delon 's character in the French crime film Le Samouraï . Leung had previously worked with Woo on his film Bullet in the Head . 
 Teresa Mo as Teresa Chang : A fellow police officer who is the girlfriend of Inspector " Tequila " Yuen . Chang helps decode the secret code songs that are sent to the police office by Alan . 
 Philip Chan as Supt. Pang : Prior to the film , Philip Chan was a police officer for about fifteen years . Philip Chan felt that certain scenes in the film were very familiar as they were similar to things had to do with real police work . 
 Philip Kwok as Mad Dog : A skilled gunfighter working for Johnny Wong . 
 Anthony Wong as Johnny Wong : Wong is the head of a Triad who encourages Alan to kill Uncle Hoi . Wong 's triad has a large amount of guns hidden in the basement of a hospital . 
 Bowie Lam as Benny : An undercover officer who is killed in the tea house shoot @-@ out . 
 Anjo Leung as Benny 's son . 
 Bobby Au @-@ Yeung as Lionheart : An assistant to Inspector " Tequila " Yuen . 
 Kwan Hoi @-@ Shan as Mr. Hoi : A triad boss who is the head of the gang Tony is investigating . Mr. Hoi is killed in a warehouse shoot @-@ out . 
 Tung Wei as Foxy : An undercover cop beaten up by Mad Dog . Foxy is spared by Alan , and lives to deliver information to Tequila from Alan . Foxy is later killed by Mad Dog at the hospital in which the final shoot @-@ out takes place . 
 John Woo as a Bartender : A bartender at the Jazz club who gives advice to Inspector " Tequila " Yuen . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The film was originally developed in 1990 . After creating films which focused on the lives of gangsters , director John Woo wanted to make a film that glorified the police instead . Woo admired Clint Eastwood 's and Steve McQueen 's characters from their films Dirty Harry and Bullitt respectively , and wanted to make his own Hong Kong @-@ style Dirty Harry police detective film . While creating this character , Woo was inspired by a police officer who was a strong @-@ willed and tough member of the police force , as well as being an avid drummer . This led to Woo having Tequila 's character be a musician as well as a cop . 
 Before production started , Woo told his actors that he was not going to make the film as stylish as his previous films , but to have it be more of an " edgy thriller " . The role of Teresa Chang was originally made for actress Michelle Yeoh who had a long relationship with producer Terence Chang . After casting Teresa Mo , the character of Teresa Chang was greatly re @-@ written . The film 's initial story was about Tony Leung 's character being a psychopath who would poison baby food . When Terence Chang was making connections to have Woo make films in the United States , Chang found people uninterested and disgusted with the theme of babies being poisoned . This halted production for a month to develop a new story . Screenwriter Barry Wong was brought in to write a new story about Tony Leung 's character being an undercover police officer . After writing the first part of the script , Wong went on a vacation outside Hong Kong , where he died leaving the script unfinished . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Hard Boiled took 123 days to shoot . Although Woo told his cast that the film would be more gritty and not as stylish as his previous films , Hard Boiled became more stylish as the filming began . The tea house sequence in the film was shot before the script was written . The crew found that the tea house was going to be torn down and decided to film a scene there . Woo saw the staircase in the tea house , and thought about a scene where a character would come shooting down gun smugglers while sliding down the banister . The tea house sequence was shot in around a week 's time and was choreographed by Woo and Philip Kwok . It was shot with interruptions from many local triads in the area asking for protection money , and residents complaining about the noise . 
 The script of the film went through several changes during filming . Due to the length of the film , scenes from a side @-@ story involving the relationship between the character Tequila and Teresa Chang were cut . Another cut scene included Tequila playing clarinet over Benny 's grave . With these cuts , Chow Yun @-@ Fat felt his character was not very deep in comparison to Leung 's character of Alan . To develop his character more , Chow asked John Woo to insert a mentor character in the film , which Woo himself would play . Chow felt that having Woo in this role would make Woo not cut out these scenes . Philip Kwok 's role of Mad Dog was not in the script and was created on the set . Kwok first worked with Woo on his film Once a Thief and was asked to return to work on Hard Boiled . After reading the script , Woo felt that the character of Johnny Wong was not a strong enough physical threat . After seeing Kwok do several of the stunts while filming , Woo created the character of Mad Dog for him . 
 The scenes shot at the Hospital maternity ward and the warehouse were shot at a new studio called " The Coca @-@ Cola Factory " which was formerly a Coke bottling plant . The hospital scenes took 40 days to shoot . The hospital segment 's location was chosen since they wanted to have an atypical location where gangs would hide their weapons . While filming in the hospital , the windows were covered with blast shields to give the appearance of night time , which allowed the crew to film at any time during the day . Members of the cast and crew stayed in the hospital for days often losing track of the time of day . After long hours of filming in the hospital , the crew became exhausted . This led to having the last scene be one long five @-@ minute scene of action to shorten the time needed to film . To complete this , during the scene when two characters go into an elevator to talk for twenty seconds , the crew changes the scene entirely and sets up the explosions for the scene to continue seamlessly . An accident occurred while filming the hospital sequence . Real glass was used and pieces of it flew toward Tony Leung and got into his eyes . Leung was sent to the hospital and after a week 's rest , he returned to the set . Woo changed the ending of Hard Boiled after many members of the crew of the film felt that Leung 's character should survive at the film 's end . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Woo is a fan of jazz music and wanted this style for the soundtrack of Hard Boiled . Woo had also previously wanted a singer to perform a jazz song and have Chow Yun Fat 's character play saxophone in his previous film The Killer . The producer for The Killer , Tsui Hark , rejected this idea for The Killer , feeling that Hong Kong audiences didn 't enjoy and understand jazz music . The score heard in Hard Boiled was created by jazz musician Michael Gibbs . During promotional screenings , the score for the film was different and was described as " very haunting music " by film scholar Bey Logan . This score could not be used as the production crew could not get the rights to the music . Other songs featured in the film , include " Hello " by Lionel Richie and the traditional song " Mona Lisa " . Woo chose these songs specifically for their lyrics to suggest that Tony was a sort of pen pal to Teresa . All the characters in Hard Boiled had their voices dubbed by their own actors in order to save money . Woo stated this was convenient as he did not have to worry about setting up boom mics and other sound elements . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 Hard Boiled 's was released on 16 April 1992 in Hong Kong . The film grossed HK $ 19 @,@ 711 @,@ 048 which was not as strong of a box office reception as Woo 's previous action films A Better Tomorrow or The Killer . On the film 's initial release in Hong Kong it debuted at number 3 in the box office where it was beaten by Tsui Hark 's Once Upon a Time in China 2 and the Stephen Chow film Fight Back to School II . 
 The North American premiere of Hard Boiled was in September 1992 at the Toronto International Film Festival . At the premiere the audience response was very positive with people stomping their feet and yelling at the screen . This reception surprised producer Terence Chang who did not expect such a positive reaction . Hard Boiled received wide release in the United Kingdom on 8 October 1993 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 A Region Free DVD of Hard Boiled was released by The Criterion Collection on 10 July 1998 . A second Region 1 DVD of the film was released by Fox Lorber . Fox Lorber released the film as a stand @-@ alone release and as a double feature with The Killer on 3 October 2000 . The most recent Region 1 release of Hard Boiled was from Dragon Dynasty , who released a two disc DVD of the film on 24 July 2007 . A Blu @-@ Ray version of the film was included as part of the Stranglehold Limited Edition for the Playstation 3 , and was later released as a standalone title by Dragon Dynasty . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Hard Boiled was received well by English @-@ language critics on its original release . The film ranking website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 94 % of critics had given the film positive reviews , based upon a sample of 31 . Initial reception was positive . Vincent Canby of The New York Times found it difficult to follow both the action scenes and the subtitles at the same time , but stated that " Mr. Woo does , in fact , seem to be a very brisk , talented director with a gift for the flashy effect and the bizarre confrontation . " A review in The Los Angeles Times stated that " With Hard Boiled , John Woo shows himself to be the best director of contemporary action films anywhere . " The Philadelphia Inquirer spoke positively about the action scenes , noting the " epic shootouts that bookend Hard @-@ Boiled , John Woo 's blood @-@ soaked Hong Kong gangster extravaganza , are wondrously staged , brilliantly photographed tableaux . " The Boston Herald proclaimed the film as " arguably Woo 's masterpiece , it is an action film to end all action films , an experience so deliriously cinematic it makes " True Romance , " a film that clearly aspires to it , look like a cheap copy " A review in Newsday gave the film three and a half stars , stating that " Mayhem has never looked better than in John Woo 's latest high @-@ caliber cops @-@ and @-@ robbers thriller , even if the plot is a bit slippery " and that John Woo " has blasted the action genre onto a whole new level . His shootouts are a ballet ; his <unk> are poetry . And while he lets the body count get away from him , he constantly fascinates , through a combination of chaos and an excruciating control over what we 're allowed to see . " 
 After the film 's initial release , critical reception continues to be positive . Film scholar Andy Klein wrote that the film is " almost a distillation of [ Woo 's ] post @-@ 1986 work . Even if the plot is full of holes , and the emotional tug isn 't quite as strong as in The Killer , the action sequences ( nearly the whole movie ) are among the greatest ever filmed " . Mark Salisbury of Empire Magazine gave the film four stars out of five , calling it " Infinitely more exciting than a dozen Die Hards , action cinema doesn 't come any better than this . " Salisbury compared Hard Boiled to Woo 's American films , stating that his Hong Kong films are " not as slick as his later films , [ Hard Boiled is ] more inventive and stylised and [ has ] great early performances from Fat and Leung " . Empire placed the film at number 70 in their list of " The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema " in 2010 . Ed Gonzalez of Slant Magazine gave the film the highest rating of four stars , proclaiming it to be one of Woo 's best films . The British film magazine Empire ranked the character of Tequila as 33rd in their " The 100 Greatest Movie Characters " poll . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 12th Hong Kong Film Awards , David Wu and John Woo won the award for " Best Film Editing " . Tony Leung was nominated for " Best Supporting Male Actor " , but lost the award to Liu Kai @-@ Chi in <unk> . 
 = = Video game = = 
 In 2007 , Midway Games released the game Stranglehold . The game 's story and storyboards were made in collaboration with John Woo . The game features the character Tequila from Hard Boiled , who is travelling the globe in search of his kidnapped daughter . John Woo 's production company Lion Rock Entertainment is developing a film version of the game which will be written by Jeremy Passmore and Andre Fabrizio . 
 = Raghunath Temple = 
 Raghunath Temple consists of a complex of seven Hindu shrines , each with its own Shikhara . It is one of the largest temple complexes of north India . It is located in Jammu in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir . The temple was built during the period 1822 – 1860 by order of Maharaja Ranjit Singh , while Jammu was under his administration by Maharaja Gulab Singh . The temple has many gods in its complex of shrines , but the presiding deity is Rama , an Avatar of Vishnu . The Mughal architectural influence is seen in all the spiral shaped towers which have gold plated spires , except the tower over the main shrine which is said to be in Sikh architectural style . The niches in the walls of the shrines are decorated with 300 well crafted images of deities . The paintings in the 15 panels of the main shrine are based on themes from Ramayana , Mahabharata , and Bhagavad Gita . 
 The temple was also in the news during 2002 when suicide bombers <unk> of the Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Toiba attacked it twice with grenades and indulged in indiscriminate firing which resulted in death of many devotees and also in injuries to many people . 
 = = Location = = 
 The temple complex is located at Sui 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) , west of Jammu city in Jammu and Kashmir . The city is well connected by road , rail and air services . The National Highway 1 A passes through Jammu and connects with all parts of the country . The National Highway 1B is entirely within the state . Jammu city has a railway station called Jammu Tawi , on the northern railway line , that is well connected with major cities of India . Express trains operate from this station to Delhi , Mumbai , Chennai , Kolkata and Amritsar . Jammu Airport operates flights to many cities in India such as Delhi , Leh and Srinagar . 
 = = History = = 
 During the reign of the rulers of Jammu <unk> , after 1765 , there was a spurt in temple building activity in Jammu area , which continued during the early period of the 19th century . The rulers built spiral shaped temples with brick and crowned each tower with bright <unk> in the shape of shikhara ( rising tower ) . One such temple complex was started in 1822 ( 1835 is also mentioned ) by Gulab Singh , the ruler of Jammu and was dedicated to his guru Baba Prem Das . Its construction was completed in 1860 by his son Maharaja Ranbir Singh . However , according to an inscription in <unk> script ( <unk> ) at the entrance of the temple , Gulab Singh and his brother Dhyan Singh are credited with building the temple in 1827 in honour of Mahant Jagannath . 
 = = = Religious school = = = 
 During the reign of Ranbir Singh , the temple complex became the centre of Sanskrit teachings to a large number of Brahmin students . A translation centre was also established as part of the temple where books on philosophy and history in Arabic and Persian languages were translated by Muslim scholars into Sanskrit . Like wise , Pundits translated many scriptures into Hindi and <unk> languages . This initiative taken by Maharaja Ranbir Singh to bring amity between the Hindu and Muslim communities was praised by Sir Aurel Stein as in : 
 order to facilitate the exchange of ideas which the Maharaja in a spirit of true enlightenment desired to promote between the representatives of Hindu and Mohammedan scholars in his domain . 
 The temple also houses a library , which has rare Sanskrit works . 
 = = Features = = 
 The Hindu temple complex , one of the largest in North India , which has seven shrines , is built over a raised platform of 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) height in an octagonal shape . The front fascia is 40 feet ( 12 m ) in width while the main shrine is set 50 feet ( 15 m ) away from the entrance . Within the enclosed space of the yard there are residential buildings and open cattle yards on its eastern and northern directions . The front fascia of the temple has three entry doors . The main shrine which is 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) <unk> feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) in size , is surrounded by a circumambulatory passage ( pradakshina path ) of 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) width . The entrance door , set on one side of this octagonal chamber of the shrine , faces east . The interior of the inner chamber is gold plated . The main walls of the outer chamber have 15 panels , each of 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) height . These interior panels have a surfeit of paintings of the Jammu School of painting consisting of images from the Hindu epics Ramayana , Mahabharata , and Bhagavad Gita , represented by gods such as Ganesha , Krishna , Sheshashayi Vishnu ( reclining Vishnu ) and also a large painting depicting the Sita Swayamvara scene ( Sita choosing her husband from an elite gathering of princesses ) . Apart from the mythology related themes , some paintings relate to secular aspects , like Kabir , a saint , engaged in weaving and army personnel of Dogra and Sikh communities . The paintings also reveal the type of attire and the weaponry prevalent during the period of temple building . In the main shrine , the idol of Lord Rama , which is the family deity of the then king and the Dogra people , is deified in the garbhagriha ( sanctum sanctorum ) . The shrine has a dome instead of the normal shikara in a pyramidal shape , which is in the Sikh architectural style . All the seven shrines have gold plated spires . Gods and Goddesses enshrined in the seven shrines are all related to the epic Ramayana . In one of the shrines there is a Shiva linga , which is carved out of black stone and measures 7 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) . The shrines are also enshrined with a very large number of <unk> ( fossil ammonite stones specially obtained from the <unk> river , in Nepal – a Vaishnava ( Hindu ) aniconic representation of Vishnu ) . The architectural features of the shrines are stated to be largely influenced by Mughal architecture . 
 A distinct feature noted in the entire temple complex is the stucco style embellishments built with brick masonry and finished with plaster . The motifs crafted are of floral ( lotuses ) and geometric designs , on the walls , in the niches and on arches . Apart from paintings on the walls , the niches in the interior parts of the shrines have 300 well crafted images of deities . The profusion of paintings and images on the internal and external faces of the temple was considered an auspicious feature , instead of leaving the wall surfaces blank . However , the images and murals on the outer walls of the temple have since been demolished . 
 = = Terrorist attacks = = 
 On 30 March 2002 , a terrorist outfit first attacked in the market area by lobbing grenades and firing and then entered the temple . The security forces surrounded them . However , ten persons , including four security forces personnel and two militants , were killed and many more were injured . The second attack took place at the temple on 24 November 2002 , when the Hindus were performing puja in the temple ; this attack was made by bombers of the Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Toiba and resulted in the deaths of 13 devotees and injuries to several more . 
 = Outliers ( book ) = 
 Outliers : The Story of Success is the third non @-@ fiction book written by Malcolm Gladwell and published by Little , Brown and Company on November 18 , 2008 . In Outliers , Gladwell examines the factors that contribute to high levels of success . To support his thesis , he examines the causes of why the majority of Canadian ice hockey players are born in the first few months of the calendar year , how Microsoft co @-@ founder Bill Gates achieved his extreme wealth , how The Beatles became one of the most successful musical acts in human history , how Joseph Flom built <unk> , <unk> , Slate , Meagher & Flom into one of the most successful law firms in the world , how cultural differences play a large part in perceived intelligence and rational decision making , and how two people with exceptional intelligence , Christopher Langan and J. Robert Oppenheimer , end up with such vastly different fortunes . Throughout the publication , Gladwell repeatedly mentions the " 10 @,@ 000 @-@ Hour Rule " , claiming that the key to achieving world class expertise in any skill , is , to a large extent , a matter of practicing the correct way , for a total of around 10 @,@ 000 hours . 
 The publication debuted at number one on the bestseller lists for The New York Times and The Globe and Mail , holding the position on the former for eleven consecutive weeks . Generally well received by critics , Outliers was considered more personal than Gladwell 's other works , and some reviews commented on how much Outliers felt like an autobiography . Reviews praised the connection that Gladwell draws between his own background and the rest of the publication to conclude the book . Reviewers also appreciated the questions posed by Outliers , finding it important to determine how much individual potential is ignored by society . However , the lessons learned were considered anticlimactic and dispiriting . The writing style , though deemed easy to understand , was criticized for oversimplifying complex social phenomena . 
 = = Background = = 
 Malcolm Gladwell , the author of Outliers , was a journalist for The Washington Post before writing for The New Yorker . The subjects for his articles , usually non @-@ fiction , range from " Ron Popeil 's infomercial empire to computers that analyze pop songs " . His familiarity with academic material has allowed him to write about " psychology experiments , sociological studies , law articles , statistical surveys of plane crashes and classical musicians and hockey players " , which he converts into prose accessible to a general audience and which sometimes pass as memes into the popular imagination . 
 Before Outliers , Gladwell , who typically writes from a contrarian viewpoint , wrote two best @-@ selling books : The Tipping Point ( 2000 ) and Blink ( 2005 ) . Both books have been described as " pop economics " . The Tipping Point focuses on how ideas and behaviors reach critical mass , such as how Hush Puppies rapidly grew popular in the 1990s . Blink explains " what happens during the first two seconds we encounter something , before we actually start to think " . All Gladwell 's books focus on singularities : singular events in The Tipping Point , singular moments in Blink , and singular people in Outliers . Gladwell was drawn to writing about singular things after he discovered that " they always made the best stories " . Convinced that the most unusual stories had the best chance of reaching the front page of a newspaper , he was " quickly weaned off the notion that [ he ] should be interested in the mundane " . 
 For Outliers , Gladwell spent time looking for research that made claims that were contrary to what he considered to be popularly held beliefs . In one of the book 's chapters , in which Gladwell focuses on the American public school system , he used research conducted by university sociologist Karl Alexander that suggested that " the way in which education is discussed in the United States is backwards " . In another chapter , Gladwell cites pioneering research performed by Canadian psychologist Roger Barnsley when discussing how the birthdate of a young hockey player can determine their skill level in the future . 
 While writing the book , Gladwell noted that " the biggest misconception about success is that we do it solely on our smarts , ambition , hustle and hard work . " In Outliers , he hopes to show that there are a lot more variables involved in an individual 's success than society cares to admit , and he wants people to " move away from the notion that everything that happens to a person is up to that person " . Gladwell noted that , although there was little that could be done with regard to a person 's fate , society can still impact the " man " <unk> part of an individual 's success . When asked what message he wanted people to take away after reading Outliers , Gladwell responded , " What we do as a community , as a society , for each other , matters as much as what we do for ourselves . It sounds a little trite , but there 's a powerful amount of truth in that , I think . " 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Outliers has two parts : " Part One : Opportunity " contains five chapters , and " Part Two : Legacy " has four . The book also contains an Introduction and Epilogue . Focusing on outliers , defined by Gladwell as people who do not fit into our normal understanding of achievement , Outliers deals with exceptional people , especially those who are smart , rich , and successful , and those who operate at the extreme outer edge of what is statistically plausible . The book offers examples that include the musical ensemble The Beatles , Microsoft 's co @-@ founder Bill Gates , and the theoretical physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer . In the introduction , Gladwell lays out the purpose of Outliers : " It 's not enough to ask what successful people are like . [ ... ] It is only by asking where they are from that we can unravel the logic behind who succeeds and who doesn 't . " Throughout the publication , he discusses how family , culture , and friendship each play a role in an individual 's success , and he constantly asks whether successful people deserve the praise that we give them . 
 The book begins with the observation that a disproportionate number of elite Canadian hockey players are born in the first few months of the calendar year . The reason is that since youth hockey leagues determine eligibility by calendar year , children born on January 1 play in the same league as those born on December 31 in the same year . Because children born earlier in the year are bigger and more mature than their younger competitors , and they are often identified as better athletes , this leads to extra coaching and a higher likelihood of being selected for elite hockey leagues . This phenomenon in which " the rich get richer and the poor get poorer " is dubbed " accumulative advantage " by Gladwell , while sociologist Robert K. Merton calls it " the Matthew Effect " , named after a biblical verse in the Gospel of Matthew : " For unto everyone that hath shall be given , and he shall have abundance . But from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath . " Outliers asserts that success depends on the idiosyncrasies of the selection process used to identify talent just as much as it does on the athletes ' natural abilities . 
 A common theme that appears throughout Outliers is the " 10 @,@ 000 @-@ Hour Rule " , based on a study by Anders Ericsson . Gladwell claims that greatness requires enormous time , using the source of The Beatles ' musical talents and Gates ' computer savvy as examples . The Beatles performed live in Hamburg , Germany over 1 @,@ 200 times from 1960 to 1964 , amassing more than 10 @,@ 000 hours of playing time , therefore meeting the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ Hour Rule . Gladwell asserts that all of the time The Beatles spent performing shaped their talent , and quotes Beatles ' biographer Philip Norman as saying , " So by the time they returned to England from Hamburg , Germany , ' they sounded like no one else . It was the making of them . ' " Gates met the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ Hour Rule when he gained access to a high school computer in 1968 at the age of 13 , and spent 10 @,@ 000 hours programming on it . 
 In Outliers , Gladwell interviews Gates , who says that unique access to a computer at a time when they were not commonplace helped him succeed . Without that access , Gladwell states that Gates would still be " a highly intelligent , driven , charming person and a successful professional " , but that he might not be worth US $ 50 billion . Gladwell chooses his words carefully to never mention that Gates ' mother was on the board of directors of IBM with access to the whole of IBM , and not just an ordinary daughter of wealthy businessmen as he says . Gladwell explains that reaching the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ Hour Rule , which he considers the key to success in any field , is simply a matter of practicing a specific task that can be accomplished with 20 hours of work a week for 10 years . He also notes that he himself took exactly 10 years to meet the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ Hour Rule , during his brief tenure at The American Spectator and his more recent job at The Washington Post . 
 <unk> his theme , Gladwell continuously reminds the reader that genius is not the only or even the most important thing when determining a person 's success . Using an anecdote to illustrate his claim , he discusses the story of Christopher Langan , a man who ended up owning a horse farm in rural Missouri despite having an IQ of 195 ( Gladwell claims that Einstein 's was 150 ) . Gladwell points out that Langan has not reached a high level of success because of the dysfunctional environment in which he grew up . With no one in Langan 's life and nothing in his background to help him take advantage of his exceptional gifts , he had to find success by himself . " No one — not rock stars , not professional athletes , not software billionaires , and not even geniuses — ever makes it alone " , writes Gladwell . 
 Later , Gladwell compares Langan with Oppenheimer , the father of the atomic bomb . Noting that they typify innate natural abilities that should have helped them both succeed in life , Gladwell argues that Oppenheimer 's upbringing made a pivotal difference in his life . Oppenheimer grew up in one of the wealthiest neighborhoods in Manhattan , was the son of a successful businessman and a painter , attended the Ethical Culture <unk> School on Central Park West , and was afforded a childhood of concerted cultivation . Outliers argues that these opportunities gave Oppenheimer the chance to develop the practical intelligence necessary for success . Gladwell then provides an anecdote : When Oppenheimer was a student at University of Cambridge he attempted to poison one of his tutors . He avoided punishment , and continued his studies by using the skills gained from his cultivated upbringing in his negotiation with the university 's administrators , who had wanted to expel him . 
 In chapter nine , Marita 's Bargain , Gladwell advances the notion that the success of students of different cultures or different socio @-@ economic backgrounds is in fact highly correlated to the time students spent in school or in educationally rich environments . He describes the Knowledge is Power Program ( KIPP ) which helps students from about 50 inner city schools across the United States achieve much better results than other inner city schools ' students and explains that their success stems from the fact that they simply spent more hours at school during the school year and the summer . Gladwell also analyzes a 5 @-@ year study done by Karl Alexander of Johns Hopkins University , demonstrating that summer holidays have a detrimental effect on students of disadvantaged backgrounds , who paradoxically progress more during the school year than students from the highest socio @-@ economic group . 
 Before the book concludes , Gladwell writes about the unique roots of his Jamaican mother , Joyce , a descendant of African slaves . Joyce attended University College in London , where she met and fell in love with Graham Gladwell , a young mathematician . After moving together to Canada , Graham became a math professor and Joyce a writer and therapist . While Gladwell acknowledges his mother 's ambition and intelligence , he also points out opportunities offered to his parents that helped them live a life better than those of other slave descendants in the West Indies . Gladwell also explains that , in the 18th century , a white plantation owner in Jamaica bought a female slave and made her his mistress . This act inadvertently saved the slave and her offspring from a life of brutal servitude . As one of the slave 's descendants , this turn of luck led to Gladwell 's relatively successful position in life . Summarizing the publication , Gladwell notes that success " is not exceptional or mysterious . It is grounded in a web of advantages and inheritances , some deserved , some not , some earned , some just plain lucky " , and at the end of the book , he remarks , " Outliers wasn 't intended as autobiography . But you could read it as an extended apology for my success . " 
 = = Style = = 
 Outliers has been described as a form of autobiography , as Gladwell mixes in elements from his own life into the book to give it a more personal touch . Lev Grossman , writing in Time magazine , called Outliers a " more personal book than its predecessors " , noting , " If you hold it up to the light , at the right angle , you can read it as a coded autobiography : a successful man trying to figure out his own context , how success happened to him and what it means . " He also surmised that Gladwell feels guilty about his success and believes that Christopher Langan should have experienced the same success that he had . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Published by Little , Brown and Company on November 18 , 2008 , Outliers debuted at number one on the bestseller lists for The New York Times in the United States and The Globe and Mail in Canada on November 28 , 2008 , holding the position on the former for eleven consecutive weeks . As in his other books , Gladwell 's engaging and vivid prose drew praise in Outliers , though Gladwell 's methodology has been criticized for too often falling prey to fallacious reasoning , inadequate and anecdotally based sampling , and oversimplified analysis . 
 David A. <unk> , reviewing the book in The Wall Street Journal , praised Gladwell 's writing style as " iconic " , and asserted that " many new nonfiction authors seek to define themselves as the ' Malcolm Gladwell of ' their chosen topic . " He complimented its clarity and easy grace , but also pointed to these as possible Achilles ' heels for Gladwell because of his oversimplification of complex sociological phenomena to " compact , pithy explanations " . Furthermore , he praised the book for asking some important questions , such as " How much potential out there is being ignored ? How much raw talent remains uncultivated and ultimately lost because we cling to outmoded ideas of what success looks like and what is required to achieve it ? " 
 In a discussion about the book in Slate magazine , John Horgan was particularly moved by Gladwell 's family history . He felt that the links between race and achievement were given substantive analysis , but found the lessons mentioned in Outliers to be " oddly anticlimactic , even dispiriting " . His contribution concluded by remarking , " Outliers represents a squandered opportunity for Gladwell — himself an outlier , an enormously talented and influential writer and the descendant of an African slave — to make a major contribution to our ongoing discourse about nature , nurture , and race . " BusinessWeek gave the book four out of five stars and appreciated its " Aha ! " moments , but wondered if Gladwell purposely omits evidence that contradicts his thesis . The review remarked that Outliers was repetitive in parts , but that Gladwell eventually pulls the stories together into an overarching narrative . 
 Criticism focused on the book 's style and oversimplified conceptualizations . Displeased with Gladwell 's generalizations drawn from small amounts of data , Roger <unk> wrote in The Austin American @-@ Statesman that this was uncharacteristic of him , and believed that the approach points to a " certain exhaustion in his favorite method " . He remarked that in Outliers , the experiments , analyses , and conclusions drawn are too mechanically applied to historical or cultural phenomena to " create a cognitive ' gotcha ' moment " , that Gladwell 's analytical method was no longer working , and that " it 's high time for Gladwell to produce something more challenging than his beautifully executed tomb robberies of old sociology papers . " Boyd Tonkin in The Independent held a similar opinion , and wondered why Gladwell " does not yet hold a tenured professorship at the University of the <unk> ' Obvious " . 
 Jason Cowley , reviewing the book in The Guardian , felt that Outliers was an argument between Gladwell and himself , referring to the many times that he uses the word " we " when defining his position , such as in the example : " There is something profoundly wrong with the way we look at success . [ ... ] We cling to the idea that success is a simple function of individual merit and that the world in which we grow up and the rules we choose to write as a society don 't matter at all . " He also believed that there was a " certain one @-@ dimensional <unk> at work " , observing that many of Gladwell 's examples are from the United States , particularly in New York City . In an article about the book for The New York Times , Steven Pinker wrote , " The reasoning in ' Outliers , ' which consists of cherry @-@ picked anecdotes , post @-@ hoc sophistry and false dichotomies , had me gnawing on my Kindle . " In a review in The New Republic , Isaac Chotiner called the final chapter of Outliers " impervious to all forms of critical thinking " . 
 Finding it ironic that Outliers provided suggestions on how to resolve cultural biases , the Sunday Times review by Kevin Jackson agreed that the book itself suffered from an unbalanced focus on American subjects , predicting that this would lead to better sales in the United States than in the United Kingdom . Jackson was disappointed in the book 's lack of new ideas , noting that it merely expands on the concept that " you have to be born at the right moment ; at the right place ; to the right family ( posh usually helps ) ; and then you have to work really , really hard . That 's about it . " He was also skeptical towards Gladwell 's arguments for the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ Hour Rule by countering that The Beatles ' success had more to do with " the youthful spirit of the age , the vogue for guitar bands and a spark of collaborative chemistry " . Regarding the book , Paul McCartney , former member of The Beatles , said in an interview on August 6 , 2010 : 
 [ ... ] I 've read the book . I think there is a lot of truth in it [ ... ] I mean there were an awful lot of bands that were out in Hamburg who put in 10 @,@ 000 hours and didn 't make it , so it 's not a cast @-@ iron theory . I think , however , when you look at a group who has been successful ... I think you always will find that amount of work in the background . But I don 't think it 's a rule that if you do that amount of work , you 're going to be as successful as the Beatles . 
 Case Western Reserve University 's assistant professor of psychology Brooke N. Macnamara , PhD , and colleagues have subsequently performed a comprehensive review of 9 @,@ 331 research papers about practice relating to acquiring skills . They focused specifically on 88 papers that collected and recorded data about practice times . In their paper , they note regarding the 10 @,@ 000 hour rule that " This view is a frequent topic of popular @-@ science writing " but " we conducted a meta @-@ analysis covering all major domains in which deliberate practice has been investigated . We found that deliberate practice explained 26 % of the variance in performance for games , 21 % for music , 18 % for sports , 4 % for education , and less than 1 % for professions . We conclude that deliberate practice is important , but not as important as has been argued " . 
 Statistical analyst Jeff Sauro looked at Gladwell 's claim that between 1952 and 1958 was the best time to be born to become a software millionaire . Sauro found that , although the 1952 – 1958 category held the most births , " [ a ] software millionaire is more than twice as likely to be born outside the 1952 to 1958 window than within it . " Sauro notes that Gladwell 's claims are used more as a means of getting the reader to think about patterns in general , rather than a pursuit of verifiable fact . 
 Sociologist Shayne Lee referenced Outliers in his opinion editorial for CNN.com that commemorated Martin Luther King Jr . ' s birthday . Professor Lee discussed the strategic timing of Dr. King 's ascent from a " <unk> " perspective , citing Outliers as the inspiration for his argument . 
 = Barack Obama " Hope " poster = 
 The Barack Obama " Hope " poster is an image of Barack Obama designed by artist Shepard Fairey , which was widely described as iconic and came to represent his 2008 presidential campaign . It consists of a stylized stencil portrait of Obama in solid red , beige and ( light and dark ) blue , with the word " progress " , " hope " or " change " below ( and other words in some versions ) . 
 The design was created in one day and printed first as a poster . Fairey sold 290 of the posters on the street immediately after printing them . It was then more widely distributed — both as a digital image and other paraphernalia — during the 2008 election season , initially independently but with the approval of the official Obama campaign . The image became one of the most widely recognized symbols of Obama 's campaign message , spawning many variations and imitations , including some commissioned by the Obama campaign . This led The Guardian 's Laura Barton to proclaim that the image " acquired the kind of instant recognition of Jim Fitzpatrick 's Che Guevara poster , and is surely set to grace T @-@ shirts , coffee mugs and the walls of student bedrooms in the years to come . " 
 In January 2009 , after Obama had won the election , Fairey 's mixed @-@ media stenciled portrait version of the image was acquired by the Smithsonian Institution for its National Portrait Gallery . Later in January 2009 , the photograph on which Fairey based the poster was revealed : a June 2006 shot by former Associated Press freelance photographer Mannie Garcia . In response to claims by the Associated Press for compensation , Fairey sued for a declaratory judgment that his poster was a fair use of the original photograph . The parties settled out of court in January 2011 , with details of the settlement remaining confidential . 
 On February 29 , 2012 , Fairey pleaded guilty in a New York federal court to destroying and fabricating documents during his legal battle with the Associated Press . Fairey had sued the news service in 2008 after it claimed that the famous poster was based on one of its photos . Fairey claimed that he used a different photograph for the poster . But he admitted that , in fact , he was wrong and tried to hide the error by destroying documents and manufacturing others , which is the source of the one count of criminal contempt to which he pleaded guilty . In September , Fairey was sentenced to two years of probation , 300 hours of community service , and a fine of $ 25 @,@ 000 . 
 In 2009 Fairey 's Obama portrait was featured in the book Art For Obama : Designing Manifest Hope and the Campaign for Change which Fairey also edited . 
 In an interview with Esquire in 2015 Fairey said that Obama had not lived up , " not even close , " to his expectations . He continued , " Obama has had a really tough time , but there have been a lot of things that he 's compromised on that I never would have expected . I mean , drones and domestic spying are the last things I would have thought [ he 'd support ] . " 
 = = Concept and design = = 
 Shepard Fairey , who had created earlier political street art critical of government and of George W. Bush , discussed the nascent Obama campaign with publicist <unk> Sergant in late October 2007 . Sergant suggested Fairey create some art in support of Obama . Sergant contacted the Obama campaign to seek its permission for Fairey to design an Obama poster , which was granted a few weeks before Super Tuesday . Fairey has said that his decision to create a portrait of Obama stemmed from Fairey 's feeling that Obama 's " power and sincerity as a speaker would create a positive association with his likeness . " Fairey found a photograph of Obama using Google Image Search ( eventually revealed to be an April 2006 photo by freelancer Mannie Garcia for The Associated Press ) and created the original poster design in a single day . The original image had the word " progress " and featured Fairey 's signature obey star — a symbol associated with his Andre the Giant Has a Posse street art campaign — embedded in the Obama campaign 's sunrise logo . Due to the Obama campaign ’ s concerns about the troublesome connotations of the original wording , Fairey changed the slogan printed under Obama ’ s image from " progress " to " hope . " 
 According to design writer Steven Heller , the poster was inspired by Social Realism and , while widely praised as original and unique , can be seen as part of a long tradition of contemporary artists drawing inspiration from political candidates and producing " posters that break the mold not only in terms of color and style but also in message and tone . " Fairey has said , " My historical inspiration was the well @-@ known JFK portrait where he is posed in a three @-@ quarters view looking slightly upward and out into the distance . The image of Lincoln on the five @-@ dollar bill has a similar feel . " The design also resembles the poster for the 1987 film " Walker " directed by Alex Cox . 
 = = Distribution during the 2008 campaign = = 
 Fairey began screen @-@ printing posters soon after completing the design and showing it to <unk> Sergant . Initially , he sold 350 and put 350 more up in public . Beginning with that sale and continuing throughout the campaign , Fairey used proceeds from selling the image to produce more of it ; after first printing , he made 4 @,@ 000 more that were distributed at Obama rallies before Super Tuesday . He also put a printable digital version on his website . As Fairey explained in an October 2008 interview , the image quickly went viral , spreading spontaneously through social media and word of mouth . 
 After the initial 700 posters , the Obama campaign conveyed through Sergant that they wanted to promote the theme of hope , and most of the posters sold by Fairey subsequently had the word " hope " and later " change " instead of " progress " ; the obey star was also absent from later versions . By October 2008 , Fairey and Sergant claimed to have printed 300 @,@ 000 posters ( with less than 2 @,@ 000 sold and the rest given away or displayed ) and 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 stickers , as well as clothing and other items with the image sold through Fairey 's website , in addition to copies printed by others . According to Fairey and Sergant , proceeds from sales of the image were used to produce more posters and other merchandise in support of the Obama campaign , rather than direct profit for Fairey . 
 = = Parodies and imitations = = 
 As the campaign progressed , many parodies and imitations of Fairey 's design appeared . For example , one anti @-@ Obama version replaced the word " hope " with " hype " , while parody posters featuring opponents Sarah Palin and John McCain had the word " nope " . In January 2009 Paste magazine launched a site allowing users to create their own versions of the poster . More than 10 @,@ 000 images were uploaded to the site in its first two weeks . 
 Mad magazine parodied the " hope " poster with an " Alfred E. Neuman for President ! " poster . Alfred was on the poster , and the word " hope " was replaced with " hopeless " . Anti @-@ Gaddafi protesters in Chicago , in solidarity with the 2011 Libyan civil war , have co @-@ opted the image . Dynamite Comics released a four @-@ part crossover with Obama and Ash Williams of their " Army Of Darkness " comics and the Evil Dead films . One of the issues covers had a picture of Ash Williams ( played by Bruce Campbell in the films ) in the style of the " Hope " poster with the bottom text reading " Hope ? " 
 Fairey was also commissioned to create a number of works in the same style . He produced two other versions , based on different photographs , officially on behalf of the Obama campaign , and another to serve as the cover of the Person of the Year issue of Time . He also created a portrait of comedian Stephen Colbert in the same style , which appeared in an issue of Entertainment Weekly honoring Colbert 's television show The Colbert Report . 
 Firas <unk> , the student who designed the controversial Obama " Joker " image , cited Fairey as being his greatest influence . <unk> described the " Joker " image as a corrective to Fairey 's glowing portrayal of Obama . Fairey has both criticized and praised the " Joker " poster , stating " The artwork is great in that it gets a point across really quickly " , but " I don 't agree with the political content of the poster " . 
 Conservative satire site The People 's Cube made visual and verbal punning images , such as " Chaos " with an image of Rush Limbaugh ( " Operation Chaos " ) , " Shrugged " with an image of Ayn Rand ( for her novel Atlas Shrugged ) and " Marxism " with an image of Groucho Marx . 
 The September 2009 issue of The Advocate , America 's oldest @-@ continuing LGBT publication , featured a cover image similar to Fairey 's design . The blue and red coloring was replaced with pink and purple , but instead of " hope " , the caption was " nope ? " . Jon Barrett , the magazine 's editor @-@ in @-@ chief , said the cover expressed the frustration among some Democratic members of the LGBT community . 
 The poster has also been parodied in popular culture . In the Futurama episode " Proposition Infinity , " a similar poster of President Richard Nixon can be seen , with the slogan " <unk> " . In the 2010 movie Megamind , a version of the poster can be seen using Megamind 's visage and the caption " NO YOU CAN 'T " , parodying Obama 's campaign slogan " Yes we can " . Disney 's animated series Phineas and Ferb has two episodes , " Nerds of a Feather " and " She 's the Mayor " , both with Obama 's poster parodied with Candace 's face . American heavy metal band Five Finger Death Punch has released a version with their mascot and the words " WAR " , referring to their album War Is The Answer . In Iron Man 2 , Tony Stark receives a similar poster of the Iron Man armor and hangs it in his Malibu garage , much to the displeasure of his assistant and love interest Pepper Potts . 
 = = = Honest Gil Fulbright = = = 
 Shepard Fairey created an adaptation of the Obama HOPE poster for satirical Kentucky politician Honest Gil Fulbright . The poster for Honest Gil Fulbright features a portrait of Frank L. Ridley , the actor who portrays Fulbright , with the words " <unk> , " which refers to Fulbright 's " honest " political message : " I 'm only in this thing for the money , but at least I 'm honest about it . " 
 = = = Fairey 's adaptation for the Occupy movement = = = 
 <unk> with the Occupy movement , in November 2011 Shepard Fairey introduced a variation of his " Hope " poster . In the new poster , he featured a Guy Fawkes mask , and the message " Mister President , we HOPE you 're on our side " , with the word " HOPE " in large font and the rest of the sentence in small font . The Obama campaign logo on the right was replaced by a similar logo with the inscription " We are the 99 % " . 
 = = Acquisition by Smithsonian = = 
 On January 7 , 2009 , the Smithsonian Institution 's National Portrait Gallery announced it had acquired Fairey 's hand @-@ finished collage ( stencil and acrylic on paper ) version of the image ( with the word " hope " ) , which the gallery said would go on display shortly before Obama 's inauguration on January 20 , 2009 . The work was commissioned and later donated by art collectors Heather and Tony Podesta ( Tony is the brother of Obama 's transition co @-@ chairman John Podesta ) . It is an unusual acquisition , in that the National Portrait Gallery normally collects official portraits as presidents are leaving office rather than before they take office . 
 = = Origin and copyright issues = = 
 The original source photograph Fairey based the poster on was not publicly known until after Obama had won the election . After a mistaken attribution to Reuters photographer Jim Young for a similar @-@ looking January 2007 photograph , in January 2009 photographer and blogger Tom <unk> discovered that the poster was based on an Associated Press photograph by freelance photographer Mannie Garcia . It was taken at a 2006 media event with Kansas Senator Sam Brownback , where the actor George Clooney was raising awareness of the War in Darfur after a trip to Sudan he had taken with his father . 
 On February 4 , 2009 , the Associated Press announced that it determined " that the photograph used in the poster is an AP photo and that its use required permission . " In a press release , the AP announced they were in discussions with Fairey 's attorney to discuss an amicable solution . Fairey was represented by Anthony Falzone , executive director of the Fair Use Project at Stanford University . Falzone was quoted in the press release : " We believe fair use protects Shepard 's right to do what he did here . " Fairey subsequently filed a federal lawsuit against the Associated Press , seeking a declaratory judgment that his use of the AP photograph was protected by the fair use doctrine and so did not infringe their copyright . 
 On October 16 , 2009 , Fairey admitted that he had based the poster on the AP photograph and had fabricated and destroyed evidence to hide the fact . Fairey 's admission came after one of his employees informed Fairey that he had discovered damning documents on an old hard drive . Realizing that these documents would expose his cover @-@ up attempt , Fairey chose to come clean to his attorney . 
 Photographer Manny Garcia contended that he retained copyright to the photo according to his AP contract . He said that he was " so proud of the photograph and that Fairey did what he did artistically with it , and the effect it 's had , " but that he did not " condone people taking things , just because they can , off the Internet . " Fairey countered that his conduct did not constitute " improper appropriation " because he had not taken any protected expression from Garcia 's original photo . In addition , he claimed his behavior would qualify as a fair use . At trial AP would have to address both arguments . 
 A judge urged a settlement , stating that AP would win the case . The AP and Shepard Fairey settled out of court in January 2011 . In a press release , the AP announced that the AP and Fairey " agreed to work together going forward with the Hope image and share the rights to make the posters and merchandise bearing the Hope image and to collaborate on a series of images that Fairey will create based on AP photographs . The parties have agreed to additional financial terms that will remain confidential . " 
 In a separate criminal action , federal prosecutors suggested that Fairey should face prison time for the destruction of evidence in the case , with the government sentencing request stating that " A sentence without any term of imprisonment sends a terrible message to those who might commit the same sort of criminal conduct . Encouraging parties to game the civil litigation system … creates terrible incentives and subverts the truth @-@ finding function of civil litigation . " However , his sentence was ultimately limited to 300 hours of community service and a $ 30 @,@ 000 fine . 
 = Hugh de Puiset = 
 Hugh de Puiset ( sometimes Hugh du Puiset or Hugh Pudsey ; c . 1125 – 3 March 1195 ) was a medieval Bishop of Durham and Chief Justiciar of England under King Richard I. He was the nephew of King Stephen of England and Henry of Blois , who both assisted Hugh 's ecclesiastical career . He held the office of treasurer of York for a number of years , which led him into conflict with Henry Murdac , Archbishop of York . In 1153 , Hugh was elected bishop of Durham despite the opposition of Murdac . 
 Hugh was not involved in the controversy between King Henry II and Thomas Becket , Archbishop of Canterbury . The king did suspect Hugh of supporting Henry 's heir , Henry the Young King , when the prince rebelled and Hugh was also suspected of aiding the King of Scots , William I , during an invasion of Northern England in 1174 . After the accession of Henry 's second son Richard as king , Hugh bought the office of Sheriff of Northumberland , as well as the earldom of Northumbria . He also acquired the office of Justiciar , which he was supposed to share with William de Mandeville , but with Mandeville 's death Hugh shared the office with William Longchamp . Longchamp had managed to secure the office for himself by the middle of 1190 . 
 As a bishop , Hugh was noted as a builder , including a stone bridge in the city of Durham and the Galilee Chapel in Durham Cathedral . His administration of the episcopal lands included an inquest into the exact holdings of the bishopric . As a patron , Hugh sponsored the career of the medieval chronicler Roger of Hoveden . Hugh had a long @-@ term mistress , by whom he had at least two sons , and possibly two more . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hugh was the nephew of brothers King Stephen of England and Henry of Blois , born as the younger son of Hugh , lord of Puiset and Agnes , sister of Stephen and Henry . Agnes ' parents were Stephen , Count of Blois and Adela , a daughter of King William the Conqueror . His paternal family held a lordship in Northern France . Hugh was born in approximately 1125 , for in 1153 with his election as bishop he was still under the canonical age limit for bishops of 28 . Henry acquired for Hugh the office of archdeacon in the see of Winchester , sometime before 1139 . 
 Hugh afterwards became archdeacon of York and treasurer of York , sometime around 1143 , probably through the patronage of William FitzHerbert while he was serving his first term as Archbishop of York . While treasurer , he was a member of the party at York that wanted to elect Hilary as archbishop after William FitzHerbert 's deposition in 1147 . The successful candidate was Henry Murdac , the Abbot of Fountains , who was supported by the bishops of Durham and Carlisle , William of St. Barbara and Æthelwold respectively . Murdac excommunicated Hugh , who returned the gesture . 
 = = Bishop of Durham under Henry II = = 
 On 22 January 1153 Hugh was elected to the see of Durham by the cathedral chapter , in spite of the opposition of Henry Murdac , who excommunicated the chapter in response . Because of Murdac 's opposition and refusal to confirm the election , Hugh only obtained consecration by making a personal visit to Rome , where the pope was able to over @-@ rule the Archbishop of York . He was consecrated on 20 December 1153 , by Pope Anastasius IV . Hugh was enthroned , or ceremonially installed as bishop in his cathedral , at Durham on 2 May 1154 . King Stephen granted to Puiset as bishop of Durham , the mineral rights at Weardale , which included lead mines . Silver was also extracted from the lead ore mined there , and that silver probably helped the bishops form their own mint . 
 Hugh may not have attended the coronation of King Henry II of England and his queen Eleanor of Aquitaine . Some sources place him at the coronation , others do not . He also did not attend the Council of Clarendon in 1164 that issued the Constitutions of Clarendon , that was the cause of the quarrel between the king and Thomas Becket . In the ensuing dispute between the king and Becket , Hugh did not take sides . He was , however , present with Roger de Pont L 'Evêque the Archbishop of York at the coronation of the king 's eldest son Henry the Young King in 1170 , and consequently was suspended by Alexander III . The coronation of the Young King eventually led to Becket 's martyrdom in December 1170 . 
 Hugh obtained an exemption allowing him to keep his castle at Northallerton in Yorkshire when Henry was ordering the destruction of most of the illegal castles that had been built during King Stephen 's reign . He also built a castle at Norham , designed to help defend the north of England against raids from Scotland . 
 Hugh was suspected of involvement in the Young King 's revolt in 1173 . He does not seem to have taken an active part , but King Henry II suspected him of supporting the rebellion . When King William the Lion of Scotland invaded northern England in the spring of 1174 , Hugh either connived at the invasion or helped the rebels and the Scottish king . Suspicion fell upon the bishop because he was cautious in defending against the Scottish raids . Hugh also concluded truces with the Scots that allowed them free passage through the ecclesiastical lands in return for no damage being done to those lands . Lastly , the bishop 's nephew Hugh IV de Puiset , who was Count of Bar in France , brought an armed force to Hartlepool , supposedly to help defend Hugh , but King Henry feared that this was an attempt to aid the rebellion of the Young King . After the revolt had been put down , King Henry II ordered Hugh 's castle of Northallerton destroyed . Hugh also was required to surrender his other castles . 
 In ecclesiastical affairs , Hugh attended the 1163 Council of Tours that was held by Pope Alexander III . In 1179 he attended the Lateran Council at Rome . It was while he was there that he became involved in the conflict between the king of Scots and the chapter of St Andrews over the election of the bishop of St Andrews . The king wanted his chaplain , another Hugh , and the chapter wanted John the Scot . The pope ordered Puiset to compel the king to obey , but in 1183 the controversy was solved by a compromise . 
 When King Richard I began his reign in 1189 , Hugh bought the offices of Earl of Northumbria and Sheriff of Northumberland . Hugh paid 2000 pounds for the office , and paid a further 1000 pounds for the office of Justiciar and a release from his crusading vow . The charter granting Hugh the earldom mentioned that Richard had invested the bishop with the earldom " by the sword and ring " which is the earliest mention in a charter of that method of investing an honour . Richard also filled the office of Archbishop of York , which had been vacant since 1181 , with Richard 's illegitimate half @-@ brother Geoffrey . The continued vacancy at York had increased Hugh 's power , as he had no superior as long as there was no archbishop . For two years , Geoffrey was unable to secure consecration , but in 1191 , a new pope , Celestine III was elected and Celestine consecrated Geoffrey and ordered Hugh to submit to Geoffrey . 
 Hugh shared the office of justiciar with William de Mandeville , but Mandeville died soon after taking office . Richard then promoted William Longchamp to share the office with Hugh . The two men did not get along , and in March 1190 Richard split the authority , giving Hugh authority north of the Humber River and giving authority over the rest of England to Longchamp . This arrangement was not permanent , and Longchamp outmanoeuvered Hugh to become sole justiciar by the middle of 1190 . Longchamp arrested Hugh for overstepping his authority and made him surrender his castle , his earldom and hostages , although the real cause wasn 't overstepping authority but Longchamp 's animosity towards Hugh . William of Newburgh , the medieval chronicler , felt that a bishop taking the office of Justiciar was wrong , and stated that God would not accept the loyalties of " a bishop who wishes to please both the heavenly and the earthly king . " 
 When Prince John , Richard 's younger brother , rebelled during King Richard 's captivity in 1193 , Hugh opposed the rebellion . Hugh attacked some of John 's northern holdings . In concert with Archbishop Geoffrey he laid siege to Tickhill Castle . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Hugh ordered an inquest into the revenues and resources of his bishopric , along with the customs of the see . This took place in 1183 , and when it was finished , the results were entered into a register that became known as the Boldon Book . Hugh also fought a long @-@ running disagreement with his own cathedral chapter over the right to oversee the monks , a conflict that lasted about 40 years . This led to the monks forging many documents purporting to show that earlier bishops had granted the monks rights and privileges exempting them from episcopal oversight . He also fought with Archbishop Roger of York over lands they both held in each other 's see . 
 As a builder , Hugh built the New Bridge , now <unk> Bridge , in Durham , the second stone bridge in the town . Hugh also oversaw work on Durham Cathedral , decorating the inside with marble , installing stained glass windows , putting in a shrine for the bones of Bede , and building the Galilee Chapel on the west end of the cathedral . Originally , Puiset had planned to put in a Lady Chapel on the east side of the cathedral , but the ground was unsuitable , and instead work began on the Galilee Chapel on the west side of the cathedral . The Galilee Chapel is unusual in that it has five aisles , and quatrefoil , or four lobed , piers . A model for the chapel may have been the work being done on York Minster in rebuilding the choir . The current Norman doorway and the gallery that is above the doorway in Durham Castle were also the work of Hugh , which was part of a hall built in the bailey of the castle . Along with the king of Scots , he built the first bridge over the River Tweed at Berwick . He also rebuilt Norham Castle , replacing the previous buildings built by Ranulf Flambard , an earlier bishop , with a stone castle . 
 Hugh was known for his extravagant tastes and opulent lifestyle , as well as his possession of a large library . He had a son , Henry , who was one of the hostages demanded by Longchamp in 1190 . Another son was Hugh , who became chancellor for King Philip II of France . Both Henry and Hugh were the sons of the bishop 's long term mistress , Alice de Percy . Alice may have been the mother of two more of the bishop 's sons , William , archdeacon of Northumberland , and Burchard , archdeacon of Durham and treasurer of York . He had a number of other mistresses but Alice was the most public , so much so that it caused a scandal , and closely resembled a marriage . 
 Hugh was not well known as a scholar . He did , however , serve as a patron to Roger of Hoveden , the medieval chronicler who started writing about 1169 . He also commissioned two large Bibles , one of which still remains at Durham and is considered a masterpiece of book creation . This is Durham Cathedral Library Manuscript A. II . 1 . 
 Hugh died on 3 March 1195 , having ruled his diocese for an exceptionally long time , forty @-@ two years . 
 = Feminist economics = 
 Feminist economics is the critical study of economics including its methodology , epistemology , history and empirical research , attempting to overcome androcentric ( male and patriarchal ) biases . It focuses on topics of particular relevance to women , such as care work or occupational segregation ( exclusion of women and minorities from certain fields ) ; deficiencies of economic models , such as disregarding intra @-@ household bargaining ; new forms of data collection and measurement such as the Gender Empowerment Measure ( GEM ) , and more gender @-@ aware theories such as the capabilities approach . Feminist economics ultimately seeks to produce a more gender inclusive economics . 
 Feminist economists call attention to the social constructions of traditional economics , questioning the extent to which it is positive and objective , and showing how its models and methods are biased by an exclusive attention to masculine @-@ associated topics and a one @-@ sided favoring of masculine @-@ associated assumptions and methods . While economics traditionally focused on markets and masculine @-@ associated ideas of autonomy , abstraction and logic , feminist economists call for a fuller exploration of economic life , including such " culturally feminine " topics such as family economics , and examining the importance of connections , concreteness , and emotion in explaining economic phenomena . Inclusion of such topics has helped create policies that have reduced gender , racial , and ethnic discrimination and inequity , satisfying normative goals central to all economics . 
 Many scholars including Ester Boserup , Marianne Ferber , Julie A. Nelson , Marilyn Waring , Nancy Folbre , Diane Elson and Ailsa McKay have contributed to feminist economics . Waring 's 1988 book If Women Counted is often regarded as the " founding document " of the discipline . By the 1990s feminist economics had become recognised as an established field within economics . 
 = = Origins and history = = 
 Early on , feminist ethicists , economists , political scientists , and systems scientists argued that women 's traditional work ( e.g. child @-@ raising , caring for sick elders ) and occupations ( e.g. nursing , teaching ) are systematically undervalued with respect to that of men . For example , Jane Jacobs ' thesis of the " Guardian Ethic " and its contrast to the " Trader Ethic " sought to explain the undervaluing of guardianship activity , including the child @-@ protecting , nurturing , and healing tasks that were traditionally assigned to women . 
 Written in 1969 and later published in the <unk> 's Handbook Betsy Warrior presents a cogent argument that the production and reproduction of domestic labor performed by women constitutes the foundation of all economic transactions and survival ; although , <unk> and not included in the GDP . According to Warrior : " Economics , as it 's presented today , lacks any basis in reality as it leaves out the very foundation of economic life . That foundation is built on women 's labor ; first her reproductive labor which produces every new laborer ( and the first commodity , which is mother 's milk and which sustains every new consumer / laborer ) ; secondly , women 's labor entails environmentally necessary cleaning , cooking to make raw materials consumable , negotiating to maintain social stability and nurturing , which prepares for market and maintains each laborer . This constitutes women 's continuing industry enabling laborers to occupy every position in the work force . Without this fundamental labor and commodity there would be no economic activity nor we would have survived to continue to evolve . " Warrior also notes that the unacknowledged income of men from illegal activities like arms , drugs and human trafficking , political graft , religious emoluments and various other undisclosed activities provide a rich revenue stream to men , which further invalidates GDP figures . Even in underground economies where women predominate numerically , like trafficking in humans , prostitution and domestic servitude , only a tiny fraction of the pimp 's revenue filters down to the women and children he deploys . Usually the amount spent on them is merely for the maintenance of their lives and , in the case of those prostituted , some money may be spent on clothing and such accouterments as will make them more salable to the pimp 's clients . For instance , focusing on just the U.S.A. , according to a government sponsored report by the Urban Institute in 2014 , " A street prostitute in Dallas may make as little as $ 5 per sex act . But pimps can take in $ 33 @,@ 000 a week in Atlanta , where the sex business brings in an estimated $ 290 million per year . " Warrior believes that only an inclusive , facts @-@ based economic analysis will provide a reliable bases for future planning for environmental and reproductive / population needs . 
 In 1970 , Ester Boserup published Woman 's Role in Economic Development and provided the first systematic examination of the gendered effects of agricultural transformation , industrialization and other structural changes . This evidence illuminated the negative outcomes that these changes had for women . This work , among others , laid the basis for the broad claim that " women and men weather the storm of macroeconomic shocks , neoliberal policies , and the forces of globalization in different ways . " Moreover , measures such as employment equity were implemented in developed nations in the 1970s to 1990s , but these were not entirely successful in removing wage gaps even in nations with strong equity traditions . 
 In 1988 , Marilyn Waring published If Women Counted : A New Feminist Economics , a groundbreaking and systematic critique of the system of national accounts , the international standard of measuring economic growth , and the ways in which women 's unpaid work as well as the value of Nature have been excluded from what counts as productive in the economy . In the foreword to the 2014 anthology Counting on Marilyn Waring , Julie A. Nelson wrote : 
 " Marilyn Waring 's work woke people up . She showed exactly how the unpaid work traditionally done by women has been made invisible within national accounting systems , and the damage this causes . Her book ... encouraged and influenced a wide range of work on ways , both numerical and otherwise , of valuing , preserving , and rewarding the work of care that sustains our lives . By pointing to a similar neglect of the natural environment , she also issued a wake @-@ up call to issues of ecological sustainability that have only grown more pressing over time . In recent decades , the field of feminist economics has broadened and widened to encompass these topics and more . " 
 Supported by formation of the Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession ( <unk> ) in 1972 , gender @-@ based critiques of traditional economics appeared in the 1970s and 80s . The subsequent emergence of Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era ( DAWN ) and the 1992 founding of the International Association for Feminist Economics ( IAFFE ) along with its journal Feminist Economics in 1994 encouraged the rapid growth of feminist economics . 
 As in other disciplines , the initial emphasis of feminist economists was to critique the established theory , methodology , and policy approaches . The critique began in microeconomics of the household and labor markets and spread to macroeconomics and international trade , ultimately extending to all areas of traditional economic analysis . Feminist economists pushed for and produced gender aware theory and analysis , broadened the focus on economics and sought pluralism of methodology and research methods . 
 Feminist economics shares many of its perspectives with ecological economics and the more applied field of green economy , including the focus on sustainability , nature , justice and care values . 
 = = Critiques of traditional economics = = 
 Although there is no definitive list of the principles of feminist economics , feminist economists offer a variety of critiques of standard approaches in economics . For example , prominent feminist economist Paula England provided one of the earliest feminist critiques of traditional economics as she challenged the claims that : 
 That interpersonal utility comparisons are impossible ; 
 That tastes are exogenous and unchanging ; 
 That actors are selfish ; and 
 That household heads act altruistically . 
 This list is not exhaustive but does represent some of the central feminist economic critiques of traditional economics , out of the wide variety of such viewpoints and critiques . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Many feminists call attention to value judgments in economic analysis . This idea is contrary to the typical conception of economics as a positive science held by many practitioners . For example , Geoff Schneider and Jean Shackelford suggest that " the issues that economists choose to study , the kinds of questions they ask , and the type of analysis undertaken all are a product of a belief system which is influenced by numerous factors , some of them ideological in character . " Similarly , Diana Strassmann comments , " All economic statistics are based on an underlying story forming the basis of the definition . In this way , narrative constructions necessarily underlie all definitions of variables and statistics . Therefore , economic research cannot escape being inherently qualitative , regardless of how it is labeled . " Feminist economists call attention to the value judgements in all aspects economics and criticize its depiction of an objective science . 
 = = = Free trade = = = 
 A central principle of mainstream economics is that trade can make everyone better off through comparative advantage and efficiency gains from specialization and greater efficiency . Many feminist economists question this claim . Diane Elson , Caren Grown and <unk> <unk> explore the role that gender inequalities play in international trade and how such trade reshapes gender inequality itself . They and other feminist economists explore whose interests specific trade practices serve . 
 For example , they may highlight that in Africa , specialization in the cultivation of a single cash crop for export in many countries made those countries extremely vulnerable to price fluctuations , weather patterns , and pests . Feminist economists may also consider the specific gendered effects of trade @-@ decisions . For instance , " in countries such as Kenya , men generally controlled the earnings from cash crops while women were still expected to provide food and clothing for the household , their traditional role in the African family , along with labor to produce cash crops . Thus women suffered significantly from the transition away from subsistence food production towards specialization and trade . " Similarly , since women often lack economic power as business owners , they are more likely to be hired as cheap labor , often involving them in exploitative situations . 
 = = = Exclusion of non @-@ market activity = = = 
 Feminist economics call attention to the importance of non @-@ market activities , such as childcare and domestic work , to economic development . This stands in sharp contrast to neoclassical economics where those forms of labor are unaccounted for as " non @-@ economic " phenomena . Including such labor in economic accounts removes substantial gender bias because women disproportionately perform those tasks . When that labor is unaccounted for in economic models , much work done by women is ignored , literally devaluing their effort . 
 More specifically , for example , Nancy Folbre examines the role of children as public goods and how the non @-@ market labor of parents contributes to the development of human capital as a public service . In this sense , children are positive externality which is under @-@ invested according to traditional analysis . Folbre indicates that this oversight partially results from failing to properly examine non @-@ market activities . 
 Marilyn Waring described how the exclusion of non @-@ market activities in the national accounting systems relied on the deliberate choice and the design of the international standard of national accounts that explicitly excluded non @-@ market activities . In some countries , such as Norway , which had included unpaid household work in the GDP in the first half of the 19th century , it was left out in 1950 for reasons of compatibility with the new international standard . 
 Ailsa McKay argues for a basic income as " a tool for promoting gender @-@ neutral social citizenship rights " partially to address these concerns . 
 = = = Omission of power relations = = = 
 Feminist economics often assert that power relations exist within the economy , and therefore , must be assessed in economic models in ways that they previously have been overlooked . For example , in " neoclassical texts , the sale of labor is viewed as a mutually beneficial exchange that benefits both parties . No mention is made of the power inequities in the exchange which tend to give the employer power over the employee . " These power relations often favor men and there is " never any mention made of the particular difficulties that confront women in the workplace . " Consequently , " Understanding power and patriarchy helps us to analyze how male @-@ dominated economic institutions actually function and why women are often at a disadvantage in the workplace . " Feminist economists often extend these criticisms to many aspects of the social world , arguing that power relations are an endemic and important feature of society . 
 = = = Omission of gender and race = = = 
 Feminist economics argue that gender and race must be considered in economic analysis . Amartya Sen argues that " the systematically inferior position of women inside and outside the household in many societies points to the necessity of treating gender as a force of its own in development analysis . " He goes on to say that experiences of men and women , even within the same household , are often so different that examining economics without gender can be misleading . 
 Economic models can often be improved by explicitly considering gender , race , class , and caste . Julie <unk> describes their importance : " Not only did gender and racial @-@ ethnic differences and inequality precede capitalism , they have been built into it in key ways . In other words , every aspect of our capitalist economy is gendered and racialized ; a theory and practice that ignores this is inherently flawed . " Feminist economist <unk> Zein @-@ <unk> says racial and gender differences should be examined since both have traditionally been ignored and thus are equally described as " feminist difference . " The July 2002 issue of the Feminist Economics journal was dedicated to issues of " gender , color , caste and class . " 
 = = = <unk> of gender differences = = = 
 In other cases gender differences have been exaggerated , potentially encouraging unjustified stereotyping . In recent works Julie A. Nelson has shown how the idea that " women are more risk averse than men , " a now @-@ popular assertion from behavioral economics , actually rests on extremely thin empirical evidence . Conducting meta @-@ analyses of recent studies , she demonstrates that , while statistically significant differences in measures of mean risk aversion are sometimes found , the substantive size of these group @-@ level differences tend to be small ( on the order of a fraction of a standard deviation ) , and many other studies fail to find a statistically significant difference at all . Yet the studies that fail to find " difference " are less likely to be published or highlighted . 
 In addition , claims that men and women have " different " preferences ( such as for risk , competition , or altruism ) often tend to be misinterpreted as categorical , that is , as applying to all women and all men , as individuals . In fact , small differences in average behavior , such as are found in some studies , are generally accompanied by large overlaps in men 's and women 's distributions . That is , both men and women can generally be found in the most risk @-@ averse ( or competitive or altruistic ) groups , as well as in the least . 
 = = = Homo economicus = = = 
 The neoclassical economic model of a person is called Homo economicus , describing a person who " interacts in society without being influenced by society , " because " his mode of interaction is through an ideal market , " in which prices are the only necessary considerations . In this view , people are considered rational actors who engage in marginal analysis to make many or all of their decisions . Feminist economists argue that people are more complex than such models , and call for " a more holistic vision of an economic actor , which includes group interactions and actions motivated by factors other than greed . " Feminist economics holds that such a reformation provides a better description of the actual experiences of both men and women in the market , arguing that mainstream economics overemphasizes the role of individualism , competition and selfishness of all actors . Instead , feminist economists like Nancy Folbre show that cooperation also plays a role in the economy . 
 Feminist economists also point out that agency is not available to everyone , such as children , the sick , and the frail elderly . Responsibilities for their care can compromise the agency of caregivers as well . This is a critical departure from the homo economicus model . 
 Moreover , feminist economists critique the focus of neoclassical economics on monetary rewards . Nancy Folbre notes , " legal rules and cultural norms can affect market outcomes in ways distinctly disadvantageous to women . " This includes occupational segregation resulting in unequal pay for women . Feminist research in these areas contradicts the neoclassical description of labor markets in which occupations are chosen freely by individuals acting alone and out of their own free will . Feminist economics also includes study of norms relevant to economics , challenging the traditional view that material incentives will reliably provide the goods we want and need ( consumer sovereignty ) , which does not hold true for many people . 
 Institutional economics is one means by which feminist economists improve upon the homo economicus model . This theory examines the role of institutions and evolutionary social processes in shaping economic behavior , emphasizing " the complexity of human motives and the importance of culture and relations of power . " This provides a more holistic view of the economic actor than homo economicus . 
 The work of George Akerlof and Janet <unk> on efficiency wages based on notions of fairness provides an example of a feminist model of economic actors . In their work , agents are not <unk> or isolated , but instead act in concert and with fairness , are capable of experiencing jealousy , and are interested in personal relationships . This work is based on empirical sociology and psychology , and suggests that wages can be influenced by fairness considerations rather than purely market forces . 
 = = = Limited methodology = = = 
 Economics is often thought of as " the study of how society manages its scarce resources " and as such is limited to mathematical inquiry . Traditional economists often say such an approach assures objectivity and separates economics from " softer " fields such as sociology and political science . Feminist economists , argue on the contrary that a mathematical conception of economics limited to scarce resources is a holdover from the early years of science and Cartesian philosophy , and limits economic analysis . So feminist economists often call for more diverse data collection and broader economic models . 
 = = = Economic pedagogy = = = 
 Feminist economists suggest that both the content and teaching style of economics courses would benefit from certain changes . Some recommend including experimental learning , laboratory sessions , individual research and more chances to " do economics . " Some want more dialogue between instructors and students . Many feminist economists are urgently interested in how course content influences the demographic composition of future economists , suggesting that the " classroom climate " affects some students ' perceptions of their own ability . 
 = = = The 2000s financial crisis = = = 
 <unk> <unk> and Ailsa McKay argue that the financial crisis of 2007 – 08 and the response to it revealed a crisis of ideas in mainstream economics and within the economics profession , and call for a reshaping of both the economy , economic theory and the economics profession . They argue that such a reshaping should include new advances within feminist economics that take as their starting point the socially responsible , sensible and accountable subject in creating an economy and economic theories that fully acknowledge care for each other as well as the planet . 
 = = Major areas of inquiry = = 
 = = = Economic epistemology = = = 
 Feminist critiques of economics include that " economics , like any science , is socially constructed . " Feminist economists show that social constructs act to privilege male @-@ identified , western , and heterosexual interpretations of economics . They generally incorporate feminist theory and frameworks to show how traditional economics communities signal expectations regarding appropriate participants , to the exclusion of outsiders . Such criticisms extend to the theories , methodologies and research areas of economics , in order to show that accounts of economic life are deeply influenced by biased histories , social structures , norms , cultural practices , interpersonal interactions , and politics . 
 Feminist economists often make a critical distinction that masculine bias in economics is primarily a result of gender , not sex . In other words , when feminist economists highlight the biases of mainstream economics , they focus on its social beliefs about masculinity like objectivity , separation , logical consistency , individual accomplishment , mathematics , abstraction , and lack of emotion , but not on the gender of authorities and subjects . However , the over @-@ representation of men among economists and their subjects of study is also a concern . 
 = = = Economic history = = = 
 Feminist economists say that mainstream economics has been disproportionately developed by European @-@ descended , heterosexual , middle and upper @-@ middle class men , and that this has led to suppression of the life experiences of the full diversity of the world 's people , especially women , children and those in non @-@ traditional families . For example , Colin Danby emphasizes how heteronormative assumptions have remained in economic models , including those of feminist economists , and offers strategies by which they may be overcome to better represent the diversity of the world 's people . 
 Additionally , feminist economists claim that the historical bases of economics are inherently exclusionary to women . Michèle Pujol points to five specific historical assumptions about woman that arose , became embedded in the formulation of economics , and continue to be used to maintain that women are different from the masculinized norms and exclude them . These include the ideas that : 
 All women are married , or if not yet , they will be and all women will have children . 
 All women are economically dependent on a male relative . 
 All women are ( and should be ) housewives due to their reproductive capacities . 
 Women are unproductive in the industrial workforce . 
 Women are irrational , unfit economic agents , and cannot be trusted to make the right economic decisions . 
 Feminist economists also examine early economic thinkers ' interaction or lack of interaction with gender and women 's issues , showing examples of women 's historical engagement with economic thought . For example , Edith Kuiper discusses Adam Smith 's engagement with feminist discourse on the role of women in the eighteenth century , France and England . She finds that through his writings , Smith typically supported the status quo on women 's issues and " lost sight of the division of labor in the family and the contribution of women 's economic work . " In response , she points to Mary Collier 's works such as The Woman 's Labour ( 1739 ) to help understand Smith 's contemporaneous experiences of women and fill in such gaps . 
 = = = <unk> macroeconomic theories = = = 
 Central to feminist economics is an effort to alter the theoretical modeling of the economy , to reduce gender bias and inequity . Feminist macroeconomic inquiries focus on international capital flows , fiscal austerity , deregulation and privatization , monetary policy , international trade and more . In general , these modifications take three main forms : gender disaggregation , the addition of gender @-@ based macroeconomic variables , and the creation of a two @-@ sector system . 
 = = = = Gender disaggregation = = = = 
 This method of economic analysis seeks to overcome gender bias by showing how men and women differ in their consumption , investment or saving behavior . Gender disaggregation strategies justify the separation of macroeconomic variables by gender . <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> show how the feminization of labor stimulates investment , while an increase in female activity in housework raises savings . This model highlights how gender effects macroeconomic variables and shows that economies have a higher likelihood of recovering from downturns if women participate in the labor force more , instead of devoting their time to housework . 
 = = = = Gendered macroeconomic variables = = = = 
 This approach demonstrates the effects of gender inequalities by enhancing macroeconomic models . Bernard Walters shows that traditional neoclassical models fail to adequately assess work related to reproduction by assuming that the population and labor are determined <unk> . That fails to account for the fact that inputs are produced through caring labor , which is disproportionately performed by women . Stephen <unk> et al. use a neoclassical growth model to show that women 's education has a positive statistically significant effect on labor productivity , more robust than that of men 's education . In both of these cases , economists highlight and address the gender biases of macroeconomic variables to show that gender plays a significant role in models ' outcomes . 
 = = = = Two @-@ sector system = = = = 
 The two @-@ sector system approach models the economy as two separate systems : one involving the standard macroeconomic variables , while the other includes gender @-@ specific variables . William Darity developed a two @-@ sector approach for low @-@ income , farm @-@ based economies . Darity shows that subsistence farming depended on the labor of women , while the production of income depended on the labor of both men and women in cash @-@ crop activities . This model shows that when men control production and income , they seek to maximize income by persuading women to put additional effort into cash @-@ crop production , causing increases in cash crops come at the expense of subsistence production . 
 = = = Well @-@ being = = = 
 Many feminist economists argue economics should be focused less on mechanisms ( like income ) or theories ( such as utilitarianism ) and more on well @-@ being , a multidimensional concept including income , health , education , empowerment and social status . They argue that economic success can not be measured only by goods or gross domestic product , but must also be measured by human well @-@ being . Aggregate income is not sufficient to evaluate general well @-@ being , because individual entitlements and needs must also be considered , leading feminist economists to study health , longevity , access to property , education , and related factors . 
 Bina Agarwal and Pradeep Panda illustrate that a woman 's property status ( such as owning a house or land ) directly and significantly reduces her chances of experiencing domestic violence , while employment makes little difference . They argue that such immovable property increases women 's self @-@ esteem , economic security , and strengthens their fall @-@ back positions , enhancing their options and bargaining clout . They show that property ownership is an important contributor to women 's economic well @-@ being because it reduces their susceptibility to violence . 
 In order to measure well @-@ being more generally , Amartya Sen , Sakiko Fukuda @-@ Parr , and other feminist economists helped develop alternatives to Gross Domestic Product , such as the Human Development Index . Other models of interest to feminist economists include the labor theory of value , which was most thoroughly developed in Das Capital by Karl Marx . That model considers production as a socially constructed human project and redefines wages as means to earning a living . This refocuses economic models on human innate desires and needs as opposed to monetary incentives . 
 = = = = Human capabilities approach = = = = 
 Feminist economists Amartya Sen and Martha Nussbaum created the human capabilities approach as an alternative way to assess economic success rooted in the ideas of welfare economics and focused on the individual 's potential to do and be what he or she may choose to value . Unlike traditional economic measures of success , focused on GDP , utility , income , assets or other monetary measures , the capabilities approach focuses on what individuals are able to do . This approach emphasizes processes as well as outcomes , and draws attention to cultural , social and material dynamics of well @-@ being . Martha Nussbaum , expanded on the model with a more complete list of central capabilities including life , health , bodily integrity , thought , and more . In recent years , the capabilities approach has influenced the creation of new models including the UN 's Human Development Index ( HDI ) . 
 = = = Household bargaining = = = 
 Central to feminist economics is a different approach to the " family " and " household . " In classical economics , those units are typically described as amicable and homogeneous . Gary Becker and new home economists introduced the study of " the family " to traditional economics , which usually assumes the family is a single , altruistic unit among which money is distributed equally . Others have concluded that an optimal distribution of commodities and provisions takes place within the family as a result of which they view families in the same manner as individuals . These models , according to feminist economists , " endorsed traditional expectations about the sexes , " and applied individualistic rational @-@ choice models to explain home behavior . Feminist economists modify these assumptions to account for exploitative sexual and gender relations , single @-@ parent families , same @-@ sex relationships , familial relations with children , and the consequences of reproduction . Specifically , feminist economists move beyond unitary household models and game theory to show the diversity of household experiences . 
 For example , Bina Agarwal and others have critiqued the mainstream model and helped provide a better understanding of intra @-@ household bargaining power . Agarwal shows that a lack of power and outside options for women hinders their ability to negotiate within their families . Amartya Sen shows how social norms that devalue women 's unpaid work in the household often disadvantage women in intra @-@ household bargaining . These feminist economists argue that such claims have important economic outcomes which must be recognized within economic frameworks . 
 = = = Care economy = = = 
 Feminist economists join the UN and others in acknowledging care work , as a kind of work which includes all tasks involving caregiving , as central to economic development and human well @-@ being . Feminist economists study both paid and unpaid care work . They argue that traditional analysis of economics often ignores the value of household unpaid work . Feminist economists have argued that unpaid domestic work is as valuable as paid work , so measures of economic success should include unpaid work . They have shown that women are disproportionately responsible for performing such care work . 
 Sabine O 'Hara argues that care is the basis for all economic activity and market economies , concluding that " everything needs care , " not only people , but animals and things . She highlights the sustaining nature of care services offered outwith the formal economy . 
 Feminist economists have also highlighted power and inequality issues within families and households . For example , Randy <unk> shows that responsibility for care work influences the time poverty experienced by single mothers in the United States . Similarly , Sarah Gammage examines the effects of unpaid care work performed by women in Guatemala . The work of the Equality Studies Department at University College Dublin such as that of Sara Cantillon has focused on inequalities of domestic arrangements within even affluent households . 
 While much care work is performed in the home , it may also be done for pay . As such , feminist economics examine its implications , including the increasing involvement of women in paid care work , the potential for exploitation , and effects on the lives of care workers . 
 Systemic study of the ways women 's work is measured , or not measured at all , have been undertaken by Marilyn Waring ( see If Women Counted ) and others in the 1980s and 1990s . These studies began to justify different means of determining value — some of which influenced the theory of social capital and individual capital , that emerged in the late 1990s and , along with ecological economics , influenced modern human development theory . ( See also the entry on Gender and Social Capital . ) 
 = = = Unpaid work = = = 
 Unpaid work can include domestic work , care work , subsistence work , unpaid market labor and voluntary work . There is no clear consensus on the definition of these categories . But broadly speaking , these kinds of work can be seen as contributing to the reproduction of society . 
 Domestic work is maintenance of the home , and is usually universally recognizable , e.g. doing the laundry . Care work is looking " after a relative or friend who needs support because of age , physical or learning disability , or illness , including mental illness ; " this also includes raising children . Care work also involves " close personal or emotional interaction . " Also included in this category is " self @-@ care , " in which leisure time and activities are included . Subsistence work is work done in order to meet basic needs , such as collecting water , but does not have market values assigned to it . Although some of these efforts " are categorized as productive activities according to the latest revision of the international System of National Accounts ( SNA ) ... [ they ] are poorly measured by most surveys . " Unpaid market work is " the direct contributions of unpaid family members to market work that officially belongs to another member of the household . " Voluntary work is usually work done for non @-@ household members , but in return for little to no remuneration . 
 = = = = System of National Accounts = = = = 
 Each country measures its economic output according to the System of National Accounts ( SNA ) , sponsored mainly by the United Nations ( UN ) , but implemented mainly by other organizations such as the European Commission , the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the Organization for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development ( OECD ) , and the World Bank . The SNA recognizes that unpaid work is an area of interest , but " unpaid household services are excluded from [ its ] production boundary . " Feminist economists have criticized the SNA for this exclusion , because by leaving out unpaid work , basic and necessary labor is ignored . 
 Even accounting measures intended to recognize gender disparities are criticized for ignoring unpaid work . Two such examples are the Gender @-@ related Development Index ( GDI ) and the Gender Empowerment Measure ( GEM ) , neither of which include much unpaid work . So feminist economics calls for a more comprehensive index which includes participation in unpaid work . 
 In more recent years there has been increasing attention to this issue , such as recognition of unpaid work within SNA reports and a commitment by the UN to the measurement and valuation of unpaid work , emphasizing care work done by women . This goal was restated at the 1995 UN Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing . 
 = = = = Measurement of unpaid work = = = = 
 The method most widely used to measure unpaid work is gathering information on time use , which has " been implemented by at least 20 developing countries and more are underway " as of 2006 . Time use measurement involves collecting data on how much time men and women spend on a daily , weekly , or monthly basis on certain activities that fall under the categories of unpaid work . 
 Techniques to gather this data include surveys , in @-@ depth interviews , diaries , and participant observation . Proponents of time use diaries believe that this method " generate [ s ] more detailed information and tend [ s ] to capture greater variation than predetermined questions . " However , others argue that participant observation , " where the researcher spends lengthy periods of time in households helping out and observing the labor process , " generates more accurate information because the researcher can ascertain whether or not those studied are accurately reporting what activities they perform . 
 = = = = = Accuracy = = = = = 
 The first problem of measuring unpaid work is the issue of collecting accurate information . This is always a concern in research studies , but is particularly difficult when evaluating unpaid work . " Time @-@ use surveys may reveal relatively little time devoted to unpaid direct care activities [ because ] the demands of subsistence production in those countries are great , " and may not take into account multitasking — for example , a mother may collect wood fuel while a child is in the same location , so the child is in her care while she is performing other work . Usually such indirect care should be included , as it is in many time use studies . But it is not always , and as a result some studies may undervalue the amount of certain types of unpaid work . Participant observation has been criticized for being " so time @-@ consuming that it can only focus on small numbers of households , " and thus limited in the amount of information it can be used to gather . 
 All data gathering involves difficulties with the potential inaccuracy of research subjects ' reports . For instance , when " people doing domestic labor have no reason to pay close attention to the amount of time tasks take ... they [ may ] often underestimate time spent in familiar activities . " Measuring time can also be problematic because " the slowest and most inefficient workers [ appear to carry ] the greatest workload . " Time use in assessing childcare is criticized as " easily <unk> [ ing ] gender differences in workload . Men and women may both put in the same amount of time being responsible for children but as participant observation studies have shown , many men are more likely to ' babysit ' their children while doing something for themselves , such as watching TV . Men 's standards of care may be limited to ensuring the children are not hurt . Dirty diapers may be ignored or deliberately left until the mother returns . " A paradoxical aspect of this problem is that those most burdened may not be able to participate in the studies : " It is usually those women with the heaviest work loads who choose not to participate in these studies . " In general , measurement of time causes " some of the most demanding aspects of unpaid work [ to be unexplored ] and the premise that time is an appropriate tool for measuring women 's unpaid work goes unchallenged . " Surveys have also been criticized for lacking " depth and complexity " as questions cannot be specifically tailored to particular circumstances . 
 = = = = = <unk> = = = = = 
 A second problem is the difficulty of comparisons across cultures . " Comparisons across countries are currently hampered by differences in activity classification and nomenclature . " In @-@ depth surveys may be the only way to get necessary information desired , but they make it difficult to perform cross @-@ cultural comparisons . The lack of adequate universal terminology in discussing unpaid work is an example . " Despite increasing recognition that domestic labor is work , existing vocabularies do not easily convey the new appreciations . People still tend to talk about work and home as if they were separate spheres . ' Working mothers ' are usually assumed to be in the paid labor force , despite feminist assertions that ' every mother is a working mother . ' There are no readily accepted terms to express different work activities or job titles . Housewife , home manager , homemaker are all problematic and none of them conveys the sense of a women who juggles both domestic labor and paid employment . " 
 = = = = = Complexity = = = = = 
 A third problem is the complexity of domestic labor and the issues of separating unpaid work categories . Time use studies now take multitasking issues into account , separating primary and secondary activities . However , not all studies do this , and even those that do may not take into account " the fact that frequently several tasks are done simultaneously , that tasks overlap , and that the boundaries between work and relationships are often unclear . How does a woman determine her primary activity when she is preparing dinner while putting the laundry away , making coffee for her spouse , having coffee and chatting with him , and attending to the children ? " Some activities may not even be considered work , such as playing with a child ( this has been categorized as developmental care work ) and so may not be included in a study 's responses . As mentioned above , child supervision ( indirect care work ) may not be construed as an activity at all , which " suggests that activity @-@ based surveys should be supplemented by more stylized questions regarding care responsibilities " as otherwise such activities can be undercounted . In the past , time use studies tended to measure only primary activities , and " respondents doing two or more things at once were asked to indicate which was the more important . " This has been changing in more recent years . 
 = = = = Valuation of time = = = = 
 Feminist economists point out three main ways of determining the value of unpaid work : the opportunity cost method , replacement cost method , and input @-@ output cost method . The opportunity cost method " uses the wage a person would earn in the market " to see how much value their labor @-@ time has . This method extrapolates from the opportunity cost idea in mainstream economics . 
 The second method of valuation uses replacement costs . In simple terms , this is done by measuring the amount of money a third @-@ party would make for doing the same work if it was part of the market . In other words , the value of a person cleaning the house in an hour is the same as the hourly wage for a maid . Within this method there are two approaches : the first is a generalist replacement cost method , which examines if " it would be possible , for example , to take the wage of a general domestic worker who could perform a variety of tasks including childcare " . The second approach is the specialist replacement cost method , which aims to " distinguish between the different household tasks and choose replacements accordingly " . 
 The third method is the input @-@ output cost method . This looks at both the costs of inputs and includes any value added by the household . " For instance , the value of time devoted to cooking a meal can be determined by asking what it could cost to purchase a similar meal ( the output ) in the market , then subtracting the cost of the capital goods , utilities and raw materials devoted to that meal . This remainder represents the value of the other factors of production , primarily labor . " These types of models try to value household output by determining monetary values for the inputs — in the dinner example , the ingredients and production of the meal — and compares those with market equivalents . 
 = = = = = Difficulty establishing monetary levels = = = = = 
 One criticism of time valuation concerns the choice of monetary levels . How should unpaid work be valued when more than one activity is being performed or more than one output is produced ? Another issue concerns differences in quality between market and household products . Some feminist economists take issue with using the market system to determine values for a variety of reasons : it may lead to the conclusion that the market provides perfect substitutes for non @-@ market work ; the wage produced in the market for services may not accurately reflect the actual opportunity cost of time spent in household production ; and the wages used in valuation methods come from industries where wages are already depressed because of gender inequalities , and so will not accurately value unpaid work . A related argument is that the market " accepts existing sex / gender divisions of labor and pay inequalities as normal and unproblematic . With this basic assumption underlying their calculations , the valuations produced serve to reinforce gender inequalities rather than challenge women 's subordination . " 
 = = = = = Criticisms of opportunity cost = = = = = 
 Criticisms are leveled against each method of valuation . The opportunity cost method " depends on the lost earnings of the worker so that a toilet cleaned by a lawyer has much greater value than one cleaned by a janitor " , which means that the value varies too drastically . There are also issues with the uniformity of this method not just across multiple individuals , but also for a single person : it " may not be uniform across the entire day or across days of the week . " There is also the issue of whether any enjoyment of the activity should be deducted from the opportunity cost estimate . 
 = = = = = Difficulties with replacement cost = = = = = 
 The replacement cost method also has its critics . What types of jobs should be used as substitutes ? For example , should childcare activities " be calculated using the wages of daycare workers or child psychiatrists ? " This relates to the problem of depressed wages in female @-@ dominated industries , and whether using such jobs as an equivalent leads to the undervaluing of unpaid work . Some have argued that education levels ought to be comparable , for example , " the value of time that a college @-@ educated parent spends reading aloud to a child should be ascertained by asking how much it would cost to hire a college @-@ educated worker to do the same , not by an average housekeeper 's wage . " 
 = = = = = Difficulties with input @-@ output methods = = = = = 
 Critiques against the input @-@ output methods include the difficulty of identifying and measuring household outputs , and the issues of variation of households and these effects . 
 = = = = Findings and economic effects of unpaid work = = = = 
 In 2011 , a wide @-@ ranging study was conducted to determine the amount of unpaid household work engaged in by residents of different countries . This study , incorporating the results of time @-@ use surveys from 26 OECD countries , found that , in each country , the average hours spent per day on unpaid household work was between about 2 to 4 hours per day . As domestic work is widely seen as " women 's work " , the majority of it is performed by women , even for women who also participate in the labor force . One study found that , when adding the time spent on unpaid household work to the time spent engaging in paid work , married mothers accumulate 84 hours of work per week , compared to 79 hours per week for unmarried mothers , and 72 hours per week for all fathers , whether married or not . 
 Efforts to calculate the true economic value of unpaid work , which is not included in measures such as gross domestic product , have shown that this value is enormous . In the United States , it has been estimated to be between 20 – 50 % , meaning that the true value of unpaid work is trillions of dollars per year . For other countries , the percentage of GDP may be even higher , such as the United Kingdom , where is may be as high as 70 % . Because this unpaid work is largely done by women and is unreported in economic indicators , it results in these contributions by women being devalued in a society . 
 = = = The formal economy = = = 
 Research into the causes and consequences of occupational segregation , the gender pay gap , and the " glass ceiling " have been a significant part of feminist economics . While conventional neoclassical economic theories of the 1960s and 1970s explained these as the result of free choices made by women and men who simply had different abilities or preferences , feminist economists pointed out the important roles played by stereotyping , sexism , patriarchal beliefs and institutions , sexual harassment , and discrimination . The rationales for , and the effects of , anti @-@ discrimination laws adopted in many industrial countries beginning in the 1970s , has also been studied . 
 Women moved in large numbers into previous male bastions — especially professions like medicine and law — during the last decades of the 20th century . The gender pay gap remains and is shrinking more slowly . Feminist economists such as Marilyn Power , Ellen Mutari and Deborah M. <unk> have examined the gender pay gap and found that wage setting procedures are not primarily driven by market forces , but instead by the power of actors , cultural understandings of the value of work and what constitutes a proper living , and social gender norms . Consequently , they assert that economic models must take these typically exogenous variables into account . 
 While overt employment discrimination by sex remains a concern of feminist economists , in recent years more attention has been paid to discrimination against caregivers — those women , and some men , who give hands @-@ on care to children or sick or elderly friends or relatives . Because many business and government policies were designed to accommodate the " ideal worker " ( that is , the traditional male worker who had no such responsibilities ) rather than caregiver @-@ workers , inefficient and inequitable treatment has resulted . 
 = = = Globalization = = = 
 Feminist economists ' work on globalization is diverse and multifaceted . But much of it is tied together through detailed and nuanced studies of the ways in which globalization affects women in particular and how these effects relate to socially just outcomes . Often country case studies are used for these data . Some feminist economists focus on policies involving the development of globalization . For example , Lourdes <unk> argues that economic development in the Global South depends in large part on improved reproductive rights , gender equitable laws on ownership and inheritance , and policies that are sensitive to the proportion of women in the informal economy . Additionally , <unk> <unk> discusses the impacts of a social clause that would enforce global labor standards through international trade agreements , drawing on fieldwork from Bangladesh . She argues that although these jobs may appear exploitative , for many workers in those areas they present opportunities and ways to avoid more exploitative situations in the informal economy . 
 Alternatively , Suzanne Bergeron , for example , raises examples of studies that illustrate the multifaceted effects of globalization on women , including <unk> Rosa 's study of Sri Lankan , Malaysian , and Philippine , workers in free trade zones as an example of local resistance to globalization . Women there use their wages to create women 's centers aimed at providing legal and medical services , libraries and cooperative housing , to local community members . Such efforts , Bergeron highlights , allow women the chance to take control of economic conditions , increase their sense of individualism , and alter the pace and direction of globalization itself . 
 In other cases , feminist economists work on removing gender biases from the theoretical bases of globalization itself . Suzanne Bergeron , for example , focuses on the typical theories of globalization as the " rapid integration of the world into one economic space " through the flow of goods , capital , and money , in order to show how they exclude some women and the disadvantaged . She argues that traditional understandings of globalization over @-@ emphasize the power of global capital flows , the uniformity of globalization experiences across all populations , and technical and abstract economic processes , and therefore depict the political economy of globalization inappropriately . She highlights the alternative views of globalization created by feminists . First , she describes how feminists may de @-@ emphasize the idea of the market as " a natural and unstoppable force , " instead depicting the process of globalization as <unk> and movable by individual economic actors including women . She also explains that the concept of globalization itself is gender biased , because its depiction as " dominant , unified , [ and ] intentional " is inherently masculinized and misleading . She suggests that feminists critique such narratives by showing how a " global economy " is highly complex , de @-@ centered and unclear . 
 = = Methodology = = 
 = = = Interdisciplinary data collection = = = 
 Many feminist economists challenge the perception that only " objective " ( often presumed to be quantitative ) data are valid . Instead , they say economists should enrich their analysis by using data sets generated from other disciplines or through increased use of qualitative methods . Additionally , many feminist economists propose utilizing non @-@ traditional data collection strategies such as " utilizing growth accounting frameworks , conducting empirical tests of economic theories , developing country case studies , and pursuing research at the conceptual and empirical levels . " 
 Interdisciplinary data collection looks at systems from a specific moral position and viewpoint instead of attempting the perspective of a neutral observer . The intention is not to create a more " subjective " methodology , but to counter biases in existing methodologies , by recognizing that all explanations for world phenomena arise from socially @-@ influenced viewpoints . Feminist economists say too many theories claim to present universal principles but actually present a masculine viewpoint in the guise of a " view from nowhere , " so more varied sources of data collection are needed to mediate those issues . 
 = = = Ethical judgment = = = 
 Feminist economists depart from traditional economics in that they say " ethical judgments are a valid , inescapable , and in fact desirable part of economic analysis . " For example , Lourdes <unk> argues that judgments about policies leading to greater well @-@ being should be central to economic analysis . Similarly , Shahra <unk> says better understanding of care work " would allow us to shift our priorities from ' making money ' or ' making stuff ' to ' making livable lives ' and ' enriching networks of care and relationship ' " which should be central to economics . 
 = = = Country case studies = = = 
 Often feminist economists use country @-@ level or smaller case studies focused on developing and often understudied countries or populations . For example , Michael <unk> and Leslie C. Gray examine how gendered social norms are central to understanding agricultural activities in Burkina Faso . Cristina Carrasco and Arantxa Rodriquez examine the care economy in Spain to suggest that women 's entrance into the labor market requires more equitable caregiving responsibilities . Such studies show the importance of local social norms , government policies and cultural situations . Feminist economists see such variation as a crucial factor to be included in economics . 
 = = = Alternative measures of success = = = 
 Feminist economists call for a shift in how economic success is measured . These changes include an increased focus on a policy 's ability to bring society toward social justice and improve people 's lives , through specific goals including distributive fairness , equity , the universal provisioning of needs , elimination of poverty , freedom from discrimination and the protection of human capabilities . 
 = = = = Human Development Index ( HDI ) = = = = 
 Feminist economists often support use of the Human Development Index as a composite statistic in order to assess countries by their overall level of human development , as opposed to other measures . The HDI takes into account a broad array of measures beyond monetary considerations including life expectancy , literacy , education , and standards of living for all countries worldwide . 
 = = = = Gender @-@ related Development Index ( GDI ) = = = = 
 The Gender @-@ related Development Index ( GDI ) was introduced in 1995 in the Human Development Report written by the United Nations Development Program in order to add a gender @-@ sensitive dimension to the Human Development Index . The GDI takes into account not only the average or general level of well @-@ being and wealth within a given country , but also how this wealth and well @-@ being is distributed between different groups within society , especially between genders . However , feminist economists do not universally agree on the use of the GDI and some offer improvements to it . 
 = = = = Social Institutions and Gender Index ( SIGI ) = = = = 
 The Social Institutions and Gender Index ( SIGI ) is a recently developed measure of gender inequality calculated by analyzing social institutions , societal practices , and legal norms and how these factors largely frame gender norms within a society . By combining these sources of inequality , SIGI is able to penalize high levels of inequality in each of the applicable dimensions , allowing for only partial compensation by the gaps between the remaining dimensions and the highly inequitable one . Through its analysis of the institutional sources of gender inequality in over 100 countries , SIGI has been proven to add new insights into outcomes for women , even when other factors such as religion and region of the world are controlled for . SIGI rankings largely mirror those of the HDI , with countries such as Portugal and Argentina leading the pack , while countries like Afghanistan and Sudan are significantly behind . 
 = = Organizations = = 
 Feminist economics continues to become more widely recognized and reputed as evidenced by the numerous organizations dedicated to it or widely influenced by its principles . 
 = = = International Association for Feminist Economics = = = 
 Formed in 1992 , the International Association for Feminist Economics ( IAFFE ) , is independent of the American Economic Association ( AEA ) and seeks to challenge the masculine biases in neoclassical economics . While the majority of members are economists , it is open " not only to female and male economists but to academics from other fields , as well as activists who are not academics " and currently has over 600 members in 64 countries . Although its founding members were mostly based in the US , a majority of IAFFE 's current members are based outside of the US . In 1997 , IAFFE gained Non @-@ Governmental Organization status in the United Nations . 
 = = = Feminist Economics journal = = = 
 Feminist Economics , edited by Diana Strassmann of Rice University and <unk> <unk> of the University of Utah , is a peer @-@ reviewed journal established to provide an open forum for dialogue and debate about feminist economic perspectives . The journal endorses a normative agenda to promote policies that will better the lives of the world 's people , both women and men . In 1997 , the journal was awarded the Council of Editors and Learned Journals ( <unk> ) Award as Best New Journal . The 2007 ISI Social Science Citation Index ranked the journal Feminist Economics 20th out of 175 among economics journals and 2nd out of 27 among Women 's Studies journals . 
 = = Relation to other disciplines = = 
 Green economics incorporates ideas from feminist economics and Greens list feminism as an explicit goal of their political measures , seeking greater economic and general gender equality . Feminist economics is also often linked with welfare economics or labour economics , since it emphasizes child welfare , and the value of labour in itself , as opposed to the traditional focus exclusively on production for a marketplace . 
 = = Graduate programs = = 
 A small , but growing number of graduate programs around the world offer courses and concentrations in feminist economics . ( Unless otherwise noted below , these offerings are in departments of economics . ) 
 = Motul de San José = 
 Motul de San José is an ancient Maya site located just north of Lake Petén Itzá in the Petén Basin region of the southern Maya lowlands . It is a few kilometres from the modern village of San José , in Guatemala 's northern department of Petén . A medium @-@ sized civic @-@ ceremonial centre , it was an important political and economic centre during the Late Classic period ( AD 650 – 950 ) . 
 The site was first settled between 600 and 300 BC , in the latter portion of the Middle Preclassic period , when it most likely was a fairly small site . This Maya city then had a long and continuous occupational history until the Early Postclassic , up to around AD 1250 , with peaks in the Late Preclassic and Late Classic periods . Motul de San José had begun to refer to Tikal as its overlord in the late 4th century AD ; by the 7th century it had switched its allegiance to Calakmul , Tikal 's great rival , before returning its allegiance to Tikal in the early 8th century . In the late 8th century Motul de San José appears to have been conquered by Dos Pilas , capital of the Petexbatún kingdom . 
 Most natural resources were easily available in the immediate vicinity of the city . The nearby port at La Trinidad de Nosotros was an important hub for the import of exotic goods and export of local products such as chert and ceramics . Other goods not immediately available were likely to have been provided by the city ’ s satellite sites . The local area provided a number of different soils suitable for varied agricultural use , and the port at La Trinidad de Nosotros provided the city with freshwater products such as turtles , crocodiles and freshwater molluscs . Deer were hunted locally and provided an important source of protein for the upper class , while freshwater snails were the main source of protein for commoners . 
 Motul de San José has been identified as the source of Ik @-@ style polychrome ceramics bearing painted scenes of the Late Classic Maya aristocracy involved in a variety of courtly activities . The Ik @-@ style was characterised by hieroglyphs painted in a pink or pale red colour , scenes with dancers wearing masks , and the realistic representation of subjects as they appeared in life . The city was the capital of a polity that included various satellite sites of varying importance , including a port on the shore of Lake Petén Itzá . 
 = = Location = = 
 Motul de San José is located 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) from the north shore of Lake Petén Itzá , in the centre of the department of El Petén . The nearest town is Flores , 10 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) to the south , on the other side of the lake . The nearest villages are San José , 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) away , and San Andrés , 6 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 0 mi ) away , both are to the south of the site , on the northern shore of the lake . The archaeological site is connected to Nuevo San José , a northern expansion of San José , by a dirt road . It lies among land that has been cleared of forest within the last century and is now used to plant maize and graze cattle . 
 Motul de San José lies on a limestone plateau at the northern edge of the fault depression that underlies the central lakes of the Petén Basin . The local topography consists of ridges , generally running east @-@ west or northeast @-@ southwest alternating with lower @-@ lying areas with clay soils . These low @-@ lying areas tend to feed into drainage systems flowing into either Lake Petén Itzá itself or into the Akte River . The Kantetul River is a seasonal watercourse with its origin 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) to the northeast of the site and flowing westwards into the Akte River , passing 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from the site core . The Akte River in turn flows west into the San Pedro River , which flows northwest into Mexico where it joins the Usumacinta River and ultimately empties into the Gulf of Mexico . A mixture of ancient and modern agricultural terraces line the riverbank , 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) north of the site core . Access to water was crucial for Maya cities , since much of the Maya lowlands have been described as a seasonal desert due to the combination of a prolonged dry season lasting between four and six months together with the limestone geography that makes surface water scarce . In addition the Maya greatly preferred water to land transport and used canoes to trade extensively by river and sea , and access to river routes connected cities to extensive trade routes . 
 Motul de San José lies within a dense cluster of smaller satellite sites . It is 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) to the southwest of the major Classic Period ruins of Tikal . The site is about 275 kilometres ( 171 mi ) north of Guatemala City . The ruins are located on a hill about 180 metres ( 590 ft ) above mean sea level . 
 The site forms part of the Motul Ecological Park ( Parque <unk> Motul in Spanish ) , which is administered by Instituto de Antropología e Historia ( IDAEH ) , the Guatemalan Institute of Anthropology and History ) , the University of San Carlos of Guatemala ( USAC ) and the local communities of San José and Nuevo San José . The park covers an area of approximately 2 @.@ 2 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 85 sq mi ) . 
 = = Emblem glyph = = 
 Maya cities and kingdoms in the Classic Period were identified in hieroglyphic texts by a distinctive emblem glyph ; they are essentially royal titles composed of three distinct parts - the glyphs representing k 'uhul and <unk> ( meaning " divine " and " lord " ) followed by the name of the polity this person ruled over . The decipherment of emblem glyphs was crucial to the interpreting the political makeup of Classic Period Maya civilization . 
 The emblem glyph of Motul de San José contains the main sign ik , " breath " or " wind " . It is found on monuments and ceramics from the 8th and 9th centuries . A vessel bearing this emblem and depicting king Lamaw Ek ' was found as far away as Altar de Sacrificios . Analysis has revealed that it was manufactured in Motul de San José , indicating some form of interaction between these distant sites . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The majority of basic natural resources were readily available in the immediate <unk> of the city , with local soils being suitable for the production of maize and mixed crops to support the local populace . The subsidiary site of La Trinidad de Nosotros , located on the shore of Lake Petén Itzá some 2 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) southeast of the site core , appears to have been an important port for the import and export of goods to and from Motul de San José . Food resources not available in the immediate vicinity of the city were probably provided by the satellite sites dispersed at some distance from the site core , and La Trinidad is likely to have played an important part in supplying exotic goods to the city as well as freshwater foodstuffs such as crocodiles , fish and turtles . Chert nodules were locally available from the first ridges to the north of the lake . A chert workshop has been discovered in the northern sector of Motul de San José . Ceramic figurines were produced in the Acropolis palace complex in Group C and also in a medium @-@ sized palace complex in Group B , an elite plaza in Group E and also in two elite plazas in the northern part of the site . 
 The small satellite site of Chak Maman Tok ' several kilometers to the southwest of Motul de San José , appears to have been an important centre for the production of chert tools , with only a few other centres within the Maya lowlands manufacturing chert on such a scale . Although very small , Chak Maman Tok ' probably played a major part within the economy of the Motul de San José polity . 
 Differences in architectural style between elite residential complexes and in the activities carried out at them suggest that the aristocracy of Motul de San José was divided into several distinct classes , including the royal family resident in Group C , royal courtiers and low to middle rank nobles . 
 The Kantetul River , although now seasonal , is reported to have been a navigable water channel until relatively recently . During the height of Motul de San José 's power , it may have provided an important link to the San Pedro River , a significant trade route in ancient times . 
 = = Ik style ceramics = = 
 Motul de San José is possibly the source of the so @-@ called " Ik @-@ style " painted polychrome ceramics , a theory that has recently received additional support from archaeological excavations at the site . These ceramic vessels , including finely painted plates and cylindrical vessels , were first associated with the then @-@ unidentified site of Ik in the 1970s by the Emblem Glyph included in the hieroglyphic texts on them . The confirmation of Motul de San José as Ik came from investigations carried out from 1998 to 2004 . Chemical analysis of Ik @-@ style ceramics have revealed that they were not only produced in workshops in Motul itself but also in satellite sites in the vicinity . 
 The Ik @-@ style ceramic corpus includes a set of features such as hieroglyphs painted in a pink or pale red colour and scenes with dancers wearing masks . One of the most distinctive features is the realistic representation of subjects as they appeared in life , something that is very rare in Mesoamerican art . The corpus is represented by more than 30 intact vessels , the majority of unknown provenance , which have been compared to ceramic fragments recovered from Motul de San José and its satellite sites . The subject matter of the vessels includes courtly life from the Petén region in the 8th century AD , such as diplomatic representations , feasting , bloodletting , scenes of warriors and the sacrifice of prisoners of war . 
 The variations in artistic style and chemical composition of the Ik @-@ style ceramics suggests that they were produced in a number of workshops local to the Motul de San José area . They have been subdivided into five types , four from Motul de San José itself and one from one of its satellite sites . There are also various lower @-@ quality examples that are presumed to have been manufactured in sites of lesser importance within the Motul de San José polity . The Ik @-@ style ceramics are believed to have been produced in the period from 740 – 800 AD . In spite of differences , all the Ik @-@ style ceramics are thought to have been made within a network of allied workshops dedicated to producing vessels for use in the banquets of the aristocracy of Motul de San José and of the petty nobility of the capital 's satellites . The ceramics were distributed widely in the Maya region as gifts in order to seal alliances between the elites of various Maya kingdoms . 
 Of particular note is that chemical analysis of ceramic fragments has revealed that the very same workshops not only produced the highest @-@ quality Ik @-@ style polychrome ceramics but also general low @-@ quality ceramics for household use . High quality Ik @-@ style ceramics made at Motul de San José have been excavated from across the Maya region , including Tikal and Uaxactún to the northeast of the city , Copán far to the south , and Altar de Sacrificios , <unk> and Seibal , in western Petén . 
 A particularly rare feature found on Motul de San José ceramics is the so @-@ called X @-@ ray style , showing a figure wearing a mask but also portraying his face underneath it . All the other representations using this rare style are depicted on Late Classic sculptures at sites with which it is known that Motul de San José had contact at this time , including Dos Pilas , <unk> , Tikal and Yaxchilan . This X @-@ ray style has been found on at least nine painted vessels from Motul de San José and is also used on the west side of Stela 2 . 
 = = Occupation and diet = = 
 Motul de San José was occupied from the Middle Preclassic right through to the Early Postclassic . However , the height of the city 's occupation was the Late Classic . Settlement density averages 250 structures per square kilometer ( 650 structures per square mile ) in the site 's monumental core , 125 structures per square kilometer ( 325 structures per square mile ) in the city 's suburban area and 79 structures per square kilometer ( 205 structures per square mile ) in the site 's periphery . 
 Motul de San José 's likely resource catchment zone probably extended between 5 and 7 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 and 4 @.@ 3 mi ) around the site core and included a number of satellite sites including Kantetul , La Trinidad de Nosotros , Akte , Buena Vista , Chachaklum and Chakokot . This region also includes two major water sources in the form of Lake <unk> Itzá to the south and the Kantetul river 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) to the north . The area around the city included a variety of soils suitable for agriculture , with 20 % of this being very fertile soil highly suited to agriculture , just over 50 % of the area was very fertile but required high maintenance ( consisting of either fertilization or crop rotation ) and 14 % being low fertility soil consisting of lowland clay and suitable only for maize or being left <unk> . Soil analysis has revealed that maize was not only grown in peripheral areas but also close to residential areas throughout Motul de San José . 
 Archaeological investigations have revealed that the diet of the inhabitants of Motul de San José included dogs ( Canis familiaris ) , turtles including Pond Sliders ( Trachemys scripta ) and Mesoamerican River Turtles ( <unk> <unk> ) , freshwater snails ( mostly Pomacea <unk> but also Jute snails ( <unk> spp . ) ) , White @-@ tailed deer ( Odocoileus virginianus ) , Red Brocket ( Mazama americana , a species of small deer ) , White @-@ lipped <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , rabbits ( Sylvilagus spp . ) , Lowland <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , Central American Agouti ( <unk> punctata ) and Nine @-@ banded Armadillos ( Dasypus <unk> ) . Only the dog had been domesticated by the Late Classic Maya so the majority of protein in the diet of the inhabitants came from hunting and fishing within the catchment area around the city . The most common food animals were the white @-@ tailed deer , river clam and river turtle . Some animal remains were recovered that were clearly associated with elite status occupation , such as those of the jaguar , the ocelot or other small feline and the crocodile ( <unk> spp . ) . These latter three appear more related to ritual and economic activity than nutritional needs . Freshwater snails were more an ingredient in the diet of lower status families while deer remains were associated with the elite residents of the city . 
 Among Motul de San José and its most important satellite La Trinidad de Nosotros , the majority of remains from Trinidad were from aquatic species , while at Motul de San José the majority were from terrestrial species . 10 % of animal remains from Motul had been modified to form artefacts , compared with only 4 % of animal remains at Trinidad . <unk> remains found at La Trinidad de Nosotros were more likely to be waste products from artefact manufacture while at Motul de San José they were more likely to be artefacts at the end of their usable life . Aquatic animal products arriving at Motul de San José were far more likely to be consumed by the elite than by commoners , whether used as food or to craft artefacts . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Preclassic Period = = = 
 = = = = Middle Preclassic = = = = 
 Motul de San José was first settled between 600 and 300 BC , in the latter portion of the Middle Preclassic period , when it was probably a fairly small site . At this time some of its satellite sites were also settled , including La Trinidad de Nosotros and Buena Vista , both of which would have been small villages at this time , and they may have been settled even earlier in the Middle Preclassic , between 800 and 600 BC . 
 = = = = Late Preclassic = = = = 
 Although investigation of Preclassic remains is difficult at Motul de San José due to the overlying Late Classic construction , it is evident that the site experienced major growth during the Late Preclassic ( 300 BC – AD 300 ) and became a sizeable centre . At roughly the same time , most of the major structures were built at Akte , and Chakokot experienced its earliest occupation during the Late Preclassic . In contrast , Buena Vista appears to have been lightly occupied . La Trinidad de Nosotros also underwent major expansion in the Late Preclassic and became larger and more important than Motul de San José , with its architectural layout being finalised in this period – later Classic period construction was superimposed upon pre @-@ existing Late Preclassic structures . 
 = = = Classic Period = = = 
 Although Motul de San José had begun to refer to Tikal as its overlord in the late 4th century , by the 7th century various hieroglyphic texts mention that it was under the dominion of Calakmul , Tikal 's greatest enemy , before again coming under the power of Tikal in the early 8th century . 
 = = = = Early Classic = = = = 
 Early Classic ceramic finds are scarce at Motul de San José and those that have been found were a minor component in mixed fill deposits . This suggests that Motul de San José was largely abandoned in the Early Classic . The best examples of Early Classic pottery come from outside of Motul de San José itself , with several complete ceramic vessels being recovered during the construction of a modern language school in Trinidad de Nosotros and some fragments of Early Classic pottery being retrieved from a looted <unk> at <unk> . 
 In the late 4th century Motul de San José began to refer to Tikal as its overlord . 
 = = = = Late Classic = = = = 
 Motul de San José experienced its second major peak in occupation during the Late Classic period , between AD 600 and AD 830 . Most of the major architecture at the site was built during this surge in activity and the city reached its maximum size . Motul de San José became one of the three most important cities around Lake Petén Itzá and was approximately the same size as Tayasal , while it was slightly smaller than <unk> Ch 'ich ' . There was renewed growth in the city 's satellite sites , Chakokot reached its peak population and most of its residential complexes were built in the Late Classic . Buena Vista experienced only light occupation at this time . Major construction work took place at Akte including the building of the principal platform and its causeway . It also appears that the rulers of Akte erected several stelae . La Trinidad de Nosotros took on its final form and most of its major architecture was built at this time including the Mesoamerican ballcourt , the major residential complexes , four plazas and the port facilities . 
 In the 8th century AD the city had important relationships with Maya cities to the southwest , especially in the Petexbatún region , and on the Pasión and Usumacinta rivers , including Seibal ( on the Pasión ) , Altar de Sacrificios ( near where the Pasión becomes the Usumacinta ) , and Dos Pilas , Aguateca , <unk> , Arroyo de Piedra and Cueva de Sangre ( all five in the Petexbatún region ) . It is possible that the widespread distribution of Ik @-@ style ceramics in elite tombs at sites in the Petexbatún region may be linked to the military defeat of Motul de San José by Dos Pilas , with these high quality ceramics forming a part of the tribute payment made to the Petexbatún kingdom . After its defeat at the hands of the Petexbatún kingdom , Motul de San José no longer erected sculpted stelae but the history of the site continued to be recorded to a certain extent in texts on Ik @-@ style ceramics . 
 = = = = = Politics = = = = = 
 In the Late Classic period Motul de San José was located between two mutually hostile powers , the great city of Tikal to the north and the breakaway kingdom of Petexbatún to the southwest , which had become a vassal of Tikal 's implacable enemy Calakmul . In Mesoamerica , such border states as Motul de San José became centres of political activity as they tried to manipulate the shifting political fortunes of their neighbours to their own advantage . This seems to be the case at Motul de San José with its rich ceramic tradition being a testament to the politically motivated banqueting that took place in the city . In the 8th century , although Motul de San José was the capital of the Ik polity , the aristocracy of its satellite sites wielded great power and were able to challenge their own position within the political hierarchy of the state while remaining subordinate to the ruling lord of the capital city . 
 During the 7th century AD , Motul de San José is recorded in hieroglyphic inscriptions as being a vassal of Calakmul . By the early 8th century the city had switched its allegiance to Jasaw Chan K 'awiil I , king of Tikal , then falling under the power of Petexbatún , itself a vassal of Calakmul , in the middle of the 8th century , before once again switching its allegiance to Tikal . In 711 , Jasaw Chan K 'awiil I , Lord of Tikal , was recorded as overlord of Motul , perhaps reflecting Tikal 's traditional overlordship of the city . In spite of these shifting alliances , Motul de San José acted with a degree of independence and was a powerful kingdom in the 8th century AD , with its ruler using the <unk> title given to high kings . The city 's rulers became very successful on the political scene in the wider Maya region , with the use of politically motivated feasting , war , economics and political marriages . 
 There is a glyphic record that sometime before 731 a lord of Motul was captured by a lord ( Ruler B ) of Machaquilá . In 740 , <unk> attacked Motul de San José . Hieroglyphic Stairway 3 at Dos Pilas records that in 745 a lord of Motul was captured by K 'awiil Chan K 'inich of Dos Pilas . In the middle of the 8th century AD , Motul de San José was closely allied with the important city of Yaxchilan on the Usumacinta River , as demonstrated by the fact that the king of Yaxchilan <unk> B 'alam IV ( " Bird Jaguar IV " ) who ruled from 752 to 768 , took two wives from Motul de San José . They are named in inscriptions at Yaxchilan as Lady Wak Tuun and Lady Wak Jalam Chan Ajaw . Lady Wak Jalam Chan Ajaw is shown preparing her husband for a battle that took place in 755 on Yaxchilan <unk> 41 , now in the British Museum in London . In fact , the alliance with Yaxchilan may date further back to the early 8th century since Yaxchilan <unk> 25 ( dedicated in AD 723 ) used the so @-@ called X @-@ ray style of imagery that is closely associated with the Motul de San José polity . However , relations with Yaxchilan were not always peaceful and Hieroglyphic Stairway 5 at Yaxchilan records that <unk> B 'alam III of Yaxchilan defeated the lord of Motul some time in the latter part of the 8th century . 
 = = = = = Known rulers = = = = = 
 All dates A.D. 
 An Ik @-@ style vessel possesses a hieroglyphic text declaring that it was the property of Chuy @-@ ti Chan , the son of Sak Muwaan , divine lord of Motul de San Jose who ruled between AD 700 and 726 . Chuy @-@ ti Chan is described as an artist and ballplayer and appears to have been appointed as an ambassador to the site known as Maan . 
 Two rulers feature prominently on Ik @-@ style ceramics , they are named as Yajawte ' K 'inich and Lamaw Ek ' . Lamaw Ek ' appears to have ruled directly after Yajawte ' K 'inich but was not his son , on one vessel his father is given the title k 'uhul Ik 'nal , a " divine noble of Motul de San José " but not the king ( whose title is k 'uhul ajaw or " divine lord " ) . Each of these two rulers had his own dedicated master painter . The artist of Yajawte ' K 'inich is named on the ceramics as T 'uubal Ajaw , Lord of T 'uubal . This latter site , T 'uubal , is thought to be located in Petén somewhere between Tikal and Naranjo . Yajawte ' K 'inich is depicted on one Ik @-@ style vessel wearing a mask and dancing , he is also depicted on Stelae 2 and 6 in the site core . Yajawte ' K 'inich is recorded on one vessel as possibly having died in AD 755 . 
 The name of the painter who produced the ceramic vessels for Lamaw Ek ' is only partially deciphered , as well as painting the vessel that possibly records the death of Yajawte ' K 'inich , he also painted a vessel recording the death of Lamaw Ek ' as having taken place in AD 779 . 
 = = = = Terminal Classic = = = = 
 Motul de San José underwent a major decline in population at the end of the Classic Period , between AD 830 and AD 1000 , and construction also suffered . Terminal Classic ceramics are common but limited to the major centres of Motul de San José itself and its principal satellite La Trinidad de Nosotros . Although it declined , construction did not halt . Occupation at Group D in the site core continued while Late Classic structures at La Trinidad de Nosotros were modified in the Terminal Classic . There is little evidence for Terminal Classic occupation at the smaller satellite sites . 
 An inscription dating to AD 830 mentions the last known ruler of Machaquilá , which may be evidence of a long @-@ standing relationship between the two sites . If this is the case , then Machaquilá appears to have been the dominant city out of the two . Seibal Stela 10 , dating to roughly 849 AD , has an inscription naming Kan Ek ' as ruler of Motul de San José , which is recorded as being one of the four paramount polities in the mid @-@ 9th century ( ca . 849 ) , along with Calakmul , Tikal and Seibal itself . 
 = = = = = Itza migration = = = = = 
 It has been suggested that Itza Maya from Motul de San José began the northward migration of Maya peoples to the Yucatán Peninsula at the end of the Classic Period . Classic period stelae at the site refer to the King of the Itzá , demonstrating that the Itza were already in the Petén region at this time . The nearby village of San José , on the shore of Lake Petén Itzá , is one of the last Itzá communities in Petén . 
 = = = Postclassic Period = = = 
 The full extent of occupation and activity in the Motul de San José area is not well understood for the Postclassic Period . It is known that there was a moderate occupation of the area during the Early Postclassic period , between AD 1000 and AD 1250 . Early Postclassic construction and ceramics have been identified at Motul de San José and all of its satellite sites , but construction was small scale and distribution of pottery was limited . La Trinidad de Nosotros was apparently a small village at this time and has produced some of the best examples of Early Postclassic ceramics . 
 There is little evidence of occupation in the Motul de San José area during the Late Postclassic , from AD 1250 to AD 1697 . It is possible that La Trinidad de Nosotros was <unk> , a settlement visited by conquistador Martín de Ursúa after the fall of the Itza capital Noj Petén to the Spanish in 1697 , but no Late Postclassic remains have yet been identified by archaeologists . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 It is likely that the satellite site of Akte was the ruin that Spanish friar Andrés de Avendaño referred to as Tanxulukmul in early 1695 . Teoberto Maler visited Motul de San José in May 1895 , and described one of the stelae in his report Explorations in the Department of Peten , Guatemala , published by the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology of Harvard University in 1910 . Ian Graham and Arlen Chase have separately mapped portions of the site core . 
 Before the establishment of the Motul Ecological Park , the site was used for agriculture , specifically the cultivation of maize . The site has been damaged several times by wildfires caused by uncontrolled stubble burning in 1986 , 1987 and again in 1998 . This last fire badly damaged the stelae in the site core . 
 In 1998 , the mayor of San José oversaw the improvement of the road to Motul de San José , which involved surfacing the road with gravel and opened the archaeological site to easier access , resulting in increased tourism at the site . 
 The Proyecto Arqueológico Motul de San José ( Motul de San José Archaeological Project ) has been investigating Motul de San José and its satellites from 1998 to 2008 , under the direction of Antonia <unk> of Williams College and Kitty Emery of the Florida Museum of Natural History . The core of the satellite site of Akte was mapped in 2002 and Trinidad de Nosotros was investigated by the project in 2003 . 
 = = Site description = = 
 Around 230 structures have been mapped in an area covering 2 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 77 sq mi ) , however , the total area occupied by the city was probably much greater than this . The total size of Motul de San José is estimated at 4 @.@ 18 square kilometres ( 1 @.@ 61 sq mi ) , with only about a third of this having been mapped . The ceremonial centre of the city covers an area of 0 @.@ 4 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 15 sq mi ) , an area which encompasses more than 144 structures including a sizeable palace , 6 stelae , 33 plazas of widely differing sizes , and various temples and elite residential areas . Further residential areas of the city cover an additional 1 @.@ 2 square kilometres ( 13 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , which includes both elite and commoner residences , with outlying settlements located for several kilometers to the north and east , with one residential group associated with agricultural terraces being situated 2 km to the north of the site . In total , 33 plaza groups have been mapped at Motul de San José . 
 By 2003 , around 1 @,@ 800 fragments of figurines had been excavated from the site , its periphery and its satellites , with 239 of these being either heads or complete figurines . 
 The site can be generally divided into three broad areas , the site core , a North Zone and an East Zone . The North Zone is separated from the site core by a wide depression containing clay soil that may have served as a reservoir for the city . Several quarries have been identified on the northern and southern edges of this depression . 
 The major architecture can be divided into five groups , labelled A to E. Each of these groups has at least one pyramid and various palace type structures . The major residential complexes of the site are found in Groups A , B and D , not including the royal palace in Group C. The major architectural groups are divided by lower lying areas that may have been used for intensive agriculture . The urban area of the site extends for 1 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) around the site core , with this area having been continuously occupied with a full range of structures from elite down to commoner in status . 
 Two distinct architectural styles date to the last period of the site 's occupation in the Late Classic . One uses well @-@ carved stone blocks for construction and is possibly earlier than the second style , which is believed to date to the Terminal Classic and uses thin , flat stones . 
 = = = Architectural groups = = = 
 = = = = Group A = = = = 
 Group A is the largest group west of the site core . The group includes a 5 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 18 ft ) tall pyramid , severely damaged by looters ' pits , with one in the summit and one each on the north , east , south and west sides . IDAEH has since refilled all five pits . Six large rectangular palace @-@ type structures are situated to the west of this pyramid , measuring up to 5 metres ( 16 ft ) high . A plaza is formed in Group A by the pyramid on the east side and a palace on the west side , accessed from the plaza via a stairway . Southeast of the palace is another plaza surrounded on three sides by palace @-@ type structures . 
 = = = = Group B = = = = 
 Group B includes a 7 @.@ 7 @-@ metre ( 25 ft ) high pyramid located about 90 metres ( 300 ft ) south of a palace complex laid out around two small plazas . The main complex in Group B closely resembles a complex at Dos Pilas in the Petexbatún region . The pyramid has been looted , with the looters ' pits having been refilled by IDAEH . The highest structure in the palace complex measures 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 15 ft ) high and is on the south side of the west plaza , its stairways stylistically resemble stairways from the Petexbatún . The palace complex has been looted , with one of the smaller structures around the east plaza having been completely destroyed . 
 A low wall runs north for 120 metres ( 390 ft ) from the northeast corner of the east plaza , it measures between 0 @.@ 3 and 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 12 and 20 in ) high and 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 20 in ) wide . The wall ends in a platform supporting several structures , it may have divided different parts of the site or marked the edge of an avenue . 
 To the north of Group B are several smaller groups of structures . They consist of residential complexes laid out around small plazas and their occupation was limited purely to the Late Classic period . Stela 2 is situated on a low platform to the west of the main pyramid . 
 = = = = Group C = = = = 
 Group C is the principal group at Motul de San José . It includes the Main Plaza , which is surrounded by pyramids and palaces . The tallest pyramid is 20 metres ( 66 ft ) high . The three largest pyramids in Group C belong to the architectural style possibly dating to the Terminal Classic , being built of thin , flat stones . Excavations have revealed that Group C was occupied from around 300 BC , in the Late Preclassic . 
 The Main Plaza in Group C measures approximately 100 by 200 metres ( 330 by 660 ft ) and is bordered by the Acropolis on the north and west sides , twin pyramids on the east side and the South Pyramid on the south side . It is the largest plaza at Motul de San José , encompassing an area greater than 11 @,@ 000 square metres ( 120 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . There are five stelae in the plaza commemorating Classic Period rulers , they have all been badly damaged by bushfires . On the west side of the plaza is a lower pyramid , measuring 7 @.@ 8 metres ( 26 ft ) high , that has been damaged by looters . A badly eroded stela was found close to this pyramid , another stela was erected in front of the South Pyramid . All three of the principal pyramids in Group C still support the remains of their summit shrines , possibly even with parts of their roofs and roof combs . The construction of these remaining structures consists of the thin , flat stones associated with the Terminal Classic occupation of the site . 
 The Twin Temples were both built on the same platform on the east side of the Main Plaza and have heights of 17 metres ( 56 ft ) and 18 metres ( 59 ft ) , three stelae ( Stelae 3 , 4 and 5 ) were erected in front of them in a north @-@ south line . The south pyramid of the two has been somewhat damaged by looters . Both of these pyramids probably originally supported roof combs and were accessed by twin stairways rising from the plaza to the west . 
 The Acropolis is a palace complex laid out around six small plazas , which it completely encloses , and forms the north side of the Main Plaza . It is a massive architectural complex covering an area of more than 83 @,@ 000 square metres ( 890 @,@ 000 sq ft ) and is likely to have been the palace of the royal family . Two structures lying immediately to the south of the central plaza within the complex itself measure as high as 10 @.@ 8 metres ( 35 ft ) and 8 @.@ 7 metres ( 29 ft ) respectively . Investigations at the northern extreme of the Acropolis uncovered a piece of a plate dated to the Terminal Classic period . Excavations in the northwestern portion of the Acropolis have revealed a series of stucco floors and large amounts of ceramic remains , as well as fragments of worked stone , obsidian , bone and shell . Among the artefacts recovered were three polychrome vessels , two tripod vessels , a flute and a drum . Ceramic remains dated to the Late Classic have been found in all levels of the Acropolis . One of the ceramic vessels excavated from the acropolis was in a style associated with Tikal . Investigations behind the west structure of the northwest plaza in the Acropolis recovered fill that included ceramic fragments dating as far back as the Late Preclassic and Early Classic . 
 The South Pyramid is the highest structure at the site , measuring 20 metres ( 66 ft ) tall . As its name suggests , it forms the south side of the Main Plaza . Excavations on the north ( plaza ) side of this temple uncovered Stela 6 . 
 = = = = Group D = = = = 
 Group D is an elaborate residential complex located to the north of the twin pyramids in Group C and northeast of the Acropolis , like the other groups it consists of various structures laid out around a plaza . The group includes two palaces , including one on the west side of the plaza that has been badly damaged by looters . A 5 @-@ metre ( 16 ft ) pyramid is situated on the east side of the Group D plaza . A looters ' trench that was cut into the pyramid revealed earlier levels of construction consisting of well made stone blocks , archaeological investigation of the looters ' tunnel revealed that the looters had probably plundered a high @-@ ranking noble , or royal , tomb . Items recovered from the looted tomb included polychrome ceramic fragments , 10 pieces of jade beads , 77 pieces of shell beads , 20 jade mosaic fragments , 145 shell mosaic fragments , 98 pyrite mosaic fragments , a shell necklace and a stingray spine . The human bones in the tomb had been painted red . The presence of the royal tomb suggests either that the palaces in Group D were royal residences or those of the priesthood dedicated to the rituals of the dead king . 
 The occupation of Group D dates as far back as the Middle Preclassic period . Group D was occupied as late as the Terminal Classic , when a termination ritual was apparently performed , after which the northern building of the group was abandoned . The ritual included scattering a large amount of rubbish in front of the south entrance to the building and then possibly burning the building itself . The rubbish is presumed to have come from the area of Group D itself and included some items associated with weaving and the manufacture of paper . 
 The south structure in Group D had a patio with two circular columns , an architectural style that is characteristic of the Terminal Classic period . 
 = = = = Group E = = = = 
 Group E is the second largest group at Motul de San José , after Group C. It is situated to the west of Groups C and D. The group includes two pyramids , measuring 7 metres ( 23 ft ) and 4 metres ( 13 ft ) high , both have been looted and the taller pyramid being located north of the smaller pyramid . Residential groups lie to the south and east of the pyramids , they are made up of three to four rectangular structures laid out around small central plazas , the structures are all less than 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) high . 
 Two palaces investigated in Group E are architecturally quite different from the palaces in Groups C and D. A notable feature is that their doors possess projecting corners . The western structure has a vaulted room with a central bench and also a cross @-@ shaped exterior bench , the walls of the structure still stand 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) high . The north structure 's walls stand 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) high and its western room had been divided in two by the placement of vertical stone slabs . This north structure did not possess any interior benches . It may be that the different architectural styles of Group E and the other main groups at Motul de San José result from their association with different lineages , each with its own style . 
 Group E is distinguished by a 200 @-@ metre ( 660 ft ) long avenue , known as the North South Avenue , with residential groups on the east side . On the west side the avenue is bordered by a 1 @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) high wall . The northern end of the avenue terminates at a small temple while the south ends at Plaza B. 
 = = = Stelae = = = 
 Six stelae are known from Motul de San José , all were found in Group C , with five of them being located in the Main Plaza . 
 Stela 1 , dating to the 8th century AD , contains the first known mention anywhere of the phrase Itza Chul Ahau ( " Divine Lord of the Itza " ) . It is situated on the west side of the Main Plaza in Group C and has the most well preserved hieroglyphic text at the site . The text describes the accession to the throne of a local lord under the supervision of Jasaw Chan K 'awiil I of Tikal . Stela 1 also provides the best evidence yet found identifying Motul de San José as the Late Classic Ik polity . 
 Stela 2 is situated some distance to the west of the Main Plaza in Group C , in Plaza B , in front of a small temple . This stela was photographed by Teoberto Maler in the first decade of the 20th century . The stela depicts king Yajawte ' K 'inich , it shows dancing figures on its east face . On its west face it depicts a figure sculpted using the so @-@ called X @-@ ray style found on Ik @-@ style ceramics , which depicts the face in profile wearing a mask that has been cut away to show the face underneath . 
 Stela 3 is located on the east side of the Main Plaza in Group C , north of Stela 4 . 
 Stela 4 is situated on the east side of the Main Plaza in Group C , near the Twin Temples , just south of Stela 3 and north of Stela 5 . The stela shows king Yajawte ' K 'inich performing a dance , with one foot raised . 
 Stela 5 is also located on the east side of the Main Plaza , just south of Stela 4 . 
 Stela 6 is located on the south side of the Main Plaza in Group C , just north of the South Pyramid . It was discovered in 1988 and had been broken into many pieces , although the base of the stela was still in situ . Two other large fragments were lying on the surface and more than 100 smaller fragments were collected . The stela appears to have shattered when it fell , some time after Motul de San José had been abandoned . The north and south faces of the stela bore sculpted designs , the remaining butt of the stela has the left foot of a human figure worked in profile on the south side . The sculpture on the north side has been pieced together in part and appears to have shown the figure of a ruler of the city dressed in rich clothing and regalia . The figure was positioned performing a dance , with one foot half lifted off the ground . In his right hand the ruler held a God K sceptre . The <unk> reconstruction of the sculpture indicates that the figure of the king measured between 2 @.@ 5 and 3 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 and 9 @.@ 8 ft ) high . Stela 6 is very similar to Stela 1 from Dos Pilas with both depicting the ruler in an identical position . The stela appears to have been a relatively late addition to the plaza and dates to the Late Postclassic period . 
 = = Satellite sites = = 
 There are a number of smaller satellite sites located around Motul de San José : 
 = = = Akte = = = 
 Akte is situated 7 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 4 mi ) northwest of Motul de San José and is known for its sculptured monuments . The centre of Akte covers an area of 35 hectares ( 0 @.@ 14 sq mi ) and includes 32 structures on a 40 @-@ metre ( 130 ft ) high artificially landscaped hill , with a number of other structures scattered through the surrounding area . The hill supporting the site core overlooks the rivers Akte and Kantetul . The main periods of occupation date to the Late Preclassic and Late Classic with further occupation in the Terminal Classic and Early Postclassic . The overall area of Akte is probably larger than that of Trinidad de Nosotros , covering a 2 to 3 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 77 to 1 @.@ 16 sq mi ) area , but this includes less structures than at Trinidad , with small residential groups widely scattered on hilltops around the site core . 
 The main residential complex at Akte rests upon a 3 to 5 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 to 16 @.@ 4 ft ) platform and contains three patios , with other residential groups clustered around the east , south and west side of the platform 's base . A small temple is located on the east side of the north patio . Akte may have served as a rural administrative centre or perhaps as a royal estate of the Motul de San José elite . 
 Seven sculpted monuments have been found at Akte , an unusual number for such a small site . If these monuments were originally erected at Akte , then this may mean that the site was actually outside of the Motul de San José polity . Archaeological investigations of the stelae carried out in 2003 were unable to determine if the monuments had been moved to Akte or not . 
 Stela 1 is the best preserved monument at Akte . It is badly eroded and can be dated by a damaged Long Count date inscribed on the back , which dates it to the end of the 7th century or the beginning of the 8th . The front of the stela bears the representation of a standing " divine lord " with attributes typical of the Late Classic . 
 Stela 2 is badly damaged , being broken into a number of fragments . 
 Stela 3 had a cache of 44 pieces of obsidian buried near its base . 
 = = = Buena Vista = = = 
 Buena Vista lies 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) to the southwest of the site core and 0 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) from the northwest shore of Lake Petén Itzá . 13 structures have been mapped , situated around a small plaza , with a small temple on the east side . The site is located on a hilltop and was once much larger but has been partially covered by the modern development of Nuevo San José . Structures 4 and 8 have been investigated , revealing that Buena Vista was probably occupied from the Middle Preclassic through to the Late Classic , with a much reduced population in the Early Postclassic . The site was surveyed in 2000 and preliminary excavations took place in 2001 . The main pyramids of Motul de San José are visible from Buena Vista , as is a large part of the lake . Buena Vista has fairly good soil and the surviving portions of the site are currently used for <unk> cultivation . 
 The earliest ceramic evidence excavated at Buena Vista dates to the very end of the Early Preclassic period , indicating that the site was initially settled at the transition between the Early and Middle Preclassic periods . The long occupational history of Buena Vista may be linked to its proximity to chert @-@ rich hills . Excavations have revealed evidence of chert workshops dedicated to the production of tools , together with dumps of waste flakes . 
 Buena Vista features an early architectural style that differs from that at Motul de San José , consisting of platforms built from unworked stone , with wide front stairways and probably without superstructures . They were built in the Middle to Late Preclassic periods and then reused in the Late Classic . The differences in style between Buena Vista and Motul probably results from differing epochs of construction . 
 Group A is arranged around the main plaza . Group B is located a little to the southeast , and contains structures 11 to 14 . 
 Structure 1 is the East Pyramid , it is located on the hillside a short distance from the rest of the mounds . It was a 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) high Late Classic funerary structure containing a looted tomb . From the summit of this temple both Lake Petén Itzá and the Twin Temples of Group C at Motul de San José are visible . 
 Structure 4 is the North Structure . It dates to the Late Classic but overlies construction dating to the Middle Preclassic . A stairway ascended the front of the building , under which were found the remains of Late Classic polychrome ceramics , perhaps belonging to a pre @-@ construction ritual offering . The stucco floors on top of the mound supported asymmetric walls that perhaps date to the Postclassic Period , being associated with a mix of Late Classic and Postclassic pottery . 
 Structures 7 , 8 and 9 were long , low rectangular platforms . They measure 15 metres ( 49 ft ) long by 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) wide and 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) high . They had perishable roofs and date to the Late Classic , although Structures 7 and 8 may overlie Middle Preclassic remains . 
 = = = Chachaklum = = = 
 Chachaklum ( also spelt <unk> 'um ) is situated 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) east of the site core and may also have formed a part of the Motul de San José polity . It is a large site covering over 2 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 77 sq mi ) , an area that includes over 141 structures . Chachaklum includes a small ceremonial centre where a possible E @-@ Group has been identified . The site is located in an area of savanna with poor soils considered unsuitable for the growing of maize , somewhat at odds with the settlement density of the site . The contrast between the settlement density and poor soils has highlighted the need for further research into Maya agriculture in a savanna environment . Chachaklum was a relatively large site of secondary rank within the Motul de San José polity . 
 Chachaklum 's principal phase of occupation appears to date to the Terminal Classic period , during the 10th and 11th centuries AD . However , the site possesses massive basal platforms and these , together with the presence of the E @-@ Group , suggests a longer occupational period than was immediately evident from the first excavations of the site . Further investigations have revealed a long occupational history beginning in the Late Preclassic period and continuing right through to the Late Classic . 
 = = = Chak Maman Tok ' ( La Estrella ) = = = 
 Chak Maman Tok ' is a very small site located 3 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) southwest of Motul de San José and about 0 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) from Buena Vista . The site includes a small number of mounds spread along the hillside overlooking Lake Petén Itzá . The site was investigated by archaeologists in 2005 and 2006 . Although the site is very small , it seems to have been an important centre for the production of high @-@ quality chert tools , and one of the major manufacturers of chert tools in the Petén lowlands with considerable economic importance within the Motul de San José polity . 
 The site has been severely damaged by modern construction with the chert deposits being reused as construction material . 
 = = = Chakokot = = = 
 Chakokot is located 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) to the east of the Main Plaza . It occupies an area of 16 hectares ( 0 @.@ 062 sq mi ) and consists of 59 structures widely dispersed around a small plaza upon the flat summit of a 40 @-@ metre ( 130 ft ) high hill . Principal occupation dates from the Late Preclassic and Late Classic periods . The soils at Chakokot are considered good for agriculture and maize was grown within the site itself . The area between Chakokot and Motul de San José is occupied by a bajo , or low @-@ lying seasonal swamp . 
 The Plaza at Chakokot is small and covers an area of about 1 @,@ 200 square metres ( 13 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . On the north and east sides it is bordered by residential groups , a 3 @-@ metre ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) square platform is to the south and on the west by two low parallel structures measuring just 0 @.@ 50 metres ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) high . 
 The largest structure at Chakokot is a 10 @-@ metre ( 33 ft ) tall temple to the east of a large residential area bordering the Plaza on the east side . 
 Most of the residential areas at Chakokot possess one or more bottle @-@ shaped underground storage chambers , known as <unk> , with 14 having been found as of 2001 . Because of the thick vegetation at the site , investigators consider that there are probably more to be found . These <unk> were closed with disc @-@ shaped stone lids , many of which were found either still in place or close to the aperture of the <unk> to which it belonged . The stone lids were without perforations so it is supposed that the chambers were used to store dry goods rather than water . 
 = = = Kantetul = = = 
 Kantetul is located 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) north of the site core . 
 = = = Ox <unk> = = = 
 Ox <unk> is located in the hill country a few kilometers south of Motul de San José , and has fertile soil for agriculture . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> is located in the hills a few kilometers north @-@ northwest of Motul de San José , and possesses rich soils for agriculture . 
 = = = La Trinidad de Nosotros = = = 
 La Trinidad is known as Sik 'u ' in the Itza language . It is located 2 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) southeast of Motul de San José on the northern shore of Lake Petén Itzá . The site is located at the closest point to Motul on the lake shore and it may have served as a Maya port . The site has more than 115 structures located in an area of 35 hectares ( 0 @.@ 14 sq mi ) , and the site may actually cover 55 hectares ( 0 @.@ 21 sq mi ) and contain about 150 structures . The site had a long occupational history stretching right through from the Middle Preclassic to the Early Postclassic , with two phases of greater activity in the Early Classic around AD 350 and in the Late Classic from AD 650 – 830 . The Terminal Classic occupation was largely limited to the lake shore but was fairly dense . The monumental architecture , port and the ballcourt all identify La Trinidad de Nosotros as an important secondary centre within the Motul de San José polity . Additionally , the site was situated close to a source of chert and probably manufactured chert tools . 
 La Trinidad de Nosotros has been tentatively identified as <unk> , a settlement visited by conquistador Martín de Ursúa after Spanish Conquest of the Itza capital Noj Petén in 1697 , but no Late Postclassic remains have yet been securely identified . 
 The site is divided into two areas . The site core is located on a hill 40 metres ( 130 ft ) above the lake and with a good view across it . The second area is spread along the lake shore and the hillside leading to the site core . The site core has at least 80 structures arranged around five plazas . The majority of the structures are residential in nature but La Trinidad has an unusual amount of ceremonial architecture for such a small site . La Trinidad seems to have been an important port for the import and export of goods to and from Motul de San José . 
 Group C is the main residential complex of the site , it has a small shrine at the eastern end . La Trinidad de Nosotros has five main plazas within its site core , labelled I through to V. All of them were resurfaced multiple times between the Late Preclassic and Late Classic . The combined surface areas of the five plazas cover over 20 @,@ 000 square metres ( 220 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , with Plaza V making up about half of this , making it slightly smaller than the main plaza at Motul de San José itself . 
 Structure A @-@ 1 is the main temple , it is a 12 @-@ metre ( 39 ft ) high radial pyramid . 
 Structure C @-@ 1 is an elite residence . 
 Structure E @-@ 1 may originally have been a circular building . 
 Structure G @-@ 1 is a sub @-@ elite residence . The ballcourt is located in Group F. It is in the form of a T @-@ shape , with 25 @-@ metre ( 82 ft ) long sides , a closed northern end zone and a small temple adjoining the eastern side . The last phase of construction dates to the Late Classic . The ballcourt is similar in design to the ballcourt on the Main Plaza of Dos Pilas in the Petexbatún region . No ballcourt has been identified at the Motul de San José site itself , making the presence of one here of especial interest . Rich deposits were found associated with the ballcourt , including 21 @,@ 000 potsherds , 239 pieces of obsidian , 155 fragments of ceramic figurines and 84 stone tools . 
 Group O is a small residential group to the west of Plaza V. 
 Various structures have been identified in the area of the port , including retaining walls , a possible breakwater and a quay . The port appears to have been partially enclosed by an artificial peninsula . 
 = Rhein @-@ class monitor = 
 The Rhein class of ironclad riverine monitors ( <unk> ) were a pair of ships built by the German Imperial Navy in the aftermath of the Franco @-@ Prussian War . The class comprised two ships , Rhein and Mosel ; both were built by the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen , in 1872 – 1874 . They were armed with a pair of 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) bronze cannon in a revolving gun turret . The ships were intended to protect the German border with France in the event of a conflict , but had short service lives , as war did not come . They served briefly in the defenses of Coblenz , starting in 1875 , before being withdraw from service . The two ships were sold for scrap , apparently in December 1884 . 
 = = Design = = 
 In the aftermath of the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 , the Imperial German Navy decided that it needed to build river gunboats for service on the Rhine and Moselle to defend the German border . This decision came despite the Navy having seen the French Navy 's negative experiences with similar gunboats during the war . The German Navy decided that two armored gunboats were necessary , and awarded the contract to AG Weser to design and build the vessels . The design staff based their work on a pair of Austro @-@ Hungarian monitors , Leitha and Maros , that had been recently built for service on the Danube . 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
 Rhein and Mosel were 47 @.@ 85 meters ( 157 @.@ 0 ft ) long at the waterline and 49 @.@ 60 m ( 162 @.@ 7 ft ) long overall , and had a beam of 7 @.@ 85 m ( 25 @.@ 8 ft ) . At cruising load , the monitors had a forward draft of <unk> m ( 2 ft 4 in ) , an aft draft of 1 @.@ 07 m ( 3 ft 6 in ) , and a maximum draft of 1 @.@ 60 m ( 5 ft 3 in ) . Freeboard was <unk> m ( 2 ft 0 in ) forward and .75 m ( 2 ft 6 in ) aft . The ships were designed to partially flood for combat , which would submerge the hull so only the upper casemate and gun turret would be above water . This reduced the freeboard to .05 m ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) and <unk> m ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) , respectively . The ships had a designed displacement of 200 metric tons ( 200 long tons ; 220 short tons ) , and at full load they displaced 283 t ( 279 long tons ; 312 short tons ) . The hulls were constructed with transverse iron frames . The ships had a crew of one officer and twenty @-@ two enlisted men , and both carried a single boat . 
 The ships were powered by two horizontal 2 @-@ cylinder single @-@ expansion steam engines ; these drove a pair of 3 @-@ bladed screws .95 m ( 3 ft 1 in ) on diameter . The engines were placed in a single engine room . Two locomotive boilers with two fireboxes apiece supplied steam to the engines ; they were located in a separate boiler room . The engines were rated at 320 indicated horsepower ( 240 kW ) and a top speed of 6 @.@ 5 knots ( 12 @.@ 0 km / h ; 7 @.@ 5 mph ) . In service , they were capable of 48 nominal horsepower and 8 @.@ 25 kn ( 15 @.@ 28 km / h ; 9 @.@ 49 mph ) . The ships maneuvered slowly and turned poorly , especially steaming downstream . They did not handle well upstream either , particularly in turning against the current . Handling while the ships were flooded for combat was especially dangerous . 
 The ships were each armed with a pair of 12 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 19 bronze cannon manufactured by Krupp ; they were rifled , muzzle @-@ loading guns , mounted in a single revolving gun turret placed on an armored casemate amidships . The guns fired a 36 @-@ pound shot , and were supplied with 300 rounds of ammunition . The ships were protected with a combination of wrought iron armor and teak . The turret sides were armored with 55 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) of iron , backed with 150 to 200 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 to 7 @.@ 9 in ) of teak ; the roofs were 65 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The conning tower had 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick sides and a 16 mm ( 0 @.@ 63 in ) thick roof . The casemate was protected with 65 mm of armor plate on the sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The intention for Rhein and Mosel was to use them to defend the railway bridges on the Rhine in the event of a French war of revenge after the Franco @-@ Prussian War in 1870 – 1871 . The ships were both built at the AG Weser dockyard in Bremen , under construction numbers 23 and 24 , respectively . The Rhine Railway Company was compelled to contribute 300 @,@ 000 <unk> to the construction of the ships , as they were intended to defend the railway bridges the company used at <unk> . Both ships were laid down in 1872 and launched later that year ; they were both commissioned into the Imperial Navy on 25 April 1874 . They spent the first year of their career at <unk> , until 7 April 1875 , when they were transferred to the defenses of Coblenz . 
 By the time the two monitors entered service , the prospect of a French attack had decreased , prompting the Navy to question the usefulness of retaining the vessels . As a result , they were quickly removed from service . The ultimate fate of the two ships is unclear ; according to naval historian Erich Gröner , both ships were sold for 3 @,@ 500 gold marks in December 1875 . Robert Gardiner , however , states that the ships remained , out of service , until 1884 , when they were sold for scrapping . The latter version would appear to be correct , as J.F. von <unk> published an elevation and <unk> of Rhein in 1881 , with the inference that Rhein and Mosel were still extant at that time . 
 = Barmherziges Herze der ewigen Liebe , BWV 185 = 
 Barmherziges Herze der ewigen Liebe ( Merciful heart of eternal love ) , BWV 185 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Weimar for the fourth Sunday after Trinity and first performed it on 14 July 1715 . 
 Bach composed the cantata as concertmaster in Weimar , responsible for one church cantata per month . The text was written by the court poet Salomon Franck for the occasion and published in 1715 . He included as the closing choral the first stanza of Johannes Agricola 's hymn " Ich ruf zu dir , Herr Jesus Christ " . The cantata is structured in six movements begins with a duet , followed by a sequence of alternating arias and recitatives and closed by a four @-@ part chorale . It is scored for a small ensemble of four vocal parts , oboe , strings and continuo . 
 Bach led the first performance in the court chapel of Schloss Weimar on 14 July 1715 . He performed the cantata again , with small instrumental revisions , at the beginning of his tenure as Thomaskantor in Leipzig , coupled with the new cantata Ein <unk> <unk> , BWV 24 . 
 = = History and words = = 
 On 2 March 1714 Bach was appointed concertmaster of the Weimar court capelle of the co @-@ reigning dukes Wilhelm Ernst and Ernst August of Saxe @-@ Weimar . As concertmaster , he assumed the principal responsibility for composing new works , specifically cantatas for the Schlosskirche ( palace church ) , on a monthly schedule . He wrote this cantata for the Fourth Sunday after Trinity . 
 The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the Epistle to the Romans , " For the earnest expectation of the creature <unk> for the manifestation of the sons of God " ( Romans 8 : 18 – 23 ) , and from the Sermon on the Mount in the Gospel of Luke : the injunctions to " be merciful " , " judge not " ( Luke 6 : 36 – 42 ) . The cantata text was written by the court poet Salomon Franck for the occasion and published in 1715 in Evangelisches Andachts @-@ Opffer . Franck stayed close to the theme of the gospel , recalling the injunctions and the parables of the mote and the beam and the blind leading the blind . The last aria summarizes the admonitions as " Das ist der Christen Kunst " ( This is the Christians ' art ) . The cantata is closed by the first stanza of Johannes Agricola 's hymn " Ich ruf zu dir , Herr Jesus Christ " ( 1531 ) . Albert Schweitzer criticized the libretto as " bland , lesson @-@ like " . 
 Bach first performed the cantata on 14 July 1715 . He dated it himself " 1715 " . When Bach performed the cantata again in Leipzig on 20 June 1723 , he transposed it from F @-@ sharp minor to G minor and made changes to the instrumentation . In that service , his fourth in Leipzig , he performed it together with a new cantata Ein <unk> <unk> , BWV 24 , after he had started his tenure as cantor with cantatas in two parts , Die Elenden sollen essen , BWV 75 , and Die Himmel erzählen die Ehre Gottes , BWV 76 . He treated the same chorale in the chorale cantata Ich ruf zu dir , Herr Jesu Christ , BWV 177 , for the same occasion in 1724 . Bach revived the cantata once more in 1746 or 1747 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 The cantata in structured in six movements , beginning with a duet , followed by a series of alternating recitatives and arias and concluded by a chorale . Similar to several other cantatas on words by Franck , it is scored for a small ensemble : four vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) and bass ( B ) ) , oboe ( Ob ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , and basso continuo ( Bc ) including bassoon ( Fg ) . A choir is only needed for the chorale , if at all . The score , partly an autograph , is titled " Concerto . / Dominica post Trinit : / <unk> <unk> der ewigen <unk> ect . / â 5 Strom . 4 Voci / Tromba / 1 Hautb 2 Violini . 1 Viola . / Violoncello / è Fagotto . S. A. T. è <unk> con Cont . / di <unk> . / 1715 " , while " tromba " ( trumpet ) is struck in the cover of the set of parts . 
 In Leipzig the oboe was replaced by a clarino ( trumpet ) for the instrumental cantus firmus of the chorale in movement 1 . The duration is given as 16 minutes . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring and keys are given for the version performed in Weimar in 1714 . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The instruments are shown separately for winds and strings , while the continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The opening movement is a duet of soprano and tenor , " Barmherziges Herze der ewigen Liebe " ( Compassionate heart of eternal love ) . It is in two ways connected to the chorale which closes the work . The melody is played line by line as a cantus firmus by the oboe , embellished and in a dancing 6 / 4 time instead of 4 / 4 . The first interval in the voices and the continuo is the same as in the chorale . The countersubject is the inversion of the theme , in German " <unk> " ( reflection in a mirror ) . <unk> reflects the theme as human mercy should reflect divine mercy . John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage with the Monteverdi Choir in 2000 , comments in his diary of the project : " Cast as a siciliano for soprano and tenor with cello continuo , there is a warm glow to this opening duet , with trills on each of the main beats to signify the flickering flame of love , and a plea to ' come melt my heart ' . Agricola 's chorale tune [ ... ] is meanwhile intoned by a clarino hovering above the two amorous vocal lines . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The alto recitative , " Ihr Herzen , die ihr euch in Stein und Fels <unk> " ( You hearts , which have changed yourselves into rocks and stones ) , is first accompanied by the strings , but ends as an arioso with continuo . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 The alto aria , " Sei <unk> in dieser Zeit " ( Be inspired at the present time ) shows the richest instrumentation , with figurative oboe solos . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The bass recitative " Die <unk> <unk> sich ! " ( Self @-@ love flatters itself ! ) is accompanied only by the continuo . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The text of the bass aria with continuo , " Das ist der Christen Kunst " ( This is the Christian 's art ) , summarizes all injunctions in one long sentence , but Bach splits it in parts , all introduced by the keywords " Das ist der Christen Kunst " . The bass as the vox Christi ( voice of Christ ) delivers the " sermon " . In Leipzig , the continuo of cello and bass in octaves was doubled by the strings , another octave higher . Gardiner admires Bach 's treatment as a " gentle , <unk> way he portrays the rhetorical displays of a pompous preacher " . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 The closing chorale , " Ich ruf zu dir , Herr Jesu Christ " ( I call to You , Lord Jesus Christ ) , summarizes the topic of the cantata to love and serve the neighbour . 
 It is illuminated by a " soaring " violin as a fifth part , similar to the treatment in the cantata for Pentecost the previous year , Erschallet , ihr Lieder , BWV 172 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The musicologist Isoyama summarizes : " ... we are bound to admire the emotional wealth with which Bach 's music infuses the poetry . In that it gives living reality to a potentially dry text , this work may be numbered among Bach 's masterpieces " . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 The sortable listing is taken from the selection provided by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . The type of choir and orchestra is roughly shown as a large group by red background , and as an ensemble with period instruments in historically informed performance by green background . 
 = Galiella rufa = 
 Galiella rufa , commonly known as the rubber cup , the rufous rubber cup , or the hairy rubber cup , is a species of fungus in the family Sarcosomataceae . The fungus produces cup @-@ shaped fruit bodies that typically grow in clusters on branches and exposed portions of buried wood throughout eastern and Midwest North America and in Malaysia . The fruit bodies have the texture of tough , gelatinous rubber , and have a rough , blackish @-@ brown , felt @-@ like outer surface and a smooth reddish @-@ brown inner surface . Although generally considered inedible by North American mushroom field guides , it is commonly consumed in Malaysia . The fungus produces several chemicals with a variety of bioactive properties . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The species was originally named Bulgaria rufa in 1832 by Lewis David de Schweinitz , based on material collected from Bethlehem , Pennsylvania . In 1913 , Pier Andrea Saccardo transferred it to the genus <unk> as defined by George Edward Massee in 1901 ( a genus now synonymous with Plectania ) due to its hyaline ( translucent ) spores . Richard Korf made it the type species of his newly created Galiella in 1957 , a genus that encompasses <unk> species ( those with a morphology similar to those in Bulgaria ) with spores that feature surface warts that are made of callose @-@ <unk> substances that stain with methyl blue dye . 
 In 1906 , Charles Horton Peck described the variety magna from material collected in North Elba , New York . Peck explained that the variety differed from the typical species in several ways : var. magna grew among fallen leaves under balsam fir trees , or among mosses on the ground , not on buried wood ; it lacked a stem , and was instead broad and rounded underneath ; its hymenium was more yellow @-@ brown then the nominate variety ; and , its spore were slightly longer . 
 The specific epithet rufa means " rusty " or reddish @-@ brown " , and refers to the color of the hymenium . The species is commonly named the " rubber cup " , the " rufous rubber cup " , or the " hairy rubber cup " . In Sabah , it is known as mata <unk> ( deer eyes ) , and in Sarawak , mata <unk> ( buffalo eyes ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of G. rufa are initially closed and roughly spherical to top @-@ shaped , and resemble minute puffballs . They later open in the shape of a shallow cup , and reach diameters of 15 – 35 mm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 4 in ) wide . The cup margin is curved inwards and irregularly toothed ; the teeth are a lighter color than the hymenium . The interior surface of the cup , which bears the spore @-@ bearing surface ( the hymenium ) is reddish @-@ brown to orange @-@ brown . The exterior surface is blackish @-@ brown , and covered with hairs that measure 7 – 8 μm long that give it a felt @-@ like or hairy texture . The flesh of the fruit body lacks any distinctive taste or odor , and is grayish , translucent , gelatinous and rubbery . The fungus sometimes has a short stem that is up to 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long by 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) wide , but it may be missing in some specimens . Dried fruit bodies become leathery and wrinkled . 
 Although the fruit bodies are generally considered by North American field guides to be inedible , or of unknown edibility , in parts of Malaysia it is commonly eaten and even " prized for its edibility " . 
 The spores are thin @-@ walled , elliptical with narrowed ends , and covered with fine warts ; they have dimensions of 10 – 22 by 8 – 10 μm . Both the spores and the asci ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are nonamyloid . The asci are narrow and typically 275 – 300 μm long . The paraphyses ( sterile cells interspersed among the asci in the hymenium ) are slender threadlike . <unk> studies have demonstrated that the development of the spore wall in G. rufa is similar to the genus Discina ( in the Helvellaceae family ) and to the other Sarcosomataceae , especially Plectania nannfeldtii ; both of these species have fine secondary wall spore ornaments . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Galiella <unk> is similar in appearance to G. rufa . It is found in north temperate Asia , where it grows on the rotting wood of Spruce trees . It has larger ascospores than G. rufa , typically 26 – 41 by 13 – 16 µm . Bulgaria <unk> is similar in shape and size , but has a shiny black hymenium . <unk> <unk> , another species found in eastern North American , is black , has a more liquid interior than G. rufa , and is larger — up to 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) across . <unk> <unk> has a shallower , <unk> fruit body with a yellowish inner surface . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Galiella rufa is a saprobic species , and grows either solitarily , but more usually in groups or in clusters on decaying hardwood branches and logs . The fungus fruits in late summer and autumn . The fungus has been noted to fruit readily on logs used for the cultivation of the shiitake mushroom . The fruit bodies are readily overlooked as they blend in with their surroundings . 
 Galiella rufa is found in Midwest and eastern North America , and has been collected in areas between New York and Minnesota , Missouri and North Carolina . The species is also found in Malaysia . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 Galiella rufa produces several structurally related <unk> compounds that have attracted attention for their biological properties : <unk> , <unk> . The compounds have anti @-@ <unk> activity , killing the nematodes Caenorhabditis elegans and <unk> incognita . These compounds have been shown in laboratory tests to inhibit the early steps of the biosynthetic pathways induced by plant hormones known as gibberellic acids , and they also inhibit the germination of seeds of several plants . <unk> is additionally a highly selective and potent inhibitor of interleukin @-@ 6 ( IL @-@ 6 ) signaling in <unk> cells . IL @-@ 6 is a multifunctional cytokine which is produced by a large variety of cells and functions as a regulator of immune response , acute phase reactions , and <unk> . Researchers are interested in the potential of small @-@ molecule inhibitors ( such as the ones produced by G. rufa ) to interfere with the IL @-@ 6 signaling cascade that leads to the expression of genes involved in disease . 
 = My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic = 
 My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic is a children 's animated fantasy television series produced by Hasbro Studios and DHX Media Vancouver . The series is based on Hasbro 's My Little Pony line of toys and animated works and is often referred by collectors to be the fourth generation or " G4 " of the My Little Pony franchise . The series premiered on October 10 , 2010 , on The Hub cable channel . Hasbro selected animator Lauren Faust as the creative director and executive producer for the show . Faust sought to challenge the established nature of the existing My Little Pony line , creating more in @-@ depth characters and adventurous settings . 
 The show follows a studious unicorn pony named Twilight Sparkle as her mentor Princess Celestia guides her to learn about friendship in the town of Ponyville . Twilight becomes close friends with five other ponies : Applejack , Rarity , Fluttershy , Rainbow Dash , and Pinkie Pie . Each represents a different facet of friendship , and Twilight discovers herself to be a key part of the magical artifacts known as the " Elements of Harmony " . The ponies travel on adventures and help others around Equestria while working out problems that arise in their own friendships . 
 The series has become a major commercial success , becoming the most highly rated original production in the Hub Network 's broadcast history and leading to new merchandising opportunities for Hasbro , including books , clothing , collectible trading cards , and comics . Despite the target demographic of young girls , Friendship Is Magic has also gained a large following of older viewers , mainly young and middle @-@ aged men , who call themselves " bronies " . Portions of the show have become part of the remix culture , and have formed the basis for a variety of Internet memes . A spin @-@ off feature film series , My Little Pony : Equestria Girls , has been made and shown in limited theatrical screenings prior to television broadcast and home media release . A feature @-@ length film adaptation directly based on the TV series itself has been announced for a theatrical release on October 6 , 2017 . 
 = = Origin = = 
 Hasbro , Inc. has produced several incarnations and lines of toys and entertainment related to the My Little Pony franchise , often labeled by collectors as " generations " . The animated series My Little Pony Tales which premiered in 1992 was the toy line 's most recent television series before Friendship Is Magic , featuring the pony designs of the first toy line . It was followed by various direct @-@ to @-@ video releases , which featured later designs up to the third incarnation of the franchise . Just as Michael Bay 's film had helped to boost the new Transformers toy line , Hasbro wanted to retool the My Little Pony franchise and update it to better suit the current demographic and taste of young girls . According to Margaret Loesch , CEO of Hub Network , revisiting properties that had worked in the past was an important programming decision , influenced to an extent by the opinions of the network 's programming executives , a number of whom were once fans of such shows . Senior Vice President Linda Steiner also stated that they " intended to have the show appeal to a larger demographic " , with the concept of " co @-@ viewing " of parents with their children being a central theme of the Hub Network 's programming . Central themes that Hasbro sought for the show included friendships and working together , factors they determined from market research in how girls played with their toys . 
 Animator and writer Lauren Faust approached Hasbro , seeking to develop her girls ' toys property " Galaxy Girls " into an animated series . Faust , who had previously worked on Cartoon Network 's The Powerpuff Girls and Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends , had been pitching original animation aimed at girls for years , but had always been rejected by studios and networks because cartoons for girls were considered unsuccessful . When she pitched to Lisa Licht of Hasbro Studios , Licht showed Faust one of their recent My Little Pony animated works , Princess Promenade , " completely on the fly " . Licht considered that Faust 's style was well suited to that line , and asked her to consider " some ideas where to take a new version of the franchise " . 
 Faust was initially hired by Hasbro to create a pitch bible for the show , allowing her to get additional help with conceptualization . Faust said she was " extremely skeptical " about taking the job at first because she had always found shows based on girls ' toys to be boring and unrelatable . My Little Pony was one of her favorite childhood toys , but she was disappointed that her imagination at the time was nothing like the animated shows , in which the characters , according to Faust , " just had endless tea parties , giggled over nothing and defeated villains by either sharing with them or crying " . With the chance to work on My Little Pony , she hoped to prove that " cartoons for girls don 't have to be a puddle of <unk> , cutesy @-@ <unk> , goody @-@ two @-@ <unk> " . To do this , she incorporated into the design of the characters and the show many elements that contradicted idealized stereotypes of girls , such as diverse personalities , the message that friends can be different and can get into arguments but still be friends , and the idea that girls should not be limited by what others say they can or cannot do . Elements of the characters ' personalities and the show 's settings were based on her own childhood imagination of the ponies ' adventures , in part inspired by the animated shows that her brothers would watch while growing up , such as Transformers and G.I. Joe ; she considered that she was making Friendship Is Magic " for me as an eight @-@ year @-@ old " . Faust still aimed for the characters to be " relatable " characters , using stereotypical " icons of girliness " ( such as the waif or the bookworm ) in order to broaden the appeal of the characters for the young female audience . 
 Faust stated that as she provided Hasbro with more of her ideas for the show , she was inspired by their positive response to the non @-@ traditional elements . Faust had initially pitched the show to include " adventure stories " in a similar proportion to " relationship stories " , but recognizing the younger target audience , as well as the difficulty of basing complex plots on the adventure elements , she trimmed back this content , focusing more on exchanges between the characters . The show still incorporates episodic creatures intended to be frightening to children , such as dragons and hydras , but it places more emphasis on the friendships among the characters , displayed with a comedic tone . By the time the show was approved , Faust had developed three full scripts for the series . 
 Faust began to work out concept sketches , several of which appeared on her DeviantArt page , including ponies from the original series ( Twilight , Applejack , Firefly , Surprise , Posey and <unk> ) , which later provided the core for the main cast of the show . Hasbro approved the show with Faust as Executive Producer and asked her to complete the pitch bible . In order to do so , Faust brought in Martin <unk> and Paul Rudish , who had worked on other animated shows with her . Faust credits Rudish for the inspiration of the pegasus ponies controlling the weather in Equestria , as well as the character of Nightmare Moon during this period . Faust also consulted Craig McCracken , her husband and also an animator and creator of The Powerpuff Girls and Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends . After seeing the initial version of the pitch bible , Hasbro requested more character designs from Faust 's team ; subsequently , Faust brought aboard Dave Dunnet and Lynne Naylor to further refine the background and character styles . 
 On completion of the pitch bible , Hasbro and Faust began looking at studios for the animation . Studio B Productions ( renamed to DHX Media on September 8 , 2010 , after its parent company , along with DHX 's other subsidiaries ) had previously worked on Adobe Flash @-@ based animations and on shows that featured a large number of animals , and Faust felt they would be a good selection . Studio B requested that Jayson Thiessen be the director , a choice Faust agreed with . She , Thiessen , and James Wootton led the completion of a two @-@ minute short to pitch the final product to Hasbro , resulting in the company 's sanctioning the full production . Faust estimates that from being initially asked to develop the show until this point took roughly one year . 
 = = Production = = 
 The show is developed at Hasbro Studios in Los Angeles , where most of the writing staff is located , and at DHX Media Vancouver in Vancouver , British Columbia , for the animation work . 
 Faust 's initial writing staff at Hasbro Studios included several writers who had worked with her on her previous shows and were approved by Hasbro . These included Amy Keating Rogers , Cindy Morrow , Meghan McCarthy , Chris Savino , Charlotte Fullerton , M.A. Larson , and Dave Polsky . The writing process began with Faust and Renzetti coming up with broad plots for each show . The two would then hold a brainstorming session with each episode 's writer , allowing the writer to script out scenes and dialog . Faust and Renzetti then worked with the writer to finalize the scripts and assign some basic storyboard instructions . Hasbro was involved throughout this process and laid down some of the concepts to be incorporated into the show . Examples of Hasbro 's influence include having Celestia be a princess rather than a queen , making one of the ponies focused on fashion , and portraying toy sets in relevant places within the story , such as Rarity 's boutique . In some cases , Hasbro requested that the show include a setting , but allowed Faust and her team to create its visual style , and Hasbro then based the toy set on it ; an example is the Ponyville schoolhouse . Faust also had to write to the E / I ( " educational and informational " ) standards that Hasbro required of the show , making the crafting of some of the situations she would have normally done on other animated shows more difficult ; for example , Faust cited having one character call another an " egghead " as " treading a very delicate line " , and having one character cheat in a competition as " worrisome to some " . Each episode also generally includes a moral or life lesson , but these were chosen to " cross a broad spectrum of personal experiences " , and not just to suit children . Because intellectual property issues had caused Hasbro to lose some of the rights on the original pony names , the show includes a mix of original characters from the toy line and new characters developed for the show . 
 Completed scripts were sent to Studio B for pre @-@ production and animation using Adobe Flash . Thiessen 's production team was also allowed to select key personnel subject to Hasbro 's approval ; one of those selected was art director Ridd Sorensen . The Studio B team would storyboard the provided scripts , incorporating any direction and sometimes managing to create scenes that the writers had believed impossible to show in animation . The animators would then prepare the key character poses , layout , background art , and other main elements , and send these versions back to the production team in Los Angeles for review by Hasbro and suggestions from the writers . Thiessen credited much of the technical expertise in the show to Wooton , who created Flash programs to optimize the placement and posing of the pony characters and other elements , simplifying and economizing on the amount of work needed from the other animators . For example , the ponies ' manes and tails are generally fixed shapes , animated by bending and stretching them in curves in three dimensions and giving them a sense of movement without the high cost of individual animated hairs . The storyboard artists and animators also need to fill in background characters for otherwise scripted scenes as to populate the world . According to writer Meghan McCarthy , many of the small nods to the fandom , pop culture references , or other easter eggs would be added at this point by the studio . Once the pre @-@ production work was approved and completed , the episode would then be animated . Though Studio B performed the initial animation work , the final steps were passed to Top Draw Animation in the Philippines , an animation studio that Studio B had worked with in the later part of season one and beyond . 
 The voice casting and production is handled by <unk> Productions , with Terry Klassen as the series ' voice director . Faust , Thiessen , and others participated in selecting voice actors , and Hasbro gave final approval . The voice work is performed prior to the animation , with the animators in the room to help provide direction ; according to Libman , this allows herself and the other actors to play the character without certain limitations . Libman noted that for recording her lines as the hyperactive Pinkie Pie , " I learned that I can go as over the top as I want and they [ the animators ] rarely pull me back . " 
 The series ' background music is composed by William Kevin Anderson , and Daniel Ingram composes the songs , which are only included if they would make sense in the episode 's script . The production team identifies specific parts of the episode where they want music cues , allowing Anderson to create appropriate music for each . Ingram works alongside Anderson 's compositions to create vocal songs that mesh with the background music while filling out the show 's fantasy setting . The composition of the music and songs far precedes the broadcast of the episode ; for example , songs for the show 's third season that began airing in November 2012 were composed in 2011 . Ingram considered that songs from previous shows of My Little Pony were " a little bit dated " and decided to bring more interesting work to the Friendship Is Magic series . Such changes include making songs with more emotional depth than typical for children 's animation , and tending to write songs that can be enjoyed musically outside of the context of the episode . Ingram 's songs have " became bigger and more epic , more Broadway and more cinematic over time " with Hasbro blessing the effort to try " something groundbreaking for daytime television " , according to Ingram . Lyrics and overall musical themes may be suggested by the writers ; two examples include songs written by Amy Keating Rogers , who is a self @-@ professed Stephen Sondheim fan . The song " The Art of the Dress " in the first season episode " Suited for Success " is inspired by " Putting it Together " from the musical Sunday in the Park with George , while the season one finale 's song , " At The Gala " , is based on Sondheim 's Into the Woods . A large musical number in the episode " The Super Speedy Cider <unk> 6000 " paid homage to the song " Ya Got Trouble " from Meredith Willson 's musical , The Music Man . 
 Before the show was approved , Hasbro and Faust had planned for episodes to be 11 minutes long , to which Faust conformed in her first full @-@ length script , " The Ticket Master " , which was part of the pitch bible . However , Faust preferred more traditional 22 @-@ minute episodes , and Hasbro eventually agreed to this . The initial production stages were very tight , requiring a schedule twice as fast as Faust had previously experienced , and frequent remote communication between the Los Angeles writing offices and the animation studio in Vancouver . At times , the two teams would hold " writer 's summits " to propose new ideas for characters and situations , at which the animation team would provide suggestions on visuals , body language , and characterization . Faust estimates that the time to complete one episode was one year ; at one point , the team was simultaneously working on various stages of all 26 episodes of the first season , and when the second season was approved , that number rose temporarily to 32 . Episodes then aired about a month after completion . Thiessen explained that they had pushed to start work on the second season as soon as the first was completed , to prevent staff turnover . 
 After the airing of the first season 's finale , Faust announced that she had left the show , and would be credited in the future as Consulting Producer . Her involvement in the second season consists mainly of story conception and scripts , and the involvement ceased after the second season . Despite leaving , she still has high hopes for the staff members , stating that " the gaps I have left are being filled by the same amazing artists , writers , and directors who brought you Season 1 . I 'm certain the show will be as entertaining as ever " . In an interview with New York Magazine , Faust stated her reasons for leaving were a combination of a hectic production schedules and a lack of creative control she had with the series . According to her husband McCracken , Faust 's departure was due to the fact that as a toy company @-@ driven show , " there were things she wanted to do with that series that she just wasn 't able to do " , and that there is " still some frustration with " not being able to bring some of her ideas to screen . 
 = = Premise = = 
 Friendship Is Magic takes place in the land of Equestria , populated by varieties of ponies including variants of Pegasus and unicorn , along with other sentient and non @-@ sentient creatures . The central character is Twilight Sparkle , a unicorn mare sent by her mentor Princess Celestia , ruler of Equestria , to the town of Ponyville to study the magic of friendship . In the show 's opening episodes , Twilight resents this assignment , as she is more concerned about the foretold appearance of Nightmare Moon . When Nightmare Moon does appear , vowing everlasting night and causing Celestia to disappear , Twilight sets off with five other ponies — Applejack , Fluttershy , Pinkie Pie , Rainbow Dash , and Rarity — to obtain the Elements of Harmony and defeat Nightmare Moon . Before Twilight can activate the Elements , Nightmare Moon appears and shatters them . In a flash of inspiration , Twilight realizes that each of her new friends represents one of the Elements of Harmony ( Honesty , Loyalty , Laughter , Generosity , and Kindness ) , and that she herself is the final piece , Magic . The magical power of the ponies ' friendship reverts Nightmare Moon to a repentant Princess Luna . Celestia reappears , reunites with her sister Princess Luna , and decrees that Twilight shall stay in Ponyville to continue studying the magic of friendship , much to the happiness of Twilight and her new friends . 
 Later episodes follow Twilight and her friends dealing with various problems around Ponyville , including interpersonal problems between friends and family , as well as more adventurous stories involving creatures like dragons and hydras . At the end of each episode , Twilight sends a report back to Celestia explaining what she learned about friendship from these adventures . This part of the formula is abandoned in " Lesson Zero " , the second season episode in which Twilight is convinced to be less rigid in her perceived duties ; after this , all the principals contribute reports , although the formality is disregarded when appropriate . In the fourth season , with the request for reports no longer applicable , the six resolve to keep a collective personal journal in which they record their thoughts about life for posterity . 
 There is a loose continuity in these episodes ; a theme throughout the first season , for example , is the ponies ' preparation for the Grand Galloping Gala that occurs in the final episode of that season . In the third season , Twilight Sparkle is shown to be tasked on a journey to test her abilities , ultimately ending up being crowned Princess Twilight and transformed into an " alicorn " — a winged unicorn . The fourth season has a loose story arc in which Twilight Sparkle accepts the challenge of finding the keys to a mysterious box revealed after the six relinquish the Elements of Harmony to their original source , the Tree of Harmony , to save Equestria . Eventually , she and her friends are able to find newfound power through their friendship to defeat a powerful foe , and Twilight is named Equestria 's Princess of Friendship . Episodes are otherwise designed to stand alone , though callbacks to previous episodes are included to reward those that have followed the show , according to Thiessen . The show is developed to give a " timeless " feel , limiting the world 's technology to simpler devices , such as record players and filmstrip projectors . However , there are occasional sophisticated items of technology shown or at least referenced to such as electrocardiography monitors , arcade video games and laser fences . 
 A central theme of the show is " cutie marks " , iconic symbols that magically appear on a pony 's flank once they have discovered their special talent in life . While physically young adults , the six main characters are envisioned as similar in maturity to humans between twelve and eighteen years old . One episode , " The Cutie Mark Chronicles " , highlights how each main character received her cutie mark as a younger filly . Several episodes focus on the exploits of a much younger trio of pony characters , related to the main cast , that call themselves the " Cutie Mark Crusaders " , who have yet to receive their cutie marks and are teased by other young ponies as " blank flanks " . In response , they desperately hurry to try to discover their talents and receive their own cutie marks , often doing so in comical fashions . This goal is achieved in the fifth season episode , " Crusaders of the Lost Mark " , when the Crusaders learn their destiny is to help others achieve their own cutie marks and related purposes of life . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 The show revolves around the adventures and daily life of the unicorn pony Twilight Sparkle ( voiced by Tara Strong ) , her baby dragon assistant Spike ( voiced by Cathy Weseluck ) , and her friends in Ponyville ( colloquially referred to as the " Mane Six " ) : 
 Rainbow Dash ( voiced by Ashleigh Ball ) , a tomboyish pegasus pony who helps control the weather , and aspires to be a <unk> ; 
