 Rarity ( voiced by Tabitha St. Germain ) , a glamorous unicorn with a flair for fashion design ; 
 Fluttershy ( voiced by Andrea Libman ) , a shy and timid pegasus pony who is fond of nature and takes care of animals ; 
 Pinkie Pie ( voiced by Libman ) , a hyperactive pony who loves throwing parties ; 
 Applejack ( voiced by Ball ) , a hard @-@ working pony who works on her family 's apple farm . 
 The younger Cutie Mark Crusaders include Apple Bloom , Applejack 's younger sister ( voiced by Michelle <unk> ) ; Sweetie Belle , Rarity 's younger sister ( voiced by Claire Corlett ) ; and <unk> , a pegasus filly that idolizes Rainbow Dash ( voiced by Madeleine Peters ) . 
 The show takes place in the fictional land of Equestria , which is ruled by two alicorn pony sisters : Twilight 's teacher Princess Celestia ( voiced by Nicole Oliver ) , and the younger Princess Luna ( voiced by St. Germain ) . Another alicorn , Princess Cadance ( voiced by Britt McKillip ) , is introduced within season two and oversees the northern Crystal Empire alongside Twilight 's older brother Shining Armor ( voiced by Andrew Francis ) , who weds her . 
 Many friends , family members , and other residents of Ponyville appear frequently , including the local schoolteacher <unk> ( Oliver ) ; the town 's mayor Mayor Mare ( Weseluck ) ; Applejack 's older brother Big McIntosh ( Peter New ) and grandmother Granny Smith ( St. Germain ) ; and the eccentric zebra Zecora ( Brenda <unk> ) , who lives in the nearby Everfree Forest and dabbles in herbal medicine . The characters also face several villains in various episodes , two of whom — the chimera @-@ like trickster Discord ( John de Lancie ) introduced in " The Return of Harmony " , and the unicorn Starlight Glimmer ( Kelly Sheridan ) introduced in " The Cutie Map " — become reformed and live with the ponies . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In total , 129 episodes have been produced and broadcast . 
 = = = Series overview = = = 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = United States = = = 
 My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic is one of several animated shows used to premiere The Hub , a retooling of the Discovery Kids channel of Discovery Communications in United States markets . The block of programming is a joint development of Hasbro and Discovery , designed to compete with similar family @-@ friendly programming blocks on other networks such as the Disney Channel and Nickelodeon . The first episode of Friendship Is Magic premiered on the first Hub broadcast , on October 10 , 2010 . In March 2011 , the show was renewed for a second season to air in 2011 – 12 . The season two premiere on September 17 , 2011 , had 339 @,@ 000 viewers , and Hasbro reported that the second season finale , " A Canterlot Wedding " , produced the best ratings of the history of the network in its core and other demographics , with an estimated 1 @,@ 032 @,@ 400 viewers . 
 The series is rated TV @-@ Y ( designed for ages 2 and up ) and targeted at girls 4 – 7 years old . The first season was produced and broadcast to " E / I " ( " educational and informational " ) standards , but Hasbro allowed the standard to be dropped in the second season . 
 = = = International = = = 
 My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic has been distributed to international markets , including Treehouse TV for the English @-@ speaking audience in Canada , Boomerang in the United Kingdom until 2012 and on Tiny Pop and Pop ( UK and Ireland ) , two British free @-@ to @-@ air children 's television channels owned and operated by CSC Media Group , from September 2013 , Cartoon Network and later Boomerang with Eleven airing repeats in Australia and TV2 in New Zealand . Some of these international broadcasts , including language translations , were arranged with Turner Broadcasting System , which had broadcast Friendship Is Magic and other Hasbro shows on many of their European and Middle Eastern channels . According to Hasbro Studio 's CEO Stephen Davis , they have marketed the show to over 180 territories around the world . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 In the United States , episodes of Friendship Is Magic are available for digital download through the iTunes Store . The show 's episodes , along with several other Hasbro properties , were added to the Netflix video streaming service on April 1 , 2012 . A two @-@ episode DVD , " Celebration at Canterlot " , was offered to Target Corporation stores as an exclusive , packaged with certain toys from the franchise . 
 Shout ! Factory has the DVD publishing rights for the series within Region 1 . Ten five @-@ episode DVDs , two six @-@ episode DVDs , and three Equestria Girls DVDs as well as a DVD box set containing all 3 films , has been released . 
 The first five seasons of the series have been released in complete DVD box sets . United Kingdom @-@ based Clear Vision has the publishing rights for the first two seasons throughout Region 2 , including most of Western Europe and the Middle East ; however , the company abruptly entered administration in December 2013 , and has managed to only release three My Little Pony DVD volume sets as of April 2014 , and a DVD / Blu @-@ ray release of Equestria Girls by August 2014 . Another Region 2 distributor known as Primal Screen had since taken over the license from Clear Vision . Madman Entertainment has the license for publishing the series via DVDs and digital downloads in Region 4 but since Season 4 , Beyond Home Entertainment took over the license . 
 Hasbro has also signed a deal with Leapfrog Enterprises to release episodes of the show for the Leapfrog Explorer tablet system . 
 = = Merchandise and other media = = 
 Friendship Is Magic is associated with the 2010 relaunch of My Little Pony toy line , having figurines and playsets based on it . A section of the Hasbro website gives information about Friendship Is Magic for children and their parents , including character backgrounds , videos , and interactive games and media . Due in part to the older fans , Hasbro has come to see My Little Pony as a " lifestyle " brand , with over 200 licenses in 15 categories of products , including clothing , <unk> , and digital media . The brand grossed one billion USD in retail sales in 2014 and 650 million USD in retail sales in 2013 . 
 = = = My Little Pony : Equestria Girls = = = 
 A companion film , titled My Little Pony : Equestria Girls , premiered on Family Day of the Los Angeles Film Festival on June 15 , 2013 , followed by limited release in theaters across the United States starting the following day . This film was released as part of the brand 's 30th anniversary . Taking place after the season three finale , the film follows Twilight Sparkle on a mission through a magic mirror to recover her stolen crown . She ends up in a world populated by humans while being transformed into a teenage girl herself , and must overcome the difficulties of her new body and interacting with students of the nearby school as she looks for the culprit . While there , she discovers and befriends similar human counterparts to other characters from Ponyville . The film was produced by Hasbro Studios and is designed to extend the toy line . To maintain continuity with the show , Hasbro used the same writing staff as the show , including the series ' current lead writer Meghan McCarthy , who considered the story to be " an extension of our mythology " . DHX Studios animated the work , and the primary voice cast reprised their respective roles . The movie was made available on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on August 6 , 2013 , along with the television premiere on Hub Network a few weeks later on September 1 , 2013 . A sequel , Rainbow Rocks , was released on September 27 , 2014 , in select movie theaters across the United States and Canada . A third film , titled Friendship Games , premiered on Discovery Family on September 26 , 2015 instead of having a theatrical release like its two predecessors . A fourth Equestria Girls film , subtitled Legend of Everfree , is currently in development and will be released sometime in late 2016 . 
 = = = Feature film = = = 
 An animated feature film based directly on the television series was first announced on October 20 , 2014 by Variety . Scheduled for a theatrical release on October 6 , 2017 in the United States , the film is Hasbro 's first animated feature film from its Allspark Pictures film division . It will be distributed worldwide by Lionsgate , with the exception of China . Thiessen will be directing the film with McCarthy writing the film and act as the film 's co @-@ executive producer alongside Mike Vogel . Originally , Joe <unk> was the scriptwriter for the film . The film concerns the " Mane Six " ponies — Twilight Sparkle , Applejack , Fluttershy , Pinkie Pie , Rainbow Dash , and Rarity — journeying beyond Equestria to stop a threat looming over their hometown of Ponyville . Hasbro 's president , Stephan Davis , said of the film that " I think it gives us an opportunity to tell a bigger story , that maybe we [ can 't ] tell on television " and that " [ it 's ] also an opportunity to broaden the franchise " . The main cast from the animated television series will be reprising their roles alongside original characters voiced by Kristin Chenoweth , Emily Blunt , Michael Peña , Uzo Aduba , Liev Schreiber , Taye Diggs , and Sia Furler . 
 = = = Comics and manga = = = 
 IDW Publishing and Hasbro have licensed the use of the show for a comic book series , drawn and written by Katie Cook and Andy Price , which began publication in November 2012 . The first issue , by early October , had already gained over 90 @,@ 000 pre @-@ orders , making it a better seller than other comics for that month . By early November , the title had exceeded 100 @,@ 000 pre @-@ orders , and IDW committed to a second run of the issue to meet the additional demand . The first issue features 19 different covers , most exclusive to specific comic book shops and chains and only available in limited numbers . The comic , through its first eight issues , remains IDW 's most successful title , and along with The Walking Dead , remain one of the few non @-@ DC , non @-@ Marvel comics to regularly break the top 100 comics sold each month . The success of the comic has led to a limited @-@ run secondary " micro @-@ series " featuring one @-@ issue stories dedicated to specific characters , an ongoing Friends Forever series featuring single @-@ issues stories of characters pairs , and stories based on the Equestria Girls film . 
 Tying in with the Japanese broadcast of the series in April 2013 , a manga adaptation by Akira Himekawa began serialization in Shogakukan 's <unk> magazine in Japan on August 12 , 2013 . The first manga adaptation completed its serialization in February 2014 , and as a result , the IDW comics were then translated into Japanese as well . An 80 @-@ page second manga was released on October 16 , 2014 . 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 A twelve @-@ track soundtrack , Friendship is Magic : Songs of Friendship and Magic ( Music from the Original TV Series ) , was released on iTunes on December 6 , 2013 , featuring select songs from the first and second seasons of the show . 
 An eleven @-@ track soundtrack , Friendship is Magic : Songs of Ponyville ( Music from the Original TV Series ) , was released on iTunes on April 21 , 2014 , featuring select songs from the third and fourth seasons of the show . 
 A ten @-@ track soundtrack , Friendship Is Magic : Songs of Harmony , was released on iTunes on April 13 , 2015 , featuring select songs from the show 's fourth season , plus the season two song " The Perfect Stallion " ( from " Hearts and Hooves Day " ) , full versions of both " Find the Music in You " ( from " <unk> Vanilli " ) and " Let the Rainbow Remind You " ( from " Twilight 's Kingdom - Part 2 " ) , as well as a mash @-@ up between " Winter Wrap Up " and " A True , True Friend " . 
 Another ten @-@ track soundtrack , " Friendship is Magic : Pinkie 's Party Playlist " , was released on iTunes on July 7 , 2016 , featuring select songs from the show 's fourth and fifth seasons , as well as a re @-@ recorded version of the " Pony Pokey " song from season one . 
 = = = = Remix album = = = = 
 Based on the popularity of brony fandom 's remixing of songs from the show , Hasbro and Lakeshore Records developed an EDM remix album entitled DJ <unk> @-@ 3 Presents My Little Pony Friendship is Magic Remixed . The album , originally set for release in late 2014 but ultimately released digitally on June 2 , 2015 and in retail June 23 , 2015 , contains 13 tracks that remix the original show compositions from Ingram with various artists . The album was produced by Justin Lassen who wanted to keep an all @-@ ages enjoyment and avoid excessive repetition of dubstep @-@ based remixes . 
 = = = = Christmas album = = = = 
 A Christmas @-@ themed album , titled It 's a Pony Kind of Christmas , was released for on @-@ demand streaming and digital release on November 6 , 2015 . Featuring performances by the cast of " My Little Pony : Friendship is Magic " as well as the Phoenix Chamber Choir from Vancouver , the album contains original holiday @-@ themed songs as well as covers of traditional Christmas songs and an extended version of " The Heart Carol " ( from the episode " Hearth 's Warming Eve " ) . Within 24 hours after its release , the album peaked at # 1 on both iTunes and Amazon . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 In April 2013 , Hasbro and Build @-@ A @-@ Bear Workshop began offering Friendship Is Magic @-@ based plush toys for customization . Sales of My Little Pony toys were three times as large in 2013 than in 2003 , and have helped Hasbro to promote other lines of toys aimed at girls . Hasbro stated that merchandising tied to Friendship Is Magic lead to franchise sales over $ 650 million in 2014 , and others have considered the show 's popularity to make 2015 the " year of the unicorn " for toy and related manufacturers . 
 Hasbro has partnered with Little , Brown and Company to publish several children 's books aimed at different reading levels involving the Friendship Is Magic franchise , including an official series guidebook , starting in April 2013 . As of January 2016 , more than 3 million My Little Pony books published by the company have been sold , and they have extended their Hasbro deal through to 2018 , as well as adding other Hasbro properties such as <unk> have In conjunction with Ruckus Media , Hasbro released an iOS application Twilight Sparkle , Teacher for a Day in October 2011 . It gives children practice in reading , incorporating mini @-@ games . Several eBooks based on Friendship Is Magic , including story versions of the Ruckus applications , have been released for the Barnes & Noble Nook , in partnership with Hasbro . 
 Hasbro has licensed Gameloft to create Friendship Is Magic video games for mobile devices , with the first game , My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic , reaching the market on November 8 , 2012 . The first game is a village @-@ building game , featuring action @-@ based mini @-@ games for iOS and Android devices . Though the game is aimed at younger players , Gameloft 's Barnabé Anglade stated that there are nods to the show 's brony fandom , such as the inclusion of fan @-@ favorite characters and popular background ponies . 
 Enterplay , LLC has been licensed to create trading cards based on Friendship Is Magic , with a first set released in early 2012 and a second set to be published in 2013 . In addition to the base cards , Enterplay has offered limited edition cards at various fan conventions , which have since become of card collector 's value . A Friendship Is Magic @-@ themed collectible card game by Enterplay , My Little Pony Collectible Card Game , was released in November 2013 . The card game has been considered successful by Enterplay , helping them to boost their sales within the hobby game sector , and have led to several expansions to the card series . 
 On April 16 , 2013 , World Trade Jewelers signed a deal with Hasbro to make Friendship Is Magic jewelry . The collection was released for consumer release in October 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The series has received positive reviews from critics . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club favorably noted its " sheer and utter joyfulness " and lack of cynicism , unlike many other shows that garnered a cult following of parents and adults . He complimented the characters ' stylized appearance , the stories ' relative complexity for children 's television , and the solid jokes which make the show enjoyable for parents as well as children . He gave the series a B + . The show has been critically praised for its humor and moral outlook by Brian Truitt of USA Today . Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club later commented that Friendship Is Magic is an example of a show that , while considered " girly " , has been able to tap into the nerd culture to allow it to gain wider acceptance than other comparable forms . Emily Ashby of Common Sense Media , an organization focusing on the parenting aspect of children 's media , gave the show a rating of four out of five stars , emphasizing its messages of friendship , tolerance and respect , but advised parents to be wary of the " influence the characters might have on their kids ' desires , since it 's rooted in a well @-@ known product line of books , toys , and just about everything in between . " Liz Ohanesian , for L.A. Weekly , said that the show is " absolutely genuine in its messages about friendship but never takes itself too seriously " . Matt Morgan , writing for Wired 's " <unk> " column , praised the show for having " rebooted the long @-@ time Hasbro property while managing to lace it with geeky undertones " and being one of the few " girl @-@ focused shows that a geeky dad can appreciate with his daughter " . Los Angeles Times critic Robert Lloyd called the show " smarter and sassier and more aesthetically sophisticated " than any of the previous My Little Pony cartoons , and praised its ability to appeal to both children and their parents , in that it is " smart and sprightly and well @-@ staged , and never horribly cute " . TV Guide listed Friendship Is Magic as one of the top sixty animated shows of all time in a September 2013 list . 
 Kathleen Richter of Ms. believed that Friendship Is Magic did little to change the nature of older animations for girls , which she considered " so sexist and racist and heteronormative . " For example , she suggested that , through the character of Rainbow Dash , the show was promoting the stereotype that " all feminists are angry , tomboyish lesbians . " She also considered that the only darker @-@ colored ponies shown to date were in positions of servitude towards the " white pony overlord . " Lauren Faust responded to these claims by stating that while Rainbow Dash was a tomboy , " nowhere in the show is her sexual orientation ever referenced " and " assuming [ tomboys ] are lesbians is extremely unfair to both straight and lesbian tomboys " , and further stating that " Color has never , ever been depicted as a race indicator for the ponies . " Amid Amidi , writing for the animation website Cartoon Brew , was more critical of the concept of the show , calling it a sign of " the end of the creator @-@ driven era in TV animation " . Amidi 's essay expressed concern that assigning a talent like Faust to a toy @-@ centric show was part of a trend towards a focus on profitable genres of animation , such as toy tie @-@ ins , to deal with a fragmented viewing audience , and overall " an admission of defeat for the entire movement , a white flag @-@ waving moment for the TV animation industry . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Friendship Is Magic originally premiered with an average viewership of 1 @.@ 4 million per month , but expanded to 4 million per month by the end of the first season , making it the highest @-@ rated of any Hasbro offering at the time . Advertising Age reports that the viewership doubled between the first and the second season . The Hub Network reported that " Hearts and Hooves Day " , an episode on the theme of Valentine 's Day , which aired on February 11 , 2012 , in the middle of the second season , was the show 's most @-@ viewed episode ever , and the second highest of any program of the Hub network ; its viewership exceeded 150 % of that of the previous year . This was surpassed by the two @-@ part season two finale , " A Canterlot Wedding " , airing in April 2012 , marking the broadcast as the highest viewership for the Hub Network to that date . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Friendship Is Magic was nominated for three British Columbia Leo Awards for Animation , " Best Program " , " Best Direction " , and " Best Overall Sound " . Additionally , the songs " Becoming Popular ( The Pony <unk> Should Know ) " ( from season 2 episode 9 , " Sweet and Elite " ) and " Find A Pet Song " ( from season 2 episode 7 , " May the Best Pet Win ! " ) , both written by Daniel Ingram , were nominated , but did not win , for " Outstanding Original Song — Children 's and Animation " at the 39th Daytime Emmy Awards . The show was named the best animated show for the 2011 – 12 television season in a user poll on the website Television Without Pity . Marcel <unk> , Todd Araki , Jason Fredrickson , and Adam McGhie received a 2014 Leo Award for their work on " Power Ponies " for " Best Overall Sound in an Animation Program or Series " on June 1 , 2014 . 
 = = = Fandom = = = 
 Despite Hasbro 's target demographic of young girls and their parents , My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic has become a cultural and Internet phenomenon , with many male fans between 13 and 35 . The response from the Internet has been traced to cartoon and animation fans on the Internet board 4chan , responding to Amidi 's negative essay regarding the show and current trends in animation . As a result of the discussion on 4chan , interest in the show spread throughout other parts of the Internet , creating a large fanbase and a multitude of creative works , fan sites , and conventions . The fanbase has adopted the name " brony " ( a portmanteau of " bro " and " pony " ) to describe themselves . The older fanbase had come as a surprise to Hasbro and staff members involved with the show . They have appreciated and embraced the fandom , adding nods to the fans within the show and the toys , while , early on , allowing the creative elements of the fandom to flourish without legal interference . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Director Adam McKay was inspired by the visuals of Friendship Is Magic , which his daughters had watched frequently , in creating a short for Morgan Spurlock 's 2014 educational / documentary web series , " We the Economy " , using cartoon <unk> in the same style as the show to explain about income inequality . 
 In early 2016 , Hasbro was sued by Font Brothers over Hasbro 's use of the font " Generation B " for much of its product packaging and marketing with the Friendship Is Magic show and toyline , including the " Friendship Is Magic " text in the show 's logo . Font Brothers claim that Hasbro has been using this font in an unlicensed manner and is seeking up to $ 150 @,@ 000 for each violation of its use . 
 Dialog from a My Little Pony : Friendship is Magic episode was brought up during the 2016 Republican National Convention by a member of the Convention to defend Melania Trump against accusations of <unk> . 
 = Jarrow March = 
 The Jarrow March , also known as the Jarrow Crusade , was a protest march in England in October 1936 against the unemployment and poverty suffered in the northeast Tyneside town of Jarrow during the 1930s . Around 200 men marched from Jarrow to London over 26 days , carrying a petition to the British government requesting the re @-@ establishment of industry in the town following the closure in 1934 of its main employer , Palmer 's shipyard . The petition was received by the House of Commons but not debated , and the march produced few immediate results . The <unk> went home believing that they had failed . 
 Jarrow 's earliest claim to fame was as the home of the 8th @-@ century saint Bede . In the early 19th century a coal industry developed , before the establishment of the shipyard in 1851 . Over the following 80 years more than 1 @,@ 000 ships were launched in Jarrow . In the 1920s , a combination of mismanagement and changed world trade conditions following the Great War brought a decline which led to the yard 's closure . Plans for its replacement by a modern steelworks plant were frustrated by opposition from the British Iron and Steel Federation , an employers ' organisation with its own plans for the industry . The loss of the steelworks , and the lack of any prospect of large @-@ scale employment in the town , was the final factor that led to residents ' organising the march . 
 Marches of the unemployed to London , termed " hunger marches " , had taken place since the early 1920s , mainly organised by the National Unemployed Workers ' Movement ( NUWM ) , a communist @-@ led body . For fear of being associated with communist agitation , the Labour Party and Trade Union Congress ( TUC ) leadership stood aloof from these marches . They exercised the same policy of detachment towards the Jarrow March , which was organised by the borough council with the support of all sections of the town and without any connection with the NUWM . The Jarrow marchers received sustenance and hospitality from local branches of all the main political parties on their way , and on their reception in London . 
 Despite the initial sense of failure among the marchers , in subsequent years the Jarrow March became recognised by historians as a defining event of the 1930s . It helped to foster the change in attitudes which prepared the way to social reform after the Second World War . The town holds numerous memorials to the march . Re @-@ enactments celebrated the 50th and 75th anniversaries , in both cases invoking the " spirit of Jarrow " in their campaigns against unemployment . In contrast to the Labour leadership 's coldness in 1936 , the postwar party adopted the march as a metaphor for governmental callousness and working @-@ class fortitude . 
 = = National background = = 
 = = = UK unemployment between the wars = = = 
 In the period immediately after the end of the First World War , Britain 's economy enjoyed a brief boom . Businesses rushed to replenish stocks and re @-@ establish peacetime conditions of trade , and while prices rose rapidly , wages rose faster and unemployment was negligible . By April 1920 this boom had given way to Britain 's first post @-@ war slump , which ushered in an era of high unemployment . Britain 's adoption of generally deflationary economic policies , including a return to the gold standard in 1925 , helped to ensure that the percentage of the workforce without jobs remained at around 10 % for the rest of the 1920s and beyond , well above the normal pre @-@ war levels . During the world recession that began in 1929 and lasted until 1932 , the percentage of unemployed peaked at 22 % , representing more than 3 million workers . 
 Unemployment was particularly heavy in Britain 's traditional staple export industries — coal mining , shipbuilding , iron and steel and textiles — all of which were in a slow decline from their Victorian heyday . Because of the concentration of these industries in the north of England , in Scotland and in Wales , the numbers of persons out of work in these regions were significantly higher , sometimes more than double the percentage , than in the south throughout the interwar period . The decline of these industries helped to create an additional problem , that of long @-@ term unemployment outside the normal cyclical variations ; some workers had no work for years . 
 = = = Hunger marches = = = 
 In 1921 , in reaction to the rising levels of unemployment , the newly formed British Communist Party set up the National Unemployed Workers ' Movement ( NUWM ) . From 1922 until the late 1930s , under its charismatic leader Wal Hannington , the NUWM organised regular marches in which unemployed workers converged on London to confront Parliament . These became known as " hunger marches " , reviving a name coined by the press in 1908 , when a group of London 's unemployed marched to Hyde Park . 
 The 1922 marchers sought a meeting with the new prime minister , Andrew Bonar Law , who refused to see them . The march leaders were denounced in The Times as " avowed Communists ... who have been identified with disturbances in their own localities " . The Labour Party and the TUC kept aloof , fearful of being tainted by association with the communist organisers . The same pattern was followed with subsequent NUWM marches ; successive prime ministers — Stanley Baldwin in 1929 , Ramsay Macdonald in 1930 and 1934 — declined to meet the marchers ' representatives , and the Labour Party and the TUC continued to keep their distance . In 1931 Macdonald became head of a Conservative @-@ dominated National Government that imposed a means test on unemployment benefits . Anger at the means test was the rationale for the 1932 hunger march , in which a series of rallies and demonstrations across London broke out into considerable violence ; clashes with opponents and police in Hyde Park , Trafalgar Square and Westminster led to the arrest and imprisonment of the march 's leaders . 
 Two additional national marches were held in 1934 and 1936 . By this time the country had made a substantial recovery from the worst depression years of 1929 – 32 . Unemployment was significantly down , annual growth was averaging 4 % , and many parts of the country were enjoying a substantial boom in housing and consumer goods . The increasing prosperity was not , however , uniformly spread , and there were sharp contrasts between economic conditions in the south and those in the north @-@ east , South Wales , Scotland and elsewhere , where the rate of recovery was much slower . At the same time , the national mood was changing ; external factors such as the rise of fascism in Europe helped to unify the British left , and there were more supportive voices in parliament on behalf of the unemployed . The idea of marching as a means of expressing political or social grievances had by now become an accepted and well @-@ established tactic . The historian A.J.P. Taylor considered that the hunger marchers had " displayed the failure of capitalism in a way that mere figures or literary description could not . Middle @-@ class people felt the call of conscience " . 
 = = Local background : Jarrow = = 
 = = = Town history = = = 
 Jarrow , situated on the River Tyne in County Durham , northern England , entered British history in the 8th century , as the home of Bede , the early Christian monk and scholar . After Bede , little changed in the remote rural community for a thousand years , although his monastery was dissolved under Henry VIII in the 16th century . The discovery of coal in the 17th century led to major changes . It was not mined on an industrial scale until the early 1800s , resulting in the population of Jarrow more than doubling between 1801 and 1821 to around 3 @,@ 500 , largely from the influx of mineworkers . 
 The town 's years as a coalfield were unhappy . Living conditions in many of the hastily erected cottages were insanitary , lacking water and drainage . There was a serious outbreak of cholera in Jarrow and northeast England in the winter of 1831 – 32 as part of a pandemic that had originated in Bengal five years before . In England cholera arrived at Sunderland , carried by passengers on a ship from the Baltic . It spread throughout the country . 
 Relations in Jarrow between employer and employee were poor ; workers were held by the " bond " system whereby they were tied to a particular employer for a year , whether or not that employer could provide work . Working conditions in the mines were dangerous : there were explosions in 1826 , 1828 and 1845 , each with large loss of life . Attempts by workers to organise into a trade union were fiercely opposed by the employers . Nevertheless , workers conducted lengthy strikes in 1832 and 1844 , each ending when hunger forced the miners back to work . After the easier seams of coal were exhausted , the Jarrow pits became less profitable , and in 1851 the owners abandoned them altogether . 
 = = = Shipbuilding = = = 
 Jarrow began its development as a shipbuilding town with the establishment in 1851 of Palmer 's shipyard on the banks of the River Tyne . The first ship from the yard was launched in 1852 , an iron @-@ built and steam @-@ powered collier ; many more such carriers followed . In 1856 the yard began building warships , and was soon supplying many of the world 's navies . With its associated iron and steel works , it became the largest shipbuilding centre in the country , employing thousands of men . Jarrow 's population , at around 3 @,@ 800 in 1850 , had increased nearly tenfold to 35 @,@ 000 by 1891 . Palmer 's was central to Jarrow 's economy , both for the numbers employed there and for the ancillary businesses that served the needs of both the yard and town . 
 The shipyard generated high employment to Jarrow , but the industrial works created a harsh environment . Ellen Wilkinson , the town 's historian and member of parliament from 1935 to 1947 , quotes a newspaper source from 1858 : " There is a prevailing blackness about the neighbourhood . The houses are black , the ships are black , the sky is black , and if you go there for an hour or two , reader , you will be black " . According to Wilkinson , the yard 's founder , Sir Charles Palmer , " regarded it as no part of his duty to see that the conditions under which his workers had to live were either sanitary or tolerable " . 
 In the 1890s , Britain held a near monopoly of the world 's shipbuilding , with a share of around 80 % . This proportion fell during the early years of the 20th century to about 60 % , as other countries increased their production . Palmer 's remained busy , and during the years of the First World War built many of Britain 's warships : the battleship HMS Resolution , the light cruiser HMS Dauntless ( <unk> ) , and numerous smaller vessels were all built in Jarrow . During the brief postwar boom of 1919 – 20 , orders remained plentiful and Palmer 's prospered . However , the firm 's management had not anticipated the conditions that developed in the 1920s when , as Wilkinson says , " every industrial country that had bought ships from Britain was now building for itself " . The firm made over @-@ optimistic assessments of future demand , and invested accordingly . The anticipated demand did not materialise ; by the mid @-@ 1920s , Palmer 's was incurring heavy losses , and was close to bankruptcy . It was temporarily reprieved by a short @-@ lived boom in 1929 , when orders rose and the town briefly enjoyed the prospect of an economic recovery . 
 = = = Closure of Palmer 's = = = 
 On 24 July 1930 Palmer 's launched its thousandth ship , the tanker Peter <unk> , but by this time the brief shipbuilding boom had been ended by the Great Depression , and there were no new orders on the firm 's books . Rumours of impending reorganisation and rationalisation in the industry gave the workforce cause for anxiety , which deepened with the formation in 1930 of National Shipbuilders Security Ltd ( NSS ) . This was a company created by the government to assist shipbuilders by acquiring failing yards and dismantling them , so that production was concentrated within a smaller number of profitable yards . To ensure this rationalisation was sustained , the closed yards were banned from any shipbuilding activity for at least 40 years . 
 During 1931 NSS was busy closing shipyards elsewhere in the country , while an order from the Admiralty for two destroyers kept Palmer 's working until mid @-@ 1932 . The second of these ships , HMS Duchess , was the last ship launched from the yard , on 19 July 1932 . By this time , Palmer 's was insolvent , but retained a faint hope of further naval contracts . These failed to materialise , and in June 1933 the firm 's creditors appointed a receiver . By December 1933 rumours of NSS interest in the yard were appearing in the press , and in the House of Commons Walter Runciman , the President of the Board of Trade , told members : 
 " There is nothing to be gained by giving Jarrow the impression that Palmer 's can be revived " . He continued : " Would it not be very much better to make a clean sweep of that as a shipyard , and throw open to the world for sale what is one of the finest and most convenient sites anywhere in Europe ? " 
 Despite efforts by management and workers to find an alternative solution , in the early summer of 1934 NSS acquired the yard , closed it , and began to dismantle its plant . Blythe wrote : " The only sound to compete with the unfamiliar noise of the marsh birds ... was the ring of the breakers ' hammers . " 
 Following the Palmer 's closure , a small hope of relief and some industrial resurrection was offered by the industrialist Sir John Jarvis , who held the ceremonial office of High Sheriff of Surrey . He was the prospective Conservative candidate for Guildford . On 4 October 1934 , Jarvis announced the " adoption " of Jarrow by the county of Surrey , and promised to bring new industries to the town ; he mentioned ship @-@ breaking , bottle manufacture and furniture @-@ making . While acknowledging the generous principle behind Jarvis 's scheme , Betty Vernon ( biographer of Jarrow politician Ellen Wilkinson ) describes it as ultimately superficial , offering little more than patchwork assistance . Blythe observes : " This excellent man failed , as anyone must fail who tries to play the good squire to a town of nearly forty thousand people " . 
 = = = Ellen Wilkinson = = = 
 In the 1931 general election , in the nationwide rout of Labour , the Jarrow constituency was won by the National Government 's candidate , William Pearson , a Conservative borough councillor and former mayor . In 1932 , when the mood in Jarrow was desperate — " a workhouse without walls " according to one commentator — the local Labour Party selected Ellen Wilkinson as its parliamentary candidate for the next general election . Wilkinson had helped to found the British Communist Party in 1920 , and had a firebrand reputation . She had been associated with Hannington and the NUWM in the early 1920s , but had left the Communist Party in 1923 and had served as Labour MP for Middlesbrough East between 1924 and 1931 . 
 Wilkinson felt a deep bond of sympathy with the people of Jarrow and the loss of the shipyard which was the life @-@ source of the town . Early in 1934 she led a deputation of Jarrow 's unemployed to meet the prime minister , MacDonald , in his nearby Seaham constituency . She records that at the end of the meeting MacDonald said to her : " Ellen , why don 't you go out and preach socialism , which is the only remedy for all this ? " This " priceless remark " , she says , brought home the " reality and sham ... of that warm but so easy sympathy " . She became Jarrow 's MP in the general election of November 1935 , when she won the seat with a majority of 2 @,@ 360 . In the opening debate of the new parliamentary session , on 9 December 1935 , she pleaded on behalf of her new constituents : " These are skilled fitters , men who have built destroyers and battleships and the finest passenger ships ... The years go on and nothing is done ... this is a desperately urgent matter and something should be done to get work to these areas which , Heaven knows , want work . " 
 = = = Proposed steelworks = = = 
 While Jarvis 's palliative measures were being developed , a more substantial project to bring industry back to Jarrow was under consideration . An American entrepreneur , T. Vosper Salt , became aware of the impending sale and break @-@ up of Palmer 's yard . He was convinced that the world demand for steel was about to rise , and thought that the site , with its ready @-@ made docking and rail facilities , would be ideal for a new , modern steelworks . In January 1934 , when an initial feasibility study report had proved favourable , Salt began discussions with the British Iron and Steel Federation ( BISF ) , a steel producers ' organisation formed that year as part of the National Government 's rationalisation of the iron and steel industry . 
 The British steel industry was protected from more efficient foreign competition by the government 's high tariff wall . The BISF , through its control of pricing , could also present a united front against new competition at home . When the feasibility report was received by the BISF in March 1935 the Federation 's chairman , Sir Andrew Duncan , at first reacted positively ; his members from the north @-@ east were rather less enthusiastic . Only one of the large steel firms in the region , the Consett Iron Company , offered support for a Jarrow steelworks , while other BISF members put pressure on London 's financial institutions to withhold capital from the new scheme . Reports of such tactics caused great anxiety in the Jarrow area , where the people were desperate for the new works to come about . In a reassuring speech shortly before the November 1935 general election , Baldwin , now leading the National Government , informed his listeners in Newcastle : " There is no truth in any of the reports that either the banks or any other authorities ... are making a dead set to prevent anything of the kind being done in the area " . 
 After the election and the return of the National Government , little happened to support Baldwin 's optimistic words . In the House of Commons on 2 March 1936 , Wilkinson spoke of the " atmosphere of mystery " that surrounded the Jarrow scheme : " Publicly one sees tremendous optimism ... but when you see people privately there is a great deal of humming and ha 'ing , and they are not quite sure " . Meanwhile , the BISF argued that increased steel production should be achieved by expanding capacity in existing facilities , rather than by building new plant . Duncan , in a reversal of his earlier attitude , now opposed the provision of finance for Jarrow which , he felt , might create a precedent that other distressed areas could exploit . The BISF finally succeeded in watering down the scheme to the extent that it became unviable ; Salt and his syndicate withdrew , and the scheme was dead , " strangled at birth " according to Wilkinson . 
 In a series of exchanges in the Commons with Runciman on 30 June , Wilkinson requested in vain that the matter be reconsidered by an independent body , rather than being decided by the BISF . One of the government 's own negotiators , who had been involved in the project since its early stages , wrote in The Times : " A system which permits the adjudication on a proposal of national importance ... to be left in the hands of parties whose financial interests may run counter to that project , is not conducive to the enterprising development of the steel industry " . 
 When , later in the summer , Runciman met workers from Jarrow the deputation encountered , in Wilkinson 's words , " a figure of ice . <unk> correct , icily polite , apparently completely indifferent to the woes of others . " His insistence that " Jarrow must work out its own salvation " , was described by Blythe as " the last straw in official cruelty " ; to Wilkinson , the phrase " kindled the town " , and inspired it to action . 
 = = March = = 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 After the loss of the steelworks , David Riley , the chairman of Jarrow Borough Council , told a rally of the town 's unemployed in July 1936 : " If I had my way I would organise the unemployed of the whole country ... and march them on London so they would all arrive at the same time . The government would then be forced to listen , or turn the military on us " . The idea of a march was taken up with enthusiasm by the mayor Billy Thompson , by Wilkinson , and by political , commercial and religious groups . It was decided that the march would be a local affair , representing the town , with no political connotations . It would be limited to 200 fit men who would arrive in London at the start of the new parliamentary session on 3 November 1936 , when a petition from the town would be presented to the House of Common . 
 Riley was appointed chief marshal , with four subcommittees to deal with organisational detail . All the local political parties — Labour , Conservative and Liberal — gave their support , as did the town 's churches and the business community . Relays of medical students from the Inter @-@ Hospital Socialist Society agreed to accompany the march as medical attendants . A fund was begun , with an initial target of £ 800 , to meet the costs of the march ; ultimately , nearly double that amount was raised , locally and on the route . Public meetings were planned for the overnight stops , to publicise the plight of Jarrow and of other areas like it . One marcher explained : " We were more or less missionaries of the distressed areas , [ not just ] Jarrow " . 
 On Monday 5 October the marchers , selected from over 1 @,@ 200 volunteers , attended an ecumenical dedication service in Christ Church , Jarrow , where the blessing was given by James Gordon , the Bishop of Jarrow . This apparent endorsement by a senior cleric gained considerable press attention , but earned a sharp response from Hensley Henson , the Bishop of Durham . Henson , a severe critic of socialism and trade unionism , described the march as " revolutionary mob pressure " , and regretted his colleague 's association with " these fatuous demonstrations , which are mainly designed in the interest , not of the Unemployed , but of the Labour party " . 
 As Jarrow 's representatives prepared to leave , six regional contingents of the sixth National Hunger March were taking the road to London , where they were due to arrive a week after the Jarrow marchers . A group of blind veterans , organised by the National League of the Blind and Disabled , was also on the march , demanding better allowances for the country 's 67 @,@ 000 blind persons . 
 = = = On the road = = = 
 = = = = Jarrow to Ripon = = = = 
 After the service of dedication , the marchers left Jarrow , cheered on by most of the town and bearing banners announcing themselves as the " Jarrow Crusade " . By the following weekend they had travelled 69 miles ( 111 km ) to the cathedral city of Ripon , where they were welcomed by the Bishop of Ripon and a delegation representing local churches . Receptions at the intervening stops had been mixed : lukewarm at Chester @-@ le @-@ Street , warm and friendly from the people in Ferryhill and also from the Conservative @-@ controlled council in Darlington . 
 Wilkinson had left the march at Chester @-@ le @-@ Street to attend the Labour Party 's annual conference , taking place in Edinburgh . The conference was not supportive of the march — one delegate criticised Wilkinson for " sending hungry and ill @-@ clad men on a march to London " . The Labour conference 's negative stance brought angry responses from the marchers ; Riley considered that they had been " stabbed in the back " . The marchers were further dismayed to learn that the Ministry of Labour 's Unemployment Assistance Board had ruled that their benefits would be reduced , since they were unavailable for work should jobs arise . 
 = = = = Ripon to Chesterfield = = = = 
 After a weekend 's rest , the marchers proceeded to Harrogate . In this solidly Conservative , prosperous town the marchers were greeted warmly by the civic authorities and were fed by the Rotary Club . They were given sleeping quarters by the Territorial Army , a change from the school and church halls , and occasional workhouse accommodation , that was provided at most overnight stops . It was becoming evident that local Conservatives were often as likely to provide practical assistance as Labour , whose local parties were constrained by the attitude of the party 's national leadership . The marchers ' claim that theirs was a unique situation , arising from specific actions ( the closing of the shipyard and the blocking of the proposed steelworks ) that could be remedied by immediate government action , may also have alienated local working @-@ class communities . Cross @-@ party support was important in maintaining the march 's non @-@ partisan ethos , a factor that led Riley to refuse a donation of £ 20 from a communist group , stating : " We are determined at all costs to preserve the non @-@ political character of this Crusade " . 
 At Harrogate Wilkinson rejoined the march , as it proceeded through southern Yorkshire towards Chesterfield in Derbyshire . The march was attracting wide publicity ; in London the government worried that King Edward might exceed his constitutional limits and receive the marchers . The cabinet issued a statement that emphasised the constitutional means for expressing grievances , and condemned marches for causing " unnecessary hardship for those taking part in them " — " crocodile tears " , according to Wilkinson . In reaching Chesterfield on 17 October , the marchers had travelled 70 miles ( 110 km ) during the week , and were at the approximate half @-@ way point in their journey . That day , the Bishop of Durham was gratified and the marchers correspondingly disappointed , when in a letter to The Times the Bishop of Jarrow denied that his blessing on the march had indicated his support for the venture . The blessing was , he said an act of Christian duty ; in general he believed that such marches should be discouraged . Wilkinson was forgiving of the bishop 's volte @-@ face , knowing , she later said , " the difficulties he had to face " . 
 = = = = Chesterfield to Northampton = = = = 
 The third week of the march covered the greatest distance of the four weeks — 83 miles ( 134 km ) . At Mansfield , the Labour @-@ controlled council defied the national leadership to give the marchers a warm welcome . This was matched by the reception from Nottingham 's Conservative mayor and councillors , and supplemented by gifts of clothing and underwear from the city 's manufacturers . At Leicester , the Co @-@ operative Society 's <unk> worked through the night without pay , repairing the marchers ' boots . According to some accounts , the marchers presented the vicar of the Church of St Mark , Leicester , with a wooden cross , although Matt Perry , in his history of the Jarrow March , indicates that this cross was donated in 1934 by the national hunger march . 
 From Leicester the march moved to Market Harborough . This was one of the least welcoming of all the overnight stops . No member of the local council greeted or visited the marchers , and they were forced to spend the night on the stone floor of an unfinished building ( the local press later denied that this was so ) . On Saturday 24 October the marchers reached Northampton , arriving at the same time as the blind group . Wilkinson left to supervise arrangements in London , and would thereafter only participate intermittently until the final day , a week hence . 
 = = = = Northampton to London = = = = 
 The leg on Monday 26 October , from Northampton to Bedford , was the longest daily march — 21 miles ( 34 km ) . Of the original contingent , 185 were still on the road , together with 10 replacements . To maintain the timetable for arrival at Marble Arch , the marchers took an extra rest day on Tuesday before marching , in teeming rain , the 19 miles ( 31 km ) to Luton . 
 On 29 October , as the marchers walked from Luton to St Albans , the plight of Jarrow was the subject of exchanges in the House of Commons between Wilkinson and Baldwin . The prime minister drew attention to the recent decrease in Jarrow 's unemployed , and said : " There is every reason to hope that the revival of industry now in progress in the Tyneside area will result in further opportunities for employment for those still unemployed at Jarrow . " Wilkinson replied that the apparent decrease in Jarrow 's unemployment figures arose from the amalgamation of the figures of Jarrow with those of a neighbouring town , and did not represent an increase in employment . She asked Baldwin whether he would break with tradition and meet a deputation of the marchers ; the prime minister declined . 
 On the penultimate stage , from St Albans to Edgware , as the march neared its end , marchers began to contemplate the return home , and the prospect of " looking out of the window ... knowing that there 's nothing , nothing at all to do " . On the final day , for the short 8 @-@ mile ( 13 km ) stretch , large crowds watched the column proceed through the London suburbs towards Marble Arch , marching to the accompaniment of their own mouth @-@ organ band despite relentless rain . On arrival , as their leaders talked to the press , the marchers retired to their overnight accommodation in London 's East End . 
 = = = London = = = 
 On Sunday 1 November the marchers proceeded to Hyde Park for a hastily organised public meeting . The Communist Party was holding a general rally in the park against unemployment ; Wilkinson records that they " generously gave way for an hour and asked their great audience to swell our Crusade meeting " . The police made a low estimate of 3 @,@ 000 for the crowd , but the journalist Ritchie Calder , who was present , put the figure at 50 @,@ 000 . 
 After a day 's rest , the marchers ' main event on Tuesday was a public meeting in the Memorial Hall , Farringdon Street . Among the guest speakers was the Rev. Canon Dick Sheppard , founder of the Peace Pledge Union . He told the marchers : " You have so aroused the conscience of the country that things are bound to happen " . Sir John Jarvis , without prior warning , then revealed plans for a steel tubes mill on the Palmers site . The impression that Jarrow 's problems could be solved thus , without government action , disconcerted the listening marchers . Wilkinson commented that such plans were in the future , and were no substitute for the town 's requirement for immediate government intervention . 
 On Wednesday 4 November Wilkinson presented the Jarrow petition to the House of Commons . With over 11 @,@ 000 signatures , it asked that " His Majesty 's Government and this honourable House should realise the urgent need that work should be provided for the town without further delay . " In the brief discussion that followed , Runciman said that " the unemployment position at Jarrow , while still far from satisfactory , has improved during recent months " , to which a Labour backbencher replied that " the Government 's complacency is regarded throughout the country as an affront to the national conscience " . 
 Blythe summarises the marchers ' anger and disillusionment : " And that was that . The result of three months ' excited preparation and one month 's march has led to a few minutes of flaccid argument during which the Government speakers had hardly mustered enough energy to roll to their feet " . A " stay @-@ in " strike was briefly proposed , before Wilkinson arranged a meeting with a cross @-@ party group of MPs . The marchers ' case was heard sympathetically ; the meeting was warned that , given international uncertainties , they might come to regret the dismantling of an important shipbuilding facility for reasons of private profit . Such statements , according to Wilkinson , made members " distinctly uncomfortable " . The next day the marchers returned by train to Jarrow , where they received an ecstatic welcome from the town . 
 = = Appraisal and legacy = = 
 Before the start of the Second World War , and the establishment of war @-@ based industries , Jarvis 's initiatives brought modest relief to Jarrow . By 1939 , about 100 men were employed in a small furniture factory and up to a further 500 in various metal @-@ based industries set up on the Palmer 's site . Jarvis had acquired the obsolete liners Olympic and Berengaria , to be broken up at the yard . However , after their triumphant homecoming many of the marchers felt that their endeavour had failed . Con Whalen , who at his death in 2003 was the last survivor of those who marched the full distance , said that the march was " a waste of time " , but added that he had enjoyed every step . His fellow marcher Guy Waller , on the 40th anniversary of the march in 1976 , said that " [ t ] he march produced no immediate startling upsurge in employment in the town . It took the war to do that " . These views are shared by most commentators and historians . The Daily Mirror columnist Kevin Maguire calls the march " a heroic failure " , while Matt Dobson , in The Socialist , writes that " out of all the hunger marches its aims were the most diluted and it made the most modest gains " . The historians Malcolm Pearce and Geoffrey Stewart provide a positive perspective , arguing that the Jarrow March " helped to shape [ post @-@ Second World War ] perceptions of the 1930s " , and thus paved the way to social reform . 
 Perry observes that " the passage of time has transformed the Jarrow Crusade ... into a potent talisman with which many apparently seek association " . Thus the Labour Party , which in 1936 shunned the march , later adopted it as " a badge of credibility " . In 1950 the party featured the Jarrow banners on its election posters ; the march then disappeared from view in an era of high employment , only to be invoked again when unemployment again became a political issue in the 1980s . In the late 20th century and beyond , Labour leaders — Michael Foot , Neil Kinnock , Tony Blair — have all associated themselves with the march . In October 1986 , on the 50th anniversary , a group from Jarrow and other towns along the way retraced the route to London . At that time of industrial recession , Jarrow once again had the highest level of unemployment in the country . The 75th anniversary in 2011 was marked by a " March for Jobs " , that drew the ire of a Conservative MP , Robert Goodwill , who noted the high level of withdrawals in its early stages and dismissed it as " an insult to the memory of the Jarrow marchers ... They are not fit to walk in [ their ] footsteps " . 
 Shortly after the return home in November 1936 Riley , together with three other Jarrow councillors who had led the march — James Hanlon , Paddy Scullion and Joseph Symonds — left Labour to form a breakaway group committed to a more direct fight for employment . All four later rejoined the party ; Scullion and Symonds both served as the town 's mayor , and Symonds was Labour MP for Whitehaven from 1959 to 1970 . In 1939 Wilkinson published her history of Jarrow , The Town that Was Murdered . A reviewer for The Economic Journal found the book " not quite as polemical as one might have expected " , but felt that in her denunciation of the BISF Wilkinson had not taken full account of the state of the iron and steel industry in the 1930s . Wilkinson continued her parliamentary career , and from 1940 to 1945 held junior ministerial office in Churchill 's wartime coalition government . In the 1945 Labour government she was appointed Minister of Education , with a seat in the cabinet , a post in which she served until her death , aged 55 , in February 1947 . 
 Among dramatisations based on the Jarrow March is a play , Whistling at the Milestones ( 1977 ) by Alex Glasgow , and an opera , Burning Road ( 1996 ) , by Will Todd and Ben <unk> . In what Perry describes as one of the ironies surrounding the march , the opera was performed in Durham Cathedral in May 1997 , in retrospective defiance of the bishop who had condemned the march . The town of Jarrow contains several commemorations , including a steel relief sculpture by Vince Rea at the new railway station , a tile mural designed by local schoolchildren , and a bronze sculpture — " The Spirit of the Crusade " by Graham <unk> — in the town centre . Buildings and street names bear the names of Wilkinson and Riley . Perry writes that " In Jarrow , Landscape and memory have fused together , just as the red hot rivets once fastened great sheets of steel in Palmer 's Yard " . 
 = 1948 Winter Olympics = 
 The 1948 Winter Olympics , officially known as the V Olympic Winter Games ( French : Les Ves Jeux olympiques d 'hiver ) ( German : <unk> <unk> 1948 ) ( Italian : V Giochi <unk> <unk> ) ( Romansh : <unk> <unk> d <unk> 1948 ) , was a winter multi @-@ sport event celebrated in 1948 in St. Moritz , Switzerland . The Games were the first to be celebrated after World War II ; it had been 12 years since the last Winter Games in 1936 . From the selection of a host city in a neutral country to the exclusion of Japan and Germany , the political atmosphere of the post @-@ war world was inescapable during the Games . The organizing committee faced several challenges due to the lack of financial and human resources consumed by the war . These were the first of two winter Olympic Games under the IOC presidency of Sigfrid Edström . 
 There were 28 nations that marched in the opening ceremonies on January 30 , 1948 . Nearly 670 athletes competed in 22 events in four sports . The Games also featured two demonstration sports : military patrol , which later became the biathlon , and winter pentathlon , which was discontinued after these Games . Notable performances were turned in by figure skaters Dick Button and Barbara Ann Scott and skier Henri <unk> . Most of the athletic venues were already in existence from the first time St. Moritz hosted the Winter Games in 1928 . All of the venues were outdoors , which meant the Games were heavily dependent on favorable weather conditions . 
 = = Host city selection = = 
 The IOC selected St. Moritz to host the 1948 Games at the 39th general session in Lausanne , Switzerland , in September 1946 . The selection process consisted of two bids , and saw St. Moritz be selected ahead of Lake Placid , United States . St. Moritz was selected because it was located in Switzerland , which had remained neutral during the war , and also because it had already hosted a Winter Games in 1928 . This made the organization of the Games simpler and more economical . Despite the existence of many of the venues , it was still a difficult task to organize a Winter Olympic Games in less than 18 months . 
 = = Organizing = = 
 The Comite Olympique ( CO ) was composed of local dignitaries and members of the Swiss National Olympic Committee ( COS ) . They decided to separate into several sub @-@ committees responsible for various aspects of the Games . These committees included housing and maintenance , venue construction , finances , and media and advertising . The local committees worked very closely with the Swiss federal government and the IOC to ensure that the organization of the Games proceeded without hindrance . Since no athletes ' village existed from the previous Games , the athletes and officials were housed in hotels around the city . It was very important for the committees to draw upon their experiences from the 1928 Olympics . Their selection of locations for the various events was contingent on the weather conditions as all the events were held outdoors . 
 Over 800 people were involved in reporting the news of the Games to the world . Nearly 500 press credentials were issued by the Press Commission for the Games . Television would not make its Olympic debut until 1956 . The coverage of the 1948 Games was split between newspapers and radio broadcasts . The organizing committee had to provide technology , such as long distance telephone lines and telegraph services , to assist the press in communicating with their constituents . 
 Over 2 @,@ 200 people were needed to provide all the services for the press , officials and athletes at the Games . These services included sanitation , security , and care of the venues . Accommodating the influx of people into St. Moritz was a difficult task for the organizing committee . It was complicated by the mountainous region in which the community was situated . A massive project to improve the village 's transportation infrastructure had to be completed prior to the Games . This included building and widening roads for vehicular traffic . Several train stations were built to accommodate the increased demands for public transit . They also had to increase the capacity of the city 's sewers . All of the projects had to be approved by the Swiss government , and justified by its impact on the success of the Games . To aid the organizing committee the IOC demanded that all participating nations provide lists of their athletes several months prior to the Games . Consequently , the Swiss knew exactly how many athletes and officials to plan for . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Since these Games were the first since World War II they were given the name " The Games of Renewal . " Japan and Germany were not invited to these Games because they were still ostracized by the international community for their role in World War II . Their absence was short @-@ lived though , as they returned to Olympic competition in 1952 . The Soviet Union did not send athletes to the St. Moritz Games of 1948 , but they did send ten delegates as observers of the Games to determine how successful the Soviet athletes would have been had they competed . 
 = = = Impact of World War II = = = 
 Sapporo , Japan had been the choice for the 1940 Winter Games . In 1938 the Japanese decided to decline the invitation to host the Games claiming that preparations for the Olympic Games were draining the country 's resources . The IOC turned to the host of the 1936 Games , Garmisch @-@ Partenkirchen , which would make it the only city to host consecutive Games . This became impractical when Germany invaded Poland on September 1 , 1939 ; subsequently Germany withdrew its bid to host the Games . Finland believed it could host the Games and extended an invitation to the IOC , but the Soviet Union 's invasion of Finland ended all hope of an Olympic Games in 1940 . The 1944 Winter Olympics had been awarded to Cortina d 'Ampezzo , Italy in 1939 . As the war continued , this proved to be impractical and the second consecutive <unk> passed without a celebration of the Games . The IOC was presented with two possible host cities for the first post @-@ war Games : Lake Placid , United States and St. Moritz , Switzerland . The IOC decided to award the Games to Switzerland , a neutral country , immediately following World War II , in order to avoid political posturing on the part of former combatants . 
 The impact of World War II was still being felt in 1948 . The lack of financial resources and human energy made the organization of the Games challenging . Athletes were also affected by a lack of resources . Many competitors arrived with little or no equipment . In one notable case , Norwegian skiers had to borrow skis from the American team in order to compete . There was also a lack of spectators due to travel restrictions and a shortage of finances in a European economy that was still recovering under the Marshall Plan . 
 = = Events = = 
 Medals were awarded in 22 events contested in 4 sports ( 9 disciplines ) . 
 Bobsleigh 
 Bobsleigh ( 2 ) ( ) 
 Skeleton ( 1 ) ( ) 
 Ice hockey ( 1 ) ( ) 
 Skating 
 Figure skating ( 3 ) ( ) 
 Speed skating ( 4 ) ( ) 
 Skiing 
 Alpine skiing ( 6 ) ( ) 
 Nordic skiing ( ) 
 Cross @-@ country skiing ( 3 ) ( ) 
 Nordic combined ( 1 ) ( ) 
 Ski jumping ( 1 ) ( ) 
 There were also two demonstration sports , military patrol and the winter pentathlon . 
 = = = Bobsled = = = 
 Two sliding sports were contested at the 1948 Winter Games , the first was bobsled . A controversy erupted when it was alleged that the sleds of the United States team had been sabotaged . It was discovered that the steering wheels had been damaged . After news broke of the apparent improprieties a truck driver stepped forward and admitted to having accidentally backed into the shed housing the bobsleds . The accident however did not hinder the United States teams who won a bronze in the two @-@ man event and a gold and a bronze in the four @-@ man event . The Swiss two @-@ man teams placed first and second , which is the best possible results for the event since only two teams were allowed to enter . The driver of the first place team , Felix <unk> , beat his coach , the driver of the second place team , Fritz <unk> . 
 = = = Ice Hockey = = = 
 The ice hockey tournament was won by Canada , with Czechoslovakia second and Switzerland third . This was the fifth Olympic gold medal for Canada in hockey . The only team to beat Canada since hockey was introduced at the 1920 Summer Olympics was Great Britain at the 1936 Winter Olympics . The tournament was almost cancelled when rival teams representing the United States arrived . An Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) team was supported by the United States Olympic Committee ( USOC ) , and an Amateur Hockey Association ( AHA ) team was supported by the Ligue Internationale de Hockey sur Glace ( <unk> ) . The International Olympic Committee ruled that neither team could compete , but the Swiss organizing committee allowed the AAU team to march in the opening ceremony , and the AHA team to play unofficially , without being eligible for medals . 
 = = = Figure skating = = = 
 Barbara Ann Scott became the first and only Canadian woman to win an Olympic gold medal in figure skating , when she won the competition at St. Moritz . Despite the distraction caused by a low @-@ flying airplane during her compulsory routine , she was able to muster the focus to place first entering the free skate . The ice had been shredded the night before the free skate by two ice hockey games ( the ice <unk> had not yet been invented ) ; nonetheless she was able to adjust her routine to avoid the potholes and emerge victorious . 
 Eighteen @-@ year @-@ old American Dick Button completed the unprecedented North American sweep of the figure skating gold medals . He led the field after the compulsory skate and then won the gold medal by becoming the first person to ever complete a double axel in competition . Later in the 1952 Olympics , Dick Button would win gold a second time . His victory came at the expense of Swiss world champion Hans <unk> who fell during the free skate . Despite the mishap <unk> would win the silver medal . 
 = = = Speed skating = = = 
 The speed skating competition was held on the same rink that had hosted the events in 1928 . At 1 @,@ 856 metres ( 6 @,@ 089 ft ) above sea level , the speed skating competition was held at the second highest altitude in Olympic history , only Squaw Valley in 1960 was higher . The competition was dominated by the Scandinavian countries of Norway and Sweden who won nine out of the twelve possible medals . Scandinavians had done poor in speed skating events up until the 1948 Games . The reason for their success was that speed skating in Europe had come to a stand still during World War II . Only countries that were ancillary to the conflict had the resources to keep their speed skating programs intact . The 500 meter race was won by Finn <unk> of Norway . There was a three @-@ way tie for second place between Norwegian Thomas <unk> and Americans Robert Fitzgerald and Kenneth Bartholomew . All three had finished in exactly 43 @.@ 2 seconds . Swede Åke <unk> won a gold medal in the 10 @,@ 000 meter race and a silver medal in the 1 @,@ 500 meter race . The 5 @,@ 000 meter event was affected by weather . The twenty racers encountered both wind , sun , and snow in the course of the day 's competition . Finally long @-@ distance specialist Reidar <unk> from Norway prevailed . 
 = = = Alpine skiing = = = 
 Alpine skiing made its Olympic debut at these Games . A few events had been held at the 1936 Games but the St. Moritz Games featured a full slate of three men 's and three women 's alpine events . Frenchman Henri <unk> won a medal in all three Alpine events ; gold in the downhill and combined , and bronze in the slalom . He was one of only two athletes to win two gold medals at the 1948 Games , and he was also the only athlete to win three or more medals . 
 Austria dominated the women 's alpine events , winning five out of a possible nine medals . Trude Beiser was a double @-@ medal winner , earning gold in the combined event and silver in the downhill . She was not the only female skier to win two medals though , United States skier Gretchen Fraser won gold in the slalom and took silver behind Beiser in the combined . Austrian Erika <unk> earned two medals by winning bronze medals in both the slalom and the combined . 
 = = = Cross @-@ country skiing = = = 
 In cross @-@ country skiing a total of 106 skiers from 15 nations competed in three events . The events were the 50 kilometer race , the 18 kilometer race and the 4 x 10 kilometer relay . There were no women 's events at the 1948 Games . Martin Lundström of Sweden was the other athlete to win two gold medals when he won the 18 kilometer race and participated on the winning cross @-@ country relay team . Overall Sweden won seven out of a possible fifteen medals in the Nordic events , including all three gold medals and a sweep of the 18 kilometer race . All fifteen medals were won by either Sweden , Norway , or Finland . 
 = = = Skeleton = = = 
 Skeleton made its second appearance at the Olympics during these Games . It debuted at the 1928 Winter Olympics also held in St. Moritz . Skeleton was a form of luge , which had originally appeared in the St. Moritz region at the end of the 19th century . American John Heaton won his second Olympic medal in the skeleton , he won his first 20 years earlier when he was 19 years old . Italian slider Nino Bibbia won the gold medal . It was the first of his 231 career wins on the Cresta <unk> track . One of the curves at Cesana Pariol , where the bobsled , luge , and skeleton events took place at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin , was named after Bibbia . 
 = = = Nordic combined = = = 
 The Nordic combined event had been contested at each Winter Olympics since 1924 . Nordic combined required athletes to first compete in the open 18 kilometer cross @-@ country ski race alongside the other cross @-@ country competitors . Their times would be assigned a point value . Two days later the athletes would take two jumps off the ski jump hill . The jumps would be given a point value and the longest jump would be combined with their cross @-@ country time to create a score . Traditional Nordic combined power Norway was stunned at the 1948 Games when Finland 's Heikki Hasu became the first non @-@ Norwegian to win the event . In fact Norway did not even make the podium . Hasu 's teammate Martti Huhtala took the silver and Sven <unk> from Sweden won the bronze . 
 = = = Ski jumping = = = 
 The Norwegians swept the ski jumping event . Birger Ruud had won the gold medal in the ski jumping event at both the 1932 and 1936 Winter Games . The twelve @-@ year hiatus due to World War II meant that Ruud was 36 years old in 1948 . He had retired from competition and was coaching the Norwegian team . However , when he arrived at the Games he decided to come out of retirement and compete one last time . Despite not having competed for several years he earned a silver medal . Norwegian Petter <unk> won the gold and teammate <unk> <unk> won the bronze . 
 = = = Demonstration sports = = = 
 Two demonstration sports were held at the 1948 Games . Military patrol had been a demonstration sport at the 1924 , 1928 , and 1936 Winter Olympic Games . It entailed a combination of cross @-@ country skiing and shooting at targets . Eventually the competition would be renamed Biathlon and was made an official Olympic medal sport at the 1960 Games in Squaw Valley , United States . Winter pentathlon involved five competitions : 10 kilometer cross @-@ country ski race , shooting , downhill skiing , fencing and horseback riding . This was the first and last time the event was held . Fourteen competitors took part in the event . 
 = = Calendar = = 
 All dates are in Central European Time ( UTC + 1 ) 
 The opening ceremonies were held at 10 : 00 am on January 30 along with the initial hockey games and the first two runs of the two @-@ man bobsled . The closing ceremonies were held at 4 : 00 pm on February 8 . All of the medals were awarded at the closing ceremonies rather than immediately after the event as current tradition dictates . 
 = = Venues = = 
 The Stad Olympique ( Olympic Stadium ) hosted the opening and closing ceremonies . The stadium was also used for speed skating , the figure skating competition and the medal games for ice hockey . Most of the ice hockey games were held at the <unk> and Kulm stadiums in St. Moritz . Bobsled was held at the St. Moritz @-@ <unk> Olympic <unk> . Skeleton was contested on the Cresta Run track . Olympia Bob Run was built in 1897 and modernized for the 1948 Games while the Cresta Run was first constructed in 1885 . The ski jump competitions were held at Olympiaschanze ski jump hill in St. Moritz . It was built in 1927 for the 1928 Games , and remained in use until 2006 . The alpine events were held on ski @-@ runs in and around Piz Nair . 
 = = Participating nations = = 
 28 nations competed in St. Moritz , the same number as the previous Winter Games in 1936 . Chile , Denmark , Iceland , Korea , and Lebanon all made their Winter Olympic debut at these Games . Germany and Japan were not invited because of their involvement in World War II . Italy , despite being an Axis power originally , was allowed to send athletes after their defection to the Allies in 1943 . Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania had been annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940 , and would not compete again as independent nations until 1992 . Argentina returned to the Winter Games after missing the 1932 and 1936 Games , and Australia and Luxembourg did not compete in 1948 , even though they had participated in 1936 . 
 = = Medal count = = 
 These are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1948 Winter Games . 
 = Polikarpov I @-@ 6 = 
 The Polikarpov I @-@ 6 was a Soviet biplane fighter prototype of the late 1920s . It was designed with traditional wooden construction in comparison with the wood and steel tube construction Polikarpov I @-@ 5 . Its development took longer than planned and the lead designer , Nikolai Polikarpov , was arrested for industrial sabotage , which only further delayed the project . Only two prototypes were built , as the I @-@ 5 was selected for production . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Development of the I @-@ 6 ( Istrebitel ' — fighter ) began in September 1928 with a deadline for delivery for the first prototype of 1 August 1929 after the first prototypes of the Polikarpov I @-@ 3 were completed . Although the new fighter shared many of the characteristics of the earlier design , including the staggered sesquiplane , single @-@ bay , layout of the wings , it was a new design which used a nine @-@ cylinder , single @-@ row , air @-@ cooled Bristol Jupiter radial engine rather the water @-@ cooled inline engine of its predecessor . It was designed by the OSS ( Russian : Otdel <unk> <unk> — <unk> Department ) , later redesignated as <unk> @-@ 1 ( Russian : <unk> Otdel — Experimental Department ) of <unk> ( " Aviation Trust " ) under the supervision of Nikolai Polikarpov , head designer of the department . It was originally intended to be compared to the I @-@ 3 , but this was changed to an evaluation of construction methods with the wooden construction I @-@ 6 compared to the mixed construction Polikarpov I @-@ 5 . Both aircraft used the Jupiter VI engine for which a license had recently been negotiated . 
 The I @-@ 6 had an oval @-@ section semi @-@ monocoque fuselage covered with ' shpon ' , molded birch plywood , with a small headrest faired into the fuselage , although the engine was enclosed in a metal cowling that left the cylinder heads exposed for better cooling . The two @-@ spar wings were covered in plywood and fabric and had a Clark Y profile . Internal bracing wires were fitted to reinforce the wings . The control surfaces were framed in duralumin , but covered in fabric . The duralumin N @-@ type struts that separated the wings , and attached the upper wing to the fuselage , had a teardrop profile . They were reinforced with steel bracing wires . The conventional undercarriage was fixed with rubber shock absorbers . The wooden propeller was given a spinner . The lighter weight of the air @-@ cooled Jupiter engine , which required neither a heavy radiator nor coolant , meant that the I @-@ 6 had an empty weight only 62 % of that of the I @-@ 3 . 
 Polikarpov was arrested and imprisoned by the OGPU in September 1929 for the crime of industrial sabotage when neither the I @-@ 6 nor the I @-@ 5 projects met their stipulated deadlines , and this delayed the first flight of the I @-@ 6 until 30 March 1930 . The second prototype was completed shortly thereafter and both aircraft appeared in that year 's May Day fly @-@ past over Moscow . Both aircraft likely used imported engines before they were replaced by the Soviet @-@ built copy of the Jupiter , the Shvetsov M @-@ 22 . One I @-@ 6 crashed on 13 June 1930 after the test pilot bailed out , without justification , in the opinion of the Soviet aviation historian Vadim B. Shavrov . 
 The I @-@ 5 and the I @-@ 6 were virtually identical in performance , although the I @-@ 6 took 15 seconds to complete a full circle versus the 9 @.@ 5 seconds of the I @-@ 5 . Both aircraft were armed with two 7 @.@ 62 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) PV @-@ 1 machine guns , but the production model of the I @-@ 5 was expected to be armed with four , although this proved to impose too great a penalty to the I @-@ 5 's performance . The exact reasons for the selection of the I @-@ 5 over the I @-@ 6 , which was debated for a full year , are not known , but likely relate to both of these factors . Curiously , Polikarpov was not informed of the selection of the I @-@ 5 until his release in 1933 after his initial sentence of death had been commuted to ten years of imprisonment in a labor camp . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Data from Shavrov , Istoriia konstruktskii samoletov v SSSR do 1938 g . 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 6 @.@ 8 m ( 22 ft 4 in ) 
 Wingspan : 10 m ( 32 ft 10 in ) 
 Height : ( ) 
 Wing area : 20 @.@ 5 m ² ( 220 @.@ 7 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 868 kg ( 1 @,@ 914 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 1 @,@ 280 kg ( 2 @,@ 822 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Shvetsov M @-@ 22 radial engine , 313 kW ( 420 hp ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 280 km / h ( 151 kn , 174 mph ) 
 Range : 700 km ( 378 nmi , 435 mi ) 
 Service ceiling : 7 @,@ 500 m ( 24 @,@ 606 ft ) 
 Wing loading : 62 kg / m ² ( 13 lb / ft ² ) 
 Power / mass : 245 W / kg ( 0 @.@ 15 hp / lb ) 
 Time to altitude : 10 minutes to 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 405 ft ) 
 Horizontal turn time : 15 sec 
 Armament 
 2 × 7 @.@ 62 mm ( 0 @.@ 30 in ) PV @-@ 1 machine guns 
 = Pilot ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Pilot " is the pilot episode of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 9 , 2009 . The episode was written by series co @-@ creators Michael Schur and Greg Daniels , and directed by Daniels . 
 The episode introduces the protagonist Leslie Knope , played by Amy Poehler , as well as the other regular characters played by cast members Rashida Jones , Paul Schneider , Aziz Ansari , Aubrey Plaza and Nick Offerman . Knope is a mid @-@ level bureaucrat in the Parks and Recreation department in the fictional town of Pawnee , Indiana . In " Pilot " , Knope sets out to turn a construction pit into a park after local nurse Ann Perkins ( Jones ) complains about the dangerous pit during a town meeting . Her anti @-@ government boss Ron Swanson ( Offerman ) reluctantly allows her to form an exploratory committee after her friend and colleague Mark Brendanawicz ( Schneider ) secretly intervenes on her behalf . 
 Daniels and Schur first started writing the script in the summer of 2008 , when they were in the early stages of conceiving the series . Like the rest of the series , the pilot was filmed in the same mockumentary style as The Office , the NBC comedy series also directed by Daniels . About one month before the pilot aired , a focus group report discussing several perceived problems with the episode was leaked to the media , which led to speculation that Parks and Recreation was not ready for prime @-@ time television . The pilot episode featured a number of cultural references to such people as Bobby Knight , Larry Bird and Laura Linney , as well as female political figures to whom Leslie compares herself , such as Hillary Rodham Clinton , Sarah Palin , and Nancy Pelosi . 
 " Pilot " received generally mixed reviews , although Poehler herself was widely praised by most television critics . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Pilot " was watched by 6 @.@ 77 million households in its original airing . Although it received lower ratings than the two Office episodes it aired between , television critics pointed out it achieved an identical rating to the popular NBC show 30 Rock , which was broadcast the same night . The pilot , along with the rest of the first season of Parks and Recreation , was released on DVD in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with Leslie Knope ( Amy Poehler ) , the deputy director of the Department of Parks and Recreation with six years of experience in the town of Pawnee , Indiana , discussing with a documentary crew her strong belief in the power of government to help other people . Later , Leslie hosts a community outreach public forum at an elementary school along with her jaded colleague Tom Haverford ( Aziz Ansari ) . Leslie is enthusiastic despite the low turnout and angry complaints , which she describes as " people caring loudly at me " . Local nurse Ann Perkins ( Rashida Jones ) complains about a giant pit near her house , which was dug out by a condominium developer that went bankrupt in the middle of the construction project . Ann says that her boyfriend Andy Dwyer ( Chris Pratt ) broke both his legs after falling into the pit , and she demands something be done about it . Leslie is inspired by the challenge and makes a " pinky promise " that she will fill in the pit and build a park on the land . 
 Leslie seeks advice from city planner Mark Brendanawicz ( Paul Schneider ) , who feels the project would prove practically impossible due to the logistics and bureaucratic red tape , but Leslie is undeterred . Leslie later fondly tells the documentary crew that she and Mark made love five years ago , but Mark only vaguely recalls the encounter . Leslie , Tom and uninterested intern April Ludgate ( Aubrey Plaza ) visit Ann and meet Andy , a lazy and demanding musician whom she is forced to wait on and support financially . Afterward , Leslie and Ann visit the pit , which Leslie accidentally falls into as Tom and April make fun of her . Ann quickly provides medical assistance . Afterward , Leslie leaves , and Ann tells the documentary crew , " She 's a little doofy , but she 's sweet " . Some time later , Leslie asks her boss Ron Swanson ( Nick Offerman ) for permission to form an exploratory committee for the pit project . Ron initially refuses , but eventually agrees to consider it so that Leslie will leave his office . Ron explains that he does not want the Parks Department to build any parks because he believes government is a waste of money , and that all government should be privatized and run by corporations for profit . Leslie repeatedly pesters Ron about the park project , but he refuses to commit . 
 Meanwhile , Tom and April continue to make fun of Leslie , much to the displeasure of Mark . Mark , who tells the documentary crew he is impressed that Leslie has somehow maintained her optimism about government for six years , secretly asks Ron to give her the park project . Mark said doing so would return a favor Ron owes him for unspecified reasons . Leslie and Ann are extremely excited about the new exploratory subcommittee , and the department celebrates by getting drunk . Despite her skepticism about politics and government , a drunken Ann pledges to do whatever it takes to help get the pit filled in , " even if it takes two months " . The episode ends with Ron explaining to the documentary crew how he makes his office as uninviting as possible . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Immediately after Ben Silverman was named co @-@ chairman of NBC 's entertainment division in 2007 , he asked Greg Daniels to create a new comedy series . Silverman and Daniels previously worked together on The Office , a half @-@ hour comedy Daniels adapted from the British comedy of the same name by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant . Daniels wrote the pilot for what eventually became Parks and Recreation along with series co @-@ creator Michael Schur , who had served as a writer on The Office . Daniels and Schur had been considering ideas for a possible show with cast members Rashida Jones and Aziz Ansari , but the concept for the series did not form until they learned Amy Poehler could play the lead character . Once that casting was determined , the script for the pilot episode was first written in the summer of 2008 revolving around her as a city bureaucrat seeking to turn an enormous construction pit into a park . They also decided the script would include the mockumentary comedy style of The Office and , like that show , would allow for improvisation on set . However , they did not consider the script an Office spin @-@ off and NBC officials vehemently insisted to media outlets that the show was a completely separate series , despite the similarities between the two shows . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The first draft of the script portrayed Leslie and Mark as slightly less likable characters . Originally , Mark asked Ron to green @-@ light the park project not to help Leslie , but because he was attracted to Ann and wanted another excuse to keep seeing her . These elements of the script were changed after press tours and focus group screenings . The show 's writers spent time researching local California politics and attended Los Angeles City Council meetings . Daniels and Schur wanted the pilot to establish that one of Leslie 's duties was talking to the public on a regular basis , and they deliberately portrayed her public forum meetings as poorly attended except by a select group of angry residents . Schur said , " I 've been to some community meetings in my life , and it is often this feeling of utter sparseness . That nobody cares . " In writing the script , Schur wanted Mark and Leslie to have a long history together before the events of the episode , rather than having the two characters meet for the first time on screen , which he felt had already been done in many television shows . The first shot of the pilot was originally a scene with Ann standing over the pit and staring at it with an annoyed expression , followed by a documentary interview with Ann and Andy . The opening scene was changed because Daniels and Schur decided they wanted the first scene of the series to be set in a park . As a result , the episode started with a cold open of Leslie interviewing children in a park , then using a broom to push a drunk man out of spiral slide . Daniels had such a specific vision for the scene , he drew an elaborate and detailed storyboard sketch of a drunk man stuck in a tubular slide . 
 Some parts of the episode consisted of a mixture of written dialogue and comedic improvisation from the actors . In one such scene , Aziz Ansari attempts to flirt with Rashida Jones when she speaks at a Parks and Recreation public forum . The scene was included in the script , but Ansari continued to improvise long after his dialogue ended , and Jones said she found it difficult to keep a straight face during filming . Schur encouraged Ansari to continue , and suggested the line in which Ansari asks to go away with Jones for the weekend . Daniels called the scene " probably the highlight of the pilot . " The ending included another example of written dialogue mixed with improvisation , when Ansari recited a list of unusual things Leslie has attempted to do while drunk . In other scenes , the written dialogue was abandoned altogether in favor of improvisation , such as the scene of Ann and Andy talking on Ann 's couch after Leslie fell into the pit and injured herself . Chris Pratt improvised a number of other lines and scenes in the episode , including when Andy asked Leslie to pass him his " itch stick " , which he then used to scratch under his leg cast in an awkward and disgusting way . 
 The pilot script included several political cultural references . Leslie compares herself to Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi in describing the prevalence of women in government . Leslie invokes former U.S. Presidents Richard Nixon and George W. Bush as shining examples of democracy . The episode also features several references to sports figures . Ron has a poster of Bobby Knight , the famous retired basketball coach , hanging in his office . The Bobby Knight image later had to be removed from the show for legal reasons . Leslie has an autographed photo of Indiana @-@ born basketball player Larry Bird on her desk . It reads , " To Lesly , Sink That Shot , Larry B. " This is a reference to a deleted scene in which Tom reveals he has tricked Leslie into believing he has brunch with Bird once a month . Tom himself actually faked the autograph , and deliberately misspelled her name " Lesly " as a joke . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Michael Schur made his directorial debut with the pilot episode . The original cut of the pilot episode was 48 minutes long , and had to be trimmed down to 22 minutes . Due to the improvisational style and hand @-@ held camerawork of the series , a great deal of extra footage is filmed in each episode and ultimately has to be discarded for the final cut . Amy Poehler said of this , " For every show , there could probably be a second show of stuff we 've edited out . " Brief portions of those deleted scenes were interwoven into short montage sequences that played along with dialogue from the documentary @-@ style interviews conducted within the episode with the characters . 
 Although the series shared the same mockumentary style as The Office , Daniels and Schur sought to establish a slightly different tone in the camerawork of the pilot episode of Parks and Recreation . For example , the documentary @-@ style interviews with characters sometimes feature two separate angles on the same person , with footage of the two different angles intercut into a single scene for the final episode . This distinguishing technique was inspired by The Five Obstructions , a 2003 documentary by Lars von Trier and Jørgen Leth , which Daniels watched at the suggestion of actor Paul Schneider . The pilot episode also makes use of the jump cut technique more often than in The Office . In one example from the pilot episode , a scene repeatedly jumps cuts to several brief clips in which Leslie seeks permission from Ron to pursue the pit project . 
 The pilot episode was filmed in southern California . The construction pit featured in the episode was dug out by the episode 's producers at an undeveloped property in Van Nuys , a district in Los Angeles . The producers went door @-@ to @-@ door to neighboring residents to seek their permission , then rented construction equipment to dig the hole in the ground . The pit was guarded 24 hours a day , and paparazzi regularly came to the set to take photos of the actors during filming . The exterior of the Pawnee government building , and several of the hallway scenes , were shot at the Pasadena city hall building . The interior parks and recreation department scenes were filmed on a sound stage . The windows could drop water that would simulate falling rain , and the windowsills included fake pigeons . The cold open scene was filmed in an actual playground in Los Angeles . The spiral tube slide used in the scene was the only one of its type left in the city , because the rest had been deemed too dangerous and removed . The public forum scenes were filmed in a Los Angeles middle school . The script originally called for the meeting to be held in a classroom because the auditorium door was locked . However , Daniels said the writers thought the school 's auditorium was such a " cool location " that they added a scene in which the auditorium lights were turned off in the middle of the meeting . 
 Singer @-@ songwriter Loudon Wainwright III makes a cameo as Barry , one of the citizens who makes wild complaints at the parks and recreations community meeting . Wainwright was selected for the part at the suggestion of casting director Allison Jones . Comedian and actor Ian Roberts , who worked with Amy Poehler on the Upright Citizens Brigade sketch comedy troupe , also made a cameo at the public meeting as Ian Winston , a man complaining about cursing at the park . During filming , guest star Chris Pratt said Poehler " [ went ] out of her way " to welcome him , and that her polite behavior put him at ease during filming . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ broadcast feedback = = = 
 Parks and Recreation was rushed into production for the pilot to meet the April 9 premiere date . As a result , when the series was paneled at a January 2009 television critics press tour , NBC did not have a finished episode to air , and only had a copy of the pilot episode script available for critics to review . Some of the parts were not yet cast , and without a finalized title , the series was known only as The Untitled Amy Poehler Project or <unk> . Alan Sepinwall , television writer for The Star @-@ Ledger , said he found the script very funny even though he normally hates reading comedy scripts " because they 're rarely as funny on the page as they are coming out of an actor 's mouth " . 
 According to a March 18 report that was leaked to television journalist Nikki Finke , focus groups responded poorly to a screening of the rough @-@ cut version of the pilot . Several viewers felt the show was a " carbon copy " of The Office , and needed to be differentiated from that series to avoid coming across as forced and unoriginal . Some viewers found it predictable , slow @-@ paced and lacking character development , and felt the beginning of the episode needed to better explain the situation and setting . Several viewers said the show lacked quality male characters , particularly a " datable " lead male . Other viewers , however , said The Office needed time to develop into a quality show , and they felt audiences would be more patient with Parks and Recreation than other shows due to its connection to The Office . Viewers also said the show 's portrayal of bureaucracy of local government was " very believable " and could provide quirky and silly situations for the show , and they liked Poehler 's character and performance . The release of the report led to speculation in the media that Parks and Recreations was not ready for prime @-@ time television . In response to the leaked negative feedback , Ben Silverman said rough cuts of shows are usually received negatively , even for ultimately successful shows . Schur also said there had been at least four complete edits to the pilot since the focus @-@ group results came in . 
 = = = Ratings and reviews = = = 
 The Parks and Recreation pilot first aired on April 9 , 2009 , in the United States on NBC . It was shown in a time slot between two fifth season episodes of The Office : " Dream Team " and " Michael Scott Paper Company " . In its original American broadcast on April 9 , the pilot was watched by 6 @.@ 77 million overall households , according to Nielsen Media Research . Media outlets described it as a solid rating for the premiere , and said it was comparable to average ratings for 30 Rock , the NBC show that also airs Thursday nights ; 30 Rock achieved the same 6 @.@ 8 million overall household rating during the 9 : 30 p.m. time slot on April 9 . " Pilot " also had a 40 percent higher rating than the final episode of Kath & Kim , which previously held the show 's time slot . However , " Pilot " did not capture the same amount of viewers as the Office episodes that ran before and after it . " Dream Team " , which ran at 8 p.m. , drew 7 @.@ 2 million households , and " Michael Scott Paper Company " , which ran at 9 p.m. , drew 8 million households . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . Daniel Carlson of The Hollywood Reporter said Parks and Recreation appears to be a " genuinely funny and engaging comedy " and that inevitable comparisons to The Office are not fair ; he also said Poehler " proves instantly she 's got the comic intelligence to carry a series like this one " . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly said " Pilot " lacked the " snap and clear character delineation " of The Office , but pointed out that show also appeared flat in early episodes ; Tucker said he liked the performances , attitude and atmosphere of the show , although it had few laugh out loud moments . Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe said the show has the potential to become a " flip , witty political allegory " and praised Poehler and the supporting cast . Los Angeles Times television critic Robert Lloyd praised the show for providing strong female leads , which he said was rare on television . He also said , " It has a kind of sunny charm , a premise fit for a novel ... Poehler and Jones have a nice , contrapuntal rhythm . I stamp this show : approved . " 
 Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said the series needs to find a way to distinguish Leslie from Steve Carell 's Michael Scott from The Office , but he said the pilot episode was funny , particularly the Aziz Ansari character . Sepinwall also said The Office did not find its footing until the second season , so comparisons simply based on the pilot were not fair . ( Ironically , most critics now agree that Parks and Recreation set a significantly higher standard after the second season . ) Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times said the supporting cast needed stronger writing and reinforcements , but that Poehler was excellent in a lead role unique for women because it is based on weakness and <unk> , but still a positive and strong part . Stanley said , " The pilot episode isn ’ t perfect , but Ms. Poehler very nearly is . " Verne Gay of Newsday said Poehler has " plenty of appeal here " so he felt the show might have potential , but felt the pilot was for the most part a " near knockoff " of The Office . Likewise , Paige Wiser of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times said " so far it 's a pale Xerox of the paper company " , although she said " there are lots of funny little moments that could add up to a great series . " Robert Bianco said the episode was not funny , and the way in which the scripts and supporting cast ridicule and ignore the Leslie character leaves a " sour whiff of gratuitous cruelty . " He also called the pilot unoriginal and described it as " a style in search of a show , " despite Poehler 's likability . Similarly , Rob Owen of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette said , " Watching Poehler 's pathetic character have her dreams stomped on by apathetic bureaucrats is off @-@ putting , more so than Michael Scott 's obliviousness , " although Owen said the Ansari character was amusing . 
 Philadelphia Inquirer television critic Jonathan Storm strongly criticized the show , calling it a flat , " miscast mess " with serious structural problems . Storm also said the Leslie character lacked energy and Poehler was playing the part against her comedic strengths . Tom Shales of The Washington Post said , " Poehler 's show unfortunately isn 't worthy of her . It 's dry and hesitant when one longs for it to be raucous and madcap . " David Hinckley of New York Daily News said the show was not funny enough to deserve Poehler 's comedic talents , and compared the dialogue to a Saturday Night Live sketch that he said could not sustain a whole sitcom . New York Post television critic Linda Stasi said the pilot lacked laughs and was so similar to The Office that " it 's starting to look like a one @-@ trick pony outfit that 's gonna keep dressing that horse up in new saddles , hoping that no one will guess it 's been around the track so many times , it 's worn a ditch in the dirt . " The pilot episode premiered in Australia on Channel Seven on December 1 , 2009 , when episodes from the critically acclaimed second season were already playing in the United States . Sacha <unk> of The Sydney Morning Herald said of the episode , " To be frank , tonight 's premiere is weak . But the potential is obvious and word from the US is that it gets much better . " 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The pilot episode , along with the five other first season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a one @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . The DVD included cast and crew commentary tracks for each episode , as well as about 30 minutes of deleted scenes . The deleted scenes included on the DVD were originally featured on the official Parks and Recreation website after the episode aired . In one of them , Tom talks about changing his name because he thought it sounded too foreign for politics , although he admits this was not a problem for U.S. President Barack Obama . The scene was eventually worked into the second season episode , " The Stakeout " . 
 = Manic Monday = 
 " Manic Monday " is a song by the American pop rock band The Bangles , and the first single released from their second studio album , Different Light ( 1986 ) . It was written by American musician Prince , using the pseudonym " Christopher " . Originally intended for the group Apollonia 6 in 1984 , he offered the song to The Bangles two years later . Lyrically , it describes a woman who is waking up to go to work on Monday , wishing it were still Sunday where she could relax . 
 The song , which was released on Monday January 27 , 1986 by Columbia Records , received generally positive reviews from music critics and some comparisons with The Mamas & the Papas ' " Monday , Monday " . It became The Bangles ' first hit , reaching number two in the United States and the United Kingdom , as well as in Austria , Canada , Germany and Ireland , and peaked within the top five of New Zealand , Norway and Switzerland . It was later certified silver in the UK by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . The song has been covered by a number of other artists . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Prince wrote " Manic Monday " in 1984 , and recorded it as a duet for the band Apollonia 6 's self @-@ titled album ; however , he eventually pulled the song . Two years later , he offered the single to The Bangles under the pseudonym " Christopher " , a character he played in the 1986 film Under the Cherry Moon . It was rumored by various writers that after Prince listened to the band 's 1984 debut album All Over the Place , he gave the song to Bangles rhythm guitarist Susanna Hoffs , so that in return she would sleep with him . 
 Debbi Peterson explained in an interview with MTV UK in 1989 about why Prince gave them the song : " [ Prince ] really liked our first album . He liked the song ' Hero Takes a Fall ' , which is a great compliment , because we liked his music . He contacted us , and said , ' I 've got a couple of songs for you . I 'd like to know if you 're interested , ' and of course we were . One of the songs Prince brought to the group was ' Manic Monday ' , written under the pseudonym of Christopher . " Peterson talked about the evolution of what Prince brought them : " It was a <unk> of a Prince arrangement . He had a demo , that was very specifically him . It was a good song , but we didn 't record it like ' This is our first hit single ! Oh my God ! I can feel it in my veins ! ' We just did the song , and the album , and then sat back and thought about it . " 
 A pop song written in D Major , " Manic Monday " moves at a tempo of 116 beats per minute and is set in common time . The song has a sequence of G – A7 – D – G – A7 – D as its chord progression . Lyrically , the song is about someone waking up from a romantic dream at six o 'clock on Monday morning , and facing a hectic journey to work when she would prefer to still be enjoying relaxing on Sunday — her " I @-@ don 't @-@ have @-@ to @-@ run day " . Actor Rudolph Valentino is referred in the first verse . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The single received generally positive reviews by music critics , some of them compared the song with the single " Monday , Monday " by the band The Mamas & the Papas . In a review for AllMusic , Mark Deming said that the single " was a far cry from anything the Bangles had recorded before " ; while Matthew Greenwald , also from the website , said " It 's a clever and deceptively simple pop narrative , an infectious pop confection ... There is also an excellently written bridge that shows Prince / Christopher to be an excellent craftsman , and , to their credit , the Bangles carry it off with style and wit " . Robert Hilburn from Los Angeles Times called the song " a candidate for best single of the year " . Dorian Lynskey commented about the painful rhyming of " Sunday " with " I @-@ don 't @-@ have @-@ to @-@ run day . " 
 Mark Moses from The Phoenix noted " the lack of lyrical substance is so glaring that Prince 's lame ' Manic Monday ' seems like a thematic highlight " . Greg Baker of The Miami News wrote in the album 's review that " the song should put [ T ] he Bangles on the ' pop ' n ' roll ' map " . A writer in Toledo Blade noted that " Manic Monday " , is a " infectious " and , along with " If She Knew What She Wants " , both are " refreshingly melodic " . Chris Willman from Los Angeles Times commented : " The first single ' Manic Monday ' represents slumming songwriter Prince 's attempt mostly successful save for the inevitable getting down interlude to concoct a modern day Mamas and the Papas hit . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Manic Monday " debuted at number eighty @-@ six on the Billboard Hot 100 , on the week ending January 25 , 1986 , and reached a peak of number two , on the issue dated April 19 , 1986 , being blocked from the top of the chart by Prince and the Revolution 's single " Kiss " . In the United Kingdom " Manic Monday " debuted at number eighty @-@ five on February 8 , 1986 , and entered the top forty , at number twenty @-@ four , on February 22 , 1986 . The song eventually reached its peak position , at number two , the next month . In Germany , the single debuted at number twenty @-@ nine on March 17 , 1986 , reaching the top ten in the next three weeks , and its peak , also at number two , on April 14 , 1986 , where it stayed two weeks . It remained in the top ten for four more weeks leaving the charts on July 20 , 1986 . 
 In Switzerland " Manic Monday " debuted at number twelve on March 30 , 1986 , becoming the highest debut of the week . It reached its peak two weeks later at number four , where it remained another week . In the Netherlands , the single debuted at number forty @-@ three on February 22 , 1986 ; and managed to reach the number twenty @-@ four . It stayed on the chart for seven weeks . In Norway , " Manic Monday " debuted at number nine in the tenth week of 1986 , becoming the second highest debut of the week . It also reached the number four two weeks later , where it stayed another two . The song also peaked within the top five in the Austrian , the Irish , and the New Zealand charts . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Manic Monday " has been covered by several artists . The Chipettes covered the song for the 1986 Alvin and the Chipmunks episode " Sweet Smell of Success " . A cover by Japanese rock band Missile Innovation was included on their self @-@ titled mini @-@ album , released on July 27 , 2005 . The Japanese J @-@ Pop singer Bonnie Pink included it on her cover album Reminiscence . In 2005 , the Christian rock band Relient K covered the song for the compilation album Punk Goes 80 's . In his album review for AllMusic , Tim Sendra described the cover as " quirky " , and it resulted " [ somehow ] a tribute to Quiet Riot " . In 2006 , the Finnish rock band Leningrad Cowboys covered the song on their seventh studio album Zombies Paradise . In 2014 , the song was covered by British singer Sophie Ellis @-@ Bextor for a live performance at ITV 's program Weekend , featuring Ed Harcourt at the piano . Swedish band Drifters recorded the song on the 2010 album <unk> hos <unk> . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Prince Nelson as " Christopher " – writer and composer 
 David Kahne – producer 
 Susanna Hoffs – lead vocals , guitar 
 Vicki Peterson – guitar , background vocals 
 Michael Steele – bass , background vocals 
 Debbi Peterson – drums 
 Leslie Libman – music video director 
 Source : 
 = = Charts and certification = = 
 = North American river otter = 
 The North American river otter ( Lontra canadensis ) , also known as the northern river otter or the common otter , is a semiaquatic mammal endemic to the North American continent found in and along its waterways and coasts . An adult river otter can weigh between 5 @.@ 0 and 14 kg ( 11 @.@ 0 and 30 @.@ 9 lb ) . The river otter is protected and insulated by a thick , water @-@ repellent coat of fur . 
 The river otter , a member of the subfamily <unk> in the weasel family ( Mustelidae ) , is equally versatile in the water and on land . It establishes a burrow close to the water 's edge in river , lake , swamp , coastal shoreline , tidal flat , or estuary ecosystems . The den typically has many tunnel openings , one of which generally allows the otter to enter and exit the body of water . Female otters give birth in these underground burrows , producing litters of one to six young . 
 North American river otters , like most predators , prey upon the most readily accessible species . Fish is a favored food among the otters , but they also consume various amphibians ( such as salamanders and frogs ) , freshwater clams , mussels , snails , small turtles and crayfish . Instances of river otters eating small mammals and occasionally birds have been reported as well . 
 The range of the North American river otter has been significantly reduced by habitat loss , beginning with the European colonization of North America . In some regions , though , their population is controlled to allow the trapping and harvesting of otters for their pelts . River otters are very susceptible to the effects of environmental pollution , which is a likely factor in the continued decline of their numbers . A number of reintroduction projects have been initiated to help stabilize the reduction in the overall population . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The North American river otter was first described by German naturalist Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber in 1777 . The mammal was identified as a species of otter and has a variety of common names , including North American river otter , northern river otter , common otter and , simply , river otter . Other documented common names are American otter , Canada otter , Canadian otter , fish otter , land otter , <unk> river otter , and Prince of Wales otter . 
 The river otter was first classified in the genus Lutra ; Lutra was the early European name . The species name was Lutra canadensis . The species epithet canadensis means " of Canada " . 
 In a new classification , the species is called Lontra canadensis , where the genus Lontra includes all the New World river otters . Molecular biological techniques have been used to determine when the river otter and the giant otter diverged . These analyses suggest they diverged in the Miocene epoch 23 @.@ 03 to 5 @.@ 33 million years ago ( Mya ) , which is " much earlier " than indicated in the fossil record . Fossils of a giant river otter dating back 3 @.@ 5 Mya have been found in the US Midwest , however fossils of the modern river otter did not appear in North America until about 1 @.@ 9 Mya . The earliest known fossil of Lontra canadensis , found in the US Midwest , is from the Irvingtonian stage ( 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 to 300 @,@ 000 years ago ) . The oldest fossil record of an Old World river otter comes from the late Pliocene epoch ( 3 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 8 Mya ) . The New World river otters originated from the Old World river otters after a migration across the Bering Land Bridge , which existed off and on between 1 @.@ 8 million and 10 @,@ 000 years ago . The otters migrated to North America and southwards again across the Panamanian Land Bridge , which formed 3 Mya . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Listed alphabetically 
 L. c. canadensis ( Schreber , 1777 ) – ( eastern Canada , USA , Newfoundland ) 
 L. c. <unk> ( Goldman , 1935 ) – ( Kodiak Islands , Alaska ) 
 L. c. <unk> ( Cuvier , 1823 ) – ( USA ) 
 L. c. mira ( Goldman , 1935 ) – ( Alaska , British Columbia ) 
 L. c. pacifica ( J. A. Allen , 1898 ) – ( Alaska , Canada , northern USA , south to central California , northern Nevada , and northeastern Utah ) 
 L. c. <unk> ( Elliot , 1905 ) – ( British Columbia ) 
 L. c. <unk> ( Rhoads , 1898 ) – ( USA , Mexico ) 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 The North American river otter is a stocky animal of 5 to 14 kilograms ( 11 to 31 lb ) , with short legs , a muscular neck no smaller than the head , and an elongated body that is broadest at the hips . An average adult male weighs about 11 @.@ 3 kilograms ( 25 lb ) against the female 's average of 8 @.@ 3 kilograms ( 18 lb ) . Its body length ranges from 66 to 107 centimetres ( 26 to 42 in ) . About one @-@ third of the animal 's total length consists of a long , tapered tail . Tail lengths range from 30 to 50 centimetres ( 12 to 20 in ) . Large male North American river otters can exceed a weight of 15 kilograms ( 33 lb ) . It differs from the European otter by its longer neck , narrower visage , the smaller space between the ears and its shorter tail . 
 A broad muzzle is found on the river otter 's flat head , and the ears are round and inconspicuous . The rhinarium is bare , with an obtuse , triangular projection . Eyes of the animal are small and placed anteriorly . A short , broad rostrum for exhaling and a long , broad cranium define the relatively flat skull . The river otter 's nostrils and ears close during submersion , inhibiting water from entering them . Its vibrissae ( whiskers ) are long and thick , enhancing sensory perception underwater and on land . 
 The fur of the species is short ( guard hairs average 23 @.@ 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 94 in ) ) , with a density of about 57 @,@ 800 hairs / cm2 ( 373 @,@ 000 hairs / in2 ) in the <unk> section . The pelage has a high luster and varies from light brown to black . The throat , chin , and lips are grayer than the rest of the body . Fur of <unk> river otters may become white @-@ tipped , and rare albinos may occur . 
 Sexual dimorphism exists among the river otters . Males are , on average , 5 % larger than females . In Idaho , juvenile , yearling , and adult males averaged 8 , 11 , and 17 % heavier , respectively , than females of the same age . A clinical reduction in size may exist from north to south along the Pacific coast , but not from east to west . 
 North American river otters live an average of 21 years of age in captivity , but they can reach 25 years of age . However , they normally live about 8 to 9 years in the wild , but are capable of living up to 13 years of age . 
 = = = Form and function = = = 
 The river otter is physically well @-@ equipped for aquatic life . The ears are short , the neck is the same diameter as the head , the legs are short and powerful , the toes are fully webbed , and the tail ( one @-@ third of body length ) is tapered . These qualities give the river otter a streamlined profile in water , but reduce agility on land . The smell and hearing abilities of the river otter are acute . The otter has a delicate sense of touch in the paws in addition to great dexterity . River otters characteristically approach within a few feet of a boat or a person on shore because they 're near @-@ sighted , a consequence of vision adapted for underwater sight . River otters have transparent nictitating membranes to protect their eyes while swimming . 
 The right lung of the river otter is larger than the left , having four lobes compared with two for the left . Reduced <unk> of the lungs is presumed to be adaptive for underwater swimming . In addition , the length of the trachea of the river otter is intermediate between that of terrestrial carnivores and marine mammals . The mean tracheal length of the river otter is 15 @.@ 3 cm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) , or 23 @.@ 2 % of the body length . A shorter trachea may improve air exchange and increase lung ventilation in diving mammals . 
 Most mustelids , including otters , have specialized teeth , including sharp canines and carnassials that inflict lethal bites to prey . Also , river otters have large molars used for crushing hard objects , such as the shells of molluscs . An adult river otter has a total of 36 teeth . Additional premolars may be present . The dental formula is 3 @.@ 1 @.@ 4 @.@ 13 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 2 . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 River otters are active year @-@ round , and are most active at night and during crepuscular hours . They become much more nocturnal in the spring , summer , and fall seasons , and more diurnal during winter . They may migrate as a result of food shortages or environmental conditions , but they do not migrate annually . 
 = = = Movement = = = 
 Otters swim by quadrupedal paddling , forelimb paddling , alternate hind @-@ limb paddling , simultaneous hind @-@ limb paddling , or body and tail dorsoventral undulation . The tail , which is stout and larger in surface area than the limbs , is used for stability while swimming and for short bursts of rapid propulsion . While swimming at the surface , the dorsal portion of the river otter 's head , including nostrils , ears , and eyes , is exposed above water . It must remain in motion to maintain its position at the surface . 
 On land , the river otter can walk , run , bound , or slide . Foot falls during walking and running follow the sequence of left limb , right limb , right limb , left limb . During walking , the limbs are moved in a plane parallel to the long axis of the body . <unk> is the result of simultaneous lifting of the limbs off the ground . As the front feet make contact with the ground , the back feet are lifted and land where the front paws first contacted the ground , producing a pattern of tracks in pairs typical of most mustelids . Sliding occurs mostly on even surfaces of snow or ice , but can also occur on grassy slopes and muddy banks . Sliding across snow and ice is a rapid and efficient means of travel , and otters traveling over mountain passes , between drainages , or descending from mountain lakes often slide continuously for several hundred meters . Rear leg paddling enables continuous sliding where gravity is an insufficient or an opposing force . During winter , the river otters heavily use openings in the ice , and may excavate passages in beaver dams for accessing open water . 
 North American river otters are highly mobile and have the capacity of traveling up to 42 km ( 26 mi ) in one day . Daily movements of yearling males and females in Idaho averaged 4 @.@ 7 and 2 @.@ 4 km ( 2 @.@ 9 and 1 @.@ 5 mi ) in spring , 5 @.@ 1 and 4 @.@ 0 km ( 3 @.@ 2 and 2 @.@ 5 mi ) in summer , and 5 @.@ 0 and 3 @.@ 3 km ( 3 @.@ 1 and 2 @.@ 1 mi ) in autumn , respectively . Daily movements of family groups averaged 4 @.@ 7 , 4 @.@ 4 , and 2 @.@ 4 km ( 2 @.@ 9 , 2 @.@ 7 , and 1 @.@ 5 mi ) in spring , summer , and winter , respectively . Both males and family groups travel drastically less during winter . 
 = = = Playing = = = 
 River otters are renowned for their sense of play . Otter play mostly consists of wrestling with conspecifics . Chasing is also a common game . River otters rely upon play to learn survival skills such as fighting and hunting . However , playful behavior was found in only 6 % of 294 observations in a study in Idaho , and was limited mostly to immature otters . 
 = = = Hunting = = = 
 Prey is captured with a quick lunge from ambush , or more rarely , after a sustained chase . River otters can remain underwater for nearly 4 minutes , swim at speeds approaching 11 km / h ( 6 @.@ 8 mph ) , dive to depths nearing 20 m ( 22 yd ) , and travel up to 400 m ( 440 yd ) while underwater . Several river otters may even cooperate while fishing . Small fish are eaten at the surface , but larger ones are taken to the shore to be consumed . Live fish are typically eaten from the head . 
 River otters dry themselves and uphold the insulative quality of their fur by frequent rubbing and rolling on grass , bare ground , and logs . 
 A highly active predator , the river otter has adapted to hunting in water , and eats aquatic and semiaquatic animals . The vulnerability and seasonal availability of prey animals mainly governs its food habits and prey choices . This availability is influenced by the following factors : detectability and mobility of the prey , habitat availability for the various prey species , environmental factors , such as water depth and temperature , and seasonal changes in prey supply and distribution in correspondence with otter foraging habitat . 
 The diet of the river otter can be deduced by analyzing either scat obtained in the field , or gut contents removed from trapped otters . Fish are the primary component of the river otter 's diet throughout the year . Every study done on the food habits of the river otter has identified varying fish species as being the primary component of its diet . For instance , an Alberta , Canada study involved the collection and analysis of 1 @,@ 191 samples of river otter scats collected during each season . Fish remnants were found present in 91 @.@ 9 % of the scat samples . Moreover , a western Oregon study revealed fish remains were present in 80 % of the 103 digestive tracts examined . Crustaceans ( crayfish ) , where regionally available , are the second @-@ most important prey for otters . Crustaceans may even be consumed more than fish . For example , a study conducted in a central California marshland indicated crayfish formed nearly 100 % of the river otter 's diet at certain times of the year . However , river otters , as foragers , will immediately take advantage of other prey when readily obtainable . Other prey consumed by river otters includes fruits , reptiles , amphibians , birds ( most especially moulting ducks which render the birds flightless and thus makes them easier to capture ) , aquatic insects , small mammals , and mollusks . River otters are not scavengers ; they avoid consuming carrion . Northern river otters do not generally handle prey of a large size relative to themselves but there are occasions where they 've been observed ambushing and killing adult common snapping turtles while the large turtles ( which are roughly equal in average body weight to a river otter ) are hibernating . Remains of the much larger American beaver have been found in otter scat in some regions , although most otter dietary studies in areas where otters and beaver are sympatric do not show them to be regular predators of beavers ( despite the claims of fur @-@ trappers that otters frequently hunt beavers ) and perhaps only young beaver kits may be attacked . 
 Otters do not dramatically reduce prey populations in the wild , generally speaking . When a copious supply of food dwindles or other prey becomes available , otters either transfer to a new location or convert their dietary choices to the most adequate prey . When left unchecked , though , otter depredations can be quite significant under certain circumstances ( e.g. in hatcheries or other fish culture facilities ) . Likewise , the potential predatory impact of otters may be considerable whenever fish are physically confined ( most commonly in smaller ponds offering sparse cover or other escape options ) . Resolution of such conflicts will usually require removal and / or relocation of nuisance otters . Even in larger bodies of water , they may take disproportional advantage of any seasonal concentrations of fish when and where only very limited areas of suitable spawning , low @-@ flow , or over @-@ wintering habitat may exist . Even such fast @-@ swimming species as trout become lethargic in extremely cold water , with a commensurate increase in their vulnerability to predation . As such , careful consideration of any threatened , endangered , or fish species of special interest is warranted prior to reintroduction of otters to a watershed . Although other prey species are of temporary significance to the river otter , the deciding factor whether the river otter can establish itself as a permanent resident of one location is the year @-@ round availability of fish . 
 There are reports of photographs of retrieving otters that were used by hunters near Butte , Nebraska . 
 = = = Social behavior = = = 
 The North American river otter is more social than most mustelids . In all habitats , their basic social group is the family , consisting of an adult female and her progeny . Adult males also commonly establish enduring social groupings , some documented to comprise as many as 17 individuals . In coastal areas , males may remain gregarious even during the estrous period of females . Family groups may include helpers , which can be made up of unrelated adults , yearlings , or juveniles . Male otters disperse from such family groups more often than females . When females leave , they tend to move much further away ( 60 – 90 km or 37 – 56 mi ) than males ( up to 30 km or 19 mi ) , which tend to move shorter distances . Male river otters do not seem to be territorial , and newly dispersing males may join established male groups . On occasion , groups of unrelated juveniles are observed . River otters living in groups hunt and travel together , use the same dens , resting sites , and latrines , and perform allogrooming . In freshwater systems , groups occur most often in autumn and during early winter . From mid @-@ winter through the breeding season , adult females move and den alone . River otters are not territorial , but individual otters of different groups portray mutual avoidance . Home ranges of males are larger than those of females , and both sexes exhibit intra- and intersexual overlap of their domains . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 Communication among North American river otters is accomplished mainly by olfactory and auditory signals . Scent marking is imperative for intergroup communication . The river otter scent @-@ marks with feces , urine , and possibly anal sac secretions . Musk from the scent glands may also be secreted when otters are frightened or angry . 
 River otters can produce a snarling growl or hissing bark when bothered , and a shrill whistle when in pain . When at play or traveling , they sometimes give off low , purring grunts . The alarm call , given when shocked or distressed by potential danger , is an explosive snort , made by expelling air through the nostrils . River otters also may use a birdlike chirp for communication over longer distances , but the most common sound heard among a group of otters is low @-@ frequency chuckling . 
 = = = Reproduction and life cycle = = = 
 North American river otters are polygynous . Females usually do not reproduce until two years of age , although yearlings produce offspring on occasion . Males are sexually mature at two years of age . The number of corpora lutea increases directly with age . 
 River otters typically breed from December to April . Copulation lasts from 16 – 73 minutes and may occur in water or on land . During the breeding , the male grabs the female by the neck with his teeth . Copulation is vigorous , and is interrupted by periods of rest . Females may caterwaul during or shortly after mating . Female estrus lasts about a month per year , and true gestation lasts 61 – 63 days . Because the otters delay implantation for at least eight months , the interval between copulation and parturition can reach 10 – 12 months . Delayed implantation distinguishes the species from the European otter , which lacks this feature . Young are born between February and April , and parturition lasts three to eight hours . 
 In early spring , expectant mothers begin to look for a den where they can give birth . The female otters do not dig their own dens ; instead , they rely on other animals , such as beavers , to provide suitable environments to raise their offspring . When the mothers have established their domains , they give birth to several kits . Litter size can reach five , but usually ranges from one to three . Each otter pup weighs approximately five ounces . At birth , the river otters are fully furred , blind , and toothless . The claws are well @-@ formed and facial vibrissae ( about 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) long ) are present . The kits open their eyes after 30 – 38 days . The newborns start playing at five to six weeks , and begin consuming solid food at 9 – 10 weeks . Weaning occurs at 12 weeks , and females provide solid food for their progeny until 37 – 38 weeks have transpired . The maximum weight and length of both sexes are attained at three to four years of age . 
 The mothers raise their young without aid from adult males . When the pups are about two months old and their coats grow in , their mother introduces them to the water . Otters are natural swimmers and , with parental supervision , they acquire the skills necessary to swim . The otters may leave the den by eight weeks and are capable of sustaining themselves upon the arrival of fall , but they usually stay with their families , which sometimes include the father , until the following spring . Prior to the arrival of the next litter , the otter yearlings venture out in search of their own home ranges . 
 = = Geographic range = = 
 The North American river otter is found throughout North America , inhabiting inland waterways and coastal areas in Canada , the Pacific Northwest , the Atlantic states , and the Gulf of Mexico . River otters also currently inhabit coastal regions throughout the United States and Canada . North American river otters also inhabit the forested regions of the Pacific coast in North America . The species is also present throughout Alaska , including the Aleutian Islands , and the north slope of the Brooks Range . 
 However , urbanization and pollution instigated reductions in range area . They are now absent or rare in Arizona , Hawaii , Kansas , Kentucky , Nebraska , New Mexico , North Dakota , Ohio , Oklahoma , South Dakota , Tennessee , and West Virginia . Reintroduction projects have expanded their distribution in recent years , especially in the Midwestern United States . In 2010 , the Colorado Department of Wildlife reported the species , reintroduced in the 1980s , was " thriving " and recommended its protection status be reconsidered . In late 2012 , a river otter nicknamed Sutro Sam took up residence around the former site of the Sutro Baths in San Francisco , the first river otter sighting in that city in more than half a century . In Canada , North American river otters occupy all provinces and territories , except for Prince Edward Island . 
 Historical records indicate river otters were once populous throughout most major drainages in the continental United States and Canada prior to European settlement . North America ’ s largest otter populations were found in areas with an abundance and diversity of aquatic habitats , such as coastal marshes , the Great Lakes region , and glaciated areas of New England . In addition , riverine habitats in interior regions supported smaller , but practical , otter populations . The otter existed on all parts of the Pacific Coast , including the seashore and inland streams and lakes . However , large populations never occurred in areas of Southern California such as the chaparral and oak woodlands and Mojave Desert seasonal waterway regions , or in the xeric shrubland regions in New Mexico , Texas , Nevada , and Colorado . In Mexico , the otters lived in the Rio Grande and Colorado River Deltas . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 Although commonly called a " river otter " , the North American river otter is found in a wide variety of aquatic habitats , both freshwater and coastal marine , including lakes , rivers , inland wetlands , coastal shorelines , marshes , and estuaries . It can tolerate a great range of temperature and elevations . A river otter 's main requirements are a steady food supply and easy access to a body of water . However , it is sensitive to pollution , and will disappear from tainted areas . 
 Like other otters , the North American river otter lives in a holt , or den , constructed in the burrows of other animals , or in natural hollows , such as under a log or in river banks . An entrance , which may be under water or above ground , leads to a nest chamber lined with leaves , grass , moss , bark , and hair . Den sites include burrows dug by woodchucks ( Marmota <unk> ) , red foxes ( Vulpes vulpes ) , nutria ( <unk> <unk> ) , or beaver and muskrat lodges . River otters also may use hollow trees or logs , undercut banks , rock formations , backwater sloughs , and flood debris . The use of den and resting sites is chiefly opportunistic , although locations that provide protection and seclusion are preferred . 
 = = = Population localization = = = 
 Aquatic life ties North American river otters almost exclusively to permanent watersheds . The river otters favor bog lakes with banked shores containing semiaquatic mammal burrows and lakes with beaver lodges . The otters avoid water bodies with gradually sloping shorelines of sand or gravel . In Maine , use of watersheds by river otters is negatively associated with the proportion of mixed hardwood @-@ softwood stands in forested areas adjacent to waterways . However , it is positively associated with the number of beaver <unk> , watershed length , and average shoreline diversity . In Idaho , river otters prefer valley habitats over mountainous terrain , and they select valley streams over valley lakes , reservoirs , and ponds . Log jams are heavily used when present . In Florida , inhabitation of North American river otters is lowest in freshwater marshes , intermediate in salt marshes , and highest in swamp forests . During the dry season , they will recede from the marshland and move to permanent ponds , where water is available and food is in greater supply . In Idaho and Massachusetts , ecological elements preferred for latrine sites include large conifers , points of land , beaver bank dens and lodges , <unk> , mouths of permanent streams , or any object that protrudes from the water . 
 River otters often reside in beaver ponds . Encounters between otters and beavers are not necessarily hostile . In Idaho , otters and beavers were recorded in the same beaver lodge simultaneously on three separate occasions . The otters may compete with the American mink ( Mustela vison ) for resources . In Alaska , the two species living in marine environments indicate niche separation through resource partitioning , probably related to the swimming abilities of these mustelids . 
 = = = Fish = = = 
 River otters consume an extensive assortment of fish species ranging in size from 2 to 50 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 79 to 19 @.@ 69 in ) that impart sufficient caloric intake for a minute amount of energy expenditure . River otters generally feed on prey that is in larger supply and easier to catch . As a result , slow @-@ swimming fish are consumed more often than game fishes when both are equally available . Slow @-@ moving species include suckers ( Catostomidae ) , catfish , sunfish and bass ( <unk> ) ; and <unk> , carp , and shiners ( Cyprinidae ) . For instance , Catostomidae are the primary dietary component of river otters in Colorado 's Upper Colorado River Basin . Likewise , the common carp ( Cyprinus carpio ) is a preferred fish species for the otter in other regions of Colorado . Fish species frequently found in the diets of the North American river otters include : Catostomidae , which consists of suckers ( <unk> spp . ) and <unk> ( <unk> spp . ) ; Cyprinidae , made up of carp ( Cyprinus spp . ) , chubs ( <unk> spp . ) , <unk> ( <unk> spp . ) , shiners ( Notropis and <unk> spp . ) , and <unk> ( <unk> spp . ) ; and <unk> , which consists of <unk> and catfish ( Ictalurus spp . ) . Other fish an integral part of the river otters ' diets are those that are often plentiful and found in large schools : sunfish ( Lepomis spp . ) ; darters ( <unk> spp . ) ; and perches ( Perca spp . ) . Bottom @-@ dwelling species , which have the tendency to remain immobile until a predator is very close , are susceptible to river otters . These include <unk> ( Umbra <unk> ) and sculpins ( Cottus spp . ) . Game fish , such as trout ( Salmonidae ) and pike ( <unk> ) , are not a significant component of their diets . They are less likely to be prey for the North American river otters since they are fast @-@ swimming and can find good escape cover . However , river otters will prey on trout , pike , walleye ( Sander <unk> <unk> ) , salmon ( Oncorhynchus spp . ) , and other game fish during spawning . 
 Adult river otters are capable of consuming 1 to 1 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 2 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 3 lb ) of fish per day . A study conducted on captive otters revealed they preferred larger fish , ranging from 15 to 17 centimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 to 6 @.@ 7 in ) , more than smaller fish , ranging from 8 to 10 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 1 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) , and they had difficulty catching fish species less than 10 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) or larger than 17 centimeters ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) . Otters are known to take larger fish on land to eat , whereas smaller fish are consumed in the water . 
 = = = Crustaceans = = = 
 Otters may prefer to feed on crustaceans , especially crayfish ( <unk> , <unk> , and others ) more than fish where they are locally and seasonally plentiful . In Georgia , crayfish accounted for two @-@ thirds of the prey in the summer diet , and their remnants were present in 98 % of the summer <unk> . In the winter , crayfish made up one @-@ third of the otter 's diet . A study conducted on North American river otters in a southwestern Arkansas swamp identified a correlation between crayfish consumption , fish consumption , and water levels . 
 During the winter and spring , when the water levels were higher , otters had a greater tendency to prey upon crayfish ( 73 % of scats had crayfish remains ) rather than fish . However , when water levels are lower , crayfish will seek out shelter while fish become more highly concentrated and susceptible to predation . Therefore , fish are more vulnerable to being preyed upon by otters because the crayfish have become more difficult to obtain . 
 = = = Reptiles and amphibians = = = 
 Amphibians , where regionally accessible , have been found in the river otter 's diet during the spring and summer months , as indicated in many of the food habit studies . The most common amphibians recognized were frogs ( Rana and Hyla ) . Specific species of reptiles and amphibians prey include : boreal chorus frogs ( Pseudacris maculata ) ; Canadian toads ( Bufo <unk> ) ; wood frogs ( Rana sylvatica ) ; bullfrogs ( Rana catesbeiana ) ; green frogs ( Rana clamitans ) ; northwestern salamanders ( Ambystoma gracile ) ; Pacific giant salamander ( Dicamptodon <unk> ) ; rough @-@ skinned newt ( Taricha granulosa ) ; and garter snakes ( Thamnophis ) . 
 Amphibians and reptiles are more obtainable by the river otter during the spring and summer as a result of breeding activity , appropriate temperatures , and water supply for the prey . 
 = = = Birds = = = 
 Waterfowl , rails , and some colonial nesting birds are preyed upon by otters in various areas . Susceptibility of these species is greatest during the summer ( when waterfowl broods are vulnerable ) and autumn . The otters have also been known to catch and consume moulting American wigeon ( <unk> americana ) and green @-@ winged teal ( Anas crecca ) . Other species of birds found within their diets include : northern pintail ( Anas acuta ) ; mallard ( Anas platyrhynchos ) ; <unk> ( Aythya <unk> ) ; ruddy duck ( <unk> jamaicensis ) ; and the American coot ( Fulica americana ) . 
 Although they consume birds , river otters do not feed on bird eggs . 
 = = = Insects = = = 
 Aquatic invertebrates have been recognized as an integral part of the river otter 's diet . Otters consume more aquatic insects in the summer as the populations increase and specific life stages heighten their susceptibility . Most aquatic invertebrates preyed upon by the otters are from the families Odonata ( dragonfly nymphs ) , Plecoptera ( stonefly nymphs ) , and Coleoptera ( adult beetles ) . Invertebrates discovered within scats or digestive tracts could most likely be a secondary food item , first being consumed by the fish that are subsequently preyed upon by the otters . 
 = = = Mammals = = = 
 Mammals are rarely consumed by river otters , and are not a major dietary component . Mammals preyed upon by otters are characteristically small or are a type species found in riparian zones . The few occurrences of mammals found in the river otter 's diet include : muskrats ( Ondatra zibethicus ) ; meadow voles ( Microtus pennsylvanicus ) ; eastern cottontails ( Sylvilagus floridanus ) ; and snowshoe hares ( Lepus americanus ) . 
 Records of otters preying upon beavers ( Castor canadensis ) vary ; it has been reported in the southern boreal forest of Manitoba . Trappers in Alberta , Canada commonly assert otters are major predators of beavers . A 1994 river otter study reported findings of beaver remains in 27 of 1 @,@ 191 scats analyzed . However , many other studies did not report any findings of beaver remains in the scat sampled . 
 = = Threats = = 
 The otter has few natural predators when in water . Aquatic predators include the alligator ( Alligator mississippiensis ) , American crocodile ( Crocodylus acutus ) , killer whales ( Orcinus orca ) , and sharks , none of which commonly coexist with this otter and thus rarely pose a threat . On land or ice , the river otter is considerably more vulnerable . Terrestrial predators include the coyote ( Canis latrans ) , bobcat ( Lynx rufus ) , lynx ( Lynx canadensis ) , domestic dog ( Canis lupus familiaris ) , wolf ( Canis lupus ) , mountain lion ( Felis concolor ) , black bear ( Ursus americanus ) and ( in young or small otters ) red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) . Most river otter mortality is caused by human @-@ related factors , such as trapping , illegal shooting , <unk> , and accidental captures in fish nets or set lines . Accidental deaths may be the result of ice flows or shifting rocks . Starvation may occur due to excessive tooth damage . 
 Threats to otter populations in North America vary regionally . Otter inhabitation is affected by type , distribution , and density of aquatic habitats and characteristics of human activities . Preceding the settlement of North America by Europeans , otters were prevalent among aquatic habitats throughout most of the continent . Trapping , loss or degradation of aquatic habitats through filling of wetlands , and development of coal , oil , gas , tanning , timber , and other industries , resulted in extirpations , or declines , in otter populations in many areas . In 1980 , an examination conducted on U.S. river otter populations determined they were extirpated in 11 states , and had experienced drastic lapses in 9 others . The most severe population declines occurred in interior regions where fewer aquatic habitats supported fewer otter populations . Although the distribution became reduced in some regions of southern Canada , the only province @-@ wide extirpation occurred on Prince Edward Island . 
 During the 1970s , improvements in natural resource management techniques emerged , along with increased concerns about otter population declines in North America . Consequently , many wildlife management agencies developed strategies to restore or enhance otter populations , including the use of reintroduction projects . Since 1976 , over 4 @,@ 000 otters have been reintroduced in 21 U.S. states . All Canadian provinces except Prince Edward Island and 29 U.S. states have viable populations that sustain annual harvests . Annual harvest numbers of northern river otters are similar for Canada and the United States , with most pelts being used in the garment industry . In the late 1970s , annual harvest in North America reached approximately 50 @,@ 000 pelts , for a value of US $ 3 million . Otters are inadvertently harvested by traps set for beavers , and therefore management plans should consider both species simultaneously . While current harvest strategies do not pose a threat to maintaining otter populations , harvest may limit expansion of otter populations in some areas . Otter harvests correlate positively with the beaver harvests and with the average beaver pelt price from the preceding year . Fur of the river otter is thick and lustrous and is the most durable of Native American furs . River otter pelts are used as the standard for rating the quality of other pelts . 
 Oil spills present a localized threat to otter populations , especially in coastal areas . Water pollution and other diminution of aquatic and wetland habitats may limit distribution and pose long @-@ term threats if the enforcement of water quality standards is not upheld . Acid drainage from coal mines is a persistent water quality issue in some areas , as it eliminates otter prey . This dilemma prevents , and consequently inhibits , recolonization or growth of otter populations . Recently , long @-@ term genetic consequences of reintroduction projects on remnant otter populations has been discussed . Similarly , many perceived threats to otters , such as pollution and habitat alterations , have not been rigorously evaluated . Little effort has gone into assessing the threat of disease to wild river otter populations , so it is poorly understood and documented . River otters may be victims of canine distemper , rabies , respiratory tract disease , and urinary infection . In addition , North American river otters can contract jaundice , hepatitis , feline <unk> , and pneumonia . They host numerous endoparasites , such as nematodes , cestodes , trematodes , the <unk> <unk> , and <unk> . Ectoparasites include ticks , sucking lice ( <unk> <unk> ) , and fleas ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 Lontra canadensis is listed in Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora . They have been virtually eliminated through many parts of their range , especially around heavily populated areas in the midwestern and eastern United States . Appendix II lists species that are not necessarily threatened with extinction currently , but may become so unless trade is closely controlled . 
 The North American river otter is considered a species of least concern according to the IUCN Red List , as it is not currently declining at a rate sufficient for a threat category . By the early 1900s , river otter populations had declined throughout large portions of their historic range in North America . However , improvements in water quality ( through enactment of clean water regulations ) and furbearer management techniques have permitted river otters to regain portions of their range in many areas . Reintroduction projects have been particularly valuable in restoring populations in many areas of the United States . However , river otters remain rare or absent in the southwestern United States . Water quality and development inhibit recovery of populations in some areas . The species is widely distributed throughout its range . In many places , the populations have re @-@ established themselves because of conservation initiatives . Reintroduction of river otters may present a problem in that it may contaminate the genetic structure of the native population . 
 Habitat degradation and pollution are major threats to their conservation ; river otters are highly sensitive to pollution and readily accumulate high levels of mercury , organochloride compounds , and other chemical elements . The species is often used as a bioindicator because of its position at the top of the food chain in aquatic ecosystems . Environmental disasters , such as oil spills , may increase levels of blood haptoglobin and interleukin @-@ 6 <unk> protein , but decrease body mass . Home ranges of river otters increase in size on oiled areas compared to <unk> areas , and individual otters also modify their habitat use . Declines in the richness and diversity of prey species may explain these changes . 
 = Dales pony = 
 The Dales pony is one of the United Kingdom 's native mountain and moorland pony breeds . The breed is known for its strength , hardiness , stamina , courage , intelligence , and good disposition . The history of the modern Dales pony is strongly linked to the history of lead mining in the Dales area of England , and it was originally a working pony descended from a number of breeds . A breed registry was created in 1916 , and the breed was used extensively by the British Army in both world wars . The Dales pony almost became extinct during the Second World War , but post @-@ war conservation efforts have had some success in rebuilding the population . Today it is used for many different activities , but population numbers are still low and this has led to it being considered " critical " by the Rare Breeds Survival Trust and " threatened " by The Livestock Conservancy . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 The Dales pony is ideally 13 to 14 hands ( 52 to 56 inches , 132 to 142 cm ) . The head is straight , neat , and broad between the eyes , with a fine muzzle and incurving ears . The body is fairly short in the back , with a broad and deep rib cage , long , broad and well @-@ muscled quarters , a well @-@ muscled neck of a good length joining neatly into strong withers and strong sloping shoulders . The legs are very muscular , with hard , dense bone , clearly defined tendons , flexible pasterns , and large round hooves with open heels . The mane , tail and leg feathers are straight , silky and abundant . 
 The majority of Dales ponies are black , though brown , bay , grey and roan colours are also acceptable . The only white markings permitted on the head are a star and / or a snip ; stripes , blazes , and white muzzles are not allowed . The hind legs may have a small amount of white , not extending above the fetlock joint , though ponies with excess white markings may be registered in the B register of the stud book . A Dales pony should move with a great deal of energy and power , lifting the hooves well clear of the ground . The over @-@ all impression should be of an alert , courageous but calm and kind animal . Ponies which do not meet the physical standard set by the breed registry may be registered as " B @-@ status " , meaning that they are of Dales Pony bloodlines but do not have the proper appearance or gaits . Foals by Dales stallions and non @-@ Dales mares may be registered as part @-@ breds . Foals out of Dales mares and non @-@ Dales stallions may not be registered , as the stud book wishes to promote breeding of purebred ponies to maintain the current population levels . 
 = = History = = 
 Horses have been present and used in the Dales area from early times . Horse remains dating to Roman times were found in the Ribchester area of the Dales , during North Pennines Archaeology 's excavations at land behind the Black Bull Inn in 2009 . The Romans themselves named an ancient British tribe to the east of the Pennines the <unk> , or ' horse @-@ riding warriors ' . The history of the modern Dales pony is strongly linked to the history of lead mining in the Dales area of England , which stretches from the Derbyshire peaks to the Scottish borders . Lead has been mined in this area since Roman times , and Richard Scrope , then Chancellor of England , owned lead mines at Wensleydale in the 14th century . Iron ore , fuel for smelting , and finished lead were all carried on pack ponies , with each pony carrying up to 240 lb ( 110 kg ) at a time . Pack pony trains of up to 20 ponies worked ' loose ' ( not led ) , under the supervision of one mounted train leader . 
 The modern Dales pony is descended from a number of breeds , with the original working ponies being bred by crossing the Scottish Galloway pony with native Pennine pony mares in the Dales area in the late 1600s . A century later Norfolk Cob bloodlines were brought into the breed , which traced back to the Darley Arabian , and most Dales ponies today have pedigrees which can trace back directly to this influential horse ( one of the foundation sires of the modern Thoroughbred ) . Clydesdale , Norfolk Trotter , and Yorkshire Roadster blood was added to improve the trotting ability of the Dales . The bloodline of the Welsh Cob stallion Comet was also added during the 19th century to increase the size of the Dales ponies , leaving a lasting resemblance between the two breeds . With their agility , power and speed , the Dales had great success in trotting races of the 18th century and were also used in organized hunts . The Fell pony continued to intermingle with the Dales into the early 20th century . In 1912 , <unk> was chosen as a Fell premium stallion by the Board of Agriculture . In 1924 , he was re @-@ registered as a Dales pony . 
 The Dales pony stud book was opened in 1916 , with the formation of the Dales Pony Improvement Society , after the introduction of Clydesdale blood threatened to affect the quality of the Dales ponies . Stallion premiums were awarded first by the Board of Agriculture , and later by the War Office , to ensure that stallions displaying the best of the breed characteristics were used for breeding . Members of the breed served with the British army in Europe during the First World War . In the early 1920s , 200 Dales ponies were purchased by the British army . The army took only the finest stock , with the least amount of draft blood . The specifications for the purchased ponies were very specific : all were older than five years , stood 14 @.@ 0 to 14 @.@ 2 hands high , weighed at least 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) with a girth measurement of 68 inches ( 170 cm ) , and were able to pack at least 294 pounds ( 133 kg ) in mountainous terrain . 
 The breed almost disappeared during the Second World War as ponies were taken for breeding <unk> ( animals which pulled commercial wagons ) , for work in towns and cities , and for use by the British Army as pack and artillery ponies . Many ponies used by the military in Europe were left behind after the war , and in many cases they were slaughtered for food . The population declined during the war to such an extent that only four new fillies were registered in 1955 . However , the post @-@ war future of the Dales pony was preserved by a small group of breeders , who began to search for unregistered ponies of the proper type . The 1960s saw three Fell pony stallions interbred with Dale mares , to help save the breed . In 1964 the Dales Pony Society underwent reorganisation . At the same time , a " Grading @-@ Up Register " was developed , with the aim of identifying and breeding ponies with characteristics of the original Dales type . The grading @-@ up program was successful , and by 1971 , populations had been rebuilt to the point that the program was discontinued . By the 1990s , the population had grown enough to allow some ponies to be exported – twelve to Canada in 1991 and four to the US in 1994 . By 1999 , there were 60 registered ponies in North America , and an estimated 800 worldwide . In the same year , the Dales Pony Society of America was formed as the official US sub @-@ registry of the UK breed registry . 
 The Dales pony has moved to " critical " status with the Rare Breeds Survival Trust , meaning there is a United Kingdom population of fewer than 300 registered breeding females . The US @-@ based Livestock Conservancy lists the breed as " threatened " , meaning that population numbers worldwide are sub @-@ 5 @,@ 000 and annual US registrations are less than 1 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Dales ponies today compete in show jumping , cross @-@ country , dressage , driving , and eventing . Their calm , kind temperament , combined with their ability to carry heavy weights for long distances , has made them an ideal pony for endurance riding and trekking holidays , as they can carry novice or experienced riders , adults or children alike , over all kinds of terrain and for long distances . Small herds still roam free in the eastern Pennines , and in 2007 there were estimated to be around 30 mares of breeding age in feral herds . 
 = Manor House , Sleaford = 
 The Manor House is a set of connected buildings located on Northgate in the English town of Sleaford , Lincolnshire . A complex arrangement , parts of the Manor House date to the 16th century , but they were extended with the addition of the Georgian Rhodes House and later Gothic @-@ Revival work . It was a private residence until the 20th century , and is now divided into commercial properties and residential apartments . The house was owned by a number of families and individuals , including local banker and businessman Benjamin Handley and Sophia Peacock , whose nephews , Cecil and Frank Rhodes , spent their summers at the estate as children . 
 The building is divided into two plots : The Manor House ( No. 31 ) and Rhodes House ( No. 33 ) . The former is a complex of buildings , mostly in stone . It is accessed through a cobbled courtyard , with a 19th @-@ century Gothic west front , including a small tower ; part of the north side of the yard is a 17th @-@ century gabled building . The brick @-@ built Rhodes House faces directly onto the street . Described by Sir Nikolaus Pevsner and John Harris as " a jigsaw puzzle " , the Manor House is notable for its re @-@ use of medieval masonry , some dating 14th century and others likely being removed from Sleaford Castle . In 1949 , it was recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade II * listed building , recognising it as " particularly important ... of more than special interest . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The origins of the Manor House and its early history have not been fully studied . In 1872 , Edward Trollope mentioned it in his history of Sleaford , writing that " all its details are not honestly known " . English Heritage and the architectural historians Sir Nikolaus Pevsner and John Harris date parts of No. 31 to the 17th century and categorise most of No. 33 as mid @-@ 18th century and " mid @-@ Georgian " respectively ; however , local historian Dr Simon Pawley , states that No. 33 is 19th century . An estate map of 1766 shows that the plot was not part of the open field system around Sleaford . A more detailed map , dated to c . 1770 , has a building on a plot owned by Robert Banks , corresponding to the location of Rhodes House . An enclosure map completed in 1794 shows a small building at the site , set back slightly from the road and adjoined by a larger one to the north , which faced onto the street ; the location and layout also correspond closely to the arrangement of the older parts of Nos. 31 and 33 . 
 = = = Nineteenth century = = = 
 By the 19th century , the house was occupied by the banker , businessman and solicitor Benjamin Handley ( 1754 – 1828 ) . He was Treasurer of the Sleaford Navigation and solicitor to the enclosure commission for Sleaford and several fenland villages , through which service he " amassed a great fortune " . It is not clear when ownership of the house changed , but Maurice Peter Moore ( 1809 – 1866 ) , clerk of the peace for Kesteven , lived there from at least 1851 until his death . The son of Rev. Dr William Moore , vicar of Spalding , he was admitted as a solicitor in 1831 . Moore was living in Sleaford by 1834 , when he is recorded as owning as property on North Street , and was in partnership with William Forbes by 1841 . Moore married Ann Gardiner Peacock in 1834 . Their first daughter , Florence , died an infant in 1838 and Ann Moore died giving birth to their only surviving child , Anne Louisa Russell ( known as Russell ) , in 1839 . 
 Moore considered disinheriting his daughter , writing that " Russell 's conduct towards me continues to be cold and heartless ... and I must look on her as not deserving to inherit from me " . Sophia Peacock , a sister of his wife , was closely involved in Russell 's up @-@ bringing and Moore developed romantic feelings for her ; in 1858 , he changed his will to give her his property instead of Russell , but Sophia rejected his marriage proposal and he disinherited her the following year . Despite Moore 's " vehement objections " , his daughter married George Edward <unk> in 1860 . After a year she eloped with Colonel Edward William de <unk> Lowe ; they married in 1866 , after <unk> divorced her on grounds of adultery . Her father " had always reason to be dissatisfied with her conduct " and , three months before his death , he made a new will and bequeathed all of his property to Peacock . After Moore 's death , Russell Lowe and her paternal uncle , Rev. Edward Moore opened a court case to contest the will . In March 1868 , the courts found that the will was legal . Sophia Peacock inherited nearly all of Moore 's estate . 
 Sophia and Ann Gardiner Peacock 's father , Anthony Taylor Peacock of South Kyme , was a wealthy banker and his father , Anthony Peacock , was a land @-@ owner , who had worked closely with Benjamin Handley as a sponsor of the Sleaford Navigation and commissioner of enclosures in the 1790s . Among the younger Peacock 's other daughters was Louisa , who married Rev. Francis William Rhodes in 1844 . Louisa and Francis Rhodes 's nine children included Cecil Rhodes and Frank Rhodes ; they spent their childhood summers with their aunt Sophia at the Manor House in Sleaford and in the Channel Islands . Frank and Cecil learnt to ride at the Manor and it was during these visits to Sleaford that Cecil began his long friendship with Robert Yerburgh , a son of the town 's vicar . On Sophia Peacock 's death in 1892 , Frank Rhodes inherited the Manor House . He was still living there in 1897 . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 In 1897 , Elizabeth Cross rented the Manor House from Rhodes , remaining there until her death in 1923 . She moved to Sleaford after the death of her husband , Rev. John Edward Cross ( 1821 − 1897 ) , a prebendary of Lincoln . She purchased " ancient buildings " around Lincolnshire so that their old stonework could be incorporated into the house . It was put up for sale in 1924 and James Gordon Jeudwine and his wife were resident at the house the following year . Jeudwine was a son of Canon George Wynne Jeudwine ; a solicitor , he became a partner in the firm Peake , Snow and Peake in 1937 , the same year that he was appointed Clerk to the Justices of the Sleaford petty sessional division . He lived at the house until his death from injuries received in a car accident in 1941 . The buildings were divided so that the old Manor House became No. 31 and the 18th century part became No. 33 ( known as Rhodes House ) . By the 1960s , ownership had changed hands again : the Manor House was sold by C. B. Cliff to H. A. Mills of Newark in 1967 . Mills became headmaster of the William Alvey School in Sleaford . In the 1970s , the owner of No. 31 , R. W. Edgely , submitted an application for planning permission to demolish the stables at No. 31 and build a house to its rear ; Mills , along with Sleaford and District Civic Trust opposed the plans . From the 1960s to 1992 , Sleaford Medical Group practised at Rhodes House and in a building behind it . As of 2015 , the building is divided into residential apartments . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Manor House is a complicated group of buildings . Its earliest part dates from the 16th century , although it is built with stone @-@ work from two centuries earlier . No. 31 is largely 19th century , incorporating older buildings and inset with medieval elements . Sir Nikolaus Pevsner summarised that " it is hard to discriminate between what is genuine and what is 19th century fancy " . No. 33 is mid @-@ Georgian . 
 No. 31 is accessed through two 18th century gate @-@ piers adorned with pineapple finials which open onto a cobbled courtyard in front of the house . The western façade is 19th century and stone ; a single @-@ storey , it incorporates a tower , in the centre of which is a 14th @-@ century door , beneath a small pointed window . The rear contains a blend of medieval features , including a 14th @-@ century head of a king , set into a chimney . The north side of the courtyard contains a projected square bay dated to 1637 and incorporates an octagonal 14th century chimney piece , reckoned to have belonged to the Old Deanery in Lincoln . This joins to an 18th @-@ century brick section , which is connected to the right with a 17th @-@ century crow @-@ stepped gabled stone house . A stone wall attached to that section is inset by a blocked door , the base of which forms a dog 's drinking fountain . The doorway , along with some of the other imported stonework , was probably taken from the decaying Sleaford Castle , now ruined . The interior includes a room dated to the early 17th century , with panelling and Tudor Revival motifs . 
 Rhodes House , No. 33 , dates to the mid @-@ 18th century . A three @-@ storey brick building with five bays and a classical stone door @-@ case , with Doric columns and an <unk> . To the north is a two @-@ storey mid @-@ 19th century extension , also in brick , and an adjoining former garden wall . The rear has seven bays and two projecting wings , dating to the 18th century . Internally , one room has 17th century panelling of a Tudor design . 
 = A7 ( Croatia ) = 
 The A7 motorway ( Croatian : Autocesta A7 ) is a 42 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 26 @.@ 3 mi ) motorway in Croatia . It connects the nation 's largest port in Rijeka , to the Croatian motorway network , as well as to the Rupa and <unk> border crossings to Slovenia . The motorway forms part of a longitudinal transportation corridor in Croatia , and it is a part of European route E61 Villach – Ljubljana – Trieste – Rijeka . The A7 motorway route south of Orehovica interchange , where it also intersects Pan @-@ European corridor Vb , is a part of European route E65 . 
 The A7 motorway runs near a number of Croatian cities and provides access to Učka Nature Park and , indirectly , to numerous resorts in the Istria and Kvarner Gulf regions . The motorway is nationally significant because of its positive economic impact on the cities and towns it connects , and because of its contribution to tourism in Croatia . The importance of the motorway as a transit route will be further increased upon completion of a proposed expansion of the Port of Rijeka and Rijeka transport node . 
 The motorway consists of two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction , separated by a central reservation . There are no emergency lanes in the tunnels . All intersections of the A7 motorway are grade separated . Numerous bridges , viaducts , tunnels , and other structures were required as the route traverses rugged terrain . As of 2010 , there are ten exits and two rest areas situated along the route . Most of the motorway is not tolled , but a single section is tolled using an open toll system with pricing tied to vehicle classification . 
 Plans for the motorway were officially formulated in 1974 and the construction was started in 1977 . The first 8 @.@ 3 @-@ kilometre ( 5 @.@ 2 mi ) sections were completed as a two @-@ lane expressway with grade @-@ separated intersections , in 1988 and 1990 , comprising the western arm of Rijeka bypass . As the first stage of the A6 motorway construction spanning between Zagreb and Rijeka neared completion in the 2000s , construction of a proper motorway along the A7 route started . In December 2009 , the Diračje – Orehovica section was upgraded to a six @-@ lane motorway , bringing the entire route between Rupa border crossing and Sveti Kuzam interchange to a uniform standard . 
 Two new sections of the A7 motorway are currently under construction , extending the route eastward into vicinity of Kraljevica , Crikvenica , and Krk Bridge . The two sections are scheduled to be completed by 2012 . Current long @-@ term plans for developing the A7 motorway define its ultimate southern terminus in Žuta Lokva at the interchange of the A1 motorway . This section is no longer part of any short @-@ term plans , as no funding until 2012 is currently scheduled for the section . Further long term plans specify an outer Rijeka bypass and a new interchange with the A8 expressway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The A7 motorway is an important north – south motorway in western Croatia , connecting the nation 's largest port and the city of Rijeka to the Slovenian road network at the Rupa border crossing . The A7 motorway currently connects to the rest of the Croatian motorway network via the A6 motorway in Orehovica interchange . The motorway is a part of International E @-@ road network routes E65 and E61 . The sections south of Orehovica interchange are a part of the E65 , while the remaining sections are a part of the E61 . 
 The motorway is of major importance to Croatia in terms of its development of the economy of Croatia , most notably in tourism , as it represents the shortest and the most convenient route between Trieste , Italy or Ljubljana , Slovenia and the Adriatic Sea . This particularly applies to tourist resorts in the Kvarner Gulf area and to the Port of Rijeka , but it is also true for resorts in Istria , served via the A8 expressway . The genuine importance of the motorway as a transit route will be demonstrated upon completion of the A7 route to Žuta Lokva interchange of the A1 motorway and proposed expansion of the Port of Rijeka and Rijeka transport node . The former is planned as a part of completion of the Adriatic – Ionian motorway , while the latter is planned to encompass the growth of the Port of Rijeka 's cargo handling capacity , improved railroad links and a new Rijeka bypass motorway linking the A7 , via a number of new interchanges , to the A6 and A8 motorways . The project is , among other goals , aiming to increase traffic along the Croatian part of Pan @-@ European corridor Vb , which connects to the A7 near Rijeka . 
 As of 2014 , the motorway spans 42 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 26 @.@ 3 mi ) between the Rupa border crossing to Slovenia and Križišće where southbound A7 traffic currently ends at a roundabout connecting to the state roads D8 and <unk> . It connects to Rijeka as it forms Rijeka bypass , the A8 expressway of the Istrian Y and the A6 which represents motorway connection to Zagreb and Split . Future development of the motorway will include southward extensions of the motorway towards Crikvenica , Novi Vinodolski , Senj , and ultimately Žuta Lokva interchange on the A1 motorway . The A7 motorway consists of two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction along its entire length , except in tunnels where there are emergency bays rather than lanes . All existing interchanges are trumpet interchanges . There are two rest areas along the motorway , providing various types of services ranging from parking spaces and restrooms to filling stations and restaurants . As of October 2010 , the motorway has 10 interchanges , providing access to a number of towns and cities and to the Croatian state road network . The motorway is operated by Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb . 
 An automatic traffic monitoring and guidance system is in place along the motorway . It consists of measuring , control , and signaling devices , located in zones where driving conditions may vary — at interchanges , near viaducts , beside bridges , in tunnels , and in zones where fog and strong winds are known to occur . The system consists of variable traffic signs used to communicate changing driving conditions , possible restrictions , and other information to motorway users . 
 The A7 motorway runs through hills , rugged coastal terrain , and urban areas , requiring a substantial number of bridges , viaducts , and tunnels along the route . Particular attention to the environment is also required since the route is situated in karst topography , which is particularly susceptible to water pollution , and the urbanized areas requiring special attention to be paid to noise pollution . Noise pollution was assessed as especially severe in the <unk> neighborhood of Rijeka , where residential buildings are particularly close to the motorway route , most notably a 26 story high @-@ rise only 40 metres ( 130 ft ) away from the route . The noise pollution was addressed by building a noise barrier 352 metres ( 1 @,@ 155 ft ) long which largely encloses that motorway section like a tunnel . Curved overhead sections of the noise barrier are covered with 2 @,@ 300 square metres ( 25 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of solar panels with annual electricity production capacity of 248 @,@ 000 kWh . 
 = = Toll = = 
 Only one section of the A7 motorway is tolled based on the vehicle classification in Croatia using an open toll system in place between the Rupa and Jurdani interchanges . The toll is payable in Croatian kuna , euros , and major credit and debit cards . A number of prepaid toll collection systems are also used , including various types of smart cards issued by the motorway operator and ENC — an electronic toll collection ( ETC ) system which is shared by most motorways in Croatia and provides drivers with discounted toll rates for dedicated lanes at toll plazas . 
 As of December 2010 , Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb collects toll on a single section of the motorway , between Rupa and Jurdani interchanges , close to the northern terminus of the motorway . Unlike those sections further south , which are used as bypass road of the city of Rijeka , therefore carrying substantial suburban and commuter traffic , the tolled section carries almost exclusively transit traffic . The Rupa toll plaza , located on the section reported 240 @,@ 975 kuna ( € 32 @,@ 400 ) collected during a single , peak season , weekend in July . Even though motorway traffic volume and thus toll revenue , decreased slightly elsewhere in the country , this particular tolled section reported virtually no change in income by 2010 . 
 = = Notable structures = = 
 As the A7 motorway route runs through rugged terrain , it utilizes a substantial number of major structures — bridges , viaducts , tunnels , underpasses , flyovers , and culverts . A significant number of interchanges present along Rijeka bypass the 18 @-@ kilometre ( 11 mi ) A7 section between Matulji and Sveti Kuzam which consists of seven interchanges ( including the Orehovica interchange with the A6 motorway ) , thus yielding an average distance of only 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) between them . 
 The longest structures on the A7 motorway are the 858 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 815 ft ) Trsat Tunnel located on the Orehovica interchange – Škurinje section , the 595 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 952 ft ) Škurinje II Tunnel situated between Škurinje and <unk> exits , and the 588 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 929 ft ) <unk> Viaduct built on Orehovica – Draga section of the motorway . Rječina Bridge , a 210 @-@ metre ( 690 ft ) inclined strut reinforced concrete bridge spanning the Rječina River canyon , is also noteworthy because its design and construction conditions are different from normal since it spans a protected water supply zone . The bridge consists of two parallel structures , and the first one to be completed was the northern span in 1984 . The southern span was the last structure completed on the present A7 motorway route , and it was opened to traffic in 2009 , 25 years after the original span . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Rijeka bypass = = = 
 Development of the city of Rijeka and the surrounding region ( particularly in relation to the development of Port of Rijeka ) , associated transit transport of cargo , tourism and associated passenger traffic to the northern Adriatic resorts , rugged coastal topography , and the existing road routes running through the city of Rijeka itself , necessitated development of a high capacity bypass road to further the development and relieve congestion on the city streets . This was first officially formulated in spatial planning documents in 1974 , and construction started in 1977 . The first , 8 @.@ 3 @-@ kilometre ( 5 @.@ 2 mi ) section was completed in July 1988 , between Diračje and Orehovica interchange , executed as a two @-@ lane expressway with grade separated intersections . The 4 @.@ 0 @-@ kilometre ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) Diračje – Matulji and Matulji – <unk> sections , completed in 1990 and 1991 respectively , were built as four @-@ lane expressways without emergency lanes . Those completed the western arm of Rijeka bypass , but traffic proceeding east from Orehovica interchange to Krk Island , Crikvenica , and Senj still had to switch to streets of Rijeka . 
 = = = Modern motorway = = = 
 In the 2000s , as the first stage of the A6 motorway construction spanning between Zagreb and Rijeka neared completion , construction of a proper motorway along the A7 route started . In 2004 , when the first stage of Rijeka – Zagreb motorway was completed , the A7 route was extended by 3 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) to Jurdani , and in 2005 , another 11 @-@ kilometre ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) section was completed between Jurdani and the Slovenian border . The two new sections were the first ones built as a six @-@ lane motorway . In May 2006 , the motorway extended 6 @.@ 35 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 95 mi ) east to Sveti Kuzam , forming the eastern arm of Rijeka bypass , relieving that part of the city from the transit traffic . Finally , after the Rijeka – Zagreb motorway was completed in 2008 , the works on the remaining single @-@ carriageway section of the route intensified . In December 2009 , the Diračje – Orehovica section was upgraded to six @-@ lane motorway , thus bringing the entire route between Rupa border crossing and Sveti Kuzam interchange to a uniform standard . 
 Even though Hrvatske autoceste normally develops motorways in Croatia , as of September 2007 , Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb was granted expansion of the concession previously awarded . The new concession contract included development and maintenance of the A7 motorway north of Križišće interchange , Krk Bridge , and a number of motorway access roads . At the same time , the concession period was extended to 32 years and 11 months , starting on the date of the original concession contract . Therefore , the concession , in its present form , will expire on May 28 , 2031 . Construction costs incurred after 2007 , when Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb took over the motorway development , were estimated at 105 million euros . 
 = = Future = = 
 Two new sections of the A7 motorway are currently under construction , extending the route eastward into vicinity of Kraljevica , Crikvenica , and Krk Bridge . The first section , between Sveti Kuzam and <unk> , Croatia , will connect the A7 motorway to <unk> state road , while the second one will connect it to extend <unk> state road . The two sections combined are only 5 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 3 mi ) long , but since they use very constricted routes defined by rugged terrain , proximity of coastline , numerous towns and villages , existing dense road network , and further transport corridors reserved for planned lowland railroad between Rijeka and Zagreb , the sections will include five viaducts and three tunnels in addition to the new interchanges . The two sections are scheduled to be completed by summer of 2012 , later delayed to November or December 2012 . 
 Long @-@ term plans of development of the A7 motorway , published in the 2000s , involved an extension of the southern terminus to the interchange with the A1 motorway at Žuta Lokva . The section between Križišće and the Žuta Lokva was initially planned to be opened as an expressway by 2009 , but those plans have been put on hold and the section is no longer included in any short @-@ term plans , as no funding is going to be appropriated for it until 2012 . In 2012 , Croatian government announced that no funds shall be made available in near future for construction of A7 south of Križišće . 
 Further long term plans specify an outer Rijeka bypass which is planned on the route Jurdani @-@ <unk> @-@ Kikovica @-@ Kraljevica , and it would be wider and longer . Similarly , a new interchange of the A8 and A7 motorways is planned near <unk> ; however , these long @-@ term plans , even though they are well documented in government studies , still have no funding approved . 
 = = Traffic volume = = 
 Traffic is regularly counted by means of a traffic census at Rupa mainline toll plaza as well as at two other sections of the motorway which are not tolled . The traffic volume is reported by Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb , the operator of the motorway , and are published by Hrvatske ceste . The traffic is the heaviest along the western arm of Rijeka bypass as the section serves the city and acts as a link between the A8 and the A6 motorways while carrying regular A7 traffic . That part of the A7 motorway carries a 20 @,@ 100 @-@ vehicle annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , and a 31 @,@ 700 @-@ vehicle average summer daily traffic ( ASDT ) figure . 
 Substantial variations observed between AADT and ASDT are normally attributed to the fact that the motorway carries significant tourist traffic to Istria and Kvarner Gulf area . The seasonal increase in traffic volume ranges from 10 % on the south of Oštrovica interchange to 120 % as measured on the Rupa – Matulji section . The central part of the motorway exhibits summer @-@ season traffic volume increase of approximately 50 % . 
 = = Rest areas = = 
 As of November 2010 , there are only two rest areas operating along the A7 motorway . Applicable legislation provides for four types of rest areas designated as types A through D : A @-@ type rest areas comprise a full range of amenities including a filling station , a restaurant , and a hotel or motel ; B @-@ type rest areas have no lodging ; C @-@ type rest areas are very common and include a filling station and a café but no restaurants or accommodations ; and D @-@ type rest areas offer parking spaces only , with possibly some picnic tables , benches , and restrooms . Even though the rest areas found along the A7 motorway follow this ranking system , the Vrata <unk> rest area is a C @-@ type rest area and the Rupa rest area is a B @-@ type facility . The filling stations also offer LPG fuel and include small convenience stores . 
 The primary motorway operator , Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb , leases the rest areas to various operators through public tenders . As of November 2010 , both rest areas found along the A7 motorway are operated by OMV . The rest area operators are not permitted to sub @-@ lease the fuel operations , but they are also penalized if some facilities required by the lease contract are not operating . All of the A7 motorway rest areas , are accessible from both traffic directions of the motorway . The rest areas normally operate 24 hours a day , seven days a week . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = HMS Minotaur ( 1863 ) = 
 HMS Minotaur was the lead ship of the Minotaur @-@ class armoured frigates built for the Royal Navy during the 1860s . They were the longest single @-@ screw warships ever built . Minotaur took nearly four years between her launching and commissioning because she was used for evaluations of her armament and different sailing rigs . The ship spent the bulk of her active career as flagship of the Channel Fleet , including during Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee Fleet Review in 1887 . She became a training ship in 1893 and was then hulked in 1905 when she became part of the training school at Harwich . Minotaur was renamed several times before being sold for scrap in 1922 and broken up the following year . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Minotaur @-@ class armoured frigates were essentially enlarged versions of the ironclad HMS Achilles with heavier armament , armour , and more powerful engines . They retained the broadside ironclad layout of their predecessor , but their sides were fully armoured to protect the 50 guns they were designed to carry . Each was equipped with a plough @-@ shaped ram that was also more prominent than that of Achilles . 
 The Minotaur @-@ class ships were 400 feet ( 121 @.@ 9 m ) long between perpendiculars and 411 feet ( 125 @.@ 3 m ) long overall . They had a beam of 58 feet 6 inches ( 17 @.@ 8 m ) and a draft of 26 feet 10 inches ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . The ships displaced 10 @,@ 627 long tons ( 10 @,@ 798 t ) . The hull was subdivided by 15 watertight transverse bulkheads and had a double bottom underneath the engine and boiler rooms . 
 Minotaur was considered " an excellent sea @-@ boat and a steady gun platform , but unhandy under steam and practically unmanageable under sail " as built . Steam @-@ powered steering improved her <unk> qualities significantly when it was installed in 1875 and she was judged " one of our very best <unk> we have in the Navy " by Vice Admiral Philip Colomb in 1890 . The ship 's steadiness was partially a result of her metacentric height of 3 @.@ 87 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Minotaur had a two @-@ cylinder trunk steam engine , made by John Penn and Sons , that drove a single 24 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) propeller . Ten rectangular fire @-@ tube boilers provided steam to the engine at a working pressure of 25 psi ( 172 kPa ; 2 kgf / cm2 ) . The engine produced a total of 6 @,@ 949 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 182 kW ) during the ship 's sea trials on 10 May 1867 and Minotaur had a maximum speed of 14 @.@ 33 knots ( 26 @.@ 54 km / h ; 16 @.@ 49 mph ) . The ships carried 750 long tons ( 760 t ) of coal , enough to steam 1 @,@ 500 nmi ( 2 @,@ 800 km ; 1 @,@ 700 mi ) at 7 @.@ 5 knots ( 13 @.@ 9 km / h ; 8 @.@ 6 mph ) . Minotaur was reboilered in 1893 and reached 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) with 6 @,@ 288 ihp ( 4 @,@ 689 kW ) . 
 The ship had five masts and a sail area of 32 @,@ 377 square feet ( 3 @,@ 008 m2 ) . Because her propeller could only be disconnected and not hoisted up into the stern of the ship to reduce drag , Minotaur only made 9 @.@ 5 knots ( 17 @.@ 6 km / h ; 10 @.@ 9 mph ) under sail . Both funnels were semi @-@ retractable to reduce wind resistance while under sail . Admiral George A. Ballard described Minotaur and her sisters as " the dullest performers under canvas of the whole masted fleet of their day , and no ships ever carried so much dress to so little purpose . " In 1893 – 4 , after her withdrawal from active service , Minotaur had two masts removed and was re @-@ rigged as a barque . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The armament of the Minotaur @-@ class ships was intended to be 40 rifled 110 @-@ pounder breech @-@ loading guns on the main deck and 10 more on the upper deck on pivot mounts . The gun was a new design from Armstrong , but proved a failure a few years after its introduction . The gun was withdrawn before any were received by any of the Minotaur @-@ class ships . They were armed , instead , with a mix of seven @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) and nine @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . All four nine @-@ inch and 20 seven @-@ inch guns were mounted on the main deck while four seven @-@ inch guns were fitted on the upper deck as chase guns . The ship also received eight brass howitzers for use as saluting guns . The gun ports were 30 inches ( 0 @.@ 8 m ) wide which allowed each gun to fire 30 ° fore and aft of the beam . 
 The shell of the 14 @-@ calibre 9 @-@ inch gun weighed 254 pounds ( 115 @.@ 2 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 12 long tons ( 12 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 420 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a 11 @.@ 3 inches ( 287 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 16 @-@ calibre 7 @-@ inch gun weighed 6 @.@ 5 long tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) and fired a 112 @-@ pound ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) shell . It was credited with the ability to penetrate 7 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) armour . 
 Minotaur was rearmed in 1875 with a uniform armament of 17 nine @-@ inch guns , 14 on the main deck , two forward chase guns and one rear chase gun . The gun ports had to be enlarged to accommodate the larger guns by hand , at a cost of £ 250 each . About 1883 two 6 inches ( 152 mm ) breech @-@ loading guns replaced two 9 @-@ inch muzzle @-@ loading guns . Four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 @-@ mm ) guns , eight QF 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns , eight machine guns and two torpedo tubes were installed in 1891 – 2 . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The entire side of the Minotaur @-@ class ships was protected by wrought iron armour that tapered from 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) at the ends to 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 140 mm ) amidships , except for a section of the bow between the upper and main decks . The armour extended 5 feet 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) below the waterline . A single 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch transverse bulkhead protected the forward chase guns on the upper deck . The armour was backed by 10 inches ( 254 mm ) of teak . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 HMS Minotaur was originally ordered on 2 September 1861 as HMS Elephant , in honour of the ship once commanded by Nelson seventy years before , but her name was changed to Minotaur during construction . She was laid down on 12 September 1861 by the Thames Ironworks in Blackwall , London . She was launched on 12 December 1863 , commissioned in April 1867 and completed on 1 June 1867 . The lengthy delay in completion was due to frequent changes in design details , and experiments with her armament and with her sailing rig . The ship cost a total of £ 478 @,@ 855 . 
 Minotaur finally commissioned in Portsmouth as the flagship of the Channel Fleet , a position which she retained until 1873 . In 1868 the ship nearly rammed the ironclad HMS Bellerophon as they were leaving Belfast Lough . Minotaur lost her bowsprit and fore topgallant mast , but Bellerophon only suffered some minor flooding . She paid off for a long refit in 1873 and resumed her position in 1875 when she rejoined the Channel Fleet . Minotaur became the first ship in the Royal Navy to receive a permanent installation of an electric searchlight in 1876 . The ship was the flagship of Vice Admiral Sir William Hewett , who had earned the Victoria Cross in the Siege of Sevastopol in 1854 , during Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee Fleet Review on 23 July 1887 . Minotaur was paid off at the end of 1887 in Portsmouth and assigned to the Reserve until 1893 when she became a training ship at Portland . She was renamed HMS Boscawen II in March 1904 and transferred in 1905 to Harwich as part of the HMS Ganges training school . The ship was renamed 11 June 1906 as HMS Ganges and then to Ganges II on 25 April 1908 . She was sold on 30 January 1922 for scrap . 
 = Whitley Castle = 
 Whitley Castle is a large and uniquely shaped Roman fort ( Latin : castra ) north @-@ west of Alston , Cumbria , England that was known to the Romans as Epiacum . The fort was built early in the 2nd century and at least partly demolished and rebuilt around AD 200 . 
 Whereas Roman forts are normally " playing @-@ card shaped " ( rectangular with rounded corners ) , Whitley Castle is lozenge @-@ shaped to fit the available site . In addition , it has the most complex defensive earthworks of any known fort in the Roman Empire , with multiple banks and ditches outside the usual stone ramparts . The fort appears to have been sited to control and protect lead mining in the area as well as to support the border defences of Hadrian 's Wall . 
 The fort was surveyed by the geologist Thomas Sopwith in the 19th century and the historian R.G. Collingwood in the 20th , with a geophysics survey in the 21st , but it has not been fully excavated . Among finds at the fort are altars with inscriptions to Hercules by the 6th Legion of the Roman army ( normally stationed at York ) and to Apollo by the fort 's garrison of auxiliaries , the 2nd Cohort of Nervians . Other finds include a midden containing shoes ; coins , fragments of Samian pottery , beads , nails , and a bronze handle shaped like a dolphin . 
 = = Situation = = 
 Whitley Castle is about 1 @,@ 000 ft ( 300 m ) above sea level in the Pennine hills on the border of Cumbria and Northumberland . It lies to the west of the modern <unk> road beside the Pennine Way long @-@ distance footpath . During the Roman era , Epiacum was situated about 15 mi ( 24 km ) south of Hadrian 's Wall and 20 mi ( 32 km ) north of the main road which ran between <unk> ( Carlisle ) in the northwest and Eboracum ( York ) in the southeast . The Maiden Way road connected it to <unk> ( <unk> ) on the Wall and <unk> ( Kirkby Thore ) on the Carlisle – York road . 
 Whitley Castle is one of the most isolated Roman sites in Britain , which may help to explain both why it remains largely unexcavated as of 2012 and why so much of it has survived . The site is a lozenge @-@ shaped spur of high ground on Castle Nook hill farm under permanent pasture . The remains lie under the grass , and are most clearly seen in aerial photographs . The Roman fort itself covers about 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) ; outside it is a system of concentric defensive ditches . 
 The fort may have been sited to exert control over the area near Alston and its lead mines , as well as to provide support for Hadrian 's Wall . 
 = = Roman fort = = 
 Epiacum was built early in the 2nd century . It was at least partly demolished and rebuilt around <unk> ; the destruction coincides with an uprising of the northern tribes in 196 . The fort was modified or wholly rebuilt about the year 300 . It appears to have been preceded by an Iron Age fort , followed by a Roman camp before the permanent fort was constructed . 
 Epiacum is in some ways a typical Roman fort : inside the wall are straight roads which cross , a headquarters building ( the <unk> ) , the commandant 's house , a set of barrack blocks for the cohort of auxiliary soldiers , and granaries to store food . Also as usual , there is a bath house and a temple ( dedicated by the auxiliaries to the Emperor Caracalla ) outside the wall . There is an altar to Mithras and another , as already mentioned , to Hercules . 
 Epiacum , however , has two unique features . Firstly , the fort 's military engineers modified the usual rectangular plan to suit the available site : it is distorted into a lozenge or parallelogram ; the internal features of the fort are similarly distorted . Six barracks were however fitted in behind the headquarters building ( Principia ) , and four in front of it , in a limited area of 1 @.@ 25 hectares ( 3 @.@ 1 acres ) . Secondly , the wall is surrounded by four steep defensive ditches and banks around the hill spur , and seven such ramparts across the uphill side of the spur . These constitute the most complex defensive earthworks of any known Roman fort , with multiple banks and ditches outside the usual stone ramparts . 
 Inscriptions on some of the altars found at Epiacum provide evidence of the Roman army units garrisoning the fort . One of these is inscribed " DEO <unk> C <unk> <unk> > <unk> VI V P F " ( " To the god Hercules , Gaius Vitellius <unk> , Centurion of the Legio VI Victrix , Loyal and Faithful , [ erected this ] . " ) This was a regular army legion based at York . 
 Another altar is inscribed " DEO <unk> G ... <unk> ... ... <unk> II NER ... " ( " To the god Apollo , Gaius Julius Marcius , [ commander ] of the 2nd Cohort of Nervians , [ fulfilled his vow ] . " ) . This and two other inscriptions also naming the 2nd Nervians , auxiliaries from the lower Rhine , date to 213 @-@ 221 AD . The altar was in a socket of a big stone slab supported by four columns , each topped by a coin ; one of these was dated to 141 @-@ 161 AD . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 Little archaeological research has taken place at Whitley Castle . In 1810 , the Revd . John Hodgson excavated the bath house , in the north @-@ east corner of Epiacum . In 1825 several leather shoes were recovered from a Roman rubbish tip when a Mr Henderson was cutting a drainage ditch . The geologist Thomas Sopwith surveyed the fort , describing it , its baths and the midden ( waste heap ) in 1833 as follows : 
 Still further north [ of the multiple ditches ] are the remains of the <unk> or baths — the supposed cemetery of the station — and , what is rather a variety in antiquarian researches , the perfect remains of a Roman <unk> , which , strange as it may appear , has furnished many loads of excellent manure to the neighbouring fields , and been hitherto the productive mine of several interesting curiosities . 
 The fort was surveyed and described by R.G. Collingwood in his Archaeology of Roman Britain , 1930 , where he noted the fort 's uniquely skewed shape and extraordinary set of defensive ramparts on the northern , uphill side . Pottery excavated in the 1950s suggested that the fort was constructed in 122 AD , at the same time as Hadrian 's Wall . A survey in 2007 – 8 by English Heritage showed a large Roman civilian settlement or vicus to the north and west of the fort . Artefacts found include coins , pottery , glass , objects made of jet , and inscribed stones . In 2012 , the University of Durham carried out a geophysics survey as part of an English Heritage project . In the absence of a full excavation , archaeologists have exploited the diggings of moles to uncover Roman artefacts by sifting earth thrown up by the animals in their molehills . Finds include fragments of terra <unk> ( Samian ware , Roman table pottery ) ; rim fragments of serving bowls and earthenware pots ; a bead made of jet ; some iron nails ; and a bronze dolphin from the bath house , most likely the handle of an instrument like a strigil or razor . 
 = = Name = = 
 The Roman name for the fort , Epiacum , is given in Ptolemy 's Geography as the first town in the area of the Brigantes tribe of northeastern England . The name probably means " the property , or estate of <unk> . ' <unk> ' is a Romanised Celtic or British name , and he may have been a local leader of the tribe of Brigantes . " 
 = = Protection = = 
 The site is on the privately owned Castle Nook Farm , and is a Scheduled Ancient Monument . In 2012 the not @-@ for @-@ profit company Epiacum Heritage Ltd. secured a £ 49 @,@ 200 Heritage Lottery Fund grant to develop a programme of events for the fort to include a website , guided tours for the public , archaeology survey days for volunteers and educational events for schools . 
 = Halo 3 Original Soundtrack = 
 The Halo 3 Original Soundtrack is the official soundtrack to Bungie 's first @-@ person shooter video game Halo 3 . Most of the original music was composed by Martin O 'Donnell and Michael Salvatori , but also includes a bonus track , " <unk> " , which was the winning entry in a contest held before the soundtrack 's release . The 2 @-@ CD set was released on November 20 , 2007 . 
 For the next game in the Halo trilogy , O 'Donnell added new themes as well as bringing back and expanding old ones , some of which had never been recorded with a full orchestra before . The score made extensive use of the piano , an instrument which O 'Donnell used frequently for composition but that had not been featured in previous Halo music . In addition to scoring the game , the music was used for promotional advertisements and trailers preceding Halo 3 's release . The game 's score and its soundtrack were generally well received . The soundtrack reached the Billboard 200 chart , and also broke the top twenty best @-@ selling soundtracks and independent albums listings . The score was nominated for X @-@ Play 's " Best of 2007 " awards , under best original soundtrack . 
 = = Background = = 
 The score for Halo 3 gave O 'Donnell and Salvatori a chance to rework and revise existing themes heard in the games , as well as create new ones . Halo : Combat Evolved featured more strings , while the soundtrack to Halo 2 featured conventional video game music staples such as guitars by Steve Vai ; in an interview , O 'Donnell noted that " to be honest , when I got to the end of Halo 2 I thought to myself : ' that was probably enough guitar . ' " He intentionally made the score to the final game a shift back to the orchestral roots of the series , stating " I took an orthodox , almost formal approach to the trilogy . " O 'Donnell acknowledged that some games and movies used entirely different music with each sequel , but such an approach wasn 't an option with Halo 3 , the third installment of a trilogy : " The Master Chief is still green , Cortana is still blue , and so you 're going to hear the monks and the cellos . " 
 O 'Donnell began by writing out the reworked themes and music he wanted to hear in the game , without knowing where he would eventually use the sounds . He approaches composition from the piano , and described his process as looking for something that " makes me go ' oh , that 's a good feeling ' " . O 'Donnell 's approach to writing music for games is to put in the audio at the last minute of development , so that his music meshes with the game play in the best possible way ; he still had not added the score when Halo 3 was demoed at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2007 , less than three months away from the game 's debut . 
 Unlike previous soundtracks , where much of the music had been synthesized on computer , the soundtrack for Halo 3 was recorded using a 60 @-@ piece orchestra , along with a 24 voice chorus . The music was recorded by the Northwest Sinfonia at Studio X in Seattle , Washington . Interviewed by some of Bungie 's staff for the Bungie Podcast , O 'Donnell noted that there was more " techno " and " tribal " sounds than on previous soundtracks . O 'Donnell also tried to avoid outside musical influences , as he believes that " Bungie should be creating culture , not being influenced by it . " 
 Scoring for a video game , O 'Donnell noted , is different from a film in that a good score sounds like it is narrating what the player does on screen ; Halo 3 uses an audio engine which allows music cues to naturally start , stop , and transition in response to game triggers . Working from his office at Bungie , dubbed the " Ivory Tower " , O 'Donnell worked with mission designers to set points in the game that trigger segments of music . Instead of pieces with a set duration , songs in the game have multiple variations that can be looped and arranged to fill the time it takes the player to travel from point A to point B. Since the interactive mixing of sounds in Halo 3 depends of what occurs in the game , O 'Donnell instead " froze " the music into set suites and transitions for the CD , so that a listener playing the soundtrack through would hear a musical representation of the game . The tracks are presented , similarly to the previous soundtrack for Halo 2 , in a suite form . The suites are named after the nine Campaign missions and unlike Volume Two , are broken into separate tracks . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Martin O 'Donnell confirmed Halo 3 's soundtrack would see a commercial release in a Bungie podcast . O 'Donnell also stressed that the soundtrack would not be released at or near the release date of the game on September 25 , 2007 . The soundtrack was officially announced on October 17 , 2007 . 
 The score to the game was used extensively for marketing purposes , even before the release of the game . The first piece heard was entitled " Finish the Fight " , and was used in the announcement trailer for Halo 3 at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2006 . This piece was accented with O 'Donnell 's well @-@ known Halo theme , which now included a trumpet fanfare and heavy brass section ; O 'Donnell stated " I want the viewer to have a feeling of anticipation and wonder for the first fifty seconds or so , up until Master Chief is revealed and they realize that it 's Cortana trying to tell them something . " The track opens with a piano section written by Matt Daspit , uncharacteristic for the series at that point ; O 'Donnell suspected " no [ other announcement at E3 ] would start with a piano " , thus grabbing attention . O 'Donnell designed the opening to lull the listener into a sense of suspense , then wonder ; " I want them to feel pride and longing the moment Master Chief walks out of the smoke . " he said . " I want them to be left with that , ' I can hardly wait to play this game ' feeling " . Another reworked theme from Halo was used as the background music for the Halo 3 E3 2007 trailer ; O 'Donnell later offered this track for free online . 
 In addition to the music composed by O 'Donnell and Salvatori , the announcement of the Halo 3 Soundtrack was followed with a call for entries to all artists or bands to submit their own original sound to be included on the final CD . The submissions were judged by O 'Donnell , producer Nile Rodgers , and other artists including Steve Vai . Rodgers stated that more than 21 @,@ 000 songs were entered , and at least 30 % were " amazing " ; the winner was Greg Haupt and his band Princeton , whose song " <unk> " appears as the final track on the second disc . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reception to the soundtrack was positive . <unk> gave the soundtrack high marks , praising the presentation as well as the piano motif introduced ; the reviewer judged that the soundtrack for the third game surpassed those of the previous titles . UGO Networks praised the reworked main theme , stating that the video game " would not have been the same " without O 'Donnell 's score . Game Informer 's Brendan Vore concurred , saying that " there 's nothing like hearing Halo 's signature ' da @-@ da @-@ da @-@ <unk> ' as you rush into a squad of Brutes . " Conversely , IGN found the piano theme was perennially overplayed , and felt that the soundtrack " begins with a bit of a bang and then eventually sputters out " . The Halo 3 Soundtrack reached a peak position of # 18 on Billboard 's Top Soundtracks list , # 20 on Top Independent Albums , and the bottom position on the Billboard 200 on December 15 , 2007 . The soundtrack had an impact outside of the gaming world ; fueled by interest in Halo 's chants , Universal Music aggressively promoted a chant @-@ based album , Chant : Music for the Soul , that sold 55 @,@ 000 copies in its first two weeks . 
 Halo 3 's music has been featured at several concerts , including Play ! A Video Game Symphony . O 'Donnell also specially arranged the Halo music for a performance of Video Games Live , and appeared at a London performance . Video Games Live has incorporated the music from Halo 3 into many of its performances , including the opening to the London Games Festival , and the 2008 Game Developer 's Conference in San Francisco . Arrangements featuring music from Halo 3 appears on the album releases Video Games Live , Vol . 1 and Video Games Live , Level 2 . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The audio and sound for Halo 3 were nominated for numerous awards , including the 2007 Spike TV Video Game Awards " Best Original Score " . Both the sound and score of Halo 3 were also nominated as finalists in the 6th Annual Game Audio Network Guild Awards , and X @-@ Play 's " Best of 2007 " Awards in the " Best Original Soundtrack " category . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All information is taken from the CD credits . 
 Martin O 'Donnell ( ASCAP ) – composer 
 Michael Salvatori ( ASCAP ) – composer 
 C Paul Johnson ( ASCAP ) – addition composition on tracks " To Kill a Demon " , " This Is Our Land " , " Keep What you Steal " , and " Greatest Journey " 
 Simon James – concert master / contractor 
 David <unk> – Northwest Sinfonia conductor 
 Joe <unk> – choir conductor 
 Stan LePard – additional orchestration 
 Nile Rodgers – producer 
 Matt Daspit - pianist 
 = Tommy Amaker = 
 Harold Tommy Amaker ( / <unk> / ; born June 6 , 1965 ) is an American NCAA Division I college basketball coach and the head coach of the Harvard University men 's basketball team . He has also coached for the University of Michigan and Seton Hall University . He played point guard and later served as an assistant coach at Duke University under Mike Krzyzewski . An All @-@ American player , Amaker set numerous records and earned many honors and awards . He took Seton Hall to the post season in each of his four seasons as their coach , helped Michigan win the National Invitation Tournament the year after a probationary ban from postseason play , and had the three highest single @-@ season win totals in the history of Harvard basketball , the school 's first five Ivy League championships and first NCAA tournament victory . 
 Amaker was a high school basketball McDonald 's All @-@ American and a Parade All @-@ American . As a college basketball player , he set most of the assists records and many steals records for Duke basketball . He also set the Atlantic Coast Conference single @-@ season games played and games started records . Among his numerous accolades , he was the first winner of the NABC Defensive Player of the Year , and he was a third team All @-@ American . 
 Amaker was an assistant coach for the Duke Blue Devils men 's basketball under Krzyzewski for nine seasons . His first four seasons were part of a five @-@ year streak of Final Four appearances by Duke ( including back @-@ to @-@ back national championships ) . As a head coach , Amaker took the Seton Hall Pirates to postseason tournaments ( NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament – 2000 and National Invitation Tournament – 1998 , 1999 , and 2001 ) in each of his four seasons as their coach . He dealt with the turmoil and self @-@ imposed sanctions of the University of Michigan basketball scandal in his first years with Michigan , where he eventually won the 2004 National Invitation Tournament with the 2003 – 04 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team and finished as the runner @-@ up with Michigan in the 2006 National Invitation Tournament . 
 In his tenure as Harvard men 's basketball coach , Amaker was the first coach to lead the Crimson to victory over a ranked opponent with the 2008 – 09 team . He also coached the 2009 – 10 Harvard Crimson men 's basketball team into the postseason ( 2010 CollegeInsider.com Tournament ) in his third year there , which included the highest single @-@ season victory total ( 21 ) in school history . In the summer of 2010 , the NCAA ruled that Amaker had committed a recruiting violation , resulting in NCAA @-@ mandated recruiting restrictions , the university 's first NCAA penalty of the men 's basketball program . The 2010 – 11 team became the first Harvard men 's basketball team to clinch a share of the Ivy League championship and surpassed the prior season win total ( 23 ) . The 2011 – 12 team became the first in school history to appear in the Associated Press ( AP ) and Coaches Polls and , for the third year in a row , established a new school record for wins ( 26 ) . Amaker 's 2011 – 12 , 2012 – 13 , 2013 – 14 and 2014 – 15 teams repeated as Ivy League champions . The 2012 – 13 team gave Harvard its first NCAA tournament victory . The 2013 – 14 team posted a record 27 wins . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Amaker was born in Falls Church , Virginia , in 1965 . He was raised by a single mother , Alma Amaker , a high school English teacher . Although not a part of Amaker 's young life , his father attended some of Amaker 's high school basketball games . 
 Amaker resided in Falls Church , but he attended W.T. Woodson High School in Fairfax , Virginia , because his mother was a teacher in Fairfax County . Her job allowed her to choose among the county schools , her choice made because the school 's basketball coach , Red Jenkins , who called Amaker " T @-@ bird , " had been impressed with his performances at his youth summer league since Amaker was 10 years old . He began playing varsity for Woodson by December , making him the first freshman to play varsity in the school 's history . His mother , whom Jenkins called " his first coach and his best coach , " attended his practices and graded papers in the coach 's office . 
 Duke University basketball head coach Mike Krzyzewski , who had just completed his first season as Duke coach , was in town to evaluate Johnny Dawkins in a 1981 Washington D.C. summer league game , but was convinced to stay for a second game to see Amaker play . Krzyzewski met Amaker 's mother and said , " Mrs. Amaker , your son is going to look great in Duke blue . " At the time , Amaker had wanted to play for the Maryland Terrapins because his sister Tami went to the University of Maryland , College Park and Amaker idolized Maryland star guard John Lucas . He was recruited eventually to Duke by assistant coach Chuck Swenson , who would later become an assistant coach during Amaker 's first five seasons at Michigan from 2001 to 2006 . 
 Amaker played on the 1983 McDonald 's All @-@ American Team and was also named to the Parade All @-@ American team . According to the Fairfax Connection , the county changed the rules regarding where teachers could send their children due to Amaker 's success at Woodson . 
 = = College career = = 
 Amaker was a star point guard at Duke after becoming a freshman starter for head coach Krzyzewski . He led the team in assists three years and in steals four seasons . While at Duke his roommate for away games was Mike Brey . 
 = = = Freshman and sophomore years = = = 
 Dawkins played point guard for the 1982 – 83 Blue Devils , but moved to shooting guard the following year to make way for Amaker . When Amaker joined the 1983 – 84 Blue Devils , unranked Duke , led by Dawkins and Amaker , won its first seven games , the longest winning streak of fourth @-@ year head coach Krzyzewski 's career . Amaker had a field goal accuracy of over 65 percent in those games . He led Duke to the NCAA Tournament during his 1984 freshman and 1985 sophomore seasons , but neither team advanced to the Sweet Sixteen ( regional semifinals ) . In the quarterfinal round of the 1984 ACC Men 's Basketball Tournament against the Mark Price @-@ led Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets , Amaker hit the game @-@ winning shot with the score tied and less than 10 seconds left in overtime . In some instances , Amaker 's defense changed the game by limiting dribble penetration and forcing low shooting percentages regardless of whether he had notable offensive contributions . 
 = = = Junior year = = = 
 During Amaker 's junior year ( 1985 – 86 ) , Duke won the inaugural NIT Season Tip @-@ Off ( then known as the preseason National Invitation Tournament ) and Amaker had nine assists in the championship game against a Danny Manning @-@ led Kansas team . In the March Carolina – Duke rivalry game against North Carolina Amaker stole the ball from Jeff Lebo and made a layup that gave Duke a late first half three @-@ point lead it never surrendered . The win clinched Duke 's first regular season ACC Championship since 1966 . According to ESPN college basketball color commentator Dick Vitale , Amaker had a reputation for putting pressure on the ball . That year , he helped the team win the 1986 ACC Men 's Basketball Tournament , including a championship game victory over the Price @-@ led Georgia Tech . 
 Duke entered the 1986 NCAA Tournament ranked number one with a team that was built around the defensive efforts of its guards , Dawkins and Amaker . In the final four with Duke clinging to a 69 – 67 lead in a rematch against Kansas , Amaker pulled down the final rebound and sank two clinching free throws in the final five seconds . The win sent Duke to the championship game , giving the team its 21st consecutive victory and an NCAA record 37 single @-@ season victories . Chicago Tribune journalist Robert Markus described Amaker and Dawkins as the best guard combination in the country , although Vitale described Amaker as unknown . 
 The 1985 – 86 Blue Devils finished as national runner @-@ up in the 1986 NCAA Tournament to Louisville . That year , Amaker recorded 81 steals , second to Jim <unk> at that point in Duke history . He set the career steals record , which stood until Shane Battier broke it in 2001 . Amaker also holds the Duke single @-@ year NCAA Tournament record with 18 steals in 1986 , which had been a tournament record . That year , he had seven steals in two tournament games — against Old Dominion in the second round on March 15 and Louisville in the final on March 31 . This seven @-@ steal total stood as the single @-@ game NCAA tournament record for seven years until the 1993 NCAA Tournament when Darrell Hawkins had eight for Arkansas against Holy Cross and Grant Hill had eight for Duke against California . The seven steals was a championship game record that was tied by Mookie Blaylock in the 1988 NCAA Tournament for Oklahoma against Kansas and was surpassed by Ty Lawson in the 2009 NCAA Tournament for North Carolina against Michigan State . Amaker was selected to the 1986 Division I Basketball Tournament All @-@ NCAA Final Four Team . The 1986 Duke team graduated four of its five starters ( Dawkins , Mark Alarie , Jay Bilas and David Henderson ) , leaving Amaker with an inexperienced supporting cast for his senior season . That year , Amaker was a spokesman against drug and alcohol abuse as part of an NCAA @-@ Fiesta Bowl drug education television program . 
 = = = Senior year = = = 
 Muggsy <unk> , Amaker 's ACC rival , was his roommate during the July 1986 FIBA World Championship . He played in at least two games in the tournament , the first for a mere two minutes against Puerto Rico , but he played a prominent role in the USA 's win over Italy . Amaker won a gold medal while serving on the US national team in the FIBA World Championship , which served as the basketball tournament for the 1986 Goodwill Games . 
 Senior Amaker served as team captain for the 1986 – 87 Blue Devils , and he led Duke back to the 1987 NCAA tournament , where they advanced to the Sweet Sixteen before losing to eventual champion Indiana . The key players on the team that year were Amaker and sophomore Danny Ferry . During his senior season , the National Collegiate Athletic Association instituted the three @-@ point field goal . Amaker led Duke in three point shooting that year . He hit a three @-@ point shot with 1 : 39 remaining in overtime against 17 – 0 ( 4 – 0 ACC ) Horace Grant @-@ led Clemson to give Duke the lead for good . A few weeks later , with the score tied in regulation at 60 against Notre Dame and on a two @-@ on @-@ one fast break with 16 seconds left , Amaker took a jump shot . Krzyzewski said Duke lost the game because it did not play as smart as its opponent and Markus described this example in his column . In Amaker 's final home game , he made a jump shot with 1 : 15 remaining that put number seventeen Duke , which made all six of its free throws in the final 45 seconds , ahead for good in its rematch against number thirteen Clemson . In the 1987 tournament he led Duke in scoring in its final two games , including 23 against the Rick Calloway / Keith Smart / Steve Alford @-@ led Indiana , who was coached by Bobby Knight , Krzyzewski 's college coach . 
 That year , the National Association of Basketball Coaches ( NABC ) awarded Amaker with the first Henry Iba Corinthian Award ( also known as the NABC Defensive Player of the Year ) . Amaker was selected to the 1987 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American third team by the NABC . He was named to the 1987 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament All @-@ Midwest Regional Team . He was a 1987 All @-@ ACC 2nd @-@ team honoree and earned the team co @-@ MVP award with Ferry that year . Amaker earned a bachelor 's degree in economics in 1987 from Duke . 
 = = = Accomplishments = = = 
 Amaker set many Duke career and single @-@ season assists records . He held the record for single @-@ season assists in the years between 1986 and 1990 , which was broken by Bobby Hurley . Hurley also broke Amaker 's records in career assists per game ( 5 @.@ 1 , 1987 – 93 ) and career assists ( 708 , 1987 – 92 ) . Steve Wojciechowski broke Amaker 's records in single @-@ season assists to turnover ratio ( 2 @.@ 88 , 1985 – 97 ) and career assists to turnover ratio ( 2 @.@ 11 , 1987 – 98 ) . Although his single @-@ season assists records were surpassed by Hurley 's freshman , sophomore and senior season totals , it still remains a record for a Duke junior . He also held Duke 's career NCAA tournament assist average record with 57 in 12 games for a 4 @.@ 7 average until Hurley surpassed it with 145 in 20 games for a 7 @.@ 3 average . His school single @-@ game assists record of 14 that he tied ( Kevin <unk> , March 2 , 1974 , vs. North Carolina ) vs. Miami on February 19 , 1986 , was not broken until Hurley 's senior 1993 season and is still a record for a junior . 
 Amaker holds several Duke and ACC records for games played . Amaker , Alarie and Dawkins have all started 40 games for the 1985 – 86 Duke team and both Ferry and Billy King have played 40 games in a season . Amaker 's 138 consecutive games started surpassed Alarie and Dawkins ' totals of 133 . His 138 consecutive games played was a Duke record until Chris Duhon played 144 in a row ending in 2004 . Consecutive games started is not shown in the 2009 – 10 Atlantic Coast Conference Media Guide records section . However , no ACC player has ever played more than 40 games in a season . 
 = = Pro career = = 
 Following his college basketball career , Amaker was drafted by the Seattle SuperSonics in the 3rd round of the 1987 NBA Draft with the 55th pick overall . He was also drafted in the first round of the April 1987 United States Basketball League 's draft by the Staten Island Stallions . He was regarded to be too small to play in the NBA at 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) and 155 pounds ( 70 kg ) . He was cut from the SuperSonics team on October 21 , 1987 . Subsequently , he spent three days with the Wyoming <unk> of the Continental Basketball Association in Casper , Wyoming . He quickly decided he wanted to return to Duke to pursue a Master of Business Administration ( MBA ) . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 = = = Duke = = = 
 Amaker accepted a graduate assistant position on Krzyzewski 's staff at Duke in 1988 while pursuing his MBA degree from the Fuqua School of Business ; the team reached the Final Four of the 1989 NCAA Tournament . He was an assistant coach from 1989 through 1997 , during which Duke won two NCAA Championships ( 1991 and 1992 ) and made two other Final Four appearances ( 1990 and 1994 ) . By 1992 , Duke had been to five consecutive final fours . While an assistant coach , he declined numerous Division I head coaching opportunities . Duke also won four regular season Atlantic Coast Conference men 's basketball championships ( 1991 , 1992 , 1994 and 1997 ) and the 1992 ACC Men 's Basketball Tournament . The 1994 – 95 season was turbulent . In October 1994 , Krzyzewski underwent back surgery . He attempted to return to coaching two weeks later but eventually was re @-@ admitted to Duke University Hospital for four days in January due to related complications . He eventually relinquished control of the team for the season to interim coach Pete <unk> . 
 After <unk> Sanderson was forced out as coach of Alabama in 1992 , Amaker was under consideration to replace him . In 1993 , he was the leading candidate to assume the head coaching job at Northwestern when Bill Foster stepped aside to serve as interim athletic director , but at age 27 , he declined the job when it was offered , noting that he had only been married one year and saying " It boiled down to us looking at a situation where we were extremely flattered , but a situation that wasn 't right for us now . " That summer Amaker was one of two college basketball members of the 10 @-@ man selection committee for the United States Olympic Team . In 1994 , he was on the short list to replace Kevin O 'Neill , who left Marquette for a job at Tennessee . In 1995 , USC was in negotiations to hire Amaker to replace interim coach Charlie Parker , who replaced George Raveling following a car accident . The reason his negotiations with USC failed was compensation since Amaker was both a Duke assistant coach and earned an additional $ 100 @,@ 000 ( US $ 155 @,@ 296 in 2016 dollars ) through a summer youth day camp . That summer , Duke promoted Amaker from assistant basketball coach to associate head coach . Krzyzewski returned to coaching in October 1995 . USC went on to hire Parker , who did not last a full season as head coach . In 1996 , Amaker was rumored to be on the short list to replace interim coach Steve Lavin at UCLA in 1997 . When the Northwestern job opened up again in 1997 , he was not under consideration because athletic director Rick Taylor sought a candidate with Division I head coaching postseason experience . 
 = = = Seton Hall = = = 
 In 1997 , Amaker took the head coaching position at Seton Hall , who had missed the post season in the two prior years . At 31 , Amaker became the youngest head basketball coach in Big East Conference history . Then , he took Seton Hall to the NCAA tournament once ( 2000 ) – when his team reached the " Sweet Sixteen " – and to the National Invitation Tournament three times ( 1998 , 1999 and 2001 ) . 
 The 1997 – 98 Seton Hall team earned the sixth seed in the 1998 Big East Men 's Basketball Tournament , but were ousted in the first round by eleventh @-@ seeded Boston College in overtime in the first round . They ended up in the 1998 National Invitation Tournament where they lost in the first round to Georgia Tech to fall to a final record of 15 – 15 . After returning Seton Hall to the post season , Amaker was considered for the Michigan job , but they decided to make interim coach Brian Ellerbe a full @-@ time head coach . 
 Seton Hall 's 1998 – 99 team earned the ninth seed in the 1999 Big East Men 's Basketball Tournament . They defeated eighth @-@ seeded Notre Dame in the first round , but lost by one point to top @-@ seeded Connecticut , who went on to win the national championship . They were invited to the 1999 National Invitation Tournament where they lost in the first round to Old Dominion and again finished 15 – 15 . 
 According to ESPN , Amaker recruited the # 2 recruiting class in the nation for the class of 2000 while at Seton Hall . The class consisted of Eddie Griffin ( ranked by some as the top high school player in the nation ) , Andre Barrett , and Marcus Toney @-@ El . The Pirates were ranked high on many experts ' pre @-@ season rankings . The 1999 – 2000 Seton Hall team earned the fifth seed in the 2000 Big East Men 's Basketball Tournament and earned a victory against twelfth @-@ seeded Providence in the first round , but lost to fourth @-@ seeded Connecticut . The first round win gave the team 20 victories and no Big East team had achieved that number of victories without getting invited to the NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament in the 21 @-@ year history of the conference . They were invited to the 2000 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament where they were seeded tenth in the East Region . They knocked off seventh @-@ seeded Oregon and second @-@ seeded Temple . In the Sweet Sixteen round they were ousted by third @-@ seeded Oklahoma State and finished with a 22 – 10 record . 
 The 2000 – 01 Pirates earned the Big East West Division 's sixth seed in the 2001 Big East Men 's Basketball Tournament and beat the East Division three seed St. John 's and west two seed Georgetown . They were defeated in the semifinals by east top seed Boston College and ended the year at 16 – 15 . They were invited to the 2001 National Invitation Tournament where they lost in the first round to Alabama . The following season , Amaker resigned as the Seton Hall head coach and became head coach at Michigan , replacing Ellerbe , who had been fired . Amaker met with Michigan athletic director Bill Martin in a hotel lobby instead of renting a room because Martin wanted to save money . Word of the meeting got back to ESPN and the New Jersey press was not kind to Amaker , hinting that he was devious and selfish . 
 = = = Michigan = = = 
 Amaker inherited a Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team that was five years into the investigation of the University of Michigan basketball scandal . The Wolverines opposed Amaker 's former mentor Krzyzewski and the 2001 – 02 Duke Blue Devils in his seventh game as head coach , but his team lost . Although the 2001 – 02 Wolverines finished at 11 – 18 , Amaker was able to lead the tenth @-@ seeded team to a victory over seventh @-@ seeded Northwestern in the 2002 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament before losing to two seed , Ohio State . 
 Michigan finished the 2002 – 03 season with a 17 – 13 record , but sat out both that year 's NCAA and NIT tournaments due to the self @-@ imposed postseason ban . The team had banned itself from post season play before the season started . Nonetheless , over the course of the season the team had earned a three seed and a first round bye in the 2003 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament , but was upset in the second round by Indiana . At the conclusion of the season , the NCAA added a second year of post season ineligibility to bring the severity of the punishment to a level it deemed more appropriate . 
 Amaker 's 2003 – 04 team earned a fifth seed and first round bye in the 2004 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament where it defeated fourth @-@ seeded Iowa before losing to top @-@ seeded Illinois . The team experienced successive wins in the 2004 National Invitation Tournament against Missouri , Oklahoma , Hawaii and Oregon . The team won the championship game against Rutgers , giving Amaker his highest single @-@ season victory total up to that point in time with a 23 – 11 record . Amaker , who has tended to avoid the spotlight , was not on the court as his team celebrated the college basketball tradition of cutting of the nets in celebration of a championship at the 2004 NIT . 
 The 2004 – 05 team only achieved a nine seed in the 2005 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament when it lost in the first round to eighth @-@ seeded Northwestern . It posted a 13 – 18 record ( 4 – 12 in conference ) and finished ninth in the conference . 
 The Wolverines ' 2005 – 06 team was a high percentage shooting , disciplined and balanced team . It was seeded seventh in the 2006 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament but lost to the tenth seeded Minnesota Golden Gophers . The team had been ranked 37th in the Ratings Percentage Index prior to the game , making them a solid contender for an 2006 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament invitation . The loss sent them to the 2006 National Invitation Tournament where they were a number one seed , and they finished as the runner @-@ up to South Carolina . Along the way to its runner @-@ up finish , the team defeated ninth @-@ seeded UTEP , fifth @-@ seeded Notre Dame ( <unk> ) , third @-@ seeded Miami and fifth @-@ seeded Old Dominion . The team ended with a 22 – 11 ( 8 – 8 ) record . 
 Michigan 's 2006 – 07 team earned an eight seed in the 2007 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament , when it defeated the ninth @-@ seeded Minnesota Golden Gophers before succumbing to top @-@ seeded Ohio State . After receiving a three seed , Michigan advanced to the second round of the 2007 National Invitation Tournament by beating Utah State before falling to Florida State . The team finished with a 22 – 13 record yet only 8 – 8 in conference play . 
 Amaker was credited for helping to restore the ethical reputation of a Michigan program which had been tarnished by scandal . However , he was criticized in the press for being unable to take the Wolverines to the NCAA tournament in six seasons at the helm . Some fans and sportswriters argued that Amaker 's Michigan teams tended to <unk> and fall apart in pressure situations , particularly in conference , on the road and at the end of the regular season . On March 17 , 2007 , Amaker was fired by the University of Michigan . Amaker was paid $ 900 @,@ 000 to buy out the remaining years on his contract . 
 = = = Harvard = = = 
 On April 11 , 2007 , Amaker was named head men 's basketball coach at Harvard University . Harvard 's recruiting process had included interviewing the underclassmen on the team who preferred Amaker to alternatives that included Mike Jarvis and Mike Gillian . Upon his arrival , Harvard had endured five consecutive non @-@ winning seasons , a streak that Amaker would not halt until his third year . Amaker became the only African American among the head coaches of Harvard 's 32 athletic teams . Amaker 's Harvard team beat his former team , Michigan , in his eighth game as coach at Harvard during the 2007 – 08 season . It was the school 's first win ever against a BCS conference school . 
 The New York Times published an accusatory article in March 2008 , raising allegations of diminished academic standards among Amaker 's first class of recruits and potentially improper recruiting practices . <unk> by this negative publicity , the Ivy League office conducted a four @-@ month investigation and " determined that no violations of NCAA or Ivy League rules occurred " , clearing Amaker and his staff completely . Typically , the NCAA would accept the results of a formal investigation performed by a conference office but , in this case , the NCAA initially tabled and then eventually rejected the Ivy League 's findings completely . The NCAA commenced its own investigation which ultimately took two years to complete . 
 Amaker 's Harvard squad defeated then @-@ ranked Boston College ( # 17 AP Poll – # 24 Coaches ' Poll ) on January 7 , 2009 for the first win over a ranked team in the program 's history . His 2008 – 09 recruiting class was the first time an Ivy League institution was ranked in the top 25 by ESPN . 
 The following season , the 2009 – 10 Harvard team played competitively against # 14 ranked Connecticut getting 30 points and 9 rebounds from senior Jeremy Lin on December 6 . Although they held the lead only once , they were within 4 points in the final seconds of the game . They also won their December 9 rematch with Boston College by a 74 – 67 margin . After coaching Harvard to its highest single @-@ season win total ever behind the play of Lin , Harvard was invited to participate in the 2010 CollegeInsider.com Tournament . The team was defeated in the first round by Appalachian State . During the season , Amaker was a nominee for the first Ben Jobe Award as the top minority Division I college basketball coach , and was recognized by Fox Sports as the 2010 Ivy League Coach of the Year . Amaker was mentioned for the 2010 head coach opening at St. John 's . 
 In the summer of 2010 , the NCAA informed Harvard that Amaker 's behavior constituted impermissible recruiting behavior . Harvard and the NCAA negotiated a settlement in which the university would " declare " what the NCAA consented to classify as secondary violations . Under the terms of the agreement , Harvard accepted punitive recruiting restrictions for the 2010 – 11 season . These were the first NCAA penalties ever assessed against the Harvard men 's basketball program and the first instance of the Ivy League being overruled on a formal rules interpretation . 
 Under Amaker 's leadership , the 2010 – 11 team tied with Princeton for the 2010 – 11 Ivy League men 's basketball season championship , which was the school 's first men 's basketball Ivy League championship since the league was formed in the 1956 – 57 season . Harvard finished the season a perfect 14 – 0 at home , which surpassed the prior season 's school record of 11 home wins . Harvard 's 12 conference game wins established a school record . The team 's victory over Colorado was the Crimson 's first against a Big 12 Conference opponent since that conference commenced play in 1996 . His fourth season also marked the fourth straight season that Harvard defeated at least one power conference opponent . Although Harvard never appeared in the 2010 – 11 NCAA Division I men 's basketball rankings , for a few weeks during the season they received a vote in the AP Poll . On March 7 , Harvard received a vote in both the AP Poll and the Coaches ' Poll . Harvard faced Ivy League co @-@ champion Princeton in a one @-@ game playoff and lost by a 63 – 62 margin . Princeton earned the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament automatic bid , while Harvard earned an at @-@ large bid to the 2011 National Invitation Tournament , marking the school 's first appearance in the National Invitation Tournament . On March 15 , Harvard was defeated by Oklahoma State by a 71 – 54 margin in the first round . The final record of 23 – 7 established a school record for number of wins , surpassing the prior season 's total of 21 . Amaker was again a finalist for the Ben Jobe Award , was a finalist for the Hugh Durham Award and was selected by the NABC as the District 13 Coach of the Year . He was named Ivy League coach of the year by <unk> 
 The 2011 – 12 Harvard team defeated then @-@ ranked Florida State ( # 22 AP Poll – # 20 Coaches ' Poll ) on November 25 , 2011 for the school 's second win over a ranked team in the program 's history , and the highest ranked opponent in the Coaches ' Poll that Harvard had defeated up to that point . On December 5 , 2011 , Harvard made its first appearance in either the AP Poll ( 25 ) or Coaches ' Poll ( 24 ) . It left Brown as the only remaining Ivy League school to have never been ranked in the AP Poll and leaves only seven schools that have played Division I basketball since the AP Poll began that have never been ranked in it . Harvard was the first Ivy League team ranked in the Coaches ' Poll since the 2009 – 10 Cornell Big Red and the first Ivy League team ranked in the AP Poll since the 1997 – 98 Princeton Tigers , who finished 8th in the poll . By January 2 , the team achieved rankings of 22 in the AP Poll and 21 in the Coaches ' Poll . The team was also ranked 21st in the Coaches ' Poll on February 6 . The team established a new record for single @-@ season wins as well as single @-@ season non @-@ league wins and tied the record for conference game wins . Amaker was selected by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association as the 2011 – 12 Men 's District I ( ME , VT , NH , RI , MA , CT ) Coach of the Year . He won the NABC Coach of the Year for District 13 and was again a finalist for both the Ben Jobe Award and the Hugh Durham Award . On March 6 , 2012 , Harvard earned its first bid to the NCAA Tournament since 1946 . 
 On October 6 , 2012 , Amaker was inducted into his high school 's inaugural hall of fame class . Amaker 's 2012 – 13 Harvard team entered the season affected by the 2012 Harvard cheating scandal . Instead of being the favorite as originally expected , the team was predicted to finish second to Princeton by various media sources because Kyle Casey and Brandyn Curry withdrew due to the scandal . Casey and Curry had been first @-@ team and second @-@ team All @-@ Ivy selections for the 2011 – 12 Ivy League men 's basketball season , respectively . Both players withdrew in hopes of preserving their final year of athletic eligibility following the investigation . During the season , the team defeated Boston College its fifth consecutive victory against Boston College Eagles men 's basketball , making Amaker a perfect 6 – 0 against the Atlantic Coast Conference . The 2012 – 13 Harvard team overcame the withdrawal of its senior co @-@ captains to repeat as 2013 Ivy League champions , which earned Harvard a trip to the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . On March 21 , 14th @-@ seeded Harvard earned the school 's first NCAA Tournament victory by a 68 – 62 margin and its first victory over a top 10 opponent when it defeated 3rd @-@ seeded New Mexico ( # 10 AP Poll – # 10 Coaches ' Poll ) . Two nights later , Harvard lost to Arizona 74 – 51 . Following the season , Amaker was inducted into the New England Basketball Hall of Fame class of 2013 . Amaker won the National Sportscasters and Sportswriters Association ( <unk> ) Clarence " Big House " Gaines College Basketball Coach of the Year in Division I as the top minority coach , the NABC Coach of the Year for District 13 and was again a finalist for the Ben Jobe Award . In August , Amaker was inducted into his fourth Hall of Fame ( Washington Metro Basketball Hall of Fame ) . 
 The 2013 – 14 team won the 2013 Great Alaska Shootout and 2013 – 14 Ivy League conference regular season championship with a 13 – 1 record and posting a school record 27 wins against 5 defeats . The team entered the 2014 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament with a number twelve seed where it defeated a ( # 15 AP Poll – # 14 Coaches ' Poll ) Cincinnati team that was seeded fifth . Harvard eventually lost to number ( # 11 / 13 ) four seed Michigan State . The team was the first Ivy League school to win games in consecutive NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournaments since the 1983 – 84 Princeton Tigers . 
 The 2014 – 15 team was the first Ivy League team to make a fifth consecutive postseason appearance since the 2001 – 02 Princeton Tigers men 's basketball team completed a seven @-@ year run for Princeton . They were the third Ivy team to make four consecutive NCAA Basketball Tournament appearances , a feat last accomplished by the 1991 – 92 Princeton Tigers men 's basketball team . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Amaker is married to Stephanie Pinder @-@ Amaker , who is a licensed clinical psychologist . The couple met at Duke . Amaker 's grandmother is Annie <unk> . Amaker 's mother , Alma , continued to make him the sauce for his favorite meal of spaghetti and express mail it to him from her home in Falls Church , Virginia , during his career at least until his days at Michigan . According to Duke teammate Bilas , Amaker was quite fashion @-@ conscious and attempted to be a trendsetter . 
 At Michigan , his daily routine included breakfast at a local hotel where he read USA Today . At Harvard , once a month , he convenes for breakfast at the Cambridge , Massachusetts , restaurant Henrietta 's Table with a group of noted African @-@ American scholars and businessmen led by Harvard Law School professor Charles Ogletree to discuss sociopolitical issues . Amaker is known for his trademark mock turtleneck shirts , each of which has his initials monogrammed into the collar , and for wearing a sports coat at each news conference . Unlike most of his peers , Amaker avoids the press and will not do a radio or television show . 
 Amaker was enshrined in the Duke Athletic Hall of Fame in 2001 . He was a member of the board of directors for USA Basketball . During his time on the board he served as a member of the Men 's Collegiate and Men 's Senior National Committees , where he helped select members of the United States 1996 Olympic gold medal team . Amaker owns two vintage Mercedes @-@ Benz cars and is a Washington Redskins fan . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = Yugoslav torpedo boat T3 = 
 The Yugoslav torpedo boat T3 was a 250t @-@ class , T @-@ group sea @-@ going torpedo boat built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy as 78 T in 1914 . She was armed with two Škoda 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) L / 30 guns , four 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , and could carry 10 – 12 naval mines . She saw active service during World War I , performing convoy , escort and minesweeping tasks , and anti @-@ submarine operations . Following Austria @-@ Hungary 's defeat in 1918 , she was allocated to the Navy of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes , which subsequently became the Royal Yugoslav Navy , and was renamed T3 . 
 During the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , she was captured by the Italians and after her main armament was modernised she served with the Royal Italian Navy under her Yugoslav designation . Following the Italian capitulation in September 1943 , she was captured by Germany , and after she was fitted with additional anti @-@ aircraft guns she served with the Kriegsmarine as TA48 . In German service her crew of 52 consisted entirely of Croatian officers and enlisted men . She was sunk by Allied aircraft in February 1945 while in the port of Trieste . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1910 , the Austria @-@ Hungary Naval Technical Committee initiated the design and development of a 275 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 279 t ) coastal torpedo boat , specifying that it should be capable of sustaining 30 knots ( 56 km / h ) for 10 hours . This specification was based an expectation that the Strait of Otranto , where the Adriatic Sea meets the Ionian Sea , would be blockaded by hostile forces during a future conflict . In such circumstances , there would be a need for a torpedo boat that could sail from the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : <unk> und <unk> Kriegsmarine ) base at Cattaro to the Strait during darkness , locate and attack blockading ships and return to port before morning . Steam turbine power was selected for propulsion , as diesels with the necessary power were not available , and the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy did not have the practical experience to run turbo @-@ electric boats . Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino ( STT ) of Trieste was selected for the contract to build eight vessels , ahead of one other tenderer . The T @-@ group designation signified the builder , STT . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 The 250t @-@ class , T @-@ group boats had a waterline length of 58 @.@ 2 m ( 190 ft 11 in ) , a beam of 5 @.@ 7 m ( 18 ft 8 in ) , and a normal draught of 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) . While their designed displacement was 262 tonnes ( 258 long tons ) , they displaced about 320 tonnes ( 310 long tons ) fully loaded . The crew consisted of 39 officers and enlisted men . The boats were powered by a Parsons steam turbine driving two propellers , using steam generated by two Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers , one of which burned fuel oil and the other coal . The turbine was rated at 5 @,@ 000 shp ( 3 @,@ 700 kW ) with a maximum output of 6 @,@ 000 shp ( 4 @,@ 500 kW ) and designed to reach a top speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . They carried 18 tonnes ( 17 @.@ 7 long tons ) of coal and 24 tonnes ( 23 @.@ 6 long tons ) of fuel oil , which gave them a range of 980 nmi ( 1 @,@ 810 km ; 1 @,@ 130 mi ) at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . The T @-@ group had one funnel rather than the two funnels of the later groups of the class . Despite the specifications of the contract being very close to the requirements for the coastal torpedo boat , the STT boats were classified as sea @-@ going . 
 The boats were originally to be armed with three Škoda 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) L / 30 guns , and three 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , but this was changed to two guns and four torpedo tubes before the first boat was completed , in order to standardise the armament with the following F @-@ group . They could also carry 10 – 12 naval mines . 78 T was the fifth of its class to be completed , and was laid down on 22 October 1913 , launched on 4 March 1914 , and completed and commissioned on 23 August 1914 . Eight T @-@ group boats were completed between February and December 1914 , designated 74 T – 81 T. In 1914 , one 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun was added . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = World War I and interwar period = = = 
 The 250t @-@ class , T @-@ group were the first small Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy boats to use turbines , and this contributed to ongoing problems with the boats . During World War I , 78 T was used for convoy , escort and minesweeping tasks , and anti @-@ submarine operations , She also conducted patrols and supported seaplane raids against the Italian Adriatic coast . Due to inadequate funding , 78 T and the rest of the 250t @-@ class were essentially coastal vessels , despite the original intention that they would be used for " high seas " operations . In 1917 , one of the 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) guns on each boat was placed on an anti @-@ aircraft mount . 
 She survived the war intact , and under the terms of the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye concluded in September 1919 , she was allocated to the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( KSCS , later Yugoslavia ) in 1920 , along with three other 250t class , T @-@ group boats , 76 T , 77 T and 79 T , which all served with the Royal Yugoslav Navy ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : <unk> Jugoslovenska Ratna Mornarica , KJRM ; <unk> Југословенска Pатна <unk> ) . In KJRM service , 78 T was renamed T3 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 In April 1941 , Yugoslavia entered World War II when it was invaded by the German @-@ led Axis powers . At the time of the invasion , T3 was assigned to the Southern Sector of the KJRM 's Coastal Defence Command based at the Bay of Kotor , along with her sister ship T1 and a number of minesweepers and other craft . T3 was captured by the Royal Italian Navy ( Italian : Regia Marina ) and was operated by them under her Yugoslav designation . She was fitted with two 76 mm ( 3 in ) L / 30 anti @-@ aircraft guns in place of her 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) guns , but no other significant alterations were made to her . 
 When the Italians capitulated in September 1943 , the German Navy ( German : Kriegsmarine ) seized T3 in the port of Rijeka and renamed her TA48 . During her time in German service she was crewed exclusively by Croatian officers and sailors , and her complement was increased to 52 . The Germans fitted her with two single 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns . She was active in the northern Adriatic but saw little action . She was sunk in the port of Trieste by Allied aircraft on 20 February 1945 . 
 = Ashurbanipal ( sculpture ) = 
 Ashurbanipal , also known as the Ashurbanipal Monument or the Statue of Ashurbanipal , is a bronze sculpture by Fred Parhad , an artist of Assyrian descent . It is located in the Civic Center of San Francisco , California , in the United States . The 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) statue depicting the Assyrian king of the same name was commissioned by the Assyrian Foundation for the Arts and presented to the City of San Francisco in 1988 as a gift from the Assyrian people . The sculpture reportedly cost $ 100 @,@ 000 and was the first " sizable " bronze statue of Ashurbanipal . It is administered by the City and County of San Francisco and the San Francisco Arts Commission . 
 Parhad 's work was met with some criticism by local Assyrians , who argued it was inaccurate to portray Ashurbanipal holding a book and a lion , or wearing a skirt . The critics thought the statue looked more like the Sumerian king Gilgamesh ; Renee Kovacs , a " scholar and self @-@ stated Assyriologist " , believed the sculpture depicted neither figure , but rather a Mesopotamian " protective figure " . Parhad defended the accuracy of his work , while also admitting that he took artistic liberties . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ashurbanipal was designed by Fred Parhad , an Iraqi @-@ born artist of Assyrian descent . Parhad rejected formal arts studies at the University of California , Berkeley and relocated to New York , where the Metropolitan Museum of Art allowed him to study its Assyrian collection . The work was commissioned by the Assyrian Foundation for the Arts under the direction of its president , <unk> David . The Assyrian Universal Alliance Foundation also claims to have commissioned the work . Funds were collected from Assyrians throughout the United States . 
 In 1987 , The Telegraph reported that the work cost $ 100 @,@ 000 and was the first " sizable " bronze statue of Ashurbanipal . It was presented to the City of San Francisco as a gift from the Assyrian people on May 29 , 1988 , unveiled at the entry to the Asian Art Museum on Van Ness Avenue . The statue now stands on Fulton Street between the Main Library and Asian Art Museum , within the city 's Civic Center . It is administered by the City and County of San Francisco and the San Francisco Arts Commission . 
 The Smithsonian Institution lists Frank <unk> as the installation 's architect and MBT Associates as its architectural firm . Ashurbanipal was surveyed by the Smithsonian 's Save Outdoor Sculpture ! program in 1992 . In 1996 , plans for a Civic Center pedestrian mall were being developed by the San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association ; one planner advocated for construction of an Assyrian garden , including lotus blossoms , pomegranate trees and reeds , at the site of the statue . 
 = = Description = = 
 The 8 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) patinated bronze statue , mounted on a base and a plinth to reach a total height of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) , weighs approximately 1 @,@ 800 pounds ( 820 kg ) . It depicts Ashurbanipal , the Assyrian king known for building the eponymously named Library of Ashurbanipal , the first and largest library in Nineveh . The bearded king is shown wearing earrings and a tunic ; he is holding a book ( or clay tablet ) in one arm and a lion cub in the other . According to the Historical Marker Database , the tablet reads in cuneiform : " Peace unto heaven and earth / Peace unto countries and cities / Peace unto the dwellers in all lands / This is the statue presented to the City of San Francisco by the Assyrian people in the 210th year of America 's sovereignty " . 
 The " larger @-@ than @-@ life " , full length statue stands above a plinth adorned with a lotus <unk> design and a concrete base with an anti @-@ graffiti coating . The base includes rosettes and a bronze plaque . One inscription below the statue reads the text of the tablet in English , Akkadian cuneiform and Aramaic . The text " Ashurbanipal , King of Assyria , 669 – 627 B.C. " appears above and the text " Dedicated May 29 , 1988 " appears below , both in English . Another inscription below the statue reads , " Presented to the City of San Francisco by the Assyrian Foundation for the Arts through donations of American Assyrian Association of San Francisco / Assyrian American National Federation " , followed by a list of names of donors . In December 2010 , the San Francisco Chronicle reported that a large plaque from the sculpture was missing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In December 1987 , as news began to circulate about the commissioned work , local Assyrians accused Parhad of misrepresenting Ashurbanipal . Criticisms included the depiction of the king holding both a book and a lion , which they argued he " wouldn 't do " , and for dressing him in a skirt , which they claimed he would never have worn . The critics thought the statue made a better portrayal of the Sumerian king Gilgamesh . One critic said : 
 It 's very simple . The statue represents Gilgamesh .... No Assyrian has a right to imagine things about our king . It 's exactly like making a copy of the Statue of Liberty and saying it is George Washington .... Assyrian kings didn 't wear miniskirts . They wouldn 't have been holding a lion or a book . It 's an insult to the Assyrians . 
 <unk> David responded : 
 They are entitled to their opinion .... We have never said this is a museum @-@ quality reproduction .... We have always said this is a characterization of Ashurbanipal as done by a 20th @-@ century artist . If they choose to think of this as Gilgamesh , they are free to do so . 
 Renee Kovacs , a " scholar and self @-@ stated Assyriologist " , said the statue depicted neither Ashurbanipal or Gilgamesh , but rather a Mesopotamian " protective figure , like a guard . " Parhad defended the accuracy of his work , while also admitting that he took artistic liberties and attempted to incorporate the various aspects of Assyrian culture , from its hunting mastery to its admiration for writing . He said of the sculpture : 
 The piece has authentic qualities to it , but it is also my statue .... With the earrings and the clothing and the hair and his daggers , it is Ashurbanipal . But in the choice of ( stance ) , the fact that he is holding a tablet and a lion , that is mine . I wanted myself to be represented in the piece . 
 = New York State Route 184 = 
 New York State Route 184 ( NY 184 ) is a state highway in St. Lawrence County , New York , in the United States . The route is signed as east – west ; however , it runs more in a northeast – southwest direction . It extends for 13 @.@ 69 miles ( 22 @.@ 03 km ) between an intersection with NY 58 in the town of Macomb and a junction with NY 812 in the village of Heuvelton . The two @-@ lane route passes through mostly rural areas of the county . NY 184 was assigned in the early 1930s to most of its current alignment ; however , it initially veered southeastward in the town of De Peyster to serve the hamlet of De Peyster . The route was realigned to bypass the community shortly afterward . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 184 begins at an intersection with NY 58 in the hamlet of Pope Mills , located east of Black Lake in the town of Macomb . The route heads northeast through the heavily forested area as a two @-@ lane road , passing a small number of isolated houses along the way . It intersects with County Route 7 ( CR 7 or Macomb Road ) before entering a stretch with several farms ahead of the De Peyster town line . About 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) into De Peyster , the route crosses over Fish Creek and briefly traverses a marshy area surrounding the waterway . Past the stream , NY 184 curves northward for roughly 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) prior to taking a more pronounced northeasterly track toward the town of Oswegatchie . 
 Near the De Peyster – Oswegatchie town line , the route begins to parallel the south bank of the Oswegatchie River as it merges with the alignment of CR 10 ( Old State Road ) . From here , NY 184 continues alongside the Oswegatchie River into the town of Oswegatchie and its village of Heuvelton not far from the town line , where the route becomes known as Union Street . As Union Street , NY 184 serves a mostly residential stretch of buildings along the riverbank before ending at a junction with NY 812 ( State Street ) across the river from the village center . 
 = = History = = 
 The origins of NY 184 date back to 1916 when the state of New York awarded a contract on July 18 to improve 11 @.@ 16 miles ( 17 @.@ 96 km ) of roads in the town of Oswegatchie to state highway standards . While the project mostly dealt with improving what is now NY 812 between Heuvelton and the city of Ogdensburg , it also covered a north – south highway connecting Heuvelton to the hamlet of De Peyster 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) to the southwest . The rebuilt roads were added to the state highway system on October 13 , 1921 , as unsigned State Highway 1388 ( SH 1388 ) . The De Peyster – Heuvelton leg of SH 1388 did not receive a posted route number until c . 1931 when it became part of NY 184 , a new route extending from Pope Mills to Heuvelton via De Peyster . It was realigned c . 1933 to bypass De Peyster on a new highway to the northwest . NY 184 's former routing to De Peyster is now part of Plimpton Road west of De Peyster and part of CR 10 north of the hamlet . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in St. Lawrence County . 
 = Yeah ! ( Usher song ) = 
 " Yeah ! " is a song by American recording artist Usher . It was written by Usher , Lil Jon , Sean Garrett , Patrick J. Que Smith , Ludacris , Robert McDowell and LRoc , and features guest vocals from Lil Jon and Ludacris . It was also produced by Lil Jon , who incorporated crunk and R & B — which he coined as crunk & B — in the song 's production . The song was released as the lead single from Usher 's fourth studio album Confessions ( 2004 ) on January 27 , 2004 , after Usher was told by Arista Records , his label at the time , to record more tracks for the album . 
 " Yeah ! " topped the US Billboard Hot 100 chart for twelve consecutive weeks , before being replaced by its follow @-@ up single " Burn " . " Yeah ! " was the longest @-@ running number one single in 2004 , subsequently topping the year @-@ end chart on the Hot 100 . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The song received a similar response in other countries , topping fourteen charts worldwide . It was certified platinum in several countries , including Australia , Belgium , Canada , Germany and Norway , and received a two times platinum certification in New Zealand . The song peaked in the top @-@ ten in several Year @-@ end charts . 
 " Yeah ! " was met with critical acclaim , with critics lauding its production , more specifically its combination of crunk and R & B. An accompanying music video , directed by Mr. X , shows Usher performing choreography in a club in front of blue laser beams . " Yeah " won a Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 47th Grammy Awards , while being nominated for Record of the Year . The song ranked second on the Billboard Hot 100 2000 – 2009 Decade @-@ end chart . As of September 2013 , the song has sold over 4 million copies in the US . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 In the fall of 2003 , Usher submitted his fourth studio album , Confessions ( 2004 ) , to his record label Arista Records . However , when the singer and the company 's then @-@ president L.A. Reid listened to the songs , Reid felt the album lacked a song that had the potential to be released as the album 's lead single . In light of this , Usher was told to record a few more tracks , and so he enlisted American rapper @-@ producer Lil Jon to aid in musical production . Lil Jon recalled " He [ Usher ] needed a single . They had ' Burn ' , ' Burn ' was hot , but they needed that first powerful monster . That 's when I came in . " 
 Several months prior to Lil Jon coming in to aid in the production of Confessions , he was commissioned by Jive Records to produce fifteen tracks for rapper Mystikal . The rapper would only select two tracks , which would give Lil Jon the opportunity to give leftover songs to other record labels . Without Lil Jon 's knowledge , Jive Records gave one of the leftover tracks to hip hop artist Petey Pablo , to which the track would eventually become " Freak @-@ a @-@ Leek " . Meanwhile , assuming that the song had not been used , Lil Jon gave the production to Usher , from which a rough version of " Yeah ! " was recorded , mixed and mastered . Eventually realizing the mistake after Pablo played " Freek @-@ a @-@ leek " to Lil Jon , the latter insisted on producing more tracks for Pablo ; however , Pablo did not give up the song , due to the fact that it was already recorded and had been getting responses from Southern radio . Lil Jon commented , " With so much invested , Jive wouldn 't give up the cut . " Lil Jon reworked the track and a new instrumental was used , from which " Yeah ! " was based . 
 Though " Yeah ! " was now completed , the label still had " Burn " on queue for the lead single . Usher 's friend and former A & R rep Kawan " KP " Prather commented : " ' Burn ' being a great song is one thing , but it 's one of them things where people said , ' It 's strong , but can we make history with that ? ' At the end of the day , you want an event . " Usher was unsure if " Yeah ! " was the right choice . After Lil Jon leaked " Yeah ! " to street DJs across the United States , Usher opted " Burn " as the lead single of the album and was already planning for its music video . The song was not intended to be a proper single and only a teaser for Usher 's fans after waiting for years . However , the responses of " Yeah ! " were overwhelmingly favorable , and " Yeah ! " was released as the first single instead of " Burn " , which became the second single from the album . The single was released in the United States on January 27 , 2004 as a CD single and 12 " single . LaFace Records sent " Yeah ! " to US contemporary hit radio on February 7 , 2004 . In the United Kingdom , it was released as a CD single , containing the album and instrumental version of the song , and two unreleased tracks from the album , " Red Light " and " Sweet Lies " . 
 = = Composition and reception = = 
 " Yeah ! " combines the genres of crunk and R & B genres , to form Crunk & B , which Lil Jon described as " R & B songs that get you crunk , make you wanna wild out " . Entertainment Weekly 's Jem Aswad found the song to contain crunk and transition between hip hop , soul and ballad genres . The song was co @-@ written by Sean Garrett , Patrick J. Que Smith , Ludacris , Robert McDowell , and James Elbert " LRoc " Phillips . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Yeah ! " is written in common time with a moderately slow tempo of 105 beats per minute , It is written in the key of G minor , and boasts trance @-@ style synths . Usher 's vocal range spans from the low note of B ♭ 3 to the high note of B ♭ 4 . 
 " Yeah ! " was lauded by contemporary critics for its production . Jem Aswad of Entertainment Weekly called it " irresistibly <unk> @-@ out " , adding , " the ensuing track glides smoothly between club @-@ friendly hip @-@ hop soul and ballads . " Laura Sinagra of Rolling Stone commented that the song " creates sensual panic by combining Usher 's jumpy attacks with Jon 's sublime , frayed beats . " Jon Caramanica of Blender noted that " Yeah ! " is the first song to mix " mainstream R & B and menacing Southern crunk . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said that the song has brought Usher to a " whole new level of crunk . " Andy Kellman of Allmusic described the song as a " crunk @-@ meets @-@ R & B foundation " which features an " instantly addictive eight @-@ note keyboard vamp " . He added that the song is " so absorbing that Ludacris ' 1500th guest verse floats by with little notice . " Matt Cibula of PopMatters characterized the song as a " full @-@ fledged club über @-@ crunk salacious " but he added that it fails to be a " club banger " . Steve Jones of USA Today referred to " Yeah ! " as a " club @-@ rattling " song from a combination of " Atlanta 's vibrant music scene " , Lil Jon 's " insistent beats " and Ludacris ' " racy rhymes " . Robert Hilburn of Los Angeles Times described " Yeah ! " as a " raucous tale of dance @-@ floor seduction " which pop musician Michael Jackson would have produced in 2004 , if he " still had the old Thriller magic " . 
 Usher himself also garnered praise for the song ; Aswad called it the " grittiest song " Usher had sung and one that " reveals his newfound maturity " . Caramanica said that it is " probably the scariest record – in a good way – he 's ever made " and Usher " smartly shares the spotlight . " Cibula stated that Usher 's " <unk> @-@ ass " singing and Ludacris ' presence contributes to the success of the single . " Yeah ! " was nominated at the 2005 Grammy Awards for Record of the Year , and won the Best Rap / Sung Collaboration award . At the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards , " Yeah ! " was nominated for best R & B / Soul or Rap Dance Cut . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Yeah ! " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number fifty @-@ three on January 13 , 2004 . On March 2 , the song peaked atop the chart and stayed at that position for twelve consecutive weeks . " Yeah ! " became Usher 's fourth number @-@ one single , Lil Jon 's first and Ludacris ' second . The single remained on the Hot 100 for forty @-@ five weeks . " Yeah ! " became the most played song in the United States in 2004 , with Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems reporting the song getting a total of 496 @,@ 805 plays . The commercial success of " Yeah ! " and follow @-@ up single " Burn " helped sustain Confessions atop the US Billboard 200 chart . The single was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on June 11 , 2006 for shipping one million copies since its release . " Yeah ! " became the best @-@ performing single of 2004 in the United States . The single ranked at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 All @-@ Time Top Songs , and second on the Hot 100 decade @-@ end chart , behind Mariah Carey 's " We Belong Together " . By September 2013 , the song had sold 4 million copies in the US . 
 Internationally , " Yeah ! " received a similar response , topping several charts . In Australia , the song topped the chart on the week of April 4 , 2004 for one week . It remained on it for only seven weeks before dropping out , and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipping 70 @,@ 000 units . In New Zealand , " Yeah ! " had a better chart performance , peaking at number one for four non @-@ consecutive weeks . It remained on the chart for twenty @-@ seven weeks before dropping and was certified two times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . In Switzerland and Austria , " Yeah ! " peaked at number one and remained on the charts for thirty @-@ eight and thirty @-@ six weeks , respectively , and was certified gold in both countries . The song topped the charts in Denmark for three weeks , remaining on the chart for seventeen weeks . In Netherlands , " Yeah ! " remained number one for four weeks , and in Norway for seven weeks . The song remained number one in Ireland for two weeks , and number one for one week in France and the United Kingdom . In the latter country , by March 4 , 2010 , " Yeah ! " had sold 434 @,@ 739 copies . 
 Compared to other countries , " Yeah ! " under performed in Finland , where it stayed on the charts for four weeks and peaked at number seventeen , and Spain where it peaked at number thirteen . The song did not top the charts in Italy and Sweden where it peaked at number three and four , respectively , and Belgium ( Flanders ) and Hungary where it charted at number two . Overall , the single remained on several charts worldwide for one year , from early 2004 to 2005 . On the 2004 year @-@ end charts , " Yeah ! " became the twenty @-@ eighth best @-@ selling single in Australia , and twenty @-@ sixth in France . It peaked in the top @-@ ten on the year @-@ end charts in Austria , Belgium ( Flanders ) , Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Netherlands , Ireland , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Mr. X , formerly Little X , had previously directed videos for Usher 's singles " U Don 't Have to Call " and " U Got It Bad " . Mr. X said that the song reminded him of laser beams . Usher and Mr. X combined ideas to create a dance video for " Yeah ! " . The development was handled by how Usher wanted to be portrayed in the video , particularly showcasing his dance moves . The music video was filmed in a vacant art gallery in Los Angeles over two days . When the shooting started , Mr. X recalled Michael Jackson 's " low @-@ tech " and " laser @-@ flashing " 1979 " Rock With You " video , and used it as a reference . Forty extra people were commissioned to dance with Usher , and two ladies to tempt him in different scenes . They went through photo browsing and phone calling , opting for Destiny <unk> , a friend of Mr. X , who seduces Usher in the club in a Marilyn Monroe wardrobe to complement the lyrics . Canadian model <unk> Ford , who was discovered by Mr. X , is portrayed as Usher 's second seductress . Lil Jon acted as an assistant director during the sessions . Usher took charge of his ideas on his wardrobe and choreography , with additional routines , specifically the Rockaway and the Thunderclap , which Mr. X learned from Jamaica . The Rockaway influenced Fat Joe and Terror Squad 's " Lean Back " video . 
 = = = Synopsis and reception = = = 
 The video begins with Usher entering a club , and in another scene dancing in front of blue lasers ; the video alternates between both the club and laser scenes throughout . In the former setting , Usher is sat down when a woman — portrayed by Destiny , video producer Mr. X 's friend — approaches him and attempts to seduce him . The woman stands up and walks to the dance @-@ floor , telling Usher to " come get me " and " baby let 's go " , in sync with the song . Usher goes and dances with her during the chorus . In the beginning of the second verse , the laser scene with Usher dancing now shows both blue and green lasers . Usher and the woman are still dancing , with the woman further attempting to seduce him . 
 In the second chorus , Usher performs choreography in the club , backed up by several male dancers . Female dancers then come in , performing choreography along with Usher and the male dancers . After Lil Jon sprays champagne towards the camera in the laser scene , Ludacris performs his verse . He is dancing in both the club and laser scene , with the camera also alternating to female 's dancing in sync in the club . 
 In the final chorus , Usher again performs choreography in the club , with another scene in the latter setting this time showing a different seductress , portrayed by model <unk> Ford , walking away telling him to follow her . While following her , he is in a hallway , with the women then pulling Usher in a room , where they begin to romance . While Ludacris says his final verse , rapper <unk> and P. Diddy 's former assistant , Fonzworth Bentley , both make appearances with Bentley holding a violin . Lil Jon says his final verse , not present in the track version of " Yeah ! " , where he repeats numerous dance moves including the Rockaway and Thunderclap , with Usher performing them . The video ends with Lil Jon repeating " rock away " and then " cut " . 
 At the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards , the video was nominated for the Michael Jackson Award for Best R & B / Soul or Rap Music Video . 
