 After World War II another series of reforms , influenced by the quality of officers produced by the special entry scheme and other nations ' experience with training officer candidates in a university setting , were initiated to increase the quality of officers in the Navy . In 1949 the entry age was increased to 16 , and by 1955 the entry age was increased to 18 and entry required a minimum of two A levels . After 1957 midshipmen no longer served in the fleet . In 1972 , all cadets became midshipmen when the rank of cadet was abolished . 
 = = = = United States Navy from 1845 = = = = 
 Congress formally authorized the establishment of the United States Military Academy in 1802 , but it took almost 50 years to approve a similar school for naval officers . One major reason for the delay was that Navy leaders preferred the apprenticeship system , citing famous officers such as Nelson and the captains of the War of 1812 who did not attend a formal naval school . However , after the Somers Affair , officers realized that the system for training officers had to change to be more efficient . 
 George Bancroft , appointed Secretary of the Navy in 1845 , decided to work outside of congressional approval and create a new academy for officers . He formed a council led by Commodore Perry to create a new system for training officers , and turned the old Fort Severn at Annapolis into a new institution which would be designated as the United States Naval Academy in 1851 . Midshipmen studied at the Academy for four years and trained aboard ships each summer . Midshipman began to mean " passed midshipman " at this time , and a student at the Naval Academy was a cadet midshipman . The rank of ensign was created in 1862 , and passed midshipmen were promoted to ensign when vacancies occurred . 
 In 1865 , the Department of Steam <unk> was created and cadet engineers were admitted to the Academy for the first time . In 1874 , Congress changed the curriculum to include four years of classroom training and two years of sea duty aboard a regular vessel prior to examinations as warranted midshipmen . In 1882 , Congress eliminated the distinction in training between engineer and naval cadets , and designated the student officers as naval cadets ; the name reverted to midshipmen in 1902 . By an act of Congress passed in 1903 , two appointments as midshipmen were allowed for each senator , representative , and delegate in Congress , two for the District of Columbia , and five each year at large . In 1912 , Congress authorized commissioning midshipmen as ensigns on graduation day , and ended the previously required two years of post @-@ graduation sea service as warrant officers . 
 In 1930 , the Naval Academy received accreditation as an approved technological institution . In 1933 , a new law enabled the Naval , Military , and Coast Guard Academies to award bachelor of science degrees , and the class of 1933 was the first to receive this degree and have it written in the diploma . In 1937 , the superintendent of the Naval Academy was granted the authority to award bachelor of science degrees to all living graduates . 
 = = = = Commonwealth navies = = = = 
 As Dominions of the British Empire formed their own navies during the 20th century , further countries began using the rank of midshipman . Today Australia , New Zealand , South Africa , Pakistan , India , Singapore , Sri Lanka , Bangladesh and Kenya use the rank . Prior to 1968 Canada also used the rank of midshipman , until the National Defence Act consolidated the Royal Canadian Navy with the Army and Air Force into a single military , called the Canadian Forces . As part of the act , the rank of midshipman was replaced with the rank of naval cadet . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In Royal Navy slang , a midshipman is sometimes referred to as a " snotty " . Two popular stories give origins for the term : the first claims that it arose from a shortage of handkerchiefs among midshipmen , who would consequently use their sleeves to wipe their noses . Prince William , later William IV , is sometimes cited as a notorious example of this practice among midshipmen . The other story claims that the three buttons formerly sewn onto midshipmen 's jacket cuffs were placed there to prevent them from wiping their noses on their sleeves . 
 = = Modern usage = = 
 = = = Royal Navy = = = 
 In the modern Royal Navy a midshipman is the lowest rank of officer , and ranks with second lieutenant in the British Army and pilot officer in the Royal Air Force and above all enlisted and warrant ranks . A midshipman 's rank insignia , which has changed little since Napoleonic times , is called a " turnback " : a white patch of cloth with a gold button and a twist of white cord on each side of the coat collar . 
 Prospective officers must have at least five GCSEs , including English and maths , plus at least 180 UCAS points from A levels or other suitable qualifications ( each qualification must be over 45 UCAS points ) . They must pass a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ day assessment , called the Admiralty Interview Board , and a medical examination . As of 2013 , it is no longer the case that those joining the Navy as university graduates start as sub @-@ lieutenants , with non @-@ graduates joining as midshipmen . Graduates and non @-@ graduates all start as midshipmen , and wait to be promoted at the same time . 
 General basic training ( initial officer training ) for Royal Navy officers takes place at the Britannia Royal Naval College . Training takes up to a year depending on specialisation ; all midshipmen participate in at least the first two terms , which are 14 weeks each . Until they have completed initial fleet training , both midshipmen and sub @-@ lieutenants at Britannia Royal Naval College do not use their substantive ranks , but instead use the rank of officer cadet . 
 During the first seven weeks of training , officer cadets learn militarization and sea sense , focusing on learning about the military environment , along with team and leadership skills . During the second seven weeks , officer cadets learn essential sea officer skills , including navigation and the marine environment , strategic studies , and basic sea survival . During the second term officer cadets spend 10 weeks in Initial Fleet Time , serving aboard capital warships as junior ratings . Upon completion of Initial Fleet Time , officer cadets return to Dartmouth for four weeks to complete their final leadership assessment , the Maritime Leadership Exercise ( MARL ) , and a week spent with different areas of the Royal Navy . If they have been successful , officers of all branches then pass out of the college . 
 Upon completion of initial officer training , university cadet entrants , engineering , logistics and flight specialization officer cadets move to their second phase of training elsewhere within the Royal Navy . Midshipmen specializing in warfare remain at the college for the Initial Warfare Officer 's Foundation course , which completes part of a foundation degree in naval studies ( equating to two thirds of a bachelor 's degree ) , on completion of initial professional training . Officers can complete degrees via distance learning with the Open University , although completion is not required . 
 = = = Other Commonwealth nations = = = 
 = = = = Royal Australian Navy = = = = 
 A midshipman in the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) holds a commission , which is usually not issued until promotion to sub @-@ lieutenant or lieutenant . Officer candidates enter the RAN at various ranks depending on previous experience or degree qualifications ; graduates from a three @-@ year course , non @-@ degree qualified entrants , and sailor <unk> below the rank of leading seaman enter as midshipman . 
 On joining the RAN , midshipmen complete six months ' initial officer training ( New Entry Officer 's Course ) at the Royal Australian Naval College . Following this all members serve six months in the fleet completing Primary Qualification ( PQ ) continuation training . Direct entry midshipmen continue their normal training and Australian Defence Force Academy ( ADFA ) entry midshipmen post to Canberra to study at the ADFA in their second year in the Navy . Midshipmen undertake an undergraduate degree over the course of three years , whilst also completing elements of their naval training . ADFA midshipmen are also undergraduate students of the University of New South Wales ( UNSW ) . When they graduate from UNSW at ADFA at the completion of their three- or four @-@ year undergraduate program , they do so with a fully recognized degree from UNSW – the same degree received by graduates of UNSW 's campus in Sydney . During Single Service Training ( SST ) at ADFA midshipmen have the opportunity to return to sea during the SST period as well as visiting shore establishments for PQ related training . 
 = = = = Royal New Zealand Navy = = = = 
 In the Royal New Zealand Navy ( <unk> ) , midshipman is the lowest commissioned officer rank , for officers under training and retained upon completion of initial training by those without a university degree . Unlike officer cadet ranks in the Army , midshipmen are treated as officers and hold a commission . The <unk> has approximately 60 midshipman commissioned at a time . 
 Midshipman begin their career at Junior Officer Common Training , which lasts 23 weeks . After completing their initial training course , midshipmen serve aboard ships for a short time , followed by specialty training for 16 weeks . After approximately two years in the Navy , midshipmen are promoted to ensign . Officers who entered the service with a university degree are promoted to sub @-@ lieutenant after completion of Junior Officer Common Training . Officers without a degree have the option of earning a university degree while serving in the Navy . 
 = = = = South African Navy = = = = 
 A midshipman in the South African Navy ( SAN ) is an officer of the lowest rank . Officer candidates are citizens between the ages of 18 and 22 , either in grade 12 or graduated from high school with an academic background in mathematics and science . Cadets initially spend a year training at the South African Naval College in Gordon 's Bay , about 55 km southeast of Cape Town , and upon graduation are commissioned as midshipmen . Midshipmen can then study for three more years at the South African Military Academy , and upon graduation receive a B Mil degree from Stellenbosch University . 
 = = = = Indian Navy = = = = 
 Midshipmen in the Indian Navy begin their career as cadets at the National Defence Academy or the Indian Naval Academy , where they study for approximately three years . After graduation they receive a B Tech degree from Jawaharlal Nehru University and are assigned to training ships for one year . After six months aboard the training ship , the cadets are promoted to midshipman . At the end of their training midshipmen are examined by a board and are cleared for promotion to sub @-@ lieutenant . 
 = = = = Pakistan Navy = = = = 
 Cadets in the Pakistan Navy undertake an initial 18 months ' training at the Pakistan Naval Academy . They study humanities , engineering , professional and technical subjects . After passing out they are appointed midshipmen , and undertake another six months of training at sea . They are assigned to operations , weapons engineering , mechanical engineering , or logistics . After passing the final fleet examination , they are promoted to the rank of sub @-@ lieutenant . 
 = = = United States Navy and Marine Corps = = = 
 In the modern United States Navy a midshipman is classified as an officer of the line , though their exercise of authority is limited by their training status . Legally , midshipmen are a special grade of officer that ranks between the senior enlisted grade ( E @-@ 9 ) and the lowest grade of chief warrant officer ( W @-@ 2 , U. S. Navy or U.S. Coast Guard ) or warrant officer ( W @-@ 1 , U. S. Army or U. S. Marine Corps . ( Note : The U. S. Air Force no longer uses the warrant officer ranks , the U.S. Public Health Service and U.S. Maritime Service , while authorized warrant officers , have never appointed or commissioned warrant officers , and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is not authorized warrant officers . ) 
 Students at the United States Naval Academy ( USNA ) are appointed as midshipman , United States Navy by the President . Students in the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps ( NROTC ) are appointed as midshipman , United States Navy Reserve by the Secretary of the Navy . Students at the United States Merchant Marine Academy ( USMMA ) are appointed as midshipmen in the United States Navy Reserve . The student body at the USNA is the Brigade of Midshipmen and the student body at the USMMA is the Regiment of Midshipmen . 
 Generally , a nomination from a member of Congress or the vice president is required to receive an appointment to the United States Naval Academy . A nomination does not guarantee an appointment and in a typical year only about 38 % of nominees receive an appointment . Currently each member of Congress and the vice president can have five appointees attending the Naval Academy at any time . Other nomination sources include the secretary of the Navy , who may appoint 170 enlisted members of the regular and reserve Navy and Marine Corps to the Naval Academy each year , and the president may nominate an unlimited number of children of career military personnel for up to 100 appointments each year . Additionally , children of Medal of Honor recipients and select cadets of JROTC Honor Unit with Distinction units do not need a nomination but need only qualify for admission . The United States Merchant Marine Academy only accepts nominations from members of Congress . There are no Presidential , Vice @-@ Presidential , military @-@ affiliated , JROTC @-@ honor unit , ROTC or Unit Commander , or Medal of Honor nominations permitted to the USMMA . 
 Midshipmen at the US Naval Academy , US Merchant Marine Academy and in the NROTC wear uniforms that comply with standards established for commissioned officers of the Navy , with shoulder board and sleeve insignia varying by school year or midshipman officer rank as prescribed by Chapter 6 of Navy Uniform Regulations . Midshipmen wear gold fouled anchors as the primary insignia on caps and shoulder boards and gold plain anchors as collar insignia on service dress and full dress uniforms . Marine option midshipmen in the NROTC wear gold Eagle , Globe and Anchor insignia in place of the anchor insignia worn by other midshipmen . 
 Midshipmen at the US Naval Academy study a core curriculum plus 21 major fields of study , a wide variety of elective courses and advanced study and research opportunities , as well as a required " surface cruise " with an active vessel during the summer . Upon graduation , midshipmen are commissioned as ensigns in the Navy or second lieutenants in the Marine Corps . 
 Midshipmen at the United States Merchant Marine Academy study a similar core curriculum , except they are split into deck ( navigation oriented ) and engineering programs . Additionally , they spend a year at sea working as cadets on U.S. flagged merchant ships , visiting ports around the world . At graduation they have two options , a job in the maritime industry ashore or sailing aboard commercial vessels plus a naval reserve commission , or an active @-@ duty commission in the United States Army , Navy , Marine Corps , Air Force , or Coast Guard as an ensign or second lieutenant . 
 = = Other countries = = 
 Today , ranks equivalent to midshipman exist in many countries . Using U.S. midshipman or pre @-@ fleet board UK midshipman as the basis for comparison , the equivalent rank would be a naval cadet in training to become a junior commissioned officer . Using post @-@ fleet board UK midshipman for comparison , the rank would be the most junior commissioned officer in the rank structure , and similar to a U.S. ensign in role and responsibility . 
 The Dutch navy has since the early 17th century included a midshipman rank which literally means ' young gentleman ' ( Dutch : <unk> ) ; today , <unk> train at the Royal Netherlands Naval College ( Dutch : Koninklijk Instituut voor de Marine ) for 3 years . Officer cadets in the German navy begin their training at the Naval Academy Mürwik ( German : Marineschule Mürwik ) in Flensburg @-@ Mürwik holding enlisted ranks with the qualifier officer candidate ( German : <unk> ) , abbreviated as OA . After about a year , they are promoted to <unk> , equivalent to the non @-@ commissioned officer ( NCO ) rank Mate ( German : Maat ) , and move to the University of the German Federal Armed Forces . About nine months later , they are promoted to Fähnrich zur See rank , equivalent to the NCO rank Boatswain ( German : <unk> ) . After 30 months of total training they are promoted to the final officer candidate rank , Oberfähnrich zur See , equivalent to the NCO rank <unk> , and after about 4 years of total training graduate with a bachelor 's degree . 
 In many romance languages , the literal translation of the local term for " midshipman " into English is " Navy Guard " , including the French garde @-@ marine , Spanish guardia marina , Portuguese guarda @-@ marinha , and Italian guardiamarina . These ranks all refer to young naval officer cadets , but the selection , training and responsibilities of each diverge from the British tradition . The French rank of garde de la marine was established in 1670 , when an office of the monarchy selected young gentlemen from the nobility to serve the King in the Gardes de la Marine . The concept of the Gardes was borrowed from the various guards units within the Maison militaire du roi de France . In 1686 these guards were organized into companies of cadets at the ports of Brest , Rochefort and Toulon . Unlike midshipmen in the Royal Navy , the Gardes trained mostly on shore and focused on military drill and theory rather than practical skills in gunnery , navigation and seamanship . After the succession of the Bourbon Philip V of Spain to the Spanish throne , the French system of naval officer education spread to Spain . The Spanish navy created the rank of guardia marina in 1717 , with the formation at Cadiz of the Royal Company of Midshipmen ( Spanish : Real Compañía de <unk> Marinas ) . 
 By restricting the French officer corps to members of the nobility , there were not enough Gardes to man all of the ships during wartime . To fill the gaps , volunteers were temporarily recruited from the merchant service ; they were allowed to hold permanent rank in the navy starting in 1763 . These professional officers wore blue uniforms to distinguish them from the Gardes de la Marine who wore red uniforms . After the revolution , the royal connotations of the term garde marine led to its replacement with aspirant ( officer cadet ) , and later <unk> de la Marine ( naval officer candidate ) . Contemporary French naval officer training still reflects this structure : students at the École navale begin their the first year as <unk> @-@ officier , are promoted in their second year to aspirant , and in their third year are commissioned as an acting sub @-@ lieutenant ( French : Enseigne de vaisseau de <unk> <unk> ) . In a modern French @-@ English dictionary , <unk> officier translates to midshipman , but both the historical term garde @-@ marine and the modern term for an officer candidate , aspirant , are also equivalent to midshipman . 
 In most Spanish- and Portuguese @-@ speaking countries , officers begin training at the rank of naval cadet , called aspirante in both languages . They are promoted to the rank guardia marina / guarda @-@ marinha during training ( in Spain , Venezuela , Ecuador and Brazil ) or after graduation ( as is the case in Portugal , Chile and Argentina ) . Similarly , in Italy naval officer cadets , called <unk> dell <unk> navale , are promoted to the rank of aspirante guardiamarina in their final year , and the lowest rank of commissioned officer is guardiamarina , both terms which translate to midshipman . 
 = = = Comparative ranks and insignia = = = 
 = Dick Bavetta = 
 Richard W. " Dick " Bavetta ( born December 10 , 1939 ) is an American retired professional basketball referee for the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . Since starting in 1975 , he had never missed an assigned game and holds the league record for most officiated games . His game on April 12 , 2013 in Washington was his <unk> consecutive game as an NBA official . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bavetta was born in the Park Slope neighborhood of Brooklyn , New York on December 10 , 1939 . His father was an officer for the New York Police Department , and his mother was a homemaker . Bavetta attended Power Memorial Academy in New York City ( the same school future NBA star Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar attended ) and is a 1962 graduate of St. Francis College in New York and played on the schools ' basketball teams . He began officiating after his brother , Joe , who officiated for the American Basketball Association , convinced him that it would be an interesting career . A Wall Street broker for Salomon Brothers with an MBA in finance from the New York Institute of Finance , Bavetta began officiating games between fellow brokers in the Wall Street League , played at New York 's Downtown Athletic Club , and later worked high school games . For ten years , he officiated Public and Catholic High School leagues in New York and later nine years in the Eastern Professional Basketball League , which later became the Continental Basketball Association . 
 = = NBA officiating career = = 
 In mid @-@ 1960s , he began to attend regional referee tryouts in the hopes of becoming an NBA referee ; however , he was rejected for nine straight years due to his small physique and unimposing size . Bavetta was finally hired by the NBA in 1975 following the retirement of Mendy Rudolph . He debuted December 2 , 1975 at Madison Square Garden in an NBA game between the New York Knicks and the Boston Celtics . His first ten years in the league were tough as he was constantly ranked bottom among NBA referees in performance evaluations and led the league in technical fouls and ejections called . 
 To improve his officiating , Bavetta refereed games for the New Jersey pro league and Rucker League in Harlem during the off @-@ seasons and studied NBA rulebooks . In 1983 , he became the first referee to undergo rigorous physical training . He ran six to eight miles and took three @-@ hour naps every day . His effort paid off when he emerged as one of the best referees . In the 1980s , he was named chief referee , who has the power to approve or overrule calls made by other officials . He was assigned to officiate his first playoff game in 1986 . 
 Bavetta 's most memorable game occurred during a 1980s nationally televised contest between the Philadelphia 76ers and Boston Celtics when he was forced to officiate an NBA game by himself after his partner , Jack Madden , broke his leg in a collision with Celtics guard Dennis Johnson . At one point in the game , Celtics forward Larry Bird and 76ers guard Julius Erving began to strangle each other and were ejected by Bavetta . Bavetta believed that this game assisted in the progression of his career in the NBA . 
 From 1990 to 2000 , Bavetta regularly refereed playoff games and was ranked at the top among referees in terms of performance evaluation . In 2000 , he was one of the highest @-@ paid referees in the NBA , earning over $ 200 @,@ 000 a year . Among those playoff games included Game 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals , in which Bavetta ruled that a three @-@ point basket made by Howard Eisley of the Utah Jazz was released after the shot clock buzzer sounded and thus would not count . However , television replays on NBC showed otherwise . Bavetta 's career was threatened when he was accidentally hit in the nose by Pacers forward Jalen Rose , who was trying to punch Knicks center Patrick Ewing during a 1999 game between the Indiana Pacers and the New York Knicks . Bavetta did not leave the game immediately , opting to wait until later in the day to have surgery . He returned the next day to officiate a New Jersey Nets game . 
 On February 8 , 2006 , Bavetta officiated his <unk> NBA game , setting a league record for most games officiated that was previously held by Jake O 'Donnell . Bavetta said the secret to his longevity was " wearing five pairs of socks " , which he claims helped keep his feet in good shape . Contributing to his good health , Bavetta says he runs five to eight miles every day . For his longevity in the league , he has received the nickname " the Cal Ripken , Jr. of referees " . 
 During the 2006 – 07 season , Bavetta officiated a December 16 , 2006 game between the New York Knicks and Denver Nuggets . The game involved a brawl where all ten players on the court were ejected by Bavetta and his officiating crew . The league eventually suspended seven players for a total of 47 games and fined both teams $ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 After 39 years of officiating in the NBA , Bavetta officially retired on August 19 , 2014 . 
 = = = Charitable works = = = 
 Bavetta is also actively involved in charitable works . He has established and financed the Lady Bavetta Scholarships since 1986 in honor of his daughters , awarded to high school minority children based on their needs . He has volunteered since 1992 with Double H @-@ Hole in the Woods Ranch working with children with cancer and HIV . He also works with the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation and serves as the Upstate New York Regional Director for the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation . 
 During the 2007 NBA All @-@ Star Weekend , Bavetta raced Turner Network Television ( TNT ) studio analyst and former NBA player Charles Barkley for a $ 75 @,@ 000 charitable donation ( $ 50 @,@ 000 contributed by the NBA and $ 25 @,@ 000 by TNT ) to the Las Vegas , Nevada Boys & Girls Clubs of America , but lost by a narrow margin . The distance of the race was three and one half full lengths of the court ( or 329 feet ) . Bavetta lost the race despite a last @-@ second dive and Barkley running the last portion of the race backwards . The dive resulted in an abrasion injury to Bavetta 's right knee . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = <unk> with Earl Strom = = = 
 According to Darryl Dawkins 's autobiography , Bavetta was officiating an NBA game during the mid @-@ 1970s between the Philadelphia 76ers and New Jersey Nets with Earl Strom as his partner for that game . Bavetta overruled Strom on a crucial last @-@ second personal foul call against the Nets , which would have been a victory for the 76ers . When the game ended and players were walking to their respective locker rooms , the door to the referees ' locker room flew open and Bavetta came staggering out . His uniform was allegedly ripped and he was wearing a big <unk> over his eye , running to get away from Strom . Strom stepped out into the hallway and hollered after Bavetta , " You 'll take another one of my fucking calls again , right , you motherfucker ? " Strom was fined for the incident . 
 Bavetta had another altercation with Strom when Strom tried to choke Bavetta during halftime of an NBA game in 1989 for allegedly siding with the home crowd . Strom reportedly apologized two weeks later . 
 = = = Allegations of game fixing = = = 
 Bavetta was one of three referees for the Game 6 of the 2002 Western Conference Finals between the Kings and the Lakers . Former referee Tim Donaghy has alleged that at least one of the referees working this game had subjective motives for wanting the Lakers to defeat the Kings , and made officiating calls to effectuate this outcome . The NBA has not permitted Bavetta to speak publicly regarding the incident , though The New York Times reported on June 12 , 2008 that the FBI is investigating allegations that Game 6 of the 2002 Western Conference Finals had been manipulated to further the series to a seventh game . Even the television announcers commented on how obvious it was that the fix was in . 
 In a 2002 article , Bill Simmons named the worst officiated games of the prior four years , alleging that the games involved either extending a series so it did not end quickly or advancing a large market team for the NBA 's benefit . All seven games named had been officiated by Bavetta . 
 = = Other achievements = = 
 Inducted into the New York City Catholic High School Hall of Fame on June 1 , 2000 
 Received the National Pro @-@ Am Lifetime Achievement Award on October 14 , 2002 
 Inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2015 . 
 Was the recipient of the 2016 Jerry Colangelo Award at the Athletes in Action All Star Breakfast , which is held each year during the NBA All Star Weekend 
 = Voliminal : Inside the Nine = 
 Voliminal : Inside the Nine is the third video album by American metal band Slipknot . Released December 5 , 2006 through Roadrunner Records , the 2 @-@ disc DVD set features an 84 @-@ minute movie created by band member Shawn " Clown " Crahan . The set also includes live performances , music videos from songs on the band 's third studio album , Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) , and the first unmasked interviews with all of the band members . The movie featured footage recorded from the recording of Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) through the end of the tour in support of the album spanning a total of 28 months . The DVD was promoted on various websites for the weeks leading up to its limited theatrical release . Critical reception of the album was mixed , Dawn wrote the album has " a raw sound " calling it " an audible treat for thrash and speed metal fans " . However , Billboard would tell fans to " save your cash for the band 's next tour " . Voliminal would be certified gold , platinum , and double platinum in Australia , the United States , and Canada respectively . 
 = = Conception and recording = = 
 The initial idea for the DVD came to percussionist Shawn Crahan , three weeks before the band entered The Mansion in 2003 , where they would work on their third studio album Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) . Crahan received help from the band 's record label Roadrunner , who supplied them with tapes , camera cleaning equipment and funds to hire people to operate the cameras when Crahan himself couldn 't . Recording began when Slipknot entered The Mansion and continued until they had finished touring in 2005 , reportedly covering 28 months of the bands time together . Crahan 's intentions were to capture as many different Slipknot situations as he could , so when the opportunity to produce a DVD came , he would be in a position to begin work immediately . During the period in which the footage was being shot , Crahan began making little tests of the footage and revealed them to his fellow band mates , judging their reactions to help him establish areas of interest from them . The whole recording process produced over 300 60 @-@ minute tapes of footage . 
 = = Production and promotion = = 
 Similarly to the editing process of their previous DVD Disasterpieces , Crahan watched and analysed all of the footage recorded for the DVD . However in contrast to <unk> this DVD was intended to show a previously unseen side to the band . During an interview in 2006 guitarist Mick Thomson explained that with the DVD the band intended to " bring something new " , he also went on to add " [ there 's ] more backstage stuff , getting to see more inside stuff as opposed to just a concert performance . " Crahan explained how he wanted to allow the viewer in on more of their time instead of just their performance , recalling a moment when the band were in Australia . He included the footage in the film , explaining ; " So I go down to Australia and I go ‘ Jesus , there ’ s bats in the air . ’ I ’ m going to film it and share it with you because it ’ s part of our lives together . But most bands and people don ’ t want to share that side of it and I think that ’ s wrong . " Throughout the movie whenever the band members appear unmasked , their faces are blurred , whereas on the second disc , during the interviews , they are completely revealed . When questioned on the subject during an interview on The Sauce in 2007 , Crahan explained that when the band perform , the masks are always a part of their show and footage of them unmasked is blurred to represent this . Further adding ; " We chose to blur it because , it 's really an intrusion . [ ... ] That 's our safe place and I kind of broke the veil a little bit by grabbing a camera and trying to show everybody those kinds of things that go on . " 
 Prior to the release of the DVD , a promotional website was launched which featured two short teaser videos . Also , for the five weeks prior to its release five short teaser videos were released through the Roadrunner Records website respectively . The DVD was released on December 5 , 2006 and was premiered in 22 separate theatres across the United States . Following the release of the DVD , a music video for the song " The Blister Exists " was released , the video featured footage from Voliminal : Inside the Nine and was of the same style as the movie . 
 The DVD is rated R16 in New Zealand for graphic violence , sexual references and offensive language 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception for Voliminal was mixed . The newspaper Dawn called the DVD " an audible treat for thrash and speed metal fans " , he went on to compliment drummer Joey Jordison , stating that he " structures his beats and percussions in a very traditional thrash set @-@ up , almost as well as ( dare I say it ) the great Dave Lombardo of Slayer fame " . Ultimate Guitar called the DVD " behind @-@ the @-@ scene action in an unorthodox format , complete with choppy editing and absolutely no specific chronology " . They would go on to state though the DVD " only gives partial attention to the music " , " The best moment in the 2 @-@ disc collection comes during a chat with Corey Taylor , who shares his feelings about everything from his less @-@ than @-@ perfect relationship with his father to the obstacles that the band faced in its early days " . <unk> wrote " Slipknot takes a unique approach to their latest film , as they turn what could have been a mundane video of live footage and band antics into a rather peculiar and extremely interesting movie " . The " scatterbrained and choppy " style of Voliminal " [ will cause ] the viewer to feel like he or she is " outside looking in " , rather than being truly involved with the band 's happenings " . Reviewing for Blogcritics , Chris Beaumont wrote " [ he ] was enthralled and bored by the documentary " . He went on to state , " the best part is watching them perform " , despite the " audio is near unlistenable " ; " these guys know their way around the stage ... this shows the whole package " . Reviewing for Billboard , Christa Titus criticized the DVD writing it " randomly [ strings ] footage from concerts and the usual backstage antics with images of pigeons and overflowing toilets , then tossing in whatever visual effects struck M. Shawn Crahan 's fancy while he edited it . " She concluded " Save your cash for the band 's next tour ... that 's where you 'll get your money 's worth " . Film School Rejects 's Cole <unk> wrote of the DVD , " [ Except fans ] , probably no one else will purchase or enjoy this DVD " . He added that with no narration , " the images are left to speak for themselves " , only " some just don ’ t speak loudly enough " . Despite the mixed reviews , Voliminal was certified gold in Australia , platinum in the United States , and double platinum in Canada . The album peaked at the 5th spot on Billboard 's Music Video charts , and remained on the chart for 10 weeks . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The first disc of Voliminal : Inside The Nine is an 84 @-@ minute movie constructed of a mixture of live performance , backstage and studio footage . The film was shot on handheld digital cameras and features rapid edits between footage which follows no chronological order . Throughout the movie there are also ten " rabbit holes " , nine of which feature additional footage for each band member respectively . 
 Interviews 
 The second disc includes interviews with all nine members of the band which are the first formal interviews of Slipknot to be released without their masks , excluding members appearances outside of Slipknot . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Aside from their real names , members of the band are referred to by numbers zero through eight . 
 = Battle of Tory Island = 
 The Battle of Tory Island ( sometimes called the Battle of Donegal , Battle of Lough Swilly or Warren 's Action ) was a naval action of the French Revolutionary Wars , fought on 12 October 1798 between French and British squadrons off the northwest coast of County Donegal , then in the Kingdom of Ireland . The last action of the Irish Rebellion of 1798 , the Battle of Tory Island ended the final attempt by the French Navy to land substantial numbers of soldiers in Ireland during the war . 
 The Society of United Irishmen , led by Wolfe Tone , launched an uprising against British rule in Ireland in May 1798 . At the request of the rebels , a small French force under General Humbert was landed at Killala , County Mayo , but by early September both this expedition and the rebellion had been defeated . Unaware of Humbert 's surrender , the French despatched reinforcements on 16 September . Having missed one invasion force , the Royal Navy was on alert for another , and when the squadron carrying the reinforcements left Brest they were soon spotted . After a long chase , the French were brought to battle in a bay off the rugged County Donegal coast in the west of Ulster , very close to Tory Island . During the action the outnumbered French attempted to escape , but were run down and defeated piecemeal , with the British capturing four ships and scattering the survivors . Over the next fortnight , British frigate patrols scoured the passage back to Brest , capturing three more ships . Of the ten ships in the original French squadron , only two frigates and a schooner reached safety . British losses in the campaign were minimal . 
 The battle marked the last attempt by the French Navy to launch an invasion of any part of the British Isles . It also ended the last hopes the United Irishmen had of obtaining outside support in their struggle with the British . After the action , Tone was recognised aboard the captured French flagship and arrested . He was brought ashore by the British at Buncrana , on the Inishowen Peninsula . He was later tried for treason , convicted , and committed suicide while in prison in Dublin , hours before he was to be hanged . 
 = = Background = = 
 Britain 's enemies in continental Europe had long recognised Ireland as a weak point in Britain 's defences . Landing troops there was a popular strategic goal , not only because an invader could expect the support of a large proportion of the native population , but also because at least initially they would face fewer and less reliable troops than elsewhere in the British Isles . Additionally , embroiling the British Army in a protracted Irish campaign would reduce its availability for other theatres of war . Finally , French planners considered that a successful invasion of Ireland might act as the ideal platform for a subsequent invasion of Great Britain . 
 The rhetoric of the French Revolution inspired many Irishmen to fight for similar principles of liberty , equality , and brotherhood in their own nation ; liberty in this context largely meant independence from Great Britain . With these goals in mind , in 1791 Dublin lawyer Wolfe Tone founded the Society of United Irishmen . Allying itself with the French Republic , the society was suppressed by the British authorities and forced to go underground when war broke out between France and Great Britain in 1793 . Tone and other members secretly travelled to France to convince the French National Convention to invade Ireland . Such an invasion , they argued , could rely on support from large numbers of Irish irregulars , and if successful would strike a severe blow to the British war effort — perhaps even severe enough to force Britain to seek peace . 
 = = = Invasion attempts = = = 
 French political divisions made organising an operation against Ireland difficult . The process was further hampered by the French Atlantic Fleet 's defeat in 1794 at the Glorious First of June and the disastrous Croisière du Grand Hiver operation in 1795 . Having lost many of its best officers during the political purges of The Terror , these defeats bred a negative mentality in the French Navy , discouraging adventurous strategic thinking . Eventually , the Expédition d 'Irlande was despatched in December 1796 under Admiral Morard de Galles , consisting of 17 ships of the line and 27 smaller vessels , and carrying as many as 25 @,@ 000 men . Despite elements of the force spending up to a week in Bantry Bay , not a single French soldier was successfully landed , and the expedition was a total disaster , with 13 ships lost and over 2 @,@ 000 men drowned . 
 The following year , Tone and his companions tried again , this time persuading the government of the Batavian Republic , which was under French occupation , to prepare their own expedition . During 1797 , the Dutch fleet was readied and provisioned , intending to combine with the French fleet and launch a second invasion attempt . The Batavian fleet sailed on a preparatory raiding cruise in the North Sea in October 1797 and on their return were confronted off the Dutch coast by the Royal Navy 's North Sea Fleet under Admiral Sir Adam Duncan . Duncan immediately attacked , and in the ensuing Battle of Camperdown captured or destroyed ten ships and scattered the rest , ending the Batavian invasion threat . 
 = = = Rebellion of 1798 = = = 
 Hoping to capitalise on the spontaneous uprising that spread across Ireland in May 1798 , Commodore Daniel Savary led a third , and more successful , effort . He took a small frigate squadron flying false British colours to Killala , and in August landed 1 @,@ 150 French troops under General Humbert . A larger force would have been despatched , but the French had been caught unprepared — the Irish rebellion had originally been planned to coincide with a later French landing , but British intelligence operations had infiltrated the United Irishmen and arrested much of its leadership , prompting a precipitate revolt . Although the uprising achieved some early successes , by the time Humbert arrived its outcome had already been decided with the defeat of successive rebel armies by British troops . Humbert 's force was joined by many United Irishmen and had some initial success , but was unable to face superior British numbers at the Battle of Ballinamuck , and surrendered on 8 September . Although its small size allowed it to reach Ireland unobserved , neither Savary 's frigate squadron nor the army it carried were large enough to have a significant impact on the campaign . 
 = = Bompart 's mission = = 
 Unaware that Humbert had surrendered and the rebellion been defeated , the French prepared a follow @-@ up expedition under the command of Commodore Jean @-@ Baptiste @-@ François Bompart . Three thousand men were embarked aboard the ship of the line Hoche and eight frigates , the force departing Brest on 16 September . However , having missed Savary 's frigate squadron , the Royal Navy were more watchful ; roving frigate patrols cruised off the principal French ports and in the approaches to Ireland , while squadrons of battleships from the Channel Fleet sailed nearby , ready to move against any new invasion force . In command of the squadron on the Irish station was Commodore Sir John Borlase Warren , a highly experienced officer ( and politician ) who had made a name for himself raiding the French coast early in the war . 
 Bompart 's squadron departed Brest late in the evening , hoping to slip past the inshore British blockade in the dark . However , they took too long to navigate the Raz passage , and were spotted at dawn on 17 September by a frigate squadron under Captain Richard Goodwin Keats , in HMS Boadicea . Keats immediately divided his forces , ordering HMS Ethalion under Captain George Countess and the brig HMS Sylph under Commander John Chambers White to follow the French force , while Keats brought news of the French movements to Admiral Lord Bridport , admiral of the Channel Fleet . 
 = = = Countess 's pursuit = = = 
 Aware of the British pursuit , Bompart nevertheless continued to the north . Countess followed closely , and was joined on 18 September by HMS Amelia under Captain Charles Herbert . Initially north of the French , Amelia had spotted the chase the previous day and caught up during the night by passing silently through Bompart 's squadron . The next day , Bompart attempted to throw off his pursuers by feinting towards Lorient , and again the following day by feinting south , as if travelling towards the Antilles . However , the British captains remained on track , and by 20 September were only nine miles from Bompart 's force , which was continuing south @-@ west as though sailing for the Americas . HMS Anson , a large razee frigate under Captain Philip Charles Durham , joined the British force on 20 September . 
 Despite Bompart 's attempts to disguise his destination , by the evening of 23 September Countess had correctly deduced the French were heading for Ireland , and despatched the brig Sylph to warn Commodore Warren and any other British ships she came across . Two days later , on 25 September , Commodore Bompart was forced to haul to the east and lose ground to his pursuers when a 100 @-@ ship British convoy passed to the north . This convoy consisted of many well @-@ armed East Indiamen , protected by several frigates , and posed a serious threat to Bompart 's overloaded ships . He then tried to drive off pursuit by feinting towards Countess 's squadron , but the faster British ships simply withdrew to a safe distance , resuming their chase once the French had returned to their original course . On 29 September Bompart made a final bid to shake his pursuers ; he attempted to engage the British frigates with three of his own — Immortalité , Loire and another . This plan failed after his flagship Hoche lost a topmast in heavy weather and fell behind the rest of the squadron , forcing the frigates to return to her protection . 
 Unable to escape , Bompart finally abandoned his pretence of sailing for the Americas and instead turned north @-@ west . During the next day high winds cost both Hoche and Anson a topmast , slowing both squadrons , but the repairs to Hoche were conducted faster and the French were able to pull ahead . For four more days pursuit continued directly north , until 4 October , when a storm descended and Bompart successfully outran Countess in the increasing darkness . In the high winds , Amelia was driven off course and away from her compatriots on 7 October while Anson again suffered damage , this time losing two topmasts . 
 On 11 October the weather cleared , and spotting two sails to the south , Countess took Ethalion to investigate . The ships were Amelia and a ship of the line of Warren 's squadron , who having received Sylph 's warning on 23 September , was sailing north in an attempt to intercept the French . Warren 's squadron of three ships of the line and the razee frigate HMS Magnanime had been joined the day before by two additional frigates stationed at Lough Swilly ; HMS Melampus under Captain Graham Moore and HMS Doris under Captain Lord Ranelagh . Warren attached Melampus to his squadron and detached Doris to scout along the Irish coast and warn the British garrisons , especially along the coast of County Donegal and the North @-@ West of Ireland region generally . Doris was also to scout along part of the coast of the West of Ireland region , further south , where the previous French landing had been effected at Killala . 
 = = = Warren 's pursuit = = = 
 Having finally eluded his pursuers , Bompart made directly for Lough Swilly where the landing was scheduled to take place . Unaware of the rebellion 's defeat , he hoped that Humbert 's army would be operating in the Lough Swilly area , as intended in the campaign planned before Humbert left France . Arriving off the coast , Bompart searched for a suitable landing site but was unable to find one before dark on 10 October . He waited out the night close to Tory Island , but was surprised the next day by sails on the horizon ; Warren 's squadron had been joined by Countess 's ships , and an overwhelming force was bearing down on the French . Abandoning all notions of landing the troops , Bompart hauled his ships close to the wind to give them room to manoeuvre and allow their captains as much opportunity as possible to escape the approaching British . 
 Throughout the day , Warren 's squadron closed from the north @-@ east while Bompart made frantic efforts to reach open water . Both fleets were hindered by a gale which swept the sea shortly before 20 : 00 . All three of Hoche 's topmasts were blown down and her <unk> shredded , leaving her substantially slower than her compatriots and forcing them to hold back in her defence . Other ships suffered too , as the French Résolue sprang a severe leak and HMS Anson lost her mizzenmast and several topmasts . 
 During the night , Bompart attempted to decoy the British by sending the schooner Biche with orders for the frigate Résolue , commanding Captain Jean @-@ Pierre Bargeau to beach his ship and fire flares in the hope of distracting Warren from his pursuit . For unknown reasons this order was never carried out , and in the morning Warren was still hard behind Bompart , whose ships were now sailing in two uneven lines . Warren 's force was even more dispersed , with HMS Robust and HMS Magnanime 4 nautical miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ) astern of the French and gaining fast , Amelia and Melampus shortly behind them and Warren 's flagship HMS Canada with HMS Foudroyant under Captain Sir Thomas Byard , <unk> . , 8 nautical miles ( 15 km ) from the enemy . The other British ships were scattered throughout this formation except Anson , which was wallowing to the rear , far out of sight . 
 Realising that he could not escape and would have to fight his way past the British , Bompart formed his squadron into a battleline and turned westwards , waiting for Warren 's signal for the attack . Because of the dispersed nature of his squadron , Warren did not issue this signal until 07 : 00 , when he ordered Robust to steer for the French line and attack Hoche directly . Captain Edward Thornbrough of Robust obeyed immediately and closed with the French , firing into the frigates Embuscade and Coquille as he passed , before closing with Hoche and , at 08 : 50 , beginning a bitter close @-@ range artillery duel . Minutes later Magnanime joined the action , firing on the rear frigates and engaging the French van of Immortalité , Loire and Bellone , which had worn out of the line in an attempt to rake her . The next three British ships into action , Ethalion , Melampus and Amelia , all raked the isolated Hoche as they passed , before pressing on sail to pursue the French frigates , now making distance to the south @-@ west . Canada and the subsequent British ships all ignored Hoche except to fire a few distant shots . By the time they passed , the ship was clearly a wreck , having been pounded repeatedly by Robust and Magnanime . Bompart finally surrendered at 10 : 50 with 270 of his crew and passengers killed or wounded . 
 Embuscade was the next to surrender , having been battered in the opening exchanges by Magnanime , and further damaged by long @-@ range fire from Foudroyant during the pursuit . Overhauled by several larger British ships , Captain de la <unk> surrendered at 11 : 30 rather than allow his ship to be destroyed . Magnanime , suffering the effects of her engagement with Hoche , took possession of Embuscade and continued to follow slowly behind the rest of the fleet , while Robust , which had suffered severely in her duel with Hoche , remained alongside her erstwhile opponent to take possession . The direction of the French squadron 's flight , following the direction of the wind , took them across the path of the straggling British ships , beginning with the Foudroyant . Most of the frigates were able outrun this ponderous enemy , but Bellone was less fortunate and a speculative shot from the battleship detonated a case of grenades in one of her topmasts . This began a disastrous fire which was eventually brought under control , but at a significant cost in speed . She was soon closely attacked by Melampus and suffered further damage . Nearby , the struggling Coquille surrendered after being outrun by the approaching Canada ; Warren ordered the slowly following Magnanime to take possession . 
 Ethalion took over pursuit of Bellone from Melampus , and for two hours maintained continuous fire with her bow @-@ chasers on the French ship . Ethalion was faster than her quarry , and she slowly pulled parallel with Bellone during the afternoon , but could not get close enough for a decisive blow . It took another two hours of pursuit before the battered Bellone eventually surrendered . Hoche apart , Bellone had suffered more casualties than any other ship present . To the south of this conflict , the struggling Anson discovered herself in danger when the surviving frigates of the French vanguard swept towards her en masse . Captain Durham was initially confused by their approach as he had been too distant to witness the action and the French ships flew false British ensigns , but he rapidly realised their true identity and at 16 : 00 opened fire on Loire . The damaged Anson was severely hampered by her inability to manoeuvre , and so could do nothing when the French ships pulled back and sailed away , except to continue to fire until they were out of range . During the evening , the surviving French frigates gradually pulled away from their pursuers and disappeared into the gathering night , leaving behind four of their squadron , including their flagship , as captives . 
 = = Chase = = 
 By nightfall some of the remaining French ships had entered Donegal Bay with Canada , Melampus and Foudroyant still in pursuit . The two forces repeatedly passed one another in the dark , and Canada almost drove ashore . Back at the battle site , Warren had ordered Robust to tow Hoche into Lough Swilly — this order later came under criticism , as Robust was in a battered state herself and the storms of the previous week had not abated . When a gale struck the pair on 13 October , Hoche lost several masts and broke her tow , only being prevented from foundering by the combined efforts of the British prize crew and their French prisoners . Eventually , on 15 October , Doris appeared and took Hoche in tow , arriving in Lough Swilly without further incident a few days later . Meanwhile , Ethalion saw Bellone safely into port , and Magnanime and Amelia brought in Coquille and Embuscade respectively . 
 = = = Melampus and Résolue = = = 
 On the morning of 13 October , Warren sighted two of the French frigates standing out of Donegal Bay and went after them , directing Moore in Melampus to stay behind to search for stragglers . Hindered by contrary winds , Melampus scoured the bay until well after nightfall , and at 23 : 30 was surprised by the sudden appearance directly in front of her of Immortalité and Résolue near St. John 's Point . Immortalité soon spotted Melampus and made sail , but Captain Bargeau of Résolue had not seen the British ship , and was hesitant about following his compatriot in the dark . In the gloom and confusion , he mistook Melampus for Immortalité and came alongside , only realising his mistake when Melampus opened fire . Because of the heavy seas , Résolue 's guns had been tied down below decks , so the only return fire she could offer was from her handful of quarterdeck guns . Bargeau , whose ship was still leaking badly , recognised that further resistance was futile and surrendered in minutes , having lost ten men and much of his rigging . Melampus put aboard a prize crew and then departed in pursuit of Immortalité . 
 = = = Flight of Loire = = = 
 Loire and Sémillante had escaped from the battle into Black Sod Bay , where they hoped to hide until they had a clear passage back to France . However , late on 15 October , a British frigate squadron under James Newman @-@ Newman rounded the southern headland of the bay , forcing the French ships to flee to the north . Pressing on sail in pursuit , Newman ordered HMS Révolutionaire to focus on Sémillante whilst he pursued Loire in HMS Mermaid , accompanied by the brig HMS Kangaroo under Commander Edward Brace . Loire and Sémillante separated to divide their pursuers ; Mermaid and Kangaroo lost track of Loire in the early evening , and Sémillante evaded Révolutionaire after dark . 
 However , on the morning of 16 October Newman spotted Loire on the horizon and immediately ordered his ships in pursuit . Loire was faster than Mermaid in the high winds but was unable to outrun Kangaroo , which directly engaged the far larger frigate in a distant artillery duel . The difference in weight of shot between the combatants was greatly unbalanced , and Kangaroo eventually fell behind after suffering damage to her rigging . Loire too had been damaged , and by 06 : 45 the following morning Captain Segond realised he could not escape his pursuers and instead shortened sail , intending to engage Mermaid — by then the only pursuer still within reach . 
 Mermaid and Loire joined battle at 07 : 00 , and the artillery exchange became close and furious after a boarding attempt by Loire was foiled by the helmsman of the British ship . Both ships took severe damage , Mermaid knocking away several of her opponent 's spars , but suffering in turn from the musketry of the soldiers still aboard the Loire . At 09 : 15 , the French vessel lost another spar , and Newman determined to rake his opponent . As he attempted to complete this manoeuvre , a shot from Loire brought down Mermaid 's mizzenmast , making her unmanageable and disabling a number of her guns . Seeing an opportunity to escape , the battered Loire disengaged , making significant distance before Newman 's crew could clear the wreckage of the mast . High winds further hampered Mermaid 's repair efforts by tearing away several sails and spars and drowning the ship 's carpenter when he was blown overboard . By the time Mermaid was ready for action once more , Loire had escaped . 
 Unfortunately for Captain Segond , when dawn broke on 18 October , HMS Anson was revealed only a short distance off , limping southwards after the damage its rigging and masts had suffered before the battle on 12 October . Although his ship was almost unmanageable , Captain Durham was not prepared to lose a second opportunity to engage , and slowly brought his vessel to bear on Loire , which was unable to escape . Accompanying Anson was Kangaroo , recovered from the damage of 16 October and ready for further action . At 10 : 30 , Anson and Loire began firing on one another , neither able to effectively manoeuvre and both relying on firepower to overwhelm their opponent . Kangaroo closed on the unprotected stern of Loire , firing as she did so and repeatedly raking the immobile French ship . By 12 : 00 Loire had lost her mainmast and was leaking badly , forcing Segond to surrender . His ship was towed to port as the sixth prize of the campaign . 
 = = = Fisgard and Immortalité = = = 
 The four remaining survivors of the French fleet had mostly avoided pursuit , and by 19 October were nearing Brest independently , hoping to slip through the tight British blockade around the harbour . Captain Mathieu @-@ Charles Bergevin on Romaine had attempted to land the troops aboard his ship in Ireland on 13 October , but was forced to abandon this plan when the soldiers refused to be put ashore . He then sailed southwest and successfully avoided all contact with British forces , joining with the schooner Biche and arriving at Brest on 23 October . The same day , after outrunning Révolutionaire 's pursuit , Sémillante arrived in Lorient — the last French ship to return home . 
 Immortalité almost reached safety . On the morning of 20 October , Captain Jean @-@ François Legrand was approaching Brest when he was spotted by Captain Thomas Byam Martin of HMS Fisgard . Fisgard , part of the inshore squadron of the Brest blockade , immediately offered battle . Immortalité initially attempted to flee but was forced to engage the faster Fisgard at 11 : 00 . During the bitter , close – range action , Fisgard took severe damage and almost lost her opponent . Immortalité , which had lost a mast and was in a sinking condition , surrendered at 15 : 00 . Among the 115 casualties aboard Immortalité were Captain Legrand , his first lieutenant and General Monge ( commander of the 250 soldiers on board ) , all dead . Fisgard , with the aid of other ships of the blockade squadron , successfully brought her prize into port . 
 = = Savary 's squadron = = 
 The French high command had not been idle during the destruction of their invasion force , and had prepared and despatched a second squadron of four frigates under Commodore Daniel Savary . This force was initially ordered to support Bompart , but was later tasked with escorting the squadron 's survivors back to France . On 27 October , Savary learnt of the destruction of both Bompart 's squadron and the Irish rebellion from sympathetic locals at Killala , and turned immediately south , hoping to avoid a similar fate . However , on 28 October , he was spotted by a three @-@ ship squadron under Captain Sir James Saumarez , which included two ships of the line . Saumarez immediately gave chase , and the squadrons exchanged long @-@ distance cannon fire throughout the day . Late in the evening Saumarez 's flagship HMS Caesar lost its foretopmast in strong winds , and command passed to Sir Richard Bickerton , 2nd Bt . , in HMS Terrible . 
 After another day 's chase , late on 29 October Savary divided his squadron , sending two frigates to the south east and turning north west with two more . In response , Bickerton split his force , sending the frigate HMS Melpomene after the southern group and following Savary himself in Terrible . By 30 October , both British ships were within 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) of their opponents and were preparing for action , when at 17 : 00 a severe storm lashed the area . Savary 's ships had been extending their pursuit by throwing guns , horses and equipment overboard in an effort to lighten their ships , and were consequently better suited to the high winds . The heavier British ships were unable to match their opponents ' speed and fell behind . When the weather cleared , the French ships were out of sight , and all four eventually returned independently to Brest , ending the final French attempt to invade Ireland . 
 An abortive effort to support the French invasion fleet was also made by the Navy of the Batavian Republic , which despatched the small frigates Furie and Waakzaamheid to Ireland with military supplies on 24 October . Within hours of leaving port , both these ships were intercepted and captured by the British frigate HMS Sirius under the young Captain Richard King at the Action of 24 October 1798 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Savary 's return to port marked the end of the last attempt by a continental nation to land troops in Ireland . French losses in the operation were so severe that a repeat effort was never seriously contemplated . Similarly , the huge Irish losses during the rebellion , combined with British reprisals against the Irish populace , ended any hopes of reigniting the uprising in the near future . Most serious of all for the United Irishmen was the arrest of Wolfe Tone himself , who was discovered among the prisoners taken from Hoche at Buncrana . Tone was charged with treason and sentenced to death , though he committed suicide in Dublin before the sentence could be carried out . 
 In Britain the engagement was considered a great success , with the thanks of Parliament bestowed on the entire force . Numerous junior officers were promoted and all crew members received financial rewards from the sale of the captured vessels . Of these prizes , Immortalité and Loire were purchased and served in the Royal Navy under their own names for many years , while Hoche and Embuscade were renamed HMS Donegal and HMS Ambuscade respectively . Coquille was intended for purchase but suffered a catastrophic ammunition explosion in December 1798 , which killed 13 people and totally destroyed the vessel . The last two prizes , Résolue and Bellone , were deemed too old and damaged to be worthy of active service . They were , however , purchased by the Royal Navy to provide their captors with prize money , Bellone becoming HMS Proserpine and Résolue becoming HMS <unk> . Both ships served as harbour vessels for some years until they were broken up . Five decades later , the battle was among the actions recognised by the clasp , " 12th October 1798 " , attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . 
 = She Wolf ( Shakira song ) = 
 " She Wolf " is a song by Colombian singer and songwriter Shakira , taken from her eighth studio album of the same name ( 2009 ) . It was released on 10 July 2009 , by Epic Records as the lead single from the album . The song was written by Shakira , John Hill , and Sam Endicott . Shakira and Hill also served as the producers for the song . A Spanish @-@ language translation of the song titled " Loba " , which features additional lyrical contributions by Jorge Drexler , was also released earlier on 6 July . Musically , " She Wolf " is a disco , hi @-@ NRG and synthpop @-@ inspired track that details Shakira 's boredom due to her uncaring partner , and how she looks for others to please her . 
 Upon its release , " She Wolf " was met with favourable reception from music critics , many of whom praised it for being different from the other songs released at that time . Commercially , " She Wolf " performed well on record charts . It peaked in the top 10 of charts of countries like Canada , Germany , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom . In the United States , " She Wolf " peaked at numbers 11 and one on the US Billboard Hot 100 and Dance / Club Play Songs charts , respectively . The Spanish @-@ language translation " Loba " peaked at number one on both the Hot Latin Songs and Tropical Songs component charts . " She Wolf " was certified double @-@ platinum in Spain and platinum in Italy , Mexico , and the United States . 
 An accompanying music video for the song was directed by Jake Nava , and features Shakira dancing in various locations , such as a red cave and a golden cage . Critical reception towards the video was also positive , many of whom praised Shakira 's dancing ability . For additional promotion , Shakira performed the song on a number of shows and music festivals . It was also a part of the setlist for The Sun Comes Out World Tour in 2010 . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " She Wolf " was written by Shakira , John Hill , and Sam Endicott . Shakira and Hill also served as the producers of the song . In an interview with Rolling Stone , Shakira said that the idea for " She Wolf " came to her " very mysteriously " , revealing " I was in the studio in a bad mood that day , then I got inspired and went to a corner and I wrote the lyrics and the melody in 10 minutes . The image of the she wolf just came to my head , and when I least expected it I was howling and panting " . Endicott , musician and lead singer of American post @-@ punk band The Bravery , explained how he and Hill began working with Shakira , saying she " contacted him ( Hill ) , asking if he had any stuff . We never had her in mind . We just made the thing independently of her , and then she liked it a lot , and she sang over it . She used some of the melodies we put in there and then wrote these crazy lyrics about being a werewolf . And that 's how it happened " . " She Wolf " was described by Slant Magazine as a " sleek , hi @-@ NRG / Italo throwback that 's drenched in disco strings " . Mikael Wood from Spin identified the song 's genre as synthpop . Shakira also howls and pants at various times during the song . It is written in B minor key and is a moderate dance groove with a tempo of 120 beats per minute . Shakira 's vocal range on the song spans from B3 to D5 . One of the lines of the song , in which Shakira sings " I 'm starting to feel just a little abused , like a coffee machine in an office " , is often cited as an example of the unusual lyrics present in Shakira 's songs . 
 The song was released by Epic Records as the lead single from the album of the same name . " She Wolf " was made available for digital download on ITunes on 10 July 2009 . It was released as a CD single later on 21 September . A Spanish @-@ language translation of the song titled " Loba " , which features additional lyrical contributions from Jorge Drexler , was released on 6 July 2009 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song was well received by most music critics . David Balls from Digital Spy gave the song a positive review and said that the song " manages to be fresh and quirky while still sounding like a smash " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine labelled " She Wolf " as a " sleek , hi @-@ NRG / Italo throwback " and said that its lyrics " walk a fine line between campy and really campy " . Michael Cragg from MusicOMH called it " three minutes of delicious pop , as camp as it is clever " , and concluded that the song is " the kind of wonderfully bizarre couplet we ’ ve come to expect from Columbia ’ s shrinking violet " . Jonathan Goss from Sabotage Times praised its lyrics and commended Shakira 's use of the word " lycanthropy " . He summed up the review by calling " She Wolf " a " modern classic " . Spin critic Mikael Wood complemented it as " lovably bonkers . " Fraser McAlpine from BBC Chart Blog gave it an overall positive review , but criticized Shakira 's howling , calling it " half @-@ hearted " . Ben Ratliff from The New York Times , however , gave it a negative review , saying that the song is " undercooked and overwritten " and that it " reaches a special class of fascinating @-@ awful " . 
 At the 2009 International Dance Music Awards ceremony , " She Wolf " was nominated for " Best Latin Track " , but lost to American rapper Pitbull 's song " I Know You Want Me ( Calle Ocho ) " . At the 2009 Los Premios MTV Latinoamérica awards ceremony , the song was nominated in the category " Canción Del Año " ( " Song of the Year " ) . At the 2009 Premios 40 Principales awards ceremony , " Loba " won the award for " Best International Song In Spanish Language " . At the 2009 Premios Shock award ceremony , the song was nominated " Best Radio Song " . At the 2010 Premios Juventud awards ceremony , the song was nominated for " Mi Ringtone " ( " My Ringtone " ) , but lost to Tito El Bambino 's song " El Amor " . At the 2010 2010 Latin Billboard Music Awards , the song was nominated for " Latin Pop Airplay Song of the Year " and " Latin Digital Download of the Year " , but lost both . At the 2010 ASCAP awards ceremony , Jorge Drexler won an award for his composition of " Loba " . It was acknowledged as an award winning song at the 2011 BMI Latin Awards . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In Austria , the song entered and peaked at number three on the Austrian Singles Chart , spending a total of 19 weeks on the chart . In the Dutch @-@ speaking Flanders region of Belgium , the song entered the Ultratop chart at number 48 and peaked at 16 , spending a total of 15 weeks on the chart . It performed much better in the French @-@ speaking Wallonia region of Belgium , where it entered the Ultratop chart at number eight and peaked at number five , spending a total of 21 weeks on the chart . " She Wolf " was Shakira 's second consecutive single to peak at number five in the region , after " Beautiful Liar " ( 2007 ) . In Finland , the song entered the Finnish Singles Chart at number 13 and peaked at number 6 , spending a total of 13 weeks on the chart . In Germany , the song peaked at number two on the German Singles Chart . In Ireland , the song peaked at number two on the Irish Singles Chart , spending a total of 12 weeks on the chart . In Italy , " Loba " entered the Italian Singles Chart at number 12 and peaked at number three , spending a total of 22 weeks on the chart . It became Shakira 's first single to receive a record certification in the country after the Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana ( FIMI ) certified the song platinum for selling 30 @,@ 000 units . In Norway , " She Wolf " narrowly missed charting inside the top ten of the Norwegian Singles Chart by peaking at number 11 . In Spain , " Loba " entered the Spanish Singles Chart at number 25 and peaked at number two , being kept from the top position by American rapper Pitbull 's song " I Know You Want Me ( Calle Ocho ) " . In this region , it was certified double @-@ platinum by the Productores de Música de España ( PROMUSICAE ) for selling 80 @,@ 000 units . In Switzerland , the song entered and peaked at number three on the Swiss Singles Chart , spending a total of 23 weeks on the chart . In this territory , it was certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) for selling 10 @,@ 000 units . In the United Kingdom , the song peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart and spent a total of 16 weeks on the chart . The British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certified " She Wolf " silver for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In Canada , it peaked at number five on the Canadian Hot 100 chart , spending a total of 20 weeks on the chart . " Loba " became a success in Mexico , peaking at number one on the Monitor Latino airplay chart and receiving a platinum certification from the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas ( AMPROFON ) . In the United States , " She Wolf " debuted at number 34 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , becoming Shakira 's highest debuting song on the chart . It later narrowly missed reaching inside the top 10 of the chart by peaking at number 11 . " She Wolf " spent a total of 20 weeks on the chart . On the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , it peaked at number one and spent a total of 15 weeks on the chart . " She Wolf " became Shakira 's second solo consecutive single to peak atop the chart after " Illegal " ( 2006 ) . On the Pop Songs chart , it peaked at number 11 and spent 12 weeks on the chart . " She Wolf " remained as Shakira 's highest @-@ debuting single on the Billboard Hot 100 until " Can 't Remember to Forget You " broke its record in 2014 by debuting at number 28 . The Spanish @-@ language translation " Loba " peaked at number one on Hot Latin Songs chart , spending a total of 22 weeks on the chart . It became Shakira 's fourteenth top @-@ ten single on the chart and tied her with American singer @-@ songwriter Selena for having the fifth @-@ most top @-@ ten singles for a female artist . Later in 2010 , Shakira became the third @-@ ranking female artist with the highest number of top @-@ ten singles on the chart after the release of " Loca " . On the Tropical Songs chart , " Loba " peaked at number one , spending a total of 20 weeks on the chart . " She Wolf " was certified platinum in the United States for digital downloads of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . As of March 2014 , " She Wolf " stands as Shakira 's second highest @-@ selling digital song in the United States with sales of 1 @,@ 812 @,@ 000 units , behind her 2006 hit " Hips Don 't Lie " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and synopsis = = = 
 The accompanying music video for the single was directed by Jake Nava , who had previously collaborated with Shakira on the video for " Beautiful Liar " . The dance sequences in the video were choreographed by Nadine " Hi @-@ Hat " Ruffin , and are said to incorporate ballet , popping and locking , tribal dance and moves similar to the ones in the eighties drama Flashdance . Talking about her dancing in the video , Shakira said , " I start doing all kinds of outrageous stuff and hanging upside down and doing stuff that wasn 't planned . But it was kind of an improvisation . I just got caught in the moment . " The music video premiered on 30 July 2009 , on MTV and was made available for download on iTunes a day later on 31 July . The video for the Spanish @-@ language translation " Loba " was released on the same day . 
 The video begins with Shakira getting out of bed in the middle of a full @-@ moon night . Her nails begin to grow and she is shown lacing a pair of boots . Shakira then enters a closet , which leads to the inside of a glittering ruby @-@ red cave , where she begins dancing wearing a black asymmetric bodysuit . The next scene depicts Shakira striking different poses inside a golden cage ( with the sign " Do Not Feed the Animal " on top ) , clad in a skin @-@ toned leotard . Shakira explained the usage of the golden cage in the video , saying that " I just wanted to express what it feels like for a she @-@ wolf to be in captivity . To be in a golden cage . I think I 've been in a golden cage most of my life . And now not anymore " . The setting changes and Shakira is seen performing a dance routine in a club with many back @-@ up dancers . A wolf is also shown walking in the club and transforming into a woman . Near to the end of the video , Shakira dances on a rooftop with a backdrop resembling San Francisco . As the song ends , she falls backwards from the roof and lands in her closet . The video ends with Shakira lying back in her bed and smiling as thunder cracks . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Critical reception towards the video was mostly positive . Adam Fairholm from the Internet Music Video Database praised Shakira 's dance moves and flexibility in the video and complimented Nava 's direction . James Montgomery from MTV also commended Shakira 's dancing , noting that she " even manages to out @-@ Beyoncé " . He also complimented Shakira 's body , commenting that her posterior is the " breakout star of the video " . Anna Pickard from The Guardian appreciated the originality of the video and noted that " the moves contained in this video are not the kind of thing you see every day " . Andrew Bast from The Daily Beast , however , gave the video a negative review and criticized it for being overly sexual . 
 At the 2009 Los Premios MTV Latinoamérica awards ceremony , the video received a nomination in the category " Video del Año " ( " Video of the Year " ) . At the 2010 Premios Juventud awards ceremony , the video won the award for " Mi Video Favorito " ( " My Favourite Video " ) . At the 2010 Premios Lo Nuestro , the video won the award for " Video del Año " ( " Video of the Year " ) . On 28 April 2014 , the video reached 100 million views on video @-@ sharing website YouTube and was hence marked " Vevo Certified " by video hosting service Vevo . It is Shakira 's tenth " Vevo Certified " video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Shakira performed the song live for the first time on the finale of the season four of America 's Got Talent , on 16 September 2009 . On 17 September , she performed the song at the 2009 ALMA Awards ceremony . She performed " She Wolf " along with " Did It Again " , the second single off the album , on 18 September episode of Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and the 17 October episode of Saturday Night Live . On 24 September , Shakira performed " She Wolf " and " Hips Don 't Lie " on the BBC Radio 1Xtra Live Lounge . On 28 September , she performed the song on T4 , a scheduling slot on Channel 4 . On 25 September , she performed the song on Friday Night with Jonathan Ross , along with her hits " Whenever , Wherever " and " Hips Don 't Lie " . 
 On 14 February 2010 , Shakira performed " She Wolf " and " Give It Up to Me " , the third single off the album , during the halftime of the 2010 NBA All @-@ Star Game . She wore a low @-@ cut leotard and a sparkling fur <unk> for the performance . At the 2010 Rock in Rio festival held in Madrid , Spain , Shakira performed " Loba " , the Spanish @-@ language translation of the song . On 10 June , at the 2010 FIFA World Cup opening ceremony , Shakira performed " She Wolf " , " Hips Don 't Lie " , and the official 2010 FIFA World Cup song , " Waka Waka ( This Time For Africa ) " . On 26 June , Shakira performed the song at the Glastonbury Festival , which took place in Pilton , Somerset . The song was also included on the setlist of The Sun Comes Out World Tour in 2010 and 2011 . The tour performance began with Shakira letting out a long howl and proceeding to dance with two female back @-@ up dancers . The performance marked the first time back @-@ up dancers were featured in the show . Dave Simpson from The Guardian commented that Shakira was " howling like a banshee " during the performance . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Somebody to Love ( Justin Bieber song ) = 
 " Somebody to Love " is a song performed by Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber . The song served as the second single from his album , My World 2 @.@ 0 . It was written by Heather B and The Stereotypes , and produced by the latter . The song was originally recorded as a demo by Bieber 's mentor , R & B singer , Usher , for his sixth studio album , Raymond v. Raymond ( 2010 ) . After things went stale with Usher 's label , The Stereotypes were encouraged to give the song to Bieber , who recorded it , with Usher performing background vocals . The song is an upbeat dance @-@ pop song , which also derives from R & B genre , while making use of Eurodisco influences . It impacted US mainstream and rhythmic radio on April 20 , 2010 . The remix of the song featuring Usher was featured on Bieber 's first compilation album My Worlds : The Collection and his second remix album Never Say Never : The Remixes . 
 Usher re @-@ recorded featured vocals for the official remix of the song , which was released on June 25 , 2010 . A variation of the track with slightly different production done by Benny Blanco , features Usher on lead vocals and Bieber as the featured artist . It is included on the follow @-@ up release of Raymond v. Raymond , titled Versus . In Japan , the song was released dually with " Never Say Never " as a double A @-@ side single . The song received positive reviews , with critics complimenting the track 's dance feel , and the lyrical content . " Somebody to Love " became Bieber 's third consecutive top ten hit in Canada , and his fourth consecutive top twenty single in the United States . It also reached the top twenty in Germany , New Zealand and Australia . 
 The accompanying music video for the official remix , directed by Dave Meyers , was intended to rely solely on choreography , and integrate different styles of dance . It features appearances from several dance crews , such as Beat Freaks and Poreotics . According to critics , the video makes allusions to previous dance @-@ heavy clips by Usher and Chris Brown . Bieber performed the song at a number of venues , including the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards and on the seventh series of The X Factor in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background = = 
 In a Q & A with Rap @-@ Up , Jonathan Yip of The Stereotypes confirmed that record was originally made for Usher , but things did not go through right with his label . According to Yip , Perez Hilton was the one who recommended the song for Bieber , and after that the producers agreed . Yip said that Usher 's label , Jive Records " wasn 't sure what they wanted to do with the record for Usher " , so they contacted Bieber 's manager , Scooter Braun , and Bieber was able to record the track . On the remix , Jonathan Yip commented , " Usher 's now back on the record , on the remix , so we can 't really complain . " A variation of the track with slightly different production , featuring Usher as lead vocalist and Bieber as the guest vocalist , is included on a follow @-@ up release to his sixth studio album , titled Versus . The Versus version of the song was produced by Benny Blanco . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 " Somebody to Love " is an urban and dance @-@ pop song that is set in common time with a moderate @-@ tempo of 125 beats per minute . Bieber 's R & B vocals are blended throughout the song . The song also integrates elements of Euro disco . Set it common time , the song is written in the key of C minor , and Bieber 's vocals span from the low note of G3 to high note of C5 . It follows the basic chord progression of Cm – E ♭ – F. 
 The song has been described by Jocelyn Vena of MTV News as a " dance track in which he professes his love for a girl and tells her he 'd do anything for her " and a " club @-@ friendly pop tune . " Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone said the song was a " thumping Eurodisco . " Lauren Carter of the Boston Herald called the track " fun and upbeat " and said , " is a standout and the track to download – give listeners time to dance or daydream , as the case may be . " 
 Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music wrote that " Somebody to Love is a straightforward plea for a soul mate ; it says something we ’ ve all felt . " Monica Herrera of Billboard commented , " Somebody to Love " offers the clearest evidence yet that he 's more than capable of clearing the hurdle from teen to adult stardom . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Somebody to Love " entered the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number ninety @-@ eight . After weeks of steadily ascending the charts , the single reached a peak of fifteen on the issue week July 17 , 2010 . The song received digital sales after the release of My World 2 @.@ 0 , propelling it to debut at ninety @-@ four on the Canadian Hot 100 . The song fell off the chart the following week and re @-@ entered on the week of June 12 , 2010 at its previous peak of ninety @-@ one . After re @-@ entering and steadily ascending the charts , the single reached a new peak of ten on the week issued July 3 , 2010 . It also peaked at twenty and thirty @-@ six on the US Pop Songs chart and US Latin Pop Songs , respectively . 
 The song performed well in several international markets . " Somebody to Love " entered the UK Singles Chart at forty @-@ seven on the issue date of June 6 , 2010 . The following week the song fell to position sixty @-@ two . In the succeeding week the single reached thirty @-@ three where it reached its peak . In Australia , " Somebody to Love " entered the chart at forty @-@ seven on the week of July 5 , 2010 . The following week , the single rose to its peak position of number twenty . On the Japan Hot 100 , the song peaked within the top ten , at number three . " Somebody to Love " also peaked within the top twenty in Germany and New Zealand , the top thirty of Austria , and elsewhere in Switzerland and on the Belgian charts . Its numerous chartings in Europe allowed the song to peak at number thirty @-@ three on the European Hot 100 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The music video for the official remix version featuring Usher was filmed during the week of May 9 , 2010 , directed by Dave Meyers . The video was choreographed by Jamaica Craft , notable for her work with choreography on videos for Usher and Ciara . Rather than a storyline as in Bieber 's previous videos , the video focuses on a dance and choreography aspect . Meyers stated that he wanted the video to be more playful , stating , 
 We 're bringing Justin into the world of dance on this one , giving Justin the chance to integrate to different styles of dance . So we kind of kept it simple with the art direction , just real graphic and really highlighting the dance . No big story lines , no crowds of people , just real clean . 
 A preview of the video was posted on AOL 's <unk> , and subsequently on Bieber 's VEVO channel , including behind the scenes clips of Bieber with the dancers , and highlights of the video with Usher and in front of a green screen . Bieber said , " It 's really awesome to be able to work with professional dancers , you know , people that were in , like , ABDC , and also got an approval from choreographer Jamaica , who said Bieber was " killing it " and that she didn 't have to give him any corrections . It made its premiere during the June 17 , 2010 results show of the seventh season of So You Think You Can Dance , and was introduced by Usher after his performance of " OMG " . It later premiered that night on VEVO and on June 18 , 2010 on 20 / 20 . The video features dance crews including , America 's Best Dance Crew season 5 winners Poreotics , and Season 3 's runner up Beat Freaks , as well as The <unk> , LXD , Medea Sirkas , solo acts <unk> Player and <unk> Fly , and other dancers and crews . Singer / actress and model Katerina Graham makes a cameo in a scene with Poreotics . Bieber 's best friend Ryan Butler , who appeared in the " One Time " video , also appears alongside Bieber , wearing a T @-@ shirt advertising his Twitter account . According to Tamar Antai of MTV News the video " makes vague allusions " to clips for Busta Rhymes ' " Pass the Courvoisier , Part II " and Chris Brown 's " Wall to Wall " . A backpack choreography scene with LXD recalls Usher 's 1997 video for " You Make Me Wanna " . 
 = = = Synopsis and reception = = = 
 The video features Bieber dancing along several dance crews along a black backdrop , and a scene with ninjas and a flame outline . The video begins with Bieber dancing with different members of the crews with use of a spotlight effect , followed by Bieber being flaunted by a single female dancer . Then the video cuts to Bieber performing Stepping ( African @-@ American ) -style choreography with two male dancers , shirtless with red hats and red suspenders . With the aid of smoke , the video moves to Bieber dancing with Beat Freaks . Usher sings his verse along with The <unk> as dancers in a room with metal chandeliers before uniting with Bieber dancing in the scene aided by Poreotics . Then Bieber and Usher sing and dance with Medea Sirkas in ninja attire in front of a background of Chinese calligraphy ( " Love " ) and flames , before returning to the black backdrop and metal chandeliers as Bieber dances with <unk> Player and LXD in a scene with <unk> . The ending features Bieber and several of the dancers featured performing group choreography before cutting to Bieber and Usher with the in front of the calligraphy and flames . 
 Monica Herrera of Billboard said Usher 's " star power is clearly rubbing off on the 16 @-@ year @-@ old " , commenting that Bieber " shows off his smoothest moves yet " and " tackles his toughest choreography . " Jocelyn Vena of MTV News commented , " While Bieber had previously teased his dancing skills in the " Baby " video , he really channeled Usher 's smooth moves in this newest clip . " Tamar Antai also of MTV said , " Usher does most of the heavy lifting where dancing is concerned , and Justin Bieber , who 's more of a singer than a dancer , is in no danger of upstaging Usher on the dance floor . " Antai compared Bieber 's moves to Usher in his " Caught Up " video , commenting " it 's nice to see Justin expanding the scope of talents to include pelvic thrusts , Matrix @-@ style slo @-@ mo leans " and , " it 's also nice to see Justin looking a little more mature and sophisticated in a hoodie and leather jacket .... and his videos are growing up with him , as this is his flashiest , most grandiose video yet . Antai also commented on the appeal of the video , commending Meyers , " who put that classic early ' 00s @-@ style big @-@ money polish on the piece – for employing fire , shirtless dudes , white ninjas ... " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Bieber performed " Somebody to Love " on multiple occasions , including as a part of his set list on the My World Tour . On most televised performances the song was performed alongside " Baby " and more of his previous songs . He performed the song at a number of venues , in Wales at Radio 1 's Big Weekend on May 22 , 2010 . Additionally Bieber performed it on Today with " Baby " and " One Time " on June 4 , 2010 He performed the song with " Baby , " assisted by Drake on June 21 , 2010 at the 2010 MuchMusic Video Awards . The song was performed with " Baby " at Macy 's Fourth of July Fireworks Spectacular on July 4 , 2010 . 
 " Somebody to Love " was also performed with " U Smile " and " Baby " at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12 , 2010 , accompanied by a full dance team and band . For the performance , Bieber , donning a black and red letter jacket and a ' 50 's style cardigan , drove into the Nokia Theater in a 1957 red Chevrolet car , and was chased by girls ( paying homage to The Beatles ' " A Hard Day 's Night . " He then proceeded to perform " U Smile " as an introduction , followed by " Baby " and " Somebody to Love " , which had dance parts in which his background dancers wore the same attire as him . During the " Somebody to Love " performance Bieber and backup dancers performed an elaborate dance routine including younger children , which was followed by a drum solo by the singer . During the performance of the song , black and red confetti fell from the sky . Critics appreciated the performance , with a Jocelyn Vena of MTV News calling Bieber a " triple threat . " " Baby " and " Somebody to Love " were performed by Bieber on the seventh series of The X Factor in the United Kingdom on November 28 , 2010 . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In 2011 , the song was performed by Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , Puck ( Mark Salling ) , Artie ( Kevin McHale ) and Mike ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) in the Glee episode " Comeback " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Heather Bright , Jonathan Yip , Ray Romulus , Jeremy Reeves 
 Production – Jonathan Yip , Ray Romulus , Jeremy Reeves 
 Background vocals – Usher 
 Mixing – Jaycen Joshua , assisted by Giancarlo Lino 
 Engineering – additional by Pat Thrall 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = = Sales and certifications = = = 
 Notes 
 All chartings are conjunctions of the single / album version and remix , with the exception of Australia and Sweden , which are chartings of the official remix version exclusively . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Ruby Blue ( album ) = 
 Ruby Blue is the debut solo album of Irish singer Róisín Murphy , released by Echo Records on 13 June 2005 ( see 2005 in music ) . After she and Mark Brydon dissolved their electronic duo Moloko , Murphy began working with producer and musician Matthew Herbert , known for his experimental work in jazz and electronic music . The songs were first released through three extended plays and were then compiled into a studio album . 
 The album often samples sounds made by everyday objects and actions , including cosmetics , brass mice , dancing and ornaments . It mixes the electronic music for which Moloko was known with jazz and pop styles . The album received positive reviews from music critics . Ruby Blue , upon its June 2005 European release , charted at No. 88 in the United Kingdom . It produced two singles , " If We 're in Love " and " Sow into You " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Murphy and Mark Brydon ended their romantic relationship but were still contractually obligated to record another album , which became Moloko 's 2003 album Statues . When she finished touring , she found herself alone and had to re @-@ evaluate the friendships she had built . During this time , she got to know Matthew Herbert , whom she had met when he remixed several of Moloko 's songs . Murphy had wanted to work with him again , commenting that " it felt very natural … because Matthew makes things seem quicker and easier " . During the first day of recording with Herbert , he had her bring an unspecified object so that they could hit it against a microphone and record the sound it made . Herbert 's approach was that for Murphy to go solo , the album should revolve around her and the sounds that surround her . They wanted to carry out recording and audio mixing in one room , so Herbert invested in a studio . There , Herbert recorded Murphy 's voice without accompaniment so that she could better hear how her voice naturally sounded . On occasion , the two added instruments to a track by having her hire an instrumentalist , sometimes to play an unusual instrument such as a hammered dulcimer . 
 After the pair had recorded a few songs , Murphy found that she enjoyed working with Herbert , and her label let her work freely without any deadline . When she presented them the album , they found it odd and did not hear any songs that would make successful singles . The A & R division suggested that Murphy make some changes to make it more radio @-@ friendly . Murphy refused , stating that she " wanted it to be as pure as possible " . The label later came to support her . The songs on Ruby Blue were gradually released on 12 " vinyl EPs titled Sequins 1 , Sequins 2 , and Sequins 3 , in January , February , and May 2005 respectively . 
 The cover of Ruby Blue was painted by Simon Henwood . Murphy met Henwood in a pub , and Henwood , who was known for his simplified paintings of teenagers , thought that she would be a good subject for a painting . Henwood came to Murphy 's house the next week and , while they were looking through her wardrobe , decided to have her dressed in sequins . Murphy positioned her body in abstract shapes for Henwood to paint . She developed a character , which Henwood described as a " disco electro pop diva with a 1940s look " . His canvases were displayed at The Hospital in Victoria , London , and Murphy purchased them " for [ her ] kids so they can see what [ she ] once looked like " . The three EPs and both singles used Henwood 's paintings in the cover , and he later directed the music videos for the singles . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Ruby Blue mixes electronica with early twentieth century vocal jazz , an interest of Herbert 's . The instruments , primarily brass and woodwinds , are layered over sampled noises such as alarm clocks , a water cooler , hairspray and helmets . Murphy 's vocals were described as a combination of " a less @-@ pained Billie Holiday and a less @-@ sheltered Doris Day " . She identified OutKast 's 2003 double album Speakerboxxx / The Love Below as an influence , stating that " it was experimental , it was soulful and funky " . The album 's lyrics are based on her romantic relationships with Brydon and then with Henwood . 
 The opening track " Leaving the City " slowly builds up during the introduction and uses out of tune instrumentation and a repetitive chorus . Following " Sinking Feeling " , which uses a beat constructed from clicking sounds , is " Night of the Dancing Flame " , which combines synthesisers with 1920s jazz . It is written in waltz time and was compared to Stevie Wonder 's work during his peak . After opening with noises such as rustling and coughing , the longest track " Through Time " proceeds into a ballad that was compared to those by Carole King . The fifth track " Sow into You " was released as the album 's second single . The song uses a metaphor of rain and harvests to describe love and sex , atop a baroque pop brass arrangement . " Dear Diary " is a torch song mixing northern soul with disco music with the sounds of doorbells and telephones ringing . 
 The seventh track " If We 're in Love " was released as the album 's lead single . It is a downtempo song featuring a boogie swing rhythm and sharp brass parts , opening with phased vocals and closing with a call and response between brass and keyboard parts . " Ramalama ( Bang Bang ) " , the eighth track , contains a chorus of onomatopoeic lyrics delivered over a tribal rhythm . The title track uses overdriven guitar parts and layers of overdubbed vocals . Its lyrics caution a woman who has become out of control and its title was chosen to contrast feelings of passion and melancholy . " Off on It " , a more experimental song with an unsteady rhythm , precedes " Prelude to Love in the Making " , an excerpt of less than one minute taken from " Love in the Making " on Sequins 2 . The album closes with " The Closing of the Doors " , a cabaret @-@ style ballad driven by the piano . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received positive reviews from music critics . The Guardian called it " the kind of ambitious avant @-@ pop hybrid that gets Björk rapturous acclaim " . AllMusic wrote that " Murphy keeps the alluring sensuality and unpredictable quirks that made Moloko unique , without sounding like she 's rehashing where she 's already been " . Stylus Magazine said the album " happily represents something of a midpoint between the downright oddity of Moloko 's early albums ... and the mix of disco sensibility and wrenching balladry of their swansong " . PopMatters referred to the album as " one of the best examples of production shaping but not overwhelming the artist 's vision " . The Guardian agreed , stating that because of Herbert 's production , Murphy sounded " sonically enticing and varied … at times sultry , rude , powerful and tender across white noise , waltz time signatures and jazz sass " but was mixed on the album overall , adding that the pair " their noodling eclipse the songs , leaving few you 'll actually be able to sing back to anyone " . Pitchfork Media remarked that " it 's hard to imagine anyone not ranking this is [ sic ] the best thing Murphy has ever done " and that " when the songwriting is on , Ruby Blue seems perfect , the ultimate combination of human warmth and technological know @-@ how " . The publication listed the album at number forty @-@ one in its list of the top fifty albums of 2005 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Ruby Blue was released in Europe on 13 June 2005 and was less successful than Murphy 's work with Moloko . The album reached number eighty on the Billboard European Top 100 Albums , dropping off the chart the next week , and charted at number eighty @-@ eight on the UK Albums Chart . It had the most success in Belgium , where it reached number seven and remained on the albums chart for twelve weeks . Elsewhere in Europe , it reached the top forty in Finland and the top fifty in Austria , Germany , the Netherlands and Switzerland . Echo released the album in the United States on 25 April 2006 , but it did not chart on the Billboard 200 . 
 = = Soundtrack appearances = = 
 A third of the album 's songs were used in the second season of medical drama Grey 's Anatomy . " Ruby Blue " , " Ramalama ( Bang Bang ) " , " Love in the Making " and " Night of the Dancing Flame " were used for " Make Me Lose Control " , " Deny , Deny , Deny " , " Bring the Pain " and " Much Too Much " respectively . The show 's music supervisor , Alexandra Patsavas , stated that she had been a fan of Moloko and gave Ruby Blue a positive review . " Ruby Blue " is included in the first volume of the show 's soundtrack . 
 Three songs have been used for reality show So You Think You Can Dance . " Ramalama ( Bang Bang ) " was used for a group performance on the sixth week of the second season . Contestants wore costumes and make @-@ up to show them as zombies in a performance combining the 1968 horror film Night of the Living Dead with Michael Jackson 's 1983 music video for " Thriller " . At the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards , the performance was part of a three @-@ way tie for Outstanding Choreography with a So You Think You Can Dance performance of Céline Dion 's " Calling You " , choreographed by Mia Michaels , and the television special Tony Bennett : An American Classic . " Night of the Dancing Flame " was used for a couple 's jazz dance in the fourth week of the following season with contestants Neil Haskell and Lauren Gottlieb . The performances were choreographed by Wade Robson . Robson also did a number to " Ruby Blue " in the fifth season of So You Think You Can Dance . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Róisín Murphy and Matthew Herbert . 
 " Leaving the City " – 4 : 49 
 " Sinking Feeling " – 3 : 32 
 " Night of the Dancing Flame " – 3 : 26 
 " Through Time " – 5 : 58 
 " Sow into You " – 3 : 56 
 " Dear Diary " – 5 : 50 
 " If We 're in Love " – 4 : 31 
 " Ramalama ( Bang Bang ) " – 3 : 35 
 " Ruby Blue " – 2 : 48 
 " Off on It " – 5 : 22 
 " Prelude to Love in the Making " – 0 : 53 
 " The Closing of the Doors " – 3 : 29 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Italian cruiser Montebello = 
 Montebello was the second of four Goito @-@ class torpedo cruisers built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s . She was built at the Arsenale di La Spezia between September 1885 and January 1889 , when she entered service . She was armed with a variety of light guns and four 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes , and was capable of a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Montebello spent her active @-@ duty career with the main Italian fleet , where she frequently took part in annual training exercises . In 1903 , she was withdrawn from front @-@ line service and converted into a training ship for engine room personnel ; she served in this capacity until 1920 , when she was sold for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Montebello was 73 @.@ 4 meters ( 241 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 7 @.@ 88 m ( 25 @.@ 9 ft ) and an average draft of 3 @.@ 31 m ( 10 @.@ 9 ft ) . She displaced 801 metric tons ( 788 long tons ; 883 short tons ) normally . Her propulsion system consisted of three triple @-@ expansion steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by six coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . Exact figures for the ship 's performance have not survived , but the members of the Goito class could steam at a speed of about 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) from 2 @,@ 500 to 3 @,@ 180 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 860 to 2 @,@ 370 kW ) . Montebello had a cruising radius of 1 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 000 km ; 1 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of between 105 and 121 . 
 The primary armament for Montebello was four 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . She was also equipped with six 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ caliber guns and two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 20 @-@ cal. guns , all mounted singly . The ship was protected with an armored deck that was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for Montebello was laid down at the Arsenale di La Spezia shipyard on 25 September 1885 . She was launched on 14 March 1888 and completed on 21 January 1889 . In 1893 , Montebello was laid up in Naples for the year ; at the time , the Italian fleet mobilized only a handful of vessels for the annual training maneuvers , preferring to keep the most modern vessels in reserve to reduce maintenance costs . In 1895 , Montebello was stationed in the 2nd Maritime Department , split between Taranto and Naples , along with most of the torpedo cruisers in the Italian fleet . These included her sister ships Monzambano , Goito , and Confienza , the eight Partenope @-@ class cruisers , and Tripoli . In 1898 , Montebello was assigned to the Levant Squadron that patrolled the eastern Mediterranean . She served on the station with the ironclad battleship Sardegna , the protected cruiser Etruria , Monzambano , and the torpedo cruiser Aretusa . 
 Later in 1898 , Montebello was withdrawn from front @-@ line service and employed as a training ship for engine room personnel . In 1903 , her boilers were replaced with a variety of coal and oil @-@ burning boilers manufactured by Pattison , Yarrow , and Thornycroft to give trainees several types of equipment to operate . At the outbreak of the Italo @-@ Turkish War in September 1911 , Montebello was stationed in Venice along with Tripoli and Goito . None of the vessels saw action during the war . The ship did not see action after Italy entered World War I either , as both the Italian and Austro @-@ Hungarian fleets adopted cautious strategies . Montebello continued in service as a training ship until 26 January 1920 , when she was stricken from the naval register and broken up for scrap . 
 = 1950 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1950 Atlantic hurricane season was the first year in the Atlantic hurricane database ( HURDAT ) that storms were given names in the Atlantic basin . Names were taken from the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet , with the first named storm being designated " Able " , the second " Baker " , and so on . It was an active season with sixteen tropical storms , with eleven of them developing into hurricanes . Six of these hurricanes were intense enough to be classified as major hurricanes — a denomination reserved for storms that attained sustained winds equivalent to a Category 3 or greater on the present @-@ day Saffir – Simpson scale . One storm , the twelfth of the season , was unnamed and was originally excluded from the yearly summary , and three additional storms were discovered in re @-@ analysis . The large quantity of strong storms during the year yielded , prior to modern reanalysis , what was the highest seasonal accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) of the 20th century in the Atlantic basin ; 1950 held the seasonal ACE record until broken by the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . However , later examination by researchers determined that several storms in the 1950 season were weaker than thought , leading to a lower ACE than assessed originally . 
 The tropical cyclones of the season produced a total of 88 fatalities and $ 38 @.@ 5 million in property damage ( 1950 USD ) . The first officially named Atlantic hurricane was Hurricane Able , which formed on August 12 , brushed the North Carolina coastline , and later moved across Atlantic Canada . The strongest hurricane of the season , Hurricane Dog , reached the equivalent of a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson scale , and caused extensive damage to the Leeward Islands . Two major hurricanes affected Florida : Easy produced the highest 24 @-@ hour rainfall total recorded in the United States , while King struck downtown Miami as a Category 4 hurricane and caused $ 27 @.@ 75 million ( 1950 USD ) of damage . The two major landfalls made the 1945 – 1950 period the only five @-@ year period to feature five major hurricane landfalls in the United States — a record that held until tied in 2000 – 2005 . The last storm of the year , an unnamed tropical storm , dissipated on November 13 . 
 = = Summary = = 
 The season officially began on June 15 and ended on November 15 ; these dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . This season was the first time that the United States Weather Bureau operated with radar technology to observe hurricanes 200 mi ( 320 km ) away from land . Although the season began on June 15 , tropical activity typically does not begin before August . The tropics remained tranquil through early August , and the U.S. Weather Bureau noted that the season had been " remarkably quiet " . The inactive period ended on August 12 , when the first tropical storm developed east of the Lesser Antilles . This storm received the name " Able " as part of the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet . ( The same alphabet was also used in the 1951 and 1952 seasons , before being replaced by female naming in 1953 . ) 
 Before the end of August , four hurricanes had formed in the Atlantic , two of which attained major hurricane status . A major hurricane is a tropical cyclone with winds of at least 111 mph ( 178 km / h ) ; a storm of this intensity would be classified as a Category 3 or greater on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale introduced in the 1970s . In contrast to the busy August , only three named storms developed in September — although three of the August hurricanes lasted into September . Hurricane Dog became the strongest hurricane of the season on September 6 with winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) ; its peak strength occurred over the open Atlantic Ocean , so it did not cause significant damage when it was at its strongest . It was among the most severe hurricanes on record in Antigua , where the hurricane struck early in its duration . Eight tropical storms or hurricanes formed in October , which is greater than in any other year . 
 In total , there were sixteen tropical storms during the season , of which five ( Tropical Storm How , Tropical Storm Mike and three unnamed tropical storms ) did not attain hurricane status . Overall , six major hurricanes occurred during the year . The Hurricane Hunters made about 300 flights into hurricanes during the season , the most since the practice began in 1943 . The number of storms was above average ; in a typical year , eleven tropical storms , six hurricanes , and between two and three major hurricanes take place . With the numerous major hurricanes , the season produced a high accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) of 211 , although it was originally assessed as 243 before reanalysis . At one point , the 1950 total was the highest on record , before being surpassed by the 2005 season . This value is an approximation of the combined kinetic energy used by all tropical cyclones throughout the season . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane Able = = = 
 The beginning of the hurricane season was inactive , with the formation of no tropical cyclones during June or July . In the middle of August a tropical wave spawned the first tropical storm of the year . Tropical Storm Able formed east of the Lesser Antilles on August 12 , and strengthened to hurricane status on August 14 . It likely formed earlier , as a Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane , but data in the eastern Atlantic was sparse . Able gradually intensified as it tracked generally west @-@ northwestward , and by 12 : 00 UTC on August 17 , Able became a major hurricane . Initially , Able was thought to pose a threat to the Bahamas and Florida . Instead , the hurricane turned to the northwest , reaching its peak intensity as a strong Category 3 hurricane , and later turned to the northeast , passing just offshore Cape Hatteras , North Carolina and Cape Cod . Steadily weakening and accelerating , Able struck Nova Scotia as a minimal hurricane , and later struck Newfoundland as an extratropical storm . It dissipated early on August 24 in the far northern Atlantic Ocean . 
 Along the coast of North Carolina , the hurricane produced light winds and rough waves , as well as moderate precipitation . Heavier rainfall occurred in southern New England , causing flooding in portions of New York City and producing slick roads that caused nine traffic fatalities . Able produced hurricane @-@ force winds in Nova Scotia , and damage across Canada totaled over $ 1 million ( 1950 CAD , $ 10 @.@ 2 million 2016 USD ) in the agriculture , communications , and fishing industries . Two people died in Canada when their raft was overturned . 
 = = = Hurricane Baker = = = 
 Tropical Storm Baker developed on August 18 east of the Lesser Antilles . It moved northwestward and later turned to the west , attaining hurricane status on August 21 . The next day , the hurricane attained Category 2 intensity just as it crossed over Antigua , where heavy damage was reported . More than 100 homes were damaged or destroyed , which left thousands homeless . Afterward , the hurricane began to weaken , and later on August 22 its winds decreased to tropical storm status . The cyclone then struck Montserrat as a strong tropical storm . The next day it struck southwestern Puerto Rico , and shortly thereafter weakened into a tropical depression , passing over the Dominican Republic . Baker turned more to the west , re @-@ attaining tropical storm status before striking eastern Cuba on August 24 . In Cuba , 37 people died , and the property losses reached several million dollars . 
 On August 25 , Baker weakened to tropical depression status while crossing Cuba , but soon thereafter regained tropical storm intensity in the western Caribbean Sea . Two days later , Baker entered the Gulf of Mexico , and by the next day Baker had regained hurricane status . It turned northward , reaching a peak intensity of 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) on August 30 . Baker weakened slightly before making landfall near Gulf Shores , Alabama with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) on August 31 . Property and crop damage totaled $ 2 @.@ 55 million ( 1950 USD ) , primarily between Mobile , Alabama and Saint Marks , Florida . Torrential rainfall fell throughout the region , with the largest total occurring in <unk> , Florida , where 15 @.@ 49 in ( 393 mm ) of precipitation were recorded . The heavy precipitation was responsible for extensive crop damage across the region . The hurricane also spawned two tornadoes , one of which destroyed four houses and a building in Apalachicola , Florida . In Birmingham , Alabama , high wind downed power lines , which caused one death and two injuries due to live wires . While inland , Baker tracked northwestward and eventually dissipated over southeastern Missouri on September 1 . 
 = = = Hurricane Charlie = = = 
 Hurricane Charlie developed on August 21 to the southwest of the Cape Verde islands , although this was discovered in subsequent analyses — at the time , the Weather Bureau did not consider Charlie to be a tropical cyclone until almost a week later . For four days , the storm tracked generally to the west as a weak tropical storm . On August 25 , it turned to the northwest and intensified , becoming a hurricane on August 28 . The next day , after Charlie had turned to the north , reconnaissance flights from the Hurricane Hunters reported peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) about 450 mi ( 740 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . On August 30 , the hurricane was posthumously estimated to have been a strong Category 2 hurricane . 
 On September 2 , Charlie turned to the north and northeast . At the time , it co @-@ existed with two other hurricanes , Dog and Easy ; it is a rare occurrence for three hurricanes to exist simultaneously in the Atlantic . Charlie slowly weakened and lost tropical characteristics , and by September 5 Charlie had transitioned into an extratropical cyclone about 480 mi ( 775 km ) southeast of Halifax , Nova Scotia . It dissipated later on September 5 without having affected land . 
 = = = Hurricane Dog = = = 
 Hurricane Dog is believed to have developed from a tropical wave that left the coast of Africa on August 24 . Its first observation as a tropical cyclone occurred on August 30 , when it was a 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) hurricane ; the storm is believed to have begun farther east as a Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane , but was not detectable before August 30 . At the time , Dog was located east of the Lesser Antilles , and it quickly attained major hurricane status as it moved to the west @-@ northwest . Dog passed through the Lesser Antilles with winds of 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) . It was considered among the worst hurricanes in the history of Antigua , where thousands were left homeless . Damage was estimated at $ 1 million ( 1950 USD , $ 9 @.@ 84 million 2016 USD ) , and there were two deaths from drowning in the region . 
 After passing through the Leeward Islands , the hurricane turned to a northerly drift with continued intensification . On September 5 , it attained wind speeds that would be equivalent to a Category 4 hurricane on the present @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson scale , with sustained winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) . Operationally , the wind intensity value was estimated by Hurricane Hunters at 185 mph ( 298 km / h ) when the hurricane was located about 450 mi ( 720 km ) south @-@ southwest of Bermuda ; this estimate is now believed to have been an overestimation of the peak winds in Hurricane Dog , though the storm produced enormous wave heights at sea . 
 Maintaining peak intensity for about 18 hours , Dog began a weakening trend as it made a sharp turn to the west . It accelerated to the north on September 10 , and two days later Dog passed within 200 mi ( 320 km ) of Cape Cod . Newspapers attributed heavy rainfall in the Mid @-@ Atlantic states — which resulted in five deaths — to the hurricane . Further north , the hurricane killed 12 people in New England , and produced a total of $ 2 million ( 1950 USD , $ 19 @.@ 7 million 2016 USD ) of property damage . Twelve others died in two shipwrecks off the coast of Canada . The hurricane later became a strong extratropical cyclone , maintaining hurricane @-@ force winds while passing south of Nova Scotia and eventually hitting Scotland with hurricane @-@ force gusts on September 18 . 
 = = = Hurricane Easy = = = 
 Hurricane Easy developed on September 1 from a trough in the western Caribbean , which persisted after Hurricane Baker moved through the region in late August . Moving northeastward , the hurricane crossed Cuba on September 3 and entered the Gulf of Mexico . Easy turned to the northwest and strengthened to its peak intensity as a Category 3 hurricane . At the time , Easy was located just off the west coast of Florida ; however , a ridge to its north caused the hurricane to stall , execute a small loop , and make landfall near Cedar Key . Following the landfall , Easy moved offshore , turned to the southeast , and made a second landfall near Hernando Beach on September 6 . The hurricane turned northwestward over the Florida Peninsula , and gradually weakened as it moved into Georgia and the southeastern United States . On September 9 , Easy dissipated over northeastern Arkansas . 
 Damage in Cuba was minor , although large portions of western Florida experienced hurricane @-@ force winds and heavy rainfall . Yankeetown reported 38 @.@ 70 in ( 983 mm ) of precipitation in 24 hours , which was , at the time , the largest 24 @-@ hour rainfall total on record in the United States . The cumulative total rainfall on Yankeetown from Easy was 45 @.@ 20 in ( 1 @,@ 148 mm ) , which still retains the record for the wettest tropical cyclone in Florida . Damage was heaviest in Cedar Key , where half of the houses were destroyed and most of the remaining were damaged . The rainfall caused heavy crop damage in the region . Across the state , Easy caused $ 3 million in damage ( 1950 USD ) , the total was less than expected , due to the sparse population of the affected area . Additionally , the hurricane was indirectly responsible for two deaths by electrocution . At the time , Easy was also known as the " Cedar Keys Hurricane " . 
 = = = Hurricane Fox = = = 
 Hurricane Fox was first discovered by Hurricane Hunters on September 10 , when it was located about 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) east of Puerto Rico . Subsequent analysis indicated that the system formed at least two days earlier . A small system , the hurricane moved generally northwestward and gradually intensified . After turning toward the north , Fox reached its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) on September 14 , as it passed about 300 mi ( 485 km ) east of Bermuda . Following its peak intensity , the hurricane accelerated to the north and northeast . By September 17 , Fox had lost all tropical characteristics , and later that day the circulation dissipated about halfway between the Azores and Newfoundland . Fox never affected land along its path . When Fox dissipated , it was the first time in 36 days without an active tropical cyclone in the Atlantic Ocean . 
 = = = Hurricane George = = = 
 George originated from a strong tropical wave when it was located several hundred miles northeast of the Lesser Antilles , and southeast of Bermuda . Forming on September 27 , George initially moved toward the north , although it curved westward over the subsequent days . Initially weak , George began strengthening on September 30 as it decreased its forward speed . The next day , while remaining nearly stationary , a nearby ship reported that George had reached hurricane status . It continued moving very slowly , passing only 100 mi ( 160 km ) south of Bermuda . The island experienced winds of 30 to 40 mph ( 40 to 65 km / h ) . Aside from rainbands , little impact was reported on Bermuda . 
 The hurricane passed west of Bermuda on October 3 . A day later , George reached its maximum intensity , attaining sustained winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) ; in its small eye , an Air Force Hurricane Hunter plane measured a central pressure of 960 mb ( 28 @.@ 35 inHg ) . It accelerated to the north and later to the northeast , and on October 5 George transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . Shortly thereafter , it passed just south of Newfoundland , and on October 7 the remnants of George dissipated south of Iceland . 
 = = = Tropical Storm How = = = 
 A tropical depression formed in the central Gulf of Mexico on October 1 , and quickly intensified into Tropical Storm How . Initially , the tropical storm moved west @-@ northwestward and its sustained winds peaked by October 2 . Officials advised small boats to remain at port along the Louisiana coast due to the storm . On October 3 , Tropical Storm How turned toward the southwest as it began weakening , and the next day it moved ashore near La Pesca , Tamaulipas , as a rapidly weakening tropical cyclone . About six hours after making landfall , How dissipated over the Sierra Madre Oriental in northeastern Mexico . How was the only named storm in the season not to attain hurricane status . 
 = = = Hurricane Item = = = 
 On October 8 , another tropical storm formed in the Gulf of Mexico just off the northwest coast of the Yucatán Peninsula . Given the name Item , the storm moved westward at first , and attained hurricane status on October 9 . Reconnaissance flights by the Hurricane Hunters reported winds of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) ; soon after that measurement , Hurricane Item turned to the southwest . On October 11 , the hurricane made landfall at peak intensity near Nautla , Veracruz , where wind gusts reached 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . It quickly dissipated over land . In the sparsely populated area where Item moved ashore , the hurricane dropped heavy rainfall . Newspaper reports considered it the worst storm to hit Mexico in ten years , with damage in Veracruz totaling around $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1950 USD , $ 14 @.@ 8 million 2016 USD ) . The strong winds sank 20 ships , and although there were no reports of casualties , Item caused 15 injuries . Communications were disrupted across the region , and downed trees blocked roads . Near <unk> , the winds damaged large areas of banana plantations . 
 = = = Hurricane Jig = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed on October 11 in the central Atlantic Ocean , northeast of the Lesser Antilles and southeast of Bermuda . Two days later , a ship reported strong winds and a rapid pressure drop , indicating a hurricane was in the region ; the tropical cyclone was given the name Jig . It moved northwestward , steadily intensifying before turning to the north and northeast . On October 15 , Hurricane Jig passed about 300 mi ( 480 km ) east of Bermuda , and later that day its sustained winds reached their peak strength , which is considered to be highly uncertain . The hurricane began weakening on October 16 . Jig became an extratropical cyclone later that day and quickly dissipated , never having affected land due to its small size . 
 = = = Hurricane King = = = 
 The origins of Hurricane King can be traced to the formation of a tropical storm just off the north coast of Honduras on October 13 . Given the name King , the tropical storm was a small weather system throughout its duration . During its first 72 hours as a tropical cyclone , King initially toward the east and east @-@ northeast . On October 16 , King 's maximum sustained winds reached hurricane strength while the storm was located between Jamaica and the Cayman Islands . The next day , King struck Cuba near Camagüey with winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) , equivalent to an upper @-@ end Category 1 hurricane . The hurricane killed seven people and caused $ 2 million ( 1950 USD , $ 19 @.@ 7 million 2016 USD ) in damage throughout the country . After crossing Cuba , King rapidly deepened over the Gulf Stream as it turned toward South Florida , becoming the sixth and final major hurricane of the season . 
 After reaching the southwestern Atlantic Ocean , King turned northward and later northwestward , striking downtown Miami on October 18 as a Category 4 hurricane . It was the most severe hurricane to impact the city since the 1926 Miami hurricane . Across Florida , damage totaled $ 27 @.@ 75 million ( 1950 USD , $ 273 million 2016 USD ) , of which $ 15 million ( 1950 USD , $ 148 million 2016 USD ) was in the Miami metropolitan area . A preliminary survey indicated there were 12 @,@ 290 houses damaged in the region , with an additional eight destroyed . Along its path through the state , strong winds were observed around Lake Okeechobee , with a 93 mph ( 150 km / h ) gust in Clewiston . Overall , there were three deaths in the state . Early on October 19 , King weakened to tropical storm status over north @-@ central Florida , and on the next day it dissipated over western Georgia . There was one additional death in Georgia . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Twelve = = = 
 A tropical storm developed in the east @-@ central Atlantic on October 17 . It moved northwestward at first before turning to the northeast on October 19 . The storm steadily intensified as it tracked toward the Azores , and it reached a peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) on October 21 . Maintaining its peak strength for 30 hours , the storm began a steady weakening trend before crossing through the southern Azores . It turned to the southeast , weakening to tropical depression status on October 24 . Subsequently , the system turned to the southwest and quickly dissipated . This tropical storm was not considered to be a tropical storm at the time , and thus the system was not included in the Monthly Weather Review 's summary of the 1950 hurricane season . It is unknown when the storm was added to the Atlantic hurricane database , although by 1962 , the storm was included in seasonal statistics . 
 = = = Hurricane Love = = = 
 In the wake of Hurricane King moving northward through Florida , an area of low pressure developed into a tropical cyclone on October 18 south of Louisiana . This storm was given the name Love and quickly strengthened , reaching hurricane status shortly thereafter . The storm initially moved westward across the Gulf of Mexico , but soon swung southward into the central portion of the Gulf on October 19 . Hurricane Love 's maximum sustained winds are believed to have reached their peak intensity early on October 20 . Throughout the hurricane 's track , dry air infringed on the western side of the tropical cyclone 's circulation , which produced unfavorable conditions for additional tropical cyclogenesis . On October 20 , the storm began curving northeastward towards the coast of western Florida ; however , the dry air completely circled Love 's center of circulation , drastically weakening the cyclone in the process . On October 21 , Love weakened to a tropical storm , and it struck the Big Bend region of Florida , north of Cedar Key . At the time , its winds were only of moderate gale force , and the storm dissipated shortly thereafter . 
 Certain areas began preparing for the storm along Florida 's west coast . Hospitals set up emergency facilities in case of power failure , and some coastal residents left their homes . Initially , the storm was forecast to strike the Tampa area , but missed to the north as it weakened . It reportedly left little damage in the sparsely populated land where it made landfall . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Mike = = = 
 Mike was not classified as a tropical storm until post @-@ analysis . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fifteen = = = 
 Only existed for two days . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Sixteen = = = 
 Sparse information on this storm . Only existed for two days , just like Fifteen . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 This was the first season in the Atlantic hurricane database in which cyclones that attained at least tropical storm status were given names . The names used to name storms during the 1950 season were taken from the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet , which was also used in the 1951 and 1952 hurricane seasons before being replaced by female names in 1953 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = Charles Scott ( governor ) = 
 Charles Scott ( April 1739 – October 22 , 1813 ) was an 18th @-@ century American soldier who was elected the fourth governor of Kentucky in 1808 . Orphaned at an early age , Scott enlisted in the Virginia Regiment in October 1755 and served as a scout and escort during the French and Indian War . He quickly rose through the ranks to become a captain . After the war , he married and engaged in agricultural pursuits on land left to him by his father , but he returned to active military service in 1775 as the American Revolution began to grow in intensity . In August 1776 , he was promoted to colonel and given command of the 5th Virginia Regiment . The 5th Virginia joined George Washington in New Jersey later that year , serving with him for the duration of the Philadelphia campaign . Scott commanded Washington 's light infantry , and by late 1778 was also serving as his chief of intelligence . <unk> at the end of the Philadelphia campaign , Scott returned to active service in March 1779 and was ordered to South Carolina to assist General Benjamin Lincoln in the southern theater . He arrived in Charleston , South Carolina , just as Henry Clinton had begun his siege of the city . Scott was taken as a prisoner of war when Charleston surrendered . <unk> in March 1781 and exchanged for Lord Rawdon in July 1782 , Scott managed to complete a few recruiting assignments before the war ended . 
 After the war , Scott visited the western frontier in 1785 and began to make preparations for a permanent relocation . He resettled near present @-@ day Versailles , Kentucky , in 1787 . Confronted by the dangers of Indian raids , Scott raised a company of volunteers in 1790 and joined Josiah Harmar for an expedition against the Indians . After Harmar 's Defeat , President Washington ordered Arthur St. Clair to prepare for an invasion of Indian lands in the Northwest Territory . In the meantime , Scott , by now holding the rank of brigadier general in the Virginia militia , was ordered to conduct a series of preliminary raids . In July 1791 , he led the most notable and successful of these raids against the village of Ouiatenon . St. Clair 's main invasion , conducted later that year , was a failure . Shortly after the separation of Kentucky from Virginia in 1792 , the Kentucky General Assembly commissioned Scott as a major general and gave him command of the 2nd division of the Kentucky militia . Scott 's division cooperated with " Mad " Anthony Wayne 's Legion of the United States for the rest of the Northwest Indian War , including their decisive victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers . 
 Having previously served in the Virginia House of Delegates and as a presidential elector , the aging Scott now ran for governor . His 1808 campaign was skillfully managed by his step @-@ son @-@ in @-@ law , Jesse Bledsoe , and he won a convincing victory over John Allen and Green Clay . A fall on the icy steps of the governor 's mansion early in his term confined Scott to crutches for the rest of his life , and left him heavily reliant on Bledsoe , whom he appointed Secretary of State . Although he frequently clashed with the state legislature over domestic matters , the primary concern of his administration was the increasing tension between the United States and Great Britain that eventually led to the War of 1812 . Scott 's decision to appoint William Henry Harrison as brevet major general in the Kentucky militia , although probably in violation of the state constitution as Harrison was not a resident of the state , was nonetheless praised by the state 's citizens . After his term expired , Scott returned to his Canewood estate . His health declined rapidly , and he died on October 22 , 1813 . Scott County , Kentucky , and Scott County , Indiana , are named in his honor , as are the cities of Scottsville , Kentucky , and Scottsville , Virginia . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Charles Scott was born in 1739 , probably in April , in the part of Goochland County , Virginia , that is now Powhatan County . His father , Samuel Scott , was a farmer and member of the Virginia House of Burgesses . His mother , whose name is not known , died most likely around 1745 . Scott had an older brother , John , and three younger siblings , Edward , Joseph , and Martha . He received only a basic education from his parents and in the rural Virginia schools near his home . 
 Shortly after his father died in 1755 , Scott was apprenticed to a carpenter . In late July 1755 , a local court was preparing to place him with a guardian , but in October , before the court acted , Scott enlisted in the Virginia Regiment . He was assigned to David Bell 's company . During the early part of the French and Indian War , he won praise from his superiors as a frontier scout and woodsman . Most of his fellow soldiers were undisciplined and poorly trained , allowing Scott to stand out and quickly rise to the rank of corporal . By June 1756 , he had been promoted to sergeant . 
 Scott served under George Washington in the Braddock Expedition , a failed attempt to capture Fort Duquesne from the French . For most of 1756 and the early part of 1757 , he divided his time between Fort Cumberland and Fort Washington , conducting scouting and escort missions . In April 1757 , David Bell was relieved of his command as part of a general downsizing of Washington 's regiment , and Scott was assigned to Captain Robert McKenzie at Fort Pearsall . In August and September , Washington sent Scott and a small scouting party on two reconnaissance missions to Fort Duquesne in preparation for an assault on that fort , but the party learned little on either mission . In November , Scott was part of the Forbes Expedition that captured the fort . He spent the latter part of the year at Fort Loudoun , where Washington promoted him to ensign . 
 Scott spent most of 1759 conducting escort missions and constructing roads and forts . During this time , Virginia 's forces were taken from George Washington and put under the control of Colonel William Byrd . In July 1760 , Scott was named the fifth captain of a group of Virginia troops that Byrd led on an expedition against the Cherokee in 1760 . Scott 's exact role in the campaign is not known . The expedition was a success , and Virginia Governor Francis Fauquier ordered the force disbanded in February 1762 ; Scott had left the army at some unknown date prior to that . 
 Sometime prior to 1762 , Scott 's older brother , John , died , leaving Scott to inherit his father 's land near the James River and Muddy Creek . Having left the army , he had settled on his inherited farm by late 1761 . On February 25 , 1762 , he married Frances Sweeney from Cumberland County , Virginia . With the help of approximately 10 slaves , Scott engaged in growing tobacco and milling flour on his farm . In July 1766 , he was named one of two captains in the local militia . Over the next several years , Scott and his wife had four boys and four or five girls . 
 = = Revolutionary War = = 
 As the American Revolution intensified in 1775 , Scott raised a company of volunteers in Cumberland County . It was the first company formed south of the James River to participate in the Revolution . The company stood ready to aid Patrick Henry in an anticipated clash with Lord Dunmore at Williamsburg , Virginia , in May 1775 , but Dunmore abandoned the city in June , and they joined units from the surrounding counties in Williamsburg later that month . In July , the Virginia Conventions created two regiments of Virginia troops , one under Patrick Henry and the other under William Woodford . As those leaders departed for Williamsburg , the Conventions acknowledged Scott as temporary commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the volunteers already assembled there . On August 17 , 1775 , he was elected lieutenant colonel of Woodford 's regiment , the 2nd Virginia . His younger brother , Joseph , served as a lieutenant in the regiment . In December , Woodford dispatched Scott and 150 men to Great Bridge , Virginia , to defend a crossing point on the Elizabeth River . Days later , this force played a significant role in the December 9 , 1775 , Battle of Great Bridge by killing British Captain Charles Fordyce , thereby halting the British advance on the crossing . Following the battle , colonial forces were able to occupy the city of Norfolk , Virginia , and Lord Dunmore eventually departed from Virginia . 
 On February 13 , 1776 , the 2nd Virginia became a part of the Continental Army ; Scott retained his rank of lieutenant colonel during the transition . After spending the winter with part of the 2nd Virginia in Suffolk , Scott was chosen by the Second Continental Congress as colonel of the 5th Virginia Regiment on August 12 , 1776 ; he replaced Colonel William Peachy , who had resigned . The 5th Virginia was stationed in the cities of Hampton and Portsmouth through the end of September . They were then ordered to join George Washington in New Jersey , eventually repairing to the city of Trenton in November . 
 = = = Philadelphia campaign = = = 
 Serving as part of Adam Stephen 's brigade , Scott 's 5th Virginia Regiment fought in the colonial victory at the December 26 Battle of Trenton . During the subsequent Battle of the Assunpink Creek on January 2 , 1777 , the 5th Virginia helped slow the advance of a combined force of British light infantry and Hessian mercenaries toward Trenton . Major George Johnston , a member of the 5th Virginia , opined that Scott had " acquired immortal honor " from his performance at Assunpink Creek . Following these battles , Washington 's main force prepared to spend the winter at Morristown , New Jersey , while Scott 's regiment was based at nearby Chatham . From this base , he led light infantry raids against British foraging parties . In his most notable engagement – the February 1 Battle of Drake 's Farm – he defeated a superior combination of British and Hessian soldiers . 
 In March 1777 , Scott returned to his Virginia farm , taking his first furlough in more than a year . In recognition of his service with Washington , Congress commissioned him a brigadier general on April 2 , 1777 . At Washington 's request , he returned to Trenton on May 10 , 1777 . His 4th Virginia Brigade and another brigade under William Woodford constituted the Virginia division , commanded by Adam Stephen , who had been promoted to major general . With Stephen and Brigadier General William Maxwell ill , Scott assumed temporary command of the division between May 19 and May 24 . Washington spent much of the summer of 1777 trying to anticipate and counter the moves of British General William Howe , and the lull in the fighting allowed Scott time to file a protest with Congress regarding how his seniority and rank had been calculated . After eight months of deliberation , Congress concurred with Scott 's protest , placing him ahead of fellow brigadier general George Weedon in seniority . 
 At the September 11 Battle of Brandywine , the 4th Virginia Brigade stubbornly resisted the advance of General Charles Cornwallis , but was ultimately forced to retreat . Following the British victory , Howe marched toward Philadelphia , stopping briefly at Germantown . Scott persistently advocated for an attack on Howe 's position at Germantown , and although he was initially in the minority among Washington 's generals , he ultimately prevailed upon Washington to conduct the attack . On October 4 , 1777 , the 4th Virginia attacked the British in the Battle of Germantown . Because of their circuitous route to the battle , however , the field was already covered by heavy smoke from muskets and a fire set by the British in a dry buckwheat field when they arrived ; eventually , they and the other colonial forces were lost in the smoke and retreated . 
 After the defeat at Germantown , Washington 's troops took a position in the hills surrounding Whitemarsh , Pennsylvania , about 14 miles ( 23 km ) from Philadelphia . Scott and four other generals initially favored an attack on Philadelphia in December , but after hearing Washington 's assessment of the enemy 's defenses there , they abandoned the idea . After a series of skirmishes with Howe 's men near Whitemarsh , Washington 's army camped for the winter at Valley Forge . Scott was afforded the luxury of boarding at the farm of Samuel Jones , about three miles from the camp , but rode out to inspect his brigade daily . Washington granted him a furlough in mid @-@ March 1778 , and he returned to Valley Forge on May 20 , 1778 . 
 When Washington and his men abandoned Valley Forge in mid @-@ June 1778 , Scott was ordered to take 1 @,@ 500 light infantrymen and harass the British forces as they marched across New Jersey . On June 26 , the Marquis de Lafayette joined Scott with an additional 1 @,@ 000 men , in anticipation of a major offensive the next day . General Charles Lee was chosen to command the operation , which was delayed by one day due to inadequate communications and delays in forwarding provisions . Lee shared no battle plan with his generals , later claiming he had insufficient intelligence to form one . On the morning of June 28 , Lee launched the attack , beginning the Battle of Monmouth . During the battle , Scott observed American artillerymen retreating . Not realizing that the men had only run out of ammunition , Scott believed the retreat was a sign of the collapse of the American offensive and ordered his men to retreat as well . Lacking a battle plan for guidance , William Maxwell and Anthony Wayne , whose units were fighting adjacent to Scott 's men , also ordered a retreat . With such a great number of his men retreating , Lee fell back and eventually aborted the offensive . Although Washington 's main force arrived and stopped the British advance , Scott 's retreat was partially blamed for giving them control of the battle . Tradition holds that , in the aftermath of the battle , Scott witnessed Washington excoriating Lee in a profanity @-@ laden tirade , but biographer Harry M. Ward considered it unlikely that Scott was present at the meeting . Lee was later court @-@ martialed for the retreat and suspended from command . 
 Following the Battle of Monmouth , the British retreated to New York City . On August 14 , Scott was given command of a new light infantry corps organized by Washington . He also served as Washington 's chief of intelligence , conducting constant scouting missions from the Americans ' new base at White Plains , New York . While Scott 's men engaged in a few skirmishes with British scouting parties , neither Washington 's army nor the British force at New York City conducted any major operations before Scott was furloughed in November 1778 . 
 = = = Service in the southern theater and capture = = = 
 A March 1779 letter from Washington to Scott , still on furlough in Virginia , ordered him to recruit volunteers in Virginia and join Washington at Middlebrook on May 1 . Men and supplies proved difficult to obtain , delaying Scott 's return ; during the delay , Washington ordered the recruits to South Carolina to join Benjamin Lincoln , who was in command of the militia forces there . Reports of significant British troop movements toward Georgia had convinced Washington that the enemy was preparing an invasion from the south . 
 Soon after Washington 's orders were delivered , a British raiding party under George Collier and Edward Mathew arrived in Virginia to capture or destroy supplies that might otherwise be sent southward to aid the reinforcements going to South Carolina . Scott 's orders changed again ; the Virginia House of Delegates ordered him to immediately prepare defenses against Collier and Mathew 's raids . When it became clear to both the legislature and Washington that Collier and Mathew intended only to raid supplies , not to invade , they concluded that the local militia would be able to sufficiently protect Virginia 's interests and that Scott should continue to recruit men to reinforce the south . The legislators presented him with a horse , a firearm , and 500 pounds sterling for his quick response to the threat . 
 Scott 's recruiting difficulties in Virginia continued , despite the implementation of a draft by the state legislature . Finally , in October 1779 , he forwarded troops sent to him from Washington 's Northern Army on to Lincoln in South Carolina , fulfilling his quota . He retained only Abraham Buford 's regiment with him in Virginia . In February 1780 , about 750 men sent by Washington under William Woodford arrived at Scott 's camp in Petersburg , Virginia . Virginia authorities , fearing that the British force to the south under General Henry Clinton would turn north to Virginia , detained Scott and Woodford until it was clear that Clinton 's object was Lincoln 's position at Charleston , South Carolina . 
 On March 30 , 1780 , Scott arrived in Charleston just as Clinton was laying siege to the city . He was captured when the city surrendered on May 12 , 1780 , and was held as a prisoner of war at <unk> 's Point near Charleston . Although he was a prisoner , he was given freedom to move within a six @-@ mile radius and was allowed to correspond and trade with acquaintances in Virginia . With the death of William Woodford on November 13 , 1780 , he became primarily responsible for the welfare of the Virginia troops at <unk> 's Point . He requested his parole on account of ill health on January 30 , 1781 , and in late March , Charles Cornwallis granted the request . 
 In July 1782 , Scott was exchanged for Lord Rawdon , ending his parole . Washington informed him that he was back on active duty and ordered him to assist General Peter Muhlenberg 's recruiting efforts in Virginia , then to report to General Nathanael Greene . Greene wrote that he did not have a command for Scott , however , and requested that he remain with Muhlenberg in Virginia . The few troops he was able to recruit were sent to a depot at Winchester , Virginia . When the preliminary articles of peace between the United States and Great Britain were signed in March 1783 , recruiting stopped altogether . Scott was brevetted to major general on September 30 , 1783 , just prior to his discharge from the Continental Army . Following the war , he became one of the founding members of the Society of the Cincinnati . 
 = = Settlement in Kentucky and early political career = = 
 In October 1783 , the Virginia Legislature authorized Scott to commission superintendents and surveyors to survey the lands given to soldiers for their service in the Revolutionary War . Enticed by glowing reports of Kentucky by his friend , James Wilkinson , he arranged for a cabin to be built for him near the Kentucky River , although the builder apparently laid only the cornerstone . Scott first visited Kentucky in mid @-@ 1785 . Traveling with Peyton Short , one of Wilkinson 's business partners , he came to Limestone ( present @-@ day Maysville , Kentucky ) via the Monongahela and Ohio Rivers . Scott and Short then traveled overland to the Kentucky River to examine the land they would later claim . Scott 's stay in Kentucky was a short one ; he had returned to his farm in Virginia by September 1785 . 
 On his return to Virginia , Scott employed Edward Carrington , former quartermaster general of the Southern Army , to set his financial affairs in order in preparation for a move to Kentucky . Carrington purchased Scott 's Virginia farm in 1785 , but allowed the family to live there until they moved to the frontier . In 1787 , Scott settled near the city of Versailles , Kentucky . Between his military claims and those of his children , the Scott family was entitled to 21 @,@ 035 acres ( 8 @,@ 513 ha ) in Fayette and Bourbon counties . Scott constructed a two @-@ story log cabin , a stockade , and a tobacco inspection warehouse . In June 1787 , Shawnee warriors killed and scalped his son , Samuel , while he was crossing the Ohio River in a canoe ; the elder Scott watched helplessly from the riverbank . Although a small party of settlers pursued the Shawnees back across the river , they were not able to overtake them . In volume three of Theodore Roosevelt 's The Winning of the West , he stated that Scott " delighted in war " against the Indians after the death of his son . 
 Scott focused on the development of his homestead as a way to deal with the grief of losing his son . The settlement became known as Scott 's Landing , and Scott briefly served as a tobacco inspector for the area . Determined to make Scott 's Landing the centerpiece of a larger settlement called Petersburg , he began selling lots near the settlement in November 1788 . Among those who purchased lots were James Wilkinson , Abraham Buford , Judge George Muter , and future Congressman and Kentucky Governor Christopher Greenup . 
 Scott was one of 37 men who founded the Kentucky Society for the Promotion of Useful Knowledge in 1787 . Although he did not participate in any of the ten statehood conventions that sought to separate Kentucky from Virginia , he supported the idea in principle . When Woodford County was formed from the part of Fayette County that included Scott 's fledgling settlement , Scott declined appointment as the new county 's lieutenant . He did , however , consent to be a candidate to represent the county in the Virginia House of Delegates . During his single term , he served on the committee on privileges and election and on several special committees , including one that recommended that President George Washington supply a military guard at Big Bone Lick to facilitate the establishment of a saltworks there . 
 = = Northwest Indian War = = 
 As tensions mounted between the Indians in the Northwest Territory and settlers on the Kentucky frontier , President Washington began sanctioning joint operations between federal army troops and local frontier militia against the Indians . In April 1790 , Scott raised a contingent of volunteers from Bourbon and Fayette counties to join Josiah Harmar in a raid against the Western Confederacy along the Scioto River in what would become the U.S. state of Ohio . The combined force of regulars and militia departed from Limestone on April 18 , 1790 , crossing the Ohio River and marching to the upper Scioto . From there , they headed south , toward the present @-@ day city of Portsmouth , Ohio , and discovered an abandoned Indian camp . Fresh footprints , including those of a well @-@ known Shawnee warrior – nicknamed Reel Foot because of his two club feet – led away from the camp site . Scott sent a small detachment to follow the tracks ; ultimately , they discovered and killed four Shawnee , including Reel Foot . Other than this , the expedition accomplished nothing , and it disbanded on August 27 , 1790 . 
 In June 1790 , Harmar and Arthur St. Clair were ordered to lead another expedition against the Indians . Harmar had hoped that Scott , Isaac Shelby , or Benjamin Logan would join the campaign and lead the Kentucky militia , but all three declined . Scott had been elected to represent Woodford County in the Virginia General Assembly , and his legislative duty prevented his service . He believed that the Kentucky militiamen would only serve under Colonel Robert Trotter , a veteran of Logan 's earlier Indian fighting campaigns . Ultimately , command of the Kentucky militiamen was given to Major John Hardin , and many militiamen refused to join the campaign , just as Scott had predicted . During the expedition , Scott 's son , Merritt , who was serving as a captain in the Woodford County militia , was killed and scalped . The entire expedition was a failure , and it solidified the Kentucky militiamen 's strong distrust of Harmar ; most vowed never to fight alongside him again . 
 During Harmar 's Campaign , Scott was serving in the state legislature in Richmond , Virginia . He was once again appointed to the committee on privileges and election . He also served on the committee on propositions and grievances and several special committees . On December 30 , 1790 , Virginia Governor Beverley Randolph , possibly acting on a recommendation from Washington , appointed Scott brigadier general in the Virginia militia and gave him command of the entire District of Kentucky . His primary responsibility was overseeing a line of 18 outposts along the Ohio River . In January 1791 , President Washington accepted U.S. Senator John Brown 's suggestion to appoint a Kentucky Board of War , composed of Brown , Scott , Isaac Shelby , Harry Innes , and Benjamin Logan . The committee was empowered to call out local militia to act in conjunction with federal troops against the Indians . They recommended assembling an army of volunteers to locate and destroy Indian settlements north of the Ohio River . Later that month , Washington approved a plan to invade the Indians ' homelands via a raid from Fort Washington ( near present @-@ day Cincinnati , Ohio ) . Most Kentuckians were displeased with Washington 's choice of Arthur St. Clair , by then suffering from gout and unable to mount his own horse unassisted , as overall commander of the invasion . Scott was chosen to serve under St. Clair as commander of the 1 @,@ 000 militiamen who took part in the invasion , about one @-@ third of the total force . 
 = = = The Blackberry Campaign = = = 
 Washington ordered Scott to conduct a series of preliminary raids in mid @-@ 1791 that would keep the enemy occupied while St. Clair assembled the primary invasion force . Both Isaac Shelby and Benjamin Logan had hoped to lead the campaign , and neither would accept a lesser position . Shelby nevertheless supported the campaign , while Logan actively opposed it . Scott issued a call for volunteers to assemble at Frankfort , Kentucky , on May 15 , 1791 , to carry out these raids . Kentuckians responded favorably to the idea of an all @-@ militia campaign , and 852 men volunteered for service , although Scott was only authorized to take 750 ; Senator John Brown was among the volunteers . After a brief delay to learn the fate of a failed diplomatic mission to the Miami tribes in the Northwest Territory , Scott 's men departed from Fort Washington on May 24 . The militiamen crossed the Ohio toward a clutch of Miami , Kickapoo , Wea , and Potawatomi settlements near the location of present @-@ day Lafayette , Indiana . For eight days , they crossed rugged terrain and were bedraggled by frequent rainstorms . The harsh conditions spoiled the militia 's supplies , and they resorted to gathering the blackberries that were growing in the area ; for this reason , the expedition earned the nickname the " Blackberry Campaign " . 
 As Scott 's men reached an open prairie near the Wea settlement of Ouiatenon on June 1 , they were discovered by an enemy scout and hurried to attack the villages before the residents could react . When the main force reached the villages , they found the residents hurriedly fleeing across the Wabash River in canoes . Aided by cover fire from a Kickapoo village on the other side of the river , they were able to escape before Scott 's men could attack . The river was too wide to ford at Scott 's location , so he sent a detachment under James Wilkinson in one direction and a detachment under Thomas Barbee in the other to find a place to ford the river . Wilkinson did not find a suitable location , but located and killed a small band of Indians before returning . Barbee located a crossing and conducted a brief raid against the Indians on the other side before returning to Scott . The next morning , Scott 's main force burned the nearby villages and crops , while a detachment under Wilkinson set out for the settlement of <unk> . The inhabitants of this village had fled across Eel Creek , and after a brief and ineffective firefight , Wilkinson 's men burned the city and returned to Scott . In his official report , Scott noted that many of <unk> 's residents were French and speculated that it was connected to , perhaps dependent upon , the French settlement of Detroit . 
 Low on supplies , Scott and his men ended their campaign . On the return trip , two men drowned in the White River ; these were the only deaths among Scott 's men . Five others were wounded but survived . In total , they had killed 38 Indians and taken 57 more prisoner . Scott sent 12 men ahead with the official report for Arthur St. Clair 's review ; the rest of the men arrived at Fort Steuben ( present @-@ day Clarksville , Indiana ) on June 15 . The next day , they recrossed the Ohio River and received their discharge papers at Louisville , Kentucky . 
 = = = St. Clair expedition = = = 
 Scott 's Wabash Campaign was well @-@ received both in Kentucky and by the Washington administration . On June 24 , 1791 , Arthur St. Clair encouraged the Board of War to organize a second expedition into the Wabash region and to remove their outposts along the Ohio River to free up manpower and finances as a prelude to his larger invasion . Scott questioned the wisdom of removing the outposts and convinced his fellow members of the Board of War to retain one at Big Bone Lick and one guarding an ironworks at the mouth of the Kentucky River . His instincts later proved to be right ; a month later , Indian raiders tried to deny the frontier settlers access to salt by capturing Big Bone Lick , but they were repelled by the militia stationed at the outpost there . Scott also did not believe that 500 men , St. Clair 's requested number for the second Wabash expedition , was sufficient for an effective operation . 
 In July , Scott gave permission to Bourbon County resident John Edwards to lead 300 men against a band of Indians suspected of stealing horses on the Kentucky side of the Ohio River . Although Edwards ' expedition almost reached the Sandusky River , they found only deserted villages . Unknown to the volunteers , they narrowly missed being ambushed by the Indians in the area . Many of the men who accompanied Edwards accused him of cowardice . Due to illness , Scott was unable to lead the expedition St. Clair requested ; instead , he chose his friend , James Wilkinson , to lead it . Wilkinson 's men departed on August 1 . During their expedition , they destroyed the evacuated village of <unk> ( also called <unk> ) , the rebuilt settlement of Ouiatenon , a small Kickapoo village , and several other small settlements in the area . Returning by the same route that Scott 's previous expedition had , Wilkinson 's men were back in Kentucky by August 21 . Scott 's and Wilkinson 's campaigns took a heavy toll on the Northwest Indians . In particular , the <unk> and Kickapoos signed a peace treaty with the United States the following year , and the Kickapoos migrated farther into Illinois and Missouri . 
 St. Clair continued his preparations for invading the northwest despite the fact that , by now , he admitted he was unfit for combat due to his ill health . Like Harmar , he was also unpopular in Kentucky , and Scott had to conduct a draft to raise the militiamen needed for St. Clair 's expedition . He and most other officers in Kentucky claimed they were too ill to lead the men ; most actually feared losing the respect of Kentuckians through their association with St. Clair . Colonel William Oldham was the highest @-@ ranking soldier willing to lead the Kentuckians . 
 St. Clair 's party left Fort Washington on October 1 . On November 3 , he ordered his men to make camp on a small tributary of the Wabash River , mistakenly believing they were camping on the St. Marys River . His intent was for the men to construct some protective works the next day , but before sunrise , a combined group of Miami and Canadians attacked the party , routing them and capturing part of their artillery and most of their supplies . Of St. Clair 's force of 1 @,@ 400 men , 600 were killed and 300 captured during the attack . The Kentucky militiamen scattered during the attack , and their leader , Colonel Oldham , was killed . Nevertheless , they and most citizens in Kentucky blamed St. Clair for the entire debacle . St. Clair retreated to Fort Washington , and on November 24 , Scott joined him there with 200 mounted volunteers in case the Indians decided to pursue him and invade Kentucky . When it became apparent that no Indian invasion was imminent , Scott 's men returned home . As a result of St. Clair 's campaign , tribes that had previously been neutral in the conflict – including the Delawares and Wyandots – allied with the Miami and Shawnee against the frontiersmen . 
 = = = Service with the Legion of the United States = = = 
 After St. Clair 's Defeat , President Washington asked Congress to authorize the formation of the Legion of the United States , a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ man force to fight the Indians in the Northwest . Congress approved the proposal in March 1792 , and Scott learned from a friend in Philadelphia that he was being considered as commander of the Legion . Ultimately , however , Washington concluded that he was " of inadequate abilities " ; his known vice of drinking too much alcohol also concerned Washington . Instead , Washington chose " Mad " Anthony Wayne to command the Legion . On June 4 , 1792 – just days after Kentucky officially gained statehood – the Kentucky General Assembly commissioned Scott and Benjamin Logan as major generals in the state militia . On June 25 , Scott was given command of the militia 's 2nd Division , which was charged with operating north of the Kentucky River ; Logan 's 1st Division operated south of the river . 
 The new state legislature had also appointed a five @-@ man committee to select a city to be the new state capital . Scott applied to have Petersburg , still a fledgling settlement , designated as the capital . Other localities – including Frankfort , Lexington , Louisville , and Boonesborough – also applied . Frankfort was eventually chosen , as Scott 's failure to secure Petersburg 's designation as the state capital contributed more than anything else to the settlement 's failure to even become a viable city . Scott 's son , Charles , Jr . , wrote to his brother Daniel that their father was planning to run for Congress in 1792 ; although Charles , Jr. expressed confidence that his father would be elected , his campaign apparently never materialized or faltered shortly after it began . He was , however , chosen as a presidential elector in 1793 . 
 Wayne originally intended to use Kentucky militiamen in preemptive strikes against the Indians and to conduct the main invasion using only federal troops , but by the time he moved to Fort Washington in mid @-@ 1793 , he had assembled fewer than 3 @,@ 000 of the 5 @,@ 000 troops he had anticipated . He now requested that Scott 's and Logan 's men join his main force . Logan flatly refused to cooperate with a federal officer , but Scott eventually agreed , and Wayne commissioned him an officer in the federal army on July 1 , 1793 . He and Governor Isaac Shelby instituted a draft to raise the 1 @,@ 500 troops he was to command in Wayne 's operation . When he joined Wayne at Fort Jefferson on October 21 , 1793 , he had only been able to raise 1 @,@ 000 men . 
 On November 4 , Wayne ordered Scott 's militiamen to destroy a nearby Delaware village . Still resentful and distrustful of federal officers and aware that Wayne would not launch a major offensive so close to winter , the men were not enthusiastic about the mission , which many of them considered trivial . That night , 501 of them deserted their camp , though Wayne noted in his report that he believed Scott and his officers had done all they could do to prevent the desertions . Scott attempted to continue the mission with his remaining men , but inclement weather prevented him from conducting a major offensive . Ultimately , the men were only able to disperse a small hunting camp before continuing on to Fort Washington and mustering out on November 10 . Wayne ordered Scott to return with a full quota of troops after the winter . 
 Tensions cooled between Wayne and the Kentuckians over the winter of 1793 – 94 . Wayne noticed that , despite their <unk> , the Kentucky volunteers appeared to be good soldiers . The militiamen , after observing Wayne , concluded that he – unlike Harmar and St. Clair – knew how to combat the Indians . Wayne augmented his popularity in Kentucky by building Fort Recovery over the winter on the site of St. Clair 's defeat . The Indians ' victory over St. Clair had become a part of their lore and inspired them to continue the fight against the western settlers ; Wayne 's construction of a fort on this site was a blow to the Indian psyche , and his re @-@ burial of some 600 skulls that the Indians had dug up and scattered across the area was popular with Kentuckians , since many of their own were among the dead . While Scott came to respect Wayne personally , his friend , James Wilkinson , began an anonymous campaign to tarnish Wayne 's image , coveting command of the Northwest expedition for himself . Scott , on leave in Philadelphia at the time , wrote to Secretary of War Henry Knox to defend Wayne 's reputation , breaching his friendship with Wilkinson . 
 Scott returned to Kentucky from Philadelphia in June 1794 , mustered 1 @,@ 500 militiamen , and joined Wayne at Fort Greeneville on July 27 . He and Thomas Barbee led this force in support of Wayne 's 1 @,@ 000 regular troops . The combined force marched quickly and captured the recently evacuated Indian town of Grand Glaize on August 8 . Here , Wayne ordered the construction of Fort Defiance , which took approximately a week . Scott was responsible for the naming of the fort ; while observing its construction , he declared , " I defy the English , Indians , and all the devils in hell to take it . " Based upon intelligence provided by Scott 's mounted volunteers , Wayne ordered his force to march toward Fort Miami on August 14 , anticipating a battle with a combined British and Indian force of 2 @,@ 400 there . About 8 : 45 a.m. on August 20 , Major William Price 's brigade of volunteers engaged the Indian force near Fort Miami , beginning the Battle of Fallen Timbers . The well @-@ positioned Indian force turned back Price 's men , but Wayne ordered his regulars to conduct a vigorous bayonet charge , which routed the Indians . Major William Campbell , the British commander of Fort Miami , refused to open the fort to his Indian allies , and Wayne 's force won a decisive victory . 
 Following the battle , Wayne ordered Scott 's volunteers to conduct numerous raids within a fifty @-@ mile radius of their position . Due to a lack of pack horses in Wayne 's force , the mounted volunteers were also employed transporting supplies between forts throughout September 1794 . They eventually grew weary of garrison duty and complained that the use of their personal horses to transport goods had injured the animals . Many threatened to mutiny if not discharged . On October 13 , 1794 , Wayne finally ordered them home . In a commendation of Wayne issued on December 4 , 1794 , the U.S. House of Representatives specifically thanked Scott and his men for their service at the Battle of Fallen Timbers . The Treaty of Greenville formally ended the war in mid @-@ 1795 . 
 = = Later political career = = 
 In 1795 , Scott traveled to Philadelphia to help clarify service records that would determine the final pay of the men who served under him before returning to his farm in Kentucky . He continued to serve , nominally , as major general of the 2nd militia division of the state militia until 1799 . Celebrations of Scott 's military heroism were held all over Kentucky , sparking his interest in a political career . With the advent of the First Party System , he declared himself a Democratic @-@ Republican , as did most Kentuckians . In 1800 , he was chosen as a presidential elector for his district by a vote of 75 to 44 over Caleb Wallace . Scott and his fellow electors all cast their votes for the ticket of Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr . 
 In 1803 , Secretary of War Henry Dearborn appointed Scott and Governor James Garrard to evaluate sites in Kentucky on which to construct a replacement for Fort Washington . Garrard , a central Kentucky native , insisted that the fort should be built at Frankfort . Scott disagreed , contending that the fort should not be in the state 's interior and that the hilly terrain around Frankfort was unsuitable for constructing a fort . He waited several days for an appointment with Garrard to try and reach an agreement , but when he was unable to secure one , he asked Dearborn for permission to act alone . Dearborn granted the request and accepted Scott 's recommendation of a site in Newport , Kentucky . In 1804 , Scott was again chosen a presidential elector with minimal opposition . 
 Tragedy marred Scott 's political rise , however . In 1797 , his son Daniel , who had settled in Virginia , died . In late 1799 or early 1800 , his last son , Charles , Jr . , also died . His daughter Martha married future U.S. Senator George M. Bibb in 1799 and moved to Daviess County . Daughter Mary had married and left the farm prior to Scott 's return from military service , and youngest daughter Nancy left the farm near the turn of the 19th century , although she never married . After the death of his wife on October 6 , 1804 , he moved in with his daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law , John and Mary <unk> , in Lexington . He sold his farm in Woodford County in October 1805 . 
 As tensions between the U.S. and Great Britain escalated in the wake of the June 22 , 1806 , Chesapeake – Leopard Affair , Scott applied to Governor Christopher Greenup to raise a mounted militia unit in anticipation of an outbreak of hostilities . Although Greenup granted the requested authorization , Scott remarried on July 25 , 1807 , and never assembled the militia unit . His second wife , Judith Cary ( Bell ) Gist , was the 57 @-@ year @-@ old widow of Colonel Nathaniel Gist , who had been a prisoner of war with Scott during the Revolutionary War . After their marriage , they moved to Canewood , Gist 's family 's plantation in Bourbon and Clark counties . 
 = = = Gubernatorial election of 1808 = = = 
 As the celebrations in honor of Scott 's military career continued across Kentucky , he began to consider the possibility of running for governor in 1808 . By mid @-@ 1806 , state senator Thomas Posey and Lexington lawyer Thomas Todd had already declared their candidacies . Posey had been chosen speaker pro tem of the state Senate and , with the death of Lieutenant Governor John Caldwell in 1804 , had assumed the role of acting lieutenant governor and presiding officer in the Senate . He subsequently lost his senatorial re @-@ election bid , but continued to act as lieutenant governor and preside over the Senate . His opponents claimed that since he was no longer a member of the Senate , he was not qualified to act as lieutenant governor ; additionally , they charged that he was sympathetic to the hated Federalist Party , even though he self @-@ identified as a Democratic @-@ Republican . Although he was not successfully unseated as the Senate 's presiding officer , the controversy diminished his chances in the 1808 election . In 1807 , Todd removed himself from contention as well , accepting Governor Greenup 's appointment to the Kentucky Court of Appeals . 
 Posey 's diminished candidacy and Todd 's exit from the race left only one major impediment to Scott 's potential candidacy . A movement began in Kentucky to draft former Governor Isaac Shelby as a candidate for another term . Known as " Old King 's Mountain " for his heroic role in the Revolutionary War Battle of King 's Mountain , Shelby could match Scott 's military appeal , and as a former delegate to Kentucky 's statehood and constitutional conventions and a former governor , his political experience far exceeded Scott 's . Ultimately , however , Shelby declined to run , and Scott officially declared his candidacy on February 11 , 1808 . John Allen had by then declared his candidacy and Green Clay 's announcement followed Scott 's by about a month . Scott 's campaign was managed by his stepson @-@ in @-@ law , Jesse Bledsoe , a law professor at Transylvania University . Bledsoe was among the most able politicians in the state , though he preferred the role of " kingmaker " to that of candidate . 
 Allen and Clay , both lawyers by profession , were hurt by a general distrust of lawyers by the Kentucky electorate . Further , Allen had served as general counsel for Aaron Burr , and several anonymous letters to the state 's newspapers accused him of being privy to Burr 's alleged scheme to create an independent state in the southwest . Henry Clay was among those who vigorously defended Allen from the charges . Scott also frequently spoke in highly complimentary terms of Allen . As a legislator , Green Clay pushed for measures favorable to debtors ; he consequently enjoyed strong support from settlers south of the Green River , many of whom were squatters and land speculators who owed substantial debts to the state . To counter Scott 's hero image , Clay supporters pointed to his service with George Rogers Clark in a 1782 expedition against the Shawnee , but the impact of this line of campaigning was minimal . As the most senior Revolutionary War officer in Kentucky , Scott became the recognized leader of the state 's veterans ' lobby . The Independence Day celebrations held around the state just before the August 1 election provided a boost for his campaign . On election day , he garnered 22 @,@ 050 votes , compared to 8 @,@ 430 votes for Allen and 5 @,@ 516 votes for Clay . 
 = = = Governorship = = = 
 Among Scott 's first acts as governor was appointing Jesse Bledsoe as Secretary of State . Bledsoe delivered Scott 's first address to the legislature on December 13 , 1808 . Later that winter , Scott was injured when he slipped on the icy steps of the governor 's mansion ; the injury left him confined to crutches for the rest of his life and rendered him even more dependent on Bledsoe to perform many of his official functions . His physical condition continued to worsen throughout his term as governor . 
 In domestic matters , Scott advocated increased salaries for public officials , economic development measures , and heavy punishments for persistent criminals . While he desired a tax code that would preclude the need for the state to borrow money , he encouraged legislators to keep taxes as low as possible . He also urged them to convert the militia into a youth army . The General Assembly routinely ignored his calls for reform but did pass a measure he advocated that allowed debtors a one @-@ year stay on collection of their debts if they provided both bond and security . 
 Scott frequently clashed with the legislature , including once when the Senate refused to confirm the appointment of Dr. Walter Brashear as lieutenant colonel commandant of the state militia 's second regiment . The governor refused to nominate anyone else for the position , saying that Brashear was the best person for it , and he assumed the senators would not want to be sent a worse nomination . He employed his gubernatorial veto three times over the course of his tenure , but all three were overridden by the legislature . Measures creating Harrison County and allowing squatters to purchase occupied land on more favorable terms were both vetoed because Scott felt that they had been passed too hastily to allow proper debate . Scott also vetoed the revocation of a pension granted to recently retired Kentucky Court of Appeals justice George Muter , because he felt it undermined citizens ' confidence in the promises of their government . 
 Throughout his term , Scott was dogged by rumors of heavy drinking and frequent use of profanity . On one occasion , an unnamed individual believed his reputation had been injured by something Scott had said and challenged him to a duel . He ignored the challenge , after which the challenger threatened to expose him as a coward . Scott was supposed to have replied , " Post and be damned ; but if you do , you will only post yourself a damned liar , and everybody else will say so . " On another occasion , after reviewing a speech written for him by Bledsoe , the governor was said to have remarked , " Well , Mr. Bledsoe , I know you think you are a damned sight smarter than I am , and so you are in many respects ; but this message as it is now , won 't do at all ; I 'll be damned if it will . " When Bledsoe asked what was wrong with the speech , he reportedly replied , " Why , damn it to hell , why don 't you put a good solemn prayer at the end of it , and talk about Providence , and the protection of Heaven , and all that ? " After the governor campaigned for Humphrey Marshall 's opponent in the 1809 legislative elections , Marshall published an article in the Western World newspaper that accused him of appearing in front of the court house drunk on election day . 
 For most of Scott 's tenure as governor , tensions between the U.S. and Great Britain escalated . Sentiment in favor of a U.S. declaration of war against the British was particularly strong in Kentucky . Most Kentuckians resented the replacement of the Embargo Act of 1807 with the weaker Non @-@ Intercourse Act of 1809 and Macon 's Bill Number 2 . Kentucky Senator Henry Clay became the acknowledged leader of the war hawks in Congress . During an address to the General Assembly on December 4 , 1810 , Scott expressed little hope of peacefully resolving U.S. grievances against Great Britain . He reminded the General Assembly , however , that France had also violated the United States ' maritime rights and urged equal treatment of the two countries for their offenses . 
 In September 1811 , William Henry Harrison , then governor of Indiana Territory , visited Kentucky and directed Colonel Samuel Wells to recruit Kentuckians for a new federal regiment then being formed by the authority of Secretary of War William Eustis . Harrison had not applied to Scott for permission to recruit in the state , and many Kentuckians – from Scott 's political enemy , Humphrey Marshall , to his trusted advisor , Jesse Bledsoe – perceived this as a slight to the governor . Ignoring Bledsoe 's indignation , Scott refused to make an issue of the faux pas and instead became one of the staunchest supporters of Harrison 's rising career . 
 In November 1811 , a messenger brought news to Kentucky of former Kentucky Attorney General Joseph Hamilton Daveiss 's death at the Battle of Tippecanoe , amplifying Kentuckians ' outcry for war with the British and Indians . In anticipation of a federal call for volunteers , Scott published messages in the state 's newspapers in February and April 1812 whipping up support for the impending war effort . By the end of July , the state 's quota of 5 @,@ 500 volunteers had been met . On August 14 , 1812 , Scott greeted two regiments of soldiers at the governor 's mansion just prior to their muster at Georgetown . He hobbled among the soldiers with his crutch , then turned and hammered it against the mansion 's steps and was heard to mutter " If it hadn 't been for you , I could have gone with the boys myself . " 
 On August 25 , 1812 , Scott 's last day in office , he appointed Harrison brevet major general over the Kentucky militia . The appointment was made on advice from incoming Governor Isaac Shelby and Henry Clay . The brevet ensured that Harrison , and not James Winchester – who was unpopular in Kentucky and with his own troops – would lead the state 's military forces in the war . Biographer Harry M. Ward noted that Harrison 's commission was unconstitutional both because he was not a citizen of the state and because the state militia 's allotment of major generals had already been filled . Kentucky historian Lowell H. Harrison concurred that the commission was " probably illegal " , but further noted that it was " acclaimed across the state " . The show of confidence from Scott and his aides influenced President James Madison to appoint Harrison as supreme commander of the Army of the Northwest . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 Following his term as governor , Scott retired to his Canewood estate with his wife and youngest step @-@ daughter , Mary Cecil Gist . Two of his stepdaughters had married during his term as governor . Anna Maria Gist married Captain Nathaniel G. S. Hart in 1809 ; Hart was killed in the River Raisin Massacre in January 1813 . Eliza Violet Gist married Francis Preston Blair on July 21 , 1812 , just prior to the expiration of Scott 's term as governor . The governor opined that Blair , who was slightly built , stoop @-@ shouldered , and suffering from tuberculosis , would leave Eliza a widow within six months . Blair , however , survived the tuberculosis and went on to become a trusted advisor to President Andrew Jackson . He outlived Scott 's prediction for him by more than sixty years . 
 By mid @-@ 1813 , Scott 's health had begun to fail rapidly . He died on October 22 , 1813 , and was buried on the grounds of Canewood . At the time of his death , he was one of the last surviving generals of the Revolutionary War . His remains were re @-@ interred at Frankfort Cemetery in 1854 . Scott County , Kentucky , and Scott County , Indiana , are named in his honor , as are the cities of Scottsville , Kentucky , and Scottsville , Virginia . 
 = Buckingham Palace = 
 Buckingham Palace ( UK / <unk> / / <unk> / ) is the London residence and administrative headquarters of the reigning monarch of the United Kingdom . Located in the City of Westminster , the palace is often at the centre of state occasions and royal hospitality . It has been a focal point for the British people at times of national rejoicing and mourning . 
 Originally known as Buckingham House , the building at the core of today 's palace was a large townhouse built for the Duke of Buckingham in 1703 on a site that had been in private ownership for at least 150 years . It was acquired by King George III in 1761 as a private residence for Queen Charlotte and became known as " The Queen 's House " . During the 19th century it was enlarged , principally by architects John Nash and Edward Blore , who constructed three wings around a central courtyard . Buckingham Palace became the London residence of the British monarch on the accession of Queen Victoria in 1837 . 
 The last major structural additions were made in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , including the East front , which contains the well @-@ known balcony on which the royal family traditionally congregates to greet crowds . The palace chapel was destroyed by a German bomb during World War II ; the Queen 's Gallery was built on the site and opened to the public in 1962 to exhibit works of art from the Royal Collection . 
 The original early 19th @-@ century interior designs , many of which survive , include widespread use of brightly coloured scagliola and blue and pink lapis , on the advice of Sir Charles Long . King Edward VII oversaw a partial redecoration in a Belle Époque cream and gold colour scheme . Many smaller reception rooms are furnished in the Chinese regency style with furniture and fittings brought from the Royal Pavilion at Brighton and from Carlton House . The palace has 775 rooms , and the garden is the largest private garden in London . The state rooms , used for official and state entertaining , are open to the public each year for most of August and September , and on selected days in winter and spring . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Site = = = 
 In the Middle Ages , the site of the future palace formed part of the Manor of Ebury ( also called Eia ) . The marshy ground was watered by the river Tyburn , which still flows below the courtyard and south wing of the palace . Where the river was fordable ( at Cow Ford ) , the village of Eye Cross grew . Ownership of the site changed hands many times ; owners included Edward the Confessor and his queen consort Edith of Wessex in late Saxon times , and , after the Norman Conquest , William the Conqueror . William gave the site to Geoffrey de Mandeville , who bequeathed it to the monks of Westminster Abbey . 
 In 1531 , King Henry VIII acquired the Hospital of St James ( later St James 's Palace ) from Eton College , and in 1536 he took the Manor of Ebury from Westminster Abbey . These transfers brought the site of Buckingham Palace back into royal hands for the first time since William the Conqueror had given it away almost 500 years earlier . 
 Various owners leased it from royal landlords and the freehold was the subject of frenzied speculation during the 17th century . By then , the old village of Eye Cross had long since fallen into decay , and the area was mostly wasteland . Needing money , James I sold off part of the Crown freehold but retained part of the site on which he established a 4 @-@ acre ( 16 @,@ 000 m2 ) mulberry garden for the production of silk . ( This is at the northwest corner of today 's palace . ) Clement Walker in <unk> Anglicana ( 1649 ) refers to " new @-@ erected <unk> and <unk> at the Mulberry Garden at S. James 's " ; this suggests it may have been a place of debauchery . Eventually , in the late 17th century , the freehold was inherited from the property tycoon Sir Hugh Audley by the great heiress Mary Davies . 
 = = = First houses on the site = = = 
 = = = = Goring House = = = = 
 Possibly the first house erected within the site was that of a Sir William Blake , around 1624 . The next owner was Lord Goring , who from 1633 extended Blake 's house and developed much of today 's garden , then known as Goring Great Garden . He did not , however , obtain the freehold interest in the mulberry garden . Unbeknown to Goring , in 1640 the document " failed to pass the Great Seal before King Charles I fled London , which it needed to do for legal execution " . It was this critical omission that helped the British royal family regain the freehold under King George III . 
 = = = = Arlington House = = = = 
 The improvident Goring defaulted on his rents ; Henry Bennet , 1st Earl of Arlington obtained the mansion and was occupying it , now known as Goring House , when it burned down in 1674 . Arlington House rose on the site — the southern wing of today 's palace — the next year . In 1698 , John Sheffield , later the first Duke of Buckingham and Normanby , acquired the lease . 
 = = = = Buckingham House = = = = 
 The house which forms the architectural core of the palace was built for the first Duke of Buckingham and Normanby in 1703 to the design of William Winde . The style chosen was of a large , three @-@ floored central block with two smaller flanking service wings . Buckingham House was eventually sold by Buckingham 's descendant , Sir Charles Sheffield , in 1761 to George III for £ 21 @,@ 000 . Sheffield 's leasehold on the mulberry garden site , the freehold of which was still owned by the royal family , was due to expire in 1774 . 
 = = = From Queen 's House to palace = = = 
 Under the new crown ownership , the building was originally intended as a private retreat for King George III 's wife , Queen Charlotte , and was accordingly known as The Queen 's House — 14 of their 15 children were born there . St James 's Palace , however , remained the official and ceremonial royal residence . 
 <unk> of the structure began in 1762 . After his accession to the throne in 1820 , King George IV continued the renovation with the idea in mind of a small , comfortable home . While the work was in progress , in 1826 , the King decided to modify the house into a palace with the help of his architect John Nash . Some furnishings were transferred from Carlton House , and others had been bought in France after the French Revolution . The external façade was designed keeping in mind the French neo @-@ classical influence preferred by George IV . The cost of the renovations grew dramatically , and by 1829 the extravagance of Nash 's designs resulted in his removal as architect . On the death of George IV in 1830 , his younger brother King William IV hired Edward Blore to finish the work . At one stage , William considered converting the palace into the new Houses of Parliament , after the destruction of the Palace of Westminster by fire in 1834 . 
 = = Home of the monarch = = 
 Buckingham Palace finally became the principal royal residence in 1837 , on the accession of Queen Victoria , who was the first monarch to reside there ; her predecessor William IV had died before its completion . While the state rooms were a riot of gilt and colour , the necessities of the new palace were somewhat less luxurious . For one thing , it was reported the chimneys smoked so much that the fires had to be allowed to die down , and consequently the court <unk> in icy magnificence . Ventilation was so bad that the interior smelled , and when a decision was taken to install gas lamps , there was a serious worry about the build @-@ up of gas on the lower floors . It was also said that staff were lax and lazy and the palace was dirty . Following the queen 's marriage in 1840 , her husband , Prince Albert , concerned himself with a reorganisation of the household offices and staff , and with the design faults of the palace . The problems were all rectified by the close of 1840 . However , the builders were to return within the decade . 
 By 1847 , the couple had found the palace too small for court life and their growing family , and consequently the new wing , designed by Edward Blore , was built by Thomas Cubitt , enclosing the central quadrangle . The large East Front , facing The Mall , is today the " public face " of Buckingham Palace , and contains the balcony from which the royal family acknowledge the crowds on momentous occasions and after the annual Trooping the Colour . The ballroom wing and a further suite of state rooms were also built in this period , designed by Nash 's student Sir James Pennethorne . 
 Before Prince Albert 's death , the palace was frequently the scene of musical entertainments , and the greatest contemporary musicians entertained at Buckingham Palace . The composer Felix Mendelssohn is known to have played there on three occasions . Johann Strauss II and his orchestra played there when in England . Strauss 's " Alice Polka " was first performed at the palace in 1849 in honour of the queen 's daughter , Princess Alice . Under Victoria , Buckingham Palace was frequently the scene of lavish costume balls , in addition to the usual royal ceremonies , investitures and presentations . 
 Widowed in 1861 , the grief @-@ stricken Queen withdrew from public life and left Buckingham Palace to live at Windsor Castle , Balmoral Castle and Osborne House . For many years the palace was seldom used , even neglected . In 1864 , a note was found pinned to the fence of Buckingham Palace , saying : " These commanding premises to be let or sold , in consequence of the late occupant 's declining business . " Eventually , public opinion forced the Queen to return to London , though even then she preferred to live elsewhere whenever possible . Court functions were still held at Windsor Castle , presided over by the sombre Queen habitually dressed in mourning black , while Buckingham Palace remained shuttered for most of the year . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The palace measures 108 metres ( 354 ft ) by 120 metres ( 390 ft ) , is 24 metres ( 79 ft ) high and contains over 77 @,@ 000 m2 ( 830 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of floorspace . The floor area is smaller than the Royal Palace of Madrid , the Papal Palace in Rome , the Louvre in Paris , the Hofburg Palace in Vienna , or the Forbidden City . There are 775 rooms , including 19 state rooms , 52 principal bedrooms , 188 staff bedrooms , 92 offices , and 78 bathrooms . The palace also has its own post office , cinema , swimming pool , doctor 's surgery , and jeweller 's workshop . 
 The principal rooms are contained on the piano nobile behind the west @-@ facing garden façade at the rear of the palace . The centre of this ornate suite of state rooms is the Music Room , its large bow the dominant feature of the façade . Flanking the Music Room are the Blue and the White Drawing Rooms . At the centre of the suite , serving as a corridor to link the state rooms , is the Picture Gallery , which is top @-@ lit and 55 yards ( 50 m ) long . The Gallery is hung with numerous works including some by Rembrandt , van Dyck , Rubens and Vermeer ; other rooms leading from the Picture Gallery are the Throne Room and the Green Drawing Room . The Green Drawing Room serves as a huge anteroom to the Throne Room , and is part of the ceremonial route to the throne from the Guard Room at the top of the Grand Staircase . The Guard Room contains white marble statues of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert , in Roman costume , set in a tribune lined with tapestries . These very formal rooms are used only for ceremonial and official entertaining , but are open to the public every summer . 
 Directly underneath the State Apartments is a suite of slightly less grand rooms known as the semi @-@ state apartments . Opening from the Marble Hall , these rooms are used for less formal entertaining , such as luncheon parties and private audiences . Some of the rooms are named and decorated for particular visitors , such as the 1844 Room , decorated in that year for the State visit of Tsar Nicholas I of Russia , and , on the other side of the Bow Room , the 1855 Room , in honour of the visit of Emperor Napoleon III of France . At the centre of this suite is the Bow Room , through which thousands of guests pass annually to the Queen 's Garden Parties in the Gardens . The Queen and Prince Philip use a smaller suite of rooms in the north wing . 
 Between 1847 and 1850 , when Blore was building the new east wing , the Brighton Pavilion was once again plundered of its fittings . As a result , many of the rooms in the new wing have a distinctly oriental atmosphere . The red and blue Chinese Luncheon Room is made up from parts of the Brighton Banqueting and Music Rooms with a large oriental chimney piece sculpted by Richard Westmacott . The Yellow Drawing Room has wallpaper supplied in 1817 for the Brighton Saloon , and a chimney piece which is a European vision of how the Chinese chimney piece may appear . It has nodding mandarins in niches and fearsome winged dragons , designed by Robert Jones . 
 At the centre of this wing is the famous balcony with the Centre Room behind its glass doors . This is a Chinese @-@ style saloon enhanced by Queen Mary , who , working with the designer Sir Charles Allom , created a more " binding " Chinese theme in the late 1920s , although the lacquer doors were brought from Brighton in 1873 . Running the length of the piano nobile of the east wing is the great gallery , modestly known as the Principal Corridor , which runs the length of the eastern side of the quadrangle . It has mirrored doors , and mirrored cross walls reflecting porcelain pagodas and other oriental furniture from Brighton . The Chinese Luncheon Room and Yellow Drawing Room are situated at each end of this gallery , with the Centre Room obviously placed in the centre . 
 The original early 19th @-@ century interior designs , many of which still survive , included widespread use of brightly coloured scagliola and blue and pink lapis , on the advice of Sir Charles Long . King Edward VII oversaw a partial redecoration in a Belle époque cream and gold colour scheme . 
 When paying a state visit to Britain , foreign heads of state are usually entertained by the Queen at Buckingham Palace . They are allocated a large suite of rooms known as the Belgian Suite , situated at the foot of the Minister 's Staircase , on the ground floor of the north @-@ facing Garden Wing . The rooms of the suite are linked by narrow corridors , one of them is given extra height and perspective by saucer domes designed by Nash in the style of Soane . A second corridor in the suite has Gothic influenced cross over vaulting . The Belgian Rooms themselves were decorated in their present style and named after Prince Albert 's uncle Léopold I , first King of the Belgians . In 1936 , the suite briefly became the private apartments of the palace when they were occupied by King Edward VIII . 
 = = = Court ceremonies = = = 
 = = = = Court dress = = = = 
 Formerly , men not wearing military uniform wore knee breeches of an 18th @-@ century design . Women 's evening dress included obligatory trains and tiaras or feathers in their hair ( or both ) . The dress code governing formal court uniform and dress has progressively relaxed . After World War I , when Queen Mary wished to follow fashion by raising her skirts a few inches from the ground , she requested a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting to shorten her own skirt first to gauge the king 's reaction . King George V was horrified , so the queen kept her hemline unfashionably low . Following their accession in 1936 , King George VI and his consort , Queen Elizabeth , allowed the hemline of daytime skirts to rise . Today , there is no official dress code . Most men invited to Buckingham Palace in the daytime choose to wear service uniform or lounge suits ; a minority wear morning coats , and in the evening , depending on the formality of the occasion , black tie or white tie . 
 = = = = Presentation of débutantes = = = = 
 Court presentations of aristocratic young ladies to the monarch took place at the palace from the reign of Edward VII . These young women were known as débutantes , and the occasion — termed their " coming out " — represented their first entrée into society . <unk> wore full court dress , with three tall ostrich feathers in their hair . They entered , curtsied , and performed a choreographed backwards walk and a further curtsy , while manoeuvring a dress train of prescribed length . ( The ceremony , known as an evening court , corresponded to the " court drawing rooms " of Victoria 's reign . ) After World War II , the ceremony was replaced by less formal afternoon receptions , usually without choreographed <unk> and court dress . 
 In 1958 , the Queen abolished the presentation parties for débutantes , replacing them with Garden Parties . 
 = = = = Investitures = = = = 
 Investitures , which include the conferring of knighthoods by dubbing with a sword , and other awards take place in the palace 's Ballroom , built in 1854 . At 36 @.@ 6 m ( 120 ft ) long , 18 m ( 59 ft ) wide and 13 @.@ 5 m ( 44 ft ) high , it is the largest room in the palace . It has replaced the throne room in importance and use . During investitures , the Queen stands on the throne dais beneath a giant , domed velvet canopy , known as a <unk> or a baldachin , that was used at the Delhi Durbar in 1911 . A military band plays in the musicians ' gallery as award recipients approach the Queen and receive their honours , watched by their families and friends . 
 = = = = State banquets = = = = 
 State banquets also take place in the Ballroom ; these formal dinners are held on the first evening of a state visit by a foreign head of state . On these occasions , for up to 170 guests in formal " white tie and decorations " , including tiaras , the dining table is laid with the Grand Service , a collection of silver @-@ gilt plate made in 1811 for the Prince of Wales , later George IV . The largest and most formal reception at Buckingham Palace takes place every November when the Queen entertains members of the diplomatic corps . On this grand occasion , all the state rooms are in use , as the royal family proceed through them , beginning at the great north doors of the Picture Gallery . As Nash had envisaged , all the large , double @-@ mirrored doors stand open , reflecting the numerous crystal chandeliers and sconces , creating a deliberate optical illusion of space and light . 
 = = = = Other ceremonies and functions = = = = 
 Smaller ceremonies such as the reception of new ambassadors take place in the " 1844 Room " . Here too , the Queen holds small lunch parties , and often meetings of the Privy Council . Larger lunch parties often take place in the curved and domed Music Room , or the State Dining Room . On all formal occasions , the ceremonies are attended by the Yeomen of the Guard in their historic uniforms , and other officers of the court such as the Lord Chamberlain . 
 Since the bombing of the palace chapel in World War II , royal christenings have sometimes taken place in the Music Room . The Queen 's first three children were all baptised there . 
 The largest functions of the year are the Queen 's Garden Parties for up to 8 @,@ 000 invitees in the Garden . 
 = = = = Security breaches = = = = 
 The boy Jones was an intruder who gained entry to the palace on three occasions between 1838 and 1841 as recorded by Charles Dickens some 40 years later . In 1982 , Michael Fagan broke into the palace twice but , contrary to media reports of the time , did not speak to the Queen . It was only in 2007 that trespassing on the palace grounds became a criminal offence . 
 = = = Garden , Royal Mews and The Mall = = = 
 At the rear of the palace is the large and park @-@ like garden , which together with its lake is the largest private garden in London . There , the Queen hosts her annual garden parties each summer , and also holds large functions to celebrate royal milestones , such as jubilees . It covers 40 acres ( 16 ha ) , and includes a helicopter landing area , a lake , and a tennis court . 
 Adjacent to the palace is the Royal Mews , also designed by Nash , where the royal carriages , including the Gold State Coach , are housed . This rococo gilt coach , designed by Sir William Chambers in 1760 , has painted panels by G. B. Cipriani . It was first used for the State Opening of Parliament by George III in 1762 and has been used by the monarch for every coronation since George IV . It was last used for the Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II . Also housed in the mews are the coach horses used at royal ceremonial processions . 
 The Mall , a ceremonial approach route to the palace , was designed by Sir Aston Webb and completed in 1911 as part of a grand memorial to Queen Victoria . It extends from Admiralty Arch , across St James 's Park to the Victoria Memorial . This route is used by the cavalcades and motorcades of visiting heads of state , and by the royal family on state occasions such as the annual Trooping the Colour . 
 = = Modern history = = 
 In 1901 the accession of Edward VII saw new life breathed into the palace . The new King and his wife Queen Alexandra had always been at the forefront of London high society , and their friends , known as " the Marlborough House Set " , were considered to be the most eminent and fashionable of the age . Buckingham Palace — the Ballroom , Grand Entrance , Marble Hall , Grand Staircase , vestibules and galleries redecorated in the Belle époque cream and gold colour scheme they retain today — once again became a setting for entertaining on a majestic scale but leaving some to feel King Edward 's heavy redecorations were at odds with Nash 's original work . 
 The last major building work took place during the reign of King George V when , in 1913 , Sir Aston Webb redesigned Blore 's 1850 East Front to resemble in part Giacomo Leoni 's Lyme Park in Cheshire . This new , refaced principal façade ( of Portland stone ) was designed to be the backdrop to the Victoria Memorial , a large memorial statue of Queen Victoria , placed outside the main gates . George V , who had succeeded Edward VII in 1910 , had a more serious personality than his father ; greater emphasis was now placed on official entertaining and royal duties than on lavish parties . He arranged a series of command performances featuring jazz musicians such as the Original Dixieland Jazz Band ( 1919 ) – the first jazz performance for a head of state , Sidney Bechet , and Louis Armstrong ( 1932 ) , which earned the palace a nomination in 2009 for a ( Kind of ) Blue Plaque by the Brecon Jazz Festival as one of the venues making the greatest contribution to jazz music in the United Kingdom . George V 's wife Queen Mary was a connoisseur of the arts , and took a keen interest in the Royal Collection of furniture and art , both restoring and adding to it . Queen Mary also had many new fixtures and fittings installed , such as the pair of marble Empire @-@ style chimneypieces by Benjamin Vulliamy , dating from 1810 , which the Queen had installed in the ground floor Bow Room , the huge low room at the centre of the garden façade . Queen Mary was also responsible for the decoration of the Blue Drawing Room . This room , 69 feet ( 21 metres ) long , previously known as the South Drawing Room , has a ceiling designed specially by Nash , coffered with huge gilt console brackets . 
 During World War I , the palace , then the home of King George V and Queen Mary , escaped unscathed . Its more valuable contents were evacuated to Windsor but the royal family remained in situ . The King imposed rationing at the palace , much to the dismay of his guests and household . To the King 's later regret , David Lloyd George persuaded him to go further by ostentatiously locking the wine cellars and refraining from alcohol , to set a good example to the supposedly inebriated working class . The workers continued to imbibe and the King was left unhappy at his enforced abstinence . In 1938 , the north @-@ west pavilion , designed by Nash as a conservatory , was converted into a swimming pool . 
 During World War II , the palace was bombed nine times , the most serious and publicised of which resulted in the destruction of the palace chapel in 1940 . Coverage of this event was played in cinemas all over the UK to show the common suffering of rich and poor . One bomb fell in the palace quadrangle while King George VI and Queen Elizabeth were in residence , and many windows were blown in and the chapel destroyed . War @-@ time coverage of such incidents was severely restricted , however . The King and Queen were filmed inspecting their bombed home , the smiling Queen , as always , immaculately dressed in a hat and matching coat seemingly unbothered by the damage around her . It was at this time the Queen famously declared : " I 'm glad we have been bombed . Now I can look the East End in the face " . The royal family were seen as sharing their subjects ' hardship , as The Sunday Graphic reported : 
 By the Editor : The King and Queen have endured the ordeal which has come to their subjects . For the second time a German bomber has tried to bring death and destruction to the home of Their Majesties … When this war is over the common danger which King George and Queen Elizabeth have shared with their people will be a cherished memory and an inspiration through the years . 
 On 15 September 1940 , known as the Battle of Britain Day , an RAF pilot , Ray Holmes of No. 504 Squadron RAF rammed a German bomber he believed was going to bomb the Palace . Holmes had run out of ammunition and made the quick decision to ram it . Holmes bailed out . Both aircraft crashed . In fact the Dornier Do 17 bomber was empty . It had already been damaged , two of its crew had been killed and the remainder bailed out . Its pilot , Feldwebel Robert Zehbe , landed , only to die later of wounds suffered during the attack . During the Dornier 's descent , it somehow unloaded its bombs , one of which hit the Palace . It then crashed into the forecourt of London Victoria station . The bomber 's engine was later exhibited at the Imperial War Museum in London . The British pilot became a King 's Messenger after the war , and died at the age of 90 in 2005 . 
 On VE Day — 8 May 1945 — the palace was the centre of British celebrations . The King , Queen , Princess Elizabeth ( the future Queen ) , and Princess Margaret appeared on the balcony , with the palace 's blacked @-@ out windows behind them , to the cheers from a vast crowd in the Mall . The damaged Palace was carefully restored after the War by John Mowlem & Co . 
 = = = 21st century : Royal use and public access = = = 
 Every year some 50 @,@ 000 invited guests are entertained at garden parties , receptions , audiences and banquets . The Garden Parties , usually three , are held in the summer , usually in July . The Forecourt of Buckingham Palace is used for Changing of the Guard , a major ceremony and tourist attraction ( daily from April to July ; every other day in other months ) . 
 The palace , like Windsor Castle , is owned by the Crown . It is not the monarch 's personal property , unlike Sandringham House and Balmoral Castle . Many of the contents from Buckingham Palace , Windsor Castle , Kensington Palace , and St James 's Palace are part of the Royal Collection , held in trust by the Sovereign ; they can , on occasion , be viewed by the public at the Queen 's Gallery , near the Royal Mews . Unlike the palace and the castle , the purpose @-@ built gallery is open continually and displays a changing selection of items from the collection . It occupies the site of the chapel destroyed by an air raid in World War II . The palace 's state rooms have been open to the public during August and September and on selected dates throughout the year since 1993 . The money raised in entry fees was originally put towards the rebuilding of Windsor Castle after the 1992 fire devastated many of its state rooms . 476 @,@ 000 people visited the palace in the year to 31 March 2015 . 
 Her Majesty 's Government is responsible for maintaining the palace in exchange for the profits made by the Crown Estate . In November 2015 , the State Dining Room was closed for six months because its ceiling had become potentially dangerous . A backlog of repairs , including new plumbing , wiring , and the removal of a large quantity of asbestos , would cost an estimated £ 150 million . 
 Thus , Buckingham Palace is a symbol and home of the British monarchy , an art gallery and a tourist attraction . Behind the gilded railings and gates which were completed by the Bromsgrove Guild in 1911 and Webb 's famous façade , which has been described in a book published by the Royal Collection as looking " like everybody 's idea of a palace " , is not only a weekday home of the Queen and Prince Philip but also the London residence of the Duke of York and the Earl and Countess of Wessex . The palace also houses the offices of the Queen , Prince Philip , the Duke of York , the Earl and Countess of Wessex , the Princess Royal , and Princess Alexandra , and is the workplace of more than 800 people . 
 = 28 cm SK L / 40 gun = 
 The 28 cm SK L / 40 was a German naval gun that was used in World War I and World War II by two classes of German pre @-@ dreadnought battleships . It was the first large German naval gun to use a horizontal sliding block breech design rather than the interrupted screw more commonly used in guns of this size ; it was also the last large German naval gun to load all its propellant in a single case . It was adapted for land service after the pre @-@ dreadnoughts began to be disarmed beginning in 1916 . Four guns served on coast defense duties on the island of Wangerooge during World War I on fixed mounts . During World War II these guns were transferred to Brest . Others were used in railway mountings in both World Wars . 
 = = Description = = 
 The 28 cm SK L / 40 gun weighed 45 @.@ 3 tonnes ( 44 @.@ 6 long tons ; 49 @.@ 9 short tons ) , had an overall length of 11 @.@ 2 meters ( 36 ft 9 in ) and its bore length was 10 @.@ 401 meters ( 34 ft 1 @.@ 5 in ) . Although designated as 28 cm ( 11 in ) , its actual caliber was 28 @.@ 3 centimeters ( 11 @.@ 1 in ) . Early guns , possibly designated as the 28 cm K L / 40 , were built using the older hoop method of construction , but later guns used more modern built @-@ up techniques with an inner gun tube and several outer jackets . It was the first large German naval gun to use Krupp 's horizontal sliding block , or " wedge " , as it is sometimes referred to , breech design rather than the interrupted screw used commonly used in heavy guns of other nations . This required that the propellant charge be loaded in a metal case ( usually brass ) which provides <unk> – it seals the breech to prevent escape of the expanding propellant gas . The 28 cm SK L / 40 was the last large German naval gun to load all its propellant in a single case ; later guns required a fore charge in addition to the main charge in the cartridge case . 
 = = = Naval turrets = = = 
 These guns were used in twin gun turrets as the main armament of the <unk> and Deutschland @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnoughts . The Drh.L. C / 01 turret was used by the <unk> and Deutschland @-@ class battleships , one twin gun turret at each end . Its guns could depress 4 ° and elevate 30 ° and could traverse about 150 ° on either side of the centerline . It could fire a 240 kg ( 530 lb ) L / 2 @.@ 6 armor @-@ piercing shell to a maximum range of 18 @,@ 830 meters ( 20 @,@ 590 yd ) at maximum elevation . These ships stowed 85 rounds per gun . The rate of fire for both types of turrets was about 2 rounds per minute . 
 = = = Land mountings = = = 
 Beginning in 1916 some guns were adapted for use ashore . One obvious change made for land service was the placement of a large counterweight just forward of the trunnions to counteract the preponderance of weight towards the breech . This , although heavy , was simpler than adding <unk> to perform the same function . It was fitted with a hydro @-@ pneumatic system to absorb the recoil from firing and to return the gun to its firing position , ready for the next round . The first four guns were placed in Bettungsschiessgerüst ( firing platform ) ( BSG ) mountings in 1917 for coast defense duties as part of " Batterie Graf Spee " on the island of Wangerooge . These were a semi @-@ portable mount that could be emplaced anywhere after several weeks of labor to prepare the position . It rotated on a pivot at the front of the mount and the rear was supported by rollers resting on a semicircular rail and was sometimes equipped with a gun shield . The gun 's rate of fire in these mounts was about one round per five minutes . 
 Other guns from the battleships were put on railroad mountings as the 28 cm SK L / 40 " Bruno " and used as railway guns . 
 = = = Ammunition = = = 
 Before and during World War I , the gun used about 73 kg ( 161 lb ) of RP C / 12 ( Rohr @-@ Pulver – tube powder ) propellant that was a mix of nitrocellulose , nitroglycerin and small amounts of other additives with a calorific value of 950 and an <unk> explosion temperature of <unk> kelvins . In World War II , it was replaced by RP C / 38 that substituted diethylene <unk> <unk> for the nitroglycerine which had a calorific value of 810 and an <unk> explosion temperature of 2495 K. This had the virtue of being harder to ignite , lessening the risk of a catastrophic fire or explosion , and reduced the erosive effects of the gaseous propellant on the gun 's bore . Sources differ on the amount of RP C / 38 used by the gun during World War II ; Campbell says 70 kg ( 154 lb ) , but Hogg says 67 kg ( 148 lb ) . 
 These guns mounted fired two types of shells during World War I : armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) L / 2 @.@ 6 and high explosive ( HE ) L / 2 @.@ 9 types . During World War II , the guns fired a wider variety of shells , including high explosive L / 2 @.@ 9 , L / 4 @.@ 3 , and L / 4 @.@ 1 shells and a heavy HE L / 4 @.@ 4 projectile ; the AP and HE rounds weighed 240 kg ( 529 lb ) , while the heavy projectile weighed 284 kg ( 626 lb ) . 
 Due to the greater elevation available in the BSG mount , the <unk> L / 4 @.@ 4 m . <unk> u . <unk> . ( mit <unk> ) had a maximum range of 27 @,@ 750 m ( 30 @,@ 350 yd ) . 
 = = = = Armor penetration = = = = 
 One source credits the <unk> L / 2 @.@ 6 shell with the ability to penetrate 160 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) of side armor at 12 @,@ 000 meters ( 13 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Naval guns = = = 
 The Treaty of Versailles allowed the Germans to retain four pre @-@ dreadnoughts , although only two , Schleswig @-@ Holstein and Schlesien , were rearmed with their original 28 cm SK L / 40 guns . The former fired the first shots of World War II when she began bombarding Polish defenses on the Westerplatte on 1 September 1939 while the latter also participated in the Polish Campaign . However both ships were relegated to training duties shortly afterwards . 
 = = = Coast defense guns = = = 
 Some of the 28 cm SK L / 40 guns were transferred to the German Army from the Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) when the pre @-@ dreadnoughts began to be disarmed and relegated to training duties in 1916 after the Battle of Jutland had proved that they were not suitable for contemporary naval combat . The first four guns , formerly used on SMS Lothringen , were placed in BSG mountings in 1917 for coast defense duty as part of " Batterie Graf Spee " on the island of Wangerooge . 
 During World War II only seven guns were used on as coast defense duties on BSG mountings . The four guns of " Batterie Graf Spee " had survived World War I and were transferred to Brest , France in 1940 . 
 = = = Railway guns = = = 
 Approximately twenty other guns from the battleships were put on railroad mountings as the 28 cm SK L / 40 " Bruno " and used as railway guns . A number were kept by the Kaiserliche Marine and used on coastal defense duties , but the others were used by the Heer in more traditional roles as long @-@ range heavy artillery . Surviving weapons were used by the Germans in World War II as coast defense duties . 
 = Thomas Gage = 
 Thomas Gage ( 10 March 1718 / 19 – 2 April 1787 ) was a British general , best known for his many years of service in North America , including his role as military commander in the early days of the American Revolution . 
 Born to an aristocratic family in England , he entered military service , seeing action in the French and Indian War , where he served alongside his future opponent George Washington in the 1755 Battle of the Monongahela . After the fall of Montreal in 1760 , he was named its military governor . During this time he did not distinguish himself militarily , but proved himself to be a competent administrator . 
 From 1763 to 1775 he served as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the British forces in North America , overseeing the British response to the 1763 Pontiac 's Rebellion . In 1774 he was also appointed the military governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay , with instructions to implement the Intolerable Acts , punishing Massachusetts for the Boston Tea Party . His attempts to seize military stores of Patriot militias in April 1775 sparked the Battles of Lexington and Concord , beginning the American War of Independence . After the Pyrrhic victory in the June Battle of Bunker Hill he was replaced by General William Howe in October 1775 , and returned to Great Britain . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Gage was born on 10 March 1718 / 19 and christened 31 March 1719 at Westminster St James , Middlesex , England , son of Thomas Gage , 1st Viscount Gage and Benedicta Maria Teresa Hall . Firle Place , Firle , Sussex , is where the Gage family had been seated since the 15th century . His father , Thomas Gage , 1st Viscount Gage , was a noted nobleman given titles in Ireland . Thomas Gage ( the elder ) had three children , of whom Thomas was the second . The first son , William Hall Gage , 2nd Viscount Gage , was born 6 January 1717 / 18 and christened 29 January 1717 / 18 , also at Westminster St James . In 1728 Gage began attending the prestigious Westminster School where he met such figures as John Burgoyne , Richard Howe , Francis Bernard , and George Germain . Despite the family 's long history of Catholicism , Viscount Gage had adopted the Anglican Church in 1715 . During his school years Thomas the younger became firmly attached to the latter church ; he eventually developed a dislike for the Roman Catholic Church that became evident in later years . After graduating from Westminster in 1736 there is no record of Gage 's activities until he joined the British Army , eventually receiving a commission as ensign . His early duties consisted of recruiting in Yorkshire . In January 1741 he purchased a lieutenant 's commission in the 1st Northampton Regiment , where he stayed until May 1742 , when he transferred to <unk> 's Regiment with the rank of captain @-@ lieutenant . Gage received promotion to captain in 1743 , and saw action in the War of the Austrian Succession with British forces in Flanders , where he served as aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Earl of Albemarle in the Battle of Fontenoy . He saw further service in the Second Jacobite Uprising , which culminated in the 1746 Battle of Culloden . From 1747 to 1748 , Gage saw action under Albemarle in the Low Countries . In 1748 he purchased a major 's commission and transferred to the 55th Foot Regiment ( which was later renumbered to the 44th ) . The regiment was stationed in Ireland from 1748 to 1755 ; Gage was promoted to lieutenant colonel in March 1751 . 
 During his early service years , he spent leisure time at White 's Club , where he was a member , and occasionally travelled , going at least as far as Paris , Mexico . He was a popular figure in the army and at the club , even though he neither liked alcohol nor gambled very much . His friendships spanned class and ability . Charles Lee once wrote to Gage , " I respected your understanding , lik 'd your manners and perfectly <unk> 'd the qualities of your heart . " Gage also made some important political connections , forming relationships with important figures like Lord Barrington , the future Secretary at War , and Jeffery Amherst , a man roughly his age who rose to great heights in the French and Indian War . 
 In 1750 , Gage became engaged to a " lady of rank and fortune , whom he persuaded to yield her hand in an honourable way " . The engagement was eventually broken , leaving Gage broken @-@ hearted . In 1753 , both Gage and his father stood for seats in Parliament . Both lost in the April 1754 election , even though his father had been a Member of Parliament for some years prior . They both contested the results , but his father died soon after , and Gage withdrew his protest in early 1755 , as his regiment was being sent to America following the outbreak of the French and Indian War . 
 = = French and Indian War = = 
 In 1755 Gage 's regiment was sent to North America as part of General Braddock 's expeditionary force , whose objective was the expulsion of French forces from the Ohio Country , territory disputed between French and British colonies where there had been military clashes in 1754 . On this expedition Gage 's regiment was in the vanguard of the troops when they came upon a company of French and Indians who were trying to set up an ambush . This skirmish began the Battle of the Monongahela , in which Braddock was mortally wounded , and George Washington distinguished himself for his courage under fire and his leadership in organising the retreat . The commander of the 44th , Colonel Sir Peter Halkett , was one of many officers killed in the battle and Gage , who temporarily took command of the regiment , was slightly wounded . The regiment was decimated , and Captain Robert Orme ( General Braddock 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp ) levelled charges that poor field tactics on the part of Gage had led to the defeat ; as a result of his accusations Gage was denied permanent command of the 44th Regiment . Gage and Washington maintained a somewhat friendly relationship for several years after the expedition , but distance and lack of frequent contact likely cooled the relationship . By 1770 , Washington was publicly condemning Gage 's actions in asserting British authority in Massachusetts . 
 = = = Creation of the light infantry = = = 
 In the summer of 1756 Gage served as second @-@ in @-@ command of a failed expedition to resupply Fort Oswego , which fell to the French while the expedition was en route . The following year , he was assigned to Captain @-@ General John Campbell Loudoun in Halifax , Nova Scotia , where a planned expedition against Louisbourg turned back when confronted by a larger French fleet . 
 In December 1757 , Gage proposed to Loudoun the creation of a regiment of light infantry that would be better suited to woodland warfare . Loudoun approved the plan before he was recalled that month , also recommending Gage to the king for promotion to full colonel . Gage spent the winter in New Jersey , recruiting for the newly raised 80th Regiment of Light @-@ Armed Foot , the " first definitely light @-@ armed regiment in the British army . " While it is uncertain exactly when he met the <unk> , his choice of the Brunswick area may well have been motivated by his interest in Margaret Kemble , a well @-@ known beauty of the area , a descendant of the Schuyler family , and the granddaughter of New York Mayor Stephanus Van Cortlandt . Recruiting and courtship were both successful . By February 1758 Gage was in Albany , preparing for that year 's campaign , and he and Margaret were married on 8 December of that year . 
 The campaign for which Gage went to Albany culminated in the disastrous Battle of Carillon , in which 16 @,@ 000 British forces were defeated by barely 4 @,@ 000 French forces . Gage , whose regiment was in the British vanguard , was again wounded in that battle , in which the British suffered more than 2 @,@ 000 casualties . Gage , who had been brevetted a brigadier general for the 1758 campaign , received in 1759 a full promotion to the position , largely through the political manoeuvring of his brother , Lord Gage . 
 = = = Failure to act against La Galette = = = 
 The new general was placed in command of the Albany post , serving under Major General Jeffery Amherst . In 1759 , shortly after capturing Ticonderoga without a fight , General Amherst learned of the death of General John Prideaux whose expedition had captured Fort Niagara . Amherst then ordered Gage to take Prideaux 's place , and to take Fort de La Présentation ( also known as Fort La Galette ) at the mouth of the Oswegatchie River on Lake Ontario . When Amherst learned that the French had also abandoned Fort St. Frédéric , he sent a messenger after Gage with more explicit instructions to capture La Galette and then , if at all possible , to advance on Montreal . 
 When Gage arrived at Oswego , which had been captured in July by troops under Frederick Haldimand 's command , he surveyed the situation , and decided that it was not prudent to move against La Galette . Expected reinforcements from Fort Duquesne had not arrived , the French military strength at La Galette was unknown , and its strength near Montreal was believed to be relatively high . Gage , believing an attack on La Galette would not gain any significant advantage , decided against action , and sent Amherst a message outlining his reasons . Although there was no immediate censure from either Amherst or the government , Amherst was incensed at the failure , and Gage 's troops were in the rear of Amherst 's army in the 1760 expedition that resulted in Montreal 's surrender . 
 = = Early governorship = = 
 After the French surrender , Amherst named Gage the military Governor of Montreal , a task Gage found somewhat thankless , because it involved the minute details of municipal governance along with the administration of the military occupation . He was also forced to deal with civil litigation , and manage trade with the Indians in the Great Lakes region , where traders disputed territorial claims , and quarrelled with the Indians . Margaret came to stay with him in Montreal and that is where his first two children , Harry , the future 3rd Viscount Gage , and Maria Theresa , were born . In 1761 , he was promoted to major general , and in 1762 , again with the assistance of his brother , was placed in command of the 22nd Regiment , which assured a command even in peacetime . 
 By all accounts , Gage appeared to be a fair administrator , respecting people 's lives and property , although he had a healthy distrust of the landowning seigneurs and of the Roman Catholic clergy , who he viewed as intriguers for the French . When peace was announced following the 1763 Treaty of Paris , Gage began lobbying for another posting , as he was " very much [ tired ] of this cursed Climate , and I must be bribed very high to stay here any longer " . In October 1763 the good news arrived that he would act as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of North America while Amherst was on leave in Britain . He immediately left Montreal , and took over Amherst 's command in New York on 17 November 1763 . When he did so , he inherited the job of dealing with the Indian uprising known as Pontiac 's Rebellion . 
 = = = Pontiac 's Rebellion = = = 
 Following the conquest of New France , Amherst , who had little respect for Indians , instituted policies that severely hampered British @-@ Indian relations , principally forbidding the sale of ammunition to them . Combined with widespread concern about British expansion into their territories , this prompted the tribes of the Ohio Country and the formerly French Pays d 'en Haut to rise against the British . In May 1763 , under the leadership of the Ottawa leader Pontiac , they launched a series of attacks on lightly garrisoned British frontier forts , successfully driving the British from some , threatening others , and also terrorising the settlers in those areas . 
 Hoping to end the conflict diplomatically , Gage ordered Colonel John Bradstreet and Colonel Henry Bouquet out on military expeditions and also ordered Sir William Johnson to engage in peace negotiations . Johnson negotiated the Treaty of Fort Niagara in the summer of 1764 with some of the disaffected tribes , and Colonel Bouquet negotiated a cease @-@ fire of sorts in October 1764 , which resulted in another peace treaty finalised by Johnson in 1765 . In 1765 , the 42nd Royal Highland Regiment finally got through to Fort Cavendish , the last fort still in French hands . The conflict was not fully resolved until Pontiac himself travelled to Fort Ontario and signed a formal treaty with Johnson in July 1766 . 
 = = = Securing his position = = = 
 When General Amherst left North America in 1763 , it was on a leave of absence from his position as commander @-@ in @-@ chief . In 1764 , Amherst announced that he had no intention of returning to North America , at which point Gage 's appointment to that post was made permanent . ( Amherst retained posts as governor of Virginia and colonel of the 60th Foot , positions he only gave up in 1768 when he was required to actually go to Virginia or give up the post . ) <unk> of other high @-@ ranking officers , especially Robert Monckton and his supporters , for his offices , continued throughout his tenure as commander @-@ in @-@ chief . Gage was promoted to lieutenant general in 1771 . In 1767 Gage ordered the arrest of Major Robert Rogers , the former leader of Rogers ' Rangers who Gage had come to dislike and distrust during the war . The arrest was based on flimsy evidence that Rogers might have been engaging in a treasonous relationship with the French ; he was acquitted in a 1768 court martial . 
 Gage spent most of his time as commander @-@ in @-@ chief , the most powerful office in British America , in and around New York City . Although Gage was burdened by the administrative demands of managing a territory that spanned the entirety of North America east of the Mississippi River , the <unk> clearly relished life in New York , actively participating in the social scene . Although his position gave him the opportunity to make financial arrangements that might have lined the pockets of high @-@ ranking officers at the expense of the military purse , there is little evidence that he engaged in any significant improper transactions . In addition to the handsome sum of £ 10 per day as commander @-@ in @-@ chief , he received a variety of other stipends , including his colonel 's salary , given for leading his regiment . These funds made it possible to send all of the Gage children ( at least six of whom survived to adulthood ) to school in England . 
 If Gage did not dip his hand unnecessarily in the public till , he did engage in the relatively common practices of nepotism and political favouritism . In addition to securing advantageous positions for several people named Gage or Kemble , he also apparently assisted in the placement of some of his friends and political supporters , or their children . 
 = = = Rising colonial tension = = = 
 During Gage 's administration political tensions rose throughout the American colonies . As a result , Gage began withdrawing troops from the frontier to fortify urban centres like New York City and Boston . As the number of soldiers stationed in cities grew , the need to provide adequate food and housing for these troops became urgent . Parliament passed the Quartering Act of 1765 , permitting British troops to be quartered in private residences . 
 Gage 's thoughts on the reasons for colonial unrest played an important role in furthering the unrest . He at first believed that the popular unrest after the 1765 Stamp Act was primarily due to a small number of colonial elites , led by those in Boston . In 1768 he recommended the deployment of two regiments to occupy Boston , a move that further inflamed the city . Among the troops quartered in the city was the 29th Regiment of Foot , which had previously clashed with colonists in Quebec and New York , and had a reputation for poor discipline . This occupation eventually led to the Boston Massacre in 1770 . Later that year he wrote that " America is a mere bully , from one end to the other , and the Bostonians by far the greatest bullies . " 
 Gage later came to change his opinion about the source of the unrest , believing that democracy was a significant threat . He saw the movement of colonists into the interior , beyond effective Crown control , and the development of the town meeting as a means of local governance as major elements of the threat , and wrote in 1772 that " democracy is too prevalent in America " . He believed that town meetings should be abolished and recommended that colonisation should be limited to the coastal areas where British rule could be enforced . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 Gage returned to Britain in June 1773 with his family and thus missed the Boston Tea Party in December of that year . The British Parliament reacted to the Tea Party with a series of punitive measures against Massachusetts known in the colonies as the Intolerable Acts . Some of the terms of those acts , for example the option to remove political trials to England , originated with Gage , and measures such as curbing the activities of town meetings and withholding representative government from the Ohio Country also show his influence . With his military experience and relative youth ( Massachusetts governor Thomas Hutchinson was then 62 years old and unpopular , and the equally unpopular lieutenant governor Andrew Oliver was 67 in 1773 and died in March 1774 ) , Gage , a popular figure on both sides of the Atlantic , was deemed the best man to handle the brewing crisis and enforce the Parliamentary acts . 
 In early 1774 , he was appointed military governor of Massachusetts , replacing Hutchinson . He arrived from Britain in early May , first stopping at Castle William on Castle Island in Boston Harbour . He then arrived in Boston on 13 May 1774 , having been carried there by HMS Lively . His arrival was met with little pomp and circumstance , but was generally well received at first as Bostonians were happy to see Hutchinson go . Local attitudes toward him rapidly deteriorated as he began implementing the various acts , including the Boston Port Act , which put many people out of work , and the Massachusetts Government Act , which formally rescinded the provincial assembly 's right to nominate members of the Governor 's Council , though it retained the elected General Court . Gage dissolved the Assembly in June 1774 after he discovered the Massachusetts representatives were sending delegates to the extralegal Continental Congress . He called for new elections to be held as per the Massachusetts Government Act , but his authority was undermined by the representatives who refused to meet with the new , appointed Governor 's Council . He attempted to buy off political leaders in Massachusetts , notably Benjamin Church and Samuel Adams . With the former he was successful — Church secretly supplied him with intelligence on the activities of rebel leaders — but Adams and other rebel leaders were not moved . 
 In September 1774 Gage withdrew his garrisons from New York , New Jersey , Philadelphia , Halifax and Newfoundland and brought all under his wing in Boston together with a large British naval presence under the control of Admiral Samuel Graves . He also sought to strictly enforce army directives calling for the confiscation of war @-@ making materials . In September 1774 , he ordered a mission to remove provincial gunpowder from a magazine in what is now Somerville , Massachusetts . This action , although successful , caused a huge popular reaction known as the Powder Alarm , resulting in the mobilization of thousands of provincial militiamen who marched towards Cambridge , Massachusetts . Although the militia soon dispersed , the show of force on the part of the provincials had a lasting effect on Gage , and he subsequently grew more cautious in his actions . The rapid response of the provincials was in large part due to Paul Revere and the Sons of Liberty . The Sons of Liberty kept careful watch over Gage 's activities and successfully warned others of future actions before Gage could mobilise his British regulars to execute them . 
 Gage was criticised for allowing groups like the Sons of Liberty to exist . One of his officers , Lord Percy , remarked , " The general 's great <unk> and moderation serve only to make them [ the colonists ] more daring and insolent . " Gage himself wrote after the Powder Alarm , " If force is to be used at length , it must be a considerable one , and foreign troops must be hired , for to begin with small numbers will encourage resistance , and not terrify ; and will in the end cost more blood and treasure . " Edmund Burke described Gage 's conflicted relationship by saying in Parliament , " An Englishman is the unfittest person on Earth to argue another Englishman into slavery . " 
 = = American War of Independence = = 
 On April 14 , 1775 , Gage received orders from London to take decisive action against the Patriots . Given intelligence that the militia had been stockpiling weapons at Concord , Massachusetts , he ordered a troop of regulars to march there on the night of 18 April to confiscate them . A brief skirmish in Lexington scattered colonial militia forces gathered there , but in a later standoff in Concord , a portion of the British force was routed by a stronger colonial militia contingent . When the British left Concord following their search ( which was largely unsuccessful , as the colonists , with advance warning of the action , had removed most of the supplies ) , arriving colonial militia engaged the British column in a running battle all the way back to Charlestown . The Battles of Lexington and Concord resulted in 273 total casualties for the British and 93 for the American rebels . 
 Following Lexington and Concord , thousands of colonial militia surrounded the city , beginning the Siege of Boston . At first , the rebels ( led mainly by Massachusetts General Artemas Ward ) faced some 4 @,@ 000 British regulars , who were bottled up in the city . British Admiral Samuel Graves commanded the fleet that continued to control the harbour . On 25 May , 4 @,@ 500 reinforcements arrived in the city , along with three more generals : Major General William Howe and Brigadiers John Burgoyne and Henry Clinton . 
 On 12 June , Gage issued a proclamation , believed to have been written by Burgoyne but distributed in Gage 's name , granting a general pardon to all who would demonstrate loyalty to the crown — with the notable exceptions of John Hancock and Samuel Adams . Gage also worked with the newly arrived generals on a plan to break the grip of the besieging forces . They would use an amphibious assault to take control of the unoccupied Dorchester Heights , which would be followed up by an attack on the rebel camp at Roxbury . They would then seize the heights on the Charlestown peninsula , including Breed 's Hill and Bunker Hill . This would allow the British to eventually take the colonial headquarters at Cambridge . The colonists were warned of these plans , and seized the initiative . On the night of 16 – 17 June , they fortified Breed 's Hill , threatening the British position in Boston . On 17 June 1775 , British forces under General Howe seized the Charlestown Peninsula at the Battle of Bunker Hill . It was a Pyrrhic victory ; Britain won but suffered more than 1 @,@ 000 casualties without significantly altering the state of the siege . Henry Clinton called it " [ a ] dear bought victory , another such would have ruined us " , while other officers noted that nothing had been gained in the victory . Gage himself wrote the Secretary at War : 
 These people show a spirit and conduct against us they never showed against the French … <unk> are now spirited up by a rage and enthusiasm as great as ever people were possessed of and you must proceed in earnest or give the business up . A small body acting in one spot will not avail , you must have large armies making diversions on different sides , to divide their force . The loss we have sustained is greater than we can bear . Small armies cannot afford such losses , especially when the advantage gained tends to do little more than the gaining of a post . 
 = = Return to Great Britain = = 
 On 25 June 1775 , Gage wrote a dispatch to Great Britain , notifying Lord Dartmouth of the results of the battle on 17 June . Three days after his report arrived in England , Dartmouth issued the order recalling Gage and replacing him with William Howe . The rapidity of this action is likely attributable to the fact that people within the government were already arguing for Gage 's removal , and the battle was just the final straw . Gage received the order in Boston on 26 September , and set sail for England on 11 October . 
 The nature of Dartmouth 's recall order did not actually strip Gage of his offices immediately . William Howe temporarily replaced him as commander of the forces in Boston , while General Guy Carleton was given command of the forces in Quebec . Although King George wanted to reward his " mild general " for his service , Gage 's sole reward after Lord George Germain ( who succeeded Dartmouth as the Secretary of State for North America ) formally gave his command to Howe in April 1776 was that he retained the governorship of Massachusetts . 
 On the <unk> ' return to England , the family eventually settled into a house on Portland Place in London . Although he was presumably given a friendly reception in his interview with a sympathetic King George , the public and private writings about him and his fall from power were at times vicious . One correspondent wrote that Gage had " run his race of glory ... let him alone to the hell of his own conscience and the infamy which must inevitably attend him ! " Others were kinder ; New Hampshire Governor Benning Wentworth characterised him as " a good and wise man ... surrounded by difficulties . " 
 Gage was briefly reactivated to duty in April 1781 , when Amherst appointed him to mobilise troops for a possible French invasion . The next year , Gage assumed command of the 17th Light Dragoons . He was promoted to full general on 20 November 1782 , and later transferred to command the 11th Dragoons . 
 = = Final years and legacy = = 
 As the war machinery was reduced in the mid @-@ 1780s , Gage 's military activities declined . He supported the efforts of Loyalists to recover losses incurred when they were forced to leave the colonies , notably confirming the treachery of Benjamin Church in order to further his widow 's claims for compensation . He received visitors at Portland Place and at Firle , including Frederick Haldimand and Thomas Hutchinson . His health began to decline early in the 1780s . 
 Gage died at Portland Place on 2 April 1787 , and was buried in the family plot at Firle . His wife survived him by almost 37 years . His son Henry inherited the family title upon the death of Gage 's brother William , and became one of the wealthiest men in England . His youngest son , William Hall Gage , became an admiral in the Royal Navy , and all three daughters married into well @-@ known families . 
 The town of Gagetown , New Brunswick was named in his honour . Consequently , the Canadian Forces base CFB Gagetown also carries his name . 
 In 1792 Lieutenant @-@ Governor of Upper Canada John Graves Simcoe renamed the archipelago of islands in the mouth of the St. Lawrence River for the victorious generals of the Conquest of Canada : Wolfe Island , Amherst Island , Howe Island , Carleton Island and Gage Island . This last is now known as Simcoe Island . 
 = Fleance = 
 Fleance ( or <unk> ) / <unk> / is a figure in legendary Scottish history . He was depicted by 16th @-@ century historians as the son of Lord Banquo , Thane of Lochaber , and the ancestor of the kings of the House of Stuart . Fleance is best known as a character in William Shakespeare 's play Macbeth , in which the Three Witches <unk> that Banquo 's descendants shall be kings . Some screen adaptations of the story expand on Fleance 's role by showing his return to the kingdom after Macbeth 's death . 
 Shakespeare 's play is adapted from Holinshed 's Chronicles , a history of the British Isles written during the late sixteenth century . In Holinshed , Fleance escapes Macbeth and flees to Wales , where he fathers a son who later becomes the first hereditary steward to the King of Scotland . 
 In real life , ' Steward ' eventually became the name ' Stewart ' ( later changed to French ' Stuart ' ) , and Walter Stewart married Princess Marjorie , daughter of Robert the Bruce . Their son , Robert II , began the Stewart / Stuart line of kings in Scotland . James VI and I , son of Mary , Queen of Scots , was the ninth Stewart / Stuart monarch ( eighth king ) of Scotland and the first of the six Stuart monarchs of England and Ireland . 
 James VI & I was the reigning monarch when William Shakespeare is believed to have written and first produced Macbeth , which may have been in the new king 's honour . 
 = = History = = 
 Fleance and his father Banquo are both fictional characters presented as historical fact by Hector Boece , whose Scotorum Historiae ( 1526 – 27 ) was a source for Raphael Holinshed 's Chronicles , a history of the British Isles popular in Shakespeare 's time . In the Chronicles , Fleance — in fear of Macbeth — flees to Wales and marries Nesta <unk> Gruffydd , daughter of Gruffydd ap Llywelyn , the last native Prince of Wales . They have a son named Walter who makes his way back to Scotland and is appointed Royal Steward . According to legend , he fathered the Stuart monarchs of England and Scotland . 
 The Stuarts used their connection with Fleance and his marriage to the Welsh princess to claim a genealogical link with the legendary King Arthur . This , they hoped , would strengthen the legitimacy of their throne . In 1722 , however , Richard Hay , a Scottish historian , presented strong evidence that not only was James not a descendant of Fleance , but also that both Fleance and Banquo never even existed . Most modern scholars now agree that Fleance is not a real historical figure . 
 = = In Macbeth = = 
 Fleance appears in Shakespeare 's Macbeth . However , only his childhood is portrayed ; the rest of his story , as it is described in Holinshed 's Chronicles , does not appear in Shakespeare 's play . Scholars suggest that Shakespeare does not elaborate on Fleance 's life after his escape from Scotland in order to avoid unnecessary distraction from the story of Macbeth himself . 
 In Act 1 , Macbeth and Banquo meet the Three Witches who foretell that Macbeth will be king and that Banquo " shalt get kings , though thou be none " . Fleance also briefly appears in the first scene of Act 2 , when his father tells him of " cursed thoughts that nature / Gives way to in repose ! " . Macbeth , aware of the threat Banquo and his son pose to his new throne , plans to have them murdered . Before Banquo goes traveling , Macbeth asks " Goes Fleance with you ? " Macbeth sends three men to follow and kill them both , saying " Fleance [ ' s ] absence is no less material to me / Than is his father 's . " Macbeth holds a banquet that night and reveals to his wife his fears of what might happen unless Fleance and Banquo are both killed . Banquo and Fleance are ambushed and while Banquo holds the assailants off he cries " Fly , good Fleance , fly , fly , fly ! / Thou <unk> revenge . " When the murderers return to Macbeth and report their failure to kill Fleance , he says , " Then comes my fit again : I had else been perfect , / Whole as the marble , founded as the rock , / As broad and general as the casing air : / But now I am cabin 'd , <unk> 'd , confined , bound in / To saucy doubts and fears . " Macbeth later meets the Three Witches again and is shown a vision of a long line of kings descended from Banquo . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 In the first scene of Act 2 , Fleance meets his father , who asks him to take his sword and tells him he is reluctant to go to bed due to the " cursed thoughts that nature / gives way to in repose ! " On Macbeth 's approach , however , Banquo demands the sword be returned to him quickly . Scholars have interpreted this to mean that Banquo has been dreaming of murdering the king . Doing so would make the throne more available for Fleance , and would fulfill the Three Witches ' prophecy that his sons would become kings . Since Banquo 's good nature is revolted by these thoughts , he gives his sword and dagger to Fleance to be sure he does not act on them . Still , he is so nervous at Macbeth 's approach that he demands their return . Other scholars have responded that Banquo 's dreams have nothing to do with him killing the king , but that they have revealed to him Macbeth 's bloody nature . They argue that Banquo is merely setting aside his sword for the night , but when Macbeth approaches , Banquo , having had these dark dreams about Macbeth , takes back his sword as a precaution . In any case , this scene adds to the dark , uncertain , unsettling tone of the play . Fleance and his father are not even certain of what time it is throughout , as Fleance says when asked at the beginning of the scene " The moon is down ; I have not heard the clock . " 
 The two scenes in which murderers attack Banquo and Fleance , Lady Macduff and Macduff 's son , have been compared to Herod 's attempt to murder Christ and save the throne for himself by killing all new @-@ born children in Bethlehem . The conversation between Fleance and Banquo in their own murder scene is especially dark . Banquo 's first line from within " Give us a light there , ho ! " communicates the nighttime setting . The stage direction " Enter <unk> , and <unk> , with a torch " , seems to foreshadow the fact that Fleance is a light for Scotland in the midst of the play 's black deeds . 
 When Macbeth returns to the witches later in the play , they show him an apparition of the murdered Banquo , along with eight kings of his family , descending through Fleance . King James , on the throne when Macbeth was written , was the ninth Stuart king . This scene thus suggests strong support for James ' right to the throne by lineage , and for audiences of Shakespeare 's day , was a tangible fulfillment of the witches ' prophecy . The apparition is also deeply unsettling to Macbeth , who not only wants the throne for himself , but also desires to father a line of kings . 
 Theater expert Marvin Rosenberg theorizes that Macbeth has a son , and interprets the play as commenting on the rivalries between pairs of father and son : Banquo and Fleance , Macduff and his son , Macbeth and his . He argues that the tension that exists between Fleance and Macbeth is made stronger if Macbeth has a child : his motive is not just selfish striving , but also fatherly ambition for his own son . But this interpretation is flawed because in IV : iii , as soon as Macduff hears that MacBeth has murdered his whole family , he says : " He has no children . " Some productions of Macbeth imply that the Macbeths have lost a child , or show this tenderness by having the title character attempt to pat Fleance on the head , when Fleance withdraws to his father 's side . 
 = = = Theatre and screen versions = = = 
 Theatre and screen versions of Macbeth have sometimes elaborated on Fleance 's role . 
 In Orson Welles 's film version of Macbeth ( 1948 ) , Fleance is briefly seen again at the very end of the movie . He does not speak in this scene , but he has returned to Scotland with the army of Malcolm and Macduff , and is shown along with those hailing Malcolm as the new king after the killing of Macbeth . 
 The BBC Shakespeare version of Macbeth shows Fleance in the final scene , implying his future role in bringing Banquo 's line to the throne . 
 In Joe Macbeth ( 1955 ) , the first film to transpose Macbeth into a gang and Mafia @-@ like setting , Fleance is replaced by a character named Lenny . Lenny 's father , Banky , is killed , but Lenny escapes , and gathers a group of angry mobsters to overthrow Macbeth , who has , through a series of murders , made himself the kingpin gangster in the area . Lenny is successful in killing Macbeth in the end , but only after Macbeth has murdered most of his family . In another gangster adaptation , Men of Respect ( 1991 ) , Fleance is replaced by a character named Phil , who similarly helps overthrow Mike ( Macbeth ) after his father , <unk> ( Banquo ) , is murdered . Phil is inducted into the gang at the end of the film , when Mal ( Malcolm ) has taken over , suggesting that the violent gang culture will continue through generations . This sentiment echoes into the final scenes of Penny Woolcock 's Macbeth on the Estate . Macduff shoots Macbeth and takes a ring ( representing his high status ) off Macbeth 's finger . Entering a bar , he flips it to Malcolm , saying , " Hail , king . " Malcolm puts it on with some show and elbows his way to the front of the bar . One of the characters he elbows is Fleance ( a skinhead ) , who makes a mock gun out of his fingers and " shoots " at the back of the darker @-@ skinned Malcolm 's skull . Again this makes it clear that the violence will not end with the new generation . 
 In Throne of Blood , a Japanese adaptation of the play , Fleance is replaced by Yoshiteru , a character played by Akira <unk> . The Macbeth and Banquo characters , Washizu and Miki , are told by an old woman spinning wool in a hut that while Washizu will rule the Forest Castle one day , Miki 's son Yoshiteru will eventually inherit it for himself . Washizu takes the throne and at one point is about to make Yoshiteru his heir , but changes his mind when his wife tells him she is pregnant . Washizu instead arranges to have Yoshiteru and his father killed , but Yoshiteru escapes . Another adaptation filmed in India , Maqbool ( 2003 ) , replaces Fleance with a character named Guddu . Maqbool ( Macbeth ) attempts to have Guddu murdered in order to strengthen power within the organized crime circle . Guddu , however , survives and marries the daughter of the former crime lord . 
 In Macbett , Eugène Ionesco 's 1972 stage adaptation , Fleance is merged with the Malcolm character . Macol ( Malcolm ) , who is thought to be King Duncan 's son , is revealed to be Banco 's ( Banquo 's ) . Duncan , wanting a male heir , adopted Macol . Macol fills the role of Malcolm in taking the kingdom from Macbett ( Macbeth ) at the end of the play . 
 In the 2006 modern dress film adaptation , set among gangsters in Melbourne , Fleance ( Craig Stott ) is depicted as a teenage boy , looking slightly older than in the original play . He also appears a bit more often , mainly in the scenes of Act V , where he sneaks on board a truck full of timber and witnesses the death of Macbeth before killing the maid and being directed home by Macduff . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Fleance 's line " The moon is down , I have not heard the clock " was the inspiration for the title of John Steinbeck 's 1942 short novel The Moon is Down . Fleance 's line foreshadows the evil encompassing the kingdom . The book was published just as the United States entered World War II and signaled the threat of the Axis powers by outlining the events in a European town occupied by foreign powers . Steinbeck 's book became a Broadway play and a film . 
 In 2008 , Pegasus Books published The Tragedy of Macbeth Part II : The Seed of Banquo , a play by American author and playwright Noah Lukeman that endeavored to pick up where the original Macbeth left off , and to resolve its many loose ends , particularly the prophesied ascension of the seed of Banquo . Written in blank verse , the play was published to critical acclaim . Another book published in 2009 by Penguin Books , Banquo 's Son , is the first in a trilogy that follows on from the Shakespearean story . The novels are written by New Zealand author and English teacher , T.K. <unk> . 
 = Scutellinia scutellata = 
 Scutellinia scutellata , commonly known as the eyelash cup , the Molly eye @-@ <unk> , the scarlet elf cap , the eyelash fungus or the eyelash pixie cup , is a small saprophytic fungus of the genus Scutellinia . It is the type species of Scutellinia , as well as being the most common and widespread . The fruiting bodies are small red cups with distinct long , dark hairs or " eyelashes " . These eyelashes are the most distinctive feature and are easily visible with a magnifying glass . The species is common in North America and Europe , and has been recorded on every continent . S. scutellata is found on rotting wood and in other damp habitats , typically growing in small groups , sometimes forming clusters . It is sometimes described as inedible , but its small size means it is not suitable for culinary use . Despite this , it is popular among mushroom hunters due to its unusual " eyelash " hairs , making it memorable and easy to identify . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 S. scutellata was first described in 1753 by Carl Linnaeus in his book Species Plantarum as Peziza scutellata , and it was given its current name by Jean Baptiste <unk> <unk> in Memoires <unk> royale des sciences de Liege in 1887 . It was also named <unk> scutellata in 1902 . The specific name scutellata is from the Latin for " like a small shield " . Common names include the eyelash fungus , the eyelash cup , the scarlet elf cap , the Molly eye @-@ <unk> and the eyelash pixie cup . 
 The Scutellinia genus is currently placed in the Pyronemataceae family . However , genera of the Pyronemataceae lack unifying macroscopic or microscopic characteristics ; this lack of uniting characters has led various authors to propose a variety of classification schemes . A 1996 study of British specimens of Scutellinia revealed that the species S. <unk> , originally described as Peziza <unk> in 1789 by French botanist Jean Baptiste François Pierre Bulliard , was synonymous with S. scutellata . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruiting body of S. scutellata is a shallow disc shape , typically between 0 @.@ 2 to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) in diameter . The youngest specimens are almost entirely spherical ; the cups open up and expand to a disc during maturity . The inner surface of the cup ( the fertile spore @-@ bearing surface , known as the hymenium ) is bright orange @-@ red , while the outer surface ( the sterile surface ) is pale brown . The flesh is red and thin . The outer surface is covered in dark coloured , stiff hairs , measuring up to 1 centimetre ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) in length . At the base , these hairs are up to 40 µm ( 0 @.@ 0016 in ) thick , and they taper towards the pointed apices . The hairs form distinctive " eyelashes " on the margin of the cup that are visible to the naked <unk> or easily visible through a magnifying glass . S. scutellata is sessile — it does not have a stalk . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 S. scutellata has asci of approximately 300 µm by 25 µm in size , and releases elliptical spores measuring 18 to 19 µm by 10 to 12 µm . The translucent ( hyaline ) ascospores have a rough exterior , ( with very small warts ) and contain small droplets of oil . They are white when present in large numbers , like a spore print . The paraphyses are cylindrical in shape and feature septa partitioning the hypha into distinct cells . Electron microscopy of the top of the ascus has revealed a roughly delimited operculum ( a flap @-@ like covering of the ascus ) and <unk> ( a pore in the apex of the ascus ) , and a subapical ring . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 While some list S. scutellata as inedible , others list it as having an unknown edibility . David Arora considers it too small to be of any culinary interest , and it lacks a distinctive smell or taste . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 S. scutellata is common in both Europe , where it can be found from late spring to late autumn , and North America , where it fruits in winter and spring . It has also been collected in Cameroon , Colombia , East Asia , India , Iceland , Israel , New Guinea and the Solomon Islands , Russia , and Turkey . 
 A saprobic species , it grows generally in subalpine regions , fruiting on rotten wood and damp soil , and can also sometimes be found on ashes , wet leaves or bracket fungi . In Alaska it has been found growing on humus in the tundra . A six @-@ year study of the succession of fungal flora appearing on freshly cut stumps of Poplar trees ( Populus canadensis ) showed that S. scutellata appeared roughly in the middle of the fungal succession ( about 2 – 4 years after the tree had been cut ) , along with the species Ascocoryne sarcoides , Scutellinia <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . When growing on wood , it is often obscured by surrounding moss . Though sometimes found alone , they typically fruit in groups , sometimes forming dense clusters on rotting wood or other plant detritus . Due to its small size , it is often overlooked , but mycologist Vera Evenson has observed that " the discovery of the <unk> Cup is always a great pleasure " , due to " the beauty of the eyelashes " . Vera McKnight describes it as " a most attractive little fungus " , and claims it is easy to notice due to its bright colouration . 
 = = Carotenoids = = 
 The carotenoids are pigmented molecules found naturally in plants , and some types of fungi , including S. scutellata . A 1965 study reported the carotenoid composition of this fungus , found to contain a high proportion of <unk> carotenes — carotenes with only one <unk> ring , such as beta @-@ carotene . Also present were minor amounts of <unk> , a molecule structurally related to the carotenes . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Of more than a dozen species of Scutellinia , S. scutellata is the most common and widespread , though a microscope is required to differentiate between some of them . It is also the type species of the genus . It is differentiated from most other Scutellinia by its larger size , and its distinctive " eyelashes " . Although David Arora describes S. scutellata as " easily recognizable " , it can be mistaken for S. <unk> ( which has a larger fruiting body and larger spores , as well as having shorter , less obvious hairs ) S. <unk> ( which is slightly smaller , and orange to yellow in colour , with smooth spores ) , <unk> <unk> ( which is much smaller , with short , pale hairs and spores lacking oil droplets ) and <unk> <unk> , which is bright orange with small brown hairs . The " Pennsylvania eyelash cup " ( S. <unk> ) is a smaller North American version that has smaller hairs and spores that are more coarsely warted than S. scutellata . S. <unk> is very similar as well , and can only be reliably distinguished by its roughly spherical ascospores that are typically 17 – 23 µm in diameter . Species from the <unk> genus are smaller and hairless . Similar fungi that favour dung over rotting wood include <unk> <unk> , C. <unk> , and <unk> granulata while species such as Anthracobia <unk> , Anthracobia <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> carbonaria and <unk> archeri are cup fungi that favour burned @-@ over ground . 
 = Joanne Gair = 
 Joanne " Kiwi Jo " or " Kiwi Joe " Gair ( born c . 1958 ) is a New Zealand @-@ born and raised make @-@ up artist and body painter whose body paintings have been featured in the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue from 1999 to the most recent edition . She is considered the world 's leading trompe @-@ l 'œil body painter and make @-@ up artist , and she became famous with a Vanity Fair Demi 's Birthday Suit cover of Demi Moore in a body painting in 1992 . Her Disappearing Model was featured on the highest rated episode of Ripley 's Believe It or Not . She is the daughter of George Gair . 
 In addition to achieving pop culture prominence and respect in the fashion and art worlds starting with her body painting of Demi Moore , she is an award @-@ winning make @-@ up artist in the rock and roll world who has helped several of her music clients win fashion and style awards . She is also considered a fashion and art trendsetter , and for a long time she was associated with Madonna . In 2001 , she had her first retrospective and in 2005 , she published her first book on body painting . At the peak of her pop culture fame after the Vanity Fair cover , she was seriously considered for an Absolut Vodka Absolute Gair ad campaign . She has done magazine editorial work , and in 2005 , she became a photographer of her own body paintings in both books and magazines . 
 = = Career = = 
 Gair , who is New Zealand @-@ born and was raised in Auckland , lives in the United States and is based in Los Angeles . In 1977 , she began teaching dance at a New Zealand primary school . She moved from New Zealand at the age of 21 and had a variety of stops on her way to Los Angeles . Most of the time was spent in Australia and Amsterdam , until she ventured to Los Angeles at the time of the 1984 Summer Olympics , after five years away from home . With the help of the Cloutier Agency she obtained a work permit . She then approached the Chanel and Gaultier beauty salons to offer her already well @-@ respected make @-@ up artist services . They both accepted her and she further solidified her reputation to the point where instead of being asked if she was George Gair 's daughter it was more common for her father to be asked if he was Joanne Gair 's father . Her early work in the music industry included album cover and music video work for David Lee Roth , Tina Turner , Grace Jones , Annie Lennox , and Mick Jagger . One of her early successes was being employed to do Roth 's 1986 Eat ' Em and Smile album cover . These experiences led to work with Madonna , which started with music videos for " Express Yourself " and " Vogue " . She has also done work on music videos for Aerosmith and Nine Inch Nails . Her work on the 1997 Nine Inch Nails video for " The Perfect Drug " won her the makeup portion of the best hair / makeup in a music video at the Music Video Production Awards . She had also won awards for Madonna 's Frozen . Among the other notable musicians she has worked with is Gwen Stefani , who won Most Stylish Video at the 1999 VH1 / Vogue Fashion Awards working with Gair on the video for No Doubt 's song " New " . Gair also worked on ad campaigns and for photo features in efforts to exhibit the artistic visions of others . 
 Eventually she expanded beyond make @-@ up artistry to body painting to express her own artistic vision . In August 1991 , Demi Moore caused international artistic commotion by appearing on the cover of Vanity Fair seven months pregnant with her daughter Scout LaRue in the photo More Demi Moore , with Gair as the make @-@ up artist and Annie Leibovitz as the photographer . Exactly one year later , she returned to the cover of the same magazine nude as a product of Gair and Leibovitz in a nearly equally as shocking body painting , Demi 's Birthday Suit ( pictured right ) . Gair was the primary body painter of this art and the magazine cover art propelled Gair to fame . Fifteen years later , it continues to be considered the most well @-@ known example of modern body painting . The 1992 cover that entailed a thirteen @-@ hour sitting for Gair and her team of make @-@ up artists was a commemoration of the August 1991 photo . The shooting was storied because photographer Annie Leibovitz could not decide where to shoot and reserved two mobile homes , four hotel rooms and five houses . The pop culture attention given to Gair and her body painting led Absolut Vodka to consider an Absolut Gair body painting promotion in 1993 . 
 Gair is considered a Trompe @-@ l 'œil body painter , but at times she describes herself more generally and colloquially as an illusionist . She also refers to herself and others refer to her as an image @-@ maker for her contributions to people 's perceptions of others . She was originally inspired to specialise in body painting by facial skin adornment of the indigenous Māori people of her native New Zealand . However , the glam rockers and heavy metal rockers as well as white @-@ face geishas , Native American Indians and Indian mehndi all contributed to her inspiration . She began using <unk> to draw on people in 1977 . Her work , which became prominent with the August 1992 Vanity Fair cover of Demi Moore , has transcended various media and involved her with leading photographers , directors , super models and celebrities . Gair has worked with leading celebrities ( Madonna , Cindy Crawford , Michelle Pfeiffer , Kim Basinger , Christina Aguilera , Gwyneth Paltrow , Sophia Loren and Celine Dion ) and been in editorial ( Vogue , W , Vanity Fair , Rolling Stone , Playboy , BlackBook , and Harper 's Bazaar ) , fashion campaigns ( Donna Karan , Versace , Victoria 's Secret , Guess , and <unk> ) , cosmetic companies ( L 'Oréal , Maybelline , Revlon , Oil of Olay , and Rimmel ) and mega @-@ brands such as Evian . At one point she was beauty editor of Black Book . Her work with Madonna includes music videos such as Express Yourself , Vogue , Fever , Rain , Frozen , the Blonde Ambition Tour and its subsequent feature documentary Truth or Dare . When Madonna teamed up with Herb Ritts for black and white photographs , Gair did the eyelashes and make @-@ up . Gair has been the subject of numerous television programs and magazine articles , including what was the highest rated episode of Ripley 's Believe It or Not ? . Her first retrospective was exhibited at the Auckland Museum as part of the Vodafone Body Art exhibition in 2001 and early 2002 . 
 Gair has earned many motion picture credits for work as a make @-@ up artist . In 1996 & 1997 , she was employed on three of Moore 's films ( Striptease , If These Walls Could Talk & G.I. Jane ) . In addition , she earned a 1997 credit on Playboy : Farrah Fawcett , All of Me for Farrah Fawcett . In 2002 , she earned a make @-@ up credit on People I Know for working with Kim Basinger . She also earned a 2003 credit for work on the short documentary The Work of Director Chris Cunningham . 
 = = Sports Illustrated = = 
 In her first year in the Swimsuit Issue ( 1999 ) , she painted Rebecca Romijn , Heidi Klum , Sarah O 'Hare , Michelle <unk> , Yamila Díaz @-@ Rahi , and Daniela <unk> in a variety of <unk> . The first Gair Sports Illustrated body paintings occurred at Richard Branson 's Necker Island in the British Virgin Islands . Some of these also appeared in a 2001 Sports Illustrated calendar , and Heidi Klum 's tie @-@ dyed swimsuit bodypainting earned her and Gair the cover of the German edition of the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue . In 2001 , the Swimsuit Issue had a goddess theme . The cover featuring Elsa Benítez used the caption " Goddess of the Mediterranean " . Gair contributed to this theme by body painting the models as statues of goddess : Klum ( Athena ) , Díaz @-@ Rahi ( Thalia ) , Veronika <unk> ( Aphrodite , Venus ) , Molly Sims ( Flora ) , Noémie Lenoir ( Luna ) , Fernanda Tavares ( Aurora ) , and <unk> <unk> ( Diana ) as goddesses . At about the same time in 2001 , her work featuring Klum was featured on the cover of the tenth anniversary of Shape Magazine . In 2003 , she painted a seven continent world map on Rachel Hunter , a fellow New Zealander , and purposely represented Australia and New Zealand " down under " ( on the buttocks ) . In the 2004 issue , when she painted Jessica White , Petra <unk> , Marisa Miller , <unk> Lenoir , Melissa Keller , and Hall , the paintings featured both body painting and real bathing suit portions in most images . However , bathing suit portions were not apparent in all images . In the 2005 issue , she painted Bridget Hall , White , Miller , Anne V , and <unk> with athletic team outfits . In the 2006 issue , she painted multiple bathing suits on Klum . One of these appeared on the cover of the German edition of Sports Illustrated . It was the ninth time that Gair and Klum worked together and the seventh time that they did so for Sports Illustrated . In the 2007 issue , where music was the theme and Beyoncé Knowles was featured on the cover , she painted rock and roll related tee shirts and bikini bottoms on Daniella <unk> , Miller , <unk> and Ana Paula Araujo . In the 2008 Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue , when she painted bathing suits on Quiana Grant , Jessica Gomes , Marisa Miller , and Tori <unk> , the average sitting time for the subjects / objects was thirteen hours . 
 The photographers in 1999 , 2001 , 2003 and 2004 were respectively Antoine Verglas , James Porto , Michael <unk> and Steven White for the Swimsuit Issue works . From 2005 – 2007 Gair took the photographs of her body paintings herself . Verglas again photographed the bodypainting for the 2008 Swimsuit Issue . No body painting pictures have been chosen as the main image on the cover of the Swimsuit Issue . However , in the 2005 Swimsuit Issue ( pictured left ) in which Carolyn Murphy is the cover model , Jessica White was shown as an inset on the cover in a Miami Dolphins jersey body painting by Gair . Thus , as a Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue photographer Gair debuted on the cover in a sense . In 2006 a small cropped portion of her photograph of a bodypainting of Klum appeared in an inset on the cover , but no bodypainting was apparent . 
 = = Books = = 
 Gair has produced two English books : Paint A ' Licious : The Pain @-@ Free Way to Achieving Your Naked <unk> ( ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 , Andrews McMeel Publishing , 2005 ) and Body Painting : Masterpieces By Joanne Gair ( with foreword by Heidi Klum ) ( ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1509 @-@ 2 , <unk> , 2006 ) as well as one Spanish book : Arte en el <unk> ( ISBN 970 @-@ 718 @-@ 470 @-@ 1 , <unk> , 2007 ) . In her first book , Paint A ' Licious , she was both the painter and photographer as well as the arranger who conceived the scenes . Paint A ' Licious had a theme of helping people achieve their fantasies . Among the works included were one called ' It 's a Stretch but You 've Still Got It , ' which shows an old woman in a pink tutu doing the splits on a golden stage , with the help of an assistant painted to blend into the curtains and ' No Sweat ' which shows an overweight woman happily leading an aerobics class with her body painted so that she appears 30 pounds slimmer . In the book , washboard abs are achieved by sitting still for a few hours , as is an hourglass figure . The book was produced over the course of ten months in New Zealand . 
 Her second book , Body Painting , includes seventy @-@ five works and some of the photographers involved were Annie Leibovitz , Herb Ritts and David LaChapelle . The book includes many works from Gair 's Auckland Museum exhibition as well as selected Swimsuit Issue images . Former model and current First Lady of France , Carla Bruni , was a subject of the book . Several Heidi Klum photos are included from various photo shoots , including the 1991 Shape magazine tenth anniversary shoot . Several photos of Demi Moore also appear including alternate photos from the Kauai , Hawaii portion of the 1992 Demi 's Birthday Suit week of shooting as well as both photos of her 1994 pregnancy with Tallulah Belle Willis and subsequent 1995 Barbie body paintings . A photo from the Disappearing Model work from Ripley 's Believe It or Not ? is also included . The book also includes magazine work such as a May 1990 Fame shoot with Goldie Hawn and Matthew Rolston and a November 1998 Interview shoot with Pamela Anderson and David LaChapelle as well as some Pirelli calendar work with Herb Ritts , Carolyn Murphy and Alek <unk> . 
 Sports Illustrated produced Sports Illustrated : In the Paint ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 20 @-@ 7 , Time , Inc . Home Entertainment , 2007 ) in November 2007 . The book is subtitled " The complete body @-@ painting collection from the SI Swimsuit Issue : The Art of Joanne Gair . " The book contains reproductions of photographs of all of the body paintings that have been included in the swimsuit issue since Gair has become involved and excludes all body painting that preceded Gair 's involvement . Thus , she is the featured artist of the book that includes photographs by all of the aforementioned photographers . The book also contains stories that accompanied some of the issues by Sports Illustrated writers such as Rick Reilly who observed the process . The cover image of Sarah O 'Hare was shot by Antoine Verglas who photographed Gair 's 1999 <unk> for the Swimsuit Issue . The book includes images produced in Gair 's earlier efforts for the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue from 1999 – 2007 . It also includes several behind @-@ the @-@ scenes images not include in the magazine . 
 = = Television = = 
 Although to many she is best known for Demi 's Birthday Suit , art aficionados consider her most famous work Disappearing Model . The work appeared on Ripley 's Believe it or Not ! . In the trompe l 'oeil body painting , the face and body of the model are almost indistinguishable from the red and blue and yellow flowers of the wallpaper in the background . Her first body paintings was also memorable as she painted a moko on a female Ford Modeling Agency fashion model named Jana , which is a <unk> employment of a traditionally male ritual face mask . An example from Gair 's website of her ability to trick the eye into seeing a three @-@ dimensional subject blend with a two @-@ dimensional background is seen in a photograph of a pregnant Elle Macpherson . Other examples of this technique include the cover of her first book ( pictured below ) and images from within this book . 
 She participated in Germany 's Next Topmodel by painting and photographing the final four contestants in leopard prints . During the episode , which was Cycle 1 episode 6 , she handled two models per day working for six to seven hours with each . The works covered the shoulders , legs , breasts and stomach and included long hair extensions . The episode resulted in work that was so successful that none of the contestants were eliminated . 
 = = Style = = 
 Gair has now developed a style as a body painter . Her typical job takes her and her team eight hours , but some jobs take twice that . She does not charge by the hour . Gair is always well prepared for her jobs , but does not generally sketch her work on paper . In fact , she claims to have only had to do so twice in over twenty years of body painting . When she needs to test something out she usually uses her opposite ( left ) arm or hand . 
 In recent years , Gair has added photography to her professional skills . In addition to being the photographer of Paint A ' Licious , she has been the photographer in some years of her Sports Illustrated work . For example , she was the photographer of Heidi Klum in 2006 . At the end of 2007 , Gair was using a Canon 5D camera . 
 = = Family = = 
 Gair is from Takapuna on the North Island of New Zealand , but she now lives in both Los Angeles and New York City . Her father is Hon. George Gair , a former New Zealand politician , and her nephew Alastair Gair is a competitive Etchells racer . Her father was a long @-@ time Member of the Parliament of New Zealand ( 1966 – 1990 ) and later Mayor of North Shore City ( 1995 – 1998 ) . Her mother is Fay Gair , and her elder sister Linda Gair served both as a model and as a painting assistant in several of the paintings in her first book . Linda also has a daughter named Lauren . One of the paintings for which Linda assisted was the cover of Paint A ' Licious . Gair also has an older brother named Warwick . 
 = Stones Bitter = 
 Stones Bitter is a bitter style of beer manufactured and distributed in the United Kingdom by the North American brewer Molson Coors . It has a straw @-@ golden hue ; it was first brewed in 1948 by William Stones Ltd at the Cannon Brewery in Sheffield . It was designed for the local steelworkers and became successful in its local area , becoming one of Sheffield 's best known products . 
 The brewing giant Bass acquired William Stones in the 1960s , and began to heavily promote the keg variant of Stones Bitter , which eventually became the highest selling bitter in the country . However the keg version was promoted at the expense of the traditional <unk> and unfiltered cask conditioned version . During the 1990s the ABV of Stones was gradually reduced , and as ale sales declined , Stones reverted from a national into a regional brand . Following the closure of the Cannon Brewery , Stones has been brewed at a number of different breweries . When Bass exited its brewing business , Stones became a Coors brand ( later Molson Coors ) . 
 Stones was promoted through a series of television advertisements during the 1980s that starred Michael Angelis and Tony Barton . It eventually became the United Kingdom 's longest ever running bitter campaign . Stones sponsored the Rugby Football League Championship and its successor the Rugby Super League throughout the 1980s and 1990s . 
 = = History = = 
 The head brewer Edward " Ted " Collins first produced Stones Bitter at the Cannon Brewery in 1948 . It was designed for the steelworkers of Sheffield 's Lower Don Valley . The product was formulated as the working classes began to favour bitter over the dark mild style of beer . The beer 's straw colour made it reasonably unique for the time , and its individuality helped it to become an immediate success . By the 1960s its local reputation was " colossal " , and it accounted for 80 per cent of William Stones ' sales . Stones had such a strong local following that it was described as being " more of a religion than a beer . " 
 From 1979 , keg Stones began to be promoted heavily nationwide , and the beer was introduced to the South of England for the first time . The beer was promoted following the withdrawal of the unpopular Brew Ten , which was itself intended to replace Bass 's regional ales . Originally the beer would be produced at the Cannon Brewery and then transported to Bass ' Hope & Anchor brewery , also in Sheffield , for pasteurisation and <unk> , but eventually demand for Stones Bitter became too great for the Cannon alone , and production was also extended to other Bass breweries . In the early 1980s it was produced at Bass ' Runcorn brewery , although this was quickly halted after drinkers complained of headaches from the poorly manufactured beer . The Runcorn beer had been brewed at a higher temperature , which increased the amount of hangover @-@ inducing <unk> oils in the beer . 
 By 1989 Stones was the ninth most popular beer in the United Kingdom , with 2 per cent of all beer sales . Demand was such that the Cannon Brewery was paying up to £ 1 @.@ 5 million per month in duty by 1991 . Cask conditioned Stones won silver in the Bitter category in the CAMRA Champion Beer of Britain in 1991 . By 1992 Stones was the UK 's highest selling bitter , a million barrel a year brand , with Bass describing it as " a tremendously important brand with untapped potential " . That same year , Bass were criticised for reducing the ABV of Stones from 4 @.@ 1 per cent to 3 @.@ 9 per cent ABV in order to reduce the impact of beer duty . The current packaging was introduced in 1994 , and evokes Vulcan , the Roman god of fire and blacksmiths , and protector of craftsmen . 
 In 1997 the Yorkshire Post described the beer as " one of Sheffield 's most famous exports " , and " a name which carries as much pride as the Made in Sheffield stamp . " In 1997 , Bass decided to <unk> Stones in order to concentrate on promoting Worthington as their national ale brand . Stones ' ABV was further reduced to 3 @.@ 8 per cent in August 1998 , and then to 3 @.@ 7 per cent a few months later leading to its derision in the Yorkshire Evening Post . Following the closure of the Cannon Brewery in 1999 , canned Stones has been brewed in Burton upon Trent and keg Stones in Tadcaster . 
 The cask conditioned variant was brewed by Highgate Brewery of Walsall , Thwaites Brewery of Blackburn and finally <unk> of Leicester . It was restored to 4 @.@ 1 per cent ABV and its original recipe in August 2006 , with Coors claiming that it would be " like [ how ] Stones used to taste . " The product was discontinued in 2011 . 
 In 2006 Off Licence News identified the canned variant as " continuing a slow but sure decline that has seen its status redefined from national brand to Yorkshire regional over the last decade . " As of 2012 Stones Bitter is among the twenty highest selling ales in the United Kingdom , with estimated annual volumes at over 100 @,@ 000 hectolitres . 
 = = Recipe and flavour = = 
 The recipes for brewery conditioned and cask conditioned Stones differed : 
 Brewery conditioned Stones is brewed with a blend of hops from America ( Columbus and Zeus ) and Europe ( Magnum and Admiral ) . The barley variety used is Pearl . The beer comes in kegs and <unk> cans , and is described as having a " fragrant grapefruit @-@ citrus hop aroma , [ which ] cuts through a characteristically <unk> background with a fruity edge . The unusual salts balance ensures that the bitterness isn ’ t dry . " 
 Cask conditioned Stones used Challenger hops , and was dry hopped with English Goldings . It was described as having an aroma of hops , sulphur and grapefruit , with a salty , <unk> and zesty taste . 
 = = Advertising = = 
 A major television campaign ran nationally from 1983 until 1991 with the tagline ( coined by playwright Peter Whelan ) : " ( Wherever you may wander ) there 's no taste like Stones " . The series initially starred Bernard Hill and Tony Barton , although Hill was replaced by Michael Angelis from 1984 onwards . The advertisements followed the characters of Jeff and Dave as they got into scrapes in various overseas locations , with humorous results . By 1987 it had become the UK 's longest running bitter campaign of all time . 
 From 1993 Stones was only advertised in the north of England . The 1994 @-@ 96 " Sheffield Gold " campaign was set in a steel foundry : a nod to the city 's heritage , although it was filmed in the Czech Republic because Sheffield 's own foundries were considered to be too clean and automated for the desired gritty and industrial effect . A spokesman for Bass explained : " We wanted sparks and goggles . " It was to be the final major marketing push for Stones , and as of 2012 the only marketing support for the brand is the provision of Stones branded glassware and bar merchandise for regular <unk> . 
 = = = Sponsorships = = = 
 Stones Bitter famously sponsored the Rugby Football League Championship from 1986 to 1995 , and then its successor the Rugby Super League from 1996 – 7 . A 1986 – 8 set of poster advertisements with the tagline : " Stones . Sheer poetry . " supported the sponsorship . In 1995 and 1996 Stones sponsored the Doncaster Handicap and the Park Hill Stakes horse racing events . 
 = Until the Whole World Hears ( song ) = 
 " Until the Whole World Hears " is a song by Christian rock band Casting Crowns . Written by Mark Hall , Bernie Herms , Jason McArthur and Roger Glidewell and produced by Mark A. Miller , it was released as a digital download on August 20 , 2009 and to Christian radio on August 29 , 2009 as the lead single from the band 's 2009 album of the same title . Musically , Until the Whole World Hears is an arena rock song with a crunchy guitar lick accompanied by blasting guitar chords and the " throaty growl " of Mark Hall 's vocals . Lyrically , it revolves around speaking the truth into a culture that doesn 't want to hear it . Part of the chorus references the Biblical character of John the Baptist . 
 " Until the Whole World Hears " received positive reception from critics and was nominated for Pop / Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year at the 41st GMA Dove Awards . Casting Crowns has performed the song as both an opening and closing song at live concerts . It peaked atop the Billboard Hot Christian Songs , Hot Christian AC and Christian AC Monitored charts . It also peaked at number four on the Billboard Christian CHR chart , number ten on the Billboard Christian Digital Songs chart and number twenty @-@ three on the Billboard Heatseekers Songs chart . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Until the Whole World Hears " was written by Mark Hall , Bernie Herms , Jason McArthur , and Roger Glidewell . It was produced by Mark A. Miller and recorded , mixed , and edited digitally by Sam Hewitt at Zoo Studio in Franklin , Tennessee . The song was mastered by Andrew Mendelson , Shelley Anderson , Natthaphol Abhigantaphand and Daniel Bacigalupi at Georgetown Masters in Nashville , Tennessee . Crowd vocals were recorded after a Sunday morning worship service at Eagles Landing First Baptist Church in McDonough , Georgia by Carter <unk> , Darren Hughes and Billy Lord . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Until the Whole World Hears " is a song with a length of five minutes and two seconds . It is set in common time in the key of D major and has a tempo of 100 beats per minute . Mark Hall 's vocals in the song span from the low note of F ♯ 4 to the high note of G5 . The song has been pegged as an arena rock song , while the guitar riff , melody , and chorus have been compared to what was " once associated with secular bands like Bon Jovi and Journey " . It is guitar @-@ driven and features a guitar lick that has been described as " crunchy " and " <unk> " , Along with the " throaty growl " of Mark Hall 's vocals and " blasting " guitar chords , a backing chorus that emphasizes the " rock vibe " of the song is also present . 
 Casting Crowns ' lead vocalist , Mark Hall , commented on the lyrical content of the song , stating that : " For believers , in context with our other songs , the messages are that God wants to use you , He wants you to grow and He wants you to have a purpose " . Hall elaborated that : " There are a trilogy of songs and messages that go together on the album . [ " Until the Whole World Hears " ] , “ Glorious Day , ” and “ To Know You . ” [ " Until the Whole World Hears " ] reminds me to be more intentional about what I do . I may not be able to get on a plane and fly to China and give out Bibles and preach the gospel , but how can I witness to my co @-@ workers and my friends and my family . " The portion of the chorus that says " like voices in the wilderness we 're crying out " is a reference to John the Baptist ; Hall said that one of his favorite characters in the New Testament was John the Baptist , and commented that " he [ John the Baptist ] was so black and white . This is wrong , and this is right . And he was speaking into a grey world , saying black and white things , and it cost him his life " . He elaborated on that , commenting that : " Until the whole world hears are the lines and the things that John the Baptist said into a culture that did not want to hear it . And we 've got to be in a place in our walk with Jesus that he 's filled us to where we step into something that 's unpopular and we can speak the truth , but that we can also speak it in love . We 've got to live in such a way that I have the purpose that John had " . 
 = = Critical reception and accolades = = 
 Upon its release , " Until the Whole World Hears " met with positive critical reception . Andrew Greer of CCM Magazine noted that " <unk> electric guitar licks infuse [ " Until the Whole World Hears " ] with a real rock vibe , emphasized by a backing chorus that will become a perfect sing @-@ along for live audience " , while Roger Gelwicks of Jesus Freak Hideout commented that the song is " probably the best on [ " Until the Whole World Hears " ] . Roger Ham of Christianity Today regarded " Until the Whole World Hears " as a " meat and potatoes <unk> overrun with blasting guitar chords and topped off with [ Mark ] Hall 's throaty growl " . 
 " Until the Whole World Hears " was nominated for Pop / Contemporary Record Song of the Year at the 41st GMA Dove Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Until the Whole World Hears " debuted at number thirty @-@ six on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart for the chart week of September 12 , 2009 , and advanced to number fifteen in its second chart week . In its fourth chart week , " Until the Whole World Hears " moved to number ten , and in its seventh chart week it jumped to number five . In its tenth chart week , it reached a new peak position of number two . It held that spot for a total of eight consecutive weeks before dropping to number five in its eighteenth chart week . After returning to the number two spot in its nineteenth chart week and holding that spot for two consecutive weeks , " Until the Whole World Hears " ascended to the top spot in its twenty @-@ first chart week . It dropped to number three in its twenty @-@ second chart week , but returned to the number one position the following week . It was supplanted from the top spot the following week , dropping to number two . It dropped out of the top five in its thirtieth week on the chart , and out of the top ten in its thirty @-@ fifth week on the chart . In total , " Until the Whole World Hears " spent forty @-@ one weeks on the Hot Christian Songs chart . 
 " Until the Whole World Hears " also peaked atop the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart , on which it spent forty @-@ two weeks , and the Christian AC Indicator chart , on which it spent twenty @-@ eight weeks . It spent twenty @-@ two weeks on the Billboard Christian CHR chart , peaking at number four , and twenty @-@ six weeks on the Billboard Christian Digital Songs chart , peaking at number ten . On the Billboard Heatseekers Songs chart , " Until the Whole World Hears " peaked at number twenty @-@ three ; it spent a total of seven weeks on that chart . 
 On the 2009 year @-@ end charts , " Until the Whole World Hears " ranked at number twenty @-@ three on the Hot Christian Songs chart and at number thirty @-@ one on the Hot Christian AC chart . On the 2010 year @-@ end charts , it ranked at number five on the Hot Christian AC chart , number seven on the Hot Christian Songs chart , number forty on the Christian Digital Songs chart and number fifty on the Christian CHR chart . 
