 The first official Fascio was founded on May 1 ( Labour Day ) , 1891 , in Catania by Giuseppe de Felice Giuffrida . ( An earlier Fascio was set up in Messina on March 18 , 1889 , but was dormant after its founder , Nicola Petrina , was arrested in July of that year and not released until 1892 . Another reason why the first Fascio of Messina – formed after the example of the Fasci operai [ Workers leagues ] constituted in Central and North Italy from 1871 – did not develop was that it brought together not individual workers but the workers ' associations of the city , which retained their independence , their status and economic orientation . ) Other leaders included Rosario Garibaldi Bosco in Palermo , Nicola Barbato in Piana dei <unk> , Bernardino Verro in Corleone , and Lorenzo <unk> in Santo Stefano <unk> . While the ruling elite depicted the men of the Fasci as treasonous socialists , communists and anarchists seeking to overthrow the monarchy ; in fact many were devout Catholics and monarchists . The movement sometimes had a messianic nature , characterised by statements as " Jesus was a true socialist and wanted just what the Fasci were demanding . " Nicola Barbato was known as " the workers ' apostle . " 
 The keenest socialist among the Fasci leaders was Garibaldi Bosco . In August 1892 he attended the Socialist party ’ s congress at Genoa and on his return obediently purged his <unk> of its anarchist and other non @-@ socialist members . His ideal of a united democratic front was shared by the father of Sicilian socialism , Napoleone <unk> . The leader in Catania , De Felice , also maintained contact with leading anarchists like <unk> Cipriani . On these and other important issues there was much friction between Catania and Palermo . 
 Crispi was replaced by Antonio Di Rudinì in February 1891 , who was succeeded by Giovanni Giolitti in May 1892 . On January 20 , 1893 , when peasants of Caltavuturo occupied communal land that they claimed was theirs , local authorities killed 13 and wounded 21 in the Caltavuturo massacre . Disturbances continued throughout the year . The Fasci started out as urban movements , animated by artisans , which evolved into a more popular and combative mass movement with the adherence of sulphur miners , and in a later stage with the involvement of peasants and sharecroppers . In the autumn of 1893 , labour conflicts in the cities and the mines came together with the protests and claims of the farmers . The movement reached its greatest breadth in the manifestations against taxes , involving the lowest tiers of the city and the countryside , becoming difficult , if not impossible , to control by its leaders . 
 = = Initial success = = 
 From its initial origins in Eastern Sicily , especially in Catania , the movement got its real impetus with the establishment of the Fascio of Palermo on June 29 , 1892 . The Leagues rapidly radiated over all Sicily . In the spring of 1893 the leaders of the movement decided to carry their propaganda to the peasants and miners of the countryside . Between March and October the number of fasci grew from 35 to 162 with more than 200 @,@ 000 members . 
 On May 21 – 22 , 1893 , a Congress was held in Palermo attended by 500 delegates from nearly 90 leagues and socialist circles . A Central Committee was elected , composed of nine members : Giacomo Montalto for the province of Trapani , Nicola Petrina for the province of Messina , Giuseppe De Felice Giuffrida for the province of Catania , Luigi Leone for the province of Siracusa , Antonio Licata for the province Agrigento , Agostino Lo Piano Pomar for the province of Caltanissetta , Rosario Garibaldi Bosco , Nicola Barbato and Bernardino Verro for the province of Palermo . The Congress decided that all Leagues were obliged to join the Italian Workers ' Party ( Partito dei Lavoratori Italiani ) , the predecessor of the PSI . 
 In July 1893 a peasant conference at Corleone drafted model agrarian contracts for labourers , sharecroppers and tenants and presented them to the landowners . When those refused to negotiate , a strike against landowners and against state taxes broke out over a large part of western Sicily . The so @-@ called Patti di Corleone ( Corleone Covenants ) , are considered by historians to be the first trade union collective contract in capitalist Italy . In September the state authorities intervened and some of the landowners were persuaded to capitulate . Elsewhere the strike continued until November 1893 . Railwaymen of Catania and Palermo , the sulphur @-@ miners and many other workers followed their example winning higher wages or better working conditions . 
 In October 1893 , a congress of miners was held in Grotte in the Province of Agrigento which was attended by some 1 @,@ 500 people , including workers and small producers . The miners demanded that the minimum age to be raised to 14 years for those who worked in the sulfur mines , the decrease of working hours and setting a minimum wage . Small producers demanded measures to avoid exploitation by large owners . The minimum @-@ age measure was meant to improve the situation for the <unk> , minors that worked in conditions of near @-@ slavery that sparked public outrage and inspired many complaints . 
 The successful struggle convinced the Sicilian ruling elite that the " upheaval " had to be stopped . They were seized by panic and some even demanded the closing of all schools to halt the spread of subversive doctrines . Prefects and frightened local councils bombarded Rome with requests for the immediate suppression of the Fasci . Despite the heavy pressure from the King , the army and conservative circles in Rome , however , Giolitti would neither treat strikes – which were not illegal – as a crime nor dissolve the Fasci nor authorise the use of firearms against popular demonstrations . His policy was “ to allow these economic struggles to resolve themselves through amelioration of the condition of the workers ” and not to interfere in the process . 
 = = Rising tensions = = 
 Nonetheless , Giolitti acknowledged the need to stifle the agitation . From May 1893 onwards , leaders of the Fasci were arrested occasionally and police and military reinforcements were sent to Sicily . In the autumn of 1893 the leadership lost control over the Fasci and the popular agitation got out of hand . Peasant squatters seized land , violent crowds demonstrated for work and against local misgovernment , tax offices were burnt down and clashes with the police grew more frequent and bloody . The violent social conflict almost rose to the point of insurrection . The proprietors and landowners asked the government to intervene . 
 However , his attitude could not be maintained . Landowners were infuriated by the unwillingness of the government to use force , while the peasants were annoyed by the unwillingness to redistribute land from the latifundia . Landowners matched the strike with a lockout , and many peasants , probably a majority in the strike centres , were left without tenancies when the planting season ended in mid @-@ December . In December 1893 the failure of the Giolitti government to restore public order gave rise to a general demand that Crispi should return to power . Giolitti had to resign on November 24 , 1893 , as a result of the Banca Romana scandal . 
 In addition to the unrest in Sicily , a wave of rioting spread through Italy in August 1893 , triggered by the killing of a number of migrant workers in the salt pans of Aigues Mortes in southern France escalated into a more generalized working @-@ class revolt supported by anarchists and violent riots in Rome and Naples . Italy seemed to be slipping to a revolution . By the time Crispi returned to power in December 1893 , Italy appeared to many to be on the brink of collapse . Crispi promised important measures of land reform for the near future . He was not blind to the misery and the need for social reform . Before 1891 he had been the patron of the Sicilian working @-@ class and many of their associations had been named after him . <unk> , the chief architect of Giolitti ’ s fall by exposing the Banca Romana scandal , was first offered the Ministry of Agriculture , which he refused , then sent to Sicily on a mission of appeasement . 
 Crispi ’ s good intentions got lost in the outcry for strong measures . In the three weeks of uncertainty before the government was formed , the rapid spread of violence drove many local authorities to defy Giolitti ’ s ban on the use of firearms . In December 1893 , 92 peasants lost their lives in clashes with the police and army . Government building were burned as well as flour mills and bakeries that refused to lower their prices when taxes were lowered or abolished . Eleven people were killed on December 10 , 1893 , in <unk> after a rally that asked for the abolition of taxes on food and disbandment of the local field guards ( <unk> <unk> ) . The protestors carried the portrait of the King taken from the municipality and burned tax files . On December 17 , 1893 , many people were wounded when troops fired on a manifestation in <unk> . Another 11 protestors were killed in <unk> <unk> on December 25 . On January 1 , 1894 , 20 people were killed and many wounded in <unk> and <unk> . On January 2 , there two dead in Belmonte <unk> and the next day 18 dead and many wounded in <unk> . Two days after , on January 5 , thirteen dead and many wounded closed the series in Santa Caterina . 
 The disorders were not the product of a revolutionary plot , but Crispi chose to believe otherwise . On the basis of dubious documents and reports , Crispi claimed that there was an organised conspiracy to separate Sicily from Italy ; the leaders of the Fasci conspired with the clerics and were financed by French gold , and war and invasion were looming . 
 = = Crackdown = = 
 On January 3 , 1894 , Crispi declared a state of siege throughout Sicily . Army reservists were recalled and General Roberto Morra di <unk> was dispatched with 40 @,@ 000 troops . The old order was restored through the use of extreme force , including summary executions . The Fasci were outlawed , the army and the polices killed scores of protesters , and hundreds wounded . Thousands of militants , including all the leaders , were put in jail or sent into internal exile . Some 1 @,@ 000 persons were deported to the penal islands without trial . All working @-@ class societies and cooperatives were dissolved and freedom of the press , meeting and association was suspended . A solidarity revolt of anarchists and republicans in the Lunigiana was crushed as well . The government also seized the opportunity to ' revise ' the electoral registers . In Catania 5 @,@ 000 of the 9 @,@ 000 electors were struck off . 
 Exactly in the early days of January a meeting of the Central Committee of the Fasci took place in Palermo to discuss the position of the movement . Two sharply contrasting positions emerged . De Felice Giuffrida , known for his anarchist tendencies , supported the need to take advantage of the situation of unrest to provoke a revolution on the island . However , the majority took an opposite view , arguing the need to proceed peacefully . A revolt was not only inappropriate , but it would be detrimental to the movement . The meeting condemned the violent incidents in various parts of the island , and launched an appeal to stay calm and not to retaliate . In the end De Felice Giuffrida accepted the position of the majority . But the die was cast for the authorities to arrest De Felice , Montalto , Petrina , and others . Garibaldi Bosco , Barbato and Verro were arrested on board the steamship <unk> that was about to leave for Tunis . 
 On February 28 , 1894 Crispi presented the " evidence " for a widespread conspiracy in parliament : the so @-@ called " International Treaty of Bisacquino " , signed by the French Government , the Czar of Russia , Giuseppe De Felice , the anarchists and the Vatican , with the goal to detach Sicily from the rest of the country and put it under a Franco @-@ Russian protectorate . The Radical deputy Felice <unk> ridiculed the conspiracy of Crispi , poking fun at " the famous treaty between the Emperor of Russia , the President of the French Republic , and Mr De Felice " . The so @-@ called " Treaty of Bisacquino " was so named not because it was signed in the Sicilian town , but because it had been invented by the Director of Public Safety of Bisacquino , the Neapolitan <unk> . 
 = = Trial in Palermo = = 
 The trials against the central committee of the Fasci that took place in Palermo , in April and May 1894 , were the final blow to the movement . In spite of an eloquent defence , which turned the Court into a political platform and thrilled every socialist in the country , they were condemned to heavy sentences of imprisonment . On May 30 , 1894 , the leaders of the movement received their sentence : Giuseppe de Felice Giuffrida to 18 years and Rosario Bosco , Nicola Barbato and Bernardino Verro to 12 years in jail . 
 “ In front of you , ” Barbato told the judges , “ we provided the documents and evidence of our innocence . My friends thought it necessary to support their defence legally ; I will not do so . Not because I have no confidence in you , but it is the law that does not concern me . So I do not defend myself . You have to sentence : we are the elements that destroy your sacred institutions . You have to sentence : it is logical , human . I will always pay tribute to your loyalty . But we say to our friends outside : do not ask for pardon , do not ask for amnesty . Socialist civilization should not begin with an act of cowardice . We demand a condemnation , we do not ask for mercy . Martyrs are more useful to the holy cause than any propaganda . <unk> us ! ” 
 The heavy sentence aroused strong reactions in Italy and in the United States . In Palermo a group of students went to the Teatro Bellini and asked the orchestra to perform the hymn of Garibaldi . And the theatre applauded . In March 1896 , after Crispi had to resign due to the humiliating defeat of the Italian army at Battle of <unk> in Ethiopia during First Italo @-@ Ethiopian War , the new government under Prime minister Antonio Di Rudinì recognized the excessive brutality of the repression . Many Fasci members were pardoned and released from jail . Di Rudinì made it clear though that a reorganization of the Fasci would not be tolerated . After their release , De Felice , Barbato and Bosco were met by a large crowd of supporters in Rome , who released the horses form their carriage and dragged them to the hotel , cheering for socialism and denouncing Crispi . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The brutal repression backfired to some extent . The Fasci leaders used the military tribunals to make impassioned and well @-@ reported speeches in their defence . The tribunals were too repressive and revolted the Liberal consciences of many Northern Italians . In an attempt to regain his former ' left wing ' , Crispi introduced a bill in July 1894 to take over large estates and uncultivated land . The idea was to rent out the land on long leases in medium @-@ sized holdings and leaseholders would be given reduced credit and tax concessions . While the bill failed to convince the Radicals and democrats of Crispi 's good intentions , it angered the Sicilian landowners . After the suppression of the Fasci those were now unwilling to make any concessions . Under the leadership of Di <unk> , they battled against the bill . When Crispi fell from power after <unk> in March 1896 , their proponent Di <unk> became Prime Minister and the Sicilian landowners were safe . 
 Nevertheless , the revolt inspired social reforms . In 1898 two measures of social legislation were passed by the minister of the treasury of Di <unk> ’ s cabinet , Luigi <unk> . The industrial workmen ’ s compensation scheme from 1883 was made obligatory with the employer bearing all costs ; and a voluntary fund for contributory disability and old age pensions was created . 
 Many former adherents of the Fasci left Sicily . Life had grown hard and employment difficult to find because of their involvement with the movement . For those in Sicily who wanted to change their life for the better in those days , there were only two alternatives : rebel or emigrate . After the failure of the rebellion many peasants had no choice but to vote with their feet and opted for emigration . Others remained , and a year later , in 1895 , protests against unjust taxes and about the issue of communal land resumed in many towns in Sicily . The disbandment of troop had to be postponed . 
 According to Hobsbawm , the Fasci were a prime example of primitive agrarian movement that became modern by aligning itself with socialism and communism . Many of its leaders continued in the Socialist Party and continued the struggle for land rights and land reform once they were released . Despite the 1894 defeat , permanent movements were set up in some areas of Sicily using modern socialist models of organisation . 
 With the dissolution of the Fasci , the unrest on Sicily did not subside . In January 1898 , peasants demanding work and bread ransacked the town hall in <unk> . In the fall of 1901 , Sicilian peasants – following the example of numerous agrarian strikes that were affecting the whole of Italy – again set off a wave of agrarian unrest , conscious of the fact that in a way they resumed " the march abruptly interrupted in 1894 by the repression of the Fasci . " Just as the Fasci movement , one of the main goals of the 1901 strikes and was a revision of the land leases to undermine the economic power of the <unk> . After the First World War the communist movement In Sicily built on the incipient organisational structures of the Fasci , such as during the <unk> Rosso . The Fasci inspired social struggle in Sicily well into the 1950s . 
 = = The role of women = = 
 The role of women in the Fasci <unk> was substantial , but is regularly overlooked in historical accounts . Women were often at the forefront of demonstrations and strikes , taking the word in meetings and conferences . During municipal elections they made sure that men were going to vote ( women did not have the right to vote at the time ) . They patrolled the taverns to prevent the men from betraying the duty of militancy with bottles of wine . They also took care of many organizational aspects and were particularly active in proselytizing for the movement , decorating the stage of the rallies , preparing ceremonies such as the inauguration opening of the flag of the Fasci , and welcoming the leaders who came to the towns with flowers . 
 Women were among the most ardent . In some municipalities the women organized themselves into women 's sections and in others even in exclusively female Fasci . The strongest and most numerous presence of women was in the Fascio of Piana degli <unk> , where over a thousand of the 3 @,@ 500 members were women in a town of 9 @,@ 000 inhabitants . For the Fasci the women abandoned the Church , but not the religious sentiment , to protest against the priests , who had tried to frighten them and isolate them with the threat of excommunication . In Piana the women organised a boycott of annual religious procession in protest of the priest ’ s opposition to the movement in 1893 . 
 At the congress in Palermo in May 1893 where the union of all the Fasci in Sicily was decided , Maria Cammarata , of the Fascio of Piana , urged the audience to ensure the registration of women . The presence and political sophistication of the female representatives at the congress surprised the editor of the <unk> di Sicilia : " I could not believe it myself . They spoke loudly and clearly , with ease and astonishing courage . " One of the most prominent women was Marietta De Felice Giuffrida , the daughter of Giuseppe de Felice Giuffrida – one of the founders of the movement . Only 14 years old , she accompanied her father throughout Sicily to help him setting up Fasci in the interior . She was " extraordinarily animated by the spirit of socialism , who spoke to the people with a fervour of a missionary , and because of her sex and age , she commanded the fascination of the masses . " 
 The authorities watched the Fasci closely and in a report to the government in Rome noticed that the female Fasci in Piana , Belmonte <unk> and San Giuseppe <unk> should be considered as dangerous . The women had developed " highly successful propaganda activities and revolutionary agendas , through which they exercised considerable influence on the other fasci in the region . " 
 = = Mafia involvement = = 
 Some historians emphasize that the leagues were engaged in class struggle against a coalition of landowners and mafiosi and ignore evidence of strategic alliances between the Fasci and the Mafia . The leagues were not only led by socialists and anarchists ; some were run by local gentry and mafiosi . The Mafia bosses Vito Cascioferro and Nunzio Giaimo led the Fasci in Bisacquino in alliance with Verro . The Mafia was sometimes needed to enforce flying pickets with credible threats of violence and to make the strike costly to landowners by destroying their property . 
 In order to give the strike teeth and to protect himself from harm , Verro became a member of a Mafia group in Corleone , the <unk> ( Little Brothers ) . However , during the great strike of the Fasci in September 1893 , the <unk> mobilized to boycott it , providing the necessary manpower to work on the lands that the peasants refused to cultivate . Since then Verro broke away from the mafiosi , and – according to police reports – became their most bitter enemy . He was killed by the Mafia in 1915 when he was the mayor of Corleone . 
 = = In literature and film = = 
 Luigi Pirandello 's 1913 novel I <unk> e i <unk> ( The Old and the Young ) retraces the history of the failure and repression of the Fasci Siciliani in the period from 1893 @-@ 94 . Although Pirandello was not an active member of this movement , he had close ties of friendship with some of its leading <unk> : Rosario Garibaldi Bosco , Enrico La Loggia , Giuseppe De Felice Giuffrida and Francesco De Luca . 
 The film Il giorno di San Sebastiano ( Saint Sebastian 's Day ) ( 1993 ) , directed by Pasquale <unk> , is based on the Caltavuturo massacre on January 20 , 1893 , when during the celebration of Saint Sebastian , a firing squad killed 15 peasants who claimed their right to state @-@ owned land . It won a Golden Globe and was presented at the Venice film festival . The play , a monologue depicting a peasant woman whose husband was killed in the events at Caltavuturo , was written by Rosario Garibaldi Bosco and first performed on February 2 , 1893 , in Palermo to raise money for the victims . 
 = 3rd Ranger Infantry Company ( United States ) = 
 The 3rd Ranger Infantry Company ( Airborne ) was a Ranger light infantry company of the United States Army active during the Korean War . As a small special forces unit , it specialized in irregular warfare . 
 Four Airborne Ranger Companies were formed in the fall of 1950 . They were trained and graduated on November 15 . By the end of 1950 , the 1st , 2nd , and 4th Companies had deployed early for combat in Korea . The 3rd Ranger Company had been drawn upon heavily to replace training losses of the deploying companies . It received 80 trainees and completed a second cycle of Ranger training at the Ranger Training Center at Fort Benning , Georgia . The company deployed to South Korea in March 1951 and was assigned to the U.S. 3rd Infantry Division for four months , where it was used as a reconnaissance and scouting unit , probing North Korean People 's Volunteer Army positions . The company is known for its " Battle of Bloody Ridge " on 11 April where , on its first mission , it was able to push back the opposing force . The company later supported the 3rd Infantry Division at the Battle of the Imjin River . 
 Later in the summer , the company was used as a stealth " target acquisition " force , infiltrating Chinese positions and spotting concentrations of troops and equipment for artillery attack . The company was deactivated on 1 August 1951 , and was merged with the U.S. 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team alongside all other Ranger units . 
 = = Origins = = 
 With the 25 June 1950 outbreak of the Korean War , the North Korean People 's Army had invaded the Republic of Korea ( ROK ) with 90 @,@ 000 well @-@ trained and equipped troops who had easily overrun the smaller and more poorly equipped Republic of Korea Army . The United States ( U.S. ) and United Nations ( UN ) began an intervention campaign to prevent South Korea from collapsing . The U.S. troops engaged the North Koreans first at the Battle of Osan , being badly defeated on 5 July by the better @-@ trained North Koreans . From then on , the U.S. and UN saw a steady stream of defeats until they had been pushed back to the tip of the peninsula , into a 140 @-@ mile ( 230 km ) -long fortification dubbed Pusan Perimeter by August . At the same time , North Korean agents began to infiltrate behind UN lines and attack military targets and cities . 
 UN units , spread out along the Pusan Perimeter , were having a difficult time repelling these units as they were untrained in combating guerrilla warfare . North Korean special forces units such as the NK 766th Independent Infantry Regiment had defeated ROK troops and used irregular warfare tactics effectively , prompting Army Chief of Staff General J. Lawton Collins to order the creation of an elite force which could " infiltrate through enemy lines and attack command posts , artillery , tank parks , and key communications centers or facilities . " All U.S. Army Ranger units had been disbanded after World War II because they required time @-@ consuming training , specialization , and expensive equipment . 
 With the defeat of the NK 766th Regiment at the Battle of P 'ohang @-@ dong , and the strength of U.S. infantry units in question , U.S. commanders felt recreating Ranger units was essential . In early August , as the Battle of Pusan Perimeter was beginning , the Eighth United States Army , in command of all US forces in Korea , ordered Lieutenant Colonel John H. McGee , the head of its G @-@ 3 Operations miscellaneous division , to create a new experimental Army Ranger unit , the Eighth Army Ranger Company . In the meantime , the Ranger Training Center was established at Fort Benning , Georgia . 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 With the successful development of the Eighth Army Ranger Company as a " test " unit for the United States Army to bring back Army Ranger units , additional Ranger companies were ordered . The companies were small light infantry special forces units which specialized in infiltration and irregular warfare . 
 The new 3rd Army Ranger Infantry Company was formulated based on the Table of Organization and Equipment documents of Ranger units in World War II , all of which had been deactivated . The 3rd Ranger Infantry Company was organized into three platoons . A headquarters element of five men oversaw the platoons . However , due to lack of battalion support for clerical , transportation , supply and mess kitchen support , 3rd company had to acquire the personnel , vehicles , and other equipment needed to support their operations . This resulted in the involvement of considerably more highly trained personnel than the five called for by the <unk> . Each platoon had three squads of ten men each , with a platoon sergeant and assistant platoon sergeant ( a.k.a platoon guide ) . Each squad had two fireteams of five men each and one man in each <unk> carried a M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle . The BAR was the largest weapon in the platoon . The 60mm M2 mortars , the 57mm recoilless rifles , and the M20 Super Bazookas were carried on the company M35 2 ½ ton cargo truck but seldom used . The company was authorized two vehicles ; an M38 Jeep and an M35 2 ½ ton cargo truck . The company was more heavily armed than the Eighth Army Ranger Company but less in strength and fire power than standard infantry companies . Like the other numbered Ranger companies , its organization called for five officers and 107 enlisted men in three platoons . 
 The troops for the Ranger company were to be Airborne qualified , so the Ranger Training Center heavily recruited troops from the 82nd Airborne Division and 11th Airborne Division who had already completed United States Army Airborne School . In spite of this , only one Ranger operation in the conflict ever required an airborne landing . At the first Airborne Ranger graduation in November 1950 , each Ranger was given a black and gold Ranger Tab as a shoulder sleeve insignia . A few days later , each Ranger was issued a blue and white tab and instructed to sew it above the Ranger Tab . The Airborne Ranger Companies then in Korea were deactivated on August 1 , 1951 . They were merged into the 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team to bring them back up to strength with airborne @-@ qualified combat @-@ experienced replacements . The 187th had been moved to Kyushu , Japan ’ s southern island to take on a ( then Top Secret ) mission to save the UN negotiators at Kaesong , North Korea . All of the Ranger officers and top NCO ’ s met in a mess hall at Camp Chickamauga , Beppu , Kyushu , Japan . Some of the senior NCOs had been WWII Rangers . At this meeting , they designed a scroll @-@ type patch similar to the WWII Ranger patches . In the center , was Ranger on top and Airborne underneath . On the left was the company number . On the right was “ Co . ” . At a later date , back in the states , more patches were made with Airborne on top and Ranger underneath . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and training = = = 
 Of a pool of 5 @,@ 000 applicants , the Ranger Training School selected 22 officers and 314 enlisted men for the first three Ranger companies on 2 October , which were entirely white . A fourth , all African @-@ American company was organized several days later . The 3rd Ranger Infantry Company ( Airborne ) was organized on 9 October 1950 , assuming the lineage of A Company of the 3rd Ranger Battalion . It had an initial strength of 135 enlisted men and five officers . The unit was formally activated on 25 October 1950 at Fort Benning . It was placed under command of Captain Jesse Tidwell and Bob Channon , who would be later promoted to Captain and in December , 1950 , to executive officer . 
 The Rangers trained extensively in reconnaissance , long @-@ range patrols , setting up roadblocks , land navigation , camouflage , concealment , and adjusting indirect fire . They undertook frequent live fire exercises , many at night , simulating raids , ambushes and infiltrations . The Rangers trained 60 hours per week and ran 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) each day and frequently held 20 miles ( 32 km ) speed marches , which were considered traditions for Ranger training from World War II . The training for the numbered companies included much of the program used by second lieutenant Ralph Puckett to train the Eighth Army Ranger Company . In spite of a 30 percent dropout rate , most of the men completed the course and graduated 15 November 1950 . 
 While the 1st , 2nd and 4th Ranger Company each embarked for Korea shortly after their training was complete , the 3rd Ranger Company was retained at Fort Benning , to train the next cycle of Rangers along with the 5th , 6th , 7th and 8th Ranger Company . After providing fillers to 1st and 4th companies to cover their training losses , the 3rd had 40 men left . In mid @-@ December , they took an additional 80 men from 7th Company and completed a second cycle of Ranger training . This proved beneficial to the 3rd Company , as it was given cold @-@ weather training alongside the 5th and 8th companies at Fort Carson , Colorado . After the first training cycle was complete ; the Ranger units already in Korea had not received this training and were thus unprepared for the Korean winter . The 3rd Company also received additional training which better prepared it for combat , including tactics of the People 's Volunteer Army , which the other companies had learned in battle and tracer designation of targets during night attacks . They also received 57mm M18 Recoilless Rifles , however , these were kept on the cargo truck due to the necessity to break up a rifle team to man a crew @-@ served weapon , which didn 't happen . The entire company was trained to be their own forward observers for artillery . In March 1951 , the 3rd , 5th , and 8th Companies sailed for Korea , a trip which was fraught with frequent discipline problems as the Rangers continuously got into fights with U.S. Marines on board the troopship while en route . After spending one night in Kobe , Japan , the next morning they sailed for Pusan , South Korea . 
 = = = Bloody Nose Ridge = = = 
 The Rangers arrived in Korea on 24 March . They disembarked from the Army Transport Ship at Pusan . After spending a night or two there , all three companies continued on to Inchon on an LST Landing Ship , Tank , arriving at Inchon on 31 March . There , 3rd Airborne Ranger Company separated from its sister companies and was attached to the US 3rd Infantry Division near the Imjin River , where the division was engaged in an intense battle with Chinese forces , attempting to push them further north . 
 The 3rd Ranger Company entered action on 11 April , part of a tank @-@ infantry task force conducting aggressive reconnaissance in a wide valley near the river . Encountering a village , the 3rd Platoon cleared the village and killed two Chinese stragglers . After the lead elements of the tank company and the 3rd Platoon had taken the <unk> village , the tank company commander wanted to move his company west into the center of the valley before continuing north . Captain and now Executive Officer , Bob Channon was near the rear of the company column . CO , Jess Tidwell , riding with the tank Co , called Channon on the radio and instructed him to come up and take control of the 1st and 2nd Platoons . By the time Channon reached the two platoons , they were crossing over two small hills just north of <unk> . As they crossed over one of the hills , Channon and his radio operator were wounded by Chinese mortar rounds . Channon took the radio from Walker , who was now incapacitated , and joined the two platoons at the bottom of the hill . Channon then called Jess Tidwell for instructions , who responded , “ move out when the tanks move out . ” Two tanks had passed through a gap in the hills and were in front of them . Soon , the two tanks moved out at high speed to join their company in the center of the valley . As the Rangers started to move forward , toward the nose of a ridge from which the fire was coming about 700 @-@ 800 yards ahead , they began taking casualties from machine gun and rifle fire . About 100 yards out from the ridge , they received a heavy mortar barrage , resulting in a number of them being wounded . Channon also received a couple of burp gun rounds to his lower left leg . Shortly after , a couple of light tanks arrived . Pete Hamilton ( 1st <unk> Ldr ) and Channon crawled up on the tanks , bore @-@ sighted the guns on the machine guns and blew them away . About 30 yards out from a Chinese trench at the base of the ridge nose , they received a heavy volley of grenades . Abandoning protocol ( once you start a charge , you are not supposed to hit the ground ) , Channon , knowing that he ’ d have no trouble getting his Rangers up again , had them hit the ground . When they got up , the Rangers took the ridge nose in a bayonet and grenade fight . When their position was secure , Platoon Sergeant Barber reported that they only had eight Rangers capable of continuing on . Pete Hamilton had been too seriously wounded to continue . Channon called Tidwell for instructions and was instructed to join the tanks and the 3rd Platoon in the center of the valley . The 2nd Platoon had been supporting the 1st Platoon with enfilade fire on the hill from their left flank . Channon put the 2nd Platoon in the lead , followed by the remnant of the 1st Platoon . The tanks and the 3rd Platoon had moved up the center of the wide valley and were more than a thousand yards to the northwest . Fortunately , after about 300 yards of sniper fire from higher on the ridge to their right , they were able to gain cover from a 3 @-@ 4 foot field dyke , and then joined the 3rd Platoon in the center of the valley . Channon moved the company up around the tanks on a small hill ahead . The tank company commander then moved the tanks up to the final objective for the day about 300 @-@ 400 yards ahead . Jess <unk> was with him , so Channon brought the company up to that small hill and got it organized . Bob Scully , Channon 's third radio operator for the day , was wounded when a mortar round hit . Jess <unk> had Channon get on a tank with other wounded for the trip back to clearing station . On the way back Channon noticed that there was more than a two thousand yard gap before they saw any fighting elements . So before continuing on , he had a jeep take him to the tank battalion CP . He strongly suggested the gap be closed before dark , which was done and 3rd Company was replaced on line . In addition to those wounded who were able to continue on , four Rangers were killed along with 25 wounded and evacuated in this first engagement . 
 The company then advanced up the valley under sniper and artillery fire until it located and destroyed a Chinese communications and supply center at the end , before returning to 3rd Infantry Division lines . In all , they had killed over 100 Chinese in this fight , and the division commanders considered the mission a success in spite of the high casualty count . In this action , the Rangers adopted a new motto , " Die Bastard , die ! " [ 1 ] They also picked up the nickname “ Cold Steel Third ” , when division commander Major General Seoul , who was observing the action with other senior officers , was heard to say , “ There go my Rangers . They like that cold steel . ” 
 = = = Imjin River missions = = = 
 Despite suffering over 50 percent casualties by this time and with few reinforcements , 3rd Ranger Company remained on the line , and was used as a reconnaissance element for the division . As the 3rd Infantry Division advanced , pressing gains from the Chinese , the company was used to guard a vital bridge over the Hantan River . It then massed with several combat engineers and other division elements to form Task Force Rogers . The task force then probed north searching for Chinese concentrations , but did not encounter any Chinese troops . 
 On 19 April , the Chinese conducted a counteroffensive in the 3rd Infantry Division sector , first striking to the east , followed by a feint that struck near the Rangers ' position . The task force was assigned to rescue a group of five 3rd Division tanks that had been disabled 8 miles ( 13 km ) inside Chinese territory . Advancing , they suppressed a Chinese ambush before the Chinese could attack , and advanced under mortar attack and took the hills surrounding the tanks . They then returned the stranded tanks to UN lines at a cost of two wounded . 
 On 22 April , the Rangers , tanks and engineers conducted another probe of the Chinese positions , to ensure they could not launch a surprise attack on nearby Republic of Korea Army formations . Encountering two Chinese companies dug in at a hill with one route of attack , Tidwell ordered a surprise attack on the hill , which was successful in pushing Chinese forces off the outlying fortifications . 
 It then moved to reinforce the British 29th Infantry Brigade , which was cut off on Hill 235 after ROK troops folded under attack . After two days of intense fighting and foot marching , the Rangers moved to relieve the British troops , despite itself being at only 67 percent strength . Encountering heavy resistance , they were initially unable to break through Chinese formations to relieve the British . 
 Chinese forces counterattacked , destroying a 3rd Infantry Division tank column sent to assist the Rangers and attacking the 3rd Ranger Company from three sides , as they dug into a hill . Though the Rangers eventually were forced to withdraw , the defense of the Rangers , the US 3rd Division and the British 29th Brigade had broken the momentum of the Chinese offensive . 
 = = = Target acquisition unit = = = 
 The 3rd Infantry Division then moved to the offensive , in early May 1951 they were used to scout for Chinese concentrations and then call in artillery to destroy them . These actions have been viewed by historians as one of few instances where Rangers in Korea were effectively employed , used as a stealthy infiltration force for terrain too difficult for conventional units . 
 On 11 May , with Chinese forces slackening their offensive , 3rd Ranger Company was recalled to Kimpo Airfield for parachute proficiency training , above the objections of the 3rd Infantry Division commanders who considered the company invaluable . The company spent several weeks in division reserve , and undertook various missions such as convoy security and guarding command posts , as well as surveillance and visiting patrols behind the front lines . In one of these rearguard actions , the Rangers evacuated a rundown village only to have one member of the unit , Corporal Dave <unk> , captured by three Chinese infiltrators . 
 By 17 June , the company was returned to the front and operated again as a target acquisition unit . Paired with 3rd Infantry Division 's reconnaissance company , an artillery battery and a forward air control party , they became known as " Task Force Ferret . " Positioned 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) ahead of the main division positions , the unit was also placed to warn the rest of the lines should the Chinese attack . By this time , however , the front lines in the battle had begun to largely stabilize , and as both armies fortified stationary positions , the Rangers infiltration abilities became unusable . 
 = = = Final mission and disbandment = = = 
 In July , the division was holding on the " Iron Triangle , " strategically important and defensible ground . In an attempt to strengthen its forces , the 3rd Infantry Division evacuated hills 682 and 717 at the southern base of the triangle , positioning the Rangers to appear as if they were still manned the hills . After eight days of patrols , Tidwell ordered an aggressive patrol to strike Chinese positions . Over three nights , they ambushed four Chinese patrols , causing several casualties and suffering few of their own . 
 On 10 July , the U.S. Army ordered the deactivation of all of its Ranger companies . The Army noted that the Ranger companies were only an exercise directed by The Pentagon which was complete . The 3rd Ranger Company was deactivated on 1 August 1951 in Korea . Like many of the other Ranger units , most of the Ranger veterans were folded into the 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team , where their airborne skills could be used . Still , Operation Tomahawk was the last airborne jump of the war . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 The 3rd Ranger Infantry Company was awarded three campaign streamers and two unit citations for its service in the Korean War . In 1953 , the unit was again designated A Company of the 3rd Battalion , 75th Ranger Regiment , that unit carries on the 3rd Ranger Company 's lineage . 
 = Varagavank = 
 Varagavank ( Armenian : <unk> , " Monastery of Varag " ; Turkish : Yedi Kilise , " Seven Churches " ) was an Armenian monastery on the slopes of Mount Varag ( <unk> Dağı ) , 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) southeast of the city of Van , in eastern Turkey . 
 The monastery was founded in the early 11th century by Senekerim @-@ Hovhannes , the Armenian King of Vaspurakan , on a preexisting religious site . Initially serving as the necropolis of the Artsruni kings , it eventually became the seat of the archbishop of the Armenian Church in Van . The monastery has been described as one of the great monastic centers of the Armenian church by Ara Sarafian and the richest and most celebrated monastery of the Lake Van area by Robert H. Hewsen . 
 During the Armenian Genocide , in April – May 1915 , the Turkish army attacked , burned , and destroyed much of the monastery . Much of it was destroyed in the 1960s , although good sections are barely extant . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 According to tradition , in the late 3rd century St. Rhipsime hid the remnant of the True Cross she wore on her neck at the site of the monastery . In 653 , when the location was discovered , Catholicos Nerses III the Builder built the Church of Surb Nshan ( Holy Seal ) . It is described by Robert H. Hewsen as " a simple hermitage " . Catholicos Nerses also established the Feast of the Holy Cross of Varag ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , celebrated by the Armenian Apostolic Church on the Sunday nearest to September 28 , always two weeks after the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross . 
 Queen <unk> , the daughter of Armenian King Gagik I and spouse of Senekerim @-@ Hovhannes , the future Artsruni King of Vaspurakan , built a church at the site in 981 dedicated to the Holy Wisdom ( Surb <unk> ) . In the late medieval period it was converted into a castle and was known as <unk> ( " <unk> " means " fortress " in Armenian ) . The Church of Surb Hovhannes ( Saint John ) was built to the north in the 10th century . 
 = = = Foundation and medieval period = = = 
 The monastery itself was founded by Senekerim @-@ Hovhannes early in his reign ( 1003 – 24 ) to house a relic of the True Cross that had been kept on the site since Rhipsime . In 1021 , when Vaspurakan fell to Byzantine rule , Senekerim @-@ Hovhannes took the relic to Sebastia , where the following year his son Atom founded the Surb Nshan Monastery . In 1025 , following his death , Senekerim @-@ Hovhannes was buried at Varagavank and the True Cross was returned to the monastery . Fearing an attack by Muslims , Varagavank Father <unk> took the True Cross in 1237 to the Tavush region of northeastern Armenia . There he settled in the <unk> monastery , which was renamed Nor Varagavank ( " New Varagavank " ) . In 1318 the Mongols invaded the region and ransacked the monastery . All the churches were destroyed except St. Hovhannes , which had an iron door and was where the monks hid . Between 1320 and the 1350s the monastery was completely restored . 
 = = = Modern period = = = 
 Persian Shah Tahmasp I ransacked the monastery in 1534 . In 1648 along with other buildings in the region , Varagavank was destroyed by an earthquake . Its restoration began immediately thereafter by monastery father Kirakos who found financial support among the wealthy merchants in Van . According to the 17th @-@ century historian <unk> of Tabriz four churches were restored and renovated . 
 The architect <unk> built a square @-@ planned gavit ( narthex ) west of Church of Surb Astvatsatsin ( Holy Mother of God ) in 1648 . It functioned as a church during the 19th century , called Surb Gevorg . To the west of the narthex was a 17th @-@ century three @-@ arched open @-@ air porch ; to the north was Church of Surb Khach ( Holy Cross ) ; while to the south was the 17th @-@ century Church of Surb Sion . <unk> cuneiform inscriptions were used as lintels on their western entrances . 
 Suleyman , the prince of <unk> Castle , invaded the monastery in 1651 , looting it of its Holy Cross , manuscripts and treasures . The cross was later repurchased and it was added to the <unk> Church of Van in 1655 . The monastery declined in the late 17th century , and in 1679 many of its treasures were sold due to economic difficulties . Archbishop <unk> <unk> renovated the monastery in 1724 . 
 In 1779 father <unk> vardapet decorated the narthex walls with frescoes of King Abgar , Empire Theodosius , Saint Gayane , Saint Rhipsime , Khosrovidukht , and Gabriel . According to Murad Hasratyan , the unknown painter had fused together the styles of Armenian , Persian , and Western European art . 
 = = = = 19th century = = = = 
 A wall was built around the monastery in 1803 , and fourteen years later , the Church of Surb Khach ( Holy Cross ) was completely renovated and converted into a depository of manuscripts by archbishop <unk> . In 1832 <unk> pasha of Van robbed the monastery 's treasures and strangled the father <unk> vardapet <unk> to death . In 1849 Gabriel vardapet <unk> restored the Church of Sion , which had been destroyed by an earthquake , and converted it into a wheat warehouse . 
 Mkrtich Khrimian , the future head of the Armenian Church , became father of Varagavank in 1857 and made the monastery effectively independent and subordinate only to the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople . He founded a printing house and began publishing <unk> <unk> ( " The Eagle of Vaspurakan " ) , the first newspaper in historical Armenia , which was published between 1858 and 1864 . He also established a modern school . The school taught subjects such as theology , music , grammar , geography , Armenian studies and history ; the prominent novelist Raffi was briefly one of the teachers . The school produced its first graduates in 1862 . 
 During the Hamidian massacres of 1896 the monastery was sacked and robbed , while some teachers and students were killed . According to a contemporary report by an American at Van , " Varak , the most famous and historic monastery in all this [ Van ] region , which has weathered the storms of centuries is almost certain to go [ on fire ] . " 
 = = = Sacking and abandonment = = = 
 Early in 1915 — during the early stages of the Armenian Genocide — Turkish government forces laid siege to Van , while the local Armenians organized self @-@ defense in what became the most notable resistance to the Turkish campaign of deportations and massacres . During most of April , the monastery was held by Armenians , but was captured and burnt by the Turks some time in late April and early May . The date of the burning of the monastery is contested . An April 27 , 1915 a message sent to " To Americans , or any Foreign Consul " by missionaries Clarence Ussher and Ernest Yarrow said that " From our window we could plainly see <unk> afire on its mountain @-@ side and Varak Monastery , with its priceless store of ancient manuscripts , going up in smoke . " Missionary Elizabeth Barrows Ussher , Clarence 's wife , wrote in her diary that the monastery was attacked by 200 cavalry and foot soldiers on April 30 , but they were repulsed . She gave May 4 as the day when the monastery was burned . American missionary teacher Grace H. Knapp recounted , however , that " On the 8th May we saw the place in flames , and Varak Monastery near by , with its priceless ancient manuscripts , also went up in smoke . " 
 Van Governor <unk> Bey ordered the Erzerum Battalion , composed of 300 cavalrymen and 1 @,@ 000 militiamen equipped with cannons , to attack Varag on May 8 . The 250 Armenian defenders were overwhelmed , and the monastery 's collections of medieval manuscripts burned and destroyed . 
 = = Current state = = 
 A significant number of the structures surviving the 1915 destruction were destroyed in the 1960s . As of 2006 the monastery 's remains were used a barn . According to historian Ara Sarafian , as of 2012 , " good sections have just barely survived until our days . " Dr. Jenny B. White , a scholar on Turkey , wrote in 2013 that on her visit the remains of the monastery " consisted of nothing more than a few brick vaults used to house goats amid a clutch of tumbledown Kurdish homes . " The best @-@ preserved section of the monastery is the church of Surb Gevorg ( St. George ) , which is now looked after by a caretaker . The dome is partly collapsed and contains some traces of surviving frescoes . The dome of the church of Surb Nshan is entirely gone . 
 In February 2010 , following the renovation of the Holy Cross Cathedral at Akdamar Island in Lake Van , Halil Berk , the Deputy Governor of Van Province , announced that the Governor 's Office sought to restore Varagavank and the <unk> monastery at <unk> Island . In June of that year , the governor also stated that the monastery at <unk> Island and Varagavank would be renovated " in the near future . " In October 2010 <unk> reported that a nearby mosque , built in 1997 , would be demolished to make room for the restoration of Varagavank . 
 The monastery was damaged as a result of the 2011 Van earthquake . According to Ara Sarafian , " parts of the main church collapsed , while other parts were significantly weakened . Old cracks got bigger , new ones appeared . " Turkish engineers reportedly inspected it and announced that they would commence restoration work in the spring of 2012 . Sarafian wrote that " such promises have been made in the past and one needs to be a little skeptical . The current state of the church makes such work much harder than at any time in the past . " He noted in a 2012 article that the local and provincial governments supported the preservation and restoration of the monastery . In October 2012 , the artist Raffi <unk> , who contributed to the restoration of the St. <unk> Church in Diyarbakır , stated that he had hoped to restore Varagavank and added that " Both Ankara and Van agreed to launch the restoration project , but social and natural obstacles delayed the process . " 
 = = = Ownership = = = 
 Taraf reported in September 2012 that the monastery is owned by the Turkish journalist and media executive Fatih <unk> . In an interview <unk> told the newspaper that the monastery belonged to his grandfather and he inherited it from his father . The monastery was confiscated during the Armenian Genocide . A group of Armenians in Turkey , led by the activist Nadya <unk> started a petition asking him to " Apply to the Armenian Patriarchate of Turkey and transfer the title deed of the church to the concerned [ Armenian community ] foundation . " <unk> told <unk> that he is ready to give it to the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople , but no government authority has approached him to respond to his offer to give back the church to its owners , and that they displayed no interest in cooperating . Revolutionary Socialist Workers ' Party ( <unk> ) activists demonstrated in early October 2012 before the Habertürk headquarters in Beyoğlu , Istanbul demanding the return of the monastery land to the Armenians . As of September 2014 there was no progress . 
 = = Architecture and manuscripts = = 
 The monastery was composed of six churches , gavit , narthex ( <unk> ) and other structures . The main church of Varagavank was called Surb Astvatsatsin ( Holy Mother of God ) . It dated to the 11th century and was similar in plan to the prominent Saint Hripsime Church in Vagharshapat . The earliest structure was on the southern part of the ensemble and was known as Surb <unk> ( 10th century ) . Queen <unk> left an inscription ( dated 981 ) on its western wall . 
 In the 10th century Queen <unk> , the wife of Gagik I , presented the monastery the " Gospel of Queen <unk> " ( arm ) , one of the best known Armenian illuminated manuscripts . In the 14th – 16th centuries the monastery became a major center of manuscript production . A number of Varagavank manuscripts are now kept at the Matenadaran in Yerevan . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Raffi mentions the monastery in volume two of the novel Sparkles ( « <unk> » , 1883 – 87 ) . The prominent poet Hovhannes Tumanyan wrote an article about the monastery in 1910 on the fiftieth anniversary of Mkrtich Khrimian becoming father of Varag and the monastery 's subsequent revival as a great center of education and culture . 
 = = European visitors = = 
 Austen Henry Layard ( 1853 ) : " ... the large Armenian convent of Yedi <unk> , or the seven churches , built of substantial stone masonry , and <unk> a spacious courtyard planted with trees . [ ... ] The church , a substantial modern edifice , stand within the courtyard . Its walls are covered with <unk> as primitive in design as in execution . " 
 Henry Fanshawe Tozer ( 1881 ) : " ... the broken Varak Dagh formed a noble object on the further side of the plain . In one of the upper valleys of the last @-@ named mountain lies an important monastery , which is the residence of the archbishop , and has a good school . " 
 H. F. B. Lynch ( 1893 ) : " The monastery of <unk> <unk> , situated on the slopes of that mountain , is the most frequented of the numerous cloisters in the neighbourhood ... " 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = British cavalry during the First World War = 
 The British cavalry were the first British Army units to see action during the First World War . Captain Hornby of the 4th ( Royal Irish ) Dragoon Guards is reputed to have been the first British soldier to kill a German soldier , using his sword , and Drummer Edward Thomas of the same regiment is reputed to have fired the first British shot shortly after 06 : 30 on 22 August 1914 , near the Belgian village of Casteau . The following Battle of Mons was the first engagement fought by British soldiers in Western Europe since the Battle of Waterloo , ninety @-@ nine years earlier . In the first year of the war in France nine cavalry brigades were formed for three British cavalry divisions . Other regiments served in six brigades of the two British Indian Army cavalry divisions that were formed for service on the Western Front . Three regiments also fought in the campaign in Mesopotamia , the only other theatre of the First World War where British cavalry served . 
 The doctrine of the British cavalry had been highly influenced by their experiences in the Second Boer War fifteen years earlier , during which one commander had preferred using irregular units to the professional cavalry regiments . By necessity , cavalry doctrine had changed since then , with emphasis being placed on dismounted firepower and covering fire from the flanks , using machine guns and attached artillery , to support cavalry charges . Cavalrymen dominated the higher command positions within the British Army during the war . The only officers to command the British Expeditionary Force on the Western Front were both cavalrymen , while the original commander of the British Cavalry Division went on to command the Egyptian Expeditionary Force during the Palestine Campaign , and another cavalryman became the Chief of the Imperial General Staff . Altogether on the Western Front , five of the ten officers who commanded the five British armies were provided by the cavalry , while another ten commanded corps , and twenty @-@ seven served as divisional commanders . 
 Among other decorations for their valour , eight cavalrymen were awarded the Victoria Cross , Britain 's highest award for bravery in the face of the enemy . Three of the awards came in the first month of the war . All but one of the thirty @-@ two British regular army cavalry regiments fought in a recognised theatre of war , either on the Western Front or in the Mesopotamia Campaign , during which over 5 @,@ 600 cavalrymen were killed , including several senior officers . 
 = = Background = = 
 The traditional role of cavalry in war is scouting — gathering information about the enemy 's location , strength , and movements — while denying the enemy the same information about one 's own forces . Other tasks include raiding into enemy territory and damaging their infrastructure and economy while avoiding conflict with enemy forces . On the field of battle , cavalry were expected to charge into and break up enemy infantry and cavalry formations . The prestige gained by participating in a cavalry charge was such that additional officers would attempt to join one whenever possible . Notable examples of this include Louis Nolan of the 15th Hussars joining the Charge of the Light Brigade in the Crimean War and Winston Churchill of the 4th Hussars joining the 21st Lancers for their charge during the Battle of Omdurman . 
 The normal peacetime British Army cavalry formation was the brigade , but twice a cavalry division had been formed . The first time was during the Anglo @-@ Egyptian War in 1882 . The second was during the Second Boer War ( 1899 – 1901 ) in South Africa , the last major conflict fought by the British Army before the First World War . During the fighting in South Africa , it was the 7 @,@ 000 @-@ strong colonial mounted contingent , not the 5 @,@ 000 @-@ strong regular cavalry , that led the way in tactical development . They were better trained , better armed , and more efficient , if only because they had been correctly trained to use the right weapons and tactics for the conflict . Since 1880 British cavalrymen had been armed with only carbines and swords , although some carried a lance ; it was not until 1903 that the cavalry were issued rifles , the same ones used by the rest of the army . The regular cavalry regiments were considered so poor in quality that General Sir Redvers Henry Buller , commanding the advance into Northern Natal , left his six cavalry regiments behind at Ladysmith , trusting in the irregular mounted forces to carry out patrols in their stead . 
 Their Boer opponents taught not only the cavalry but the whole army some lessons . In one engagement at Dronfield , 150 Boers held off the British cavalry division , which was then supported by several artillery batteries , and at <unk> seventy @-@ four men held up the entire British Army . So effective were their tactics that they forced the British cavalry , if only for a short time , to leave their swords and lances behind and concentrate on their firepower . This proved to the British Army the value of a full size rifle over a carbine . Soon the cavalry were practising working dismounted and advancing in open order . Their change in tactics was evidenced during the charge at Klip Drift . On their way to relieve the siege of Kimberley , the cavalry used their horses and rifles instead of swords and lances to get behind the defending Boers . The charge was later described as " an ideal cavalry operation , but not a cavalry charge as the term is generally understood . " Nevertheless , it would prove to be the last time that a full British cavalry division conducted a mounted charge . 
 Following the Boer War there were calls for the disbandment of the cavalry by such notable persons as the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Forces Lord Roberts and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle . Between 1900 and 1903 the cavalry 's share of the army budget was cut from six to under 4 @.@ 5 per cent , and recruiting for the cavalry was suspended for a year . Added to this , the Commonwealth Defence Act 1903 proposed a force of nine brigades formed by a militia , with six of the brigades planned to be mounted infantry known as light horse . In the same year , Lord Roberts appointed Robert Baden @-@ Powell of the 5th Dragoon Guards to the position of Inspector General of Cavalry , a surprising choice as Roberts had earlier described him as being " certainly not a General " . Within the year , Baden @-@ Powell was endorsing a change in policy , recommending that instead of countering an enemy charge with a countercharge of their own , the cavalry should dismount and engage them with rifle fire . For cavalry to survive , by necessity British cavalry doctrine had to change , as the emphasis was now on dismounted firepower and cavalry charges that were supported by covering fire from the flanks , by their own machine guns , and the guns of the Royal Horse Artillery ( RHA ) . To support this change in policy , cavalrymen were now required to do two hours rifle or sword practice a day . This made them just as proficient as the infantry with their rifles . In 1908 one regiment , the 14th Hussars , recorded having 354 marksmen , 212 first class shots , thirty @-@ five second class , and only four third class shots . 
 The resulting reforms helped shape the cavalry 's contribution to the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) , which was established with one cavalry division supported by two brigades of horse artillery . All would be trained for the mounted charge but would also be armed with rifles , the only major power to do so . The cavalry regiments were armed with Maxim Machine Guns , although these were replaced by Vickers Machine Guns from 1912 . More than anything else , the issue of entrenching tools that were carried on the troop packhorses demonstrated how much the cavalry 's doctrine had changed since the Boer Wars . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 In 1914 , prior to the start of the First World War , there were just over 15 @,@ 000 cavalrymen serving in thirty @-@ one British Army cavalry regiments . There were three Household Cavalry regiments and twenty @-@ eight line cavalry regiments consisting of seven dragoon guards , three dragoon , twelve hussar , and six lancer regiments . In the British Army the term " cavalry " was only used for regular army units . The other mounted regiments in the army , which were part of the Territorial Force reserve , were the fifty @-@ five yeomanry regiments and three special reserve regiments of horse . Several of the cavalry regiments , amounting to 6 @,@ 000 men , were serving overseas in British India , South Africa , and Egypt . Twelve of the regiments based in Great Britain were assigned to four cavalry brigades , three regiments per brigade , identified as being part of the cavalry division for the BEF . After the declaration of war in August 1914 , the cavalry joined the rest of the BEF in France , together with a fifth independent cavalry brigade , formed from three un @-@ brigaded regiments then based in England . British cavalry brigades were a third larger than French and German brigades , which only had two regiments . To provide a reconnaissance force for the six infantry divisions , two regiments the 15th Hussars and the 19th Hussars were split up with one squadron being assigned to each infantry division . Also in August 1914 , a thirty @-@ second regiment , the Household Cavalry Composite Regiment , was formed from three squadrons that were drawn from each of the Household Cavalry regiments ; its existence proved short @-@ lived as it was disbanded on 11 November 1914 , with its manpower returning to their parent regiments . 
 Early in the war twenty @-@ four reserve cavalry regiments were formed to provide training to recruits for the cavalry and yeomanry regiments . Only four of them saw any combat — the 6th , 8th , 9th , and 10th Reserve Cavalry Regiments — all during the 1916 Easter Rising in Dublin . The 6th Reserve Cavalry Regiment , with thirty @-@ five officers and 851 other ranks , was the largest unit then available to Dublin commander Brigadier General William Lowe of the 7th Dragoon Guards . 
 = = = Commanders = = = 
 The cavalry were well represented among the British Army 's higher ranks , with five of the ten officers who would command the five armies on the Western Front being cavalrymen . The two commanders of the BEF during the First World War , Field Marshals John French and Douglas Haig , came from the 19th Hussars and 7th Hussars respectively . William Robertson , 3rd Dragoon Guards , who rose in rank from private to field marshal , was the Quartermaster General , then Chief of Staff of the BEF before becoming the Chief of the Imperial General Staff in December 1915 . 
 Edmund Allenby , 6th Dragoons , who started the war as the commander of the Cavalry Division , went on to command the Cavalry Corps , then V Corps , the Third Army , and the Egyptian Expeditionary Force . He was replaced as commander of the Third Army by Julian Byng , 10th Hussars , who had previously commanded the Canadian Corps . Hubert Gough of the 16th Lancers , known before the war for his involvement in the Curragh incident mutiny , started the war as a brigade commander , became the commander of the I Corps , then the Fifth Army . He was replaced by William Birdwood , 12th Lancers , who had previously commanded the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps during the Gallipoli Campaign . Charles Briggs , 1st Dragoon Guards , commanded the British Salonika Army . William Peyton , 15th Hussars , commanded the Western Desert Force during the Senussi Campaign . He later transferred to the Western Front , where he was temporarily commander of the Fifth Army before taking over command of the X Corps . 
 Philip <unk> , 19th Hussars , commanded the XX Corps in Allenby 's Egyptian Expeditionary Force . Charles Kavanagh , 10th Hussars , commanded the I Corps and the Cavalry Corps . Hugh Fanshaw , 19th Hussars , commanded the Cavalry Corps and the V Corps . Beauvoir De Lisle , 1st Dragoons , commanded both the XIII and XV Corps . Michael Rimington 6th Dragoons , commanded the Indian Cavalry Corps . Altogether during the First World War , the British cavalry provided ten corps and twenty @-@ seven divisional commanders . 
 = = = Divisions and brigades = = = 
 The original cavalry division consisted of a ninety @-@ six man headquarters , as well as 6 @,@ 872 cavalrymen in four brigades , 1 @,@ 682 artillerymen in four artillery batteries , 191 men in a Royal Engineers field squadron and another 206 men in the engineers signal squadron , twenty @-@ six men in an Army Service Corps headquarters , and four field ambulances with 496 men . This made a total of 9 @,@ 269 men , 9 @,@ 518 horses , 425 wagons , twenty @-@ three cars , 412 bicycles , eighteen motorcycles , twenty @-@ four 13 @-@ pounder guns , and twenty @-@ four Vickers machine guns . It was a large force when mounted , but when asked to serve dismounted , the cavalry division was only the equivalent of two weakened infantry brigades , with less artillery than an infantry division . It did , however , have a higher allocation of artillery compared to foreign cavalry divisions . 
 By September 1914 , the cavalry division was numbered the 1st Cavalry Division . It was joined by the 2nd Cavalry Division , which had been formed on 6 September , and the 3rd Cavalry Division , formed on 29 September . By the end of the year another six British cavalry regiments ( as well as artillery and support elements ) , which had been in India , were now in France serving in two cavalry divisions that were part of the British Indian Army . The 1st Indian Cavalry Division arrived in November and the 2nd Indian Cavalry Division in December . They were renumbered the 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions in December 1916 . Although they were numbered , to prevent confusion with similar numbered British and Indian brigades , the latter were generally known by their names : for example , the Mhow Cavalry Brigade instead of the 5th ( Mhow ) Cavalry Brigade for example . The three British and two Indian cavalry divisions now came under the command of the British Cavalry Corps and the Indian Cavalry Corps . 
 By the end of 1915 , after several occasions when the British had to temporarily dismount regiments and send them into the front lines , an establishment for the Dismounted Cavalry Division was created . The three British cavalry divisions each formed a dismounted cavalry brigade , with the 1st Brigade being raised from the 1st Division , and so on . The cavalry brigades formed a dismounted cavalry battalion , numbered after their parent brigades , so the 9th Cavalry Brigade formed the 9th Dismounted Battalion , for example . The cavalry regiments each formed one dismounted company and a machine gun section for their battalion . However , the Dismounted Cavalry Division , with only three brigades , was smaller than an infantry division , which had four brigades . This disadvantage was felt throughout the formation , with the dismounted cavalry brigade only having three battalions instead of the four in an infantry formation , and the dismounted cavalry battalion only having three , albeit larger , companies as opposed to the four of an infantry battalion . There was one other divisional @-@ sized formation raised in 1916 that contained British cavalry regiments . This was the Imperial Cavalry Division , which served in the campaign in Mesopotamia . This was another British Indian Army division , and like all Indian divisions , it had one British regiment per brigade . 
 By April 1915 the British Army had formed nine cavalry brigades , serving in three cavalry divisions . A cavalry brigade headquarters had seven officers and forty @-@ seven men , which controlled three cavalry regiments , a battery of six 13 @-@ pounder guns provided by the Royal Horse Artillery , and a signals troop from the Royal Engineers . When dismounted , one man in four would be assigned to hold the horses ; therefore a brigade 's rifle fire was only equivalent to an infantry battalion . By now only three British cavalry regiments were not serving on the Western Front , having remained in India on internal security duties . These were the 7th Hussars , 14th Hussars , and the 21st Lancers . When the two hussar regiments left for the Mesopotamia Campaign in 1915 , only one regiment , the 21st Lancers , remained . They did , however , see action on the North West Frontier , winning one of the eight Victoria Crosses awarded to British cavalrymen during the war . 
 In March 1916 the two cavalry corps were disbanded and the five divisions were assigned to the five British armies . A skeleton corps staff was retained to allow for the re @-@ establishment of a new corps if one was required , which did happen the following September . At the same time , Gough was appointed as the Inspector General of Training of Cavalry Divisions . The cavalry divisions went through a period of training , re @-@ organisation , and issuance of new equipment . One of the major changes was the withdrawal of the regiments ' machine guns for their concentration in newly formed brigade machine gun squadrons , each of twelve sections with two machine guns to a section . The division also received a Light Armoured Car Battery equipped with six Rolls Royce Armoured Cars . The training covered topics such as how to cross trench systems using mobile bridging equipment , tactics to employ against an entrenched enemy , blowing up and filling in trenches , and skill at arms , including machine guns and bayonet fighting . 
 = = = The cavalry regiment = = = 
 The 1914 British cavalry regiment was composed of twenty @-@ six officers and 523 other ranks . The commanding officer was a lieutenant colonel , with a major as the second in command ; other officers in the headquarters were an adjutant , quartermaster , signals officer , medical officer , and a veterinary officer . The other ranks included one warrant officer , thirty @-@ seven senior non commissioned officers , twenty @-@ two artificers , six trumpeters , and 457 privates , or twenty @-@ seven officers and 598 other ranks in the regiments based in India . 
 Of these men , forty @-@ eight were part of the regimental headquarters , and twenty @-@ seven , armed with two Vickers Machine Guns , were assigned to the machine gun section . In 1909 the School of Musketry proposed that each regiment should have six machine guns , but this was declined for " financial reasons " . The remaining 474 men were in the regiment 's three squadrons , four troops per squadron . Commanded by a major with a captain as the second in command , a squadron had 158 men , six officers , a squadron sergeant major , a squadron quartermaster sergeant , eight sergeants , two trumpeters , six artificers , and 134 other ranks . Each troop had one officer , two sergeants , one artificer , and thirty other ranks . Regiments in India had four squadrons with 173 men in each squadron . 
 To look after the regiment 's horses , attached to the regimental headquarters , was a veterinary officer , a quartermaster sergeant farrier ( also responsible for killing wounded or sick horses ) , a saddler sergeant , and a saddle @-@ tree maker . Each squadron had two <unk> , one a sergeant , and each troop had a shoeing smith . The regiment had 528 riding horses , seventy @-@ four draught horses , six pack horses , eighteen carts or horse @-@ drawn wagons , and fifteen bicycles . 
 British cavalry were armed with a 1908 pattern sword ; lancers were armed with a 9 @.@ 1 feet ( 2 @.@ 8 m ) lance with a steel head mounted on an ash stave . Cavalrymen were also armed with Lee – Enfield rifles , unlike their French and German counterparts , who were only armed with a shorter range carbine . As the war progressed , the cavalrymen were issued with <unk> helmets , hand grenades , trench mortars , and Hotchkiss light machine guns . The replacement of the Vickers Guns with the Hotchkiss , issued one per troop , greatly increased the firepower of the cavalry regiments . Like the infantry , cavalrymen were dressed in a khaki uniform , with a service dress cap . Instead of infantry webbing , they carried their ammunition in a <unk> . The French cuirassiers , by comparison , would not have looked out of place in the Napoleonic Wars ; they still wore blue and red uniforms with breast and back metal plates and plumed brass @-@ steel helmets . While the Germans had a standard field grey uniform , their uhlans still wore Polish style czapka helmets and tunics with plastron fronts , while the hussars wore frogged jackets and the cuirassiers had steel spiked helmets . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Although the trench warfare on the Western Front was dominated by the artillery and infantry , the cavalry still suffered 5 @,@ 674 dead and 14 @,@ 630 other casualties . For comparison , one infantry regiment — the Northumberland Fusiliers — had 16 @,@ 000 casualties . Unlike the huge losses in the infantry regiments , only ten cavalry regiments suffered over 200 dead . The 3rd Dragoon Guards , with 333 dead , had the most killed , while the 7th Hussars had eighty dead , one less than the 21st Lancers , which had remained in India throughout the war . The dead included one major general , eleven brigadier generals , but only twenty @-@ eight of the 1 @,@ 161 lieutenant colonels killed during the war were from the cavalry , several of those after having assumed command of an infantry battalion . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The British Army tried to learn the lessons of the First World War and incorporate them into its doctrine . In the 1920s and much of the 1930s , the General Staff tried to establish a small , mechanised , professional army ; one result was the Experimental Mechanized Force . There was also a general reduction in the army , which resulted in the cavalry branch being reduced in numbers , with several famous regiments being amalgamated . In the Household Cavalry , the 1st and 2nd Life Guards became the Life Guards . In the line cavalry , sixteen regiments were amalgamated , becoming eight new regiments . The 3rd and 6th Dragoon Guards became the 3rd Carabiniers ( Prince of Wales 's Dragoon Guards ) , and the 5th Dragoon Guards and the 6th Dragoons became the 5th Royal Inniskilling Dragoon Guards . The other amalgamations used their previous regimental numbers as part of their new regimental names . The new regiments were the 4th / 7th Royal Dragoon Guards , the 13th / 18th Royal Hussars , the 14th / 20th King 's Hussars , the 15th / 19th The King 's Royal Hussars , the 16th / 5th The Queen 's Royal Lancers , and finally the 17th / 21st Lancers . 
 Although mechanisation of the British cavalry was well advanced by 1939 , there was still a 1st Cavalry Division that served in the Syria – Lebanon Campaign during the Second World War . Eventually all the cavalry regiments were mechanised and became part of the Household Cavalry and the Royal Armoured Corps . There is still one regiment that retains their horses , the Household Cavalry Mounted Regiment , which together with the Household Cavalry Regiment was formed from the Life Guards and the Blues and Royals , which was itself an amalgamation of the Royal Horse Guards ( Blues ) and the 1st ( Royal ) Dragoons . 
 = = British cavalry regiments , brigades , and divisions = = 
 Other units that served in British cavalry , brigades , divisions and corps during the war 
 = Skeptic 's Toolbox = 
 Held every August since 1992 , the Skeptic 's Toolbox was formed by psychologist and now @-@ retired University of Oregon professor Ray Hyman . The workshop , held over four days , focuses on making people into better critical thinkers by investigating a central theme . The attendees are broken up into groups and given tasks that they must work on together and present in front of the entire group on the last day . The Skeptic 's Toolbox is sponsored by the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry . 
 = = History = = 
 Hyman created the Skeptic 's Toolbox in 1989 to teach people how to be better skeptics . He tells James Underdown that " we were putting out more fires by skeptics than by believers ... they were going overboard " . The first toolbox was in Buffalo , NY with himself , James Alcock and Steve Shaw ( now called Banachek ) . With the exception of one year when the toolbox was held in Boulder , Colorado , the toolbox has been held at the University of Oregon in Eugene . In general , the faculty likes to keep the numbers at about 90 in order to give everyone personalized attention , and allow everyone the chance to participate . At the 1993 Toolbox , " More than a hundred people participated , from 19 states , Canada , and Hong Kong , and their enthusiasm continued to grow with each passing day , ending on the fifth day with what appeared to be a unanimous ' If only we had more time ! ' " . 
 In 1997 Skeptical Inquirer Magazine announced that CFI would begin offering an academic certificate for students in a three @-@ year program . Students needed to complete 30 units in academic work as well as in workshops . The two certificates offered were Humanistic Studies and Science and the Paranormal , attending The Skeptic 's Toolbox would satisfy one of the workshop requirements . 
 = = Methodology and focus = = 
 While critical thinking is the overall focus , lectures designed around the theme focus on the specialties of the faculty . A reporter for the Register @-@ Guard attended the 2003 toolbox and wrote of his experience hearing lectures on post traumatic stress syndrome , graphology , repressed memory court cases , communication with the dead , healing through prayer , traditional Chinese medicine and psychic dogs . All that and Jerry Andrus 's display of optical illusions too . The goal of the Toolbox is to " help skeptics add to their arsenal of tools and techniques with which to both guard against deception and properly evaluate paranormal claims " . Learning how to communicate with believers is also considered important : " Skeptics search for truths , believers tend to want validation of their experiences " . 
 Getting the skeptical message across to believers was a focus at the 1993 event . Faculty felt that non @-@ skeptics might be more receptive if attendees understood how they were perceived by others . " Many people view skeptics as die @-@ hard cynics and <unk> , even as enemies of free speech . <unk> often hear only the " COP " in CSICOP " . 
 In 2010 , interviewed by D. J. <unk> , Hyman explained , " give people the tools to think , help them to become better thinkers " . Mentalist Bob Fellows performed at the second conference and told the audience , " The effect ( of a magic trick ) on audiences who ( believe the trick is real magic ) can be enormously powerful . And when deceit is involved , they can be potentially harmful as well " . Hyman felt that it was necessary to teach attendees with a " case @-@ based approach ... concrete examples as a first step toward extracting broad examples ... ( giving ) the benefit of context " to the learning experience . 
 = = Faculty of the Toolbox = = 
 Loren <unk> - A founding faculty member of the Skeptic 's Toolbox , <unk> explained to Harriet Hall , about the beginnings of the Toolbox , " Ray Hyman , Jerry Andrus and I were meeting together once a month or so and we decided that maybe the three of us could put a Toolbox together . " 
 Barry Beyerstein - " One of the many enjoyable tasks I undertake for CSICOP is to lecture in Ray Hyman 's annual summer workshop at the University of Oregon . Not only is it the towering presence of Ray himself , and the joy of observing the sheer brainpower of my fellow faculty at work , it is also the people , literally from around the world , who enroll in this and other CSICOP functions that keep me from suffering that occupational hazard ' skeptic 's burnout . ' They are a remarkable lot , genuinely nice people committed to critical thinking and leaving the place a bit better than they found it . They make me very pleased that my fate was to become a skeptical inquirer . " 
 Harriet Hall - Prior to attending the Toolbox as a student , Hall had been a " passive skeptic " , " I hadn 't done any writing ... Ray Hyman and Wally Sampson encouraged me to try my hand at writing , one thing led to another and now I 'm on the faculty of the Skeptic 's Toolbox . " 
 Lindsay Beyerstein - She started attending the Skeptic 's Toolbox when she was 14 ; her father Barry Beyerstein strongly influenced her involvement in the skeptical movement . " It 's sorta funny , the skeptics ' movement is now finally old enough , it 's like Scientology , we have second gen ! " She recounts , " I was always involved with my Dad in skeptical meetings ... " We would have family newsletter @-@ stuffing nights ( for the BC Skeptics ) . " instead of hiring babysitters her father would take Lindsay to his media interviews . " Does Satanic music cause suicide ? Out @-@ of @-@ body experiences ... it was always something new and different . " 
 James Alcock - " Ray and I and a magician by the name of Steve Shaw , now known as Banachek did the very first Toolbox in Buffalo ... a little while later Ray asked me if I could come out here to this group . " Ray stated " It took a long while to get Jim out here , but finally we managed it . " 
 = = Other = = 
 Gallery of photos 
 = Marty Mayberry = 
 Marty Mayberry ( born 9 February 1986 ) is a double leg amputee LW3 classified Paralympic alpine skier from Australia . He lost both legs after contracting meningococcal disease when he was sixteen years old . His experiences led him to study medicine , and he attended Griffith University and the University of Sydney where he pursued health science courses . Beyond the classroom , he has written a paper on Meningococcal disease , worked part @-@ time on research about the disease , and talked about his experiences at a conference . While at a music festival , he met his future wife whom he married in June 2010 . 
 Having started out as an able @-@ bodied skier , Mayberry took up the disability sport . He made his national team debut in 2005 , and went on to represent Australia at the 2006 Winter Paralympics the following year , when he did not medal . With the aid of a prosthesis , adjustments were made to his skiing legs , and he competed in several skiing competitions during 2007 , 2008 and 2009 . He was selected for the Australian 2010 Winter Paralympics team at a ceremony in Canberra in November 2009 . Between then and the start of the Games , he participated in a few more competitions , including one where he picked up a gold medal , and participated in a national team training camp . He was selected as Australia 's flag bearer for the opening ceremony . In competition , he earned a silver medal in the men 's downhill standing event , finished 24th in the Super @-@ G , was disqualified from the slalom , and failed to finish in the giant slalom . Following the games , he retired from skiing . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Mayberry was born on 9 February 1986 , and grew up in Byron Bay , New South Wales , where he attended Byron Bay High School . By 2009 , he resided in Queensland , and was living in <unk> , Queensland by 2010 . In June 2010 , he <unk> a woman he met at a music festival . 
 Following a high school ski trip when he was in year 11 , Mayberry contracted meningococcal disease at the age of 16 , and this resulted in double below the knee amputations . He was in a coma for two weeks as a result of the disease , and , when he woke up at [ [ Lismore Base 
 Hospital ] ] , learned his legs had been amputated . One of the things that motivated him to keep going during rehabilitation was the opportunity for sports . 
 Mayberry studied health sciences at Griffith University , and medicine at the University of Sydney . He went into medicine partly because of his illness during high school . He relocated to Sydney with his fiance to do so not long before the start of the 2009 — 2010 ski season . In August 2010 , he was the opening speaker at the Amanda Young Foundation Meningococcal Conference , and in 2010 and 2011 , worked part @-@ time at the Kids Research Institute at the Children 's Hospital at <unk> , where he was in contact with " Robert Booy in his research on the psycho @-@ social impact of meningococcal B on families . " He wrote up his experiences in dealing with meningococcal infection in the Journal of <unk> and Child Health . 
 He lives by Gandhi 's quote " Be the change you want to see in the world " . 
 = = Skiing = = 
 Mayberry is an LW3 classified skier who competes in standing events using a pair of artificial legs . Prior to contracting meningococcal , he was involved with skiing . He was back to competing at it on the disability side by 2004 . When fully kitted out , he looks like an able @-@ bodied skier , and is capable of skiing faster than 110 kilometres per hour ( 68 mph ) . He received support for his skiing from the Australian Institute of Sport , New South Wales Institute of Sport and the Australian Government Sports Training Grants program . 
 Mayberry has won medals at IPC Alpine Skiing World Cup events and the Paralympic Games . He made his Australian national team debut in 2005 at the European Cup Finals , and went on to represent Australia the following year at the 2006 Torino Games where he failed to medal in the four men 's standing events he competed in . He finished 33rd in the downhill , 21st in the Giant Slalom , 19th in the Slalom and did not finish in the Super G. Mayberry attributed his poor performance at the 2006 Games to his prosthetic legs , which " just didn 't feel right during the speed events in Italy . " Following those Games , he worked with prosthetist Peter Farrand to develop new legs that would address the problems in Italy . Continuing to ski following the 2006 Games , he earned a gold medal at a World Cup event in 2007 in Slalom , and earned a bronze medal in slalom event at a 2008 World Cup competition . 
 During Australia 's 2009 — 2010 summer , Mayberry was based in Europe and North America for training . At the 2009 World Championships , he had a pair of sixth places finished in the Super G and downhill events . That year , at a Spanish hosted IPC World Cup , he crashed in the giant slalom event and did not score a time . He was officially named to the Australian 2010 Winter Paralympics team in November 2009 . A ceremony was held in Canberra with Australian Paralympic Committee president Greg Hartung and Minister for Sport Kate Ellis making the announcement . Mayberry was selected to the largest Winter Paralympics team that Australia had ever sent to the Games . 
 In 2010 , he was the only elite skier with his type of disability in his classification . At the second to last World Cup event before the 2010 Games , on a course in Vancouver , Canada , he won a silver medal in the downhill with a time of 1 : 16 @.@ 02 . In Aspen , Colorado , at the last World Cup event before the 2010 Games , he won a gold medal in the downhill event . Prior to the start of the Games , he participated in a national team training camp in Vail , Colorado before the Aspen hosted World Cup . He and the rest of Australia 's para @-@ alpine team arrived in the Paralympic village on 9 March 2010 . 
 As a 24 @-@ year @-@ old , Mayberry competed in five events in the 2010 Paralympic games : downhill , super G , super combined , giant slalom , and slalom . His parents were in Vancouver to watch him compete . Mayberry won a silver medal in the men 's standing downhill event where he tied with another skier , and had a combined time of 1 : 22 @.@ 78 He finished 24th in the Super @-@ G , was disqualified from the slalom event after missing a gate , and did not finish in the Giant Slalom . Following the Games , he returned with the team to Sydney , where he attended a press conference at Sydney International Airport . He won an Australian Institute of Sport Sport Achievement Award in 2010 . By September 2010 , he had retired from elite skiing , one of several 2010 Winter Paralympic skiers to retire following the games . Others who retired at the same time he did included Shannon Dallas and Bart Bunting . 
 = Red Museum = 
 " Red Museum " is the tenth episode of the second season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on December 9 , 1994 . It was written by Chris Carter , directed by Win Phelps , and featured guest appearances by Mark Rolston , Paul Sand , Bob Frazer , and Robert Clothier . The episode helps to explore the series ' overarching mythology . " Red Museum " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 4 , being watched by 9 @.@ 9 million households in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed to negative reviews from critics , with many noting the episode 's complexity as a detractor . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Mulder and Scully travel to Wisconsin after several teens are found wandering in the woods in their underwear with “ He Is One ” scrawled on their backs . However , the duo soon stumble upon a strange cult of vegetarian “ walk @-@ ins . ” 
 Originally , the episode was slated to be a crossover episode with the CBS show Picket Fences . However , the networks nixed the idea before any filming could begin . A facet of the episode , that the adherents of the Red Museum believe that the year 2012 will bring about the dawning of The New Age , is later referenced in the series ' finale " The Truth " , seven seasons later . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Fox Mulder and Dana Scully are called in to investigate a number of kidnappings in Delta Glen , Wisconsin where local teenagers are recovered half @-@ naked and drugged with either the phrase " He is one " or " She is one " written on their backs . Meeting with Sheriff Mazeroski , the agents initially suspect a nearby cult , the Church of the Red Museum , which was founded by vegetarian Richard Odin . Mulder , Scully and Mazeroski attend a ceremony of the Red Museum , causing Mulder to believe that they are walk @-@ ins , people whose souls have been taken over by someone else . One of the kidnap victims claims to have felt an animal spirit enter him . 
 The girlfriend of Mazeroski 's son , Rick , is the latest to be found , and her blood is found to contain an unknown alkaloid substance and high levels of scopolamine , a controlled substance . This appears to link her to Odin , a former doctor . Meanwhile , the agents meet an old man who points to a pair of men injecting growth serum into cattle , which he believes is at the cause of the trouble . That night , local doctor Jerrold Larson is killed in a plane crash . An investigation of the site turns up shipping orders that trace back to the kidnapped teens . One of the men injecting the cows is murdered by the Crew Cut Man . The other , a peeping tom named Gerd Thomas , is revealed to be the kidnapper after the agents find a hidden supply of videotapes in the home of one of the victims . Thomas claims that Larson had been turning the children into " monsters " with the drugs he had been injecting in them , which he claims to be unknown . 
 Meanwhile , Rick is murdered by the Crew Cut Man . Having passed by him on the road , Scully recognizes him as the assassin who killed Deep Throat . Her toxicology results on the victims show what she thinks is the mysterious substance known as " Purity Control " . Mulder theorizes that Larson had been injecting the children with alien DNA , and convinces Mazeroski to round up all of the children who had been receiving treatment from Larson and hide them with the Church of the Red Museum . Mulder tracks the Crew Cut Man down at a beef processing plant that he is about to destroy . While Mulder wants him alive , Mazeroski kills him as revenge for Rick 's murder . 
 Scully reports that the Crew Cut Man had no records on file with the FBI or other agencies . The material injected into the cows and children is found to be an unknown substance . All the children who were inoculated came down with a flu @-@ like illness while those in the Church of the Red Museum did not , causing her to think they were a control group . Scully declares the case open and unsolved . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was originally intended to be a crossover episode with the CBS show Picket Fences , which was set in another town in Wisconsin . David E. Kelley , the series creator of Picket Fences , and Chris Carter , the series creator of The X @-@ Files , were talking in a parking lot and thought it might be interesting to have Mulder and Scully visit Rome , Wisconsin for an X @-@ Files episode . Unlike a traditional crossover , the two shows would be shot with different viewpoints and one would be aired as an X @-@ Files episode and the other as an episode of Picket Fences . Ultimately , CBS decided against the crossover and both episodes created ended up becoming stand @-@ alones . Executive producer Robert Goodwin said of the experience " I spent days on the phone with a producer of Picket Fences . We spent days organizing our schedules . Then at the very last minute , of course , we found out that no one had told CBS , and they said ' Forget it . We 're having enough trouble on Friday nights without publicizing The X @-@ Files . ' It 's too bad . " The Picket Fences episode intended to be part of the crossover was called " Away in the Manger " and aired the week following " Red Museum . " While every reference to Picket Fences has been purged from the X @-@ Files episode , there still are some small winks left in the Picket Fences episode referring to the happenings at the X @-@ Files , including a mention of Dr. Larson . <unk> , British Columbia served as a location for Delta Glen , while the beef processing plant was shot in a facility in Cloverdale , with the local employees being used for the butchering and cleaning up scenes . 
 Producer Glen Morgan was disappointed with the resolution regarding the Crew Cut Man , saying " My feeling is that to bring this guy back , his presence should have been better developed , and he 's shot off screen . I thought ' Geez , this is the guy who killed Deep Throat , who the audience loved , and it 's kind of tossed away . ' The episode just seems like half of one thing for a while , then half of something else . I think that was a curious choice for Chris [ Carter ] . He wanted to take a real left turn , but I 'd rather have seen a whole episode about that guy showing up and Mulder getting back at him . " X @-@ Files writer James Wong also had a negative view of the episode , saying " I think that was one of the most confusing episodes I 've ever seen . It had some really neat ideas in it , but I don 't think it pulled together finally . " 
 The episode is the first in the series to mention the concept of walk @-@ ins , a plot device that would later be used five seasons later , when the truth about Samantha 's abduction was finally revealed to Mulder . It should also be noted that the adherents of the Red Museum believed that the year 2012 will bring about the dawning of The New Age . In the series ' finale , " The Truth , " it is revealed to Mulder by the Cigarette Smoking Man that the alien colonists plan to colonize the earth on December 22nd , 2012 . Despite the developments in the show 's mythological plot arc , this 2012 reference is the first explicit reference to the date of the planned colonization , a date that is only finally confirmed in the series finale — both to Mulder and the audience — seven seasons later . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Red Museum " premiered on the Fox network on December 9 , 1994 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 4 , with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 9 @.@ 9 million households . 
 The episode received mostly mixed to negative reviews from critics . Entertainment Weekly gave " Red Museum " a B , noting that the episode was " creative if convoluted . " Reviewer Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club criticized the way " Red Museum " was written , writing that the episode , " tries the neat trick of combining what appears to be a [ Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week ] ep with mythos ; the results are intriguing , but not entirely successful . " He concluded that the episode was " good " but ultimately " forgettable . " Critical Myth 's John Keegan gave the episode 5 / 10 , criticizing the complexity of the plot . He wrote that " Fairly quickly , The X @-@ Files gained a reputation for episodes that were so convoluted and confusing that few people could make sense of them . This episode stands as one of the shining examples of that trend , and it ’ s only appropriate that the episode was written by Chris Carter . " 
 = Henry Chadwick ( theologian ) = 
 Henry Chadwick , KBE , FBA ( 23 June 1920 – 17 June 2008 ) was a British academic and Church of England priest . A former Dean of Christ Church Cathedral , Oxford – and as such , head of Christ Church , Oxford – he also served as Master of Peterhouse , Cambridge , becoming the first person in four centuries to have headed a college at both universities . 
 A leading historian of the early church , Chadwick was appointed Regius Professor at both the universities of Oxford and Cambridge . He was a noted supporter of improved relations with the Roman Catholic Church , and a leading member of the Anglican – Roman Catholic International Commission ( ARCIC ) . An accomplished musician , having studied music to degree level , he took a leading part in the revision and updating of hymnals widely used within Anglicanism , chairing the board of the publisher , Hymns Ancient & Modern Ltd . , for twenty years . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Born in Bromley , Kent , Henry Chadwick was the son of a barrister ( who died when Chadwick was five ) and a music @-@ loving mother . He had a number of accomplished siblings : Sir John Chadwick served as the British Ambassador to Romania , and the Revd William Owen Chadwick and his other brother also became priests . Despite this , it was one of his sisters he would later describe as " the brightest of us all " . Chadwick was educated at Eton College , where he became a King 's Scholar . Although he did not show much aptitude as a Grecian , his lifelong love of music made its first appearance and resulted in his receiving organ lessons from Henry Ley . 
 After leaving Eton , he went to Magdalene College , Cambridge , on a music scholarship , and was expected to make music his career . A highlight of his undergraduate musical career was playing a two piano arrangement of Chabrier 's España with Boris Ord , then organist of King 's College , Cambridge . However , Chadwick chose to further his interest in Evangelical Christianity , which had existed from his school days . He graduated in 1941 and began his theological training in 1942 , at Ridley Hall , Cambridge , being ordained deacon by the Archbishop of Canterbury , in Canterbury Cathedral , in 1943 and priest by the Bishop of Dover in 1944 . He served a curacy at the Evangelical parish of Emmanuel , Croydon , arriving towards the end of the Second World War , as Croydon was attacked by German V @-@ weapons , which provided a difficult pastoral challenge . From there , he became an assistant master at Wellington College . He married Peggy in 1945 . 
 = = Academic career = = 
 = = = Cambridge = = = 
 Chadwick became a Fellow of Queens ' College , Cambridge , with his appointment as Chaplain in 1946 , and in 1950 advanced to the position of Dean . His rising academic reputation was confirmed in 1953 with the publication of a project had occupied him since the days of his curacy — his new translation of Origen 's Contra <unk> , with introduction and notes . He had by now made himself an expert in Patristic Greek ; only an <unk> in philology marking his earlier abandonment of Greek for music . Also in 1953 he was appointed co @-@ editor ( with Hedley Sparks ) of the Journal of Theological Studies and continued editing it until 1985 . He held the university appointment of <unk> Lecturer from 1954 – 6 . 
 = = = Oxford = = = 
 Chadwick moved to Oxford in 1959 , to take up the position of Regius Professor of Divinity ( and with it the associated canonry at Christ Church Cathedral ) at the relatively young age of 39 . He was named a Fellow of the British Academy ( FBA ) soon after , and in 1962 Gifford Lecturer at the University of St Andrews lecturing on Authority in the Early Church . He gave a second series of lectures in 1963 – 4 , on Authority in Christian Theology . 1963 also saw him appointed to an early Anglican inquiry into the issues surrounding the ordination of women . In the 1960s , along with scholars like E. R. Dodds , Peter Brown , and John Matthews , Chadwick helped make Oxford a centre in the developing study of Late Antiquity . He clarified the classical philosophical roots of Christian thinkers from Justin Martyr and Clement of Alexandria to Augustine of Hippo , and set about raising academic standards within the theology department — in particular making the degree of Doctor of Divinity ( DD ) into a genuine research degree , as opposed to an honorary award made to senior clerics who had produced a volume of sermons . 1967 saw the publication of his most widely read work , The Early Church , published under the Pelican imprint of Penguin Books . He was disappointed that he was allowed to include so few footnotes in the original publication , and correspondingly delighted when the publishers of a German edition requested additional notes for their translation . That same year he was appointed to a Church of England doctrine commission investigating " The place of the Articles in the Anglican tradition and the question of Subscription and Assent to them " , which produced its report in July 1968 ready for that year 's Lambeth Conference . The report ultimately led to changes in the doctrinal affirmations required of Church of England clergy at their ordination or on taking up new appointments . In 1968 he was appointed a vice @-@ president of the British Academy . 
 In 1969 , Chadwick was appointed Dean of Christ Church , uniquely a dual role as a cathedral dean and head of a college . This period was not entirely happy ; a scholarly ability to see all sides of a question , along with an ingrained desire not to upset his colleagues , sometimes made it hard for him to make a quick or firm decision . However , during his time as Dean the college benefited from a continued programme of renovation with internal changes that provided more student accommodation . The position gave Chadwick the chance to influence the musical direction of the cathedral . In The Independent newspaper , obituary writer Andrew Louth notes that at the retirement of Sydney Watson as organist , when he and Chadwick played piano duets together Chadwick 's technique was the equal of Watson 's . The new organist , Simon Preston , had ambitious plans for improving musical standards , and Chadwick was pleased to be able to support these , not least by raising funds for a new organ . 
 Chadwick also found time to contribute to the administration of the wider university , serving on the Hebdomadal Council , as a Delegate of Oxford University Press , as one of the curators of the Bodleian , and as Pro @-@ Vice @-@ Chancellor 1974 – 5 . It was during this period that he began to participate in the discussions of the Anglican – Roman Catholic International Commission ( ARCIC ) ; he was a member of the commission 1969 – 81 and again 1983 – 90 @.@ his early Evangelical sympathies having been tempered over time , helped by his friendship with Edward Yarnold , Master of Campion Hall . He was a master of the Anglican approach of producing statements capable of a range of interpretations to enable common ground to be reached , this worked well for simpler historical differences , but did not always impress the Roman Catholic members of the commission when it came to questions of ecclesiology and church authority . He was also able to use his historical background to put forward summaries of early church positions on a variety of subjects , and he had a true desire to establish consensus on the basis of the principles revealed by this research . Although his scholarly output suffered from the pressures on his time , he was editor of Oxford Early Christian Texts ( from 1970 ) , and was able to work on two major monographs , Priscillian of Avila : the occult and the charismatic in the early Church ( published 1976 ) and Boethius : the consolations of music , logic , theology and philosophy ( published 1981 ) . The second of these in particular allowing him to draw on the full range of his interests . 
 = = = Return to Cambridge = = = 
 In 1979 , Chadwick resigned the deanship , returning to Cambridge to take up the Regius Chair of Divinity . Additionally , he became a <unk> of Cambridge University Press , a Fellow of Magdalene , and was installed as an honorary canon of Ely Cathedral . He gained a reputation as a popular lecturer in Cambridge , and between 1982 and 1983 gave the Sarum Lectures in Oxford , for which his subject was Augustine of Hippo . Edited , these lectures became the basis for his 1986 book , Augustine . He retired from the professorship in 1983 and settled in Oxford . 
 After four years in retirement , he received an unexpected invitation to become Master of Peterhouse in 1987 , thus becoming the first person in over four centuries to lead a college at both Oxford and Cambridge . Chadwick 's second appointment as head of a college proved a happier experience than his first . The college had been experiencing some problems following the admission of the first female students , to which some fellows were implacably opposed , making their displeasure known at High Table . Chadwick insisted on civility , which coupled with the retirement of some of the fellows , ensured an improvement in the atmosphere within the college . This continued after his second retirement ( again to Oxford ) in 1993 . He was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1989 Queen 's Birthday Honours . In 1991 he published a new translation of Augustine 's Confessions , with extensive notes revealing Augustine 's debt to Plotinus . 
 Chadwick also edited Oxford Early Christian Studies ( from 1990 ) . With his brother Owen , he edited The Oxford History of the Christian Church ( 12 vols . , 1981 – 2010 ) . His own volumes in this series were The Church in Ancient Society : from Galilee to Gregory the Great ( 2001 ) and East and West : The Making of a Rift in the Church : From Apostolic Times until the Council of Florence ( 2005 ) . His final work was to have been on Photios I of Constantinople , research for which covered many of his interests , particularly classical learning and Christianity , and ecumenism . Some of his material on the topic was published in East and West . He was also an Editorial Advisor of Dionysius . He died in Oxford on 17 June 2008 . 
 = = Reputation and recognition = = 
 Writing in an obituary for The Guardian , the then Archbishop of Canterbury , Rowan Williams , wrote , " ' The Anglican church , ' it was said , ' may not have a Pope , but it does have Henry Chadwick . ' " and further described him as an " aristocrat among Anglican scholars " . Other obituaries and appreciations describe how he was generous with his time and knowledge , and always ready to point students in the right direction . The Independent credits his capacious memory and a personal library of around 20 @,@ 000 books as the foundation of his broad scholarship . According to The Times , when reviewing others ' writing he was usually generous , though capable of a courteous demolition job when well @-@ deserved . 
 A capable preacher , though doubtful of his ability when preaching to a non @-@ academic congregation , Chadwick was well regarded as a lecturer and companion at High Table . However , a natural shyness could give him a rather remote air . On an American lecture tour , he noticed three young women who came to every lecture , but took no notes . At the end of lectures he asked the women how they had enjoyed them , to be told that they had no real interest in the subject itself , but they loved to hear him speak . The character of the college provost in the A Staircase in Surrey novels of Christ Church colleague J. I. M. Stewart was based on that of Chadwick . 
 Chadwick held honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow , Uppsala , Yale , Leeds , Manchester , Surrey , Chicago , Harvard , Jena and the Augustinian University of Rome . He was made an honorary fellow of Queens ' College , Cambridge , in 1958 , just before he took up his Oxford Chair ; and of Magdalene College , Cambridge , in 1962 . He also treasured a stole given to him by Pope John Paul II in 1982 , and this was placed on his coffin during his funeral at Christ Church on 25 June 2008 . Two <unk> were made in his honour , one for his contributions to the study of church history ( Christian Authority , ed . Gillian Evans , 1988 ) , the other for his ecumenical work ( The Making of Orthodoxy , ed . Rowan Williams , 1989 ) . In addition to his work on ARCIC he was involved in similar conversations with the Eastern Orthodox Churches . In 1974 Ladbrokes had Chadwick at odds of 7 – 1 for appointment as the next Archbishop of Canterbury ; his brother Owen was at 6 – 1 . In 1984 The Times reported that both brothers were reputed to have turned down more than one bishopric . 
 Chadwick 's love of music led him to serve for twenty years as chairman of the council of Hymns Ancient & Modern Ltd . During this time the company expanded its scope . From producing the <unk> Hymns Ancient and Modern ( A & M ) , and The English Hymnal , it also took ownership of Canterbury Press , SCM Press , and the Church Times , leading to jokes that Chadwick was an ecclesiastical Rupert Murdoch . He was heavily involved in the editorial process leading to the supplements to A & M , 100 Hymns for Today , More Hymns for Today , Worship Songs Ancient and Modern , and Hymns Ancient and Modern New Standard , which combined the best of the original book with that from the supplements into a single volume , and also the most recent revision , Common Praise . He had particularly argued for the inclusion of the Spiritual , Steal Away , and this was amongst the music used at his funeral . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Chadwick published over 125 books , monographs , articles etc . Mentioned in obituaries as being particularly notable are : 
 Origen : Contra <unk> ( 1953 ) 
 Early Christian Thought and The Classical Tradition : Studies in Justin , Clement , and Origen ( Oxford , 1966 ) 
 Priscillian of Avila : The Occult and the Charismatic in the Early Church ( 1976 ) 
 Augustine ( Past Masters , Oxford , 1986 ) 
 Saint Augustine : Confessions ( Translation , introduction , notes . Oxford , 1991 ) 
 The Early Church ( The Penguin History of the Church , 1967 revised 1993 ) 
 The Church in Ancient Society : From Galilee to Gregory the Great ( Oxford History of the Christian Church , 2001 ) 
 East and West : the making of a rift in the Church ( History of the Christian Church , 2003 ) 
 = Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European root = 
 The roots of the reconstructed Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European language ( PIE ) are basic parts of words that carry a lexical meaning , so @-@ called morphemes . PIE roots usually have verbal meaning like " eat " or " run " . Roots never occur alone in the language . Complete inflected words like verbs , nouns or adjectives are formed by adding further morphemes to a root . 
 = = Word formation = = 
 Typically , a root plus a suffix forms a stem , and adding an ending forms a word . 
 <formula> 
 For example , * <unk> ' he carries ' can be split into the root * bʰer- ' to carry ' , the suffix * <unk> ' imperfective aspect ' and the ending * <unk> ' present tense , third person singular ' . 
 The suffix is sometimes missing , which has been interpreted as a zero suffix . Words with zero suffix are termed root verbs and root nouns . Beyond this basic structure , there is the nasal infix , a present tense marker , and reduplication , a sort of prefix with a number of grammatical and derivational functions . 
 = = = Finite verbs = = = 
 Verbal suffixes , including the zero suffix , convey grammatical information about tense and aspect , two grammatical categories that are not clearly distinguished . Present and <unk> are universally recognised , while some of the other aspects remain controversial . Two of the four moods , the subjunctive and the optative , are also formed with suffixes , which sometimes results in forms with two consecutive suffixes : * <unk> @-@ e @-@ e @-@ ti > * <unk> ' he would carry ' , with the first * e being the present tense marker , and the second the subjunctive marker . Reduplication can mark the present and the perfect . 
 Verbal endings convey information about grammatical person , number and voice . The imperative mood has its own set of endings . 
 = = = Nouns and adjectives = = = 
 Nouns usually derive from roots or verb stems by <unk> or by other means ( see the morphology of the Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European noun for some examples ) . This can hold even for roots that are often translated as nouns : * ped- , for example , can mean ' to tread ' or ' foot ' , depending on the ablaut grade and ending . Some nouns like * <unk> @-@ o- ' lamb ' or * h ₂ <unk> ' star ' , however , do not derive from verbal roots . In any case , the meaning of a noun is given by its stem , whether this is composed of a root plus a suffix or not . This leaves the ending , which conveys case and number . 
 Adjectives are also derived by <unk> of ( usually verbal ) roots . An example is * <unk> ̥ h ₁ <unk> @-@ s ' begotten , produced ' from the root * <unk> ₁ - ' to beget , to produce ' . The endings are the same as with nouns . 
 = = = <unk> and participles = = = 
 <unk> are verbal nouns and , just like other nouns , are formed with suffixes . It is not clear whether any of the infinitive suffixes reconstructed from the daughter languages ( * <unk> , * <unk> , * <unk> , among others ) was actually used to express an infinitive in PIE . 
 <unk> are verbal adjectives formed with the suffixes * <unk> ( active imperfective and <unk> participle ) , * <unk> ( perfect participle ) and * <unk> ₁ <unk> or * -m ( e ) <unk> ( <unk> participle ) , among others . 
 = = Shape of a root = = 
 In its base form , a PIE root consists of a single vowel , preceded and followed by consonants . Except for a very few cases , the root is fully characterized by its consonants , while the vowel may alternate in accordance with inflection or word derivation . Thus , the root * bʰer- can also appear as * <unk> , with a long vowel as * <unk> or * <unk> , or even <unk> as * <unk> , in different grammatical contexts . This process is called ablaut . 
 In linguistic works , * e is used to stand in for the various ablaut grades that the vowel may appear in . Some reconstructions also include roots with * a as the vowel , but the existence of * a as a distinct vowel is disputed ; see Indo @-@ European ablaut : a @-@ grade . The vowel is flanked on both sides by one or more consonants ; the preceding consonants are the onset , the following ones are the coda . 
 The onset and coda must contain at least one consonant ; a root may not begin or end with the ablaut vowel . Consequently , the simplest roots have an onset and coda consisting of one consonant each . Such simple roots are common ; examples are : * deh ₃ - ' to give ' , * bʰer- ' to carry ' , * <unk> ₁ - ' to put ' , * <unk> ' to run ' , * h ₁ ed- ' to eat ' , * h ₂ <unk> ' sharp ' , * ped- ' to tread ' , * <unk> ' to sit ' , * <unk> ' to clothe ' . Roots can also have a more complex onset and coda , consisting of a consonant cluster ( multiple consonants ) . These include : * <unk> ' to breathe ' , * h ₁ <unk> ' red ' , * h ₂ erh ₃ - ' to plough ' , * h ₃ <unk> ' straight ' , * <unk> ' to bind ' , * <unk> ' to freeze ' , * <unk> ' to flow ' and * <unk> ' to sleep ' , * <unk> ' to moisten ' . The maximum number of consonants seems to be five , as in * <unk> ' to twine ' . 
 Early PIE scholars reconstructed a number of roots beginning or ending with a vowel . The latter type always had a long vowel ( * <unk> ' to put ' , * <unk> ' to grow ' , * <unk> ' to give ' ) , while this restriction did not hold for vowel @-@ initial roots ( * ed- ' to eat ' , * <unk> ' to drive ' , * <unk> ' to smell ' ) . <unk> theory can explain this behaviour by reconstructing a laryngeal following the vowel ( * <unk> ₁ - , * <unk> ₂ - , * deh ₃ - , resulting in a long vowel ) or preceding it ( * h ₁ ed- , * h ₂ <unk> , * h ₃ ed- , resulting in a short vowel ) . These reconstructions obey the mentioned rules . 
 = = = Sonority hierarchy = = = 
 When the onset or coda of a root contains a consonant cluster , the consonants in this cluster must be ordered according to their sonority . The vowel constitutes a sonority peak , and the sonority must progressively rise in the onset and progressively fall in the coda . 
 PIE roots distinguish three main classes of consonants , arranged from high to low sonority : 
 Non @-@ labial sonorants * l , * r , * y , * n , denoted collectively as R. 
 Labial sonorants * w * m , denoted collectively as M. 
 <unk> , denoted collectively as * C. These include three subgroups : 
 Plosives ( voiceless * p * t * <unk> * k * kʷ , voiced * b * d * <unk> * g * <unk> and aspirated * <unk> * <unk> * <unk> * <unk> * <unk> ) , denoted collectively as * P. 
 The sibilant * s . 
 The laryngeals * h ₁ * h ₂ * h ₃ , denoted collectively as H. 
 The following rules apply : 
 A consonant closer to the main vowel must have a higher sonority than the consonant further away . Thus , consonants in the onset must follow the order <unk> , and the reverse RMC in the coda , giving <unk> as the full root shape . Roots with a different order of sonority , like * * <unk> or * * <unk> , are not allowed . 
 Only one member of each sonority class may appear in the onset or coda . Thus , roots like * * <unk> , * * <unk> or * * <unk> are not allowed . 
 Strangely , laryngeals can also occur in the coda before a sonorant , as in * peh ₂ <unk> ' small ' . 
 = = = <unk> clusters = = = 
 The obstruent slot of an onset or coda may consist of multiple obstruents itself . Here , too , only one member of each subgroup of obstruents may appear in the cluster ; a cluster may not contain multiple laryngeals , sibilants or plosives . 
 The rules for the ordering within a cluster of obstruents are somewhat different , and do not fit into the general sonority hierarchy : 
 * s may appear only before a plosive , not after it . Thus , * <unk> ' to observe ' , * <unk> ₂ - ' to stand ' and * <unk> ' to spread ' are valid roots . * * <unk> and * * <unk> are not . Plosives are automatically devoiced when preceded by * s in the onset . 
 A laryngeal may appear before or after any obstruent other than another laryngeal . Examples are * keh ₂ <unk> ' to grab ' , * <unk> ₂ - ' to fly ' . 
 In several roots , an unusual phenomenon called s @-@ mobile occurs , where some descendants include a <unk> * s while other forms lack it . There does not appear to be any particular pattern ; sometimes forms with * s and without it even occur side by side in the same language . 
 = = = Further restrictions = = = 
 PIE abided by the general cross @-@ linguistic constraint against the co @-@ occurrence of two similar consonants in a word root . In particular , no examples are known of roots containing two plain voiced plosives ( * * <unk> ) or two glides ( * * <unk> ) . A few examples of roots with two fricatives , two nasals , or two glides ( * h ₂ eh ₃ - , * <unk> etc . ) can be reconstructed , but they were rare as well . An exception , however , were the voiceless and voiced aspirated plosives , which relatively commonly co @-@ occurred ( e.g. * <unk> ₂ - ' to fly ' , * <unk> ' to burn ' ) . In particular , roots with two voiced <unk> were more than twice as common than could be expected to occur by chance . 
 An additional constraint prohibited roots containing both a voiced aspirated and a voiceless plosive ( * * <unk> ) , unless the latter occurs in a word @-@ initial cluster after an * s ( e.g. * <unk> ' to stiffen ' ) . Taken together with the abundance of * <unk> @-@ type roots , it has been proposed that this distribution results from a limited process of voice assimilation in pre @-@ PIE , where a voiceless stop was assimilated to a voiced aspirate , if another one followed or preceded within a root . 
 = = = Exceptions = = = 
 Some roots cannot be reconstructed with an <unk> * e , an example being * <unk> ' to grow , to become ' . Such roots can be seen as generalized zero grades of forms like * * <unk> , and thus follow the phonotactical rules . 
 Some roots like * <unk> ' to sneeze ' or * <unk> ₂ <unk> ' to duck ' do not appear to follow these rules . This might be due to incomplete understanding of PIE phonotactics or to wrong reconstructions . * <unk> , for example , might not have existed in PIE at all , if the Indo @-@ European words usually traced back to it are <unk> . 
 Thorn clusters are sequences of a dental ( * t * d * <unk> ) plus a velar plosive ( * k * g * <unk> etc . ) . Their role in PIE phonotactics is unknown . Roots like * <unk> ' to perish ' apparently violate the phonotactical rules , but are quite common . 
 = = Lexical meaning = = 
 The meaning of a reconstructed root is conventionally that of a verb ; the terms root and verbal root are almost synonymous in PIE grammar . This is because , apart from a limited number of so @-@ called root nouns , PIE roots overwhelmingly participate in verbal inflection through well @-@ established morphological and phonological mechanisms . Their meanings are not always directly <unk> , due to semantic shifts that led to discrepancies in the meanings of reflexes in the attested daughter languages . Many nouns and adjectives are derived from verbal roots via suffixes and ablaut . 
 Nevertheless , some roots did exist that did not have a primary verbal derivation . Apart from the aforementioned root nouns , the most important of these were the so @-@ called <unk> roots , which had adjectival meaning . Such roots generally formed <unk> adjectives with the suffix * <unk> , thematic adjectives in * <unk> and compounding stems in * <unk> . They included at least * h ₁ <unk> ' red ' , * h ₂ <unk> ' white ' , * <unk> ' deep ' and * <unk> ₂ - ' heavy ' . 
 Verbal roots were inherently imperfective ( <unk> , present ) or perfective ( punctual , <unk> ) . To form a verb from the root 's own aspect , verb endings were attached directly to the root , either with or without a thematic vowel . The " other " aspect , if it was needed , would then be a so @-@ called " characterised " stem , as detailed in Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European verb . The characterised stems are often different in different descendants , which suggests that they did not yet exist in PIE proper . 
 = = Creation of new roots = = 
 Roots were occasionally created anew within PIE or its early descendants . A variety of methods have been observed . 
 = = = Root extensions = = = 
 Root extensions are additions of one or two sounds , often plosives , to the end of a root . These extensions do not seem to change the meaning of a root , and often lead to variant root forms across different descendants . The source and function of these extensions is not known . 
 For * ( s ) <unk> ' to push , hit , thrust ' , we can reconstruct : 
 * ( s ) <unk> > Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) ' <unk> 
 * ( s ) <unk> > English stoke ( Germanic k goes back to PIE * g . ) 
 * ( s ) <unk> > Vedic <unk> ' <unk> 
 = = = <unk> metathesis = = = 
 When the root contains a sonorant , the zero grade is ambiguous as to whether the sonorant should be placed before the ablaut vowel or after it . Speakers occasionally analysed such roots the " wrong " way , and this has led to some roots being created from existing ones by swapping the position of the sonorant . 
 An example of such a pair of roots , both meaning ' to increase , to enlarge ' : 
 * h ₂ <unk> > Gothic <unk> , Ancient Greek <unk> . 
 * h ₂ <unk> > Gothic <unk> , Latin <unk> , Lithuanian <unk> . 
 Another example concerns the root ' sky ' : 
 * <unk> > Ancient Greek Zeus , Latin <unk> , Sanskrit <unk> . 
 * <unk> > Latin <unk> , Old Prussian <unk> , Sanskrit <unk> . 
 = M @-@ 14 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 14 is an east – west state trunkline highway in the southeastern portion of the US state of Michigan . Entirely freeway , it runs for 22 @.@ 250 miles ( 35 @.@ 808 km ) to connect Ann Arbor with Detroit by way of a connection with Interstate 96 ( I @-@ 96 ) . The western terminus is at a partial interchange with I @-@ 94 west of Ann Arbor . From there , the freeway curves around the north side of Ann Arbor and runs concurrently with US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) . East of that section , M @-@ 14 passes through woodlands and fields in Washtenaw County . In Wayne County , the freeway returns to a suburban area of mixed residential neighborhoods and light industrial areas . It crosses two different rivers and a pair of rail lines as it approaches Detroit 's inner suburbs , where it terminates at an interchange between I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 275 . 
 When the state 's highway system was first signed in 1919 , there was a different M @-@ 14 that ran the length of the Lower Peninsula of Michigan . This was later replaced by a pair of different US Highways in the 1920s and 1930s . Another M @-@ 14 was designated that lasted until the 1940s . The current highway dates back to 1956 when it was designated along a series of roads that previously carried US 12 . During the 1960s and 1970s , M @-@ 14 was moved to the freeway alignment it currently uses ; sections of the former route are still maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) as unsigned highways . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The western terminus of M @-@ 14 is west of Ann Arbor , at exit 171 on I @-@ 94 . This is a partial interchange ; only traffic from eastbound I @-@ 94 can access eastbound M @-@ 14 , and traffic from westbound M @-@ 14 must follow westbound I @-@ 94 . From this junction , M @-@ 14 runs northeasterly through suburban <unk> Township . The freeway is bordered by residential subdivisions to the southeast and woodlands to the northwest . M @-@ 14 curves around to the east through an interchange that has ramps that connect Miller and Maple roads ; the ramps connect to Maple Road through a pair of roundabouts . As it approaches the Huron River , the freeway has an interchange with Business US 23 ( Bus . US 23 ) ; the two highways merge and run concurrently to the north over the river . Bus . US 23 / M @-@ 14 then has an <unk> right @-@ in / right @-@ out interchange that uses short connector roads to provide access to Barton Drive on the north side of the river . The freeway then continues north to an interchange with US 23 . The business loop ends there , and M @-@ 14 turns eastward to follow the US 23 freeway around the north side of Ann Arbor . 
 The US 23 / M @-@ 14 freeway runs for about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before US 23 turns southward to run between Ann Arbor and Ypsilanti while M @-@ 14 continues east through Ann Arbor Township past Domino 's Farms , the office complex for Domino 's Pizza that was to be the home to Tom Monaghan 's Leaning Tower of Pizza . East of that complex , M @-@ 14 runs through woodlands and fields north of the community of Dixboro . The freeway turns northeasterly after the interchange with M @-@ 153 . At the Napier Road underpass , M @-@ 14 crosses into Wayne County . 
 Once across the county line , the M @-@ 14 freeway runs through residential subdivisions from the western Detroit suburbs . There is an interchange for Beck Road as M @-@ 14 turns back to the east . The freeway crosses a rail line operated by CSX Transportation The freeway passes Ford Motor Company 's Sheldon Road Plant near the Sheldon Road interchange . There is a crossing for another CSX rail line near the bridges over the River Rouge by the St. Johns Golf Course . The freeway through this area curves around a bit north of its previous course . As M @-@ 14 nears the Livonia city line , it meets an interchange with I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 275 that marks the eastern terminus of M @-@ 14 in Plymouth Township . 
 M @-@ 14 is maintained by MDOT like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 14 were the 86 @,@ 500 vehicles daily east of the Sheldon Road interchange in Plymouth Township ; the lowest counts were the 26 @,@ 641 vehicles per day west of the Miller Road interchange . All of M @-@ 14 has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designations = = = 
 In July 1919 , M @-@ 14 was signed on a north – south route that ran most of the length of the Lower Peninsula , beginning at the Ohio state line south of Hudson to end three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of downtown Cheboygan . It mostly followed the path of present @-@ day US 127 , I @-@ 75 and M @-@ 27 . This edition of M @-@ 14 was truncated in November 1926 when the US Highway System was formed . From the Jackson area north to Lansing , it was US 127 ; from Lansing to Cheboygan , it was US 27 . In 1930 , US 127 was rerouted to replace the remainder of M @-@ 14 when US 223 was created . Right afterwards , M @-@ 14 was designated from Battle Creek to Edmore . This designation of M @-@ 14 was eliminated when M @-@ 66 was rerouted to replace it in the mid @-@ 1940s . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 In 1956 , the portion of US 12 from the west side of Ann Arbor into Detroit was rerouted from surface streets to new stretches of freeways running south of Ann Arbor and Ypsilanti . The former route of US 12 , much of which was known as Plymouth Road , was retained as a trunkline and redesignated M @-@ 14 . In 1964 , a northern bypass connecting US 23 with M @-@ 153 was completed , and M @-@ 14 was rerouted onto the new freeway ; the highway still ran through Ann Arbor along routes now designated Bus . US 23 and Business Loop I @-@ 94 . The following year , the freeway was extended to its present western terminus at I @-@ 94 , and M @-@ 14 is removed from the business routes and transferred to the expressway . 
 In 1977 , when the Jeffries Freeway ( I @-@ 96 ) was completed , M @-@ 14 was shortened to have its eastern terminus at I @-@ 275 exit 28 in Plymouth Township , and the portion of Plymouth Road within the city of Detroit was returned to local control . The portion of Plymouth Road – Ann Arbor Road between I @-@ 275 and the city boundary with Redford Township was retained as an unsigned trunkline , maintained by the state to this day . In 1979 , the final segment of the M @-@ 14 freeway , between M @-@ 153 and I @-@ 275 was completed . The former route of M @-@ 14 in Washtenaw County along Plymouth – Ann Arbor Road was returned to local control . The portion of Ann Arbor Road from the Wayne County line east to I @-@ 275 also became an unsigned state trunkline , also still maintained by MDOT . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = The Ghost Network = 
 " The Ghost Network " is the third episode of the first season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer David H. Goodman and supervising producer J. R. Orci , and was directed by Frederick E. O. Toye . The episode follows the Fringe team 's investigation into a bus that was filled with amber , encasing the people inside . They discover a man named Roy ( Zak Orth ) who predicted it and other similar events , and Walter realizes Roy has connections to a past experiment he did over twenty years ago , called the " Ghost Network " . 
 The episode was important in the show 's evolution , as the writers noted that Roy was the first guest character the audience could get emotionally invested in . " The Ghost Network " also included their quest to explain seemingly impossible and weird phenomenon through a real scientific explanation from Walter 's past research . 
 It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 23 , 2008 . An estimated 9 @.@ 42 million viewers watched the episode on its first broadcast . It received mixed reviews , with many believing the show to be finally finding its legs , while others worried over the ongoing formulaic storylines featured in each episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A man named Roy McComb ( Zak Orth ) confesses to his priest that he sees visions of bad things , including a bus where everyone is going to die . Simultaneously with this scene , a man enters a bus , unleashes a canister emitting gaseous fumes , and steals a backpack before quickly getting off . The Fringe team arrives soon after , only to find the fumes have hardened into an amber @-@ like substance , trapping and killing those inside . Walter ( John Noble ) studies the substance and concludes it started out as a gas and then solidified , suffocating the passengers . While looking at a victim 's video footage , Olivia ( Anna Torv ) discovers a backpack is missing , and traces it back to one of the victims , a Federal employee with undercover connections to a drug cartel . They interview her " handler " , who comes to identify her body . The Fringe team finds out about Roy , and search through his apartment , believing he is behind the bus and other Pattern @-@ related terror attacks . They soon realize all of his drawings are dated before the incidents took place , despite the fact that several of them were never made public . In an interrogation , Roy tells Charlie ( Kirk Acevedo ) he 's been receiving his visions for nine months , roughly when they began seeing Pattern @-@ related attacks . 
 Meanwhile , they trace the substance to Massive Dynamic . Olivia interviews Massive Dynamic executive Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) , who tells her the substance has been seen in an attack before . Walter suspects Roy is psychic and runs tests on him before realizing Roy has some kind of magnetic compound in his blood . This leads Walter to recall he and his old lab partner William Bell had conducted research on creating a " Ghost Network " to secretly communicate messages from one person to another in an otherwise undetectable frequency range . During this research , Roy was one of his past test subjects . Walter further theorizes that someone else has perfected his research , and that Roy is overhearing secret messages from some of the people behind the terrorist attacks . Olivia and Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) arrive at his old house to find equipment needed to tap into Roy 's mind . 
 Using the equipment , they are able to intercept messages in Latin detailing an upcoming exchange at South Station in an hour . They realize the handler removed a small crystalline disk from the Federal agent 's hand when he identified her body , and that he is now going to exchange it for something else . Olivia intercepts the man , who is killed before she can talk to him . She chases another man involved in the exchange , who commits suicide in front of a bus after giving them a briefcase containing the disc . Phillip Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) secretly gives the disc to Nina for analysis , while Roy is sent home , as they believe he will no longer see visions because the Ghost Network has been compromised . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Executive producer Jeff Pinkner decided he wanted fellow executive producer David H. Goodman and supervising producer J. R. Orci to collaborate in writing the episode ; Goodman wrote the first half , while Orci wrote the rest of the episode . The two later worked together on only one other episode , " The Equation " . Frederick E. O. Toye directed the episode , as he had worked previously with the writers on Alias . The writers had the idea for a couple of weeks of Olivia walking into an apartment and discovering walls covered with drawings of events that " no man could possibly have known about " . They wanted to take " urban myths or legends of strange events " and come up with a fringe science equivalent ; this led them to creating the story of Roy , a man with seemingly " psychic " abilities , which they then expanded by offering a real scientific explanation in the form of Walter 's past research . In the show 's early development , the producers were also unsure about how other aspects should be developed , such as Joshua Jackson 's character Peter . For instance , in " The Ghost Network " , they debated whether or not Peter would break into his childhood home before finally " stalling and just let him do it " ; Orci came up with Peter 's explanation to Olivia , that he used to live there so it wasn 't really breaking in . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The character Roy McComb was played by actor Zak Orth . Roy 's name was inspired from Richard Dreyfuss ' character Roy Neary in Close Encounters of the Third Kind . The writers noted in the audio commentary that Roy was the first guest character the audience could get emotionally invested in . They wanted the actor to shave off his head in preparation for the experimentation scene in Walter 's lab , but Orth successfully " begged " them to change their minds . When casting for the part of Grant , the writers looked for a man similar in appearance to previous character John Scott ( Mark Valley ) , as they wanted " to play into whatever Olivia 's feelings about how she was or was not betrayed by John " . Peter Hermann won the part . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Orci came up with the idea to start the episode in a church 's confessional , while the <unk> scene on the bus was originally scripted to take place on a subway ; one of the writers felt the bus " let you see more of the city " . Early in the show 's creation the writers were trying to figure out what Fringe could be , and ultimately chose " big crazy event [ s ] " at the start of each episode that would catapult its plot and drive its characters . They felt the bus scene essentially achieved this . When creating the scene on the bus when the gas canister is released , the crew sat on a bus that was really driving through the streets of New York City ; director Frederick Toye called the shooting " Student film style , run and gun " . To shoot the three scenes of the bus in the tunnel , the crew looked at a variety of locations before choosing a tunnel near the United Nations headquarters on the east side of Manhattan . As it was a busy area , they had to shoot at night and then attempt to make it appear to be daytime , as the scenes were set during the day . They had a limited schedule to shoot all three scenes , and despite never having seen the tunnel before , the production crews had 8 @-@ 9 hours to quickly set up the massive set and leave enough time to shoot the scenes before dawn approached . To simulate being encased in amber , the actors had to pretend they were frozen . 
 The episode marked the first time composer Michael Giacchino worked with assistant Chad Seiter on a Fringe episode . Seiter would continue to score the rest of the season 's first half . Joshua Jackson 's character briefly plays the piano in a scene near the end of the episode , and it is really Jackson playing . The writers noted in the audio commentary that Jackson can actually play the piano , and that when he receives musical scenes , he learns the piece ( s ) beforehand to be able to play it for the scene . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Ghost Network " first aired in the United States on September 23 , 2008 . The episode 's broadcast was watched by an estimated 9 @.@ 42 million viewers in the US . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews . A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded the episode with a B , explaining that while he thought it was " much more fun " than the previous week 's episode and enjoyed Peter 's expanded presence , he was growing slightly wearied by the " hint @-@ dropping " of Peter 's past . Murray thought the climax was " so exciting " that he was willing " to forgive the fact that this is the third week in a row that Walter 's big idea has involved some kind of communication with the unconscious " . Jon Lachonis from UGO Networks compared it negatively to the pilot , as he thought " [ ' The Ghost Network ' ] struggled with the aspects that it really needed to prove itself in " . Lachonis also had problems with the villains ' logic , such as needing to kill a bus full of people to get at one person , rather than confront her alone later , though he understood they " just needed something weird to headline the show " . IGN 's Travis Fickett rated it 7 @.@ 5 / 10 , writing that he thought it was a solid episode because the " characters are coming together nicely , the story is better than last week 's – but already it seems the show is hitting a formula " . Fickett expressed <unk> that Fringe would eventually become too formulaic , much like the first season of Smallville , and concluded his review by calling Fringe " a solid show , but [ not ] exceptional yet " . 
 Critics did however praise John Noble 's consistent performance as Walter Bishop , with Jon Lachonis calling it " still fantastically done " . Writing for Mania.com , Stephen Lackey thought that though the episode wasn 't perfect , Fringe had finally seemed to hit its stride , as its " mix of humor and darker storytelling ... is starting to come together nicely " . Lackey concluded his review by expressing his " excitement " at watching Fringe get better and better , and thought the show could become the best new series of the year if it continued to improve with each episode . Another UGO writer , Alex Zalben , compared " The Ghost Network " to the similarly @-@ plotted The X @-@ Files film The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe . Zalben wrote , " Man , that X @-@ Files movie was just no good . Fringe wins . " 
 = Breathing ( Jason Derulo song ) = 
 " Breathing " is a song recorded by American recording artist Jason Derulo for his second studio album , Future History ( 2011 ) . It was written by Derulo , Jacob Luttrell , Lauren Christy , Julian Bunetta , <unk> <unk> <unk> , Shope Trad and Folksong Thrace , while production of the song was helmed by DJ Frank E. " Breathing " was initially released as one of four promotional singles for the album in September 2011 . It was later released to contemporary hit radio in Australia on October 24 , 2011 , and elsewhere from January 31 , 2012 , as the third single from Future History . Musically , " Breathing " is a Eurodance song that displays influences of electro and house , and features " tribal vocal chorales " in the background . It samples the song " <unk> Pee " , which is sung by the Bulgarian State Television Female Vocal Choir . Lyrical inspiration for the song came from the death of Derulo 's cousin , who died in 2011 . 
 " Breathing " garnered positive reviews by many music critics , most of whom praised the production . The song attained moderate chart success , where it peaked inside the top @-@ ten on the singles charts in Australia , Austria , Bulgaria , Germany , Slovakia and Switzerland . Additionally , it reached the top @-@ thirty in France , the Netherlands , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . The song peaked at number 28 on the US Pop Songs chart . " Breathing " was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , for shipments of 140 @,@ 000 copies . The accompanying music video was directed by Colin Tilley , and features Derulo in an abandoned warehouse , as well as other scenes of him shirtless in a blue tinted room . Derulo performed " Breathing " live at the Belfast City Hall in Northern Ireland , to coincide with the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards . The song has been covered by British recording artist Cher Lloyd . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Breathing " was written by Jason Derulo , Jacob Luttrell , Lauren Christy , Julian Bunetta , <unk> <unk> <unk> , Shope Trad and Folksong Thrace , while production of the song was helmed by DJ Frank E. The track was mixed by Manny Marroquin at Larrabee Sound Studios in North Hollywood , Los Angeles , with assistance by Erik Madrid and Chris Galland . Luttrell and Frank E played keyboards on the song , and the drums and synth programming was handled by Frank E. During an interview with Digital Spy , Derulo revealed that the inspiration for " Breathing " came from the death of his cousin , who died in 2011 . He stated , " That song means a lot to me as it 's serious and heartfelt " . Derulo further explained that " Breathing " was heavily influenced by African chants , eurodance and rock guitar . 
 " Breathing " was released digitally worldwide on September 9 , 2011 , as the third promotional single for Future History . The song later impacted contemporary hit radios in Australia on October 24 , 2011 , as the third official single from the album . In the United States , " Breathing " was sent to contemporary hit radio and rhythmic contemporary radio playlists on January 31 , 2012 . In Germany , it was made available as a CD single on February 24 , 2012 . In the United Kingdom , a CD single and digital EP , which contains the album version , an instrumental version and three remixes of " Breathing " , was released on February 26 , 2012 . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Breathing " is three minutes and fifty @-@ four seconds long . It is a Eurodance song that displays influences of electro and house . " Breathing " is written in the key of B ♭ minor and is set in common time with a tempo of 120 beats per minute . Derulo 's vocal range spans from the note of F4 to the note of F6 . The song features " tribal vocal chorales " in the background , and samples the song " <unk> Pee " , which is sung by the Bulgarian State Television Female Vocal Choir . The song contains lyrical content about winning back a past love . " Breathing " opens with a " slow build @-@ up of synths and a quick club beat " before Derulo sings : " I only miss you when I 'm breathing / I only miss you when my heart is beating / You are the color that I 'm bleeding / I only miss you when I 'm breathing . " Scott Shetler of PopCrush noted that he appears to be screaming the vocals during the chorus line : " I only miss you when I 'm breathing " , writing that " his final note [ is ] stretched out for several seconds " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Breathing " received positive reviews from music critics . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy described the song as " hypnotic " and " an impressive club pumper " . He praised " Breathing " for being a perfect tribute to Derulo 's late cousin . Nicole James of MTV Buzzworthy viewed the song as a " more subtle route " than the album 's previous promotional single " Pick Up the Pieces " . She praised Derulo for knowing " how to make a dance song " and wrote that " Breathing " is the type of song you would add " to your Girls ' Night Out playlist " . Aaron @-@ Spencer Charles of Metro wrote that the song is " an anthem for the clubs " that fans of pop and dance music would love . Pete Rivas of The AU Review praised the song 's hook and likened its catchy production to the album 's other two singles " Don 't Wanna Go Home " and " It Girl " Scott Shetler and other reviewers of PopCrush wrote that " ' Breathing ' is a song we could definitely get down to in a club " . Ben Chalk of MSN Music viewed " Breathing " as one of the standout tracks on Future History . He concluded by writing that in the song , " Derulo 's energy overshadows the kitchen sink production and inane lyrics " . Meena Rupani of DesiHits noted that " Breathing " is " more tribal " than his previous singles . Rupani also noted Derulo 's continuation of past themes , " as he tries to romance the ladies with his cheesy lyrics but also keep the guys dancing in the clubs with the beats " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In Australia , " Breathing " debuted at number 36 on the ARIA Singles Chart on November 14 , 2011 . It peaked at number nine in its fifth week on the chart , becoming Derulo 's sixth top @-@ ten single in that country . " Breathing " also charted on the Australian Urban Singles Chart at number four . It was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 140 @,@ 000 copies . " Breathing " debuted at number 37 on the New Zealand Singles Chart on December 12 , 2011 . It ascended to number 30 in its third week , but descended the chart for the following two weeks . " Breathing " managed to peak at number 28 in its sixth week . In the United States , " Breathing " peaked at number 28 on the Pop Songs chart , but failed to impact the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 " Breathing " achieved commercial success in Europe . It peaked at number one on the Bulgarian Airplay Chart , and number four on the Slovak Airplay Chart . In Austria , " Breathing " debuted at number 43 on February 10 , 2012 , and peaked at number eight in its fifth week on the chart . It peaked at number five on the German Singles Chart , becoming Derulo 's third top @-@ ten single in that country . The song was certified gold by The Federal Association of Music Industry ( BVMI ) , denoting shipments of 150 @,@ 000 copies . In Switzerland , " Breathing " debuted at number 33 on March 11 , 2012 . It descended to number 50 in its second week on the chart , but managed to peak at number seven in its seventh week . The song was certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , denoting sales of 15 @,@ 000 copies . " Breathing " peaked at number 19 on the Irish Singles Chart and spent a total of 10 weeks in the chart . In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number 101 on January 28 , 2012 , and ascended to number 49 the following week . It managed to peak at number 25 in its seventh week on the chart . " Breathing " also charted on the UK R & B Singles Chart at number nine . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Breathing " was directed by Colin Tilley and premiered exclusively on <unk> on November 3 , 2011 . The video begins with Derulo on the balcony of a building at night , as well as scenes of him sitting in an old chair surrounded by cobwebs inside an industrial warehouse . There are then scenes which feature Derulo standing shirtless in a dark , blue @-@ tinted room , digitally showing the insides of his body to show the intensity of his emotion . After the first chorus , Derulo then rises out of the chair and begins to dance . During the bridge , Derulo is shown kissing his former love interest , before several female backup dancers join him to perform choreography in the final chorus . Aaron @-@ Spencer Charles of Metro noted that the video had " some impressive footwork and a great ' straight jacket ' dance move with the choreographed piece with female dancers . " A reviewer for 4Music also praised Derulo 's dance routines in the video . Contessa Gayles of AOL Music described the video as " creepy " and compared it to Rihanna 's " Disturbia " ( 2008 ) video . 
 = = = Live performances and cover versions = = = 
 On November 6 , 2011 , Derulo performed " Breathing " at the Belfast City Hall in Northern Ireland , to coincide with the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards . The song was part of a set list , which also included " Whatcha Say " , " In My Head " , " Don 't Wanna Go Home " and " It Girl " . Holly Thomas of the Daily Mail praised his set , writing that " Jason Derulo gave a steamy performance " . In 2012 , British recording artist Cher Lloyd performed a cover of " Breathing " as part of the set list for her Sticks and Stones Tour . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes for Future History . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = = Promotional single = = = 
 = = = Single release = = = 
 = Scottish art in the eighteenth century = 
 Scottish art in the eighteenth century is the body of visual art made in Scotland , by Scots , or about Scottish subjects , in the eighteenth century . This period saw development of professionalisation , with art academies were established in Edinburgh and Glasgow . Art was increasingly influenced by Neoclassicism , the Enlightenment and towards the end of the century by Romanticism , with Italy becoming a major centre of Scottish art . 
 The origins of the tradition of Scottish landscape painting are in the capriccios of Italian and Dutch landscapes undertaken by James Norie and his sons . These were further developed by Jacob More , who added a romantic sensibility to the Scottish landscape . Alexander Nasmyth helped found the Scottish landscape tradition and was highly influential as a teacher in Edinburgh on the subsequent generation of artists . John Knox linked it with the Romantic works of Walter Scott and was one of the first artists to take an interest in the urban landscape of Glasgow . Aberdeen @-@ born John Alexander and William Mossman were the leading portrait artists of the first half of the century . Allan Ramsay emerged as the leading portrait painter of the mid @-@ century and to the royal family , noted for his intimate representations . Towards the end of the century Henry Raeburn emerged as the leading portraitist and one of the first artists to spend the majority of their career in Scotland , extending his range to leading figures of the Enlightenment and most famous for his depiction of the Skating Minister . 
 Neoclassicism was pioneered by Gavin Hamilton and his proteges , the brothers John and Alexander Runciman , and David Allan . Alexander Runciman pioneered historical painting and Alan helped develop genre art , both of which would be taken up by Scottish artists in the next century . After the Acts of Union in 1707 there was very little patronage for large and expensive works of art in Scotland . With the growth of civic development there was an increasing demand for public statuary and the portrait bust also became popular . Commissions of new statuary tended to be made in relatively cheap lead and even more economical painted or gilded plaster . From the late eighteenth century there are a handful of examples of work from Scottish artists . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Professionalisation = = = 
 Many Scottish painters of the early part of the eighteenth century remained largely artisans . Roderick Chalmers ' ( fl . 1709 – 30 ) painting The Edinburgh Trades ( 1720 ) shows the artist himself , perhaps ironically , among the glaziers , wrights and masons of the burgh . Thomas Warrender ( fl . 1673 – 1713 ) produced the Allegorical Still Life ( after 1708 ) , of a letter board that seems to be a commentary on the union of 1707 , but he made his living as a house decorator , working closely with architects , including William Adam . He may have trained James Norie ( 1684 – 1757 ) , who with his sons James ( 1711 – 36 ) and Robert ( d . 1766 ) , painted the houses of the peerage with Scottish landscapes that were pastiches of Italian and Dutch landscapes . They tutored many artists and have been credited with the inception of the tradition of Scottish landscape painting that would come to fruition from the late eighteenth century . The painters Allan Ramsay ( 1713 – 84 ) , Gavin Hamilton ( 1723 – 98 ) , the brothers John ( 1744 – 68 / 9 ) and Alexander Runciman ( 1736 – 85 ) , Jacob More ( 1740 – 93 ) and David Allan ( 1744 – 96 ) , mostly began in the tradition of the Nories , but were artists of European significance , spending considerable portions of their careers outside Scotland . Henry Raeburn ( 1756 – 1823 ) was the most significant artist of the period to pursue his entire career in Scotland , born in Edinburgh and returning there after a trip to Italy in 1786 . 
 In 1729 there was an attempt to found a school of painting in Edinburgh as the Academy of St. Luke , named after the Renaissance Accademia di San Luca in Rome . Its sponsors were the elder Norie , the poet Allan Ramsay and William Adam . Its president was George Marshall , a painter of still lives and portraits , and its treasurer was the engraver Richard Cooper . Other members included Cooper 's student Robert Strange , the two younger Nories , the portrait painters John Alexander ( c . 1690 @-@ c . 1733 ) and Allan Ramsay , son of the poet ( 1713 – 84 ) . The success of the group was limited by its associations with Jacobitism , with Strange printing bank notes for the rebels . The Foulis Academy was founded in Glasgow in 1754 by the printmaking brothers Robert and Andrew Foulis , and in Edinburgh the Board of Trustees for Fisheries , Manufactures and Improvements in Scotland established the Trustees Drawing Academy in 1760 , indicating that art was now part of civic life and not just aristocratic patronage . 
 The growing importance of art can be seen in the post of Royal Painter and Limner , created in 1702 for George Ogilvie . The duties included " drawing pictures of our [ Monarch 's ] person or of our successors or others of our royal family for the <unk> of our houses and palaces " . However , from 1723 to 1823 the office was a sinecure held by members of the Abercrombie family , not necessarily connected with artistic ability . 
 = = = Intellectual trends = = = 
 All the major painters of the period were to varying degrees influenced by forms of Neoclassicism , which revived Greek and Roman form of artistic expression . Italy became an important point of reference for Scottish artists , with over fifty artists and architects known to have travelled there in the period 1730 – 80 as part of a Grand Tour , to paint , sample the art and learn from Italian masters . With so many artists visiting or resident , Rome became almost a " Third Academy ) " for Scots . In the second half of the century Scots became the major figures in the trade in antique sculpture , particularly Gavin Hamilton , Colin Morison ( 1732 – 1801 ) and James <unk> ( 1734 – 1817 ) , making them the arbiters of British taste in this area . However , the only major Scottish collection of marble before the nineteenth century was that of James Johnstone , 2nd Marquess of Annandale . 
 Scottish artists in the later eighteenth century were strongly influenced by the Enlightenment , which stressed rationalism and human inquiry , of which Scotland was a major centre of influence . Artists like Alan Ramsey formed The Select Society , with philosophers David Hume and Adam Smith and produced his Dialogue on Taste , which made a major contribution to the study of aesthetics . Scotland also played a major part in the origins of the Romantic movement through the publication of James Macpherson 's Ossian cycle , which was proclaimed as a Celtic equivalent of the Classical epics . Fingal , written in 1762 , was speedily translated into many European languages , and its deep appreciation of natural beauty and the melancholy tenderness of its treatment of the ancient legend did more than any single work to bring about the Romantic movement in European , and especially in German literature , influencing Herder and Goethe . 
 = = Forms = = 
 = = = Landscape = = = 
 The origins of the Scottish landscape painting tradition are in the Nories ' capriccios or pastiches of Italian and Dutch landscapes . Jacob More , having trained with the Nories , moved to Italy in 1773 and is chiefly known as a landscape painter . This period saw a shift in attitudes to the Highlands and mountain landscapes in general , from viewing them as hostile , empty regions occupied by backwards and marginal people , to interpreting them as aesthetically pleasing exemplars of nature , occupied by rugged primitives , which were now depicted in a dramatic fashion . Produced before his departure to Italy , More 's series of four " Falls of Clyde " ( 1771 – 73 ) paintings have been described by art historian Duncan Macmillan as treating the waterfalls as " a kind of natural national monument " and has been seen as an early work in developing a romantic sensibility to the Scottish landscape . 
 Alexander Nasmyth visited Italy and worked in London , but returned to his native Edinburgh for most of his career . He produced work in a large range of forms , including his portrait of Romantic poet Robert Burns , which depicts him against a dramatic Scottish background , but he is chiefly remembered for his landscapes and is described in the Oxford Dictionary of Art as " the founder of the Scottish landscape tradition " . He was also a highly influential teacher at the Trustees Drawing Academy in Edinburgh . The work of John Knox ( 1778 – 1845 ) continued the theme of landscape , directly linking it with the Romantic works of Walter Scott . He was also among the first artists to take a major interest in depicting the urban landscape of Glasgow . Alexander Runciman was probably the first artist to paint Scottish landscapes in watercolours in the more romantic style that was emerging towards the end of the century . 
 = = = Portraiture = = = 
 Aberdeen @-@ born John Alexander and William Mossman were the leading portrait artists of the first half of the century . John Alexander was born in Aberdeen and was a great grandson of portrait painter George Jamesone . He studied in London and Rome , returning to Scotland about 1720 . His younger contemporary William Mossman ( 1700 – 71 ) was also from Aberdeen and studied in Rome . Both worked predominately in the north @-@ east around their home city , but also painted many of the figures of early @-@ Enlightenment Edinburgh . Alexander 's best known work included the portrait of George Drummond the Lord Provost of Edinburgh ( 1756 ) , who had been responsible for the creation of the New Town in Edinburgh and the Royal Infirmary , which is shown in the background of the painting . Mosman 's work included his portrait of John Campbell of the Bank ( 1749 ) , who was chief cashier of the Royal Bank of Scotland and a Whig , but who is depicted in the recently forbidden Highland Dress . Because of his Jacobite sympathies Alexander was forced to leave for the continent after the rebellion of 1745 , and in Rome he made a living painting the Jacobite expatriates who congregated there , before his return a few years later . 
 Allan Ramsay studied in Sweden , London and Italy before basing himself in Edinburgh , where he established himself as a leading portrait painter to the Scottish nobility and he undertook portraits of many of the major figures of the Scottish Enlightenment , including his friend the philosopher David Hume and the visiting Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau . After a second visit to Italy he moved to London in 1757 and from 1761 he was Principal Painter in Ordinary to George III . He now focused on royal portraits , often presented by the king to ambassadors and colonial governors . His work has been seen as anticipating the grand manner of Joshua Reynolds , but many of his early portraits , particularly of women , are less formal and more intimate studies . 
 The leading portrait painter of the second half of the century was Henry Raeburn ( 1756 – 1823 ) . He was the first significant artist to pursue his entire career in Scotland . Born in Edinburgh and returning there after a trip to Italy in 1786 , he is most famous for his intimate portraits of leading figures in Scottish life , going beyond the aristocracy to lawyers , doctors , professors , writers and ministers , adding elements of Romanticism to the Grand Manner tradition of Joshua Reynolds . The most famous painting attributed to him is The Reverend Robert Walker Skating on Duddingston Loch , known as The Skating Minister . He became a knight in 1822 and the King 's painter and limner in 1823 , marking a return to the post being associated with the production of art . 
 = = = <unk> and genre painting = = = 
 Gavin Hamilton spent almost his entire career in Italy and emerged as a pioneering neoclassical painter of historical and mythical themes , including his depictions of scenes from Homer 's Iliad , as well as having been an informal tutor to British artists , early archaeologist and antiquarian . Many of his works can be seen as Enlightenment speculations about the origins of society and politics , including the Death of Lucretia ( 1768 ) , an event thought to be critical to the birth of the Roman Republic . His classicism would be a major influence on French artist Jacques @-@ Louis David ( 1748 – 1825 ) . 
 John and Alexander Runciman both gained reputations as painters of mythological and historical themes . They travelled to Italy , where they worked with Hamilton . John died in 1768 / 9 and Alexander returned home . His most widely known work , distributed in etchings , was mythological . His version of The Origin of Painting ( 1773 ) , depicting Pliny 's story of a young Corinthian woman outlining a shadow on the wall , has her hand guided by Cupid , suggesting the ultimate motivation for art was love . The same theme was painted by another of Hamilton 's proteges , David Allan , two years later . In the late eighteenth century Ossian became a common subject for Scottish artists , and works were undertaken by Alexander Runciman and David Allan among others . 
 Alexander also produced one of the earliest examples of a Scottish historical painting , showing the escape of Mary , Queen of Scots from Loch Leven Castle , which would become a major form in the nineteenth century . Allan returned to Edinburgh in 1780 , became director and master of the Academy of Arts in 1786 . Here he produced his most famous work , with illustrations of themes from Scottish life , earning him the title of " the Scottish Hogarth " . These included Highland Wedding , Blair Athol ( 1780 ) and illustrations for the elder Allan Ramsey 's Gentle Shepherd ( 1788 ) . These themes would be taken up by David Wilkie ( 1785 – 1841 ) , often noted as the founder of the British tradition of genre painting . 
 = = = Sculpture = = = 
 After the Acts of Union in 1707 the royal family spent very little time in , or money on , Scottish palaces and many Scottish nobles followed the royal court to England , tending to invest in sculpture for their residences in London , rather than their estates in Scotland . With the growth of civic development there was an increasing demand for public statuary , often with the patronage of a public institution , such as the lead figure of George II at the newly founded Royal Infirmary , Edinburgh in 1753 or the figure of the judge Duncan Forbes for the Outer Parliament House in 1752 . The portrait bust , designed for interior display , also became popular . By the middle of the century statuary were preferred to painted portraits among the aristocracy . 
 As in England , commissions of new statuary tended to be made in relatively cheap lead and even more economical painted or gilded plaster . The plasterwork of John Cheere 's yard in London was particularly in demand . Also important was the work from the yard of John Bacon ( 1740 – 99 ) who produced a monument for Robert Dundas ( d . 1787 ) at Borthwick Church and one for Mrs Allardyce ( d . 1787 ) at West Church , Aberdeen . Bacon was also a partner in Mrs Eleanor Coade 's Artificial Stone Manufactory at Lambeth in London . This produced a buff coloured ceramic that could be moulded to provide fine detail , and be fired in sections , but was impervious to frost and fire . Much cheaper than carved stone , Coade stone was used for sphinxes , balustrading , capitals , coat of arms , tablets , ornamental vases , church monuments and fonts . It was used extensively by the Adam brothers , particularly in the houses they built in Scotland , such as Cullen , Banff , Culzean Castle , Ayrshire , Dunbar Castle , East Lothian , Register House , Edinburgh , Gosford House , East Lothian and Wedderburn , Berwickshire . As well as supplying sculpture , candelabra and <unk> , the Adam family supplied designs to the Carron Company , founded in 1759 , which produced a wide range of iron products , including stoves , safes , vases and tablets . 
 From the late eighteenth century there are a handful of examples of work from Scottish artists . These included statues of druids on the portico of Penicuik House carved by one " Willie Jeans " in 1776 ; the marble bust of James Gillespie by the obscure Robert Burn ( fl . 1790 – 1816 ) and the bronze figure in Roman armour at the City Chambers , Edinburgh , which may represent Charles Edward Stuart or Louis XV . James Tassie ( 1735 – 99 ) was born in Glasgow and trained as a stonemason . He attended the Foulis Academy , before moving to Dublin and then London . He developed a formula for making casts in vitreous paste and manufactured casts of antique carved gems . He also produced portrait medallions and among his sitters were many leading figures in Scottish intellectual life , such as Adam Smith , David Hume and Henry Raeburn . His medallions were popular when produced in Wedgwood jasper and were used by the Carron Company to be cast in iron . 
 = Clathrus ruber = 
 Clathrus ruber is a species of fungus in the stinkhorn family , and the type species of the genus Clathrus . It is commonly known as the latticed stinkhorn , the basket stinkhorn , or the red cage , alluding to the striking fruit bodies that are shaped somewhat like a round or oval hollow sphere with interlaced or latticed branches . The fungus is saprobic , feeding off decaying woody plant material , and is usually found alone or in groups in leaf litter on garden soil , grassy places , or on woodchip garden <unk> . Although considered primarily a European species , C. ruber has been introduced to other areas , and now has a wide distribution that includes northern Africa , Asia , Australia , and North and South America . The species was illustrated in the scientific literature during the 16th century , but was not officially described until 1729 . 
 The fruit body initially appears like a whitish " egg " attached to the ground at the base by cords called rhizomorphs . The egg has a delicate , leathery outer membrane enclosing the compressed lattice that surrounds a layer of olive @-@ green spore @-@ bearing slime called the gleba , which contains high levels of calcium that help protect the fruit body during development . As the egg ruptures and the fruit body expands , the gleba is carried upward on the inner surfaces of the spongy lattice , and the egg membrane remains as a volva around the base of the structure . The fruit body can reach heights of up to 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) . The color of the fruit body , which can range from pink to orange to red , results primarily from the carotenoid pigments lycopene and beta @-@ carotene . The gleba has a fetid odor , somewhat like rotting meat , which attracts flies and other insects to help disperse its spores . Although the edibility of the fungus is not known with certainty , its odor would deter most from consuming it . C. ruber was not regarded highly in tales in southern European folklore , which suggested that those who handled the mushroom risked contracting various ailments . 
 = = Taxonomy , phylogeny , and naming = = 
 Clathrus ruber was illustrated as early as 1560 by the Swiss naturalist Conrad Gesner in his <unk> <unk> <unk> — Gesner mistook the mushroom for a marine organism . It appeared in a woodcut in John Gerard 's 1597 Great Herball , shortly thereafter in Carolus Clusius ' 1601 Fungorum in <unk> <unk> Brevis Historia , and was one of the species featured in Cassiano dal Pozzo 's <unk> <unk> ( " paper museum " ) that consisted of thousands of illustrations of the natural world . 
 The fungus was first described scientifically in 1729 , by the Italian Pier Antonio Micheli in his Nova plantarum genera <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , who gave it its current scientific name . The species was once referred to by American authors as Clathrus <unk> L. , as they used a system of nomenclature based on the former American Code of Botanical Nomenclature , in which the starting point for naming species was Linnaeus 's 1753 Species Plantarum . The International Code for Botanical Nomenclature now uses the same starting date , but names of Gasteromycetes used by Christian Hendrik Persoon in his Synopsis Methodica Fungorum ( 1801 ) are sanctioned and automatically replace earlier names . Since Persoon used the specific epithet ruber , the correct name for the species is Clathrus ruber . Several historical names of the fungus are now synonyms : Clathrus flavescens , named by Persoon in 1801 ; Clathrus <unk> by Joseph Pitton de Tournefort and published by Elias Fries in 1823 ; Clathrus nicaeensis , published by Jean @-@ Baptiste Barla in 1879 ; and Clathrus ruber var. flavescens , published by Livio <unk> and Dario <unk> in 1990 . 
 Clathrus ruber is the type species of the genus Clathrus , and is part of the group of Clathrus species known as the <unk> series . Common features uniting this group include the vertical arms of the receptacle ( fruit body ) that are not joined together at the base , and the spongy structure of the receptacle . According to a molecular analysis published in 2006 , out of the about 40 Phallales species used in the study , C. ruber is most closely related to Aseroe rubra , Clathrus archeri , Laternea <unk> , and Clathrus <unk> . 
 The generic name Clathrus is derived from Ancient Greek <unk> or " lattice " , and the specific epithet is Latin ruber , meaning " red " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " basket stinkhorn " , the " lattice stinkhorn " , or the " red cage " . It was known to the locals of the Adriatic hinterland in the former Yugoslavia as <unk> <unk> or <unk> <unk> , meaning " witch 's heart " . This is still the case in parts of rural France , where it is known as cœur de <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Before the volva opens , the fruiting body is egg @-@ shaped to roughly spherical , up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) in diameter , with a gelatinous interior up to 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 in ) thick . White to grayish in color , it is initially smooth , but develops a network of polygonal marks on the surface prior to opening as the internal structures expand and stretch the peridium taut . The fruit body , or receptacle , bursts the egg open as it expands ( a process that can take as little as a few hours ) , and leaves the remains of the peridium as a cup or volva surrounding the base . The receptacle ranges in color from red to bright pink to pale orange , and it is often lighter in color approaching the base . The color appears to be dependent upon the temperature and humidity of the environment . The receptacle consists of a spongy network of " arms " interlaced to make meshes of unequal size . At the top of the receptacle , the arms are up to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick , but they taper down to smaller widths near the base . A cross @-@ section of the arm reveals it to be spongy , and made up of one wide inner tube and two indistinct rows of tubes towards the outside . The outer surface of the receptacle is ribbed or wrinkled . There are between 80 and 120 mesh holes in the receptacle . The unusual shape of the receptacle has inspired some creative comparisons : David Arora likened it to a <unk> , while the German Mycological Society — who named C. ruber the 2011 " Mushroom of the Year " — described it as " like an alien from a science fiction horror film " . 
 A considerable variation in height has been reported for the receptacle , ranging from 8 to 20 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 9 in ) tall . The base of the fruit bodies are attached to the substrate by rhizomorphs ( thickened cords of mycelia ) . The dark olive @-@ green to olive @-@ brown , foul @-@ smelling sticky gleba covers the inner surface of the receptacle , except near the base . The odor — described as resembling rotting meat — attracts flies , other insects , and , in one report , a scarab beetle ( <unk> <unk> ) that help disperse the spores . The putrid odor — and people 's reaction to it — have been well documented . In 1862 Mordecai Cubitt Cooke wrote " it is recorded of a botanist who gathered one for the purpose of drying it for his herbarium , that he was compelled by the stench to rise during the night and cast the offender out the window . " American mycologist David Arora called the odor " the vilest of any stinkhorn " . The receptacle collapses about 24 hours after its initial eruption from the egg . 
 The spores are elongated , smooth , and have dimensions of 4 – 6 by 1 @.@ 5 – 2 µm . Scanning electron microscopy has revealed that C. ruber ( in addition to several other Phallales species ) has a hilar scar — a small indentation in the surface of the spore where it was previously connected to the basidium via the sterigma . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are six @-@ spored . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Clathrus ruber may be distinguished from the closely related tropical species C. crispus by the absence of the corrugated rims which surround each mesh of the C. crispus fruit body . The phylogenetically close species C. <unk> has a yellow receptacle with arms that are structurally simpler , and its gleba is concentrated on specialized " <unk> " located at the lattice intersections . It is known only from Venezuela to southern Brazil . Clathrus columnatus has a fruit body with two to five long vertical orange or red spongy columns , joined together at the apex . 
 = = = Edibility and folklore = = = 
 Although edibility for C. ruber has not been officially documented , its foul smell would dissuade most individuals from consuming it . In general , stinkhorn mushrooms are considered edible when still in the egg stage , and are even considered delicacies in some parts of Europe and Asia , where they are pickled raw and sold in markets as " devil 's eggs " . However , an 1854 report provides a cautionary tale to those considering consuming the mature fruit body . Dr. F. <unk> Porcher , of Charleston , South Carolina , described an account of poisoning caused by the mushroom : 
 " A young person having eaten a bit of it , after six hours suffered from a painful tension of the lower stomach , and violent convulsions . He lost the use of his speech , and fell into a state of stupor , which lasted for forty @-@ eight hours . After taking an emetic he threw up a fragment of the mushroom , with two worms , and mucus , tinged with blood . Milk , oil , and emollient <unk> , were then employed with success . " 
 British mycologist Donald Dring , in his 1980 monograph on the <unk> family , wrote that C. ruber was not regarded highly in southern European folklore . He mentions a case of poisoning following its ingestion , reported by Barla in 1858 , and notes that Ciro Pollini reported finding it growing on a human skull in a tomb in a deserted church . According to John Ramsbottom , Gascons consider the mushroom a cause of cancer ; they will usually bury specimens they find . In other parts of France it has been reputed to produce skin rashes or cause convulsions . 
 = = Ecology , habitat , and distribution = = 
 Like most of the species of the Phallales order , Clathrus ruber is saprobic — a decomposer of wood and plant organic matter — and is commonly found fruiting in mulch beds . The fungus grows alone or clustered together near woody debris , in lawns , gardens , and cultivated soil . 
 Clathrus ruber was originally described by Micheli from Italy . It is considered native to southern and central continental Europe , as well as Macaronesia ( the Azores and the Canary Islands ) , western Turkey , North Africa ( Algeria ) , and western Asia ( Iran ) . The fungus is rare in central Europe , and is listed in the Red data book of Ukraine . 
 The fungus has probably been introduced elsewhere , often because of the use of imported mulch used in gardening and landscaping . It may have extended its range northwards into the British Isles or been introduced in the nineteenth century . It now has a mainly southerly distribution in England and has been recorded from Cornwall , Devon , Dorset , Somerset , the Isle of Wight , Hampshire , Sussex , Surrey , and Middlesex . In Scotland , it has been recorded from Argyll . It is also known from Wales , the Channel Islands , and Ireland . The fungus also occurs in the United States ( California , Florida , Georgia , Virginia , North Carolina , and New York ) , Canada , Mexico , and Australasia . The species was also reported from South America ( Argentina ) . In China , it has been collected from Guangdong , Sichuan , Guizhou , and Tibet . Records from Japan are referable to Clathrus <unk> ; records from the Caribbean are probably of C. crispus . 
 = = Biochemistry = = 
 Like other stinkhorn fungi , C. ruber bioaccumulates the element manganese . It has been postulated that this element plays a role in the enzymatic breakdown of the gleba with simultaneous formation of odorous compounds . Compounds like dimethyl sulfide , aldehydes , and amines — which contribute to the disagreeable odor of the gleba — are produced by the enzymatic decarboxylation of keto acids and amino acids , but the enzymes will only work in the presence of manganese . A chemical analysis of the elemental composition of the gelatinous outer layer , the embryonic receptacle and the gleba showed the gelatinous layer to be richest in potassium , calcium , manganese , and iron ions . <unk> + stabilizes the polysaccharide gel , protecting the embryonic receptacle from drying out during the growth of the egg . Potassium is required for the gelatinous layer to retain its osmotic pressure and retain water ; high concentrations of the element are needed to support the rapid growth of the receptacle . The high concentration of elements suggests that the gelatinous layer has a " placenta @-@ like " function — serving as a reservoir from which the receptacle may draw upon as it rapidly expands . 
 Pigments responsible for the orange to red colors of the mature fruit bodies have been identified as carotenes , predominantly lycopene and beta @-@ carotene — the same compounds responsible for the red and orange colors of tomatoes and carrots , respectively . <unk> is also the main pigment in the closely related fungus Clathrus archeri , while beta @-@ carotene is the predominant pigment in the Phallaceae species Mutinus caninus , M. ravenelii , and M. elegans . 
 = Garamond = 
 Garamond is a group of many old @-@ style serif typefaces , originally those designed by Claude Garamond and other 16th century French designers , and now many modern revivals . Though his name was written as ' <unk> ' in his lifetime , the typefaces are invariably spelled ' Garamond ' . 
 Garamond worked as an engraver of punches , the masters used to stamp matrices , the moulds used to cast metal type . He worked in the tradition of what is now called old @-@ style serif letter design , that produced letters with a relatively organic structure resembling handwriting with a pen but with a slightly more structured and upright design . Although Garamond himself remains considered an eminent figure in French printing of the sixteenth century , historical research over the last century has increasingly placed him in context as one artisan among several active at a time of rapid production of new typefaces in sixteenth @-@ century France , operating within a pre @-@ existing tradition defined by the work of printers of the preceding half @-@ century , in particular Aldus Manutius and his punchcutter Francesco Griffo . Therefore , the term Garamond may be understood to mean typefaces based on the appearance of early modern French printing , not necessarily specifically Garamond 's work . 
 Some distinctive characteristics in Garamond 's letters are the small eye of the ' e ' and the bowl of the a , which has a sharp hook upwards at top left . The ' M ' is slightly splayed . The x @-@ height ( height of lower @-@ case letters ) is low , especially at larger sizes , making the capitals large relative to the lower case , while the top serifs on the ascenders of letters like ' d ' have a downward slope and rise subtly above the cap height . Garamond typefaces are popular and often used , particularly for printing body text and books . 
 Since around 1910 , many modern revivals of Garamond and related typefaces have been developed . Among these , the roman ( regular ; upright ) versions of Adobe Garamond , Granjon , Sabon , and Stempel Garamond are directly based on Garamond 's work . It is common to pair these with italics based on those created by his contemporary Robert Granjon , who was well known for his proficiency in this genre . However , many ' Garamond ' revivals are actually based on the work of a later punch @-@ cutter , Jean Jannon , whose work was for some years misattributed to Garamond . 
 Modern Garamond revivals also often add a matching bold and ' lining ' numbers at the height of capital letters , neither of which were used in Garamond 's time . The most common digital release of Garamond is Monotype Garamond . Bundled with many Microsoft products , it is a revival of Jannon 's work . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Garamond 's life and career = = = 
 Garamond designed type in the ' roman ' , or upright style , in italic , and Greek . In the period of Garamond 's early life roman type had been displacing the blackletter or Gothic type which was used in much ( although not all ) early French printing . 
 The roman designs of Garamond which are his most imitated were based on a typeface cut in 1495 – 1496 for the Venetian printer Aldus Manutius by Francesco Griffo . This was first used in the book De Aetna , a short work by poet and cleric Pietro Bembo which was Manutius ' first printing in the Latin alphabet after a long series of publications of classics of Greek literature that had won him an international reputation . Historian Beatrice Warde has assessed De Aetna as something of a pilot project , a small book printed to an even higher standard than Manutius ' norm . 
 French typefounders of the 16th century assiduously examined Manutius 's work ( and , it is thought , De Aetna in particular ) as a source of inspiration . De Aetna was printed using a mixture of alternate characters , perhaps as an experiment , and several of these are all found in Robert Estienne 's printing of the 1530s ; typefaces created by Antoine Augereau ( who may have been Garamond 's mentor ) only use those letters preferred in Manutius ' later printing , indicate that other Manutius books were examined as a source of inspiration separately . This examination extended to in some cases copying his first ' M ' shown in De Aetna which had no serif pointing out of the letter at top right , a design considered very eccentric . ( It has been suggested to be the result of defective casting , especially since Manutius ' later fonts do not show it . ) 
 The period from 1520 to around 1560 , encompassing Garamond 's career , was an extremely busy period for typeface creation . Many fonts were created , some apparently for exclusive use by a specific printer , others sold or traded between them . Many engravers were active over this time , including Garamond himself , Granjon , Guillaume Le Bé , Antoine Augereau , Simon de <unk> , Pierre <unk> and others , creating typefaces not just in the Latin alphabet , but also in Greek and Hebrew for scholarly use . This period saw the creation of a pool of high @-@ quality punches and matrices that would supply the French printing industry , to a large extent , for the next two centuries . 
 Garamond was born perhaps around 1510 , but very little is known about his life or work before 1540 . He worked for a variety of employers on commission , creating punches for publishers and the government . Garamond 's typefaces were popular abroad , and replaced Griffo 's original roman type at the Aldine Press in Venice . He also worked as a publisher and bookseller . While his italics have been considered less impressive than his roman typefaces , he was one of the early printers to establish the modern tradition that the italic capitals should slope as the lower case does , rather than remain upright as Roman square capitals do . 
 Garamond designed type for the Greek alphabet from early in his career , but these , the Grecs du roi fonts created for the government around 1540 , are very different to his Latin designs : they attempt to simulate the elegant handwriting of Cretan scribe Angelo <unk> and include a vast variety of alternate letters and ligatures to achieve this . This style is impractical for modern setting of body text , since it requires careful manual choice of characters for every word . Several ' Garamond ' releases such as Adobe 's contain Greek designs that are either a compromise between Garamond 's upright Latin designs and his slanted Greek ones or primarily inspired by his Latin designs . 
 Garamond died in 1561 and his punches and matrices were sold off by his widow . Purchasers included the Le Bé type foundry in Paris run by the family of Guillaume Le Bé , Christophe Plantin of Antwerp , and the Frankfurt foundry often referred to by historians as <unk> @-@ Berner . The chaotic sales caused problems , and Le Bé 's son wrote to Plantin 's successor Moretus offering to trade matrices so they could both have complementary type in a range of sizes . Egelhoff @-@ Berner brought out a specimen in 1592 of types by Garamond and others , which would later be a source for many Garamond revivals . 
 Plantin 's collection of original Garamond punches and matrices survives at the Plantin @-@ Moretus Museum in Antwerp , together with many other typefaces collected by Plantin from other typefounders of the period . The collection has been used extensively for research , for example by historians Harry Carter and Hendrik Vervliet . Carter 's son Matthew would later describe his research as helping to demonstrate " that the finest collection of printing types made in typography 's golden age was in perfect condition ( some muddle aside ) [ along with ] Plantin 's accounts and inventories which names the cutters of his types . " 
 While some records such as Plantin 's exist of what exact types were cut by Garamond himself , many details of his career remain uncertain , with initial opinion of his date of birth as around 1480 being substituted by much later estimates more recently . A document called the Le Bé Memorandum ( based on the memories of Guillaume Le Bé , but collated by one of his sons around 1643 ) suggests that Garamond finished his apprenticeship around 1510 . This is considered unlikely by modern historians since his mother was still alive when he died in 1561 and little is known of him before around 1540 . 
 It has been suggested that the first Roman types designed by Claude Garamond were a set created for Robert Estienne and first used by him around 1530 @-@ 3 , that were the first typefaces used in Paris to copy the Manutius model . However , Vervliet , Mosley and the French ministry of culture 's history of Garamond 's career suggest that these ' Estienne typefaces ' were not designed by Garamond and that his career began somewhat later . Vervliet suggests that the creator of this set of typefaces to a unified design may have been a ' Master Constantin ' , recorded in the Le Bé Memorandum as a master type designer of the period before Garamond but about whom nothing is otherwise known and to whom no obvious other body of work can be ascribed . If so , his disappearance from history ( perhaps due to an early death , since all his presumed work appeared in just three years from 1530 to 1533 ) may have allowed Garamond 's reputation to develop in the following decade . The Le Bé Memorandum does however attribute them to Garamond ; Vervliet notes that attributions of the Estienne type to Garamond do begin quite early but suggests that this may be a mistake caused by his later reputation , and because the Estienne typefaces remained proprietary Le Bé might not have been knowledgeable about their source . 
 = = = Jean Jannon = = = 
 In 1621 , sixty years after Garamond 's death , the French printer Jean Jannon released a specimen of typefaces that had some characteristics similar to the Garamond designs . The French Royal Printing Office ( Imprimerie Royale ) appears to have bought matrices from him in 1641 . ( The contract is actually made for one ' Nicholas Jannon ' , which historians have concluded to be a simple mistake . ) Despite the purchase , it is not clear that the office ever much used Jannon 's type : historian James Mosley has reported being unable to find books printed by the Imprimerie that use more than a few specific sizes of italic , although " it is not easy to prove a negative " . His type would later be misattributed to Garamond . Jannon wrote in his specimen that : 
 Seeing that for some time many persons have had to do with the art [ of printing ] who have greatly lowered it ... the desire came upon me to try if I might imitate , after some fashion , some one among those who honourably busied themselves with the art , [ men whose deaths ] I hear regretted every day [ Jannon mentions some eminent printers of the previous century ] ... and inasmuch as I could not accomplish this design for lack of types which I needed ... [ some typefounders ] would not , and others could not furnish me with what I lacked [ so ] I resolved , about six years ago , to turn my hand in good earnest to the making of punches , matrices and moulds for all sorts of characters , for the accommodation both of the public and of myself . 
 Jannon 's career took place during a politically tense period . Jannon was a Protestant in mostly Catholic France , and began his career as printer for the Protestant Academy at Sedan in what is now north @-@ eastern France before taking up <unk> , in his thirties by his report . Sedan the time enjoyed an unstable independence as a principality at a time when the French government had conceded through the Edict of Nantes to allowing a complicated system of restricted liberties for Protestants . While acknowledging his talent and commissioning equipment from him , as documented by the surviving purchase order , it is known that authorities in 1644 raided an office in Caen where he had been commissioned to do printing . Warde initially assumed that this was the source of the Jannon materials in the Imprimerie Nationale before the government 's purchase order from Jannon came to light . Jannon 's types and their descendants are recognizable by the triangular serifs on the top left of such characters as ' m ' , ' n ' and ' r ' , which have a very steep slant in Jannon 's design compared to Garamond 's . The italics are also very different to Garamond 's own or Granjon 's , being much more ornate . 
 By the nineteenth century , Jannon 's matrices had come to be known as the Caractères de l 'Université ( Characters of the University ) . It has sometimes been claimed that this term was an official name designated for the Jannon type by Cardinal Richelieu , while Warde in 1926 more plausibly suggested it might be a garbled recollection of Jannon 's work with the Sedan Academy , which operated much like a university despite not using the name . Carter in the 1970s followed this conclusion . Mosley , however , concludes that no report of the term ( or much use of Jannon 's type at all ) exists before the nineteenth century , and it may originate from a generic term of the previous century simply meaning older or more conservative typeface designs , perhaps those preferred in academic publishing . 
 = = = After Jannon = = = 
 The old @-@ style typefaces of Garamond and his contemporaries and successors remained in use in printing for over two hundred years after Garamond 's death , and became influential on Dutch printing during the period known as Dutch golden age , when Dutch printing was itself very influential across Europe . Dutch printers and punchcutters , however , sometimes favoured more solid , darker designs than Garamond 's . 
 Old @-@ style serif typefaces by Garamond and his colleagues finally fell out of use with the arrival of what is now called the Didone style of printing in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries , promoted by the Didot family in France and others . This favoured a much more geometric , constructed style of letter which could show off the increasingly refined paper and printing technologies of the period . Mosley comments : 
 The upheavals of the Revolution coincided with the major shift in the style of printing types that is associated with the family of Didot , and the stock of old materials abruptly lost its value , except as scrap . Punches rust , and the copper of matrices is recyclable . All traces of the early types that had been in the hands of the trade typefounders like Le Bé , <unk> and <unk> in Paris vanished completely . No relics of them were saved anywhere , except in commercial centres that had become relative backwaters , like Antwerp , where the Plantin @-@ Moretus printing office piously preserved the collection of its founder ... the term caractères de l 'Université became attached by default to the set of apparently early matrices that had survived , its provenance forgotten , in the mixed stock of materials of the national printing @-@ office . 
 Garamond 's reputation remained respected , even by members of the Didot family whose type designs came to dominate French printing . 
 = = = Revival era = = = 
 A revival of interest in ' old @-@ style ' serif typefaces took place in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century . This saw a revival of the Imprimerie royale typefaces ( the office was now called the Imprimerie nationale following the end of the French monarchy ) , which , unlike Garamond 's own work , had survived in Paris . The attribution came to be considered certain by the Imprimerie 's director Arthur Christian . 
 Early revivals were often based directly on the Imprimerie nationale types , one of the first by <unk> and then by American Type Founders . These revivals could be made using pantograph machine engraving systems , which gave a cleaner result than historic typefaces whose master punches had been hand @-@ carved out of steel , and allowed rapid development of a large range of sizes . In addition , the new hot metal typesetting technology of the period created increasing availability and demand for new fonts . Among hot metal typesetting companies , Monotype 's branches in Britain and the United States brought out separate versions , and the American branch of Linotype licensed that of ATF . 
 A number of historians began in the early twentieth century to question if the Imprimerie nationale Latin @-@ alphabet type was really the work Garamond as the Grecs du Roi undoubtedly were . Doubt was raised by French historian Jean Paillard , but he died in the First World War soon after publishing his conclusions in 1914 and his work remained little @-@ read . ATF 's historian Henry Lewis Bullen secretly doubted that the ' Garamond ' his company was reviving was really Garamond 's work , noting that he had never seen it in a sixteenth @-@ century book . He discussed his concerns with ATF junior librarian Beatrice Warde , who would later move to Europe and become a prominent writer on printing advising the British branch of Monotype . 
 In a 1926 paper published on the British typography journal The <unk> , Beatrice Warde revealed her discovery that the Imprimerie nationale type had been created by Jean Jannon , something she had discovered by examining printing credited to him in London and Paris and through reading the work of Paillard . 
 By the time Warde 's article was published some revivals had been released that were more authentic revivals of Garamond 's work , based on period books and printing specimens . The German company Stempel brought out a crisp revival of the original Garamond typefaces in the 1920s , inspired by a rediscovered specimen from the <unk> @-@ Berner foundry in Frankfurt , as did Linotype in Britain . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = The Renaissance = = = 
 1470 – first book printed in France , by a Swiss / German team at the Sorbonne , Paris . Early books printed in France use type of a blackletter design or influenced by it . 
 1496 – Aldus Manutius publishes De Aetna , a short text of poetry that serves as his first printing in the Latin alphabet . Its new ' roman ' metal type sets a standard imitated by French printers . 
 = = = Late Renaissance = = = 
 1510 – Garamond may have been born around this time . 
 1530 – Robert Estienne begins to publish in a new and more elegant style of ' roman ' type , influenced by De Aetna with its asymmetrical ' M ' . These typefaces were once attributed to Garamond . Vervliet has argued that they are not by Garamond , but notes that the attribution of them to him begins quite early . 
 1541 – Garamond is advanced money to cut the Grecs du Roi type . 
 1561 – Death of Garamond . 
 1563 – Christophe Plantin buys matrices and other equipment in Paris at auction , some from Garamond 's widow , for his partnership in Antwerp . Other equipment is bought by other Parisian and German printers ; a specimen sheet identifying his types is issued by a Frankfurt foundry in 1592 . 
 1560 – 70s – The work of Garamond and his contemporaries becomes very influential in the Low Countries and western Germany . A decline sets into the production of new typefaces , probably mostly due to simple saturation of the market with typefaces of acceptable quality , and possibly also due to economic and religious factors causing the emigration of printers and typefounders to other countries . <unk> now a clearly separate industry to printing . 
 = = = Early modern period = = = 
 1580 – birth of Jannon 
 1621 – Jannon issues a specimen of his type . 
 1640 – Jannon leaves Sedan for Paris . 
 1641 – foundation of the Imprimerie Royale , which buys matrices from Jannon 
 1644 – Jannon 's printing office in Caen is raided by authorities concerned that he may have been publishing banned material . Jannon is not imprisoned , but returns to Sedan . 
 1658 – death of Jannon 
 = = = Eighteenth century = = = 
 1756 – Parisian printer Jean @-@ Pierre Fournier , who had inherited the Le Bé foundry , writes of his collection of vintage type that " I own the foundry of Garamond , the Le Bé family and Granjon . I shall be happy to display my punches and matrices to all those who are lovers of true beauty ... these are the types that made the reputations of the <unk> , Plantin and the <unk> . " However , his extensive collections are dispersed after his death in 1783 and ultimately ' traditional ' old @-@ style type falls out of use in France . 
 = = = Early revival era = = = 
 Late nineteenth century – revival in interest in ' old @-@ style ' typefaces such as the Caslon type ( 1730s , England ) and that of Jenson ( 1470s , Venice ) . 
 1912 – revival of the Imprimerie Royale ( now Imprimerie nationale , following the revolution ) type by the <unk> foundry . 
 1914 – Jean Paillard publishes a book arguing that the Imprimerie nationale type was not created by Garamond but his work attracts little attention . He is killed serving in the First World War a few months later . 
 1920 – a copy of the 1592 Berner specimen of typefaces is published in facsimile . 
 1923 – ATF issue a specimen of their Garamond revival , in development for several years prior . ATF 's historian Henry Bullen privately tells Beatrice Warde , then a junior librarian , that he suspects that Garamond had nothing to do with the type , since he had never seen it in a contemporary book , but has no better candidate for its creator . Warde subsequently moves to Europe , becoming a freelance writer on printing and adviser to Monotype in London . 
 1925 – Based on the Egelhoff @-@ Berner specimen , Stempel Garamond is released in Germany : later also released by Linotype , it is the first Garamond revival actually based on his work . 
 1923 – Monotype Garamond is published based on the Imprimerie nationale type . 
 1926 – Warde discovers and reveals that the Imprimerie nationale type was created by Jannon , and that all revivals based on it are not directly based on Garamond 's work . 
 = = Contemporary versions = = 
 = = = Based on Garamond 's design = = = 
 = = = = Adobe Garamond = = = = 
 Released in 1989 , Adobe Garamond is designed by Robert Slimbach for Adobe Systems , based on a Roman type by Garamond and an italic type by Robert Granjon . The font family contains regular , <unk> , and bold weights and was developed through viewing fifteenth @-@ century equipment at the Plantin @-@ Moretus Museum . Its quite even , mature design attracted attention on release for its authenticity to Garamond 's work , a contrast to the much more aggressive ITC Garamond popular at the time . The OpenType version of the font family was released in 2000 as Adobe Garamond Pro , with enhanced support for its alternate glyphs such as ligatures , small caps and italic swash capitals , and is sold through Adobe 's <unk> system . It is one of the most popular versions of Garamond in books and fine printing . 
 = = = = Garamond Premier = = = = 
 Slimbach started planning for a second interpretation of Garamond after visiting the Plantin @-@ Moretus Museum in 1988 , during the production of Adobe Garamond . His visit there led him to conclude that Garamond could not be truly revived digitally unless in a set of optical sizes , with adaptations in the design for different sizes of text . Unable to create such a large range of styles practically with the technology and business requirements of the 1980s , he completed the project in 2005 with several optical sizes , each designed in four weights ( regular , medium , <unk> and bold , with an additional light weight for display sizes ) using the OpenType font format . It features glyph coverage for Central European , Cyrillic and Greek characters including <unk> . Professor Gerry Leonidas , an expert in Greek @-@ language printing , described it in 2005 as " bar none , the most accomplished typeface you can get for complex Greek texts " . Adobe executive Thomas Phinney described it as a " modernized interpretation " different to their earlier Garamond , which remains on sale . 
 = = = = Stempel Garamond = = = = 
 A hot @-@ metal period adaptation created by the Stempel Type Foundry in the inter @-@ war period , and released through Linotype in other countries , that has remained popular . It is sharp , somewhat angular design with a crisp hook rather than a teardrop at top left of the ' a ' . Stempel Garamond has relatively short descenders , allowing it to be particularly tightly <unk> . An unusual feature is the digit 0 , which has reversed contrast , with the thickest points of the number on the top and bottom of the digit . 
 = = = = Sabon = = = = 
 Sabon is a Garamond revival designed by Jan Tschichold in 1964 , jointly released by Linotype , Monotype and Stempel in 1967 . It is named after Jacques Sabon , who introduced Garamond 's types to German printing . An unusual feature of many releases of Sabon is that the italic , based on Granjon 's work , is wider than most normal italics , at the same width as the roman style . This suited the hot metal typesetting machines of the period . Later Sabon versions , such as Jean François <unk> 's Sabon Next , have not always maintained this principle . 
 = = = = EB Garamond = = = = 
 Released in 2011 by Georg Duffner , EB Garamond is a free software version of Garamond released under the Open Font License and available through Google Fonts . Duffner based the design on a specimen printed by <unk> @-@ Berner in 1592 , with italic and Greek characters based on Robert Granjon 's work , as well as the addition of Cyrillic characters and OpenType features such as swash italic capitals and schoolbook alternates . It is intended to include multiple optical sizes , as of 2014 including fonts based on the 8 and 12 point forms on the 1592 specimen . It has been described as " one of the best open source fonts " by prominent typeface designer Erik <unk> . As of February 2016 , no bold weight has yet been released . 
 = = = = URW + + Garamond No. 8 = = = = 
 Garamond No. 8 is a freeware version of Garamond contributed by URW + + to the <unk> project , based on Stempel Garamond . Featuring a bold weight , small capitals , optional text figures and automatic ligature insertion , it is particularly popular in the TeX community and is also included on some Linux distributions . Originally released as a PostScript Type 1 , it has been converted into the <unk> format , usable by most current software . It is distributed under the AFP license , which allows it to be used freely ( without support ) but not sold or have its distribution charged for . 
 = = = = Granjon = = = = 
 Despite the name , Granjon , by the English branch of Linotype , is based on the original Garamond roman with a Granjon italic . ( Warde commented " It would seem that Garamond 's name , having so long been used on a design he never cut , is now by stern justice left off a face which is undoubtedly his . " ) 
 = = = Based on Jannon 's design = = = 
 = = = = ATF Garamond / Garamond No. 3 = = = = 
 American Type Founders created a revival of the Imprimerie Nationale typefaces around 1919 – 1923 , designed in @-@ house by its design department led by Morris Fuller Benton . It received a first sumptuous showing , marketed especially towards advertisers , in ATF 's 1923 specimen book . Also involved in the revival was book designer T.M. Cleland , who created a set of matching borders and ornaments . The design gained its current name in a more practical hot metal adaptation licensed to and marketed by Linotype 's American branch from around 1936 ; the number distinguished it from Stempel 's version and other variants which Linotype also sold . It was the style of Garamond preferred by prominent designer Massimo Vignelli . A variant is used by Deutsche Bahn , and the original ATF Garamond on which it was based has also been revived . 
 = = = = Monotype Garamond = = = = 
 Monotype 's 1922 design , based on Jannon 's work in the Imprimerie Nationale , is bundled with many Microsoft products . Its italic , faithful to Jannon 's , is extremely calligraphic , with a very variable angle of slant and flourishes on several lower @-@ case letters . Its commercial release is more extensive than the basic Microsoft release , featuring additional features such as swash capitals and small capitals , although like many pre @-@ digital fonts these are only included in the regular weight . Popular in the metal type era , its digitisation has been criticised for having too light a colour on the page for body text if printed with many common printing systems . This is a known problem with many Monotype digitisations of the period . Some publicity art for it in the metal period was created by a young Rodney <unk> . Monotype 's 1933 guide to identifying their typefaces noted the asymmetrical T , the sharp triangular serif at top left of m , n , p and r , and a q unlike the p , with a point at top right rather than a full serif . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 A revival by Frederic Goudy for the American branch of Monotype , the name chosen to differ from other revivals . An elegant sample created by Bruce Rogers was shown in a spring 1923 issue of Monotype 's magazine . It like Monotype Garamond features a large range of swash characters , based on Imprimerie Nationale specimen sheets . 
 Mosley has described it as " a lively type , underappreciated I think . " LTC 's digitisation deliberately maintained its eccentricity and irregularity true to period printing , avoiding perfect verticals . In 1923 , Morison at the British branch of Monotype thought it somewhat florid in comparison to the version of his branch which he considered a personal project , noting in a 1923 letter to American printer Daniel Berkeley Updike that " I entertain very decided opinions about this latest of Mr. Goudy 's achievements ... a comparison leaves me with a preference for our version . " He added that he " could not bring myself to believe " that Garamond himself had cut the swash capitals that " Mr. Goudy has done his best to reproduce " . 
 = = = = Jannon = = = = 
 František <unk> 's 2010 revival with optical sizes is one of the few modern revivals of Jannon 's work . <unk> also created a matching sans @-@ serif companion design , Jannon Sans . 
 = = = Related fonts = = = 
 As one of the most popular typefaces in history , a number of designs have been created that are influenced by Garamond 's design but follow different design paths . 
 = = = = ITC Garamond = = = = 
 ITC Garamond was created by Tony Stan in 1975 , and follows ITC 's house style of unusually high x @-@ height . It was initially intended to serve as a display version but was used for text , in which its tight spacing and high x @-@ height gives it a somewhat hectoring appearance . As a result , it has proven somewhat controversial among designers ; it is generally considered poorly @-@ proportioned for body text . It remains the corporate font of the California State University system in printed text . As seen below , it was also modified into Apple Garamond which served as Apple 's corporate font from 1984 until replacement with Myriad . Publishers using it included O 'Reilly Media and French publisher Actes Sud . 
 = = = = Cormorant = = = = 
 An open @-@ source adaptation of Garamond intended for display sizes , designed by Christian Thalmann and co @-@ released with Google Fonts . It features a delicate style suitable for printing at larger sizes , and considerable contrast in stroke weight in its larger sizes . Thalmann added several unusual alternate designs such as an upright italic and <unk> styles , as well as exaggerated , highly slanting accents . 
 = = = = Claude Sans = = = = 
 A humanist sans @-@ serif based on the letterforms of Jannon 's type , created by Alan Meeks and published by Letraset and later ITC . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 This list focuses on notable references to Garamond or his typefaces , not including the extremely large number of books printed in them . 
 In Umberto Eco 's novel Foucault 's Pendulum , the protagonists work for a pair of related publishing companies , Garamond and <unk> , both owned by a Mister Garamond . 
 Garamond is the name of a character in the Wii game Super Paper Mario . He appears in the world of <unk> ( the mirror @-@ image of Flipside , where the game begins ) . He is a prolific and highly successful author , unlike his Flipside counterpart , Helvetica ( a probable recognition of the relative suitability of the two fonts for use in book typesetting ) . 
 For many years the masthead of British newspaper The Guardian used " The " in Garamond and " Guardian " in bold Helvetica . 
 A condensed variant of ITC Garamond was adopted by Apple in 1984 upon the release of the Macintosh , known as Apple Garamond . This was a proprietary font not publicly available , less condensed than the publicly released ITC Garamond Condensed . 
 One of the initial goals of the literary journal Timothy McSweeney 's Quarterly Concern was to use only a single font : Garamond 3 . The editor of the journal , Dave Eggers , has stated that it is his favourite font , " because it looked good in so many permutations — italics , small caps , all caps , tracked out , justified or not . " 
 In Robin Sloan 's fantasy novel Mr. Penumbra 's 24 @-@ Hour Bookstore several character names derive from historical figures associated with the Garamond typeface . 
 = = = Printer ink claim = = = 
 It has been claimed that Garamond uses much less ink than Times New Roman at a similar point size , so changing to Garamond could be a cost @-@ saver for large organizations that print large numbers of documents , especially if using inkjet printers . Garamond , along with Times New Roman and Century Gothic , has been identified by the GSA as a " toner @-@ efficient " font . 
 This claim has been criticised as a misinterpretation of how typefaces are actually measured and what printing methods are desirable . Monotype Garamond , the version bundled with Windows , has a generally smaller design at the same notional point size compared to Times New Roman and quite spindly strokes , giving it a more elegant but less readable appearance . To make letters , especially the lower @-@ case , as high as in an equivalent setting of Times New Roman , the text size must be increased , counterbalancing any cost savings . Thomas Phinney , an expert on digital fonts , noted that the effect of simply swapping Garamond in would be compromised legibility : " any of those changes , swapping to a font that sets smaller at the same nominal point size , or actually reducing the point size , or picking a thinner typeface , will reduce the legibility of the text . That seems like a bad idea , as the percentage of Americans with poor eyesight is skyrocketing . " Professional font designer Jackson Cavanaugh commented " If we 're actually interested in reducing waste , just printing less – using less paper – is obviously more efficient . " 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Texas Recreational Road 8 = 
 Recreational Road 8 ( RE 8 ) is a Recreational Road located in McMullen County in the southeastern portion of the U.S. state of Texas . The highway is approximately 1 @.@ 1 miles ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) in length , and connects Texas State Highway 72 ( TX 72 ) to the community of Calliham and Choke Canyon State Park . The roadway travels through rural areas and central Calliham . Calliham was first laid out in 1922 , and a road first appeared in the location of RE 8 by 1940 . Farm to Market Road 99 ( FM 99 ) was designated in the location of RE 8 in 1954 . Recreational Road 8 was officially designated in June of 1981 , after FM 99 was relocated . The highway was cancelled and relocated in 1983 . The highway is currently the only route to deviate from the recreational road criteria . 
 = = Route description = = 
 RE 8 begins at an at @-@ grade intersection with TX 72 south of the unincorporated community of Calliham . The highway proceeds as a two @-@ lane , paved road , traveling northward toward Calliham . As it travels through mainly rural areas , the route intersects a small dirt road before entering the southern portion of Calliham . The road intersects Fletcher Street and continues past several houses , traveling parallel to Naylor Street for a short distance before it intersects <unk> Street , where it bends northeastward and continues . The road passes a large RV park and intersects Deer Trail before continuing past several houses . It proceeds to its northern terminus , an intersection with Quail Run Road at the edge of Choke Canyon State Park . A long park road continues north into the park , providing access to several campgrounds and recreational areas . 
 The highway is maintained by the Texas Department of Transportation ( TxDOT ) . Part of the job of the TxDOT is to measure traffic along the highway . These counts are taken using a metric called annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) . This is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles that travel along a portion of the highway . The TxDOT usually measures AADT near an intersection . In 2011 , the highway 's AADT was 530 vehicles , taken at a point just north of the intersection with TX 72 . This was an increase from the previous year , when the count was just 330 vehicles , which was taken at the same point . This was a decrease from 2009 , when the AADT for the route was 390 vehicles . No portion of the roadway is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . RE 8 is currently the only route in the Recreational Road system to deviate from the system criteria . The TxDOT defines a <unk> Road as a route which travels " to a recognized recreational area " , while RE 8 serves Choke Canyon State Park . 
 = = History = = 
 The community of Calliham was first settled in 1918 , and was known as <unk> . The settlement was a simple camp city , but boomed in 1922 when oil was discovered nearby . In 1923 , due to the rapid expansion , J. W. Stephenson laid out the plan for the townsite for the community , which contained all roads and sites . The community continued to expand into the 1930s . By 1940 , an unimproved dirt road connected central Calliham to camps north of the community . The road crossed the Frio River on a concrete bridge , and had a single cattle guard located on its course . By 1951 , the road 's first block from its southern terminus was improved to a graded , bituminous surface , made up of crushed rock and asphalt . On October 28 , 1952 , FM 2153 was designated along the course of the highway , for a length of approximately 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) . On October 13 , 1954 , the Texas Transportation Commission ( TTC ) cancelled FM 2153 , and extended FM 99 over its course . The designation was officially passed by the Texas State Highway Department 's Administration Circle on December 1 , 1954 . 
 By 1956 , the entire length of the highway had been graded and resurfaced with crushed rock , as well as being minorly straightened . Between then and 1961 , the route was listed as being a Federal Aid Secondary Road , its surface was improved to bituminous , the bridge over the Frio River was replaced , and the road 's course was minorly straightened . On March 27 , 1981 , FM 99 was approved to be relocated around the location of the newly created Choke Canyon Reservoir . The relocation was officially designated on June 15 , 1981 . On April 3 , 1981 , RE 8 was approved to be designated over the relocated portion of FM 99 . The designation was made official the same day FM 99 was relocated . On June 29 , 1983 , the TTC approved the cancellation and redesignation of RE 8 , and on August 18 , 1983 the redesignation was approved . The route was shifted to its present location , with a total length of about 1 @.@ 4 miles ( 2 @.@ 3 km ) . In 1988 , Calliham was shifted southward from the Choke Canyon Reservoir , causing RE 8 to be shortened by about 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 48 km ) . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in McMullen County . 
 = U.S. Route 223 = 
 US Route 223 or US Highway 223 ( US 223 ) is a diagonal ( northwest – southeast ) United States Numbered Highway lying in the states of Michigan and Ohio . The southernmost section is completely concurrent with the US 23 freeway , including all of the Ohio segment . It connects US 23 in the south near Toledo , Ohio , with US 127 south of Jackson , Michigan . The highway passes through farmland in southern Michigan and woodland in the Irish Hills . Including the concurrency on the southern end , US 223 is 46 @.@ 34 miles ( 74 @.@ 58 km ) in total length . 
 The highway designation was created in 1930 out of the southern end of US 127 . Three sets of reroutings through Adrian have resulted in the creation of two different business loops through the city . A change proposed in the 1960s and implemented in the 1970s shifted the southern end of US 223 to replace M @-@ 151 and then run along the US 23 freeway between Whiteford Township , Michigan , and Sylvania , Ohio . Since the 1980s , US 223 no longer reaches Toledo , instead feeding into the freeway system for the city . Changes proposed and enacted into law in the 1990s would upgrade the highway as an Interstate Highway . Congress has designated this corridor as part of Interstate 73 ( I @-@ 73 ) , although neither state intends at this time to complete the freeway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 223 starts at an interchange in with State Route 51 ( SR 51 ) and SR 184 in Sylvania on the northwest side of the Toledo , Ohio metropolitan area . Although unsigned by the Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) along the US 23 freeway , US 223 runs concurrently around two @-@ thirds of a mile ( 1 @.@ 0 km ) to the Ohio – Michigan state line . Once across the border , the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) has signed both numbers along the freeway . The two highways ' designations follow the freeway northward through rural farmland . At exit 5 , US 223 separates from the freeway and turns west along an extension of St. Anthony Road . 
 The highway continues westward through the farmland as a two @-@ lane road to the Monroe – Lenawee county line . US 223 meets its former routing and turns northwesterly along Lansing Road , crossing a branch of the Indiana & Ohio Railway . US 223 runs parallel to the Adrian & Blissfield Railroad that branches off southwest of the highway . Both the highway and rail line run northwesterly into Blissfield . The two cross while US 223 runs along Adrian Street through downtown , and the highway makes its first crossing of the River Raisin before leaving downtown . The second crossing is in Palmyra northwest of Blissfield . 
 US 223 returns to a due west track as it crosses a branch of the Norfolk Southern Railway , and the roadway approaches the outskirts of Adrian . The highway runs along the southern city limits for Adrian as it meets M @-@ 52 . The only business loop for US 223 runs north of this intersection with M @-@ 52 into downtown Adrian while US 223 continues through this secondary business corridor south and west of town . US 223 crosses Beaver Creek and then intersects M @-@ 34 on the western city line in a residential section of Adrian . As US 223 crosses fully into the city of Adrian , it continues northwesterly , then turns due west at the intersection were it meets its business loop 's western terminus . Outside of town , the highway cross through more farmland continuing to northwestern Lenawee County . 
 US 223 passes out of flat farmlands into the Irish Hills region as the highway runs northeast of Manitou Beach as the roadway rounds the northern shore of Devils Lake . The Irish Hills region has gently rolling hills that transition to forests from farms . Southeast of Somerset US 223 meets US 127 and ends . The entire highway in both Ohio and Michigan is listed on the National Highway System , a system of highways important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 As early as 1912 , the Ohio section of what is now US 223 was shown on maps as SR 54 , however the road was not signed with the number at the time . The Michigan section carried two numbers when the signs were erected by July 1 , 1919 . The segment from Somerset to Adrian was M @-@ 80 , and the remainder in Michigan was M @-@ 34 . Ohio signed its highways , including SR 54 , by July 1923 . 
 When the United States Numbered Highway System debuted on November 11 , 1926 , these highways were all used as part of the southern end of US 127 , which started in Lansing , Michigan , and ended in Toledo at the time . In 1930 , US 127 south of Somerset was rerouted to replace M @-@ 14 to the state line and extended to end in Cincinnati , Ohio . The section of US 127 between Somerset and Toledo was then renumbered US 223 , making the highway a spur of US 23 . 
 The routing of US 223 was changed through Adrian in 1935 , shifting the highway along different streets through town . Another change in 1942 through Adrian led to the creation of the first business loop through the city . This version of the business loop lasted until the main highway was moved a second time in 1956 . With this subsequent move , the business loop designation was shifted to its current location . 
 Michigan first started converting US 23 into a freeway in 1957 . Several years later , the state first proposed a realignment of US 223 in 1965 . This change would reroute the highway to replace M @-@ 151 in southern Monroe County , and use the US 23 freeway to connect to Sylvania , Ohio . The Michigan State Highway Department truncated M @-@ 151 in 1965 , eliminating the section that ran eastward through Samaria to US 25 south of Monroe . The remainder of the US 223 realignment change was made in 1977 when Michigan shifted its segment of US 223 over M @-@ 151 as previously proposed . Instead of running south through Ottawa Lake , US 223 continued east to the US 23 freeway and south into Ohio . 
 The last major change occurred when ODOT truncated US 223 at exit 234 . The city of Toledo and the state proposed the change in late 1985 to simplify travel in the area . The section of US 223 from Sylvania into downtown Toledo was used for an extension of SR 51 when the change was made between 1985 and 1987 . A local regional planning group in Michigan proposed upgrading the section of US 223 through Lenawee County in 1990 , citing increased congestion and accidents in the previous five years . The commission also supported upgrades to the highway because it was the main route between the Jackson and Toledo areas . Subsequent upgrades during 2000 added passing lanes near Palmyra and 6 @.@ 6 miles ( 10 @.@ 6 km ) of roads were resurfaced . 
 = = Future = = 
 The original defined alignment of I @-@ 73 would have run along I @-@ 75 to Detroit . However , Congress amended that definition in 1995 to have a branch along the US 223 corridor to south of Jackson and the US 127 corridor north to I @-@ 75 near Grayling . From Grayling it would use I @-@ 75 to Sault Ste . Marie . Except south of Jackson , where the existing highways are two @-@ lane roads and a section of road north of Lansing where the freeway reverts to a divided highway , this corridor is mostly a rural four @-@ lane freeway . While there are no immediate plans to convert the section of US 127 between St. Johns and Ithaca to freeway , MDOT continues to purchase parcels for right @-@ of @-@ way to be used for future upgrades . 
 MDOT included using the US 223 corridor as one of its three options to build I @-@ 73 in 2000 . The others included using the US 127 corridor all the way into Ohio with a connection to the Ohio Turnpike or using US 127 south and a new freeway connection to US 223 at Adrian . MDOT abandoned further study of I @-@ 73 after June 12 , 2001 , diverting remaining funding to safety improvement projects along the corridor . The department stated there was a " lack of need " for sections of the proposed freeway , and the project website was closed down in 2002 . According to press reports in 2011 , a group advocating on behalf of the freeway is working to revive the I @-@ 73 project in Michigan . According to an MDOT spokesman , " to my knowledge , we ’ re not taking that issue up again . " The Lenawee County Road Commission is not interested in the freeway , and according to the president of the Adrian Area Chamber of Commerce , " there seems to be little chance of having an I @-@ 73 link between Toledo and Jackson built in the foreseeable future . " 
 In 2012 , MDOT announced a construction project along the US 23 / US 223 freeway in southern Monroe County what would rebuild the northbound lanes of the freeway between exits 1 and 5 in addition to improving the interchange ramps in the area . The interchange between US 223 the freeway at exit 5 will also be upgraded to contain a pair of roundabouts in a configuration known as a dumbbell interchange . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Business loop = = 
 Business US Highway 223 ( Bus . US 223 ) is a business route running through downtown Adrian , Michigan . It is also currently the highest numbered and signed business routing in the state of Michigan . Both Business Spur I @-@ 375 ( BS I @-@ 375 ) and Capitol Loop currently exist but BS I @-@ 375 is not signed and the Capitol Loop , while inventoried as Connector 496 does not use that number on signs . 
 The current routing of Bus . US 223 marks the second time the designation has been used in the Adrian area . The first was created in 1942 when the first bypass of Adrian was constructed . This bypass was built along Cadmus Road at Treat Highway west to M @-@ 52 ( Adrian Highway ) . US 223 then ran along M @-@ 52 to connect with the previous routing . Bus . US 223 was designated along Church , Center , Beecher and Treat streets , the former routing of US 223 through downtown . This incarnation of Bus . US 223 would survive until March 26 , 1956 when another new bypass of Adrian was built . The first Bus . US 223 was deleted to allow the designation to be used on the routing of the first US 223 bypass . This first bypass became the current alignment of Bus . US 223 . 
 In the current routing , Bus . US 223 follows M @-@ 52 ( Adrian Highway / Main Street ) and a former route of US 223 through downtown . The southern terminus is at US 223 at an intersection with M @-@ 52 near downtown Adrian . The business loop follows M @-@ 52 north into downtown on Main Street . At Church Street , the Bus . US 223 turns northwest and follows that street to Maumee Street . The loop follows Maumee Street west out of the center of town back to the main highway . The northern terminus of Bus . US 223 is an intersection with US 223 northwest of downtown Adrian . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Lenawee County . 
 = Ralph Richardson = 
 Sir Ralph David Richardson ( 19 December 1902 – 10 October 1983 ) was an English actor who , along with his contemporaries John Gielgud and Laurence Olivier , dominated the British stage of the mid @-@ 20th century . He worked in films throughout most of his career , and played more than sixty cinema roles . From an artistic but not theatrical background , Richardson had no thought of a stage career until a production of Hamlet in Brighton inspired him to become an actor . He learned his craft in the 1920s with a touring company and later the Birmingham Repertory Theatre . In 1931 he joined the Old Vic , playing mostly Shakespearean roles . He led the company the following season , succeeding Gielgud , who had taught him much about stage technique . After he left the company , a series of leading roles took him to stardom in the West End and on Broadway . 
 In the 1940s , together with Olivier and John Burrell , Richardson was the co @-@ director of the Old Vic company . There , his most celebrated roles included Peer Gynt and Falstaff . He and Olivier led the company to Europe and Broadway in 1945 and 1946 , before their success provoked resentment among the governing board of the Old Vic , leading to their dismissal from the company in 1947 . In the 1950s , in the West End and occasionally on tour , Richardson played in modern and classic works including The Heiress , Home at Seven , and Three Sisters . He continued on stage and in films until shortly before his sudden death at the age of eighty . He was celebrated in later years for his work with Peter Hall 's National Theatre and his frequent stage partnership with Gielgud . He was not known for his portrayal of the great tragic roles in the classics , preferring character parts in old and new plays . 
 Richardson 's film career began as an extra in 1931 . He was soon cast in leading roles in British and American films including Things to Come in the 1930s , The Fallen Idol and The Heiress in the 1940s , and Long Day 's Journey into Night and Doctor Zhivago in the 1960s . He received nominations and awards in the UK , Europe and the US for his stage and screen work from 1948 until his death , and beyond , with a posthumous Academy Award nomination for his final film , Greystoke . 
 Throughout his career , and increasingly in later years , Richardson was known for his eccentric behaviour on and off stage . He was often seen as detached from conventional ways of looking at the world , and his acting was regularly described as poetic or magical . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Richardson was born in Cheltenham , Gloucestershire , the third son and youngest child of Arthur Richardson and his wife Lydia ( née Russell ) . The couple had met while both were in Paris , studying with the painter William @-@ Adolphe Bouguereau . Arthur Richardson had been senior art master at Cheltenham Ladies ' College from 1893 . 
 In 1907 the family split up ; there was no divorce or formal separation , but the two elder boys , Christopher and Ambrose , remained with their father and Lydia left them , taking Ralph with her . The ostensible cause of the couple 's separation was a row over Lydia 's choice of wallpaper for her husband 's study . According to John Miller 's biography , whatever underlying causes there may have been are unknown . An earlier biographer , Garry O 'Connor , speculates that Arthur Richardson might have been having an extramarital affair . There does not seem to have been a religious element , although Arthur was a dedicated Quaker , whose first two sons were brought up in that faith , whereas Lydia was a devout convert to Roman Catholicism , in which she raised Ralph . Mother and son had a variety of homes , the first of which was a bungalow converted from two railway carriages in Shoreham @-@ by @-@ Sea on the south coast of England . 
 Lydia wanted Richardson to become a priest . In Brighton he served as an altar boy , which he enjoyed , but when sent at about fifteen to the nearby Xaverian College , a seminary for trainee priests , he ran away . As a pupil at a series of schools he was uninterested in most subjects and was an indifferent scholar . His Latin was poor , and during church services he would improvise parts of the Latin responses , developing a talent for invention when memory failed that proved useful in his later career . 
 In 1919 , aged sixteen , Richardson took a post as office boy with the Brighton branch of the Liverpool and Victoria insurance company . The pay , ten shillings a week , was attractive , but office life was not ; he lacked concentration , frequently posting documents to the wrong people as well as engaging in pranks that alarmed his superiors . His paternal grandmother died and left him £ 500 , which , he later said , transformed his life . He resigned from the office post , just in time to avoid being dismissed , and enrolled at the Brighton School of Art . His studies there convinced him that he lacked creativity , and that his draughtsmanship was not good enough . 
 Richardson left the art school in 1920 , and considered how else he might make a career . He briefly thought of pharmacy and then of journalism , abandoning each when he learned how much study the former required and how difficult mastering shorthand for the latter would be . He was still unsure what to do , when he saw Sir Frank Benson as Hamlet in a touring production . He was thrilled , and felt at once that he must become an actor . 
 <unk> by what was left of the legacy from his grandmother , Richardson determined to learn to act . He paid a local theatrical manager , Frank R <unk> , ten shillings a week to be a member of his company and be taught the craft of an actor . He made his stage debut in December 1920 with <unk> 's St Nicholas Players at the St Nicholas Hall , Brighton , a converted bacon factory . He played a gendarme in an adaptation of Les Misérables , and was soon entrusted with larger parts including Banquo in Macbeth and Malvolio in Twelfth Night . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 The heyday of the touring actor @-@ manager was nearing its end but some companies still flourished . As well as Benson 's , there were those of Sir John Martin @-@ Harvey , Ben Greet , and , only slightly less prestigious , Charles Doran . Richardson wrote to all four managers : the first two did not reply ; Greet saw him but had no vacancy ; Doran engaged him , at a wage of £ 3 a week . Richardson made his first appearance as a professional actor at the Marina Theatre , Lowestoft , in August 1921 , as Lorenzo in The Merchant of Venice . He remained with Doran 's company for most of the next two years , gradually gaining more important roles , including Banquo in Macbeth and Mark Antony in Julius Caesar . 
 Doran 's company specialised in the classics , principally Shakespeare . After two years of period costumes Richardson felt the urge to act in a modern work . He left Doran in 1923 and toured in a new play , Outward Bound by Sutton Vane . He returned to the classics in August 1924 , in Nigel Playfair 's touring production of The Way of the World , playing <unk> . While on that tour he married Muriel Hewitt , a young member of Doran 's company , known to him as " Kit " . To his great happiness , the two were able to work together for most of 1925 , both being engaged by Sir Barry Jackson of the Birmingham Repertory Theatre for a touring production of The Farmer 's Wife . From December of that year they were members of the main repertory company in Birmingham . Through Jackson 's chief director , the veteran taskmaster H K Ayliff , Richardson " absorbed the influence of older contemporaries like Gerald du Maurier , Charles Hawtrey and Mrs Patrick Campbell . " Hewitt was seen as a rising star but Richardson 's talents were not yet so apparent ; he was allotted supporting roles such as Lane in The Importance of Being Earnest and Albert <unk> in Hobson 's Choice . 
 Richardson made his London debut in July 1926 as the stranger in Oedipus at Colonus in a Sunday @-@ night performance at the Scala Theatre , with a cast including Percy Walsh , John Laurie and D A Clarke @-@ Smith . He then toured for three months in Eden Phillpotts 's comedy Devonshire Cream with Jackson 's company led by Cedric Hardwicke . 
 When Phillpotts 's next comedy , Yellow Sands , was to be mounted at the Haymarket Theatre in the West End , Richardson and his wife were both cast in good roles . The play opened in November 1926 and ran until September 1928 ; with 610 performances it was the longest London run of Richardson 's entire career . During the run Muriel Hewitt began to show early symptoms of encephalitis lethargica , a progressive and ultimately fatal illness . 
 Richardson left the run of Yellow Sands in March 1928 and rejoined Ayliff , playing Pygmalion in Back to Methuselah at the Royal Court Theatre ; also in the cast was a former colleague from the Birmingham Repertory , Laurence Olivier . The critics began to notice Richardson and he gained some favourable reviews . As <unk> in Ayliff 's modern @-@ dress production of The Taming of the Shrew , Richardson played the character as a breezy cockney , winning praise for turning a usually dreary role into something richly entertaining . For the rest of 1928 he appeared in what Miller describes as several unremarkable modern plays . For much of 1929 he toured South Africa in Gerald Lawrence 's company in three period costume plays , including The School for Scandal , in which he played Joseph Surface . The sole venture into musical comedy of his career was in Silver Wings in the West End and on tour . It was not a personal triumph ; the director 's final injunction to the company was , " For God 's sake don 't let Richardson sing " . In May 1930 Richardson was given the role of Roderigo in Othello in what seemed likely to be a prestigious production , with Paul Robeson in the title role . The biographer Ronald Hayman writes that though a fine singer , " Robeson had no ear for blank verse " and even Peggy Ashcroft 's superb performance as Desdemona was not enough to save the production from failure . Ashcroft 's notices were laudatory , while Richardson 's were mixed ; they admired each other and worked together frequently during the next four decades . 
 = = = Old Vic , 1930 – 32 = = = 
 In 1930 Richardson , with some misgivings , accepted an invitation to join The Old Vic company . The theatre , in an unfashionable location south of the Thames , had offered inexpensive tickets for opera and drama under its proprietor Lilian Baylis since 1912 . Its profile had been raised considerably by Baylis 's producer , Harcourt Williams , who in 1929 persuaded the young West End star John Gielgud to lead the drama company . For the following season Williams wanted Richardson to join , with a view to succeeding Gielgud from 1931 to 1932 . Richardson agreed , though he was not sure of his own suitability for a mainly Shakespearean repertoire , and was not enthusiastic about working with Gielgud : " I found his clothes extravagant , I found his conversation flippant . He was the New Young Man of his time and I didn 't like him . " 
 The first production of the season was Henry IV , Part 1 , with Gielgud as Hotspur and Richardson as Prince Hal ; the latter was thought by The Daily Telegraph " vivacious , but a figure of modern comedy rather than Shakespeare . " Richardson 's notices , and the relationship of the two leading men , improved markedly when Gielgud , who was playing Prospero , helped Richardson with his performance as Caliban in The Tempest : 
 He gave me about two hundred ideas , as he usually does , twenty @-@ five of which I eagerly seized on , and when I went away I thought , " This chap , you know , I don 't like him very much but by God he knows something about this here play . " ... And then out of that we formed a friendship . 
 The friendship and professional association lasted until the end of Richardson 's life . Gielgud wrote in 1983 , " Besides cherishing our long years of work together in the theatre , where he was such an inspiring and generous partner , I grew to love him in private life as a great gentleman , a rare spirit , fair and balanced , devotedly loyal and tolerant and , as a companion , bursting with vitality , curiosity and humour . " Among Richardson 's other parts in his first Old Vic season , <unk> in Antony and Cleopatra gained particularly good notices . The Morning Post commented that it placed him in the first rank of Shakespearean actors . At the beginning of 1931 Baylis re @-@ opened Sadler 's Wells Theatre with a production of Twelfth Night starring Gielgud as Malvolio and Richardson as Sir Toby <unk> . W. A. Darlington in The Daily Telegraph wrote of Richardson 's " ripe , rich and mellow Sir Toby , [ which ] I would go many miles to see again . " 
 During the summer break between the Old Vic 1930 – 31 and 1931 – 32 seasons , Richardson played at the Malvern Festival , under the direction of his old Birmingham director , Ayliff . Salaries at the Old Vic and the Festival were not large , and Richardson was glad of a job as an extra in the 1931 film Dreyfus . As his wife 's condition worsened he needed to pay for more and more nursing ; she was looked after in a succession of hospitals and care homes . 
 Succeeding Gielgud as leading man at the Old Vic , Richardson had a varied season , in which there were conspicuous successes interspersed with critical failures . James Agate was not convinced by him as the domineering Petruchio in The Taming of the Shrew ; in Julius Caesar the whole cast received tepid reviews . In Othello Richardson divided the critics . He emphasised the plausible charm of the murderous Iago to a degree that Agate thought " very good Richardson , but indifferent Shakespeare " , whereas The Times said , " He never stalked or hissed like a plain villain , and , in fact , we have seldom seen a man smile and smile and be a villain so adequately . " His biggest success of the season was as Bottom in A Midsummer Night 's Dream . Both Agate and Darlington commented on how the actor transformed the character from the bumbling workman to the magically changed creature on whom Titania dotes . Agate wrote that most of those who had played the part hitherto " seem to have thought Bottom , with the ass 's head on , was the same Bottom , only funnier . Shakespeare says he was ' translated ' , and Mr Richardson translated him . " With Sybil Thorndike as a guest star and Richardson as Ralph , The Knight of the Burning Pestle was a hit with audiences and critics , as was a revival of Twelfth Night , with Edith Evans as Viola and Richardson again playing Sir Toby , finishing the season to renewed praise . 
 = = = West End and Broadway = = = 
 Richardson returned to the Malvern Festival in August 1932 . He was in four plays , the last of which , Bernard Shaw 's Too True to Be Good , transferred to the New Theatre in London the following month . The play was not liked by audiences and ran for only forty @-@ seven performances , but Richardson , in Agate 's phrase , " ran away with the piece " , and established himself as a West End star . In 1933 he had his first speaking part in a film , playing the villain , Nigel Hartley , in The Ghoul , which starred Cedric Hardwicke and Boris Karloff . The following year he was cast in his first starring role in a film , as the hero in The Return of Bulldog Drummond . The Times commented , " Mr Ralph Richardson makes Drummond as brave and stupid on the screen as he is in print . " 
 Over the next two years Richardson appeared in six plays in London ranging from Peter Pan ( as Mr Darling and Captain Hook ) to Cornelius , an allegorical play written for and dedicated to him by J B Priestley . Cornelius ran for two months ; this was less than expected , and left Richardson with a gap in engagements in the second half of 1935 . He filled it by accepting an invitation from Katharine Cornell and Guthrie McClintic to play Mercutio in their production of Romeo and Juliet on a US tour and on Broadway . Romeo was played by Maurice Evans and Juliet by Cornell . Richardson 's performance greatly impressed American critics , and Cornell invited him to return to New York to co @-@ star with her in Macbeth and Antony and Cleopatra , though nothing came of this . 
 In 1936 London Films released Things to Come , in which Richardson played the swaggering warlord " The Boss " . His performance parodied the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini so effectively that the film was immediately banned in Italy . The producer was Alexander Korda ; the two men formed a long and mutually beneficial friendship . Richardson later said of Korda , " Though not so very much older than I am , I regarded him in a way as a father , and to me he was as generous as a prince . " In May 1936 Richardson and Olivier jointly directed and starred in a new piece by Priestley , Bees on the Boatdeck . Both actors won excellent notices , but the play , an allegory of Britain 's decline , did not attract the public . It closed after four weeks , the last in a succession of West End productions in which Richardson appeared to much acclaim but which were box @-@ office failures . In August of the same year he finally had a long @-@ running star part , the title role in Barré Lyndon 's comedy thriller , The Amazing Dr <unk> , which played for 492 performances , closing in October 1937 . 
 After a short run in The Silent Knight , described by Miller as " a Hungarian fantasy in rhymed verse set in the fifteenth century " , Richardson returned to the Old Vic for the 1937 – 38 season , playing Bottom once again and switching parts in Othello , playing the title role , with Olivier as Iago . The director , Tyrone Guthrie , wanted to experiment with the theory that Iago 's villainy is driven by suppressed homosexual love for Othello . Olivier was willing to co @-@ operate , but Richardson was not ; audiences and most critics failed to spot the supposed motivation of Olivier 's Iago , and Richardson 's Othello seemed underpowered . O 'Connor believes that Richardson did not succeed with Othello or Macbeth because of the characters ' single @-@ minded " blind driving passion – too extreme , too inhuman " , which was incomprehensible and alien to him . It was for the same reason , in O 'Connor 's view , that he never attempted the title roles in Hamlet or King Lear . 
 Richardson made his television debut in January 1939 , reprising his 1936 stage role of the chief engineer in Bees on the Boatdeck . His last stage part in the 1930s was Robert Johnson , an Everyman figure , in Priestley 's Johnson Over Jordan directed by Basil Dean . It was an experimental piece , using music ( by Benjamin Britten ) and dance as well as dialogue , and was another production in which Richardson was widely praised but which did not prosper at the box @-@ office . After it closed , in May 1939 , he did not act on stage for more than five years . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 At the outbreak of war Richardson joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve as a sub @-@ lieutenant pilot . He had taken flying lessons during the 1930s and had logged 200 hours of flying time , but , though a notoriously reckless driver , he admitted to being a timid pilot . He counted himself lucky to have been accepted , but the Fleet Air Arm was short of pilots . He rose to the rank of lieutenant @-@ commander . His work was mostly routine administration , probably because of " the large number of planes which seemed to fall to pieces under his control " , through which he acquired the nickname " <unk> " Richardson . He served at several bases in the south of England , and in April 1941 , at the Royal Naval Air Station , Lee @-@ on @-@ Solent , he was able to welcome Olivier , newly commissioned as a temporary sub @-@ lieutenant . Olivier rapidly eclipsed Richardson 's record for <unk> . 
 In 1942 , on his way to visit his wife at the cottage where she was cared for by a devoted couple , Richardson crashed his motor @-@ bike and was in hospital for several weeks . Kit was at that point mobile enough to visit him , but later in the year her condition worsened and in October she died . He was intensely lonely , though the comradeship of naval life was some comfort . In 1944 he married again . His second wife was the actress Meriel Forbes , a member of the Forbes @-@ Robertson theatrical family . The marriage brought him lifelong happiness and a son , Charles ( 1945 – 98 ) , who became a television stage manager . 
 During the war Richardson compered occasional morale @-@ boosting shows at the Royal Albert Hall and elsewhere , and made one short film and three full @-@ length ones , including The Silver Fleet , in which he played a Dutch Resistance hero , and The Volunteer , a propaganda film in which he appeared as himself . 
 Throughout the war Guthrie had striven to keep the Old Vic company going , even after German bombing in 1942 left the theatre a near @-@ ruin . A small troupe toured the provinces , with Sybil Thorndike at its head . By 1944 , with the tide of the war turning , Guthrie felt it time to re @-@ establish the company in a London base , and invited Richardson to head it . Richardson made two stipulations : first , as he was unwilling to seek his own release from the forces , the governing board of the Old Vic should explain to the authorities why it should be granted ; secondly , that he should share the acting and management in a triumvirate . Initially he proposed Gielgud and Olivier as his colleagues , but the former declined , saying , " It would be a disaster , you would have to spend your whole time as referee between Larry and me . " It was finally agreed that the third member would be the stage director John Burrell . The Old Vic governors approached the Royal Navy to secure the release of Richardson and Olivier ; the Sea Lords consented , with , as Olivier put it , " a <unk> and lack of reluctance which was positively hurtful . " 
 = = = Old Vic , 1944 – 47 = = = 
 The triumvirate secured the New Theatre for their first season and recruited a company . Thorndike was joined by , among others , Harcourt Williams , Joyce Redman and Margaret Leighton . It was agreed to open with a repertory of four plays : Peer Gynt , Arms and the Man , Richard III and Uncle Vanya . Richardson 's roles were Peer , Bluntschli , Richmond and Vanya ; Olivier played the Button Moulder , Sergius , Richard and Astrov . The first three productions met with acclaim from reviewers and audiences ; Uncle Vanya had a mixed reception . The Times thought Olivier 's Astrov " a most distinguished portrait " and Richardson 's Vanya " the perfect compound of absurdity and pathos " . Agate , on the other hand , commented , " ' <unk> for life , sir , and jolly miserable ' is what Uncle Vanya takes three acts to say . And I just cannot believe in Mr Richardson wallowing in misery : his voice is the wrong colour . " In 1945 the company toured Germany , where they were seen by many thousands of Allied servicemen ; they also appeared at the Comédie @-@ Française theatre in Paris , the first foreign company to be given that honour . The critic Harold Hobson wrote that Richardson and Olivier quickly " made the Old Vic the most famous theatre in the Anglo @-@ Saxon world . " 
 The second season , in 1945 , featured two double @-@ bills . The first consisted of Henry IV , Parts 1 and 2 . Olivier played the warrior Hotspur in the first and the doddering Justice Shallow in the second . He received good notices , but by general consent the production belonged to Richardson as Falstaff . Agate wrote , " He had everything the part wants – the exuberance , the mischief , the gusto . ... Here is something better than virtuosity in character @-@ acting – the spirit of the part shining through the actor . " As a teenager , the director Peter Hall saw the production ; he said fifty years later , " Of the performances I 've seen in my life I 'm <unk> I saw that . " In the second double bill it was Olivier who dominated , in the title roles of Oedipus Rex and The Critic . Richardson took the supporting role of Tiresias in the first , and the silent , cameo part of Lord Burleigh in the second . After the London season the company played both the double @-@ bills and Uncle Vanya in a six @-@ week season on Broadway . 
 The third , and final , season under the triumvirate was in 1946 – 47 . Olivier played King Lear , and Richardson , Cyrano de Bergerac . Olivier would have preferred the roles to be cast the other way about , but Richardson did not wish to attempt Lear . Richardson 's other roles in the season were Inspector Goole in An Inspector Calls , Face in The Alchemist and John of Gaunt in Richard II , which he directed , with Alec Guinness in the title role . 
 During the run of Cyrano , Richardson was knighted , to Olivier 's undisguised envy . The younger man received the accolade six months later , by which time the days of the triumvirate were numbered . The high profile of the two star actors did not endear them to the new chairman of the Old Vic governors , Lord Esher . He had ambitions to be the first head of the National Theatre and had no intention of letting actors run it . He was encouraged by Guthrie , who , having instigated the appointment of Richardson and Olivier , had come to resent their knighthoods and international fame . Esher terminated their contracts while both were out of the country , and they and Burrell were said to have " resigned " . 
 Looking back in 1971 , Bernard Levin wrote that the Old Vic company of 1944 to 1947 " was probably the most illustrious that has ever been assembled in this country " . The Times said that the triumvirate 's years were the greatest in the Old Vic 's history ; as The Guardian put it , " the governors summarily sacked them in the interests of a more mediocre company spirit " . 
 = = = International fame = = = 
 For Richardson , parting company with the Old Vic brought the advantage of being free , for the first time , to earn substantial pay . The company 's highest salary had been £ 40 a week . After his final Old Vic season he made two films in quick succession for Korda . The first , Anna Karenina , with Vivien Leigh , was an expensive failure , although Richardson 's notices in the role of <unk> were excellent . The second , The Fallen Idol , had notable commercial and critical success , and won awards in Europe and America . It remained one of Richardson 's favourites of his films . In Miller 's words , " Carol Reed 's sensitive direction drew faultless performances not just from Ralph as Baines ( the butler and mistakenly suspected murderer ) , but also from Michèle Morgan as his mistress , Sonia <unk> as his cold @-@ hearted wife , and especially from Bobby <unk> as the distraught boy , Felipe . " 
 Richardson had gained a national reputation as a great actor while at the Old Vic ; films gave him the opportunity to reach an international audience . Unlike some of his theatre colleagues , he was never condescending about film work . He admitted that film could be " a cage for an actor , but a cage in which they sometimes put a little gold " , but he did not regard filming as merely a means of subsidising his much less profitable stage work . He said , " I 've never been one of those chaps who scoff at films . I think they 're a marvellous medium , and are to the stage what engravings are to painting . The theatre may give you big chances , but the cinema teaches you the details of craftsmanship . " The Fallen Idol was followed by Richardson 's first Hollywood part . He played Dr Sloper , the overprotective father of Olivia de Havilland in The Heiress , based on Henry James 's novel Washington Square . The film did not prosper at the box @-@ office despite good reviews , an Academy Award for Best Actress for Havilland , and nominations for the director ( William Wyler ) and Richardson . 
 The Heiress had been a Broadway play before it was a film . Richardson so liked his part that he decided to play it in the West End , with Ashcroft as Sloper 's daughter Catherine . The piece was to open in February 1949 at Richardson 's favourite theatre , the Haymarket . Rehearsals were chaotic . Burrell , whom Richardson had asked to direct , was not up to the task – possibly , Miller speculates , because of nervous exhaustion from the recent traumas at the Old Vic . With only a week to go before the first performance , the producer , Binkie Beaumont , asked him to stand down , and Gielgud was recruited in his place . Matters improved astonishingly ; the production was a complete success and ran in London for 644 performances . 
 After one long run in The Heiress , Richardson appeared in another , R C Sherriff 's Home at Seven , in 1950 . He played an amnesiac bank clerk who fears he may have committed murder . He later recreated the part in a radio broadcast , and in a film version , which was his sole venture into direction for the screen . Once he had played himself into a role in a long run , Richardson felt able to work during the daytime in films , and made two others in the early 1950s beside the film of the Sherriff piece : Outcast of the Islands , directed by Carol Reed , and David Lean 's The Sound Barrier , released in 1951 and 1952 respectively . For the latter he won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor . With his characteristic liking for switching between modern roles and the classics , his next stage part was Colonel Vershinin in Three Sisters in 1951 . He headed a strong cast , with Renée <unk> , Margaret Leighton and Celia Johnson as the sisters , but reviewers found the production weakly directed , and some felt that Richardson failed to disguise his positive personality when playing the ineffectual Vershinin . He did not attempt Chekhov again for more than a quarter of a century . 
 In 1952 Richardson appeared at the Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon Festival at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre ( forerunner of the Royal Shakespeare Company ) . His return to Shakespeare for the first time since his Old Vic days was keenly anticipated , but turned out to be a serious disappointment . He had poor reviews for his Prospero in The Tempest , judged too prosaic . In the second production of the festival his Macbeth , directed by Gielgud , was generally considered a failure . He was thought unconvincingly villainous ; the influential young critic Kenneth Tynan professed himself " unmoved to the point of paralysis , " though blaming the director more than the star . Richardson 's third and final role in the Stratford season , Volpone in Ben Jonson 's play , received much better , but not ecstatic , notices . He did not play at Stratford again . 
 Back in the West End , Richardson was in another Sherriff play , The White Carnation , in 1953 , and in November of the same year he and Gielgud starred together in N C Hunter 's A Day by the Sea , which ran at the Haymarket for 386 performances . During this period , Richardson played Dr Watson in an American / BBC radio co @-@ production of Sherlock Holmes stories , with Gielgud as Holmes and Orson Welles as the evil Professor Moriarty . These recordings were later released commercially on disc . 
 In late 1954 and early 1955 Richardson and his wife toured Australia together with Sybil Thorndike and her husband , Lewis Casson , playing Terence Rattigan 's plays The Sleeping Prince and Separate Tables . The following year he worked with Olivier again , playing Buckingham to Olivier 's Richard in the 1955 film of Richard III . Olivier , who directed , was exasperated at his old friend 's insistence on playing the role sympathetically . 
 Richardson turned down the role of <unk> in Peter Hall 's premiere of the English language version of Samuel Beckett 's Waiting for Godot in 1955 and later reproached himself for missing the chance to be in " the greatest play of my generation " . He had consulted Gielgud , who dismissed the piece as rubbish , and even after discussing the play with the author , Richardson could not understand the play or the character . Richardson 's Timon of Athens in his 1956 return to the Old Vic was well received , as was his Broadway appearance in The Waltz of the Toreadors for which he was nominated for a Tony Award in 1957 . He concluded the 1950s with two contrasting West End successes , Robert Bolt 's Flowering Cherry , and Graham Greene 's The Complaisant Lover . The former , a sad piece about a failed and deluded insurance manager , ran for 435 performances in 1957 – 58 ; Richardson co @-@ starred with three leading ladies in succession : Celia Johnson , Wendy Hiller and his wife . Greene 's comedy was a surprise hit , running for 402 performances from June 1959 . Throughout rehearsals the cast treated the love @-@ triangle theme as one of despair , and were astonished to find themselves playing to continual laughter . During the run , Richardson worked by day on another Greene work , the film Our Man in Havana . Alec Guinness , who played the main role , noted " the object @-@ lesson in upstaging in the last scene between Richardson and Noël Coward " , faithfully captured by the director , Carol Reed . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 Richardson began the 1960s with a failure . Enid Bagnold 's play The Last Joke was savaged by the critics ( " a meaningless jumble of pretentious whimsy " was one description ) . His only reason for playing in the piece was the chance of acting with Gielgud , but both men quickly regretted their involvement . Richardson then went to the US to appear in Sidney Lumet 's film adaptation of Long Day 's Journey into Night , alongside Katharine Hepburn . Lumet later recalled how little guidance Richardson needed . Once , the director went into lengthy detail about the playing of a scene , and when he had finished , Richardson said , " Ah , I think I know what you want – a little more flute and a little less cello " . After that , Lumet was sparing with suggestions . Richardson was jointly awarded the Cannes Film Festival 's Best Actor prize with his co @-@ stars Jason Robards Jr and Dean Stockwell . 
 Richardson 's next stage role was in a starry revival of The School for Scandal , as Sir Peter Teazle , directed by Gielgud in 1962 . The production was taken on a North American tour , in which Gielgud joined the cast as , he said , " the oldest Joseph Surface in the business " . A revival of Six Characters in Search of an Author in 1963 was judged by the critic Sheridan Morley to have been a high @-@ point of the actor 's work in the 1960s . Richardson joined a British Council tour of South Africa and Europe the following year ; he played Bottom again , and Shylock in The Merchant of Venice . 
 For his next four stage productions , Richardson was at the Haymarket . Father Carving a Statue ( 1964 ) by Graham Greene was short @-@ lived . He had a more reliable vehicle in Shaw 's You Never Can Tell ( 1966 ) in which he played the philosopher @-@ waiter William , and in the same year he had a great success as Sir Anthony Absolute in The Rivals . The critic David Benedictus wrote of Richardson 's performance , " ... he is choleric and gouty certainly , the script demands that he shall be , but his most engaging quality , his love for his son in spite of himself , shines through every line . " In 1967 he again played Shylock ; this was the last time he acted in a Shakespeare play on stage . His performance won critical praise , but the rest of the cast were less well received . 
 Interspersed with his stage plays , Richardson made thirteen cinema films during the decade . On screen he played historical figures including Sir Edward Carson ( Oscar Wilde , 1960 ) , W E Gladstone ( Khartoum , 1966 ) and Sir Edward Grey ( Oh ! What a Lovely War , 1969 ) . He was scrupulous about historical accuracy in his portrayals , and researched eras and characters in great detail before filming . Occasionally his precision was greater than directors wished , as when , in Khartoum , he insisted on wearing a small black finger @-@ stall because the real Gladstone had worn one following an injury . After a role playing a disabled tycoon and Sean Connery 's father in Woman of Straw , in 1965 he played Alexander <unk> in Lean 's Doctor Zhivago , an exceptionally successful film at the box office , which , together with The Wrong Box and Khartoum , earned him a BAFTA nomination for best leading actor in 1966 . Other film roles from this period included Lord Fortnum ( The Bed @-@ Sitting Room , 1969 ) and Leclerc ( The Looking Glass War , 1969 ) . The casts of Oh ! What a Lovely War and Khartoum included Olivier , but he and Richardson did not appear in the same scenes , and never met during the filming . Olivier was by now running the National Theatre , temporarily based at the Old Vic , but showed little desire to recruit his former colleague for any of the company 's productions . 
 In 1964 Richardson was the voice of General Haig in the twenty @-@ six @-@ part BBC documentary series The Great War . In 1967 he played Lord Emsworth on BBC television in dramatisations of P G Wodehouse 's Blandings Castle stories , with his wife playing Emsworth 's bossy sister Constance , and Stanley Holloway as the butler , Beach . He was nervous about acting in a television series : " I 'm sixty @-@ four and that 's a bit old to be taking on a new medium . " The performances divided critical opinion . The Times thought the stars " a sheer delight ... situation comedy is joy in their hands " . The reviewers in The Guardian and The Observer thought the three too theatrical to be effective on the small screen . For television he recorded studio versions of two plays in which he had appeared on stage : Johnson Over Jordan ( 1965 ) and Twelfth Night ( 1968 ) . 
 During the decade , Richardson made numerous sound recordings . For the Caedmon Audio label he re @-@ created his role as Cyrano de Bergerac opposite Anna Massey as Roxane , and played the title role in a complete recording of Julius Caesar , with a cast that included Anthony Quayle as Brutus , John Mills as Cassius and Alan Bates as Antony . Other Caedmon recordings were Measure for Measure , The School for Scandal and No Man 's Land . Richardson also recorded some English Romantic poetry , including The Rime of the Ancient Mariner and poems by Keats and Shelley for the label . For Decca Records Richardson recorded the narration for Prokofiev 's Peter and the Wolf , and for RCA the <unk> for Vaughan Williams 's Sinfonia antartica – both with the London Symphony Orchestra , the Prokofiev conducted by Sir Malcolm Sargent and the Vaughan Williams by André Previn . 
 Richardson 's last stage role of the decade was in 1969 , as Dr Rance in What the Butler Saw by Joe Orton . It was a conspicuous failure . The public hated the play and made the fact vociferously clear at the first night . 
 = = = 1970 – 74 = = = 
 In 1970 Richardson was with Gielgud at the Royal Court in David Storey 's Home . The play is set in the gardens of a nursing home for mental patients , though this is not clear at first . The two elderly men converse in a desultory way , are joined and briefly enlivened by two more extrovert female patients , are slightly scared by another male patient , and are then left together , conversing even more emptily . The Punch critic , Jeremy Kingston wrote : 
 At the end of the play , as the climax to two perfect , delicate performances , Sir Ralph and Sir John are standing , staring out above the heads of the audience , cheeks wet with tears in memory of some unnamed misery , weeping <unk> as the lights fade on them . It makes a tragic , unforgettable close . 
 The play transferred to the West End and then to Broadway . In The New York Times Clive Barnes wrote , " The two men , bleakly examining the little nothingness of their lives , are John Gielgud and Ralph Richardson giving two of the greatest performances of two careers that have been among the glories of the English @-@ speaking theater . " The original cast recorded the play for television in 1972 . 
 Back at the Royal Court in 1971 Richardson starred in John Osborne 's West of Suez , after which , in July 1972 , he surprised many by joining Peggy Ashcroft in a drawing @-@ room comedy , Lloyd George Knew My Father by William Douglas @-@ Home . Some critics felt the play was too slight for its two stars , but Harold Hobson thought Richardson found unsuspected depths in the character of the ostensibly phlegmatic General Boothroyd . The play was a hit with the public , and when Ashcroft left after four months , Celia Johnson took over until May 1973 , when Richardson handed over to Andrew Cruickshank in the West End . Richardson afterwards toured the play in Australia and Canada with his wife as co @-@ star . An Australian critic wrote , " The play is a vehicle for Sir Ralph ... but the real driver is Lady Richardson . " 
 Richardson 's film roles of the early 1970s ranged from the Crypt Keeper in Tales from the Crypt ( 1972 ) to the Caterpillar in Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland ( 1972 ) and Dr Rank in Ibsen 's A Doll 's House ( 1973 ) . The last of these was released at the same time as an American film of the same play , starring Jane Fonda ; the timing detracted from the impact of both versions , but Richardson 's performance won good reviews . In The Observer , George Melly wrote , " As for Sir Ralph as Dr Rank , he grows from the ageing elegant cynic of his first appearance ( it 's even a pleasure to watch him remove his top hat ) to become the heroic dying stoic of his final exit without in any way forcing the pace . " In 1973 Richardson received a BAFTA nomination for his performance of George IV in Lady Caroline Lamb , in which Olivier appeared as Wellington . 
 = = = 1975 – 83 = = = 
 Peter Hall , having succeeded Olivier as director of the National Theatre , was determined to attract Ashcroft , Gielgud and Richardson into the company . In 1975 he successfully offered Richardson the title role in Ibsen 's John Gabriel <unk> , with Ashcroft and Wendy Hiller in the two main female roles . The production was one of the early successes of Hall 's initially difficult tenure . The critic Michael Billington wrote that Hall had done the impossible in reconciling the contradictory aspects of the play and that " Richardson 's <unk> is both moral monster and self @-@ made superman ; and the performance is full of a strange , unearthly music that belongs to this actor alone . " 
 Richardson continued his long stage association with Gielgud in Harold Pinter 's No Man 's Land ( 1975 ) directed by Hall at the National . Gielgud played Spooner , a down @-@ at @-@ heel sponger and opportunist , and Richardson was Hirst , a prosperous but isolated and vulnerable author . There is both comedy and pain in the piece : the critic Michael Coveney called their performance " the funniest double @-@ act in town " , but Peter Hall said of Richardson , " I do not think any other actor could fill Hirst with such a sense of loneliness and creativity as Ralph does . The production was a critical and box @-@ office success , and played at the Old Vic , in the West End , at the Lyttelton Theatre in the new National Theatre complex , on Broadway and on television , over a period of three years . 
 After No Man 's Land , Richardson once again turned to light comedy by Douglas @-@ Home , from whom he commissioned The Kingfisher . A story of an old love affair rekindled , it opened with Celia Johnson as the female lead . It ran for six months , and would have lasted much longer had Johnson not withdrawn , leaving Richardson unwilling to rehearse the piece with anyone else . He returned to the National , and to Chekhov , in 1978 as the aged retainer Firs in The Cherry Orchard . The notices for the production were mixed ; those for Richardson 's next West End play were uniformly dreadful . This was Alice 's Boys , a spy and murder piece generally agreed to be preposterous . A legend , possibly apocryphal , grew that during the short run Richardson walked to the front of the stage one night and asked , " Is there a doctor in the house ? " A doctor stood up , and Richardson sadly said to him , " Doctor , isn 't this a terrible play ? " 
 After this débâcle the rest of Richardson 's stage career was at the National , with one late exception . He played Lord Touchwood in The Double Dealer ( 1978 ) , the Master in The Fruits of Enlightenment ( 1979 ) , Old <unk> in The Wild Duck ( 1979 ) and Kitchen in Storey 's Early Days , specially written for him . The last toured in North America after the London run . His final West End play was The Understanding ( 1982 ) , a gentle comedy of late @-@ flowering love . Celia Johnson was cast as his co @-@ star , but died suddenly just before the first night . Joan Greenwood stepped into the breach , but the momentum of the production had gone , and it closed after eight weeks . 
 Films in which Richardson appeared in the later 1970s and early 1980s include Rollerball ( 1975 ) , The Man in the Iron Mask ( 1977 ) Dragonslayer ( 1981 ) in which he played a wizard and Time Bandits ( 1981 ) in which he played the Supreme Being . In 1983 he was seen as <unk> in Tony Palmer 's Wagner ; this was a film of enormous length , starring Richard Burton as Richard Wagner and was noted at the time , and subsequently , for the cameo roles of three conspiratorial courtiers , played by Gielgud , Olivier and Richardson – the only film in which the three played scenes together . For television , Richardson played Simeon in Jesus of Nazareth ( 1977 ) , made studio recordings of No Man 's Land ( 1978 ) and Early Days ( 1982 ) , and was a guest in the 1981 Morecambe and Wise Christmas Show . His last radio broadcast was in 1982 in a documentary programme about Little Tich , whom he had watched at the Brighton Hippodrome before the First World War . 
 Richardson 's final role was Don Alberto in Inner Voices by Eduardo De Filippo at the National in 1983 . The direction was criticised by reviewers , but Richardson 's performance won high praise . He played an old man who denounces the next @-@ door family for murder and then realises he dreamt it but cannot persuade the police that he was wrong . Both Punch and The New York Times found his performance " mesmerising " . After the London run the piece was scheduled to go on tour in October . Just before that , Richardson suffered a series of strokes , from which he died on 10 October , at the age of eighty . All the theatres in London dimmed their lights in tribute ; the funeral Mass was at Richardson 's favourite church , the Church of our Lady of the Assumption and St Gregory , in Soho ; he was buried in Highgate Cemetery ; and the following month there was a memorial service in Westminster Abbey . 
 Richardson 's last films – one for television and two for the cinema – were released after his death . These were Witness for the Prosecution , in which he played the barrister Sir Wilfrid Robarts , co @-@ starring with Deborah Kerr and Diana Rigg ; Give My Regards to Broad Street , with Paul McCartney ; and Greystoke , a retelling of the Tarzan story . In the last , Richardson played the stern old Lord Greystoke , rejuvenated in his latter days by his lost grandson , reclaimed from the wild ; he was posthumously nominated for an Academy Award . The film bears the <unk> , " Dedicated to Ralph Richardson 1902 – 1983 – In Loving Memory " 
 = = Character and reputation = = 
 As a man , Richardson was on the one hand deeply private and on the other flamboyantly unconventional . Frank Muir said of him , " It 's the <unk> of Ralph that one has to cling to ; he wasn 't really quite like other people . " In Coveney 's phrase , " His oddness was ever startling and never hardened into mere eccentricity . " Richardson would introduce colleagues to his ferrets by name , ride at high speed on his powerful motor @-@ bike in his seventies , have a parrot flying round his study eating his pencils , or take a pet mouse out for a stroll , but behind such unorthodox behaviour there was a closely guarded self who remained an enigma to even his closest colleagues . Tynan wrote in The New Yorker that Richardson " made me feel that I have known this man all my life and that I have never met anyone who more adroitly <unk> me while keeping me firmly at arm 's length . " 
 Richardson was not known for his political views . He reportedly voted for Winston Churchill 's Conservative party in 1945 , but there is little other mention of party politics in the biographies . Having been a devoted Roman Catholic as a boy , he became disillusioned with religion as a young man , but drifted back to faith : " I came to a kind of feeling I could touch a live wire through prayer " . He retained his early love of painting , and listed it and tennis in his Who 's Who entry as his recreations . 
 Peter Hall said of Richardson , " I think he was the greatest actor I have ever worked with . " The director David Ayliff , son of Richardson 's and Olivier 's mentor , said , " Ralph was a natural actor , he couldn 't stop being a perfect actor ; Olivier did it through sheer hard work and determination . " Comparing the two , Hobson said that Olivier always made the audience feel inferior , and Richardson always made them feel superior . The actor Edward Hardwicke agreed , saying that audiences were in awe of Olivier , " whereas Ralph would always make you feel sympathy ... you wanted to give him a big hug . But they were both giants . " 
