 = = Live performances = = 
 At the 41st GMA Dove Awards , Casting Crowns performed Until the Whole World Hears along with a children 's choir . At a concert at the Sprint Center in Kansas City , Missouri on February 5 , 2010 , Casting Crowns opened with the song . At concerts in Hershey , Pennsylvania ( February 28 , 2010 ) , Johnson City , Tennessee ( March 8 , 2012 ) , and Grand Rapids , Michigan ( February 16 , 2012 ) , Casting Crowns closed their set list with the song . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Roberto Cofresí = 
 Roberto Cofresí y Ramírez de Arellano ( June 17 , 1791 – March 29 , 1825 ) , better known as El Pirata Cofresí , was a pirate from Puerto Rico . Despite his birth into a noble family , the political and economic difficulties faced by the island as a colony of the Spanish Empire during the late 18th and early 19th centuries meant that his household was poor . Cofresí worked at sea from an early age ; although this familiarized him with the region 's geography , it provided only a modest salary . He eventually decided to abandon a sailor 's life , becoming a pirate . Despite previous links to land @-@ based criminal activities , the reason for Cofresí 's change of vocation is unknown ; historians speculate that he may have worked as a privateer aboard El Scipión , owned by one of his cousins . 
 The timing of this decision was crucial in establishing him as the dominant Caribbean pirate of the era . Cofresí began his new career in early 1823 , filling a role vacant in the Spanish Main since the death of Jean Lafitte , and was the last major target of West Indies anti @-@ piracy operations . While piracy was heavily monitored and most pirates were rarely successful , Cofresí was confirmed to have plundered at least eight vessels and has been credited with over 70 captures . At the height of his career , he evaded capture by vessels from Spain , Gran Colombia , United Kingdom , Denmark , France and the United States . Cofresí preferred to outrun his pursuers but his flotilla engaged the West Indies Squadron twice , attacking the schooners USS Grampus and USS Beagle . 
 Cofresí commanded several small @-@ draft vessels , the best known a fast six @-@ gun sloop named Anne , and demonstrated a preference for speed and maneuverability over firepower . He manned them with small , rotating crews , which most contemporary documents and accounts numbered at 10 to 20 in size . Although most crew members were recruited locally , men from the other Antilles , Central America and expatriate Europeans occasionally joined the pirates . Unlike his predecessors , Cofresí is not known to have imposed a pirate code on his crew ; his leadership was enhanced by an audacious personality , a trait acknowledged even by his pursuers . According to 19th @-@ century reports he had a rule of engagement that when a vessel was captured , only those willing to join his crew were permitted to live . Cofresí 's influence extended to a large number of civil informants and associates , forming a network which took 14 years after his death to fully dismantle . 
 Despite never confessing to a murder , he reportedly boasted about his crimes ; the number of people who died as a result of his pillaging ranged from 300 to 400 , mostly foreigners . Cofresí proved too much for local authorities who , unable to contain him themselves , accepted international help to capture the pirate ; Spain created an alliance with the West Indies Squadron and the Danish government of Saint Thomas . On March 5 , 1825 , the alliance set a trap which forced Anne into a naval battle . After 45 minutes , Cofresí abandoned his ship and escaped overland ; he was recognized by a local resident , who ambushed and injured him . Cofresí was captured and imprisoned , making a last unsuccessful attempt to escape by trying to bribe an official with part of a hidden stash . The pirates were sent to San Juan , Puerto Rico , where a brief military tribunal found them guilty and sentenced them to death . On March 29 , 1825 , Cofresí and most of his crew were executed by firing squad . 
 The pirate inspired stories and myths after his death , most emphasizing a Robin Hood @-@ like " steal from the rich , give to the poor " philosophy which became associated with him . In poetry and oral tradition this portrayal has evolved into legend , commonly accepted as fact in Puerto Rico and throughout the West Indies . A subset of these claims that Cofresí became part of the Puerto Rican independence movement and other secessionist initiatives , including Simón Bolívar 's campaign against Spain . Historic and mythical accounts of his life have inspired songs , poems , plays , books and films . In Puerto Rico caves , beaches and other alleged hideouts or locations of buried treasure have been named after Cofresí , and a resort town near Puerto Plata in the Dominican Republic is named for him . 
 = = Early years = = 
 = = = Lineage = = = 
 In 1945 , historian Enrique Ramírez Brau speculated that Cofresí may have had Jewish ancestry . A theory , held by David Cuesta and historian Úrsula Acosta ( a member of the Puerto Rican Genealogy Society ) , held that the name <unk> ( " copper stone " ) may have been chosen by his family when the 18th @-@ century European Jewish population adopted surnames . The theory was later discarded when their research uncovered a complete family tree prepared by Cofresí 's cousin , Luigi de Jenner , indicating that their name was spelled Kupferschein ( not <unk> ) . Originally from Prague , Cofresí paternal patriarch Cristoforo Kupferschein received a recognition and coat of arms from Ferdinand I of Austria in December 1549 and eventually moved to Trieste . His last name was probably adapted from the town of <unk> . After its arrival , the family became one of Trieste 's early settlers . Cristoforo 's son Felice was recognized as a noble in 1620 , becoming Edler von Kupferschein . The family gained prestige and became one of the city 's wealthiest , with the next generation receiving the best possible education and marrying into other influential families . Cofresí 's grandfather , Giovanni <unk> Kupferschein , held several offices in the police , military and municipal administration . According to Acosta , Cofresí 's father Francesco received a <unk> education and left at age 19 for Frankfurt ( probably in search of a university or legal practice ) . In Frankfurt he mingled with influential figures such as Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , returning to Trieste two years later . 
 As a cosmopolitan , mercantile city Trieste was a probable hub of illicit trade , and Francesco was forced to leave after he killed Josephus Steffani on July 31 , 1778 . Although Steffani 's death is commonly attributed to a duel , given their acquaintanceship ( both worked at a criminal court ) it may have been related to illegal activity . Francesco 's name and those of four sailors soon became linked to the murder . Convicted in absentia , the fugitive remained in touch with his family . Francesco went to Barcelona , reportedly learning Spanish there . By 1784 he had settled in Cabo Rojo , Puerto Rico , a harbor town in the municipality of San Germán , where he was accepted by the local aristocracy with the Spanish honorific Don ( " of noble origin " ) . Francesco 's name was Hispanicized to Francisco Cofresí , which was easier for his neighbors to pronounce . Since he was linked to illegal commerce in his homeland , he probably relocated to Cabo Rojo for strategic reasons ; its harbor was far from San Juan , the capital . Francisco soon met María Germana Ramírez de Arellano , and they married . His wife was born to Clemente Ramírez de Arellano y del Toro , a noble and first cousin of town founder Nicolás Ramírez de Arellano . Her family , descended from the aristocracy of Navarre , owned a significant amount of land in Cabo Rojo . After their marriage the couple settled in El <unk> ( or El <unk> ) , near the coast . Francisco 's father Giovanni died in 1789 , and a petition pardoning him for Steffani 's murder a decade before was granted two years later ( enabling him to return to Trieste ) . However , no evidence exists that Francisco ever returned to the city . 
 = = = Penniless nobleman and marauder = = = 
 The Latin American wars of independence had repercussions in Puerto Rico ; due to widespread privateering and other naval warfare , maritime commerce suffered heavily . Cabo Rojo was among the municipalities affected most , with its ports at a virtual standstill . African slaves took to the sea in an attempt at freedom ; merchants were assessed higher taxes and harassed by foreigners . Under these conditions , Cofresí was born to Francisco and María Germana . The youngest of four children , he had one sister ( Juana ) and two brothers ( Juan Francisco and Ignacio ) . Cofresí was baptized into the Roman Catholic Church by José de Roxas , the first priest in Cabo Rojo , when he was fifteen days old . María died when Cofresí was four years old , and an aunt assumed his upbringing . Francisco then began a relationship with María <unk> , the mother of his last child Julián . A don by birth , Cofresí 's education was above average ; since there is no evidence of a school in Cabo Rojo at that time , Francisco may have educated his children or hired a tutor . The <unk> , raised in a multicultural environment , probably knew Dutch and Italian . In November 1814 Francisco died , leaving a modest estate ; Roberto was probably homeless , with no income . 
 On January 14 , 1815 , three months after his father 's death , Cofresí married Juana Creitoff in San Miguel Arcángel parish , Cabo Rojo . Contemporary documents are unclear about her birthplace ; although it is also listed as Curaçao , she was probably born in Cabo Rojo to Dutch parents . After their marriage , the couple moved to a residence bought for 50 pesos by Creitoff 's father , Geraldo . Months later Cofresí 's father in @-@ law lost his humble home in a fire , plunging the family into debt . Three years after his marriage Cofresí owned no property and lived with his mother @-@ in @-@ law , Anna Cordelia . He established ties with residents of San Germán , including his brothers @-@ in @-@ law : the wealthy merchant Don Jacobo <unk> and Don Manuel <unk> . The couple struggled to begin a family of their own , conceiving two sons ( Juan and Francisco Matías ) who died soon after birth . 
 Although he belonged to a prestigious family , Cofresí was not wealthy . In 1818 he paid 17 <unk> in taxes , spending most of his time at sea and earning a low wage . According to historian Walter Cardona Bonet , Cofresí probably worked in a number of fishing corrals in <unk> Bay . The corrals belonged to Cristóbal Pabón Dávila , a friend of municipal port captain José Mendoza . This connection is believed to have later protected Cofresí , since Mendoza was godfather to several of his brother Juan Francisco 's children . The following year he first appeared on a government registry as a sailor , and there is no evidence linking him to any other jobs in Cabo Rojo . Although Cofresí 's brothers were maritime merchants and sailed a boat , the Avispa , he probably worked as an able fisherman . On December 28 , 1819 Cofresí was registered on the Ramona , ferrying goods between the southern municipalities . In addition , her frequent voyages to the Mona Passage and Cofresí 's recognition by local residents indicate that he occasionally accompanied the Avispa That year , Cofresí and Juana lived in Barrio del Pueblo and paid higher taxes than the previous year : five reales . 
 Political changes in Spain affected Puerto Rico 's stability during the first two decades of the 19th century . Europeans and refugees from the American colonies began arriving after the Royal Decree of Graces of 1815 , changing the archipelago 's economic and political environments . With strategic acquisitions , the new arrivals triggered a rise in prices . Food distribution was inefficient , particularly in non @-@ agricultural areas . <unk> and desperate , the local population drifted toward crime and dissipation . By 1816 , governor Salvador Meléndez Bruna shifted responsibility for law enforcement from the Captaincy General of Puerto Rico to the mayors . Driven by hunger and poverty , highway robbers continued to roam southern and central Puerto Rico . In 1817 wealthy San Germán residents requested help with the criminals , who were invading houses and shops . The following year , Meléndez established a high @-@ security prison at El Arsenal in San Juan . During the next few years , the governor transferred repeat offenders to San Juan . Cabo Rojo , with its high crime rate , also dealt with civil strife , inefficient law enforcement and corrupt officials . While he was still a don , Cofresí led a criminal gang in San Germán which stole cattle , food and crops . He was linked to an organization operating near the Hormigueros barrio since at least 1818 and to another nobleman , Juan Geraldo Bey . Among Cofresí 's associates were Juan de los Reyes , José Cartagena and Francisco Ramos , and the criminals continued to thrive in 1820 . The situation worsened with the arrival of unauthorized street vendors from nearby municipalities , who were soon robbed . A series of storms and droughts drove residents away from Cabo Rojo , worsening the already @-@ poor economy ; authorities retrained the unemployed and underemployed as night watchmen . 
 The regional harvest was destroyed by a September 28 , 1820 hurricane , triggering its largest crime wave to date . Newly appointed Puerto Rican governor Gonzalo <unk> Herrera immediately ordered Lieutenant Antonio Ordóñez to round up as many criminals as possible . On November 22 , 1820 , a group of fifteen men from Cabo Rojo participated in the highway robbery of Francisco de Rivera , Nicolás Valdés and Francisco Lamboy on the outskirts of Yauco . Cofresí is believed to have been involved in this incident because of its timing and the criminals ' link to an area headed by his friend , Cristóbal Pabón Dávila . The incident sparked an uproar in towns throughout the region , and convinced the governor that the authorities were conspiring with the criminals . Among measures taken by <unk> were a mayoral election in Cabo Rojo ( Juan Evangelista Ramírez de Arellano , one of Cofresí 's relatives , was elected ) and an investigation of the former mayor . The incoming mayor was ordered to control crime in the region , an unrealistic demand with the resources at his disposal . Bernardo Pabón Davila , a friend of Cofresí and relative of Cristóbal , was assigned to prosecute the Yauco incident . Bernardo reportedly protected the accused and argued against pursuing the case , saying that according to " private confidences " they were fleeing to the United States . Other initiatives to capture highway robbers in Cabo Rojo were more successful , resulting in over a dozen arrests ; among them was the nobleman Bey , who was charged with murder . Known as " El <unk> " , Bey testified that Cofresí led a criminal gang . Cofresí 's primary collaborators were the Ramírez de <unk> family , who prevented his capture as Cabo Rojo 's founding family with high positions in politics and law enforcement . The central government issued wanted posters for Cofresí , and in July 1821 he and the rest of his gang were captured ; Bey escaped , becoming a fugitive . Cofresí and his men were tried in San Germán 's courthouse , where their connection to several crimes was proven . 
 On August 17 , 1821 ( while Cofresí was in prison ) Juana gave birth to their only daughter , Bernardina . Due to his noble status , Cofresí probably received a pass for the birth and took the opportunity to escape ; in alternative theories , he broke out or was released on parole . While Cofresí was a fugitive , Bernardo Pabón Davila was Bernardina 's godfather and <unk> <unk> her godmother . On December 4 , 1821 , a wanted poster was circulated by San Germán mayor <unk> Cardona . There is little documentation of Cofresí ’ s whereabouts in 1822 . Historians have suggested that he exploited his upper @-@ class connections to remain concealed ; the Ramírez de <unk> family held most regional public offices , and their influence extended beyond the region . Other wealthy families , including the Beys , had similarly protected their relatives and Cofresí may have hidden in plain sight due to the inertia of Cabo Rojo authorities . When he became a wanted man , he moved Juana and Anna to her brothers ' houses and would visit in secret ; Juana also visited him at his headquarters at Pedernales . It is unknown how far Cofresí traveled during this time , but he had associates on the east coast and may have taken advantage of eastern migration from Cabo Rojo . Although he may have been captured and imprisoned in San Juan , he does not appear in contemporary records . However , Cofresí 's associates Juan " El Indio " de los Reyes , Francisco Ramos and José " Pepe " Cartagena were released only months before his recorded reappearance . 
 = = " Last of the West India pirates " = = 
 = = = Establishing a reputation = = = 
 By 1823 Cofresí was probably on the crew of the corsair barquentine El Scipión , captained by José Ramón Torres and managed by his cousin ( the first mayor of Mayagüez , José María Ramírez de Arellano ) . Historians agree , since several of his friends and family members benefited from the sale of stolen goods . Cofresí may have joined to evade the authorities , honing skills he would use later in life . El Scipión employed questionable tactics later associated with the pirate , such as flying the flag of Gran Colombia so other ships would lower their guard ( as she did in capturing the British frigate Aurora and the American brigantine Otter ) . The capture of the Otter led to a court order requiring restitution , affecting the crew . At this time , Cofresí turned to piracy . Although the reasons behind his decision are unclear , several theories have been proposed by researchers . In Orígenes <unk> Ramírez Brau speculates that Cofresí 's time aboard El Scipión , or seeing a family member become a privateer , may have influenced his decision to become a pirate after the crew 's pay was threatened by the lawsuit . According to Ursula Acosta , a lack of work for privateers ultimately pushed Cofresí into piracy . 
 The earliest document linked to Cofresí 's modus operandi is a letter dated July 5 , 1823 , from Aguadilla , Puerto Rico which was published in the St. Thomas Gazette . The letter reported that a brigantine , loaded with coffee and West Indian indigo from La Guaira , was boarded by pirates on June 12 . The hijackers ordered the ship brought to Mona Island ( incorrectly anglicized as " Monkey Island " ) , a small island in the eponymous passage between Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic , where its captain and crew were ordered to unload the cargo . After this was done , the pirates reportedly killed the sailors and sank the brigantine . Both of Cofresí 's brothers were soon involved in his operation , helping him move plunder and deal with captured ships . Juan Francisco was able to gather information about maritime traffic in his work at the port , presumably forwarding it to his brother . The pirates communicated with their cohorts through coastal signs , and their associates on land warned them of danger ; the system was probably used to identify loaded vessels as well . According to Puerto Rican historian Aurelio Tió , Cofresí shared his loot with the needy ( especially family members and close friends ) and was considered the Puerto Rican equivalent of Robin Hood . Acosta disagrees , saying that any acts of generosity were probably opportunistic . Cardona Bonet 's research suggests that Cofresí organized improvised markets in Cabo Rojo , where plunder would be informally sold ; according to this theory , merchant families would buy goods for resale to the public . The process was facilitated by local collaborators , such as French smuggler Juan Bautista <unk> . 
 On October 28 , 1823 , months after the El Scipión case was settled , Cofresí attacked a ship registered to the harbor of Patillas and robbed the small fishing boat of 800 pesos in cash . Cofresí attacked with other members of his gang and that of another pirate , Manuel Lamparo , who was connected to British pirate Samuel <unk> ( also known as Juan Bron ) . That week he also led the capture of the John , an American schooner . Out of Newburyport and captained by Daniel Knight , on its way to Mayagüez the ship was intercepted by a ten @-@ ton schooner armed with a swivel gun near Desecheo Island . Cofresí 's group , consisting of seven pirates armed with sabers and muskets , stole $ 1 @,@ 000 in cash , tobacco , tar and other provisions and the vessel 's square rig and mainsail . Cofresí ordered the crew to head for Santo Domingo , threatening to kill everyone aboard if they were seen at any Puerto Rican port . Despite the threat , Knight went to Mayagüez and reported the incident . 
 It was soon established that some of the pirates were from Cabo Rojo , since they disembarked there . Undercover agents were sent to the town to track them , and new mayor Juan Font y Soler requested resources to deal with a larger group which was out of control . Links between the pirates and local sympathizers made arresting them difficult . The central government , frustrated with Cabo Rojo 's inefficiency , demanded the pirates ' capture and western Puerto Rico military commander José Rivas was ordered to exert pressure on local authorities . Although Cofresí was tracked to the beach in <unk> , near his brothers ' homes in <unk> , the operation only recovered the John 's sails , meat , flour , cheese , lard , butter and candles ; the pirates escaped aboard a schooner . A detachment caught Juan José Mateu and charged him with conspiracy ; his confession linked Cofresí to the two hijackings . 
 Cofresí 's sudden success was an oddity , nearly a century after the end of the Golden Age of Piracy . By this time , joint governmental efforts had eradicated rampant buccaneering by Anglo @-@ French seamen ( primarily based on Jamaica and Tortuga ) , which had turned the Caribbean into a haven for pirates attacking shipments from the region 's Spanish colonies ; this made his capture a priority . By late 1823 , the pursuit on land probably forced Cofresí to move his main base of operations to Mona ; the following year , he was often there . This base , initially a temporary haven with Barrio Pedernales his stable outpost , became more heavily used . Easily accessible from Cabo Rojo , Mona had been associated with pirates for more than a century ; it was visited by William Kidd , who landed in 1699 after fleeing with a load of gold , silver and iron . A second pirate base was found at Saona , an island south of Hispaniola . 
 In November a number of sailors aboard El Scipión took advantage of her officers ' shore leave and mutinied , seizing control of the ship . The vessel , repurposed as a pirate ship , began operating in the Mona Passage and was later seen at Mayagüez before disappearing from the record . Cofresí was linked to El Scipión by pirate Jaime Márquez , who admitted under police questioning on Saint Thomas that boatswain Manuel Reyes Paz was a Cofresí associate . The confession hints that the ship was captured by Hispaniola authorities . Cofresí is recorded in the Dominican Republic , where his crew reportedly rested off Puerto Plata province . On one excursion , the pirates were intercepted by Spanish patrol boats off the coast of Samaná Province . With no apparent escape route , Cofresí is said to have ordered the vessel 's sinking and it sailed into Bahía de Samaná before coming to rest near the town of Punta Gorda . This created a diversion , allowing him and his crew to escape in skiffs they rowed to shore and adjacent wetlands ( where the larger Spanish ships could not follow ) . The remains of the ship , reportedly full of plunder , have not been found . 
 In an article in the May 9 , 1936 issue of Puerto Rico Ilustrado , Eugenio <unk> described an 1823 incident between Cofresí and Puerto Rican physician and politician Pedro Gerónimo Goyco . The 15 @-@ year @-@ old Goyco traveled alone on a schooner to a Santo Domingo school for his secondary education . In mid @-@ voyage , Cofresí intercepted the ship and the pirates boarded it . Cofresí assembled the passengers , asking their names and those of their parents . When he learned that Goyco was among them , the pirate ordered a change of course ; they landed on a beach near Mayagüez , where Goyco was freed . Cofresí explained that he knew Goyco 's father , an immigrant from Herceg Novi named Gerónimo <unk> who had settled in Mayagüez . Goyco returned home safely , later attempting the voyage again . The elder <unk> had favored members of Cofresí 's family , despite their association with a pirate . Goyco grew up to become a militant abolitionist , similar to Ramón Emeterio Betances and Segundo Ruiz Belvis . 
 Cofresí 's actions quickly gained the attention of the Anglo @-@ American nations , who called him " <unk> " ( a mistranslated , onomatopoeic variant of his last name ) . Commercial agent and ambassador to the United States Judah Lord wrote to John Quincy Adams ( then United States Secretary of State ) describing the El Scipión situation and the capture of the John . Adams relayed the information to Commodore David Porter , leader of the anti @-@ piracy West Indies Squadron , who sent several ships to Puerto Rico . On November 27 Cofresí sailed from his base on Mona with two sloops ( armed with pivot gun cannons ) and assaulted another American ship , the brigantine William Henry . The Salem Gazette reported that the following month a schooner sailed from Santo Domingo to Saona , capturing 18 pirates ( including Manuel Reyes Paz ) and a " considerable quantity " of leather , coffee , indigo and cash . 
 = = = International manhunt = = = 
 Cofresí 's victims were locals and foreigners , and the region was economically destabilized . When he boarded Spanish vessels he usually targeted immigrants brought by the royal decree of 1815 , ignoring his fellow criollos . The situation was complicated by several factors , most of them geopolitical . The Spanish Empire had lost most of its possessions in the New World , and her last two territories ( Puerto Rico and Cuba ) faced economic problems and political unrest . To undermine the commerce of former colonies , Spain stopped issuing letters of marque ; this left sailors unemployed , and they gravitated towards Cofresí and piracy . On the diplomatic front , the pirates assaulted foreign ships while flying the Spanish flag ( angering nations who had reached an agreement about the return of ships captured by corsairs and compensation for losses ) . Aware that the problem had developed international overtones , Spanish @-@ appointed governor of Puerto Rico Lt Gen Miguel Luciano de la Torre y Pando ( 1822 – 1837 ) made Cofresí 's capture a priority . By December 1823 other nations joined the effort to combat Cofresí , sending warships to the Mona Passage . Gran Colombia sent two corvettes , the <unk> and the Bolívar , under the command of former privateer and Jean Lafitte associate Renato Beluche . The British assigned a corvette , HMS Scout , to the region after the William Henry incident . 
 On January 23 , 1824 de la Torre implemented anti @-@ piracy measures in response to Spanish losses and political pressure from the United States , ordering that piracy be tried in a military tribunal with its defendants considered enemy combatants . De la Torre ordered the pursuit of pirates , bandits and those aiding them , issuing medals , certificates and bounties in gold and silver as rewards . Manuel Lamparo was captured on Puerto Rico 's east coast , and some of his crew joined Cofresí and other fugitives . 
 United States Secretary of the Navy Samuel L. Southard ordered David Porter to assign ships to the Mona Passage , and the commodore sent the schooner USS Weasel and the brigantine USS Spark . The ships were to investigate the zone , gathering information at Saint Barthélemy and St. Thomas with the goal of destroying the base at Mona . Although Porter warned that the pirates were reportedly well @-@ armed and -supplied , he said the crews would probably not find plunder at the base because of the proximity of eastern Puerto Rican ports . On February 8 , 1824 the Spark arrived at Mona , conducted reconnaissance and landed . A suspicious schooner was seen , but captain John T. Newton decided not to chase it . The crew found a small settlement with an empty hut and other buildings , a chest of medicine , sails , books , an anchor and documents from the William Henry . Newton ordered the base and a large canoe found in the vicinity destroyed , and reported his findings to the Secretary of the Navy . According to another report , the ship sent was the USS Beagle ; in this account , several pirates eluded the Beagle 's crew . Undeterred , Cofresí quickly resettled on Mona . 
 Attacks on two <unk> were reported by Renato Beluche on February 12 , 1824 , and published in El Colombiano several days later . The first was the <unk> , captained by Alexander Murdock , which sailed with a load of cocoa from Trinidad and was intercepted en route to Gibraltar . The second , the Bonne Sophie , sailed from Havre de Grace under the command of a man named <unk> with dry goods bound for Martinique . In both cases , the sailors were beaten and imprisoned and the ships plundered . The ships were part of a convoy escorted by the Bolívar off Puerto Real , Cabo Rojo , and Cofresí captained a ship identified by Beluche as a <unk> ( a small schooner ) . Although the Bolívar could not capture it , her crew described the vessel as painted black , armed with a rotating cannon and having a crew of twenty unidentified Puerto Rican men . Cofresí was presumably leading the vessels to dock at Pedernales , where Mendoza and his brother could facilitate the distribution of loot with the aid of official inertia . From there , other associates usually used <unk> Bay for transportation and ensured that the loot reached stores in Cabo Rojo and nearby towns . 
 In this region Cofresí 's influence extended to government and the military , with the Ramírez de Arellano family involved in the smuggling and sale of his loot . On land the loot , hidden in sacks and barrels , was brought to Mayagüez , Hormigueros or San Germán for distribution . When Beluche returned to Colombia , he published an article critical of the situation in the press . La Gaceta de Puerto Rico countered , accusing him of stealing the Bonne Sophie and connecting him to the pirates . 
 On February 16 , 1824 , de la Torre mandated a more @-@ aggressive pursuit and prosecution of pirates . In March the governor ordered a search for the schooner Caballo Blanco , reportedly used in the boarding of the <unk> and the Bonne Sophie and similar attacks . In private communication with Mayagüez military commander José Rivas , he asked Rivas to find someone trustworthy who could launch a mission to capture " the so @-@ called <unk> " and to notify him personally of the pirate 's arrest . Authorizing the use of force , the governor described Cofresí as " one of the evil ones that I am pursuing " and acknowledged that the pirate was protected by Cabo Rojo authorities . The mayor was unable ( or unwilling ) to cooperate , despite orders from de la Torre . Rivas tracked Cofresí to his house twice , but found it empty . When the captain lost contact with the pirate and his wife , he was also unable to communicate with the mayor . A similar search was undertaken in San Germán , whose mayor reported to de la Torre on March 12 , 1824 . 
 Martinique governor François @-@ Xavier Donzelot wrote to de la Torre on March 22 , concerned about the capture of the Bonne Sophie and the impact of piracy on maritime commerce . This brought France into the search for Cofresí ; on March 23 de la Torre authorized France to patrol the Puerto Rican coast and commissioned a frigate , the Flora . The mission was led by a military commander named Mallet , who was ordered to the west coast and pursue the pirates " until he [ was ] able to trap and destroy them " . Although the Flora arrived three days after the operation 's approval , the attempt was unsuccessful . Rivas then assigned Joaquín Arroyo , a retired Pedernales militiaman , to monitor activity near Cofresí 's house . 
 In April 1824 , Rincón mayor Pedro García authorized the sale of a vessel owned by Juan Bautista de Salas to Pedro Ramírez . Ramírez , who may have been a member of the Ramírez de Arellano family , lived in Pedernales and was a neighbor of Cofresí 's brothers and Cristobal Pabón Davila . On April 30 , shortly after acquiring the ship , Ramírez sold it to Cofresí ( who used it as a pirate flagship ) . The irregularity of the transactions was quickly noticed , prompting an investigation of García . The scandal weakened his already @-@ frail authority , and Matías <unk> intervened as the governor 's representative . De la Torre asked the mayor of Añasco , <unk> de la Concha , to retrieve the records and verify their accuracy . The investigation , led by public prosecutor José Madrazo of the Regimiento de Granada 's Military Anti @-@ Piracy Commission , concluded with Bautista 's imprisonment and sanctions for García . Several members of the Ramírez de Arellano family were prosecuted , including the former mayors of Añasco and Mayagüez ( Manuel and José María ) , <unk> and Antonio . Others with the same last name but unclear parentage , such as Juan Lorenzo Ramirez , were also linked to Cofresí . 
 A number of unsuccessful searches were carried out in Cabo Rojo by an urban militia led by Captain Carlos de Espada , and additional searches were made in San Germán . On May 23 , 1824 , the Mayagüez military commander prepared two vessels and sent them to Pedernales in response to reported sightings of Cofresí . Rivas and the military captain of Mayagüez , Cayetano Castillo y <unk> , boarded a ship commanded by Sergeant Sebastián <unk> . Sailor Pedro Alacán , best known as the grandfather of Ramón Emeterio Betances and a neighbor of Cofresí , was captain of the second schooner . The expedition failed , only finding a military deserter named Manuel Fernández de Córdova . Also known as Manuel Navarro , Fernández was connected to Cofresí through Lucas <unk> ( a merchant from Trieste who was involved in the Bonne Sophie incident ) . In the meantime , the pirates fled toward southern Puerto Rico . Poorly supplied after his hasty retreat , Cofresí docked at Jobos Bay on June 2 , 1824 ; about a dozen pirates invaded the hacienda of Francisco Antonio Ortiz , stealing his cattle . The group then broke into a second estate , owned by Jacinto <unk> , stole plantains and resupplied their ship . It is now believed that Juan José Mateu gave the pirates refuge in one of his haciendas , near Jobos Bay . The next day the news reached Guayama mayor Francisco Brenes , who quickly contacted the military and requested operations by land and sea . He was told that there were not enough weapons in the municipality for a mission of that scale . Brenes then requested supplies from Patillas , which rushed him twenty guns . 
 However , the pirates fled the municipality and traveled west . On June 9 , 1824 , Cofresí led an assault on the schooner San José y Las Animas off the coast of <unk> in Peñuelas . The ship was en route between Saint Thomas and Guayanilla with over 6 @,@ 000 pesos ' worth of dry goods for Félix and Miguel Mattei , who were aboard . The Mattei brothers are now thought to have been anti @-@ establishment smugglers related to Henri La Fayette <unk> Ducoudray Holstein and the Ducoudray Holstein Expedition . The schooner , owned by Santos Lucca , sailed with captain Francisco Ocasio and a crew of four . Frequently used to transport cargo throughout the southern region and Saint Thomas , it made several trips to Cabo Rojo . When Cofresí began the chase , Ocasio headed landward ; the brothers abandoned ship and swam ashore , from where they watched the ship 's plundering . Portugués was second @-@ in @-@ command during the boarding of the San José y las Animas , and Joaquín " El <unk> " Hernández was a crew member . The pirates took most of the merchandise , leaving goods valued at 418 pesos , three reales and 26 <unk> . Governor Miguel de la Torre was visiting nearby municipalities at the time , which occupied the authorities . Cargo from the San José y Las Animas ( clothing belonging to the brothers and a painting ) was later found at Cabo Rojo . Days later , a sloop and a small boat commanded by Luis Sánchez and Francisco <unk> left Guayama in search of Cofresí . Unable to find him , they returned on June 19 , 1824 . Patillas and Guayama enacted measures , monitored by the governor , which were intended to prevent further visits . 
 De la Torre continued his tour of the municipalities , ordering Rivas to focus on the Cabo Rojo area when he reached Mayagüez . The task was given to Lieutenant Antonio Madrona , leader of the Mayagüez garrison . Madrona assembled troops and left for Cabo Rojo , launching an operation on June 17 which ended with the arrest of pirate Eustaquio Ventura de Luciano at the home of Juan Francisco . The troops came close to capturing a second associate , Joaquín " El <unk> " Gómez . Madrona then began a surprise attack at Pedernales , finding Cofresí and several associates ( including Juan Bey , his brother Ignacio and his brother @-@ in @-@ law Juan Francisco Creitoff ) . The pirates ' only option was to flee on foot . The Cofresí brothers escaped , but Creitoff and Bey were captured and tried in San Germán . Troops later visited Creitoff 's house , where they found Cofresí 's wife and mother @-@ in @-@ law . Under questioning , the women confirmed the brothers ' identities . The authorities continued searching the homes of those involved and those of their families , where they found quantities of plunder hidden and prepared for sale . Madrona also found burned loot on a nearby hill . Juan Francisco Cofresí , Ventura de Luciano and Creitoff were sent to San Juan with other suspected associates . Of this group the pirate 's brother , Luis de Río and Juan Bautista <unk> were prosecuted as accomplices instead of pirates . Ignacio was later arrested and also charged as an accomplice . The Mattei brothers filed a claim against shopkeeper Francisco Betances that some of his merchandise was cargo from the San José y Las Animas . 
 In response to a tip , José Mendoza and Rivas organized an expedition to Mona . On June 22 , 1824 , Pedro Alacán assembled a party of eight volunteers ( among them Joaquín Arroyo , possibly Mendoza 's source ) . He loaned a small sailboat he co @-@ owned ( the Avispa , once used by Cofresí 's brothers ) to José Pérez Mendoza and Antonio <unk> . There were eight volunteers , The locally coordinated operation intended to ambush and apprehend Cofresí in his hideout . The expedition left the coast of Cabo Rojo with Action Stations in place . Despite unfavorable sea conditions , the party arrived at their destination . However , as soon as they disembarked the Avispa was lost . Although most of the pirates were captured without incident , Cofresí 's second in @-@ command Juan Portugués was shot to death in the back and dismembered by crewmember Lorenzo <unk> . Among the captives was a man identified as José Rodríguez , but Cofresí was not with his crew . Five days later , they returned to Cabo Rojo on a ship confiscated from the pirates with weapons , three prisoners and Portugués ' head and right hand ( probably for identification when claiming the bounty ) . Rivas contacted de la Torre , informing him of further measures to track the pirates . The governor publicized the expedition , writing an account which was published in the government newspaper La Gaceta del Gobierno de Puerto Rico on July 9 , 1824 . Alacán was honored by the Spanish government , receiving the ship recovered from the pirates as compensation for the loss of the Avispa . Mendoza and the crew were also honored . Cofresí reportedly escaped in one of his ships with " <unk> " Hernández , resuming his attacks soon after the ambush . 
 Shortly after the Mona expedition , Ponce mayor José Ortíz de la Renta began his own search for Cofresí . On June 30 , 1824 , the schooner Unión left with 42 sailors commanded by captain Francisco <unk> . After three days , the search was abandoned and the ship returned to Ponce . The governor enacted more measures to capture the pirates , including the commission of gunboats . De la Torre ordered the destruction of any hut or abandoned ship which might aid Cofresí in his escape attempts , an initiative carried out on the coasts of several municipalities . Again acting on the basis of information obtained by interrogation , the authorities tracked the pirates during the first week of July . Although José " Pepe " Cartagena ( a local mulatto ) and Juan Geraldo Bey were found in Cabo Rojo and San Germán respectively , Cofresí avoided the troops . On July 6 , 1824 Cartagena resisted arrest and was killed in a shootout , with the developments again featured in La Gaceta del Gobierno de Puerto Rico . During the next few weeks , a joint initiative by Rivas and the west coast mayors led to the arrest of Cofresí associates Gregorio del Rosario , Miguel Hernández , Felipe Carnero , José Rodríguez , Gómez , Roberto Francisco <unk> , Sebastián Gallardo , Francisco Ramos , José Vicente and a slave of Juan Nicolás Bey ( Juan Geraldo 's father ) known as Pablo . However , the pirate again evaded the net . In his confession , Pablo testified that Juan Geraldo Bey was an accomplice of Cofresí . Sebastián Gallardo was captured on July 13 , 1824 , and tried as a collaborator . The defendants were transported to San Juan , where they were prosecuted by Madrazo in a military tribunal overseen by the governor . The trial was plagued by irregularities , including Gómez ' allegation that the public attorney had accepted a bribe of 300 pesos from Juan Francisco . 
 During the searches , the pirates stole a " sturdy , copper @-@ plated boat " from Cabo Rojo and escaped . The ship was originally stolen in San Juan by Gregorio <unk> and Francisco Pérez ( both arrested during the search for the Caballo Blanco ) and given to Cofresí . When the news became public , mayor José María Hurtado asked local residents for help . On August 5 , 1824 , Antonio de Irizarry found the boat at Punta Arenas , a cape in the <unk> barrio . The mayor quickly organized his troops , reaching the location on horseback . Aboard the ship they found three rifles , three guns , a carbine , a cannon , ammunition and supplies . After an unsuccessful search of nearby woods , the mayor sailed the craft to Pedernales and turned it over to Mendoza . A group left behind continued the search , but did not find anyone . Assuming that the pirates had fled inland , Hurtado alerted his colleagues in the region about the find . The mayor resumed the search , but abandoned it due to a rainstorm and poor directions . Peraza , Pérez , José Rivas del Mar , José María Correa and José Antonio Martinez were later arrested , but Cofresí remained free . 
 On August 5 , 1824 , the pirate and a skeleton crew captured the sloop María off the coast of Guayama as she completed a run between Guayanilla and Ponce under the command of Juan Camino . After boarding the ship they decided not to plunder her , since a larger craft was sailing towards them . The pirates fled west , intercepting a second sloop ( La <unk> ) off <unk> . Cofresí did not plunder her either , instead requesting information from captain Rafael Mola . That month a ship commanded by the pirates stalked the port of Fajardo , taking advantage of the lack of gunboats capable of pursuing their shallow @-@ draft vessels . Shortly afterwards , the United States ordered captain Charles <unk> of the USS Weasel to monitor the western waters of Puerto Rico as part of an international force . The schooner located a sloop commanded by the pirates off Culebra , but it fled to Vieques and ran inland into dense vegetation ; <unk> could only recover the ship . 
 The Danish sloop <unk> was intercepted off Isla Palominos on September 3 , 1824 , as she completed a voyage from Saint Thomas to Fajardo ; the pirates stole goods and cash from the passengers . The incident attracted the attention of the Danish government , which commissioned the Santa Cruz ( a 16 @-@ gun brigantine commanded by Michael <unk> ) to monitor the areas off Vieques and Culebra . On September 8 – 9 a hurricane , Nuestra Señora de la Monserrate , struck southern Puerto Rico and passed directly over the Mona Passage . Cofresí and his crew were caught in the storm , which drove their ship towards Hispaniola . According to historian Enrique Ramírez Brau , an expedition weeks later by Fajardo commander Ramón <unk> to search Vieques , Culebra and the Windward Islands for pirates was actually after Cofresí . The operation used the schooner Aurora ( owned by Nicolás Márquez ) and the Flor de Mayo , owned by José María <unk> . After weeks of searching , the team failed to locate anything of interest . 
 Continuing to drift , Cofresí and his crew were captured after his ship reached Santo Domingo . Sentenced to six years in prison , they were sent to a keep named Torre del Homenaje . Cofresí and his men escaped , were recaptured and again imprisoned . The group escaped again , breaking the locks on their cell doors and climbing down the prison walls on a stormy night on a rope made from their clothing . With Cofresí were two other inmates : a man known as <unk> and Manuel Reyes Paz , former boatswain of El Scipión . After reaching the province of San Pedro de Macorís , the pirates bought a ship . They sailed from Hispaniola in late September to Naguabo , where <unk> disembarked . From there they went to the island of Vieques , where they set up another hideout and regrouped . 
 = = = Challenge to the West Indies Squadron = = = 
 By October 1824 piracy in the region was dramatically reduced , with Cofresí the remaining target of concern . However , that month Peraza , Pérez , <unk> , Gallardo , José Rodríguez and Ramos escaped from jail . Three former members of Lamparo 's crew — a man of African descent named <unk> Hernández Morales , Antonio del Castillo and Juan Manuel de Fuentes Rodríguez — also broke out . They were joined by Juan Manuel " Venado " de Fuentes Rodríguez , Ignacio Cabrera , Miguel de la Cruz , Damasio Arroyo , Miguel " El <unk> " de la Rosa and Juan Reyes . Those traveling east met with Cofresí , who welcomed them on his crew ; the pirate was in Naguabo looking for recruits after his return from the Dominican Republic . Hernández Morales , an experienced knife fighter , was second @-@ in @-@ command of the new crew . At the height of their success , they had a flotilla of three sloops and a schooner . The group avoided capture by hiding in Ceiba , Fajardo , Naguabo , Jobos Bay and Vieques , and when Cofresí sailed the east coast he reportedly flew the flag of Gran Colombia . 
 On October 24 , Hernández Morales led a group of six pirates in the robbery of Cabot , Bailey & Company in Saint Thomas , making off with US $ 5 @,@ 000 . On October 26 the USS Beagle , commanded by Charles T. Platt , navigated by John Low and carrying shopkeeper George Bedford ( with a list of plundered goods , which were reportedly near Naguabo ) left Saint Thomas . Platt sailed to Vieques , following a tip about a pirate sloop . The Beagle opened fire , interrupting the capture of a sloop from Saint Croix , but the pirates docked at Punta Arenas in Vieques and fled inland ; one , identified as Juan Felis , was captured after a shootout . When Platt disembarked in Fajardo to contact Juan Campos , a local associate of Bedford , the authorities accused him of piracy and detained him . The officer was later freed , but the pirates escaped . Commodore Porter 's reaction to what was later known as the Fajardo Affair led to a diplomatic crisis which threatened war between Spain and the United States ; Campos was later found to be involved in the distribution of loot . 
 With more ships , Cofresí 's activity near Culebra and Vieques peaked by November 1824 . The international force reacted by sending more warships to patrol the zone ; France provided the Gazelle , a brigantine , and the frigate <unk> . After the Fajardo incident the United States increased its flotilla in the region , with the USS Beagle joined by the schooners USS Grampus and USS Shark in addition to the previously @-@ commissioned Santa Cruz and Scout . Despite unprecedented monitoring , Cofresí grew bolder . John D. Sloat , captain of the Grampus , received intelligence placing the pirates in a schooner out of Cabo Rojo . On the evening of January 25 , 1825 Cofresí sailed a sloop towards the Grampus , which was patrolling the west coast . In position , the pirate commanded his crew ( armed with sabers and muskets ) to open fire and ordered the schooner to stop . When Sloat gave the order to counterattack , Cofresí sailed into the night . Although a skiff and cutters from the Grampus were sent after the pirates , they failed to find them after a two @-@ hour search . 
 The pirates sailed east and docked at Quebrada de las Palmas , a river in Naguabo . From there , Cofresí , Hernández Morales , Juan Francisco " <unk> " Pizarro and De los Reyes crossed the mangroves and vegetation to the Quebrada barrio in Fajardo . Joined by a fugitive , Juan Pedro Espinoza , the group robbed the house of Juan <unk> and hid in a house in the nearby Río Abajo barrio . Two days later Cofresí again led his flotilla out to sea and targeted the San Vicente , a Spanish sloop making its way back from Saint Thomas . Cofresí attacked with two sloops , ordering his crew to fire muskets and blunderbusses . Sustaining heavy damage , the San Vicente finally escaped because she was near port . 
 On February 10 , 1825 , Cofresí plundered the sloop Neptune . The merchant ship , with a cargo of fabric and provisions , was attacked while its dry goods were unloaded at dockside in Jobos Bay . The Neptune was owned by Salvador <unk> , who was supervising the unloading . Cofresí began the charge in a sloop , opening musket fire on the crew , and Pastoriza fled in a rowboat . Despite a bullet wound , Pastoriza identified four of the eight to ten pirates ( including Cofresí ) . An Italian living in Puerto Rico , Pedro <unk> , was reportedly second @-@ in @-@ command during the attack . The pirates pursued and shot those who fled . Cofresí sailed the Neptune out of Jobos Port , a harbor in Jobos Bay ( near Fajardo ) , and adopted the sloop as a pirate ship . 
 Guayama mayor Francisco Brenes doubled his patrol . <unk> was soon arrested , and informed on his shipmates . Hernández Morales led another sloop , intercepting the Beagle off Vieques . After a battle , the pirate sloop was captured and Hernández Morales was transported to St. Thomas for trial . After being sentenced to death , he escaped from prison and disappeared for years . According to a St. Thomas resident , on February 12 , 1825 the pirates retaliated by setting fire to a town on the island . That week , the Neptune captured a Danish schooner belonging to W. Furniss ( a company based in Saint Thomas ) off the Ponce coast with a load of imported merchandise . After the assault , Cofresí and his crew abandoned the ship at sea . Later seen floating with broken masts , it was presumed lost . Some time later Cofresí and his crew boarded another ship owned by the company near Guayama , again plundering and abandoning it . Like its predecessor , it was seen near Caja de Muertos ( Dead Man 's Chest ) before disappearing . 
 Evading the Beagle , Cofresí returned to Jobos Bay ; on February 15 , 1825 , the pirates arrived in Fajardo . Three days later John Low picked up a six @-@ gun sloop , the Anne ( commonly known by its Spanish name Ana or La Ana ) , which he had ordered from boat @-@ builder Toribio Centeno and registered in St. Thomas . Centeno sailed the sloop to Fajardo , where he received permission to dock at Quebrada de Palmas in Naguabo . As its new owner Low accompanied him , remaining aboard while cargo was loaded . That night Cofresí led a group of eight pirates , stealthily boarded the ship and forced the crew to jump overboard ; during the capture , Cofresí reportedly picked $ 20 from Low 's pocket . Despite having to " walk the plank " , Low 's crew survived and reported the assault to the governor of Saint Thomas . Low probably attracted the pirates ' attention by docking near one of their hideouts ; his work on the Beagle rankled , and they were hungry for revenge after the capture of Hernández Morales . Low met Centeno at his hacienda , where he told the Spaniard about the incident and later filed a formal complaint in Fajardo . Afterwards , he and his crew sailed to Saint Thomas . Although another account suggests that Cofresí bought the Anne from Centeno for twice Low 's price , legal documents verify that the builder was paid by Low . Days later , Cofresí led his pirates to the Humacao shipyard and they stole a cannon from a gunboat ( ordered by Miguel de la Torre to pursue the pirates ) which was under construction . The crew armed themselves with weapons found on the ships they boarded . 
 After the hijacking , Cofresí adopted the Anne as his flagship . Although she is popularly believed to have been renamed El Mosquito , all official documents use her formal name . The Anne was quickly used to intercept a merchant off the coast of Vieques who was completing a voyage from Saint Croix to Puerto Rico . Like others before it , the fate of the captured ship and its crew is unknown . The Spanish countered with an expedition from the port of Patillas . Captain Sebastian Quevedo commanded a small boat , the Esperanza , to find the pirates but was unsuccessful after several days at sea . At the same time , de la Torre pressured the regional military commanders to take action against the pirates and undercover agents monitored maritime traffic in most coastal towns . The pirates docked the Anne in Jobos Bay before sunset , a pattern reported by the local militia to southern region commander Tomás de <unk> . At this time the pirates sailed the Anne towards Peñuelas , where the ship was recognized . Cofresí 's last capture was on March 5 , 1825 , when he commanded the hijacking of a boat owned by Vicente <unk> in Salinas . 
 = = Capture and trial = = 
 By the spring of 1825 , the flotilla led by the Anne was the last substantial pirate threat in the Caribbean . The incursion which finally ended Cofresí 's operation began serendipitously . When Low arrived at his home base in Saint Thomas with news of the Anne 's hijacking , a Puerto Rican ship reported a recent sighting . Sloat requested three international sloops ( with Spanish and Danish papers ) from the Danish governor , collaborating with Pastoriza and <unk> . All four of Cofresí 's victims left port shortly after the authorization ; the task force was made up of the Grampus , the San José y Las Animas , an unidentified vessel belonging to <unk> and a third sloop staffed by volunteers from a Colombian frigate . After sighting the Anne while they negotiated the involvement of the Spanish government in Puerto Rico , the task force decided to split up . 
 The San José y Las Animas found Cofresí , and mounted a surprise attack . The sailors aboard hid while Cofresí , recognizing the ship as a local merchant vessel , gave the order to attack it . When the Anne was within range , the crew of the San José y las Animas opened fire . Startled , the pirates countered with cannon and musket fire while attempting to outrun the sloop . Unable to shake off the San José y las Animas and having lost two members of his crew , Cofresí grounded the Anne and fled inland . Although a third pirate fell during the landing , most scattered throughout rural Guayama and adjacent areas . Cofresí , injured , was accompanied by two crew members . Half his crew was captured shortly afterwards , but the captain remained at large until the following day . At midnight a local trooper , Juan Candido Garay , and two other members of the Puerto Rican militia spotted Cofresí . The trio ambushed the pirate , who was hit by blunderbuss fire while he was fleeing . Despite his injury , Cofresí fought back with a knife until he was subdued by militia machetes . 
 After their capture , the pirates were held at a prison in Guayama before their transfer to San Juan . Cofresí met with mayor Francisco Brenes , offering him 4 @,@ 000 pieces of eight ( which he claimed to possess ) in exchange for his freedom . Although a key component of modern myth , this is the only historical reference to Cofresí 's hiding any treasure . Brenes declined the bribe . Cofresí and his crew remained in Castillo San Felipe del Morro in San Juan for the rest of their lives . On March 21 , 1825 , the pirate 's reputed servant ( known only as Carlos ) was arrested in Guayama . 
 = = = Military prosecution = = = 
 Cofresí received a council of war trial , with no possibility of a civil trial . The only right granted the pirates was to choose their lawyers ; the arguments the attorneys could make were limited , and their role was a formality . José Madrazo was again the prosecutor . The case was hurried — an oddity , since other cases as serious ( or more so ) sometimes took months or years . Cofresí was reportedly tried as an insurgent corsair ( and listed as such in a subsequent explanatory action in Spain ) , in accordance with measures enacted by governor Miguel de la Torre the year before . It is thought that the reason for the irregularities was that the Spanish government was under international scrutiny , with several neutral countries filing complaints about pirate and privateer attacks in Puerto Rican waters ; there was additional pressure due to the start of David Porter 's court @-@ martial in the United States for invading the municipality of Fajardo . The ministry rushed the Cofresí trial , denying him and his crew defense witnesses or testimony ( required by trial protocol ) . The trial was based on the pirates ' confessions , with their legitimacy or circumstances not established . 
 The other pirates on trial were Manuel Aponte Monteverde of Añasco ; Vicente del Valle Carbajal of Punta Espada ( or Santo Domingo , depending on the report ) ; Vicente <unk> of Cumaná ; Antonio Delgado of Humacao ; Victoriano Saldaña of <unk> ; Agustín de Soto of San Germán ; Carlos Díaz of Trinidad de <unk> ; Carlos Torres of Fajardo ; Juan Manuel Fuentes of Havana , and José Rodríguez of Curaçao . Torres stood out as an African and Cofresí 's slave . Among the few sentenced for piracy who were not executed , his sentence was to be sold at public auction with his price earmarked for trial costs . Cofresí confessed to capturing a French sloop in Vieques ; a Danish schooner ; a sailing ship from St. Thomas ; a <unk> and a schooner from the Dominican Republic ; a sloop with a load of cattle in Boca del Infierno ; a ship from which he stole 800 pieces of eight in Patillas , and an American schooner with a cargo worth 8 @,@ 000 pieces of eight ( abandoned and burned in Punta de <unk> ) . 
 Under pressure , he was adamant that he was unaware of the current whereabouts of the vessels or their crews and that he had never killed anyone ; his testimony was corroborated by the other pirates . However , according to a letter sent to Hezekiah Niles ' Weekly Register Cofresí admitted off the record that he had killed nearly 400 people ( but no Puerto Ricans ) . The pirate also confessed that he burned the cargo of an American vessel to throw off the authorities . The defendants ' social status and association with criminal ( or outlaw ) elements dictated the course of events . Captain José Madrazo served as judge and prosecutor of the one @-@ day trial . Governor Miguel de la Torre may have influenced the process , negotiating with Madrazo beforehand . On July 14 , 1825 , U.S. Congressman Samuel Smith accused Secretary of State Henry Clay of pressuring the Spanish governor to execute the pirates . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On the morning of March 29 , 1825 , a firing squad was assembled to carry out the sentence handed down to the pirates . The public execution , which had a large number of spectators , was supervised by the Regimiento de Infantería de Granada between eight and nine a.m. Catholic priests were present to hear confessions and offer comfort . As the pirates prayed , they were shot before the silent crowd . Although San Felipe del Morro is the accepted execution site , Alejandro Tapia y Rivera ( whose father was a member of the Regimiento de Granada ) places their execution near Convento <unk> in the Baluarte de Santo Domingo ( part of present @-@ day Old San Juan ) . According to historian Enrique Ramírez Brau , in a final act of defiance Cofresí refused to have his eyes covered after he was tied to a chair and he was blindfolded by soldiers . Richard Wheeler said that the pirate said that after killing three or four hundred people , it would be strange if he was not accustomed to death . Cofresí 's last words were reportedly , " I have killed hundreds with my own hands , and I know how to die . Fire ! " 
 According to several of the pirates ' death certificates , they were buried on the shore next to Cementerio Santa María Magdalena de <unk> . Hernández Morales and several of his associates received the same treatment . Cofresí and his men were buried behind the cemetery , on what is now a lush green hill overlooking the cemetery wall . Contrary to local lore , they were not buried in Old San Juan Cemetery ( Cementerio Antiguo de San Juan ) ; their execution as a criminals made them ineligible for burial in the Catholic cemetery . A letter from Sloat to United States Secretary of the Navy Samuel L. Southard implied that at least some of the pirates were intended to be " beheaded and quartered , and their parts sent to all the small ports around the island to be exhibited " . Spanish authorities continued to arrest Cofresí associates until 1839 . 
 At this time defendants were required to pay trial expenses , and Cofresí 's family was charged 643 pieces of eight , two reales and 12 <unk> . Contemporary documents suggest that Juana Creitoff , with little or no support from Cofresí 's brothers and sisters , was left with the debt . His brothers distanced themselves from the trial and their brother 's legacy , and Juan Francisco left Cabo Rojo for Humacao . Ignacio also evidently disassociated himself from Creitoff and her daughter , and one of Ignacio 's granddaughters ignored Bernardina and her descendants . Due to Cofresí 's squandering of his treasure , his only asset the Spanish government could seize was Carlos . <unk> at 200 pesos , he was sold to Juan Saint Just for 133 pesos . After the auction costs were paid , only 108 pesos and 2 reales were left ; the remainder was paid by Félix and Miguel Mattei after they made a deal with the authorities giving them the cargo of the San José y las Animas in return for future accountability . Juana Creitoff died a year later . 
 Bernardina later married a Venezuelan immigrant , Estanislao Asencio Velázquez , continuing Cofresí 's blood lineage in Cabo Rojo to this day . She had seven children : José Lucas , María <unk> , Antonio Salvador , Antonio Luciano , Pablo , María Encarnación and Juan Bernardino . One of Cofresí 's most notable descendants was Ana González , better known by her married name Ana G. Méndez . Cofresí 's great @-@ granddaughter , Méndez was directly descended from the Cabo Rojo bloodline through her mother Ana González Cofresí . Known for her interest in education , she was the first member of her branch of the Cofresí family to earn a high @-@ school diploma and university degree . A teacher , Méndez founded the Puerto Rico High School of Commerce during the 1940s ( when most women did not complete their education ) . By the turn of the 21st century her initiative had evolved into the Ana G. Méndez University System , the largest group of private universities in Puerto Rico . Other branches of the Cofresí family include Juan Francisco 's descendants in Ponce , and Ignacio 's lineage persists in the western region . Internationally , the Kupferschein family remains in Trieste . Another family member was Severo Colberg Ramírez , speaker of the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico during the 1980s . Colberg made efforts to popularize Cofresí , particularly the heroic legends which followed his death . He was related to the pirate through his sister Juana , who married Germán Colberg . 
 After Cofresí 's death , items associated with him have been preserved or placed on display . His birth certificate is at San Miguel Arcángel Church with those of other notable figures , including Ramón Emeterio Betances and Salvador Brau . Earrings said to have been worn by <unk> were owned by <unk> Ramírez de Arellano , a maternal cousin . Her great @-@ great @-@ grandson , collector Teodoro Vidal <unk> , gave them to the National Museum of American History in 1997 and the institution displayed them in a section devoted to Spanish colonial history . Locally , documents are preserved in the Institute of Puerto Rican Culture 's General Archive of Puerto Rico , the Ateneo Puertorriqueño , the University of Puerto Rico 's General Library and Historic Investigation Department and the Catholic Church 's Parochial Archives . Outside Puerto Rico , records can be found at the National Archives Building and the General Archive of the Indies . However , official documents relating to Cofresí 's trial and execution have been lost . 
 = = Modern view = = 
 Few aspects of Cofresí 's life and relationships have avoided the romanticism surrounding pirates in popular culture . During his life , attempts by Spanish authorities to portray him as a menacing figure by emphasizing his role as " pirate lord " and nicknaming him the " terror of the seas " planted him in the collective consciousness . This , combined with his boldness , transformed Cofresí into a swashbuckler differing from late @-@ 19th @-@ century fictional accounts of pirates . The legends are inconsistent in their depiction of historical facts , often contradicting each other . Cofresí 's race , economic background , personality and loyalties are among variable aspects of these stories . However , the widespread use of these myths in the media has resulted in their general acceptance as fact . 
 The myths and legends surrounding Cofresí fall into two categories : those portraying him as a generous thief or anti @-@ hero and those describing him as overwhelmingly evil . A subcategory represents him as an adventurer , world traveler or womanizer . Reports by historians such as Tió of the pirate sharing his loot with the needy have evolved into a detailed mythology . These apologetics attempt to justify his piracy , blaming it on poverty , revenge or a desire to restore his family 's honor , and portray Cofresí as a class hero defying official inequality and corruption . He is said to have been a protector and benefactor of children , women and the elderly , with some accounts describing him as a rebel hero and supporter of independence from imperial power . 
 Legends describing Cofresí as malevolent generally link him to supernatural elements acquired through witchcraft , mysticism or a deal with the Devil . This horror fiction emphasizes his ruthlessness while alive or his unwillingness to remain dead . Cofresí 's ghost has a fiery aura or extraordinary powers of manifestation , defending the locations of his hidden treasure or roaming aimlessly . Cofresí has been vilified by merchants . Legends portraying him as benign figure are more prevalent near Cabo Rojo ; in other areas of Puerto Rico , they focus on his treasure and depict him as a cutthroat . Most of the hidden @-@ treasure stories have a moral counseling against greed ; those trying to find the plunder are killed , dragged to Davy Jones ' Locker or attacked by the ghost of Cofresí or a member of his crew . Rumors about the locations of hidden treasure flourish , with dozens of coves , beaches and buildings linked to pirates in Puerto Rico and Hispaniola . 
 The 20th century revived interest in Cofresí 's piracy as a tourist attraction , with municipalities in Puerto Rico highlighting their historical connection to the pirates . By the second half of the century , beaches and sports teams ( especially in his native Cabo Rojo , which features a monument in his honor ) were named for him ; in the Dominican Republic , a resort town was named after the pirate . Cofresí 's name has been commercialized , with a number of products and businesses adopting it and its associated legends . Puerto Rico 's first flag carrier seaplane was named for him . Several attempts have been made to portray Cofresí 's life on film , based on legend . 
 <unk> , songs and plays have been adapted from the oral tradition , and formal studies of the historical Cofresí and the legends surrounding him have appeared in book form . Historians Cardona Bonet , Acosta , Salvador Brau , Ramon <unk> <unk> , Antonio S. Pedreira , Bienvenido Camacho , Isabel <unk> Coll , Fernando <unk> Sabat , Ramírez Brau and Cayetano Coll y Toste have published the results of their research . Others inspired by the pirate include poets <unk> Rosa Nieves and the brothers Luis and Gustavo <unk> Matos . Educators Juan Bernardo <unk> and Robert Fernández Valledor have also published on Cofresí . In mainstream media Cofresí has recently been discussed in the newspapers El Mundo , El Imparcial , El Nuevo Día , Primera Hora , El <unk> de Catalunya , Die Tageszeitung , Tribuna do Norte and The New York Times , and the magazines Puerto Rico Ilustrado , Fiat Lux and Proceedings have published articles on the pirate . 
 = Stephen II of Hungary = 
 Stephen II ( Hungarian : II István ; Croatian : Stjepan II ; Slovak : Štefan II ; 1101 – early 1131 ) , King of Hungary and Croatia , ruled from 1116 until 1131 . His father , King Coloman , had him crowned as a child , thus denying the crown to his uncle Álmos . In the first year of his reign , Venice occupied Dalmatia and Stephen never restored his rule in that province . His reign was characterized by frequent wars with neighbouring countries . 
 = = Early years ( till 1116 ) = = 
 Stephen and his twin brother , Ladislaus , were sons of King Coloman of Hungary by his queen , Felicia of Sicily . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , they were born " ... in the year of our Lord 1101 . " Stephen was named after the first king of Hungary , who had been canonized in 1083 , implying that he was his father 's heir from birth . A document written in Zadar in approximately 1105 AD makes mention of " Stephen , our most renowned king " along with Coloman , proving that the latter had his four @-@ year @-@ old son crowned king . 
 By the time of Stephen 's coronation , Coloman had demonstrated his intention to secure the succession for his son . Coloman 's ambitious brother , Álmos — who had already rebelled against the king in 1098 — opposed this plan and left Hungary . He first sought the assistance of Henry V , Holy Roman Emperor , followed by an appeal to Duke Boleslaw III of Poland . When all of his efforts ended in failure , Álmos submitted to Coloman and returned to Hungary , although he made several abortive attempts to dethrone Coloman in the following decade . In order to bring an end to the menace these plots presented to Stephen 's succession , Coloman had Álmos and Álmos 's little son , Béla , blinded . 
 When he fell gravely ill in early 1116 , Coloman also had his brother imprisoned . The Illuminated Chronicle narrates that the dying king " instructed his son and his great men " to invade Rus ' in order to take vengeance for Coloman 's failure in the 1099 siege of Peremyshl ( Przemyśl ) , Poland . Coloman died on 3 February 1116 . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Wars and internal conflicts ( 1116 – 1127 ) = = = 
 Stephen was crowned king in Székesfehérvár within thirty days of his father 's death . His peaceful succession showed the effectiveness of the measures Coloman had implemented to prevent Álmos from usurping the throne . Upon his councilor ’ s advice , Stephen initiated a meeting with Vladislaus I , Duke of Bohemia , in order to improve the countries ' relations , which had deteriorated in the previous decade . The two monarchs met on the river Olšava , which marked the border of their realms . However , the lack of mutual confidence hindered the opening of negotiations , leading to armed conflicts which evolved into a battle on 13 May . On the battlefield , the Bohemian army inflicted a serious defeat on Stephen 's troops . The contemporaneous Cosmas of Prague blamed the young king 's advisors for the fiasco , but later medieval Hungarian chronicles — all completed under kings descending from Stephen 's opponent , Álmos — wrote that the king acted without consulting his advisors " ... for he was of an impetuous nature " . 
 The Hungarian people are prodigious in energy , mighty in strength , and very powerful in military arms — sufficient to fight with a king of lands anywhere . After the death of their king , Coloman , their princes sent to Duke Vladislav to renew and confirm with the new king , named Stephen , their ancient peace and friendship . ... Vladislav came to the River Olšava , which separates the realms of Hungary and Moravia . Immediately , the Hungarian people , innumerable as the sands or drops of rain , covered the whole surface of the land in the field of <unk> , like locusts . ... But , as scripture says , " Woe to the land whose king is a child . " Their princes , through their inborn pride in themselves , strayed from the duke 's peaceful words and sent replies more to stir up strife than to bring the kiss of peace . 
 Doge Ordelafo Faliero , who had conquered an island in the Gulf of Kvarner during the last year of Coloman 's reign , returned to Dalmatia at the head of the Venetian fleet in May 1116 . On 15 July , he vanquished the Hungarian troops which had arrived to relieve Zadar . Thereafter all towns — including Biograd na Moru , Šibenik , Split , and Trogir — surrendered to Venice , terminating Stephen II 's suzerainty along the coastline of the Adriatic Sea . However , in either 1117 or 1118 , the Hungarian troops were able to defeat the Venetians , during which Ordelafo Faliero himself died at a battle near Zadar , enabling Biograd na Moru , Split , and Trogir to rejoin the sovereignty of the Hungarian monarch . However , the new Doge , Domenico Michele , invaded and reconquered all Dalmatia . A five @-@ year truce , which was concluded in 1117 or 1118 , confirmed the status quo : the seizure of Dalmatia by Venice . 
 Stephen 's troops launched a plundering raid into Austria in 1118 , provoking a counter @-@ attack by Leopold III , Margrave of Austria , later that same year . Bořivoj II , Duke of Bohemia , supported Leopold and pillaged the northwestern regions of the Kingdom of Hungary . Despite this , when Vladislaus I dethroned his brother Bořivoj in 1120 , Bořivoj fled to Hungary and settled at Stephen 's court . 
 Stephen married a daughter of Robert I of Capua , in the early 1120s . Historian Paul Stephenson wrote that Stephen 's marriage alliance with the Normans of Southern Italy " ... must have been partly directed against the Venetians . " The Norman Princes of Capua had been the Pope 's staunch supporters during the Investiture Controversy , suggesting that his marriage also continued his father 's pro @-@ Papal foreign policy . According to Włodzimierz <unk> , Stephen in 1121 married Adelhaid , daughter of Heinrich , <unk> of Regensburg . 
 Stephen 's cousin and the daughter of his uncle Álmos , Adelaide , whose husband Soběslav had been expelled from Moravia , arrived in Hungary in early 1123 . According to Cosmas of Prague , Stephen " kindly received her ... acknowledging her as his relative " , which implies that his relations with his uncle were cordial around that time . In the same year , the young king launched a military expedition against the Principality of Volhynia in order to assist its expelled prince , Iaroslav Sviatopolchich , regain his throne . Even though Sviatopolchich was assassinated at the beginning of the siege of his former seat , Volodymyr @-@ Volynskyi , Stephen decided to continue the war . However , according to the Illuminated Chronicle , his commanders threatened to dethrone him if he continued the aggression , forcing Stephen to lift the siege and return to Hungary . 
 Cosma , of the line of <unk> , stood up before the King and said : " Lord , what is this thing which you are doing ? If with the death of a multitude of your soldiers you take the castle , whom will you appoint as its lord ? If you choose one among your nobles , he will not remain here . Or do you wish to abandon your kingdom and yourself have the dukedom ? We barons will not storm the castle . If you wish to storm it , storm it alone . We are returning to Hungary and we will choose for ourselves a king . " Then by order of the nobles the heralds announced throughout the camp that the Hungarians should return as speedily as possible to Hungary . When the King thus saw himself justly deprived of the help of his people , he returned to Hungary . 
 Taking advantage of the absence of the Venetian fleet from the Adriatic Sea because of a naval expedition in the Levant , Stephen invaded Dalmatia in the first half of 1124 . His charter confirming the liberation of Split and Trogir in July 1124 is evidence that the central regions of Dalmatia returned to his rule . However , upon the return of the Venetian armada the Dalmatian towns once again surrendered , one after another . According to the Historia Ducum <unk> , only the citizens of Biograd na Moru " ... dared resist the doge and his army ... " , but " ... their city was razed to its foundations . " 
 According to the Illuminated Chronicle , the blind Álmos , " ... fearing death at the hands of King Stephen ... " , fled to the Byzantine Empire . Many of his partisans followed him , and Emperor John II Komnenos settled them in a town in Macedonia . The Byzantine historian John Kinnamos confirmed that the emperor looked upon Álmos " ... favorably and received him with kindness . " He added that Stephen " sent his envoys to the emperor and demanded that ... [ Álmos ] ... be expelled from " the Byzantine Empire , but his request was rejected . The sources do not specify the date which Álmos 's fled , but it likely occurred circa 1125 . Historian Ferenc Makk wrote that Álmos was forced to flee from Hungary because he had taken advantage of Stephen 's failures in Volhynia and Dalmatia , and conspired against Stephen . 
 Stephen met the new Duke of Bohemia , <unk> — whose wife was Adelhaid — in October 1126 . The meeting of the two monarchs ' brought an end to the hostilities between their two countries . Around the same year , Stephen also concluded an agreement with Archbishop Conrad I of Salzburg . 
 = = = Last years ( 1127 – 1131 ) = = = 
 According to the Byzantine chronicler Niketas Choniates , the citizens of the Byzantine town Braničevo " attacked and plundered the Hungarians who had come to " the Byzantine Empire " to trade , perpetrating the worst crimes against them . " In retaliation , Stephen decided to wage war against the Byzantine Empire . The Illuminated Chronicle relates that the childless Stephen " ... so ordered the succession to the throne that after his death the son of his sister Sophia , by name Saul , should reign . " The chronicle does not specify the date of this event , but Ferenc Makk says that Stephen most probably declared Saul as his heir during the first half of 1127 , before storming the Byzantine Empire . 
 Stephen broke into the empire in the summer . His troops sacked Belgrade , Braničevo and Niš , and plundered the regions around Serdica ( Sofia , Bulgaria ) and Philippopolis ( Plovdiv , Bulgaria ) , before returning to Hungary . In response , Emperor John II marched against Hungary in 1128 , where he defeated the royal troops in a battle at Haram , and " captured <unk> , the richest land in Hungary " ( now in Serbia ) . Stephen was unable to participate in the fighting because " he happened to be sickly in body and was recuperating someplace in the midst of his land " , according to John Kinnamos . The Illuminated Chronicle said that his illness was so serious that " all expected his death . " The chronicle added that " traitors " went so far as to elect two kings , the " Counts Bors and Ivan " . Upon regaining his health , Stephen had Ivan executed and expelled Bors from his kingdom . 
 John Kinnamos wrote of a second campaign by Stephen against the Byzantine Empire . The Hungarian troops , supported by Czech reinforcements under the command of Duke Vaclav of Olomouc , took Braničevo by storm and destroyed its fortress . Emperor John II Komnenos was forced to retreat and sue for peace . Historian Ferenc Makk writes that the resulting peace treaty was signed in October 1129 . 
 Going to <unk> for a second time , [ Emperor John ] made haste to rebuild it . Since some time elapsed in the task , the army , suffering from winter weather and lack of necessities , was in severe distress . When he learned this , the Hungarians ' king decided to cross the Danube as quickly as possible and attack them unexpectedly . In the Hungarians ' land , however , there was a woman , a Latin by birth , outstanding in wealth and other distinction . Sending to the emperor , she revealed what was being planned . Since he was unable to engage them with an equivalent force , because as stated his army had already been overcome by disease and lack of necessities , he fortified the city where possible and withdrew . 
 For many years , Stephen believed that his cousin , Béla , had died after being blinded on the orders of Stephen 's father . Having learnt , around 1129 , that Béla was alive , the king " ... rejoiced with great joy ... " , according to the Illuminated Chronicle . He even granted Béla the town of Tolna and arranged Béla 's marriage with Helena of Rascia . 
 The Illuminated Chronicle recounts that Stephen showed blatant favoritism towards the " <unk> " , identified as Pechenegs or Cumans by historians , who had arrived in Hungary in the 1120s . In his last years , he even tolerated the crimes they committed against his subjects , causing a revolt . Before his death , Stephen " ... laid aside his royal state and took the habit of a monk ... " . He died of dysentery in the spring of 1131 . No source recorded the exact date of his death , but most of his biographies wrote that he died on 1 March . He was buried in the Várad Cathedral ( Oradea , Romania ) . 
 = = Family = = 
 According to the Illuminated Chronicle , Stephen had no " wish to marry a lawful wife but took to himself concubines and harlots " . However , his advisors , " grieving that the kingdom was in a sorry state and the King without a heir " , persuaded him to marry . They chose a daughter of the late Robert I of Capua as their monarch 's wife , although her name was not recorded . Stephen died childless . 
 The following family tree presents Stephen 's ancestors and some of his relatives who are mentioned in the article . 
 * Whether Géza 's first or second wife was his children 's mother is uncertain . 
 = The Hardest Day = 
 The Hardest Day was the name of a Second World War air battle fought during the Battle of Britain on 18 August 1940 between the Nazi German Luftwaffe and British Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . 
 By June 1940 , the Allies had been defeated in Western Europe and Scandinavia . Rather than come to terms with Germany , Britain rejected all overtures for a negotiated peace . Consequently Adolf Hitler issued the German armed forces ( Wehrmacht ) Directive No. 16 ordering the invasion of the United Kingdom . 
 The invasion of the United Kingdom was codenamed Operation Sea Lion ( Unternehmen Seelöwe ) . However , before this could be carried out , air supremacy or air superiority was required . The Luftwaffe had to destroy the RAF in order to prevent it from attacking the invasion fleet or providing protection for any attempt by the Royal Navy 's Home Fleet to intercept a landing by sea . Hitler ordered the Luftwaffe 's commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring and the Oberkommando der Luftwaffe ( High Command of the Air Force ) to prepare for this task . 
 The primary target was RAF Fighter Command . In July 1940 , the Luftwaffe began military operations to destroy the RAF . Throughout July and early August , the Germans targeted convoys in the English Channel and occasionally RAF airfields . On 13 August , a major German effort , known as Adlertag ( Eagle Day ) , was made against RAF airfields , but failed . The failure did not deter the Germans from persisting with air raids against the RAF or its infrastructure . 
 On 18 August 1940 , the Luftwaffe made an all @-@ out effort to destroy Fighter Command . The air battles that took place on this day were amongst the largest aerial engagements in history at that time . Both sides suffered very heavy losses . The British outperformed the Luftwaffe in the air , achieving a favourable ratio of 2 : 1 . However , a number of RAF aircraft were caught and destroyed on the ground , equalling the total losses of both sides . Further large and costly aerial battles took place after the 18 August , but both sides lost more aircraft combined on this day than at any other point during the campaign , including the 15 September , the Battle of Britain Day , generally considered the climax of the fighting . For this reason , the air battles of the 18 August 1940 became known as " The Hardest Day " in Britain . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Luftwaffe was detailed to destroy Fighter Command before the planned invasion of Britain could take place . The OKL hoped that the destruction of the British fighter force would force the British to come to terms by air power alone and the very risky Operation Sea Lion would not be needed . The enormous numerical superiority of British naval forces over their German opponents made a crossing of the Channel very dangerous , even with air superiority . Furthermore , the aircraft losses of the spring campaign had weakened the Luftwaffe before the Battle of Britain , and it could not begin its campaign against Fighter Command immediately . It was forced to wait until it had reached acceptable levels before a main assault against the RAF could be made in August 1940 . 
 Until the Luftwaffe was ready to begin operations over the mainland , the first phase of the German air offensive targeted British shipping in the Channel . The raids rarely involved attacks against RAF airfields inland , but encouraged RAF units to engage in battle by attacking British Channel convoys . These operations lasted from 10 July to 8 August 1940 . The attacks against shipping were not very successful , and only 24 @,@ 500 GRT was sunk . Mine laying from aircraft had proved more profitable , sinking 38 @,@ 000 tons . The impact on Fighter Command was minimal . It had lost 74 fighter pilots killed or missing and 48 wounded in July , but British strength rose to 1 @,@ 429 by 3 August , leaving it only short of 124 pilots . Still , the attacks succeeded in forcing the British to abandon the Channel convoy route and to redirect shipping to ports in north @-@ eastern Britain . With this achieved the Luftwaffe began the second phase of its air offensive , attacking RAF airfields and supporting structures in Britain . 
 The first major raid inland and against RAF airfields came on 12 August , and the Luftwaffe quickly escalated its offensive . The Germans did not achieve a degree of success commensurate with their exertions on this date . Nevertheless , in the belief they were having considerable effect on Fighter Command , they prepared to launch their all @-@ out assault on the RAF the following day . By 13 August , German air strength had reached acceptable levels . After bringing its serviceable rates up , the Luftwaffe carried out heavy attacks under the codename Adlertag ( or Eagle Day ) , with 71 per cent of its bomber force , 85 per cent of its Messerschmitt Bf 109 fighter units , and 83 per cent of its Messerschmitt Bf 110 heavy fighter / fighter @-@ bomber units operational . The day went badly for the Germans , who failed to impair Fighter Command and its bases or command and control system . This was due in large part to poor intelligence , which failed to identify Fighter Command airfields and distinguish them from those of Bomber and Coastal Commands . Still , the Germans pursued their strategy against Fighter Command on 15 August , suffering 76 losses . Undeterred , they prepared to make another large @-@ scale attack on RAF bases on 18 August . The month of August witnessed an escalation in air combat , as the Germans made a concentrated effort against Fighter Command . 
 = = Luftwaffe plan = = 
 German intelligence suggested that the RAF was down to just 300 serviceable fighters on 17 August 1940 , taking into consideration German pilots ' claims and their estimates of British production capabilities . In fact , there were 855 machines serviceable , with another 289 at storage units and 84 at training units . These resources were included in a total of 1 @,@ 438 fighters , twice as many as at the beginning of July 1940 . Expecting weakening opposition , the Luftwaffe prepared for a major action against RAF Sector Stations on 18 August . 
 The Luftwaffe 's plan of attack was simple . German bombers were to strike at the RAF airfields in the south @-@ east corner of England . The most important airfields in this region , under the command of AOC ( Air Officer Commanding ) Keith Park and his No. 11 Group RAF , were the Sector Stations at RAF Kenley , Biggin Hill , Hornchurch , North Weald , Northolt , Tangmere and Debden . The first five were on the periphery of Greater London . Tangmere was in the south near the coast at Chichester , while Debden was in the north near Saffron Walden . Each of these airfields housed two to three squadrons and had its own sector operations room . From there , its fighters were directed from its satellite airfields into combat . There were six satellite airfields at Westhampnett , Croydon , Gravesend , Manston , Rochford and RAF Martlesham Heath ; Manston and Martlesham Heath each housed two squadrons , the remainder each housed one . Finally , there was RAF Hawkinge , just inland from Folkestone . Not all of these airfields were targeted on 18 August . 
 Despite the failure of Adlertag and considerable loss rates on 15 , 16 and 17 August , Kesselring convinced Göring that the only sound strategy was to continue to send heavily escorted bombers to destroy British airfields . Kesselring also advocated the use of Jagdgeschwader ( fighter wings ) in free @-@ chase tactics . Messerschmitt Bf 109 single @-@ engine fighters were to be sent out in advance of the main raids to force the British fighters into large @-@ scale air battles which , in theory , would destroy RAF aircraft in combat and deplete the British defences . However , this time , Kesselring changed his operational methods . In consultation with Hugo Sperrle , commanding Luftflotte 3 ( Air Fleet 3 ) , he chose not to scatter his effort against a large amount of targets . Instead , he narrowed down the targets to a short list in order to concentrate his strength and striking power . Sector stations RAF Kenley , North Weald , Hornchurch and Biggin Hill were chosen as the prime targets . 
 = = RAF defences = = 
 = = = Initial strategy and tactics = = = 
 Up to the late Spring of 1940 , Fighter Command had been preparing to meet a possible air attack on the British Isles coming only from due east , from Germany itself ; prior to the German victory in Western Europe . The possibility that France might fall and Britain would continue to fight on had not been considered . An air attack from Germany meant the Luftwaffe 's bombers would operate beyond the range of their fighters and be vulnerable to attack . If twin @-@ engine fighters , such as the Messerschmitt Bf 110s were used , they would be fighting at the limits of their range . 
 It was also doubted that fast fighter aircraft could engage in dogfights . The g @-@ force effect on the human body also seemed to suggest the prospect of air @-@ to @-@ air combat between fighters was impractical anyway . The threat they saw related only to the return @-@ fire of the bomber 's gunners . Before the war the effectiveness of return , or cross @-@ fire , from bombers had been exaggerated by the Air Staff and Air Ministry . 
 This short @-@ sighted belief had a detrimental impact on the tactical effectiveness of RAF Fighter Command until the summer , 1940 . With German bombers perceived as the only prey , AOC Fighter Command Hugh Dowding and his planners devised a system and tactics which used unwieldy and tight fighter formations to bring the RAF fighters into combat with bombers , followed by set @-@ piece tactics for the engagement . Because the bomber 's return fire was considered so dangerous , fighter pilots were trained to open fire at long range , 300 to 400 yards , then break away without closing to short @-@ range . These tactics , practised so thoroughly over the years , proved totally useless to the battle situation facing them over Britain in 1940 . 
 The tactics were unsuitable for fighter @-@ versus @-@ fighter combat . Packed in tight formation , the RAF pilots were more concerned with keeping their position and not colliding with each other than they were keeping watch for the enemy . It made them vulnerable to surprise attacks by Bf 109s and Bf 110s . Even if the British fighters reached the bombers without interception , the chaos of modern aerial combat made it impossible to concentrate attacks with large , rigid formations . Pilots were also forced into paying far too much respect to the bomber 's defensive capabilities . Attacks were broken off far too early and caused little damage to bombers . These tactical failures were evident during the battles in Belgium and France . Moreover , rushed training with pilots who were barely able to use the old tactical methods meant that airmen could not cope with much needed radical changes . 
 The V formation was developed in June , which made a greater emphasis on each pilot looking for the enemy , search capability and avoiding being taken by surprise . Still , it was inferior to German fighter tactics . 
 German fighter tactics were more flexible . In the Spanish Civil War , Werner Mölders developed a new system of fighter tactics . The primary deployment was to use large numbers of Bf 109s on free @-@ hunting missions , or sweeps , over the battle area . Instead of flying the standard V formation , used by many air forces , the Germans paired their fighters into Rotte . It consisted of two fighters ; a pilot and his wingman 200 yards abreast . Flying this way meant each could cover the others blind spots . If an enemy made an attack , the other could move in behind it to protect the other Rotte member . The Rotte could be expanded into a Schwarm ( Swarm or Flight ) . The formation was eventually given the name " Finger @-@ four " . It offered maximum protection and all members of a Schwarm were on the lookout for threats and targets . 
 = = = C3 : Command , communication and control = = = 
 At the operational level the British fighter defences proved to be far more sophisticated . The RAF defences were not just based on the combat power of Fighter Command . Just as important as the " teeth " of the defence was the " eyes and ears " - its nervous system which carried intelligence and information between them to position the " teeth " to strike . 
 By the summer , 1940 , the Chain Home radar stations along the English and Scottish coasts was able to track incoming aircraft from continental Europe at all but the lowest altitudes . The best detection altitude was 20 @,@ 000 feet . Aircraft at this height could be detected over 100 miles away . To assess their identity , IFF ( Identification Friend or Foe ) could , by means of a distinctive blip on radar screens , distinguish German and British aircraft . 
 The radar technology was not flawless . It struggled to gauge heights of incoming formations above 25 @,@ 000 feet and could not measure their numerical strength . It could also take several minutes to assess the line of advance for aircraft on a zigzag course . Moreover , the radar looked out to sea and was unable to track aircraft overland . That was the job of the Royal Observer Corps . Tens of thousands of volunteers , the length and breadth of Britain tracked the German formations over land . They were connected to Sector airfields by landline and could communicate intelligence in real time . 
 The detection and interception of incoming raids was as follows : 
 Radar detects the enemy aircraft 
 Radar plots are dispatched by landline to the filter room at Fighter Command Headquarters , Stanmore Park 
 At the filter room enemy plots were compared with known plots of RAF fighters to assess identity to corroborate IFF 
 Unidentified or hostile plots were dispatched by landline to fighter group or Sector operations rooms for plotting on situation maps 
 No. 11 Groups operations room at RAF Uxbridge kept a record of the status of each unidentified or hostile raid , and the state of RAF Squadrons ; whether they were refuelling , landing , in combat or scrambling 
 Fighter controllers at the Sector operations rooms would choose which formations to engage and exactly what and how many Squadrons to scramble and issue the relevant orders to satellite controllers 
 Fighter controllers at satellite fields would then bring their Squadrons into the field as directed by Sector controllers 
 Squadrons would be loosely deployed across the south east to prevent the enemy slipping through 
 Squadron Leaders are then responsible for the combat engagement 
 = = = Anti @-@ aircraft defences = = = 
 A number of unusual defence mechanisms were used at RAF bases on 18 August 1940 . Among the more conventional was the anti @-@ aircraft artillery piece . The three main types in service were the 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch , 3 @.@ 7 @-@ inch and 3 @-@ inch batteries . The first two were modern and effective over 26 @,@ 000 feet . The last was a First World War vintage weapon and was effective only to 14 @,@ 000 feet . Usually batteries were sited in fours , with a range @-@ finder and predictor which measured the speed and height of the aircraft while taking into account the time the shell took to reach that patch of sky , thus calculating when to detonate the fuse in the shell . As with most artillery , when firing at aircraft , the higher the shell travelled the less effective it became . A shell fired to 5 @,@ 000 feet would only be half as effective at 10 @,@ 000 feet and a quarter as accurate at 15 @,@ 000 feet . The German bombers usually tried to fly around heavy concentrations and if forced to fly through them , chose to fly at heights of around 15 @,@ 000 feet . 
 Most of the heavy artillery defences were located around London and the Thames Estuary . Others concentrated around Dover , Folkestone , Harwich , Ipswich , Portsmouth and Southampton docks . 
 For low @-@ level defence the Bofors 40 mm was used which had a rate of fire around 120 rounds a minute . The 2 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 9 kg ) shells were highly effective against low flying aircraft , capable of blowing a hole big enough for a man to fit through . However , there were only a few to go around . More than twice as many were needed to protect RAF Kenley and Biggin Hill . To make up the difference 3 inch guns , firing over open sights from 1918 were used . They could fire only 15 rounds per minute . 
 However , there was an unusual defence weapon that had been designed for use at Kenley on 18 August ; the parachute @-@ and @-@ cable . On the north side of the airfield at 60 @-@ foot intervals they were fired vertically upwards by a rocket in salvoes of nine or more . As enemy aircraft came in at low @-@ altitude the parachute device deployed and held a 480 @-@ foot long steel cable from an altitude of 600 feet . An enemy aircraft would hopefully fly through it . If it struck , the second parachute deployed and the unfortunate victim was left towing away the contraption . If the cable was picked up on the wing , there was a good chance that the aircraft would go down out of control . This device had not been used before 18 August 1940 . To support them , Barrage balloons with cutting cables capable of tearing off bombers ' wings were also used . 
 = = Lunchtime engagement = = 
 = = = German build @-@ up = = = 
 The morning weather was clear and sunny making ideal flying conditions . At his Headquarters in Brussels , Albert Kesselring commanding Luftflotte 2 ( Air Fleet 2 ) directed the Geschwader ( Wings ) under his command to carry out attacks on targets Nos. 1017 and <unk> in the Luftwaffe catalogue ; Biggin Hill and Kenley . Biggin Hill was handed over to KG 1 which was to send 60 Heinkel He 111s from its base in Amiens to conduct a high @-@ level attack . RAF Kenley was the responsibility of KG 76 based in airfields to the north of Paris . The Kampfgeschwader ( Bomber Wing ) consisted of a mixed formation of 48 Dornier Do 17s and Junkers Ju 88s . The force attacking Kenley was smaller numerically than the one hitting Biggin Hill and the Ju 88 and Do 17 carried only two @-@ thirds the bomb @-@ load of a He 111 . The planners reasoned a more accurate low @-@ level strike carried out by a staffel from KG 76 would compensate for the weaker firepower of KG 76s main formations . Fighter escort was provided by Jagdgeschwader 3 ( JG 3 ) , Jagdgeschwader 26 ( JG 26 ) , Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 ) , Jagdgeschwader 52 ( JG 52 ) , Jagdgeschwader 54 ( JG 54 ) and Zerstörergeschwader 26 ( ZG 26 ) . The Jagdgeschwader would carry out free @-@ hunting and close escort from bases in the Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais . 
 Both of these airfields contained Sector Operations rooms from which the British fighters were directed into action . These airfields were selected by the Luftwaffe because they were the largest ones known to be operating RAF fighters . The German intelligence had no knowledge of the Sector Operations rooms there . The rooms were above ground and had little protection . If those poorly protected buildings could be hit , and those inside killed or wounded , it would be a serious blow to the control system in the region . 
 At their airfield at Cormeilles @-@ en @-@ Vexin , 9 Staffel ( Squadron ) KG 76 were briefed by their commander Hauptmann ( Captain ) Joachim Roth . The Staffel was to conduct a low @-@ level attack against Kenley with Roth flying as a navigator in the lead aircraft . The unit had specialised in low @-@ level attacks in France with great success . The nine Do 17s were to head across the Channel and make landfall at Beachy Head . From there they were to follow the Brighton @-@ London rail line north @-@ east to the target area . The crews were ordered to concentrate their attacks against buildings and hangars on the southern end of the airfield . 
 The Dorniers were to carry twenty 110 @-@ lb bombs each fitted with a fuse that would allow for function if released from 50 feet or higher ; the type of bomb previously used by the Staffel had to release from twice this height , making the unit 's Do 17s correspondingly more vulnerable to ground fire . 
 The attack was to be part of a coordinated pincer movement against the airfields . Ju 88s from II . / KG 76 were to dive @-@ bomb buildings and hangars from high @-@ altitude first . Five minutes later , 27 Do 17s from I. and II . / KG 76 would level @-@ bomb from high altitude to crater the runways and landing grounds while knocking out its defences . 9 Staffel KG 76 , the specialist low @-@ level strike unit , would go in and finish off any buildings still standing . It was a bold and imaginative plan . If it worked , it would wreck Kenley from end @-@ to @-@ end . The high @-@ flying bombers would have full fighter escort but the low @-@ flying bombers would have to use stealth to avoid interception to and from the target area . The operation began at 09 : 00 but was postponed because of heavy haze reducing visibility up to 4 @,@ 000 feet . 
 In the intervening time , a few skirmishes took place between RAF fighters and German reconnaissance aircraft . A Lehrgeschwader 2 ( LG 2 ) Bf 110 was shot down in the morning . At 11 : 00 KG 1 's formations took off and the main formations headed out to sea . The form @-@ up was more difficult for KG 76 and its Do 17s and Ju 88s . Their bases in and around Calais were covered in 8 / 10ths cloud cover with a base of 6 @,@ 500 feet which reached to 10 @,@ 000 feet . As the bombers climbed through the haze the formation soon lost cohesion . Valuable time was lost as they reformed . Unfortunately the Do 17s of I. and III . / KG 76 had overtaken the III . / KG 76 Ju 88s which should have been ahead of them by five minutes . These delay had serious consequences for 9 Staffel KG 76 . 
 Meanwhile , Gerhard Schöpfel , leading III . / JG 26 and Bf 109s from JG 3 , 40 in total , were already crossing the Dover straights to sweep the skies clear of the main raid . Some 25 miles behind him were the 27 Do 17s of I. and III . / KG 76 escorted by 20 Bf 110s that were to strike Kenley . Close by the Dorniers were the Ju 88s of III . / KG 76 escorted by Bf 109s from JG 51 . This formation should have been 15 miles in front . Some 15 miles to the rear of the <unk> , KG 1 's He 111s were bound for Biggin Hill , escorted by 40 Bf 109s from JG 54 . The formations were moving at around three miles per minute , at 12 @,@ 000 feet . Around 50 miles to the south @-@ west , the nine Do 17s of 9 Staffel were at wave @-@ top height , half way between Dieppe , Seine @-@ Maritime and Beachy Head , intent on sneaking under British radar beams unobserved . Altogether , the raiding force contained 108 bombers and 150 fighters . 
 = = = British scramble = = = 
 The British followed the main raids and were aware of all the approaching aircraft , save for the low @-@ altitude 9 Staffel . The radar station near Dover began reporting a build @-@ up over the Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais area . This activity increased until 12 : 45 when six separate concentrations were reported . The plotters estimated the strength of the force as 350 aircraft , one @-@ third more than the actual size . 
 At RAF Uxbridge , AOC No. 11 Group RAF Keith Park and his controllers directed No. 501 Squadron RAF and its 12 Hawker Hurricanes , already in the air , to Canterbury at 20 @,@ 000 feet . They had been on their way back to RAF Gravesend having spent most of the morning on patrol operating from RAF Hawkinge near Folkestone . Within minutes eight more Squadrons were dispatched to meet them ; two from Kenley , two from Biggin Hill and one each from North Weald , Martlesham , Heath , Manston and Rochford . 
 Within a short time the fighters assigned to engage were all airborne . Five Squadrons ; No. 17 , No. 54 , No. 56 , No. 65 , and 501 with 17 Supermarine Spitfires and 36 Hurricanes were moving to patrol the Canterbury @-@ Margate line to block any attack on the Thames Estuary ports or the airfields to the north of it . Four Squadrons ; No. 32 , No. 64 , No. 601 , and No. 615 , with 23 Spitfires and 27 Hurricanes went into position above Kenley and Biggin Hill . A total of 97 RAF fighters were to meet the attack . 
 Park did not send all of his forces aloft , and he held a reserve . Three Squadrons at RAF Tangmere were kept and made ready to meet more attacks from the south . Six more were in reserve to meet a possible follow @-@ up to the coming raid . 
 = = = 9 Staffel KG 76 attacks Kenley = = = 
 As the advance led by Gerhard Schöpfel made their way past the coast it spotted the vic @-@ formation of RAF fighters . They were Hurricanes of 501 Squadron which were conducting wide spirals to gain height . Schöpfel bounced them and shot down four in two minutes killing one pilot and wounding three others . As he departed other members of his Geschwader ( Wing ) dived on the Squadron and an inconclusive dogfight ensued . Schöpfel 's victims were Donald McKay and Pilot Officers <unk> Bland , Kenneth Lee and F. Kozlowski . Bland was the only one killed . 
 Both the Do 17s and Ju 88s of the III . / KG 76 were engaged by AAA defences as they crossed Dover . The Do 17s were escorted by ZG 26 while III . / JG 51 led by Hannes Trautloft escorted the Ju 88s . Trautloft remarked on the impressive numerical strength of the German formations . Fortunately the German bombers had flown too far east of Canterbury and thus avoided the main concentration of fighters on the Canterbury @-@ Margate line . At 13 : 01 they passed over Ashford and had a clear 40 mile run before they reached Biggin Hill and its four defending Squadrons . 
 As 9 Staffel crossed the coast they were fired at by Royal Navy patrol boats . The machine gun fire was ineffective . However , the Royal Observer Corps Post K3 , situated on top of Beach Head , spotted the Dorniers . They immediately telephoned a warning to Observer Group Headquarters at Horsham and fighter sector stations in the area , including RAF Kenley . Wing Commander Thomas <unk> , the station commander at Kenley , noticed the low @-@ flying Dornier plot appear on his situation map . They appeared to be heading away towards the west , and was unsure of their target . His controllers were organising Nos. 64 and 615 Squadrons to meet the high @-@ altitude raid . Roth headed past Lewes until he picked up the rail line , Brighton @-@ London . He then turned north @-@ west . 
 With the Observer Corps passing a steady stream of reports regarding approaching German formations they soon realised a coordinated attack was underway . The two Squadrons approaching the high @-@ altitude attack could not be diverted and no fighters had been asked to engage the 9 Staffel . The only Squadron on the ground in the area was No. 111 Squadron RAF that had 12 Hurricanes at RAF Croydon . Although usually the responsibility of Park , the controllers took the matter into their own hands and ordered all aircraft into the air . Even those that were not in combat condition were flown north @-@ east , to avoid them being caught on the ground . 
 No. 111 Squadron managed to get into position above Kenley at 3 @,@ 000 feet . With luck they could intercept 9 Staffel . Biggin Hill soon took the same precaution of ordering all fighters into the air by order of Group Captain Richard Grice . At 13 : 10 the German bombers were within 40 miles of the BBC high @-@ power transmitter at Hatfield , Hertfordshire . In accordance with policy , it was shut down to deny the Germans the opportunity to use it as direction @-@ finding beacon and the BBC Home Service was kicked off air in the process . Using the railway lines , Roth , in the lead Do 17 , homed in on Kenley from the south . They were now just six miles away . 
 Joachim Roth 's low @-@ level navigation had been extremely accurate . He had navigated his unit to within two minutes flying time from the target without interception , over unfamiliar enemy territory , on time and exactly on the planned route . But as the Dorniers neared the airfield they noticed that there was no smoke , or signs of damage . They expected to be polishing off a damaged fighter station . As the Germans burst over the airfield the air was suddenly filled with tracer rounds as the Dornier 's gunners engaged the Bofors and British AAA defences . 
 Some of No. 111 Squadron dived onto the Dorniers , but one Hurricane was shot down , either by the Dorniers or British ground fire . Pilot Flight Lieutenant Stanley Connors was killed . The rest pulled up and away to avoid friendly fire . They flew to the northern edge of the airfield to catch the raiders as they emerged . Two Hurricanes from No. 615 were taking off under the attack . 
 Within minutes all the Dorniers had been hit . Feldwebel Johannes Petersen 's Do 17 was flying higher than the others . It was hit , and caught fire , but carried on . Günter Unger lined up his Do 17 in order to attack a hangar and released his 20 110 @-@ lb bombs before his starboard engine was knocked out . Unteroffizier ( Junior Officer or NCO ) Schumacher watched as three hangars were destroyed by Unger ’ s bombs . Unger ’ s Dornier was then was hit by something . It bled black smoke and lost speed . Unger was engaged by No. 111s Harry Newton . Newton was shot down by accurate return fire and bailed out . However , Newton fired a burst of machine gun fire at the Dornier in frustration before leaving the Hurricane . He damaged the Dornier , but Unger flew on . Oberleutnant ( First Lieutenant ) Hermann Magin was lining up a hangar when he was hit and slumped over . The quick reactions of the navigator , 28 @-@ year @-@ old Wilhelm @-@ Friedrich <unk> , saved the crew . He took control and climbed out of the defensive fire before ordering the crew to abandon the aircraft . 
 As the bombers worked over the airfield , Aircraftman D. Roberts waited for them on the northern boundary with his Parachute @-@ and @-@ cable launchers . Three Do 17s were heading towards him , climbing slowly . When they were in range he fired the cables . Nine rockets flew upwards . Wilhelm Raab saw the rockets go up . Although he did not understand what they were , he banked the Do 17 to avoid the lines of smoke that may or may not have concealed something . Because the Dornier banked , one of the cables that hit his bomber slid off the wing before the lower parachute had time to deploy . Pilot Petersen 's Dornier was not that lucky . Already on fire it ran into the cable which dragged it out of the sky . The Do 17 crashed killing all five crewmen . Oberleutnant Rudolf <unk> ( carrying Joachim Roth ) also managed to avoid a collision , but before he could do so fire hit his Dornier destroying the fuel tanks . The bomber caught fire and he was barely able to keep control . Eventually it crash @-@ landed at Leaves Green in Kent after being shot down by No. 111 Squadron Hurricanes . Roth was killed , but <unk> survived with burns . 
 Of the bombers that evaded the defences and No. 111 Squadron , two ditched into the sea and two more crash @-@ landed in France . The German crew was picked up by Kriegsmarine ships . Out of the nine Do 17s , four were lost , two damaged in crash landings and all were at least damaged . Wilhelm @-@ Friedrich <unk> was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross for helping the wounded pilot Hermann Magin guide his Do 17 back home . Magin died of wounds soon after . 
 For their efforts , 9 Staffel destroyed at least three hangars , hit several other buildings and destroyed eight Hurricanes on the ground . According to other sources , 10 hangars were destroyed , six damaged , the operations room put out of action , and many buildings were destroyed . It would have been worse had the bombs been released higher . A lot of bombs landed horizontally and did not explode on impact . To achieve this level of damage , KG 76 dropped nine tons of bombs . At the end of the day just one hangar was left operational at Kenley . The low @-@ level raid put the airfield out of commission for two hours . In combat , two Hurricanes were shot down by the Dornier 's return fire . In return 9 Staffel lost four Do 17s , three slightly damaged and two seriously damaged . Low @-@ level attacks were abandoned after The Hardest Day . 
 = = = KG 1 and KG 76 hit Kenley , Biggin Hill and West Malling = = = 
 Nos. 610 , 615 and 32 Squadrons were guarding the air space near Biggin Hill . Operating at about 25 @,@ 000 feet they were waiting for the high @-@ altitude force to reach the area . Unfortunately , the German escort fighters had climbed much higher and they were taken by surprise . JG 3 's Bf 109s had been flying extended cover for the 12 Ju 88s and 27 Do 17s of KG 76 . They spotted No. 615 below them and bounced the RAF fighters . Oberleutnant Lothar Keller and <unk> Helmut Meckel and Helmut Landry each destroyed a Hurricane . While 615 had taken grievous losses , it had served an important purpose by keeping the escorting German fighters busy . While they engaged JG 3 , Squadron Leader Michael Crossley led No. 32 Squadron against I. and III . / KG 76 bombers without having to worry about enemy fighter aircraft . 
 ZG 26 's Bf 110s were flying near the formation , and tried to offer JG 3 support by intercepting Crossley 's fighters but failed . Crossley led a head @-@ on attack and downed one Do 17 while his squadron damaged several others . So close had the RAF fighters pressed home their attacks that the bombers had to move and <unk> to avoid their fire . It put the bomb @-@ aimers off their aim . The Dorniers were already too close to their targets and the pilots could not realign before the formation was over and passed the aiming point . Having been thwarted from bombing their official targets they aimed for rail tracks to the north and east of the airfield . Some of the unit targeted RAF Croydon , three miles north @-@ west of Biggin Hill . Others turned around without releasing their bombs . The crews that bombed the rail lines found they were a difficult target to hit at 15 @,@ 000 feet . Some released their bombs at intervals in the hope of hitting their targets , however some bombs fell on residential property . 
 Crossley attempted a second pass on the bombers soon after . This time , the Bf 110s succeeded in getting in between the bombers and 32 Squadron . One Bf 110 was damaged while their gunners shot down and wounded Flight Lieutenant ' <unk> ' Russell . Seconds later , No. 64 Squadron 's eight Spitfires turned up , led by Squadron Leader Donald MacDonell . They dived on the Dorniers from high @-@ altitude . Some of the Squadron , including Squadron Leader MacDonell , attacked the Bf 110s , believing them to be Dorniers . MacDonell damaged a Bf 110 flown by Ruediger . <unk> crash @-@ landed and was taken prisoner . Several confusing dogfights broke out and lasted for some time . 
 The Ju 88s arrived over the target at Kenley to find a smoke pall hanging over the target . It was impossible to begin dive @-@ bombing attacks under those conditions . Given the amount of damage to Kenley , it also seemed unnecessary to the bomber crews . As they were deciding what action to take , they were attacked . The Bf 109s led by Hannes Trautloft had a difficult job of defending the Ju 88s . After passing Biggin Hill on their way to RAF West Malling British AAA fire began targeting the formation . One Ju 88 was hit , and Trautloft gave it special protection . As he manoeuvred himself into position , the formation was jumped by Spitfires and Hurricanes . One Ju 88 was lost to 32 Squadron 's Pilot Officer Bolesław <unk> . As they attack began , the Ju 88s turned to West Malling , and began dive @-@ bombing attacks as an alternate target . 
 KG 1 , meanwhile , had a clear run to its target . The battles with KG 76 had drawn in four of the five RAF Squadrons . Still , the British sent No. 615 Squadron and its 15 Spitfires to deal with KG 1 . They were confronted with a large number of Bf 109s from JG 54 , escorting the He 111s . The German fighters successfully defended their charges and the RAF fighters could not break through to the bombers , which were flying in stepped @-@ up waves from 12 to 15 @,@ 000 feet . Most of the German bomber crews noted the absence of fighter opposition and speculated that the RAF might be at the end of its tether . Most of the personnel at Biggin Hill had time to take cover before the bombers arrived . KG 1 lost only one He 111 and one another damaged but failed to damage Biggin Hill . It is likely the losses sustained by KG 1 were inflicted by Spitfires from No. 65 Squadron RAF which stumbled across of their He 111s while 615 and JG 54 were locked in combat . 
 Thus far , the German fighters had performed well , but now it came to the most difficult part of the operation : withdrawing under attack . The German fighters were low on fuel and could only do so much to protect the bombers . Damaged stragglers lagged behind the main bomber streams and were easy prey for RAF fighters if they could be found . The four German raiding formations were all heading in different directions by 13 : 30 : 9 Staffel were well clear to the south , heading back over Beachy Head ; KG 1 were completing their bomb run while the Spitfires of 610 were being held at arms length by JG 54 Bf 109s ; the Ju 88s of KG 76 had attacked West Malling and their escorts were battling Nos. 32 , 64 , 501 and 615 Squadrons . The Dorniers were heading home under attack by elements of 32 , 64 and 615 Squadrons . However , further to the east , Nos. 1 , 17 , 54 , 56 and 266 Squadrons totalling 23 Spitfires and 36 Hurricanes were moving in to meet the main formations during their withdrawal . 
 RAF controllers faced difficulties of their own . Thickening haze made it impossible for the Observer Corps to plot the route of German formations . A concentrated force of RAF fighters , should it be able to engage the main formations , might be able to inflict serious damage . However , the haze might enable the Germans to slip by and leave the concentrated force of RAF fighters near Canterbury striking at thin air . Instead of adopting an " all or nothing " approach , Park ordered the fighters to spread out and engage singly if needed . 
 Park 's plan paid dividends . Bf 110s from ZG 26 were soon discovered by No. 56 Squadron and quickly found themselves under attack . In the short and sharp engagement , ZG 26 lost five Bf 110s and another damaged to No. 56 Squadron . Worse was follow when No. 54 and 501 engaged the Messerschmitts . ZG 26 lost a further two shot down and two damaged to No. 54 Squadron . None of the RAF Squadrons reported any losses in these engagements . The Geschwader lost other machines to No. 151 and No. 46 Squadrons who arrived to join the battle . According to one source , the total losses of ZG 26 amounted to 12 destroyed and seven damaged throughout the entire day . Another source gives a list of 15 Bf 110s written off ; 13 destroyed , two written off and six damaged on 18 August 1940 . Whatever the actual losses , The Hardest Day marked the start of a decline in Bf 110 operations . Production was not keeping pace with losses , and there simply were not enough aircraft to go around . 
 No. 266 Squadron was the last unit to trade shots with German formations . During the battles five Bf 109s were destroyed ; two from JG 26 and three from JG 3 . A further three Bf 109s were 60 , 70 and 80 percent damaged . Four German pilots were killed , one wounded , one captured and one missing . One made it back to base where the crippled fighter crash @-@ landed . One JG 3 and one JG 26 Bf 109s fell to Spitfires of 266 Squadron . Three fell to Spitfires of No. 54 Squadron . Bomber losses amounted to eight destroyed and ten damaged ; including five Do 17s and two Ju 88s destroyed from KG 76 and one KG 1 He 111 lost . 
 The British suffered casualties as well . No. 17 Squadron lost one Hurricane and one pilot killed . No. 32 Squadron suffered the loss of one Hurricane destroyed ; No. 65 Squadron lost one Hurricane shot down and one pilot missing . No. 111 Squadron lost one Hurricane destroyed on the ground and one damaged on the ground and three shot down in aerial combat , but all pilots survived . No. 501 Squadron suffered heavy losses amounting to five Hurricanes destroyed , two pilots killed , one seriously wounded . No. 601 lost two Hurricanes and both pilots killed while No. 602 Squadron lost three Spitfires and one damaged with one pilot wounded . No. 615 Squadron also took crippling casualties . It lost three Hurricanes with one pilot killed and another wounded . However , a further six of their Hurricanes were destroyed in the Kenley raid by 9 Staffel . / KG 76 . The casualties of 615 have been challenged by another source which indicates 615 Squadron lost only three on the ground at Kenley ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 The main battle was over , but more combats took place as Kesselring sent in even more Bf 109s to support the withdrawing bombers . Jagdgeschwader 2 ( JG 2 ) and Jagdgeschwader 27 ( JG 27 ) engaged RAF fighters near the Isle of Wight as the bombers left British air space . II . / JG 2 lost one Bf 109 destroyed and another damaged in battle with Hurricanes from No. 601 Squadron , suffering one pilot missing and the other wounded . JG 27 lost six Bf 109s ( three each from I. and II . / JG 27 ) in action against No. 85 Squadron RAF . Three pilots were killed , two were posted missing presumed dead and the other was picked up in the Channel by a Heinkel He 59 air @-@ sea rescue aircraft . 
 = = Large @-@ scale Ju 87 operations = = 
 = = = German build up = = = 
 Hugo Sperrle 's Luftflotte 3 ordered his dive bomber units to begin operations against the radar stations and airfields on the southern coast of Britain . The targets on the afternoon of 18 August were RAF Ford , RAF Thorney Island and Gosport , all belonging to the Fleet Air Arm or Coastal Command . Included in the target selection was the radar station at Poling , West Sussex , near Littlehampton . 
 Reconnaissance by Junkers Ju 86 aircraft had identified the airfields as fighter bases . The high altitude and poor resolution of the photographs meant the aircraft on the ground could not be identified properly and the Germans mistakenly believed them to be fighter fields . In fact , none of the airfields belonged to Fighter Command . Gosport housed a torpedo development unit , Thorney Island housed No. 59 Squadron RAF and No. 235 Squadron RAF with Bristol Blenheim 's assigned to RAF Coastal Command . Ford was a naval air station and housed No. 829 Squadron Fleet Air Arm which was working up with Fairey Albacore aircraft at the time . These targets were given to Sturzkampfgeschwader 77 ( StG 77 or Dive Bombing Wing 77 ) . The Geschwader committed 109 Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive @-@ bombers to the raid . It was the largest concentration of Ju 87s to operate over Britain to date . 
 I. / StG 77 were to strike at Thorney Island with 28 Ju 87s ; 28 II . / StG 77 were assigned to Ford ; and 31 III . / StG 77 Ju 87s were to destroy Poling radar station . A fourth unit , Sturzkampfgeschwader 3 ( StG 3 or Dive Bombing Wing 3 ) , sent 22 Ju 87s to attack Gosport . The dive @-@ bombers were supported by 157 Bf 109s ; 70 from JG 27 ; 32 from JG 53 acting as close escort ; and 55 from JG 2 which was to sweep the Portsmouth area in advance of the main raid independently . The Ju 87s were based around Caen , too far away for the attacks . So in the morning the Stukas were moved into closer airfields around Cherbourg , right on the Channel coast . There , fuel tanks were filled , bombs loaded , and crews given a final briefing . 
 At 13 : 29 the first Ju 87s took off . By 13 : 45 all were in formation and beginning the 85 @-@ mile trip . Major Helmut Bode led III . / StG 77 to Poling . He knew nothing of the technicalities of his target . Behind him was Hauptmann Alfons <unk> 's II . / StG 77 bound for Ford . After them , Hauptmann Herbert Meisel 's III Gruppe was heading on the left of the formation for Thorney Island . Hauptmann Walter Seigel 's I. / StG 3 headed for Gosport on the extreme left . Each Ju 87 was loaded with 550 @-@ lb bombs under the main fuselage and four 11 @-@ lb bombs and two under each wing . The Bf 109s would not take off for some time . The long trip and low speed of the Ju 87s meant there was plenty of time to catch up without burning fuel keeping close contact with the Stukas . 
 = = = British scramble = = = 
 At 13 : 59 , Poling radar station picked up the German formations and reported them as 80 @-@ strong . Smaller forces ranging from 9 to 20 @-@ plus represented the German fighters moving up behind it . The British estimated the Luftwaffe attack force to be 150 @-@ aircraft strong . It was an underestimation by half . No. 10 Group RAF and No. 11 Group alerted their units from their operations rooms at Uxbridge and Box in Wiltshire . No. 10 and 11 Groups dispatched more Squadrons to support the already airborne 11 Hurricanes from No. 601 Squadron . 10 Group dispatched one Squadron each from RAF Middle Wallop , RAF Exeter and RAF Warmwell , and one each from No. 11 's RAF Tangmere and RAF Westhampnett . The RAF order of battle included ; nine Hurricanes of No. 43 Squadron RAF , led by Squadron Leader Frank Reginald Carey patrolling Thorney Island ; No. 602 Squadron RAF protected Westhampnett with 12 Spitfires ; No. 152 Squadron RAF and 11 Spitfires patrolled Portsmouth air space ; No. 234 Squadron RAF with 11 Spitfires over the Isles of Wight to engage the attackers ; No. 213 Squadron RAF with 12 Hurricanes which were to move 80 miles eastward from <unk> patrol St. Catherine 's Point . Finally , No. 609 Squadron RAF and 12 Spitfires remained in reserve around Middle Wallop to meet any unexpected German moves . 
 Having lost all of its Bristol Blenheim night fighters in the raid of 16 August , Tangmere dispatched two Hurricanes from the Fighter Interception Unit ( FIU ) fitted with FIU airborne radar to test the device in action . RAF Coastal Command also joined in , and committed No. 235 Squadron RAF and its Bristol Blenheim 's . The defence was reliant on the 68 Spitfires and Hurricanes . The numerical standing meant a ratio of one RAF fighter to every four German fighters and bombers , or in other words , one British aircraft to every two German fighters . Even had the fighter controllers realised the strength of the raid , there was little that could be done . Other fighters were refuelling and rearming after the attacks on Kenley and Biggin Hill and would not be available . 
 During the British scramble , Bf 109s from JG 52 which were part of a pre @-@ raid sweep , chanced upon RAF fighters out in the open at RAF Manston . Twelve Bf 109s from 2 Staffel II . / JG 52 , led by Hauptmann Wolfgang Ewald attacked while the British fighters were refuelling . After two passes , the Germans claimed 10 fighters and three Blenheims destroyed . In fact , just two No. 266 Squadron RAF Spitfires were destroyed with another six Hurricanes damaged but repairable . A single Hurricane was also destroyed . 
 = = = Ju 87s attack unopposed = = = 
 As the Ju 87s reached the coast , the respective groups split off and headed for their assigned targets . By this time , some 15 miles off the Isle of Wight , the Bf 109s had caught up and were now zigzagging around the dive @-@ bombers . Bode led III . / StG 77 to attack from the North West , dead into wind in order to bomb accurately . Usually the Ju 87s attacked in line astern , but Bode chose to attack in groups of three to split the AAA fire . To keep the enemy 's heads down , he fired his machine guns in an 80 @-@ degree dive . He soon left an altitude of 13 @,@ 000 feet , releasing his bombs and pulling out at 2 @,@ 275 feet . The rest of his unit followed . 
 Poling took severe punishment from very accurate bombing . Since Ventnor radar station had been knocked out already , this attack demonstrated that an attack on Fighter Command 's command , communication and control system was possible . Emergency equipment had been installed on the site in case of a breakdown , but the information and reading of the radar was significantly less reliable . In fact , Poling was so badly damaged it was out of action for the rest of August . Fortunately , the CH chain had a mobile radar station at the Isle of Wight to fill in for it . Another was due to be set up near Poling anyway , so the chain remained unaffected . The damage done to Kenley and Poling were no more than inconveniences to Park and Dowding . Only one WAAF member , Avis Parsons , was studying the plots at Poling up until the attack . She was awarded the Military Medal for her actions on 5 September 1940 . 
 As Bode was in action at Poling , Alfons <unk> 's unit attacked Ford . There were only six Lewis machine guns manned at Ford and the Ju 87s were able to attack with complete confidence . Bombs rained down on huts , hangars , building and amongst aircraft drawn up together for maintenance . Early on bombs struck the field 's oil tanks and storage compounds causing an enormous blaze which contributed to the crippling damage on the airfield . Gosport also came under attack soon after . Siegel 's Ju 87s , with no air opposition , swooped onto their targets causing large @-@ scale damage . 
 As the Ju 87s began their attack , Spitfires from No. 234 Squadron engaged the 25 @-@ strong Bf 109 escort commanded by Hauptmann Karl @-@ Wolfgang Redlich . I. / JG 27s commander , Gruppenkommandeur ( Group Commander ) Eduard Neumann heard the battle developing , but communications were poor and he decided to let Redlich , one of his most experienced Staffelkapitän ( Squadron Leaders ) fight alone . In the resulting combat , three Bf 109s were shot down . 
 = = = Disaster for StG 77 = = = 
 While three of the four Ju 87 groups reached and bombed their targets without interception , the 28 Stukas of I. / StG 77 were attacked by No. 43 and 601 Squadron sporting a force of 18 Hurricanes . The escorting Bf 109s from II . / JG 27 were flying too far away and could not stop the Hurricanes making an attack before the Ju 87s made their dives . Three Ju 87s were shot down in exchange for a damaged Hurricane , hit by return fire . The Bf 109s soon came under attack themselves and could not assist the dive @-@ bombers effectively . Still , some Ju 87s made attacks . While they were doing so , some of the German crews saw No. 235 Blenheims taking off to defend their base . Some hangars were hit by the Ju 87s and much damage done . As the Bf 109 escorts turned to meet the two engaging RAF Squadrons , around 300 aircraft filled a patch of sky 25 miles long , from Gosport to Bognor Regis . No. 152 , 235 Squadrons engaged the Germans over Thorney Island . No. 602 engaged the Ju 87s that attacked Ford but III . / JG 27 bounced No. 602 Squadron , claiming four Spitfires destroyed . Spitfires from No. 234 and Hurricanes from 213 Squadron each destroyed one Bf 109 . 
 The running air battles had cost the Ju 87 units heavily . The lack of protection for I. / StG 77 had cost it 10 Ju 87s with one damaged beyond repair . Total manpower losses for the unit amounted to 17 killed or mortally wounded , six wounded and five captured out of 56 men . II . / StG 77 lost three Ju 87s to fighter attack and one damaged beyond repair , five crewmen dead and one captured . III . / StG 77 also lost two Ju 87s and two damaged with four men killed . StG <unk> casualties amounted to 26 killed , six taken prisoner , and six wounded . The battles brought the number of Ju 87s lost thus far in the campaign to 59 with a further 33 damaged . The price was too high and with the exception of sporadic attacks on convoys later in the year , the Ju 87 played no further part in the Battle of Britain . Among the dead was Gruppenkommandeur Hauptmann Herbert Meisel . 
 The Bf 109s of JG 27 lost six fighters . Two pilots were saved . Another source gives eight Bf 109s destroyed . JG 27 claimed 14 victories , but it is likely this was an exaggeration . Only seven were allowed to stand by the Luftwaffe . RAF casualties in the air battles amounted to five fighters destroyed and four damaged . No. 43 Squadron suffered one damaged Hurricane ; 152 Squadron two damaged Spitfires ; No. 601 Squadron lost two Hurricanes ; No. 602 Squadron lost three Spitfires and one damaged . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The damage done to Ford was great . The local fire brigades helped put out the numerous fires and clear up the dead in and around the station . Mostly foam was used as the main water pipe had burst . Other fire units used water from static water tanks and a ditch which had filled from the fractured pipe . Ford had received less warning than the other targets and suffered heavier casualties : 28 killed and 75 wounded . Some 14 aircraft were destroyed : five Blackburn Sharks , five Fairey Swordfish , and two Fairey Albacore . A further 26 aircraft were damaged but repairable . As well as petrol and oil installations , two hangars , the motor transport hangar , two stores buildings , the ratings ' and petty officers ' canteens and numerous accommodation buildings were destroyed . 
 At Gosport , five aircraft were lost and five damaged . Several buildings were wrecked and two hangars damaged . But there were no casualties . The Ju 87 attack had been accurate , and no bombs fell outside the military compounds . In the Gosport area , 10 barrage balloons were shot down and two damaged . 
 The attacks of No. 43 and 601 Squadron disrupted the raid against Thorney Island and damage was not concentrated . Two hangars and two buildings were wrecked . Three aircraft were destroyed : a Blenheim , an Avro Anson and a Magister . One Vickers Wellington was also damaged . The only casualties were five civilian workers , injured when a 110 @-@ lb bomb landed on their shelter . 
 The loss of long @-@ range radar station at Poling caused few problems . The Chain Home Low radar there was working and could see almost as far out to sea . Along the surrounding coastline , for 70 miles , another six radar stations gave interlocking stations which provided cover , so there was no hole in the system . Within a few days , mobile units were moved into wooded areas nearby to provide cover until Poling was repaired . 
 = = Weather intervention = = 
 = = = RAF over France = = = 
 After the second attack there followed several hours of quiet as Nos. 10 and 11 Groups and Luftflotte 2 and 3 , tired after considerable exertions , stopped to draw breath . On both sides of the Channel , unit commanders now phoned round frantically , trying to establish whether missing crews and aircraft were safely down elsewhere . It was time to move the dead , wounded and refuel and rearm the aircraft before the next potential mission . 
 In the interim , two Bristol Blenheim of No. 114 Squadron RAF made an attack on <unk> and Dieppe . It passed over at high altitude , and dropped its bombs . The Germans recorded no damage at <unk> , and the attack on Dieppe seems to have gone unnoticed . As the bombers headed home , they passed two Spitfires of the Photographic Reconnaissance Unit ( PRU ) . These aircraft had their armament removed , stripped of radios and everything not essential for their mission . They were fitted with extra fuel tanks and cameras to carry out their work . To achieve greater speed , the machines were polished to reduce drag . The Spitfires were the fastest aircraft either the RAF or Luftwaffe at that time , achieving a speed of just under 400 mph . Flying at 34 @,@ 000 feet they usually came and went undetected . They photographed ports and airfields and then returned . 
 = = = Fresh German operations = = = 
 By 17 : 00 , the Luftwaffe was ready to strike again . Radar stations were not plotting more German formations off the Kent coast and over the Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais area . Having attacked Biggin Hill and Kenley , Luftflotte 2 was not going after the Sector Station RAF North Weald and RAF Hornchurch . Some 58 Do 17s of KG 2 were sent to bomb Hornchurch and 51 He 111s of KG 53 were directed to attack North Weald . The two raiding formations were to pass over the coast at the same time ; so the He 111s attacking North Weald , with further to go , left 15 minutes earlier . The He 111s were to cross over at <unk> , the Dorniers at Deal . Fighter escort was provided by 140 Bf 109s and Bf 110s from JG 3 , JG 26 , JG 51 , JG 54 and ZG 26 . 
 The British correctly estimated the German strength as 250 aircraft . To meet the threat the Fighter Controllers at 11 Group 's Uxbridge centre scrambled 13 Squadrons ; No. 12 Group at <unk> passed on ordered to four more . Soon , a combined total of 47 Spitfires and 97 Hurricanes were in the air . Ten of the RAF fighters in the air ( nine Spitfires from No. 19 Squadron and one Hurricane from No. 151 Squadron ) were armed with 20 mm cannon . 
 No. 11 Group moved No. 32 , 54 , 56 , and 501 Squadrons , totalling 11 Spitfires and 33 Hurricanes , to the Margate @-@ Canterbury line to engage the enemy formations first . The remaining units were to climb to altitude and wait over or near the threatened fighter airfields , until a clearer picture emerged of enemy intentions . 
 = = = KG 53 raid = = = 
 KG 53 approached North Weald from the east between Maldon , Essex and Rochford . No. 56 Squadron 's 12 Hurricanes engaged the bombers , while No. 54 Squadron ’ s 11 Spitfires engaged the escorting Bf 109s and Bf 110s . In the engagement , at least one Bf 110 was shot down . The line of advance was now clear to the British ground controllers . Five Squadrons : No. 46 , 85 , 151 , 257 , and 310 with 61 Hurricanes , were scrambled to intercept the bombers in front of , or over the target . By 17 : 00 the airfield was covered in 5 / 10ths stratocumulus at 5 @,@ 000 feet . Within thirty minutes the cloud base fell to just 3 @,@ 500 feet . The German formation leaders soon realised that there was no hope of hitting a target from 12 @,@ 000 feet , particularly when they could not see it . At 17 : 40 , KG 53 turned away and headed for base . They had lost a single bomber to 56 Squadron . Things were about to change . As they turned around , 28 Hurricanes from Nos. 46 , 85 , and 151 Squadron prepared for a head @-@ on attack . Meanwhile , 12 Hurricanes from 256 Squadron closed on the Germans from behind . 
 No. 151 's Pilot Officer Richard Milne shot down Gruppenkommandeur of II . / KG 53 , Major Reinhold Tamm . The He 111 blew up , killing all aboard . The escorting Bf 109s counter @-@ attacked , shooting down two No. 151 Squadron Hurricanes , killing one pilot and wounding the other . No. 257 Squadron also engaged and lost one pilot killed in a crash landing after combat with Bf 110s . No. 46 Squadron — the only 12 Group unit to take part — also engaged . Shortly hence , the 13 Hurricanes from No. 85 Squadron , led by Peter Townsend , struck at the bombers but was blocked by ZG 26 Bf 110s . Bf 109s was also present and inconclusive engagements began . It was likely the Bf 109s belonged to III . / JG 51 providing top cover . There were intense combats around the bombers . No. 1 Squadron 's leader , David <unk> , accounted for one JG 3 Bf 109 . No. 85 Squadron accounted for one He 111 , but lost a Hurricane to the Bf 110s , the pilot , Pilot Officer Paddy Hemmingway , bailed out into the Channel and survived . Another pilot , Flight Lieutenant Dick Lee , a veteran of the Battle of France and a flying ace with nine victories was reported missing in action . He was last seen chasing three Bf 109s out to sea . His body was never found . Among the few British squadrons left in the fight ( owing to fuel and ammunition running low ) was No. 54 Squadron . Its commander , Colin Falkland Gray , destroyed a Bf 110 . 
 As KG 53 retreated out to sea , the German bombers dumped their bombs . Around 32 German bombs fell on the town of Shoeburyness . Two houses were destroyed and 20 damaged . One bomb landed on an Anderson Air Raid Shelter , killing a man and his wife . Another landed on the railway signal box , killing the signalman . Several bombs fell on a War Department gunnery range , causing no damage . Some 200 German bombs fell on the mud flats and sandbanks off Shoeburyness . Many were delayed @-@ action bombs , and went off at irregular intervals . 
 KG 53 had lost only four He 111s destroyed and one damaged . Its personnel losses amounted to 12 dead , two wounded and four prisoners of war . A further five were rescued by British ships , bringing the total number captured to nine . The low losses of the group in the face of fighter attacks were down to the determination of ZG 26 . It cost the unit seven Bf 110s and a further six damaged . 
 = = = KG 2 raid = = = 
 Squadron Leader Michael Crossley was back in action with No. 32 Squadron . With No. 501 , Crossley 's units attempted to engage KG 2 while over Herne Bay . The 15 @-@ strong Hurricanes were blocked by escorting Bf 109s . No. 501 came under attack from II . / JG 51 . One was shot down and its pilot , George E.B. Stoney was killed . His victor was Hauptmann Josef <unk> , an Austrian pilot . No. 501 quickly counter @-@ attacked , destroying two Bf 109s . One of them was flown by Horst <unk> , an ace with 20 victories and the fourth highest claimant in the Luftwaffe at that time . The other victim was Hans @-@ Otto Lessing . Both German pilots were killed . Another Bf 109 fell to Peter Brothers . The Bf 109s 22 @-@ year @-@ old pilot , Gerhard Mueller was killed . Meanwhile , Crossley , Karol <unk> and Alan <unk> shared in the destruction of another Bf 109 . The pilot , Walter Blume was severely injured and taken prisoner . Within a short time , the Germans turned the tables , and three Hurricanes ( Crossley , Pilot Officer de <unk> and Pilot Officer Pearce ) were shot down . All three survived , though Pearce and de <unk> suffered burns . But while the RAF fighters were kept busy by the escort , the Dorniers continued without interception . 
 As the Dorniers passed Sheerness , the anti @-@ aircraft defences opened fire to protect the naval yard at Chatham , Kent . Along the south bank of the Thames Estuary 15 gun positions fired six <unk> of <unk> heavy shells . The German bombers opened up a little , to spread out . The cloud over the target ruined the German bomb run , and some bombers began the return trip with their loads still on board . While crossing the coast over Deal , Kent , three attacked the Royal Marines barracks there . They continued back across the Channel , having made no contact with enemy fighters . 
 = = Night raids = = 
 = = = German = = = 
 At 18 : 18 night began to fall . The Luftwaffe sent bombers from KG 1 , 2 , 3 , 27 and 53 to bomb targets at Sheffield , Leeds , Hull , Colchester , Canvey Island , Manningtree and Sealand . British records mentioned damage only at Sealand . Most bombs were scattered over rural districts . In one incident , a KG 27 He 111 , shortly before midnight , attacked the flying and training school at Windrush , in Gloucestershire , where night flying was in progress . The bomber , piloted by Alfred Dreher , crashed into an Avro Anson piloted by Sergeant Bruce Hancock . Both aircraft crashed , killing all five men involved . 
 = = = British = = = 
 While the Luftwaffe was attacking Britain , 36 Bristol Blenheim 's from RAF Bomber Command took off in ones and twos to attack a score of German airfields in the Netherlands and France . Its sole success was at Vlissingen , Netherlands , where it damaged two Jagdgeschwader 54 ( JG 54 ) Bf 109s . At the same time four Armstrong Whitworth Whitleys were attacking the Fiat works in Turin , Italy and 20 more were heading for the aluminium works at <unk> in southern Germany . The 18 August 1940 ended before either force reached its target . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Overclaiming and Propaganda = = = 
 Overclaiming of aerial victories was not uncommon , and both sides claimed more aircraft shot down than was the case . For the 18 August action , British propaganda claimed 144 German aircraft destroyed , which was over twice the actual figure . In response , the Germans claimed they had only lost 36 , a figure which has since been proven to be half the actual figure ( 69 to 71 ) . The German propaganda elements claimed to have destroyed 147 British aircraft , which was over twice the actual figure . Again , the British admitted to losing only 23 , when the actual figure was around 68 . Other sources between them insist the RAF 's losses were 27 – 34 fighters destroyed , and 29 aircraft destroyed on the ground , including only eight fighters . 
 One German fighter pilot stated that losses were always under reported . Siegfried Bethke pointed out that the German High Command always misled the public about losses . According to him , German aircraft that crashed into the Channel were not counted in the official figures although the loss of the aircraft was total . Bethke intimates that one aircraft in his unit that was damaged by 88 hits had to be broken up and taken back to Germany and was not added to the loss record . 
 = = = Sorties and losses = = = 
 During the 18 August 1940 , Luftwaffe units flew a total of 970 sorties over Britain : some 495 by medium bombers , 460 by fighters and 15 by reconnaissance units . Of this total , about 170 of the bomber sorties were flown on the night of 17 / 18 August ; the remainder were flown during the daylight hours on the 18 August . Less than half of the available ( or serviceable ) aircraft on the Luftflotte 2 and Luftflotte 3 order of battle were involved in the action that day , so it was clear that the Luftwaffe was not greatly extended in providing forces for the offensive . Luftflotte 5 did not take any part in the fighting , although its reconnaissance aircraft were active over England and Scotland . 
 Altogether , the Luftwaffe lost between 69 and 71 aircraft destroyed or damaged beyond repair as a result of its operations over Britain on 18 August 1940 . Of this total , 59 were lost to certain or probable action by fighters while two fell to ground fire , four to a combination of both and one collided with a British training aircraft . The remaining three crashed in German @-@ held territory owing to technical failures . Altogether , the losses represented seven per cent of the force committed . Around 29 aircraft crashed in England . Personnel losses were 94 German crews killed , 40 captured and 25 returned with wounds . Some 27 to 31 German aircraft returned with damage . 
 The gross underestimation of Fighter Command 's strength issued to Luftwaffe units meant the British reaction was much stronger than expected . During the 24 @-@ hour period , Fighter Command flew 927 sorties , slightly fewer than the Germans . Only 41 of these sorties were flown by night , 28 on 17 / 18 August and 13 on 18 / 19 August . The remaining 886 sorties were flown by day , a number almost exactly equal to the 861 serviceable Spitfire , Hurricane , Defiant and Gladiator day fighters available to squadrons . 
 The average operational sortie rate of one per serviceable fighter was not spread evenly throughout the command , however . Nos 12 and 13 Groups in the Midlands and north of Britain , with a third of the serviceable fighters between them , put up 129 ( or only 15 per cent ) of the day sorties , and of these only three made contact with the enemy . No. 11 Group put up one @-@ third of the serviceable fighters in 600 sorties , or more than two @-@ thirds of the total ; on average . Each of the serviceable Spitfires and Hurricanes flew 1 @.@ 7 operational sorties . No. 43 squadron flew the most sorties : 63 operations including five each from the 13 serviceable at the beginning of the day . 
 Only 403 ( 45 percent ) of the total number of sorties flown by Fighter Command were directed at the three major German raids . A further 56 ( or just over 6 per cent ) were standing patrols to protect shipping off the coast . Most of the remaining 427 sorties ( nearly 50 per cent ) were made to engage the reconnaissance aircraft . Usually several half @-@ squadrons were committed . This was not excessive . But by sending more units to counter the flights , German aircraft were forced to fly higher and were denied the opportunity to drop to low altitude to take higher resolution photographs . This contributed to a lack of German intelligence which often failed to distinguish fighter , bomber and naval airfields from each other . Much of the time their strength was directed at non @-@ fighter airfields on this date . 
 Of the 403 sorties put up by Fighter Command to meet the major German attacks , 320 of those made contact with the enemy , meaning 80 percent of the fighters sent to intercept the bombers did so . The percentage would have been higher , had the bombers on the afternoon raid not turned around short of their targets . 
 Between 27 and 34 RAF fighters were destroyed . A specialist source of the battle indicated the figure to be 31 destroyed or beyond repair . Of these , 25 fell to German fighters , two to return fire from the bombers . One was shot down by British ground fire in error and the loss of the remainder cannot be established . Some 26 of the fighters lost were Hurricanes , and five were Spitfires . Personnel losses for the RAF amounted to 10 British fighter pilots killed on the day , and another who died of wounds . Around 19 pilots were wounded , 11 so seriously that they did not take part in the rest of the battle . 
 Losses on the ground amounted to eight fighters ( two Spitfires ) . Around 28 aircraft of other types were destroyed on the ground . The total destroyed or damaged beyond repair amounted to 68 aircraft , although 17 of these were trainers or non @-@ operational types . 
 = = = Göring , Mölders and Galland = = = 
 Göring spent The Hardest Day at Karinhall with two of his top fighter pilots , Werner Mölders and Adolf Galland . He was decorating them with the Combined Pilots @-@ Observation Badge in Gold with Diamonds after they had achieved much success in recent weeks . However , Göring took the opportunity to berate them over bomber losses and in particular , what he saw , as a lack of aggression in the Jagdwaffe . This did not go down well with the two men . Göring moved to quickly reconcile with them by ordering their promotion to Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) in command of their respective Geschwader ( Wings ) . Göring felt a younger generation of combat leaders would help motivate the force . They were dismissed . 
 On the 19 August , Göring read the reports on the losses of the 18 August , and unhappy with the extent of the losses , recalled both pilots . Hitler 's Directive 17 had ordered the Luftwaffe to achieve air superiority , but remain strong enough for when , or rather if , Sea Lion was launched . Moreover , Göring recognised that the Luftwaffe was his power base . A failure would be bad , but a severe weakening of the Luftwaffe would be far worse . He emphasised to his commanders the need to preserve the Luftwaffe 's strength . Essentially , the core theme of the conference was fighter protection . The fighter leaders advocated sweeps to clear the skies in advance of attacks . Other commanders present thought a combination of sweeps and close escort would be more effective in reducing losses . Göring agreed and listed a number of forms that the sweeps may take . The most important tactical change he made was instituting a wholesale purge of older Geschwaderkommodore in favour of younger men . From now on , leaders were to be drawn from the ranks , given responsibility based on skill and experience rather than rank , while allowing them to have a free rein in tactical engagements ( a form of aerial Auftragstaktik ) . 
 Göring also placed emphasis on correct rendezvous with the bombers , which had been lacking in recent operations ( see Adlertag ) . The longer @-@ range bombers were ordered directly to fighter airfields to pick up their escorts on the way to the target . He determined that as many fighters as possible should remain on sweeps while a smaller number maintained close contact with the bombers . For now , this would be the main tactical arrangement of fighter @-@ bomber cooperation . 
 = = = Outcome = = = 
 German target selection was sound on The Hardest Day . There were four means open to the Luftwaffe for destroying Fighter Command ; bombing airfields ; destroying the command , control system and radar stations ; and attacking aircraft factories producing fighter aircraft . 
 Luftflotte 2 was well used in this way . Operations against Kenley , Biggin Hill , North Weald and Hornchurch had the potential to destroy 11 Group 's major sector stations and impair its defences . It would also draw the defending fighters into battle . The attempt to attack Kenley , however , failed and 9 Staffel KG 76 paid a high price . The weather prevented any chance of the raids on Hornchurch and North Weald being successful . On the other hand , Luftflotte 3 had poor intelligence , and its raids on the radar stations were ineffective . Radar elimination would enable the Luftwaffe to destroy the command and control system of Fighter Command , but despite the severe damage done to the Poling station , the existence of other stations nearby gave the system plenty of cover . The airfields the Air Fleet attacked at Ford , Gosport and Thorney Island had nothing to do with the main battle as they belonged to Coastal Command and the FAA . Sperrle and his command remained unaware of their errors in intelligence . 
 The tactical handling of Luftflotte 3 was not good either . The escorting fighters of StG 77 were stretched too far across a 30 @-@ mile front . By chance half of the defending fighters went into action against one of the attacking Ju 87 groups with disastrous results for the group concerned . The German fighters , which outnumbered the RAF units by 2 : 1 , were unable to protect the Stuka units . Had the targets been closer together , the concentration of fighters would have allowed the Germans to destroy more RAF fighters in the air , while protecting their charges . 
 Considering the weight of attack against airfields , hardly any fighters were destroyed on the ground . Figures indicated just two Spitfires and six Hurricanes were lost in this manner . The main reason for this was the high state of readiness of RAF units during daylight . The command depended on radar and the Observer Corps warning them in advance , giving them plenty of time to get airborne . The successful strafing attack by Bf 109s of JG 52 on Manston depended on a combination of circumstances and chance which did not occur often during the battle . 
 The attacks on airfields , on this day and throughout the battle , did not cause any real danger to RAF Fighter Command . Biggin Hill was never out of service during the Battle of Britain , and Kenley was out of action for only two hours on 18 August . German medium bombers , usually sent in waves of 50 , could carry between 60 and 85 tons of bombs . But this was not enough to destroy an airfield . If the airfield 's hangars and buildings were destroyed , work on aircraft could be done in the open in summer periods . Should the craters become too troublesome , RAF units could move to another field , not necessarily an airfield , and operate fighters of it , provided it was 700 yards long and 100 yards wide to allow for operations . The vulnerable operations buildings on some airfields were hidden underground . One flaw was the vulnerability of operations rooms . At Kenley and Biggin the sector operations buildings were above ground , but they were difficult to hit even had the Luftwaffe known their location . Vital communications ( telephone cables ) were buried underground , making them vulnerable only to an accidental direct hit . 
 Attacking and destroying the radar chain was also difficult . The stations were indeed vulnerable to dive bombers and low flying aircraft , however the British had mobile units which could be moved around to cover any gaps . Rapid repair services were also quick . Rarely were radar stations out of action for more than a few days . 
 A last option was to attack fighter factories , which was not attempted on 18 August . Only the Spitfire factory at Southampton and the Hawker factory in Surrey were within range of escorted bombers . Without the Bf 109s , the bombers would suffer heavy casualties attempting to attack factories further north in daylight . Still , the attacks on the southern factories would require large concentrations of bombers and fighters which would be powerful enough to destroy them without sustaining heavy losses . 
 Overall , each side suffered more losses on this date than on any other day during the Battle of Britain . In terms of the outcome , the battle does not appear to have been strategically favourable to either side . The loss rates were in the British favour , but the both air forces had sustained a level of attrition they could not support for long . Historian Alfred Price : 
 The laurels for the day ’ s action went to the defenders . The aim of the Luftwaffe was to wear down the Fighter Command without suffering excessive losses in the process , and in this it had failed . It cost the attackers five aircrew killed , wounded , or taken prisoner , for each British pilot casualty . In terms of aircraft , it had cost the Luftwaffe five bombers and fighters for every three Spitfires and Hurricanes destroyed in the air or on the ground . If the battle continued at this rate the Luftwaffe would wreck Fighter Command , but it would come close to wrecking itself in the process . 
 = Retrieval @-@ induced forgetting = 
 Retrieval @-@ induced forgetting ( or RIF ) is a memory phenomenon where remembering causes forgetting of other information in memory . The phenomenon was first demonstrated in 1994 , although the concept of RIF has been previously discussed in the context of retrieval inhibition . 
 RIF is demonstrated through a three @-@ phase experiment consisting of study , practice of some studied material , and a final test of all studied material . Such experiments have also used multiple kinds of final tests including recall using only category cues , recall using category and word stems , and recognition tests . The effect has been produced using many different kinds of materials , can be produced in group settings , and is reduced in special populations such as individuals with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) or schizophrenia . 
 Although RIF occurs as a consequence of conscious remembering through explicit retrieval , the actual forgetting is thought to occur implicitly , below the level of awareness . Cognitive psychologists continue to debate why RIF occurs , and how it relates to the larger picture of memory and general cognition . In particular , researchers are divided on the idea of whether the forgetting is caused by a process that actively inhibits information , or due to interference from other information in memory . Inhibition associated with RIF has been looked at as similar to forms of physical inhibition . RIF has also been tied to memory retrieval strategies , with disrupting such strategies affecting the phenomenon . 
 = = Prior and related research = = 
 Although the term " retrieval @-@ induced forgetting " was first used in 1994 , it was described in an earlier review by Robert A. Bjork in terms of suppressing memories that become active but are not relevant for a given situation . Bjork described a study by Neely and <unk> who found that participants were slower at recognizing words when they were shown a related word immediately beforehand . The researchers hypothesized that participants were actually trying to suppress the related words during recognition , as it was irrelevant and unhelpful information in completing the recognition task . 
 RIF is similar to some other memory phenomena . It is comparable to part @-@ set cuing in that both show lowered memory performance given some previously studied information . In one example of part @-@ set cuing , people asked to recall as many as U.S. states as they could remembered more states than those asked to after being shown the names of some states beforehand . Having been cued with a portion of the to @-@ be @-@ recalled information , recall performance worsened . RIF is also related to forgetting attributable to changes in one 's context where the forgetting is automatic and without awareness . Output interference is a related phenomenon , where generation of words from a category such as fruits can make other words from the category harder to remember , or cause <unk> where participants repeat already @-@ remembered words . 
 = = Retrieval @-@ practice paradigm = = 
 RIF has been shown in retrieval @-@ practice paradigm experiments , with exact instructions and procedures varying slightly from experiment to experiment . In the original version of the experiment , booklets were used to present stimuli and to complete testing . Since then this procedure has often been done using computer software such as Microsoft PowerPoint or E @-@ Prime . The experiments typically consist of study , retrieval @-@ practice , and test phases . 
 = = = Study phase = = = 
 In the study phase , participants are asked to study word pairs that consist of a category name and a word that belongs to that category , an example being <unk> – orange . Typically multiple word pairs across a number of categories , say 48 items divided equally into 8 categories , are used . Among several others , participants might study word pairs such as the following : 
 METAL – iron 
 TREE – birch 
 METAL – silver 
 TREE – elm 
 = = = Retrieval @-@ practice phase = = = 
 A subset of the items are tested using a fill @-@ in @-@ the @-@ blank test . For a given item , the participant is shown the category name and the first two letters of a studied word from that category ( e.g. METAL – ir _ _ _ _ _ _ ) . Participants are instructed to fill in the blank with an appropriate studied word from that category . Participants will typically practice remembering the items multiple times . The retrieval @-@ practice phase splits items into three different types that are of interest during the final test , and are often denoted using the following notation : 
 Practiced items ( Rp + items ) are studied words that participants attempt to remember during retrieval practice . 
 Unpracticed – related items ( <unk> items ) are studied words that are not practiced , but related ( by category ) to words that were practiced . 
 Unpracticed – unrelated items ( <unk> items ) are studied words in categories that are never practiced . These categories are typically unrelated to practiced categories . These items also serve as a baseline to compare to unpracticed – related items . 
 = = = Test phase = = = 
 After retrieval practice , participants are given a final test , where they are asked to remember all studied items . The goal of the test phase is to assess whether prior retrieval practice affects how well the unpracticed – related words are remembered compared to the unpracticed – unrelated words . RIF is ultimately measured as the difference between the proportion of items recalled between these two types . 
 In a category @-@ cued test , one studied category is shown at a time and participants are asked to remember all studied items from that category . Although a set amount of time is given for each category , the exact amount of time varies across studies . For instance , Anderson and co @-@ researchers , in 1994 , gave participants 30 seconds for each category cue ( and given that there were 6 words in each category , this meant that participants had 5 seconds , on average , to remember each item ) . Other studies have used longer durations . 
 Category @-@ plus @-@ stem @-@ cued tests add a word stem to the category cue . Typically , for each category , participants are given a specific number of letters corresponding to a unique studied word from the category . Because these cues are specific to a particular word , participants are given relatively less time to respond to each cue compared to category @-@ cued tests . Response times for each cue vary from study to study , although many experiments have used an interval of 10 seconds , though some studies have reported using response times as few as 3 seconds . Typically , category @-@ plus @-@ stem @-@ cued tests include only the first initial letter from the word , but some have included multiple letters . 
 Recognition tests do not require participants to produce a word from memory . Instead participants are literally shown a word , and are asked to report whether it was a word that appeared during the study phase . Recognition tests typically show all of the studied words and a number of non @-@ studied words , the lures . Researchers measure how often participants correctly recognize studied items , and how often they incorrectly recognize lures . The difference between these two proportions is a statistic measuring one 's ability to discriminate between studied and non @-@ studied items , and has been used to represent RIF . Reaction time is also used to represent RIF , where slower reaction times are thought to represent more RIF due to difficulty in recognizing the studied item . 
 = = General findings = = 
 RIF studies have generally yielded results where , on average , unpracticed – related words are remembered less well than the baseline of unpracticed – unrelated words . 
 = = = Generality of RIF = = = 
 RIF studies have generally used words from basic and easily recognized categories , but the effects have been shown with a wide variety of stimuli : 
 <unk> : Retrieving a non @-@ dominant meaning of a word can cause forgetting of its dominant meaning . 
 Words based on their lexical properties : Words categorized by having the same initial letters have shown RIF on the basis of this shared property . 
 <unk> @-@ spatial information : When stimuli are categorized by the basis of its location , RIF has been shown given practice of a subset of items in a given location . 
 Propositional information : Remembering a set of studied propositional statements can produce RIF for other propositional statements that have shared relations , even if the subject of the sentence differs . 
 Details of a mock crime scene : Remembering information about one type of item previously viewed in a mock crime scene produces RIF for similar items in the same crime scene . 
 Personality traits of others : Remembering some personality traits for a given person has caused RIF for other traits of that same person . 
 = = = Modifications to retrieval @-@ practice phase = = = 
 Although the typical paradigm includes retrieval practice of previously studied words , some studies have shown RIF even when participants were asked to retrieve something else . For instance , RIF has occurred even when participants generated new , unstudied items from previously studied categories in what is called " extra @-@ list retrieval practice " or " semantic generation . " In a method called " impossible retrieval practice , " RIF has also been observed when participants were asked to generate a word for a category , even though one did not actually exist . RIF is still observed at final test in cases where successful retrieval is not possible , such as one where having studied a number of fruits a participant is asked to generate a word given a cue resembling <unk> – wu . Some studies have also examined the effect on RIF when participants , instead of being asked to perform retrieval practice , are given additional study trials making them restudy the material instead of remembering prior information . In these cases , participants have failed to show any RIF effects . 
 = = = RIF studies in special populations = = = 
 Because RIF is an effect related to the accessibility of information , researchers have studied whether it persists in populations that have certain disorders related to memory . In one study of students diagnosed with ADHD , the degree of RIF observed compared to a control group depended on the kind of final test used . When using a category @-@ cued test , there were no differences in RIF compared to a control group . However , when a category @-@ plus @-@ stem @-@ cued test was used , participants with ADHD , on average , showed less RIF than controls . Patients with depression show no RIF compared to controls when using a category @-@ plus @-@ stem @-@ cued test . Patients with schizophrenia show comparable RIF effects to control groups under a category @-@ cued test , but reduced RIF using a recognition test . 
 = = = Socially @-@ shared RIF = = = 
 The effects of studying or remembering information in groups has also been examined . When groups of individuals experience an event together , and then jointly remember the event , conditions are created for retrieval induced forgetting to occur . Selective remembering in the conversation induces both Speakers and Listeners in the conversation to forget unmentioned , but related to the mentioned , memories ( <unk> ) to a larger degree than unmentioned , but unrelated to the mentioned memories ( <unk> ) . This effect is called socially @-@ shared RIF , and can even occur with <unk> memories , which are memories of circumstances in which one learned about consequential events . One example of this phenomenon is when Americans influence each other 's memories of the September 11th attacks by communicating with one another about these memories . More specifically , remembering a subset of details about the event causes RIF for other related , critical information about the event . Importantly , simply listening to somebody remembering her September 11 memories results in induced forgetting in one 's own memories . 
 = = Theoretical accounts = = 
 = = = Interference = = = 
 Many instances of forgetting are often accounted to the interference from heightened accessibility of other , associated information in memory . Researchers have described how interference may explain RIF in a number of ways . For instance the theory of blocking suggests that because practiced words are more easily remembered at test , they may occupy a " response channel " in memory and effectively prevent unpracticed – related words in memory from being remembered . Unpracticed – unrelated words would be less affected by this blocking effect because retrieval of practiced words would not block items from different categories . Other theories such as resource diffusion and response decrement are similar to blocking . These theories describe retrieval processes as a finite set of resources that cannot be distributed adequately enough to unpracticed – related items at test . 
 Other models of interference have been proposed that more precisely define the idea of an item 's strength in memory through separating the strength of item itself in memory and the contextual information it is linked to . Such models may explain why certain strengthening methods predict RIF and others do not . 
 = = = Inhibition = = = 
 Generally speaking , inhibition theory assumes the existence of a set of processes that allows the suppression of memories . Central to the inhibition account of RIF is that access to unpracticed – related items is actively suppressed by this inhibitory process during retrieval @-@ practice . For instance , when participants perform retrieval practice , the category cue may activate many associated items . The degree to which related , but inappropriate associates , that is unpracticed – related words , become accessible serves as a source of competition that disrupts retrieval of an appropriate response . To resolve this competition , an inhibitory process intervenes to suppress accessibility to such items . Subsequently , this suppression facilitates retrieval of an appropriate item and prevents retrieval of contextually inappropriate items . Items from unrelated categories , that is unpracticed – unrelated items , are less competitive during retrieval practice and thus , require less inhibition . At final test , the consequences of the suppression persist , and previously competitive items that were inhibited become more difficult to remember . 
 This reduction in accessibility is consistent with the definition of inhibition proposed by Robert A. Bjork : that inhibition is an active , direct form of suppression that serves to reduce access to one or several responses for some adaptive purpose . 
 Memory inhibition in reference to RIF has sometimes been likened to processes of inhibition associated with motor control , such as those responsible for baseball players stopping their swing when they anticipate a ball . Similarly , when a dominant response in memory is inappropriate , inhibitory processes must be recruited to temporarily suppress that response so that a more appropriate one can be retrieved . 
 = = = Other accounts = = = 
 Individual strategies in retrieval have been considered as one way RIF might occur , in that retrieval practice may be inconsistent with the way participants remember items studied from those categories . If retrieval practice disrupts participants ' memory strategy , it may affect their ability to remember particular items at final test . If participants are preparing to remember items during retrieval @-@ practice based on some strategy , certain presentation orders may disrupt that strategy whereas others may not . For instance , when participants practice items in the same order as presented during study , RIF is lower compared to when presentation is random during retrieval practice . These results are the same even when participants are explicitly instructed to remember the order in which items are presented during study . 
 = The Philadelphia Inquirer = 
 The Philadelphia Inquirer is a morning daily newspaper that serves the Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , metropolitan area of the United States . The newspaper was founded by John R. Walker and John Norvell in June 1829 as The Pennsylvania Inquirer and is the third @-@ oldest surviving daily newspaper in the United States . Owned by Philadelphia Media Network , The Inquirer has the eighteenth largest average weekday U.S. newspaper circulation and has won nineteen Pulitzer Prizes . It is the newspaper of record of the Delaware Valley . 
 The paper has risen and fallen in prominence throughout its history . The Inquirer first became a major newspaper during the American Civil War when its war coverage was popular on both sides . The paper 's circulation dropped after the war , then rose by the end of the 19th century . Originally supportive of the Democratic Party , The Inquirer 's political affiliation eventually shifted toward the Whig Party and then the Republican Party before officially becoming politically independent in the middle of the 20th century . By the end of the 1960s , The Inquirer trailed its chief competitor , the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin , and lacked modern facilities and experienced staff . In the 1970s , new owners and editors turned the newspaper into one of the country 's most prominent , winning 20 Pulitzers . 
 The editor is Bill Marimow . Stan <unk> is Vice President of News Operations . 
 = = History = = 
 The Philadelphia Inquirer was founded as The Pennsylvania Inquirer by printer John R. Walker and John Norvell , former editor of Philadelphia 's largest newspaper , the Aurora & Gazette . An editorial in the first issue of The Pennsylvania Inquirer promised that the paper would be devoted to the right of a minority to voice their opinion and " the maintenance of the rights and liberties of the people , equally against the abuses as the usurpation of power . " They pledged support to then @-@ President Andrew Jackson and " home industries , American manufactures , and internal improvements that so materially contribute to the agricultural , commercial and national prosperity . " Founded on June 1 , 1829 , The Philadelphia Inquirer is the third @-@ oldest surviving daily newspaper in the United States . However , in 1962 , an Inquirer @-@ commissioned historian traced The Inquirer to John Dunlap 's The Pennsylvania Packet , which was founded on October 28 , 1771 . In 1850 The Packet was merged with another newspaper , The North American , which later merged with the Philadelphia Public Ledger . Finally , the Public Ledger merged with The Philadelphia Inquirer in the 1930s , and between 1962 and 1975 , a line on The Inquirer 's front page claimed that the newspaper is the United States ' oldest surviving daily newspaper . 
 Six months after The Inquirer was founded , with competition from eight established daily newspapers , lack of funds forced Norvell and Walker to sell the newspaper to publisher and United States Gazette associate editor Jesper Harding . After Harding acquired The Pennsylvania Inquirer , it was briefly published as an afternoon paper before returning to its original morning format in January 1830 . Under Harding , in 1829 , The Inquirer moved from its original location between Front and Second Streets to between Second and Third Streets . When Harding bought and merged the Morning Journal in January 1830 , the newspaper was moved to South Second Street . Ten years later The Inquirer again was moved , this time to its own building at the corner of Third Street and Carter 's Alley . Harding expanded The Inquirer 's content and the paper soon grew into a major Philadelphian newspaper . The expanded content included the addition of fiction , and in 1840 , Harding gained rights to publish several Charles Dickens novels for which Dickens was paid a significant amount . At the time the common practice was to pay little or nothing for the rights of foreign authors ' works . 
 = = = Civil War to 1920s = = = 
 Harding retired in 1859 and was succeeded by his son William White Harding , who had become a partner three years earlier . William Harding changed the name of the newspaper to its current name , The Philadelphia Inquirer . Harding , in an attempt to increase circulation , cut the price of the paper , began delivery routes and had newsboys sell papers on the street . In 1859 , circulation had been around 7 @,@ 000 ; by 1863 it had increased to 70 @,@ 000 . Part of the increase was due to the interest in news during the American Civil War . Twenty @-@ five to thirty thousand copies of The Inquirer were often distributed to Union soldiers during the war and several times the U.S. government asked The Philadelphia Inquirer to issue a special edition specifically for soldiers . The Philadelphia Inquirer supported the Union , but Harding wanted their coverage to remain neutral . Confederate generals often sought copies of the paper , believing that the newspaper 's war coverage was accurate . 
 Inquirer journalist Uriah Hunt Painter was at the First Battle of Bull Run in 1861 , a battle which ended in a Confederate victory . Initial reports from the government claimed a Union victory , but The Inquirer went with Painter 's firsthand account . Crowds threatened to burn The Inquirer 's building down because of the report . Another report , this time about General George Meade , angered Meade enough that he punished Edward <unk> , the reporter who wrote it . <unk> and other war correspondents later decided to attribute any victories of the Army of the Potomac , Meade 's command , to Ulysses S. Grant , commander of the entire Union army . Any defeats of the Army of the Potomac would be attributed to Meade . 
 During the war , The Inquirer continued to grow with more staff being added and another move into a larger building on Chestnut Street . However , after the war , economic hits combined with Harding becoming ill , hurt The Inquirer . Despite Philadelphia 's population growth , distribution fell from 70 @,@ 000 during the Civil War to 5 @,@ 000 in 1888 . Beginning in 1889 , the paper was sold to publisher James Elverson . To bring back the paper , Elverson moved The Inquirer to a new building with the latest printing technology and an increased staff . The " new " Philadelphia Inquirer premiered on March 1 and was successful enough that Elverson started a Sunday edition of the paper . In 1890 , in an attempt to increase circulation further , the price of The Inquirer was cut and the paper 's size was increased , mostly with classified advertisements . After five years The Inquirer had to move into a larger building on Market Street and later expanded into adjacent property . 
 After Elverson 's death in 1911 , his son by his wife Sallie Duvall , James Elverson Jr. took charge . Under Elverson Jr . , the newspaper continued to grow , eventually needing to move again . Elverson Jr. bought land at Broad and <unk> Streets and built the eighteen @-@ story Elverson Building , now known as the Inquirer Building . The first Inquirer issue printed at the building came out on July 13 , 1925 . Elverson Jr. died a few years later in 1929 and his sister , Eleanor Elverson , Mrs. Jules Patenôtre , took over . 
 = = = Annenberg years = = = 
 Eleanor Elverson Patenôtre ordered cuts throughout the paper , but was not really interested in managing it and ownership was soon put up for sale . Cyrus Curtis and Curtis @-@ Martin Newspapers Inc. bought the newspaper on March 5 , 1930 . Curtis died a year later and his stepson @-@ in @-@ law , John Charles Martin , took charge . Martin merged The Inquirer with another paper , the Public Ledger , but the Great Depression hurt Curtis @-@ Martin Newspapers and the company defaulted in payments of maturity notes . Subsequently ownership of The Inquirer returned to the Patenôtre family and Elverson Corp. Charles A. Taylor was elected president of The Inquirer Co. and ran the paper until it was sold to Moses L. Annenberg in 1936 . During the period between Elverson Jr. and Annenberg The Inquirer stagnated , its editors ignoring most of the poor economic news of the Depression . The lack of growth allowed J. David Stern 's newspaper , The Philadelphia Record , to surpass The Inquirer in circulation and become the largest newspaper in Pennsylvania . 
 Under Moses Annenberg , The Inquirer turned around . Annenberg added new features , increased staff and held promotions to increase circulation . By November 1938 Inquirer 's weekday circulation increased to 345 @,@ 422 from 280 @,@ 093 in 1936 . During that same period the Record 's circulation had dropped to 204 @,@ 000 from 328 @,@ 322 . In 1939 , Annenberg was charged with income tax evasion . Annenberg pleaded guilty before his trial and was sent to prison where he died in 1942 . Upon Moses Annenberg 's death , his son , Walter Annenberg , took over . Not long after , in 1947 , the Record went out of business and The Philadelphia Inquirer became Philadelphia 's only major daily morning newspaper . While still trailing behind Philadelphia 's largest newspaper , the Evening Bulletin , The Inquirer continued to be profitable . In 1948 , Walter Annenberg expanded the Inquirer Building with a new structure that housed new printing presses for The Inquirer and , during the 1950s and 1960s , Annenberg 's other properties , Seventeen and TV Guide . In 1957 Annenberg bought the Philadelphia Daily News and combined the Daily News ' facilities with The Inquirer 's . 
 A thirty @-@ eight @-@ day strike in 1958 hurt The Inquirer and , after the strike ended , so many reporters had accepted buyout offers and left that the newsroom was noticeably empty . Furthermore , many current reporters had been <unk> just before the strike and had little experience . One of the few star reporters of the 1950s and 1960s was investigative reporter Harry Karafin . During his career Harry Karafin exposed corruption and other exclusive stories for The Inquirer , but also extorted money out of individuals and organizations . Karafin would claim he had harmful information and would demand money in exchange for the information not being made public . This went on from the late 1950s into the early 1960s before Karafin was exposed in 1967 and convicted of extortion a year later . By the end of the 1960s , circulation and advertising revenue was in decline and the newspaper had become , according to Time magazine , " uncreative and undistinguished . " 
 = = = Corporate ownership = = = 
 In 1969 Annenberg was offered US $ 55 million for The Inquirer by Samuel Newhouse , but having earlier promised John S. Knight the right of first refusal of any sale offer , Annenberg sold it to Knight instead . The Inquirer , along with the Philadelphia Daily News , became part of Knight Newspapers and its new subsidiary , Philadelphia Newspapers Inc . Five years later , Knight Newspapers merged with Ridder Publications to form Knight Ridder . 
 When The Inquirer was bought , it was understaffed , its equipment was outdated , many of its employees were <unk> and the paper trailed its chief competitor , the Evening Bulletin , in weekday circulation . However , Eugene L. Roberts Jr . , who became The Inquirer 's executive editor in 1972 , turned the newspaper around . Between 1975 and 1990 The Inquirer won seventeen Pulitzers , six consecutively between 1975 and 1980 , and more journalism awards than any other newspaper in the United States . Time magazine chose The Inquirer as one of the ten best daily newspapers in the United States , calling Roberts ' changes to the paper , " one of the most remarkable turnarounds , in quality and profitability , in the history of American journalism . " By July 1980 The Inquirer had become the most circulated paper in Philadelphia , forcing the Evening Bulletin to shut down two years later . The Inquirer 's success was not without hardships . Between 1970 and 1985 the newspaper experienced eleven strikes , the longest lasting forty @-@ six days in 1985 . The Inquirer was also criticized for covering " Karachi better than Kensington " . This did not stop the paper 's growth during the 1980s , and when the Evening Bulletin shut down , The Inquirer hired seventeen Bulletin reporters and doubled its bureaus to attract former Bulletin readers . By 1989 Philadelphia Newspapers Inc . ' s editorial staff reached a peak of 721 employees . 
 The 1990s saw gradually dropping circulation and advertisement revenue for The Inquirer . The decline was part of a nationwide trend , but the effects were exacerbated by , according to dissatisfied Inquirer employees , the paper 's resisting changes that many other daily newspapers implemented to keep readers and pressure from Knight Ridder to cut costs . During most of Roberts 's time as editor , Knight Ridder allowed him a great deal of freedom in running the newspaper . However , in the late 1980s , Knight Ridder had become concerned about The Inquirer 's profitability and took a more active role in its operations . Knight Ridder pressured The Inquirer to expand into the more profitable suburbs , while at the same time cutting staff and coverage of national and international stories . Staff cuts continued until Knight Ridder was bought in 2006 , with some of The Inquirer 's best reporters accepting buyouts and leaving for other newspapers such as The New York Times and The Washington Post . By the late 1990s , all of the high level editors who had worked with Eugene Roberts in the 1970s and 1980s had left , none at normal retirement age . Since the 1980s , the paper has won just one Pulitzer , a 1997 award for " Explanatory Journalism . " In 1998 Inquirer reporter Ralph Cipriano filed a libel suit against Knight Ridder , The Philadelphia Inquirer , and Inquirer editor Robert Rosenthal over comments Rosenthal made about Cipriano to The Washington Post . Cipriano had claimed that it was difficult reporting negative stories in The Inquirer about the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia and Rosenthal later claimed that Cipriano had " a very strong personal point of view and an agenda ... He could never prove [ his stories ] . " The suit was later settled out of court in 2001 . 
 The paper launched an online news desk in the early 2000s in order to compete with local radio stations for breaking news . Knight Ridder was bought by rival The McClatchy Company in June 2006 . The Inquirer and the Philadelphia Daily News were among the twelve less @-@ profitable Knight Ridder newspapers that McClatchy put up for sale when the deal was announced in March . On June 29 , 2006 , The Inquirer and Daily News were sold to Philadelphia Media Holdings LLC , a group of Philadelphian area business people , including Brian P. Tierney , Philadelphia Media 's chief executive . The new owners planned to spend US $ 5 million on advertisements and promotions to increase The Inquirer 's profile and readership . 
 In the years following Philadelphia Media Holding 's acquisition , The Inquirer has seen larger than expected revenue losses , mostly from national advertising , and continued loss of circulation . The revenue losses have caused management to cut four hundred jobs at The Inquirer and Daily News in the three years since the papers were bought . Despite efforts to cut costs , Philadelphia Newspapers LLC , filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on February 21 , 2009 . Philadelphia Media Holdings was about US $ 390 million in debt due to money borrowed to buy The Inquirer and Daily News . The bankruptcy was the beginning of a year long dispute between Philadelphia Media Holdings and creditors . The group of creditors , which include banks and hedge funds , wanted to take control of Philadelphia Newspapers LLC themselves and oppose efforts by Philadelphia Media Holdings to keep control . Philadelphia Media Holdings received support form most of the paper 's unions and launched a public relations campaign to promote local ownership . A bankruptcy auction was held on April 28 , 2010 . The group of lending creditors and a group of local investors allied with Brian Tierney both bid for Philadelphia Newspapers , but the lenders had the winning bid . The deal fell through after the group of lenders , under the name of Philadelphia Media Network , was unable to reach a contract agreement with the union representing the company 's drivers . Philadelphia Newspapers , represented by Lawrence G. McMichael of Dilworth Paxson LLP , challenged the right of creditors to credit bid at a bankruptcy auction . The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit held that credit bidding was not permitted . The papers went up for auction again in September and again Philadelphia Media Network won the bid . After successfully negotiating a contract with all of the paper 's fourteen unions , the US $ 139 million deal became official on October 8 . 
 The Philadelphia Inquirer continued to struggle to make a profit due to competition from digital media sources . By May 2012 the combined journalist staff at all of Philadelphia Media Network was about 320 and some of the same stories and photographs appear both in The Inquirer and Daily News . On April 2 , 2012 a group of local business leaders under the name of Interstate General Media LLC . The buyers paid $ 55 million for the paper , which is less than 15 percent of $ 515 million spent to buy the papers in 2006 . The Inquirer is now part of Philadelphia Media Network , LLC . PMN 's owner is H.F. " Gerry " Lenfest , who appointed <unk> " Terry " <unk> as Publisher and CEO in October 2015 . 
 In October 2011 Philadelphia Media Network sold the Inquirer Building to developer Bart <unk> of Tower Investments Inc. who intends to turn the complex into a mixed use complex of offices retail and apartments . The next month publisher and CEO Gregory J. Osberg announced that 600 of the 740 Philadelphia Media Network employees of The Inquirer , Daily News and Philly.com would move to office space in the former Strawbridge & Clothier department store on east Market Street . The remaining employees would move to offices in the suburbs . The Philadelphia Media Network moved to the new location in July 2012 , consolidating the offices entirely on the third floor . Cutbacks had left much of the 525 @,@ 000 square feet ( 49 @,@ 000 m2 ) within the Inquirer Building empty but the 125 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 12 @,@ 000 m2 ) east Market Street location will consolidate Philadelphia Media 's departments including the Daily News ' newsroom with The Inquirer 's . The new location will include a street level lobby and event room . Plans for the building also include electronic signage such as a news ticker on the corner of the high @-@ rise . 
 = = Politics = = 
 John Norvell left the Aurora & Gazette and his job as editor because he disagreed with what he felt was the newspaper 's editorial approval of a movement towards a European class system . When Norvell and John Walker founded The Inquirer they wanted the newspaper to represent all people and not just the higher classes . The newly launched newspaper supported Jeffersonian democracy and President Andrew Jackson , and it declared support for the right of the minority 's opinion to be heard . A legend about the founding of The Inquirer states that Norvell said , " There could be no better name than The Inquirer . In a free state , there should always be an inquirer asking on behalf of the people : ' Why was this done ? Why is that necessary work not done ? Why is that man put forward ? Why is that law proposed ? Why ? Why ? Why ? ' " 
 When Norvell and Walker sold their newspaper to Jesper Harding , Harding kept the paper close to the founder 's politics and backed the Democratic Party . However , disagreeing with Andrew Jackson 's handling of the Second Bank of the United States he began supporting the anti @-@ Jackson wing of the Democrats . During the 1836 Presidential election Harding supported the Whig party candidate over the Democratic candidate and afterwards The Inquirer became known for its support of Whig candidates . Before the American Civil War began , The Inquirer supported the preservation of the Union , and was critical of the antislavery movement which many felt was responsible for the Southern succession crisis . Once the war began The Inquirer maintained an independent reporting of the war 's events . However The Inquirer firmly supported the Union side . At first The Inquirer 's editors were against emancipation of the slaves , but after setbacks by the Union army The Inquirer started advocating a more pro @-@ war and pro @-@ Republican stance . In a July 1862 article The Inquirer wrote " in this war there can be but two parties , patriots and traitors . " 
 = = = Republican Bible = = = 
 Under James Elverson , The Philadelphia Inquirer declared , " the new Inquirer shall be in all respects a complete , enterprising , progressive newspaper , moved by all the wide @-@ awake spirit of the time and behind in nothing of interest to people who want to know what is going on every day and everywhere ... steadily and vigorously Republican in its political policy , but just and fair in its treatment of all questions ... " During the 1900 Republican convention in Philadelphia , Elverson set up a large electric banner over Broad Street that declared " Philadelphia Inquirer – Largest Republican Circulation in the World . " At the turn of the 20th century the newspaper began editorial campaigns to improve Philadelphia , including the paving of major streets and stopping a corrupt plan to buy the polluted Schuylkill Canal for drinking water . The newspaper continued similar politics under Elverson Jr . , and by the 1920s The Inquirer became known as the " Republican Bible of Pennsylvania " . 
 Between 1929 and 1936 , while under <unk> and Curtis @-@ Martin , The Inquirer continued to support the Republican party and President Herbert Hoover , noticeably by not reporting on the news of the Great Depression . Statistics on unemployment or business closings were ignored , even when they came from the government . Information about Philadelphia banks closing was relegated to the back of the financial section . When Moses Annenberg took over The Philadelphia Inquirer , he announced that the paper would " continue to uphold the principles of the Republican Party , " but in a meeting with newspaper editors shortly after , he proposed that the paper go independent and support President Franklin D. Roosevelt in the upcoming election . The editors rejected this idea and the paper remained Republican . In the late 1930s Annenberg disagreed with Roosevelt 's New Deal programs and his handling of strikes . This prompted editorials criticizing the policies of Roosevelt and his supporters . He strongly opposed Democratic Pennsylvania governor George Earle and had The Inquirer support the Republican candidates in the 1938 Pennsylvania state elections . When Republicans swept the election there was a celebration at The Inquirer headquarters with red flares and the firing of cannons . The attacks against Democrats and the support given towards Republicans caught the attention of the Roosevelt administration . Annenberg had turned The Philadelphia Inquirer into a major challenger to its chief competitor the Democratic Record , and after Annenberg began focusing on politics , Democratic politicians often attacked Annenberg and accused him of illegal business practices . In 1939 Annenberg was charged with income tax evasion , pleaded guilty before the trial , and was sent to prison for three years . Annenberg 's friends and his son , Walter , claimed that the whole trial was politically motivated and his sentence was harsher than it should have been . 
 = = = Independent = = = 
 When the Record shut down in 1947 , The Inquirer announced that it was now an independent newspaper and , frustrated with corruption in Philadelphia , supported Democratic candidates in the 1951 election . While Walter Annenberg had made The Inquirer independent he did use the paper to attack people he disliked . Sometimes when a person or group angered Annenberg , they were blacklisted and not mentioned anywhere within The Inquirer . People on the blacklist were even airbrushed out of images . People who were on the list at one point included Nicholas Katzenbach , Ralph Nader , Zsa Zsa Gabor , and the basketball team the Philadelphia Warriors , who were not mentioned for an entire season . In 1966 , Walter Annenberg used The Inquirer to attack Pennsylvania gubernatorial candidate Milton Shapp . During a press conference , an Inquirer reporter asked Shapp if he had ever been a patient in a mental hospital ; having never been a patient , Shapp said no . The next day 's headline in The Inquirer read " Shapp Denies Ever having been in a Mental Home . " Shapp attributed his loss of the election to Annenberg 's attack campaign . 
 Annenberg was a backer and friend of Richard Nixon . In the 1952 presidential election critics later claimed Annenberg had The Inquirer look the other way when covering accusations Nixon was misappropriating funds . Later , to avoid accusations of political bias , Annenberg had The Inquirer use only news agency sources such as the Associated Press for the 1960 and 1968 presidential elections . When Nixon was elected president in 1968 , Annenberg was appointed the U.S. ambassador to the Court of St. James 's . A year later when Annenberg sold the newspaper to Knight Newspapers , a part of the deal stipulated that Annenberg 's name would appear as " Editor and Publisher Emeritus " in The Inquirer 's masthead . In 1970 Annenberg , already unhappy with changes in the newspaper , had his name removed from the paper after an editorial critical of Richard Nixon appeared . 
 Under Knight Ridder , The Inquirer continued to be editorially independent . However , conservative commentators have labeled The Inquirer left leaning , and the paper has not endorsed a Republican candidate for President of the United States since Gerald Ford in 1976 . Throughout the 1990s and into the 21st century , groups supportive of Israel such as the Zionist Organization of America often accused The Inquirer of being anti @-@ Israel . At the same time , Edward S. Herman , a University of Pennsylvania media analyst , has written many articles accusing The Inquirer of having given in to conservative pressure and including a conservative slant in the paper 's reporting and editorial page . In 2006 , The Inquirer became one of the only major United States newspapers to print one of the Jyllands @-@ Posten Muhammad cartoons . Afterwards , protesting the printing of the cartoon , Muslims picketed outside The Inquirer Building . 
 When Philadelphia Media Holdings L.L.C. ( PMH ) bought the paper in 2006 , Brian P. Tierney and the business people behind PMH signed a pledge promising that they would not influence the content of the paper . Tierney , a Republican activist who had represented many local groups in the Philadelphia area , had criticized The Inquirer in the past on behalf of his clients . One of Tierney 's clients had been the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia , which he had represented during the Cipriano affair . PMH membership also included Bruce E. Toll , vice chairman of Toll Brothers Inc . Tierney said that the group was aware that the fastest way to ruin its investment in The Inquirer was to threaten the paper 's editorial independence . The 2012 sale of Philadelphia Media Network to six local business leaders also led to concern of conflict of interest . The new owners , which included New Jersey Democratic fundraiser George Norcross III , media entrepreneur H. F. Lenfest , former New Jersey Nets owner Lewis Katz , and CEO of Liberty Property Trust and chairman of the Greater Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce William <unk> , pledged not to influence the content of the paper . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Philadelphia Inquirer is headquartered at 801 Market Street in Center City Philadelphia along with The Philadelphia Daily News . The Inquirer is printed seven days a week at the Schuylkill Printing Plant in Upper Merion Township , Montgomery County . According to <unk> , The Inquirer is the fifteenth most circulated weekday newspaper in the United States . The Inquirer 's publisher is H.F. " Gerry " Lenfest . Editor is William K. Marimow . Marimow served as editor from 2006 to 2010 and returned in May 2012 . Since 1995 , The Inquirer has been available on the Internet , most recently at Philly.com , which , along with the Philadelphia Daily News is a division of Philadelphia Media Network . 
 The Inquirer 's local coverage area includes Philadelphia , southeastern Pennsylvania , and southern New Jersey . In Pennsylvania , The Inquirer maintains bureaus in Conshohocken ; Doylestown ; Media ; West Chester ; and Norristown , while in New Jersey it has bureaus in Cherry Hill and Margate . In September 1994 The Inquirer and WPHL @-@ TV co @-@ produced a 10 : 00 p.m. newscast called Inquirer News Tonight . The show lasted a year before WPHL @-@ TV took complete control over the program and was renamed <unk> News at Ten . In 2004 , The Inquirer formed a partnership with Philadelphia 's NBC station , WCAU , giving the paper access to WCAU 's weather forecasts while also contributing to news segments throughout the day . 
 = = Pulitzer Prizes = = 
 = Don 't Stand Another Chance = 
 " Don 't Stand Another Chance " is a song by American recording artist Janet Jackson , included on her second studio album , Dream Street ( 1984 ) . It was written by Janet Jackson , her brother Marlon Jackson and John Barnes . Marlon also produced it , and provided backing vocals along with his brothers Michael , Tito , and Jackie . " Don 't Stand Another Chance " was released as the lead single from Dream Street on August 13 , 1984 by A & M Records . 
 " Don 't Stand Another Chance " received generally positive reviews from critics . Although it did not chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , the song managed to reach number four on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles . " Don 't Stand Another Chance " became Jackson 's second single to enter the top ten of the Hot R & B Songs chart , reaching number nine . In order to promote Dream Street and the single , Jackson performed the song on American Bandstand . She later included the song on her 2008 Rock Witchu Tour and her performance at the 2010 Essence Music Festival . 
 = = Background = = 
 Janet Jackson was born in Gary , Indiana , the youngest of ten children . Jackson had initially desired to become a horse racing jockey or entertainment lawyer , with plans to support herself through acting . Despite this , she was anticipated to pursue a career in entertainment , and considered the idea after recording herself in the studio . At age seven , Jackson performed at the Las Vegas Strip at the MGM Casino and began acting in the variety show The Jacksons in 1976 . The year after , she was selected to have a starring role as Penny Gordon Woods in the sitcom Good Times . She later starred in A New Kind of Family before joining the cast of Diff 'rent Strokes , portraying Charlene Duprey for two years . Jackson also played the recurring role of Cleo Hewitt during the fourth season of Fame , but expressed indifference towards the series . When Jackson was sixteen , she was arranged a contract with A & M Records and released her self @-@ titled debut album in 1982 . She stated , " On my first album the songs were sort of teenage like . I wanted to make a change for my second album . The first album <unk> you . The second one sets your image . I couldn 't stay like that . People would still look at me as a little girl and I 'd never grow " . " Don 't Stand Another Chance " was written by Jackson , her brother Marlon Jackson and musician John Barnes . Marlon Jackson also produced the single and provided backing vocals along with his brothers Michael , Tito , and Jackie . Although it was slated for a mid @-@ July release , " Don 't Stand Another Chance " was released on August 13 , 1984 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Don 't Stand Another Chance " received generally positive reviews from critics . Ed Hogan from AllMusic did not provide a review of the album version of " Don 't Stand Another Chance " , but commented that " the extended 12 " mix rocks , showcasing outstanding synth work by John Barnes " . A writer for Broadcast Engineering magazine stated " Though Janet Jackson does not have an outstanding voice , she handles herself with real sophistication on Dream Street " , in songs like " Don 't Stand Another Chance " . Phil Hardy wrote in the book The Da Capo Companion to 20th @-@ century Popular Music that " Don 't Stand Another Chance " was not " much better than dance club ready @-@ songs " . 
 Although " Don 't Stand Another Chance " did not chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , it managed to reach number four on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles . The song also became Jackson 's second single to enter the top ten of the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , reaching number nine , and additionally it reached number 23 on the Hot Dance Club Play chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In order to promote Dream Street and the single , Jackson performed the song on American Bandstand along with " Dream Street " . According to Jason Lipshutz from Billboard , the Jackson 's appearance was among the ten classic moments with TV host Dick Clark on the show . Several years later , Jackson included " Don 't Stand Another Chance " on her 2008 Rock Witchu Tour in the " Pre @-@ Control Medley " section of the show . The song was later added to her performance at the 2010 Essence Music Festival , which she headlined . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Dutch 7 " single 
 A. " Don 't Stand Another Chance " - 4 : 18 
 B. " Rock ' N ' Roll " - 4 : 10 
 US 12 " single 
 A1 . " Don 't Stand Another Chance ( Specially Remixed Version ) " - 6 : 52 
 B1 . " Don 't Stand Another Chance ( Dub Version ) " - 6 : 52 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Janet Jackson - vocals , songwriter 
 Marlon Jackson - songwriter , producer 
 John Barnes - songwriter , keyboards , Moog synthesizer , Fairlight programming , drum programming 
 Jonathan Moffat - drums 
 Bill Bottrell - engineer , mixing 
 John McClain - mixing 
 Credits adapted from Dream Street album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Shake It Off ( Mariah Carey song ) = 
 " Shake It Off " is a song performed by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey , taken from her tenth studio album , The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) . It was written and produced by Carey along with Jermaine Dupri , Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , and Johntá Austin . The song was initially solicited to radio on July 12 , 2005 by Island and Mercury Records as the album 's third single in the United States , while " Get Your Number " served as the album 's third single elsewhere . Described by Dupri as " ghetto , " the track is a R & B song that makes use of pop and hip hop influences and a simple , sparse production . Lyrically , the song follows Carey as she moves on from her relationship with an unfaithful lover , packing her things and breaking up with him over an answering machine . 
 The song was well received by music critics , with many complimenting its simple yet inspirational lyrics , as well as calling it a standout track from the album . It peaked at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 , blocked by Carey 's own " We Belong Together " and Kanye West 's " Gold Digger " for six weeks . Furthermore , it marked the first time a female lead artist occupied the top two positions of the Hot 100 . The song also peaked at numbers six and five in Australia and New Zealand , and numbers fifteen and nine in Ireland and the United Kingdom , respectively . 
 The song 's music video , directed by Jake Nava features numerous extravagant wardrobe changes and starred actor Chris Tucker . The video was nominated for Best R & B Video at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards . " Shake It Off " was performed live by Carey on several televised events , including the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards , the 2005 World Music Awards and British program Top of the Pops . Additionally it was performed as a five @-@ piece concert on Good Morning America , and on the New Year 's Eve special titled , Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest . " Shake It Off " was included on the set @-@ lists of The Adventures of Mimi Tour ( 2006 ) , the Angels Advocate Tour ( 2010 ) , and The Elusive Chanteuse Show ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Carey had produced back @-@ to @-@ back commercially and critically failing albums , Glitter ( 2001 ) and Charmbracelet ( 2002 ) . After the release of " Charmbracelet " , and its succeeding tour , Carey began working on The Emancipation of Mimi , her tenth studio effort . By November 2004 , Carey had already recorded several songs for the album . Island Records head L.A. Reid suggested Carey to compose a few more strong singles to ensure the project 's commercial success . Noting that she had written some of her best work with Jermaine Dupri , Reid recommended that Carey meet with Dupri for a brief studio session . Carey took Reid 's advice and headed to Atlanta to collaborate with Dupri . During this two @-@ day trip , the duo wrote and produced " Shake It Off " and " Get Your Number , " which were eventually released as the album 's third and fourth singles . Following this recording session , " Shake It Off " was briefly selected as the album 's lead single , replacing the two other contenders " Stay The Night " and " Say Somethin ' " . Dupri explained to MTV News : 
 I had that beat actually before she got to the studio . So she came in , she heard that beat and was like , ' Yeah , that 's what I want . ' That was one of the first records we had . I didn 't really know what to do for her because I didn 't hear nothing else that was on the album , but I just felt like she didn 't have that bounce on her album . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Shake It Off " is a mid @-@ tempo R & B and pop song with a hip hop backbeat and a " thumping " , sparse production . Written and produced by Carey , Jermaine Dupri , Bryan @-@ Michael Cox and Johntá Austin , the song drew comparisons to several productions from Usher 's 2004 album , Confessions . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by W.B.M. Music Corporation , " Shake It Off " is set in common time with a tempo of 66 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of D major with Carey 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of D3 to the high @-@ note of G # 6 . The song follows in the chord progression of Bm7 – Am7 – Gmaj7 The verses and chorus remain in a narrow voice range , until according to Jon Pareles of The New York Times , Carey " gives herself a few of her old sky @-@ high notes as a background flourish " near the song 's end . According to Carey 's album guide in Rolling Stone , Dupri leaves his trademark on the album 's best tracks including " Shake It Off " , with the track 's production and beat described as " syncopated " and " bouncy . " 
 Lyrically , the song features a message of female strength , the song lyrics were described as " goofy " and " fun " by Larry Katz from the Boston Herald . Reading " Just like the <unk> commercial / I really gotta get up out of here " , Carey tells her lover that she is leaving him , making a " clever " reference to a commercial . In regards to the latter lyrics , Lawrence Farber from the Windy City Times wrote " they are a playful approach to bitterness — and , more specifically , a cheatin ' bad apple . " She then sings " By the time you get this message / It 's gonna be too late / So don 't bother paging me / ' Cause I 'll be on my way , " establishing that the relationship is over , and that he shouldn 't even try to mend the situation . She also makes reference to his infidelity , " with this one and that one / By the pool , on the beach , in the streets . " In an interview with MTV News , Dupri described the song 's composition : 
 " ' Shake It Off ' was just like ... That comes from that style of I guess [ Usher 's ] Confessions and just that bounce . It 's got a lot of ingredients to it because I never thought that Mariah could make a bouncy type of record . When you hear that song — the whole bounce of the record and the way she 's flipping it and the stuff she talking about ... I knew that record was gonna go just because you never heard Mariah talk about this stuff . ... She 's like , ' I packed up my Louis Vuitton . ' She took it really on the ghetto side . I knew that was gonna strike people . Either it was gonna hit them in a wrong way or they was gonna love it . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Shake It Off " was met with generally positive reviews from music critics . AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine picked " Shake It Off " as a top pick from the album . Michael Paoletta , writing for Billboard , gave the song a positive review , complimenting its lyrics , production and Carey 's vocals . He concluded his review with his assurance that the song would be a success , writing " After ' We Belong Together ' brought her back to radio big time , ' Shake It Off ' will take Carey 's good fortune to the next step . " Some critics compared the song heavily to Usher 's material from his 2004 album , Confessions . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine wrote " Mariah too heavily bites on the styles of her successors : Usher by way of Dupri on ' Shake It Off ' , " while Dan Gennoe of Yahoo ! Music UK said the song was " Usher @-@ lite " . Lawrence Ferber from the Windy City Times described " Shake It Off " as a " standout " track from the album . When discussing the track with Ferber , Carey described the song as her favorite from The Emancipation of Mimi : " Shake it off can apply to anything . Whatever personal dramas we go through , put that song on and you lose the anxiety or intensity of the moment . I 'll listen to that song when I 've just come out of an annoying meeting . I gotta shake this off . " While Todd Burns from Stylus Magazine described it as " sultry " , a writer from the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram called it " lyrically crude " and " ghetto " . Similarly , The Michigan Daily 's Chris Gaerig criticized Carey 's " airy vocals " and wrote " Carey sounds like a 13 @-@ year @-@ old boy going through puberty , singing love songs to a grade school crush . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Shake It Off " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number sixty @-@ six the week 's highest debut . In its seventh week on the chart , it reached number two behind Carey 's previous single , " We Belong Together , " marking the second time a female lead artist occupied the top two positions of the Hot 100 . " Shake It Off " was at the number two position for an additional six weeks after " We Belong Together " fell from number one ( seven weeks in total ) ; it was subsequently held off the top spot by Kanye West 's " Gold Digger " . The song stayed within the Hot 100 for twenty @-@ six weeks , and finished at number fifteen on the Billboard Year @-@ End Chart . The single fared well on multiple Billboard component charts , reaching the top spot on the Mainstream Top 40 ( Pop Songs ) tally , and becoming her second consecutive number @-@ one on the chart following " We Belong Together " as well as her sixth number @-@ one overall . It peaked at number two on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , and number twenty @-@ seven on the Hot Dance Club Play chart . " Shake It Off " was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipments of over 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 " Shake It Off " was released throughout Australia and New Zealand as the third single from The Emancipation of Mimi in late @-@ 2005 . In the United Kingdom , it was released as a double A @-@ side along with " Get Your Number , " the third single serviced to the United States at the same time . The single performed well outside the United States , reaching number five and six on the Australian Singles Chart , and New Zealand Singles Chart , respectively . The single was later certified Gold in Australia by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of over 35 @,@ 000 units . On the UK Singles Chart , the song debuted at number nine during the week of October 15 , 2005 . Dropping to number ten the following week , the song lasted a total of eight weeks in the singles chart before making its descent . 
 = = Remix = = 
 " Shake It Off " became another remix in which Carey would feature a hip @-@ hop artist , having done so several times in the past . Most notably , Carey began incorporating hip @-@ hop and pop from her 1995 remix of her single " Fantasy " , which featured rap verses from Ol ' Dirty Bastard ( O.D.B. ) . The song was considered one of the pioneering songs that began the infusion of the " thug @-@ love duet " . According to Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times , the song " Nowadays clean @-@ cut pop stars are expected to collaborate with roughneck rappers , but when Ms. Carey teamed up with Ol ' Dirty Bastard , of the Wu @-@ Tang Clan , for the 1995 hit ' Fantasy ( Remix ) , ' it was a surprise , and a smash . " Originally intended to feature only Jay @-@ Z , the remix included rising rapper Young Jeezy , who considered the position the " highest @-@ profile guest appearance to date " that he had been offered . In an interview with MTV News , Jeezy described how he came to be included on the remix : 
 When I got the call [ from Mariah ] , I was like , ' I don 't know if that 's me . She was like , ' Nah , it 's gonna be your type of beat . ' I 'm like , ' Oh , for real ? ' Then when Hov called he said , ' I 'm gonna do it with you . ' I was like , ' Dag , this is big . ' But when I did it , I kept it me and kept it ' hood . At first I ain 't think she was gonna like it but she called and said she loved it . From there it was a wrap . That 's history . Mariah is known for doing remixes with street cats from Mobb Deep to O.D.B. , so to be a part of that was a good look for me and the Def Jam movement . 
 According to <unk> Daniel , writer of The New York Sun , Carey 's remixes of " Shake If Off " and " It 's Like That " helped cement her impression on the music scene during the release of The Emancipation of Mimi , writing " the multiple mix tapes , further legitimized her return . " In a review of Jay @-@ Z 's material at the time , an editor at XXL rated the remix two out of five stars , criticizing his lyrics and " swag " , which he felt were missing during lines reading " The Emancipation of M @-@ I @-@ M @-@ I / I spray semi <unk> , <unk> / Twenty worldwide nigga get your plaques / Guess who the fuck got his swagger back ? " . He concluded on a mixed note , writing " With run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill punchlines and a dated reference to How Stella Got Her Groove Back , Jay seems to be missing some of his usual swagger on this white label – only remix . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The song 's music video was originally scheduled to be directed by Brett Ratner , who had shot Carey 's previous two videos . However , Jake Nava was used as the director instead , as Ratner had other obligations regarding one of his films . It was filmed during the end of June 2005 . When describing the video 's concept to MTV News , Carey said " I actually just got the treatment . We came up with some cool concepts . " When asked for a more detailed synopsis , Carey declined and responded " It 's " really technical . It 's a new approach that I would have to let [ the director ] explain . It 's new territory . " During a scene in the video in which Carey had to wear very high @-@ heeled pumps , she had the video crew carry her to various sections of the set . When Nava suggested she wear a pair of sensible flat footwear in between shoots , Carey jokingly replied " my feet repel them <unk> . " When recalling the moment in a later interview , Carey claimed her feet were " in agony " and said " My high heels had left my feet bleeding . Laugh all you want , my feet hurt . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The single 's video was directed by Jake Nava , and contains numerous wardrobe changes by Carey in a storyline involving luxurious scenery in which the singer leaves her significant other . It is presented in one continuous shot , with no edits . The video begins with a TV screen and the word ' Mimi ' appearing , while on the monitor , Dupri raps his introduction . As the television fades , Carey is then shown lying in a bathtub overflowing with water and rose petals , with her hair flowing over the side of the tub . Next , the camera follows down one floor of the mansion to find Carey , decked out in bright blue makeup and high heels , as she sings " By the time you get this message / It 's gonna be too late / So don 't bother paging me / ' Cause I 'll be on my way , " into the phone . A short scene is then shown of her lover in a strip club , receiving the message Carey had sent him . As he reads it , he blows smoke into the screen , fading to reveal Carey dressed in a trench coat and dress , before grabbing her bag and heading out the door as she sings , " So I packed up my Louis Vuitton / Jumped in your ride and took off . " 
 As she leaves the mansion , she exits into " Emancipation Street " , a ghetto looking plaza made up entirely of props and hand made stores . With shops named " So So Fetch " and " Pink Yet Lavender " , Carey then walks up to a wall , where she passes Jermaine Dupri , who makes a cameo appearance . As she leans on the wall , her coat slips off , and two schoolgirls do a shake dance at the pay phones . Carey then appears in a Lamborghini Murcielago speaking on her PDA with Chris Tucker , who as a cameo , appeared on the set of the video shoot , as the man in the passenger 's seat . As Carey leaves her lover a second message , he is seen frolicking pool @-@ side with two other women , while she says " with this one and that one / By the pool , on the beach , in the streets . " Her phone breaks up as she drives past the " <unk> " sign , so she tells him , " Hold on , " singing , " Save this recording , because I 'm never coming back home . " Carey is then shown on bleachers at a high school football game , with Da Brat featured as a cameo act , as she argues with a man in the background . She writes ' MIMI ' on one of the bleachers and the letters transform into a large shiny " MIMI " sign made of lights , which appear in large , vibrant lights . Carey walks up to a microphone in front of the large ' MIMI ' lights , and dances and sings in front of the camera , wearing a revealing black ensemble and leopard print boots . In the final scene , Carey is seen on a beach , as she slips out of her robe and walks into the sunset , with the glare obscuring whether she 's wearing any clothing . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video was nominated for a MTV Video Music Award at the 2006 ceremony , in the category of Best R & B Video , but lost to Beyoncé 's " Check On It " . The song 's music video generated strong public reaction , topping the Total Request Live ( TRL ) music video countdown in its second week in release . Additionally , the music video received strong rotation on MTV , VH1 and BET , having over 500 @,@ 000 requests in its first 24 hours . Similarly , at the time , music videos were predominantly watched on television , as sites like YouTube were not yet popular . During this period , Yahoo ! and AOL began allowing the public to view videos free of charge on their website , allowing them to stream as well . After the launch of the websites , Billboard announced that the video for " Shake It Off " had generated over two million requests on its first day of release , setting a record at the time for the websites . It peaked at number two on Billboard 's Hot Videoclip Tracks chart . The video was well received by fans and critics alike , with a writer from The Sacramento Bee writing how he thought it was impressive that Carey at 35 , and with over fifteen years in the business , had arranged such a popular video . He also described it as " sassy , fun and ghetto " , while outing it as one of her best videos . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Following the release of " It 's Like That " , Carey embarked on several stateside , European and Asian promotional tours in support of The Emancipation of Mimi , as well as its accompanying singles . In the United Kingdom , Carey filmed a two @-@ part appearance on the British music program Top of the Pops , performing " It 's Like That " , " We Belong Together " and " Shake It Off " . After returning to the United States for the a string of televised performances , Carey performed " Shake It Off " at Good Morning America . On August 3 , USA Today announced that Carey would be added to the roster of performers at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards , held on the 28th of the month . The ceremony was held at the American Airlines Arena in downtown Miami Beach Florida , with Carey 's performance taking place at the National Hotel in South Beach . Apart from The Killers , she was the only performer to tape their appearance from an undisclosed location in Miami . After being introduced by Eva Longoria , Carey appeared on a long stage in the hotel 's courtyard , with Dupri opening the song with his rap verses in a nearby cabana . After performing " Shake It Off " and the official remix version of " We Belong Together , " Carey made her way into the shallow pool , followed by Dupri and the back @-@ up dancers . 
 At the 2005 World Music Awards , Carey performed " Shake It Off " alongside Dupri . Wearing black shorts and a pink blouse , the performance started as Carey got out of a Lamborghini Murciélago on stage , a re @-@ enactment of the video . Additionally , a large lighted ' MIMI ' sign was placed behind the stage , also a prop used at the end of the song 's music video . The following week , Carey performed the song , as well as its accompanying number " Get Your Number , " on the British music chart program , Top of the Pops . On November 15 , 2005 , the Chicago Tribune announced that Carey would perform during half @-@ time of the Thanksgiving game between the Detroit Lions and the Atlanta Falcons . Airing on the 24th , Carey performed " Shake It Off " , as well as her newly released single from the album 's re @-@ release , " Don 't Forget About Us " . Two months later , she celebrated the new year on television , placing as the featured performer at the Times Square Ball drop on New Year 's Eve in New York . The special , titled Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest , aired on ABC at 10 pm on December 31 , and featured Carey on stage wearing a short sparkling dress , and performing a selection of the album 's singles , including " Shake It Off " . Aside from performing the song live on several high profile televised events , Carey included the song on both her Adventures of Mimi and Angels Advocate Tours . On the former tour , the performance began as a large Broadway @-@ styled prop reading ' MIMI ' , similar to the one from the video , descended from the rafters . As the song began , Carey walked down a spiraled staircase , ushered by one of her several back up dancers . Sporting a black bikini and matching sheer cape , Carey sang the song while , according to some critics , performing some of her most diverse physical movements from the entire show . On her Angels Advocate Tour , Carey performed the song during the first quarter of the concert . According to Ryan J. Downey of MTV News , Carey gave a " rousing rendition " of the song , and " set the tone for what felt like a celebratory evening . " 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 Australian CD single 
 " Shake It Off " ( Album Version ) – 3 : 53 
 " Shake It Off " ( Instrumental ) – 3 : 54 
 " Secret Love " – 3 : 30 
 " Shake It Off " ( Video ) 
 Sweden CD single ( Promo ) 
 " Shake It Off " ( Album Version ) – 3 : 53 
 " Shake It Off " ( Remix featuring Jay Z and Young Jeezy ) – 5 : 03 
 United States 12 " single ( Promo ) 
 " Shake It Off " ( Remix Edit featuring Jay Z and Young Jeezy ) – 4 : 12 
 " Shake It Off " ( Remix featuring Jay Z and Young Jeezy ) – 5 : 03 
 " Shake It Off " ( Remix Instrumental featuring Jay Z and Young Jeezy ) – 5 : 02 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for The Emancipation of Mimi adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 Mariah Carey – songwriting , producer , vocals , background vocals 
 Jermaine Dupri – songwriting , producer 
 Johntá Austin – songwriting , producer , background vocals 
 Bryan @-@ Michael Cox – songwriting , producer 
 Phil Tan – audio mixing 
 Herb Power – mastering 
 Brian Frye – engineer 
 John Horesco – engineer 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = All Hope Is Gone = 
 All Hope Is Gone is the fourth studio album by the American heavy metal band Slipknot . Released on August 20 , 2008 by Roadrunner Records , the album was published in two versions : the standard album in a Compact Disc case and a special edition packaged in a six @-@ fold digipak containing three bonus tracks , a 40 page booklet , and a bonus DVD with a documentary of the album 's recording . Preparation for the album began in 2007 , while recording started in February 2008 in the band 's home state of Iowa . All Hope Is Gone is Slipknot 's first studio album since 2004 's Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) . Before the album 's launch , Slipknot released a series of promotional images and audio samples from the album through various websites . All Hope Is Gone is considered the band 's most eclectic @-@ sounding album , incorporating elements from their previous three . All Hope Is Gone includes their " brutal " edge , such as the track " All Hope Is Gone " , reminiscent of songs such as " ( sic ) " from their debut self @-@ titled album ; slow burning , " trippy " elements such as " Gehenna " , reminiscent of " Skin Ticket " from their second album Iowa ; the thrash metal @-@ influenced " Gematria ( The Killing Name ) " ; and acoustics ( " Snuff " ) . 
 Lyrically , All Hope Is Gone centers on themes such as anger , disaffection , obsession , and the music industry . The album name also features a more prominent focus on politics than their previous albums . Slipknot promoted All Hope Is Gone on a world tour and at the Mayhem Festival . Generally well received by critics , the album reached the top position on nine record charts worldwide , including the Billboard 200 — the first Slipknot album to do so . It was certified Platinum by the RIAA on August 10 , 2010 for shipments in excess of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 albums in the United States . It is the final studio album released by the band to include two longtime members : bassist and founding member Paul Gray , who was found dead in an Iowa hotel on May 24 , 2010 , almost two years after the release of All Hope Is Gone , and drummer Joey Jordison , who departed from the group in December 2013 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Preparation for All Hope Is Gone began in 2007 . Drummer Joey Jordison explained , " I 've told them to demo whatever they can so we 've got as much material to choose from as possible . " In February 2008 , Slipknot entered the Sound Farm Studio in Jamaica , Iowa with producer Dave Fortman . All Hope Is Gone is the band 's first album written and recorded in their home state of Iowa . Bassist Paul Gray explained that the band decided to record in Iowa because there were too many distractions in Los Angeles , where production of their previous albums had taken place . The band also stated that being close to home was good for their mindset ; vocalist Corey Taylor drove home every night to see his son . Unlike Slipknot 's previous releases , the album 's writing process involved all nine band members , who wrote over 30 songs . Jordison commented , " I have to say that the band is at its peak ; everyone — I mean everyone — is now completely involved in the writing process , and it 's a beautiful thing . " Taylor felt the writing process had some problems , but also noted that the creation of every Slipknot album has had conflict and that the band has come to embrace it after realizing that the conflict helps to bring out their creativity . Taylor and guitarist Jim Root paired up with Sid Wilson , performing on keyboards , and percussionist Shawn Crahan to work on " oblique , arty pieces " . Taylor also experimented with tracking in an old well , stating , " There was this natural reverb to it that was just intense . " According to Crahan none of the experimental tracks made it onto the album . However , one of them , " Til We Die " , appears as a bonus track on the album 's special edition along with " Child Of Burning Time " and the similarly experimental Bloodstone Mix of " Vermillion Pt . 2 " . The track " Sulfur " was the first combined effort of Jordison and Root , who wrote the song in one evening . 
 Many of the band members have expressed their dissatisfaction with All Hope Is Gone and is considered to be their least favorite album . Feeling discontent over the record 's production process , Root said , " it felt a little bit rushed . And it felt like we were trying to do things just to appease a schedule , which I didn 't really like . " Root was particularly disappointed with the record 's producer , Dave Fortman , and said , " Dave Fortman really helped me appreciate Rick Rubin as a producer . [ Fortman ] wasn 't able to get nine people together on the same page and , to me , that 's the most important thing in making a Slipknot record . " Conversely , Jordison said , " It 's finally the record that I 've wanted Slipknot to sound like . " He went on to compliment Fortman 's ear for tone , and considered All Hope Is Gone to be the band 's best album . All Hope Is Gone was mixed by Colin Richardson in Miloco 's The Engine Room studio in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Rumors that Slipknot would be recording and touring All Hope Is Gone without their trademark masks circulated after band members appeared unmasked during performances with various side @-@ projects . However , Shawn Crahan dismissed these rumors in an interview on The Sauce . Bassist Paul Gray elaborated that the band would return with a new image ; " It 'll still be Slipknot , " he stated , " but we 're gonna upgrade , step things up a little . " Beginning April 1 , 2008 , Slipknot 's website displayed ten teasers to promote All Hope Is Gone . The first nine displayed the band in their purgatory masks , however , the final teaser featured a darkened photograph of the band with their new masks . Slipknot premiered their new masks on July 1 , 2008 on Spinner.com ; eight million people visited the website to view the masks on the first day . 
 On June 15 , 2008 , a 30 @-@ second sample and cover art from the album 's title track , " All Hope Is Gone " , were made available on Amazon.com. The song began airplay the same day and on June 20 , 2008 , Roadrunner Records offered the track as a free download on their website . " All Hope Is Gone " was later released as a digital single . The second single from the album , " Psychosocial " , began airplay on June 26 , 2008 and was released as a digital single on July 7 , 2008 . Following the album 's launch , " Dead Memories " was released as a digital single on December 1 , 2008 , along with an accompanying music video . The music video for " Sulfur " , the album 's fourth single , premiered on April 18 , 2009 , and the single was released on June 15 , 2009 . From August 17 through 19 , 2008 , Kerrang ! magazine held six listening events across the United Kingdom which included a preview of the documentary supplied with the album 's special edition , and free merchandise . On April 17 , 2009 , Roadrunner Records announced that the album would be released on vinyl on April 19 , 2009 , coinciding with Record Store Day . 
 The album 's cover art and track listing were released on July 8 , 2008 . Slipknot began its All Hope Is Gone World Tour the following day — the tour was their first since 2005 . The band initially toured with the Mayhem Festival across the United States , through August 16 , 2008 . Afterward , Slipknot was scheduled to appear at the Reading and Leeds Festivals in England , the Two Days a Week Festival in Austria , and the <unk> Festival in Germany . However , the European tour dates were canceled due to Jordison breaking his ankle . Slipknot performed at the Rock on the Range Festival on May 16 and 17 , 2009 then headlined the Download Festival in England during the summer , the first time they had headlined the festival . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 Musically , the album sees the band moving away from nu metal and focusing on a more standard metal sound , featuring additional elements of groove metal , death metal and thrash metal . Prior to the album 's release , Slipknot 's members displayed interest in making All Hope Is Gone their heaviest album , which Joey Jordison affirmed saying , " It 's going to be heavier than Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) , but just as weird and as experimental . " Corey Taylor reiterated this , describing All Hope Is Gone as a " very dark " combination of the band 's two previous studio albums , Iowa and Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) . In All Hope Is Gone , Slipknot expands on their use of traditional song structures , acoustics , and solos that they introduced on their previous album Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) . The song " Snuff " is led by acoustic guitars and has been dubbed as Slipknot 's " attempt at a power ballad " , though it remains " dark and ominous " . In an interview with Artistdirect , Shawn Crahan stated , " Everyone can feel the pain that 's in there . It 's not forced upon you . You have it in there innately . " Slipknot also retained a metal edge reminiscent of their earlier work . Stephen Erlewine of Allmusic wrote " Gematria ( The Killing Name ) " goes from " a cluster of cacophony " to " an onslaught of densely dark intricate riffs " . Crahan compared it to the song " ( sic ) " from their debut album , explaining , " The technique and the style are very reminiscent of the old , brutal shit that we 've done . " Jim Kaz of IGN stated that the " swaggering , cock @-@ rock groove and an anthemic chorus " of " Psychosocial " gives Slipknot the potential to reach out to new fans " without sacrificing a lick of intensity " . Crahan stated he " loves " his parts of " Psychosocial " , in which the band incorporates snare drums , reminiscent of " Before I Forget " . He also cited " This Cold Black " as one of his favorite songs , saying that it has a " driving tempo and a lot of attitude " . The track " Gehenna " incorporates elements of Slipknot 's slower , more cerebral edge reminiscent of " Prosthetics " and " Purity " from their debut album , and " Skin Ticket " from Iowa . Crahan called it a " trippy song " , explaining , " It 's just somewhere we go . " 
 Corey Taylor explained that the phrase " All Hope Is Gone " is aimed at the fans ' expectations of the band , further elaborating , " Just when you thought you had us figured out , give up all hope because you 're never , ever going to . " Throughout the album , Taylor incorporates a focus on politics in his lyrics , compared to Slipknot 's previous albums . The opening track , " <unk> " , features Taylor 's response to former United States Vice President Spiro Agnew ’ s speech targeted at Vietnam War <unk> and the second track " Gematria ( The Killing Name ) " follows in the same vein . During an interview with Kerrang ! , Taylor discussed the song 's lyrical content , explaining , " There are a lot of people who are disguising politics as religion and dictating taste and turning it into policy . And that hurts me . " Reviewing for IGN , Jim Kaz said that lyrically , " Gematria ( The Killing Name ) " gives the listener a " heaping dose of Corey Taylor 's caustic bravado " . On the track " Wherein Lies Continue " , Taylor offers a " dressing down of the world as we know it " , explaining , " It kinda goes up against any civilization that takes themselves way too seriously and where the ' leaders ' are so pretentious that they think they are deemed to speak for the people . " He also proclaimed , " It wouldn 't be a Slipknot album if I didn 't rag on the recording industry . " On " Butcher 's Hook " , Taylor specifically targets " all those little emo boys " , commenting , " People give us shit for wearing outfits , but all of those guys look exactly the same . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 All Hope Is Gone was Slipknot 's first album to debut at number one on the Billboard 200 album chart , outselling LAX from The Game by 1 @,@ 134 units . Initially , Billboard published an article stating that The Game had secured the top spot with a margin of 13 units , in what was described as the " closest race for number one since SoundScan began tracking Data in 1991 " . After a recount 12 hours later , the article was rewritten and Slipknot was awarded the number one spot , having sold 239 @,@ 516 units . All Hope Is Gone debuted at number two in the United Kingdom , topped only by The Verve 's album Forth . In Canada , the album sold over 20 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and debuted at # 1 on the Canadian Albums Chart . The album also debuted at number one on eight other charts worldwide . " Psychosocial " , the album 's second single , brought Slipknot their first MTV Video Music Awards nomination for Best Rock Video , as well as their seventh Grammy nomination for Best Metal Performance at the 51st Grammy Awards . In December 2008 , Total Guitar ranked All Hope Is Gone as one of the " 50 Best Guitar Albums of the Year " . In 2009 , it was rated 16th in UK magazine Kerrang ! ' s " The 50 Best Albums of the 21st Century " reader poll . 
 All Hope Is Gone has been certified Platinum in the United States of America and Canada by the RIAA and the CRIA respectively . As of January 2012 the album has sold over 1 million copies in the U.S. It has been certified Gold in the United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand and Germany hence being a commercial success . As of 2014 , the album has sold 1 @,@ 106 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. alone . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 All Hope Is Gone was generally well received by critics . Several music critics anticipated the album immediately after the release of Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) . In its review of Vol . 3 , Allmusic stated , " There 's a sense that whatever Slipknot do next might be their ultimate broadcast to the faithful . " Copies of All Hope Is Gone intended for reviewers were pressed under the false name " Rusty Cage " to reduce the risk of the album leaking onto the Internet . Stephen Erlewine wrote in his review for Allmusic that the early " cluster of cacophony " of " Gematria " is " so effective [ ... ] that when things do get a little softer a little later on , the album threatens to collapse like a soufflé " . Criticizing the album , Erlewine wrote , " One more power ballad like Snuff would be enough to derail the album . " He gave the album a rating of four out of five stars . Regarding the album 's creation process , Darren Sadler of Rock Sound wrote , " Slipknot raised their collective middle fingers , and created an album that stands out head and shoulders above everything else that will be released this year . " He compared the album 's sound to those of other bands such as Stone Sour , Morbid Angel , and Meshuggah , and he gave the album a score of 9 out of 10 . Ryan Ogle of Blabbermouth.net gave All Hope Is Gone 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 stars . Ogle stated that the fans ' views of the " diversity " of the album would be Slipknot 's " saving grace , or their misfortune " , concluding , " While it may not be as jaw @-@ dropping or revolutionary as some might have hoped , it 's by no means a bad release . " Reviewing for Blender , writer Darren Ratner observed a different theme in the lyrics when compared to previous Slipknot albums , noting that the band is able to " make ugliness sound just a little bit pretty " . Marc Weingarten of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B + rating , calling All Hope Is Gone " a metal assault @-@ and @-@ battery on the hypocrisies of the modern world " . Jim Kaz of IGN stated that the band 's attempt to move from nu @-@ metal to " more classic metal elements " was " the best career move they could 've made " . Kaz gave All Hope Is Gone a score of 8 @.@ 1 out of 10 , writing , " [ It ] effectively [ builds ] upon the band 's collective strengths . " Q noted that the band no longer resembled " a threat to Western civilisation " but claimed that the album delivered one shock ; " how listenable they 've become " , including " Snuff " in the top 50 downloads for August 2008 . 
 Rolling Stone reviewer Chris Steffen praised the percussive edge on All Hope Is Gone noting , " The band ’ s multiple percussionists generate a din that ’ s more suffocating than ever [ on the track ] ' Gematria ' . " He proposed " Snuff " as the " most melodic " song on the album , comparing it to " Circle " from Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) . Steffen also wrote that " ' Psychosocial ' is capped off with a time @-@ signature shattering guitar / drum breakdown that will leave the best air @-@ instrumentalists stumped " . The album was praised by Total Guitar 's writer Nick Cracknell , who declared the effort " Slipknot 's heaviest and most aggressive work to date " . He compared " Dead Memories " to the works of Alice in Chains , while praising " Gehenna " for being the band 's " most experimental work in their history " . Cracknell went on to state " Wherein Lies Continue " contains a " huge chugging verse riff " which evolves into an " incredible soaring chorus " . Dan Martin of The Guardian compared " Dead Memories " to Metallica 's song " Enter Sandman " and called " Gematria ( The Killing Name ) " a work of " astonishingly dense thrash " , giving the album four out of five stars . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Slipknot . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Aside from their real names , members of the band are referred to by numbers zero through eight . 
 = Sick Cycle Carousel = 
 " Sick Cycle Carousel " is a song by American alternative rock band Lifehouse . It is the second single released from their debut studio album No Name Face ( 2000 ) . The track was written by Lifehouse lead singer Jason Wade and Scott Faircloff , who says he felt freedom when writing songs for the album . American record producers Ron Aniello and Brendan O 'Brien produced and mixed the song , respectively . Musically , " Sick Cycle Carousel " is a moderate rock song with an influence of soft rock . The song was released on June 4 , 2001 by DreamWorks Records . 
 The song received positive reviews from critics , who applauded how the producers brought out Wade 's vocals over the instrumentation . It managed to chart on the Billboard Alternative Songs chart at number 21 . The track later charted in the Netherlands and New Zealand at number 71 and 47 , respectively . An official music video for the song premiered on VH1.com on June 27 , 2001 that features effects to make objects look smaller than they really are . 
 = = Background , release and composition = = 
 The song was written by Lifehouse lead singer Jason Wade and was produced by American record producer Ron Aniello . When asked about his experience with making songs for No Name Face in an interview with Billboard , Wade said , " DreamWorks has been amazing in letting us make the record . They 're super @-@ artist @-@ friendly . They let us make our record the way we wanted to make it . It 's the best label we could be on . " In an interview with MTV Radio , Wade explained the message behind " Sick Cycle Carousel " and said , " It 's one of those songs I 'm really afraid to put an explanation to as far as what it 's about for me personally . I don 't want it to lose its mystery and mystique . Everyone interprets it differently . It 's funny hearing people telling what 's it 's about to them because then I can go , ' Maybe that 's what it 's about . ' It 's got a weird mystique to me still . " It was released on March 25 , 2002 by DreamWorks Records . 
 " Sick Cycle Carousel " was described as being a rock song with an influence of soft rock . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 92 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of A minor with Wade 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of C4 to the high @-@ note of G5 . The song has a basic chord progression of F – G – Am7 – F – G – Am7 . John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout called it " a song about the <unk> merry go round we feel like we 're on when we keep committing the same sins over and over " . Liana Jonas of Allmusic applauded on how Aniello and O 'Brien " brought Wade 's vocals and lyrics to the forefront of the mix " for all the songs on the album . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Sick Cycle Carousel " had limited commercial success after the success of Lifehouse 's first single , " Hanging by a Moment " . The track debuted at number 33 on the Billboard Alternative Songs chart for the week of May 26 , 2001 . After it spent 12 consecutive weeks on the chart , the song eventually peaked at number 21 for two consecutive weeks . In the Netherlands , the song debuted at number 84 on the Mega Single Top 100 for the week of December 8 , 2001 . It eventually peaked at number 71 after it spent six consecutive weeks on the chart . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , the track debuted at number 50 for the week of August 19 , 2001 . The song then peaked at number 47 during the week of September 2 , 2001 before leaving the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was filmed in June 2001 at an airplane hangar at Los Angeles International Airport and at a Lifehouse show in London . It was directed by Marcos Siega , who is most notable for his work with Blink @-@ 182 and Papa Roach . In an interview with MTV , Wade talked about the idea behind the music video and said , " This is the closest we 'll probably ever come to being in a Tim Burton fantasy world . It was done in a real ' Jack and the Beanstalk ' style . And Marcos used some camera tricks that make it look amazing . From far away , the stage set looked normal , but when you get closer you get smaller and it gets huge . We were being filmed in front of this bookcase that was like 150 feet high . It 's a real visual trip . " It premiered on VH1.com on June 27 , 2001 . 
 It begins with a shot of Wade 's face and the guitar introduction . He then sings the first line of lyrics , which is followed by a transition to a boy lying on a bed . As the video switches between Wade and the boy , it zooms on the bed frame ( which has the same face from the album cover ) and opens into another area . The boy is then seen walking around the new area looking around until he goes up nearby stairs . While going up the stairs , the video switches between shots of the boy going up the stairs and Wade singing the lyrics . Once up the stairs , the boy looks around and then walks into a bright light that he sees nearby . He walks through the bright archway into a dark room as the video switches to Lifehouse playing the song . After this , it switches to the boy as he looks up and the camera zooms out to reveal that he is in a giant maze . He then walks back where he came from to find that he is in a house with Lifehouse playing on the television . He then jumps off a window sill and appears tiny as he walks up to a book that is bigger than him . It then transitions to Lifehouse playing the song as the boy gets up on a chair which slowly transcends into his original bed . The video then zooms out on the boy lying on his bed and then switches to the band . It ends with the boy walking into darkness and Wade 's face looking on the floor . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 On January 10 , 2001 , MTV confirmed that Lifehouse would serve as an opening act on a 14 @-@ day tour for Matchbox Twenty , who were promoting their album Mad Season ( 2000 ) . The tour started February 27 , 2001 in Minneapolis and ended on March 29 , 2001 in Universal City . In July 2001 , Lifehouse went on tour with 3 Doors Down as an opening act on 12 select dates , and performed songs from No Name Face , including " Sick Cycle Carousel " . Before they went on tour with 3 Doors Down , the band went on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on June 25 , 2001 and performed " Sick Cycle Carousel " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Jason Wade , Scott Faircloff 
 Production – Ron Aniello 
 Mixing – Brendan O 'Brien 
 Engineering – Bob Kearny , Marc Green , Paul Hayden 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Australian CD single 
 European CD single 
 = = Charts = = 
 = End of Watch = 
 End of Watch is a 2012 American crime drama film written and directed by David Ayer . It stars Jake Gyllenhaal and Michael Peña as Brian Taylor and Miguel Zavala , two Los Angeles Police Department officers who work in South Central Los Angeles . The film focuses on their day @-@ to @-@ day police work , their dealings with a certain group of gang members , and their personal relationships . 
 Ayer , who had written several police procedural films previously , wanted End of Watch to focus more on the friendship between partners and honest police work rather than corruption . Gyllenhaal , Peña , and other cast members underwent an intensive training program to prepare for their roles as police officers . Filming took place in Los Angeles in August 2011 with a budget of $ 7 million . 
 End of Watch premiered on September 8 , 2012 at the Toronto International Film Festival and was released in American theaters on September 21 , grossing over $ 57 million at the box office . The film was well received by critics and received a number of accolades , including two Independent Spirit Award nominations . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Brian Taylor and Miguel Zavala are close friends and partners in the Newton Division of the Los Angeles Police Department ( LAPD ) in South Central Los Angeles . Taylor , a former Marine , is recording their police activities for a film project . 
 Upon responding to a public disturbance call , Tre , a Bloods gang member , yells racist insults at Zavala , who responds by accepting a fight . Zavala beats and arrests him , but wins Tre 's respect for not charging him with assault . Later that night , Tre and his fellow Bloods gang members are attacked by a group of Sureños in a drive @-@ by shooting and one of Tre 's friends is killed . The next day , the officers respond to a noise complaint at a house party full of Sureños , where Taylor encounters a gang member named Big Evil , whose truck he later finds is filled with ornately @-@ decorated firearms and a large amount of money . 
 Taylor and Zavala are awarded the Medal of Valor after rescuing three children from a house fire . Upon further investigating a house , they arrest a man who is also in possession of several ornate firearms , and is guarding a cell full of human trafficking victims . When ICE agents arrive , one agent informs the officers that the house is tied to the Sinaloa Cartel , and strongly urges them to " lay low " due to possible reprisals . Around this time , Taylor begins dating a woman named Janet , and Zavala 's wife Gabby gives birth to their first child . 
 One night , Taylor and Zavala respond to a call from their fellow officer , Sook , and find her partner Van Hauser with a knife through his eye . He leads them to Sook , who is being savagely beaten nearby . After arresting the culprit , the officers learn that Van Hauser is not returning to patrol and Sook is leaving the force . Taylor marries Janet , and at their wedding Zavala tells Taylor that , should anything happen to him , he will take care of Janet . The next day , the officers perform a welfare check on an elderly woman . In her house , they discover drugs , dismembered corpses , and a message from the cartel . Unbeknownst to them , a cartel member has " green @-@ lit " the officers , and the gangsters from the earlier drive @-@ by begin following them . 
 Shortly after Janet gets pregnant , the officers are baited into chasing a reckless driver into an apartment complex , where they are ambushed by the same group of Latino gang members . They fight their way into an alley , where Taylor is shot in the chest . As Zavala desperately attends to his partner , the assassins arrive and shoot him several times in the back , killing him . Police backup eventually arrives and the gangsters are killed after refusing to surrender . 
 Taylor survives , having been shielded by Zavala 's body . At Zavala 's funeral , Taylor tries to deliver a eulogy , but only manages to say a few words : " He was my brother . " In a flashback to the day of the shooting , Zavala recounts to Taylor a story from his teens before the two receive the call from dispatch . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jake Gyllenhaal as Brian Taylor 
 Michael Peña as Miguel " Mike " Zavala 
 Natalie Martinez as Gabby Zavala 
 Anna Kendrick as Janet Taylor 
 Frank Grillo as Sarge 
 America Ferrera as Officer Orozco 
 Cody Horn as Officer Davis 
 David Harbour as Van Hauser 
 Cle Sloan as Tre 
 <unk> Avery as Bonita 
 Kristy Wu as Sook 
 = = Production = = 
 David Ayer , who wrote and directed End of Watch , grew up in South Central Los Angeles and has had numerous friends in the LAPD . He had written several films previously about police officers in Los Angeles , but while these depicted rogue and corrupt officers , he wanted to feature honest , ethical police work in End of Watch . In contrast to his previous works , Ayer wanted to focus on the friendship between Taylor and Zavala and " have all the cop stuff drop away and become secondary to the chemistry of these guys " . Ayer wrote the screenplay over six days in December 2010 . Jaime FitzSimons , a longtime friend of Ayer and a former police officer with the LAPD , served as the film 's technical advisor , and his experiences from working in Los Angeles inspired several plot points of the film . 
 Jake Gyllenhaal was the first to be cast in the film ; after receiving the script , he read it in an hour and immediately contacted Ayer . Michael Peña was cast shortly after , following a string of auditions . He and Gyllenhaal did not bond immediately but gradually became close friends over the process of training and filming . Gyllenhaal and Peña undertook five months of intensive training under the guidance of FitzSimons to prepare for their roles — this included 12 @-@ hour ride @-@ alongs with multiple Greater Los Angeles Area law enforcement agencies up to three times a week , as well as training in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , police tactics and weapons . On his first ride @-@ along , Gyllenhaal witnessed a murder during a drug bust . Tactical training was also given to the other actors playing police officers , including David Harbour , America Ferrera , Cody Horn , and Frank Grillo . 
 End of Watch was filmed on location in South Central Los Angeles , primarily in the area of the LAPD 's Newton Division , one of the most violent and gang @-@ affiliated areas of the city . Filming took place over 22 days in August 2011 , with a budget of $ 7 @.@ 5 million . The film was shot in a combination of found footage style and traditional photography . Most scenes were captured by four cameras simultaneously : these included a handheld camera operated by Gyllenhaal , cameras clipped to Gyllenhaal and Peña 's vests , and dashboard footage from their patrol car . Some scenes were shot entirely by Gyllenhaal . An alternate ending of the film was shot where both of the main characters died , but Ayer ultimately chose to retain the original ending . 
 = = Release = = 
 The world premiere of End of Watch was held on September 8 , 2012 at the Toronto International Film Festival . It was originally scheduled to be released theatrically on September 28 , 2012 , but the release was later moved to September 21 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 End of Watch was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on January 22 , 2013 by Universal Studios Home Entertainment . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Over its opening weekend in the United States , the film grossed $ 13 @.@ 1 million and was the highest @-@ grossing film at the box office for the weekend . It was especially popular among Hispanics , who made up 32 % of the audience on the opening weekend , and a writer for The Hollywood Reporter attributed the film 's popularity to strong word of mouth . The film was initially released in 2 @,@ 730 theaters and expanded to 2 @,@ 780 locations in its second week of release . On December 7 , the film was given a nationwide re @-@ release in 1 @,@ 259 theaters shortly after it received two Independent Spirit Award nominations . On the first weekend of its re @-@ release , it grossed $ 752 @,@ 000 . 
 After a total of 119 days , the film ended its American theatrical run in January 2013 with a gross of $ 41 million . It grossed $ 16 @.@ 6 million from other territories , making a worldwide total gross of $ 57 @.@ 6 million . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 End of Watch received positive reviews from critics , who praised Ayer 's direction and the performances of Gyllenhaal and Peña . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 85 % approval rating with an average rating of 7 @.@ 1 / 10 , based on 168 reviews . The website 's consensus states : " End of Watch has the energy , devotion to characters , and charismatic performances to overcome the familiar pitfalls of its genre and handheld format . " At Metacritic , the film received a score of 68 out of 100 , based on 37 critics , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film 4 out of 4 stars , calling it " one of the best police movies in recent years , a virtuoso fusion of performances and often startling action " , and went on to name the film the fourth best of 2012 . Film critic James Berardinelli described End of Watch as " satisfying and emotionally potent ... a good , gritty drama of the sort that seems increasingly rare within the thriller genre " , giving the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars . Olly Richards , writing for Empire , gave the film 4 out of 5 stars and summarized it as " a collection of cop @-@ movie clichés but presented with sufficient flair and strong performances that the ride is enough , even if its on rails " . While New York 's Bilge Ebiri found the film largely unrealistic and Ayer 's direction " serviceable at best " , he wrote that " Ayer and his cast appear to have so convincingly nailed the way these characters talk and act that you might not even notice the film slipping from workaday grit into out @-@ and @-@ out myth . " 
 Critics praised End of Watch for its avoidance of clichés often used in police films , particularly the buddy cop genre . Peter Debruge of Variety wrote that " Like a knife in the eye , End of Watch cuts past the cliches of standard police procedurals " and praised Ayer for depicting the LAPD as " an honorable and efficient organization of people working together " . Entertainment Weekly 's Lisa Schwarzbaum , who gave the film an A- , described it as " one of the best American cop movies I 've seen in a long time [ and ] also one of the few I 've seen that pay serious attention to what cop life feels like , both on and off duty " . In a review for The Globe and Mail , however , Rick Groen opined that the focus on " saintly " police officers was less interesting than Ayer 's " trademark grit and authenticity " . 
 The performances of Peña and Gyllenhaal were also praised by critics . Peter Debruge commended the realism that the two actors brought to their roles , saying , " Gyllenhaal and Peña so completely reinvent themselves in @-@ character . Instead of wearing the roles like costumes or uniforms , they let the job seep into their skin . " The Los Angeles Times 's Betsy Sharkey applauded the chemistry between the two lead actors , as well as their individual performances , writing , " As good as Gyllenhaal is in this , Peña nearly steals the show . " In a review for USA Today , Claudia Puig commended Gyllenhaal for " giv [ ing ] his best performance since Brokeback Mountain " and Peña for " shin [ ing ] with charisma " . Roger Ebert highlighted End of Watch as " one of the performances of [ Peña 's ] career " and praised the performances given by the supporting cast , including Natalie Martinez and Anna Kendrick . 
 An aspect of the film criticized in numerous reviews was its handheld camerawork and cinematography . Richard Corliss wrote for Time that the found footage style of cinematography " borders on the ludicrous " and that " the tactic fatally substitutes photo realism for <unk> realism " . Similarly , The Washington Post 's Michael O 'Sullivan found the aesthetic gimmicky , overused , and " an unnecessary distraction from the story " . On the other hand , Amy Biancolli of the San Francisco Chronicle felt that although the cinematography was inconsistent , " it 's used to deepen its main characters " and " lends the film a lively intimacy " . 
 Other reviewers criticized the casting of minorities as gang members . Manohla Dargis of The New York Times pointed out that " almost all of [ the crimes are ] committed by the black and mainly brown people " , while The Globe and Mail 's Rick Groen criticized " the script 's penchant for <unk> the ghetto 's black residents " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Bolton Wanderers F.C. = 
 Bolton Wanderers Football Club ( / <unk> / ) is a professional association football club based in Bolton , Greater Manchester . For the 2016 – 17 Season , the team will play in League One , the third tier of the English football league system . 
 The club was formed as Christ Church Football Club in 1874 , and adopted its current name in 1877 . Founder members of the Football League in 1888 , Bolton have spent the highest number of seasons of any club in the top flight without winning the title ( the 2011 – 12 season was their 73rd , non @-@ consecutive year in the top flight ) . The closest they have come to the title is third in the First Division on three occasions ( 1891 – 92 , 1920 – 21 and 1924 – 25 ) . As of 2015 , the club has spent more seasons in the top division than any other club outside the current Premier League . 
 Bolton were a successful cup side in the 1920s , winning the FA Cup three times . The club won the cup a fourth time in 1958 . A leaner spell followed , reaching a nadir in 1987 when the club spent a season in the Fourth Division . The club regained top @-@ flight status in 1995 after a 15 @-@ year absence . In a period of relative success , the club qualified for the UEFA Cup twice , reaching the last 32 in 2005 – 06 and the last 16 in 2007 – 08 . 
 The club played at Burnden Park for 102 years from 1895 . On 9 March 1946 , The Burnden Park disaster occurred , which was a human crush in which 33 Bolton fans lost their lives . In 1997 it moved out of town to the Reebok Stadium , named after long @-@ term club sponsor Reebok . The stadium was renamed the Macron Stadium in July 2014 , to reflect the club 's new deal with Italian sportswear company Macron . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history ( 1877 – 1929 ) = = = 
 The club was founded by the Reverend Joseph <unk> Wright , Perpetual curate of Christ Church Bolton and Thomas Ogden , the schoolmaster at the adjacent church school in 1874 as Christ Church F.C. It was initially run from the church of the same name on Deane Road , Bolton , on the site where the Innovation factory of the University of Bolton now stands . The club left the location following a dispute with the vicar , and changed its name to Bolton Wanderers in 1877 . The name was chosen as the club initially had a lot of difficulty finding a permanent ground to play on , having used three venues in its first four years of existence . 
 Bolton were one of the 12 founder members of the Football League , which formed in 1888 . At the time Lancashire was one of the strongest footballing regions in the country , with 6 of the 12 founder clubs coming from within the boundaries of the historic county of Lancashire . Having remained in the Football League since its formation , Bolton have spent more time in the top flight ( Premier League / old First Division ) than out of it . 
 In 1894 Bolton reached the final of the FA Cup for the first time , but lost 4 – 1 to Notts County at Goodison Park . A decade later they were runners @-@ up a second time , losing 1 – 0 to local rivals Manchester City at Crystal Palace on 23 April 1904 . 
 The period before and after the First World War was Bolton 's most consistent period of top @-@ flight success as measured by league finishes , with the club finishing outside the top 8 of the First Division on only two occasions between 1911 – 12 and 1927 – 28 . In this period Bolton equalled their record finish of third twice , in 1920 – 21 and 1924 – 25 , on the latter occasion missing out on the title by just 3 points ( in an era of 2 points for a win ) . 
 On 28 April 1923 , Bolton won their first major trophy in their third final , beating West Ham United 2 – 0 in the first ever Wembley FA Cup final . The match , famously known as The White Horse Final was played in front of over 127 @,@ 000 supporters . Bolton 's centre @-@ forward , David Jack scored the first ever goal at Wembley Stadium . Driven by long @-@ term players Joe Smith in attack , Ted Vizard and Billy Butler on the wings , and Jimmy Seddon in defence , they became the most successful cup side of the twenties , winning three times . Their second victory of the decade came in 1926 , beating Manchester City 1 – 0 in front of over 91 @,@ 000 spectators , and the third came in 1929 as Portsmouth were beaten 2 – 0 in front of nearly 93 @,@ 000 fans . 
 In 1928 the club faced financial difficulties and so was forced to sell David Jack to Arsenal to raise funds . Despite the pressure to sell , the agreed fee of £ 10 @,@ 890 was a world record , more than double the previous most expensive transfer of a player . 
 = = = Top flight run and cup success ( 1929 – 1958 ) = = = 
 From 1935 to 1964 , Bolton enjoyed an uninterrupted stay in the top flight – regarded by fans as a golden era – spearheaded in the 1950s by Nat Lofthouse . The years of the Second World War saw most of the Wanderers ' playing staff see action on the front , a rare occurrence within elite football , as top sportsmen were generally assigned to physical training assignments , away from enemy fire . However , 15 Bolton professionals , led by their captain Harry Goslin , volunteered for active service in 1939 , and were enlisted in the 53rd Bolton Artillery regiment . By the end of the war , 32 of the 35 pre @-@ war professionals saw action in the British forces . The sole fatality was Goslin , who had by then risen to the rank of Lieutenant and was killed by shrapnel on the Italian front shortly before Christmas 1943 . 53rd Bolton Artillery took part in the Battle of Dunkirk and also served in the campaigns of Egypt , Iraq and Italy . Remarkably , a number of these soldiers managed to carry on playing the game in these theatres of war , taking on as ' British XI ' various scratch teams assembled by , among others , King Farouk of Egypt in Cairo and Polish forces in Baghdad . 
 On 9 March 1946 , the club 's home was the scene of the Burnden Park disaster , which at the time was the worst tragedy in British football history . 33 Bolton Wanderers fans were crushed to death , and another 400 injured , in an FA Cup quarter @-@ final second leg tie between Bolton and Stoke City . There was an estimated 67 @,@ 000 @-@ strong crowd crammed in for the game , though other estimates vary widely , with a further 15 @,@ 000 locked out as it became clear the stadium was full . The disaster led to <unk> Hughes 's official report , which recommended more rigorous control of crowd sizes . 
 In 1953 Bolton played in one of the most famous FA Cup finals of all time – The Stanley Matthews Final of 1953 . Bolton lost the game to Blackpool 4 – 3 after gaining a 3 – 1 lead . Blackpool were victorious thanks to the skills of Matthews and the goals of Stan Mortensen . 
 Bolton Wanderers have not won a major trophy since 1958 , when two Lofthouse goals saw them overcome Manchester United in the FA Cup final in front of a 100 @,@ 000 crowd at Wembley Stadium . The closest they have come to winning a major trophy since then is finishing runners @-@ up in the League Cup , first in 1995 and again in 2004 . 
 = = = Few highs and many lows ( 1958 – 1995 ) = = = 
 While Bolton finished 4th the following season , the next 20 years would prove to be a fallow period . The club suffered relegation to the Second Division in 1963 – 64 , and were then relegated again to the Third Division for the first time in their history in 1970 – 71 . This stay in the Third Division lasted just two years before the club were promoted as champions in 1972 – 73 . Hopes were high at Burnden Park in May 1978 when Bolton sealed the Second Division title and gained promotion to the First Division . However , they only remained there for two seasons before being relegated . 
 Following relegation in 1980 , Bolton signed former Manchester United European Cup winning striker Brian Kidd from Everton for £ 150 @,@ 000 as they prepared to challenge for a quick return to the First Division . Kidd scored a hat @-@ trick in his third game for Bolton , a 4 – 0 win over Newcastle United in the league , but the rest of the season was a struggle as Bolton finished close to the relegation places . By the end of the 1981 – 82 season , Bolton were no closer to promotion and had lost several key players including Peter Reid and Neil Whatmore . The following season Bolton were relegated to the Third Division after losing 4 – 1 at Charlton Athletic on the final day . 
 Despite a new @-@ look , much younger team and an 8 – 1 win over Walsall , Bolton 's best league win for 50 years , Bolton failed to win promotion in the 1983 – 84 season , and would remain in the Third Division for another three seasons . In 1986 Nat Lofthouse was appointed President of the football club , a position he would hold until his death on 15 January 2011 . At the end of the 1986 – 87 season , Bolton Wanderers suffered relegation to the Fourth Division for the first time in their history , but won promotion back to the Third Division at the first attempt . The club won the Sherpa Van Trophy in 1989 , defeating Torquay United 4 – 1 . During the 1990 – 91 season , Bolton were pipped to the final automatic promotion place by Southend United and lost to Tranmere Rovers in the play @-@ off final , but they failed to build on this and the following season saw the club finish 13th . 
 The early 1990s saw Bolton gain a giant @-@ killing reputation in cup competitions . In 1993 Bolton beat FA Cup holders Liverpool 2 – 0 in a third round replay at Anfield , thanks to goals from super John McGinlay and Andy Walker . The club also defeated higher division opposition in the form of Wolverhampton Wanderers ( 2 – 1 ) that year before bowing out to Derby County . Bolton also secured promotion to the second tier for the first time since 1983 . In 1994 Bolton again beat FA Cup holders , this time in the form of Arsenal , 3 – 1 after extra time in a fourth round replay , and went on to reach the quarter @-@ finals , bowing out 1 – 0 at home to local rivals ( and then Premiership ) Oldham Athletic . Bolton also defeated top division opposition in the form of Everton ( 3 – 2 ) and Aston Villa ( 1 – 0 ) that year . 
 = = = Return to the top flight , into Europe ( 1995 – 2008 ) = = = 
 Bolton reached the Premiership in 1995 thanks to a 4 – 3 victory over Reading in the Division One play @-@ off Final . Reading took a 2 – 0 lead before Bolton scored two late goals to take the game to extra time , scoring twice more before a late Reading consolation . The same year Bolton progressed to the League Cup Final , but were defeated 2 – 1 by Liverpool . Bolton were bottom for virtually all of the 1995 – 96 Premiership campaign and were relegated as they lost their penultimate game 1 – 0 to Southampton . 
 The club won promotion back to the Premiership at the first attempt thanks to a season in which they achieved 98 league points and 100 goals in the process of securing the Division One championship , the first time since 1978 that they had finished top of any division . This season also marked the club 's departure from Burnden Park to the Reebok Stadium , the last game at the stadium being a 4 – 1 win over Charlton Athletic . 
 Bolton were relegated on goal difference at the end of the 1997 – 98 Premiership campaign . The following season they reached the 1999 Division One play @-@ off Final but lost 2 – 0 to Watford . 
 In 2000 Bolton reached the semi @-@ finals of the FA Cup , Worthington Cup and play @-@ offs but lost on penalties to Aston Villa , 4 – 0 on aggregate to Tranmere Rovers and 7 – 5 on aggregate to Ipswich Town respectively . In 2000 – 01 Bolton were promoted back to the Premiership after beating Preston North End 3 – 0 in the play @-@ off final . 
 Bolton struggled in the following two seasons , but survived in the Premiership . The 2001 – 02 season began with a shock as they destroyed Leicester 5 – 0 at Filbert Street to go top of the table . Despite a 2 – 1 win away at Manchester United , becoming the first team since the formation of the Premiership to come from behind and win a league game at Old Trafford , they went into a deep slump during the middle of the season and needed a Fredi Bobic hat @-@ trick against Ipswich Town to survive . Despite losing the final three games , 16th place was secured . The 2002 – 03 season began with a poor start and , despite another win away at Manchester United , they were bottom until a 4 – 2 win against Leeds United at Elland Road . Despite suffering from a lack of consistency , Bolton achieved the results needed and secured survival in a final day 2 – 1 victory over Middlesbrough . 
 Bolton reached the League Cup final in 2004 , but lost 2 – 1 to Middlesbrough . Nevertheless , the club finished eighth in the league , at the time the highest finish in their Premiership history . 
 In 2005 , Bolton finished sixth in the league , thus earning qualification for the UEFA Cup for the first time in their history . The following season , they reached the last 32 but were eliminated by French team Marseille as they lost 2 – 1 on aggregate . Between 2003 – 04 and 2006 – 07 , Bolton recorded consecutive top @-@ eight finishes , a record of consistency bettered only by the big four of Chelsea , Manchester United , Liverpool and Arsenal . 
 The 2007 – 08 season saw Bolton survive with a 16th @-@ place finish , their safety being confirmed on the final day of the season , as they went on an unbeaten run for their final five games , as well as getting to the last sixteen of the UEFA Cup . During the European run , Bolton gained an unexpected draw at former European champions Bayern Munich as well as becoming the first British team to beat Red Star Belgrade in Belgrade . They also defeated Atlético Madrid on aggregate before being knocked out by Sporting Lisbon . 
 = = = Recent history ( 2008 – ) = = = 
 Bolton broke their record transfer fee with the signing of Johan Elmander from Toulouse on 27 June 2008 , in a deal which cost the club a reported £ 8 @.@ 2 million and saw Norwegian striker Daniel <unk> head in the opposite direction . In the 2010 – 11 FA Cup , Bolton progressed all the way to the semi @-@ finals , but were beaten 5 – 0 by Stoke at Wembley , with the match being described as " a massive anti @-@ climax " . 
 The following season began as the previous one had ended with just one win and six defeats , their worst start since the 1902 – 03 season when they were relegated . On 17 March 2012 , manager Owen Coyle travelled to the London Chest Hospital with Fabrice Muamba who had suffered from a cardiac arrest whilst playing against Tottenham Hotspur at White Hart Lane in a FA Cup match . Muamba stayed in a critical condition for several weeks and Coyle was widely praised for the manner in which he represented the club during the period . That 13 May , Bolton were relegated to the Championship by one point on the last day of the season after drawing 2 – 2 with Stoke City . 
 The Championship season started badly for Bolton , with only three wins in ten league matches and a second round exit from the League Cup following a loss at Crawley Town . As a result of poor performances leaving them in 16th place , Bolton sacked Coyle on 9 October 2012 , replacing him with Crystal Palace 's Dougie Freedman . They finished in 7th place , losing out on a play @-@ off place to Leicester City on goal difference . The 2013 – 14 began with a trip to Turf Moor , in celebration of the 125th anniversary of the Football League . 
 In December 2015 , Bolton , who were £ 172 @.@ 9 million in debt , were handed a winding @-@ up petition from HM Revenue and Customs over unpaid taxes , and a transfer embargo for the following month 's window . After ending a 17 @-@ game winless run , manager Neil Lennon , who had been investigated by the club due to allegations about his personal life , said that the club had " been through hell " . On 18 January 2016 , the club avoided an immediate winding @-@ up order after their case was adjourned until 22 February to give it time to either close a deal with a potential buyer or raise sufficient short @-@ term funds from asset sales . The club was said to owe HM Revenue and Customs £ <unk> On 9 April , Bolton lost 4 – 1 away at Derby County to confirm their relegation to the third tier for the first time since 1993 . 
 = = Colours and badge = = 
 Bolton Wanderers ' home colours are white shirts with navy and red trim , worn with navy shorts and white and navy hooped socks . Their current away kit is a red jersey with blue trim worn with red shorts and red and blue hooped socks . Bolton did not always wear the white kit they do today , in 1884 they wore white with red spots , leading to the club 's original nickname of " The Spots " . This nickname has fallen into disuse since the club adopted its now @-@ traditional colours of white shirts with navy blue shorts . The navy blue shorts were dispensed with in 2003 , in favour of an all @-@ white strip , but they returned in 2008 . The club had previously experimented with an all @-@ white kit in the 1970s . 
 The Bolton Wanderers club badge previously consisted of the initials of the club in the shape of a ball , with red and blue ribbons beneath . The ribbons controversially replaced the Red Rose of Lancashire , coinciding with the club 's 125th anniversary , celebrated in 2002 . The club 's original badge was the town crest of Bolton . The badge has been changed again for the 2013 – 14 season , to be similar to the older style with the ' Red Rose ' . It also shows the year when the club started using their current name . The re @-@ design has been welcomed by fans who saw the ribbons as a poor choice . 
 The club 's nickname of " The Trotters " has several claimed derivations ; that it is simply a variation on " Wanderers " , that it is an old local term for a practical joker , or that one of the grounds used before the club settled at Pikes Lane resided next to a piggery , causing players to have to " trot " through the pig pens to retrieve the ball if it went over the fence . 
 = = Stadiums = = 
 When the club was first founded , Christ Church had a nomadic existence , playing at a number of locations in the area . The club , which had by then been renamed Bolton Wanderers , started playing regularly at Pike 's Lane in 1881 . Spending £ 150 on pitch improvements , season tickets cost a guinea . They played here for fourteen years until the tenancy expired and they moved to Burnden Park . 
 Situated in the Burnden area of Bolton , approximately one mile from the centre of the town , the ground served as the home of the town 's football team for 102 years . In its heyday , Burnden Park could hold up to 70 @,@ 000 supporters but this figure was dramatically reduced during the final 20 years of its life . A section of The Embankment was sold off in 1986 to make way for a new <unk> superstore . At this time , Bolton were in a dire position financially and were struggling in the Football League Third Division , so there was a low demand for tickets and the loss of part of the ground gave the Bolton directors good value for money . 
 By 1992 the club 's directors had decided that it would be difficult to convert Burnden Park into an all @-@ seater stadium for a club of Bolton 's ambition , as the Taylor Report required all first- and second @-@ tier clubs to do . A decision was made to build an out of town stadium in the suburb of Horwich , with the eventual location chosen 5 miles due west of the town centre . The stadium opened in August 1997 , as a modern , all @-@ seater stadium with a capacity of around 29 @,@ 000 . In recognition of the club 's former ground the stadium stands on " Burnden Way " . It has four stands , though the lower tier seating is one continuous bowl . It was originally known as the Reebok Stadium after long @-@ time team sponsor , Reebok . This was initially unpopular with many fans , as it was considered impersonal , and that too much emphasis was being placed on financial considerations . This opposition considerably lessened since the stadium was built . In April 2014 , the stadium was renamed as part of a four @-@ year deal with new sponsors Macron sportswear . 
 In 2014 the club established Bolton Wanderers Free School at the stadium , a sixth form offering sports and related courses for 16 to 19 @-@ year @-@ olds 
 = = Support = = 
 Bolton Wanderers Supporters ' Association ( <unk> ) is the official supporters ' association of Bolton Wanderers Football Club . The Supporters ' Association was formed in 1992 , on the initiative of a fan , Peter Entwistle . Later that year the Directors of the football club , satisfied that the Association had proven itself to be organised and responsible , officially recognised Bolton Wanderers Supporters ' Association as the club 's supporters ' group . 
 In 1997 , shortly after the move from Burnden Park to the Reebok Stadium , the <unk> accepted the invitation from the football club to hold its monthly meetings at the new stadium . The Macron Stadium has continued to be their venue ever since . In the year 2000 , the Association expanded significantly when its invitation to affiliate was accepted by Bolton Wanderers supporters groups in other parts of Britain , and also by groups around the world . All of these foreign groups have come on board to become independent , but integral , parts of the official Bolton Wanderers supporters ' family . Requests for affiliated status continue to be received regularly from other places around the world where Wanderers fans find themselves gather together . 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 Bolton 's main rivals historically have been with near neighbours Bury , though this has lessened since the Second World War as the two clubs have rarely been in the same league . The club also has a rivalry with Blackburn Rovers , as the two sides are separated by just fifteen miles and are both founder members of the Football League . More recently , Bolton have developed an enmity with Wigan Athletic , whose fans generally regard Bolton as their main rivals . Bolton fans maintain a mutual dislike with the fans of Tranmere Rovers , Burnley , and Wolverhampton Wanderers . 
 = = Ownership and finances = = 
 The holding company of Bolton Wanderers F.C. is Burnden Leisure plc , which is a private company limited by shares . Burnden Leisure was previously a public company traded on the AIM stock exchange until its voluntary delisting in May 2003 following Eddie Davies 's takeover . The club itself is 100 % owned by Burnden Leisure , with Sports Shield Consortium leader holding 94 @.@ 5 % of issued shares in Burnden Leisure since the takeover from Eddie Davies in 2016 . The remaining stakes are held by over 6 @,@ 000 small shareholders with less than 0 @.@ 1 % holding each . 
 Since exiting the Premier League , Eddie Davies , the then owner of the club revoked his investment into the club . This led to published debts of almost £ 200m and bought the club very close to being wound up over unpaid tax bills owed to HMRC . As a gesture of his goodwill and as incentive to sell the club , Davies promised to wipe over £ <unk> of debt owed to him when the club was sold , which wiped a significant proportion of debt the club owed . 
 = = = Sponsorship = = = 
 Bolton Wanderers had a long @-@ established partnership with sporting goods firm Reebok , which was formed in the town . Between 1997 and 2009 this partnership encompassed shirt sponsorship , kit manufacture and stadium naming rights . The combined shirt sponsorship ( 1990 – 2009 ) and kit manufacture ( 1993 – 2012 ) deals covering 22 years represent the longest kit partnership in English football history . The stadium 's naming rights were held by Reebok since its opening in 1997 and was due to run until the end of the 2015 – 16 season . Bolton 's kit manufacturer from the 2014 – 15 season changed to Italian sportswear brand Macron who also manufacture kits for clubs including Aston Villa , Lazio and Napoli . The stadium was also re @-@ branded as the Macron Stadium from July 2014 in an agreement that will last for an initial four years . 
 = = Players = = 
 As of 22 July 2016 . 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Reserves and Academy squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Former players = = = 
 For details on former players , see List of Bolton Wanderers F.C. players and Category : Bolton Wanderers F.C. players . 
 In 2005 , a list of " 50 Wanderers Legends " was compiled by the club as the result of a fan survey : " Thousands of supporters ... nominated their favourites with modern day heroes giving the old @-@ timers a run for their money " . 
 Nat Lofthouse finished top of the list , with Jay @-@ Jay Okocha second and John McGinlay third . 
 In 2012 a Wanderers Legends book was released by The Bolton News , featuring 30 legends , including players like Gary Cahill and Kevin Davies 
 = = = Player records = = = 
 = = Club officials = = 
 Bolton Wanderers Football & Athletic Co management 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Football League = = = 
 Second Division / First Division 
 Champions : 1908 – 09 , 1977 – 78 , 1996 – 97 
 Runners @-@ up : 1899 – 1900 , 1904 – 05 , 1910 – 11 , 1934 – 35 
 Play @-@ off Winners : 1995 , 2001 
 Play @-@ off Runners @-@ up : 1999 
 Play @-@ off Semi @-@ finalists : 2000 
 Third Division / Second Division 
 Champions : 1972 – 73 
 Runners @-@ up : 1992 – 93 
 Play @-@ off Runners @-@ up : 1991 
 Play @-@ off Semi @-@ finalists : 1990 
 Fourth Division / Third Division 
 Third : 1987 – 88 
 Overall League Performance 
 Division 1 / Premier League : 1888 – 1899 , 1900 – 1903 , 1905 – 1908 , 1909 – 1910 , 1911 – 1933 , 1935 – 1964 , 1978 – 1980 , 1995 – 1996 , 1997 – 1998 , 2001 – 2012 ( 73 seasons ) 
 Division 2 / Championship : 1899 – 1900 , 1903 – 1905 , 1908 – 1909 , 1910 – 1911 , 1933 – 1935 , 1964 – 1971 , 1973 – 1978 , 1980 – 1983 , 1993 – 1995 , 1996 – 1997 , 1998 – 2001 , 2012 – 2016 ( 30 seasons ) 
 Division 3 / League 1 : 1971 – 1973 , 1983 – 1987 , 1988 – 1993 , 2016 – ( 12 seasons ) 
 Division 4 / League 2 : 1987 – 1988 ( 1 season ) 
 = = = Cup Competitions = = = 
 FA Cup 
 Winners : 1923 , 1926 , 1929 , 1958 
 Runners @-@ up : 1894 , 1904 , 1953 
 Semi @-@ finalists : 1889 , 1896 , 1915 , 1935 , 1946 , 2000 , 2011 
 Football League Cup 
 Runners @-@ up : 1995 , 2004 
 Semi @-@ finalists : 1977 , 2000 
 FA Charity Shield 
 Winners : 1958 
 Football League Trophy 
 Champions : 1989 
 Runners @-@ up : 1986 
 Reserves and Others 
 Football League War Cup Winners ( 1 ) – 1945 
 Premier League Asia Trophy Winners ( 1 ) – 2005 
 Peace Cup Runners up ( 1 ) – 2007 
 Carlsberg Cup Winners ( 1 ) – 2010 
 Lancashire Senior Cup Winners ( 12 ) – 1886 , 1891 , 1912 , 1922 , 1925 , 1927 , 1932 , 1934 , 1939 ( shared with Preston North End ) , 1948 , 1989 , 1991 
 Central League Champions – 1955 , 1995 
 Premier Reserve League North Champions – 2007 
 Manchester Senior Cup 1922 , 1963 , 2015 
 = Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle = 
 Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky 's relations with the group of composers known as the Belyayev circle , which lasted from 1887 until Tchaikovsky 's death in 1893 , influenced all of their music and briefly helped shape the next generation of Russian composers . This group was named after timber merchant Mitrofan Belyayev , an amateur musician who became an influential music patron and publisher after he had taken an interest in Alexander Glazunov 's work . By 1887 , Tchaikovsky was firmly established as one of the leading composers in Russia . A favorite of Tsar Alexander III , he was widely regarded as a national treasure . He was in demand as a guest conductor in Russia and Western Europe , and in 1890 visited the United States in the same capacity . By contrast , the fortunes of the nationalistic group of composers known as The Five , which preceded the Belyayev circle , had waned , and the group had long since dispersed ; of its members , only Nikolai Rimsky @-@ Korsakov remained fully active as a composer . Now a professor of musical composition and orchestration at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov had become a firm believer in the Western @-@ based compositional training that had been once frowned upon by the group . 
 As a result of the time Tchaikovsky spent with the Belyayev circle 's leading composers — Glazunov , Anatoly Lyadov and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov — the somewhat fraught relationship he had previously endured with The Five would eventually meld into something more harmonious . Tchaikovsky 's friendship with these men gave him increased confidence in his own abilities as a composer , while his music encouraged Glazunov to broaden his artistic outlook past the nationalist agenda and to compose along more universal themes . This influence grew to the point that Glazunov 's Third Symphony became known as the " anti @-@ <unk> " symphony of his <unk> ( " <unk> " refers to " kuchka " , the shortened Russian name for The Five ) and shared several stylistic fingerprints with Tchaikovsky 's later symphonies . Nor was Glazunov the only composer so influenced . Rimsky @-@ Korsakov wrote about the Belyayev composers ' " worship of Tchaikovsky and ... tendency toward eclecticism " that became prevalent during this period , along with a predilection toward " Italian @-@ French music of the time of wig and farthingale " ( that is , of the 18th Century ) typified in Tchaikovsky 's late operas The Queen of Spades and Iolanta . 
 Over the long term , Tchaikovsky 's influence over the Belyayev composers was not as great . Though they remained more eclectic in their musical approach and focused more on absolute music than The Five had done , they continued writing overall in a style more akin to Rimsky @-@ Korsakov than to Tchaikovsky . Even Glazunov backed away from echoing Tchaikovsky strongly in his mature work , instead amalgamating nationalistic and cosmopolitan styles in an eclectic approach . The Belyayev composers also spread the nationalist musical aesthetic to Russia as a whole and were themselves an influence on composers well into the Soviet era . 
 = = Tchaikovsky and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov = = 
 During 1884 , the 44 @-@ year @-@ old Tchaikovsky began to shed the unsociability and restlessness that had plagued him since his abortive marriage in 1878 , and which had caused him to travel incessantly throughout Russia and Western Europe . In March 1884 , Tsar Alexander III conferred upon him the Order of St. Vladimir ( fourth class ) , which carried with it hereditary nobility , and won Tchaikovsky a personal audience with the Tsar . The Tsar 's decoration was a visible seal of official approval , which helped Tchaikovsky 's rehabilitation from the stigma associated with the conditions of his marriage . This rehabilitation may have been cemented in the composer 's mind with the success of his Third Orchestral Suite at its January 1885 premiere in St. Petersburg , under Hans von Bülow 's direction . Tchaikovsky wrote to his patroness Nadezhda von Meck : " I have never seen such a triumph . I saw the whole audience was moved , and grateful to me . These moments are the finest adornments of an artist 's life . Thanks to these it is worth living and laboring . " The press was likewise unanimously favorable . 
 While he still felt a disdain for public life , Tchaikovsky now participated in it for two reasons — his increasing celebrity , and what he felt was his duty to promote Russian music . To this end , he helped support his former pupil Sergei Taneyev , now director of the Moscow Conservatory , by attending student examinations and negotiating the sometimes sensitive relations among various members of the staff . Tchaikovsky also served as director of the Moscow branch of the Russian Musical Society during the 1889 – 90 season . In this post , he invited a number of international celebrities to conduct , including Johannes Brahms , Antonín Dvořák and Jules Massenet . Tchaikovsky promoted Russian music both in his own compositions and in his role as a guest conductor . In January 1887 he substituted at the Bolshoi Theater in Moscow on short notice for the first three performances of his opera Cherevichki . Conducting was something the composer had wanted to master for at least a decade , as he saw that success outside Russia depended to some extent on conducting his own works . Within a year of the Cherevichki performances , Tchaikovsky was in considerable demand throughout Europe and Russia , which helped him overcome a life @-@ long stage fright and boosted his self @-@ assurance . 
 Tchaikovsky 's relationship with Rimsky @-@ Korsakov had gone through changes by the time he visited St. Petersburg in November 1887 . As a member of The Five , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov had been essentially self @-@ educated as a composer . He regarded Tchaikovsky with suspicion since he possessed an academic background and did not agree with the musical philosophy espoused by The Five . However , when Rimsky @-@ Korsakov was appointed to a professorship at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory in 1871 , he recognized that he was ill @-@ prepared to take on such a task . He had also reached a compositional impasse , and realized he was essentially on a creative path leading nowhere . He sent a letter to Tchaikovsky in which he outlined his situation and asked what he ought to do . The letter " deeply touched and amazed " Tchaikovsky with its poignancy . As Tchaikovsky later relayed to Nadezhda von Meck , " Of course he had to study " . 
 Between 1871 and 1874 , while he lectured at the Conservatory , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov thoroughly grounded himself in Western compositional techniques , and came to believe in the value of academic training for success as a composer . Once Rimsky @-@ Korsakov had made this turn @-@ around , Tchaikovsky considered him an esteemed colleague , and , if not the best of friends , was at least on friendly terms with him . When the other members of The Five became hostile toward Rimsky @-@ Korsakov for his change of attitude , Tchaikovsky continued to support Rimsky @-@ Korsakov morally , telling him that he fully applauded what Rimsky @-@ Korsakov was doing , and admired both his artistic modesty and his strength of character . Beginning in 1876 , Tchaikovsky was a regular visitor to the Rimsky @-@ Korsakov home during his trips to Saint Petersburg . At one point , Tchaikovsky offered to have Rimsky @-@ Korsakov appointed to the directorship of the Moscow Conservatory , but he refused . 
 Tchaikovsky 's admiration extended to Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's compositions . He wrote Rimsky @-@ Korsakov that he considered Capriccio Espagnol " a colossal masterpiece of instrumentation " and called him " the greatest master of the present day " . In his diary , Tchaikovsky confided , " Read [ Rimsky- ] Korsakov 's Snow Maiden and marveled at his mastery and was even ( ashamed to admit ) envious " . 
 = = Glazunov = = 
 Tchaikovsky was impressed with not only Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's achievements but also those of the teenage Glazunov . A child prodigy , Glazunov had begun piano studies at the age of nine and to compose at the age of 11 . At the age of 13 , in 1879 , he met Balakirev , who recommended Rimsky @-@ Korsakov as a private tutor in musical composition , counterpoint and orchestration , and brought Rimsky @-@ Korsakov an orchestral score Glazunov had written . " The boy 's talent was indubitably clear " , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov remembered . Glazunov studied with Rimsky @-@ Korsakov for a little less than two years , during which time he progressed , in Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's words , " not by the day , but literally by the hour " . He also continued to receive advice from Balakirev . At 16 , he completed his First Symphony , which was successfully premiered under Balakirev 's direction on March 29 , 1882 . Present at this performance was Mitrofan Belyayev , a lumber baron and amateur musician who would take the young composer under his wing , and composer Sergei Taneyev , who was a close friend of Tchaikovsky . Glazunov would eventually become a professor at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory , and later its director . 
 Tchaikovsky began showing a keen interest in Glazunov shortly after hearing about the premiere of Glazunov 's First Symphony from Taneyev . At that time , Tchaikovsky wrote Balakirev , " Glazunov interests me greatly . Is there any chance that this young man could send me the symphony so that I might take a look at it ? I should also like to know whether he completed it , either conceptually or practically , with your or Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's help . " Balakirev replied , " You ask about Glazunov . He is a very talented young man who studied for a year under Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . When he composed his symphony , he did not need any help . " Tchaikovsky studied the score for Glazunov 's First String Quartet , and wrote his brother Modest , " Despite its imitation of [ Rimsky- ] Korsakov ... a remarkable talent is discernible . " Glazunov later sent Tchaikovsky a copy of his Poème lyrique for orchestra , about which Tchaikovsky had written enthusiastically to Balakirev , and had recommended for publication to his publisher P. Jurgenson . 
 According to critic Vladimir Stasov , Glazunov and Tchaikovsky first met in October 1884 at a gathering hosted by Balakirev . Glazunov was then 19 years old . Tchaikovsky was in Saint Petersburg because his opera Eugene Onegin was being performed at the Mariinsky Theater . Glazunov later wrote that while the nationalists ' circle " was no longer so ideologically closed and isolated as it had been earlier " , they " did not consider P.I. Tchaikovsky one of our own . We valued only a few of his works , like Romeo and Juliet , The Tempest , Francesca [ da Rimini ] and the finale of the Second Symphony . The rest of his output was either unknown or alien to us " . Tchaikovsky 's presence won over Glazunov and the other young members present , and his conversation with them " was a fresh breeze amid our somewhat dusty atmosphere ... Many of the young musicians present , including Lyadov and myself , left Balakirev 's apartment charmed by Tchaikovsky 's personality . ... As Lyadov put it , our acquaintance with the great composer was a real occasion . " 
 Glazunov adds that his relationship with Tchaikovsky changed from the elder composer being " not ... one of our own " to a close friendship that would last until Tchaikovsky 's death . " I met Tchaikovsky quite often both at Balakirev 's and at my own home " , Glazunov remembered . " We usually met over music . He always appeared in our social circle as one of the most welcome guests ; besides myself and Lyadov , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov and Balakirev were also constant members of our circle . " This circle , with which Tchaikovsky would spend an increasing amount of time in the last couple of years of his life , would come to be known as the Belyayev circle , named after its patron , Belyayev . According to musicologist Richard Taruskin , Belyayev , through his financial influence , would shape Russian music more greatly and lastingly than either Balakirev or Stasov were able to do . 
 = = Belyayev and his circle = = 
 Belyayev was one of a growing number of Russian nouveau @-@ riche industrialists who became patrons of the arts in mid- to late @-@ 19th @-@ century Russia ; their number included Nadezhda von Meck , railway magnate Savva Mamontov and textile manufacturer Pavel Tretyakov . While Nadezhda von Meck insisted on anonymity in her patronage in the tradition of noblesse oblige , Belyayev , Mamontov and Tretyakov " wanted to contribute conspicuously to public life " . They had worked their way up into wealth , and being <unk> in their national outlook believed in the greater glory of Russia . Because of this belief , they were more likely than the aristocracy to support native talent , and were more inclined to support nationalist artists over cosmopolitan ones . This preference was not due to any social agenda inherent in the art , but due to " its sympathetic and skillful portrayal of peculiar aspects of landscape , of daily life , and of character types with which they were familiar and which they lived " , and it paralleled a general upsurge in nationalism and Russophilia that became prevalent in mainstream Russian art and society . 
 An amateur viola player and chamber music enthusiast , Belyayev hosted " quartet Fridays " at his home in Saint Petersburg . A frequent visitor to these gatherings was Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , who had met Belyayev in Moscow in 1882 . Belyayev became a music patron after he had heard the Glazunov 's First Symphony . Not only did Glazunov become a fixture at the " quartet Fridays " , but Belyayev also published Glazunov 's work and took him on a tour of Western Europe . This tour included a visit to Weimar , Germany , to present the young composer to Franz Liszt , and where Glazunov 's First Symphony was performed . 
 Soon Belyayev became interested in other Russian composers . In 1884 he set up an annual Glinka Prize , named after pioneer Russian composer Mikhail Glinka ( 1804 – 1857 ) . In 1885 , disgusted with the quality of music publishing in Russia and the lack of foreign copyright for works printed there , he founded his own publishing firm in Leipzig , Germany . This firm initially issued works by Glazunov , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , Lyadov and Borodin at its own expense , and would boast a catalog of over 2000 works , all written by Russian composers , by the time of the October Revolution in 1917 . At Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's suggestion , Belyayev also founded his own concert series , the Russian Symphony Concerts , open exclusively to Russian composers . Among the works written especially for this series were the three by Rimsky @-@ Korsakov for which he is currently best known in the West — Scheherazade , the Russian Easter Festival Overture and Capriccio Espagnol . These concerts would last until the October Revolution , and by 1910 would host premieres of 165 works . Belyayev set up an advisory council , made up of Glazunov , Lyadov and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , to select which among the many composers appealing for help should be assisted , either through money , publication or performances . This council would look through the compositions and appeals submitted and suggest which were deserving of patronage and public attention . Though the three worked together , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov became the de facto leader of the group . " By force of matters purely musical I turned out to be the head of the Belyayev circle " , he wrote . " As the head Belyayev , too , considered me , consulting me about everything and referring everyone to me as chief . " 
 The group of composers who now congregated with Glazunov , Lyadov and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov were nationalistic in their outlook , as the Five before them had been . Like The Five , they believed in a uniquely Russian style of classical music that utilized folk music and exotic melodic , harmonic and rhythmic elements , as exemplified by the music of Balakirev , Borodin and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . Unlike The Five , these composers also believed in the necessity of an academic , Western @-@ based background in composition . The necessity of Western compositional techniques was something that Rimsky @-@ Korsakov had instilled in many of them in his years at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory . Compared to the " revolutionary " composers in Balakirev 's circle , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov found those in the Belyayev circle to be " progressive ... attaching as it did great importance to technical perfection , but ... also broke new paths , though more securely , even if less speedily . ... " 
 = = Visits in 1887 = = 
 In November 1887 , Tchaikovsky arrived in Saint Petersburg in time to hear several of the Russian Symphony Concerts . One of these concerts included the first complete performance of his First Symphony , subtitled Winter Daydreams , in its final version . Another concert featured the premiere of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's Third Symphony in its revised version . Before this trip , Tchaikovsky had spent considerable time corresponding with Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , Glazunov and Lyadov , and during his visit , he spent much time in the company of these men . 
 Nine years earlier , Tchaikovsky had penned a ruthless dissection of The Five for Nadezhda von Meck . At that time , his feelings of personal isolation and professional insecurity had been at their strongest . In the nine intervening years , Mussorgsky and Borodin had both died , Balakirev had banished himself to the musical sidelines , and Cui 's critical missives had lost much of their sting for Tchaikovsky . Rimsky @-@ Korsakov was the only one left who was fully active as a composer , and much had changed in the intervening years between him and Tchaikovsky as a result of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's change in musical values . Tchaikovsky had also changed . More secure as a composer and less isolated personally than he had been in the past , Tchaikovsky enjoyed the company he now kept with Glazunov , Lyadov and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , and found much to enjoy in their music . 
 Tchaikovsky admired several of the pieces he heard during these concerts , including Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's symphony and Glazunov 's Second Overture on Greek Themes . He promised both Glazunov and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov that he would secure performances of their works in concerts in Moscow . When these arrangements did not arise as planned , Tchaikovsky made urgent covert attempts to make good on his promises , especially to Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , whom he now called " an outstanding figure ... worthy of every respect " . 
 In December 1887 , on the eve of his departure to tour as a guest conductor through Western Europe , Tchaikovsky stopped in Saint Petersburg and consulted with Glazunov , Lyadov and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov on a detailed program of Russian music that he might lead in Paris . Though this opportunity did not arise , it shows his openness to promoting works by the Belyayev circle as his duty to promote Russian music . 
 = = Lyadov = = 
 Though they had previously corresponded , Tchaikovsky made the personal acquaintance of another Rimsky @-@ Korsakov pupil , Lyadov , during his November 1887 visit . Lyadov had the dubious distinction of being expelled from the Saint Petersburg Conservatory for cutting classes — a move on the part of the Conservatory that Rimsky @-@ Korsakov had upheld . Lyadov was eventually readmitted , and became friends with Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . He also assisted Rimsky @-@ Korsakov and Balakirev in editing the orchestral scores of Borodin , and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov and Alexander Borodin on scoring the " Polovtsian Dances " from Borodin 's opera Prince Igor in 1878 . Like Rimsky @-@ Korsakov and Glazunov , Lyadov would become a professor at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory and a leading member of the Belyayev circle . Lyadov never totally shed his penchant for indolence and procrastination , and this would cost him the commission for the ballet The Firebird from impresario Sergei Diaghilev ; the commission would go to the young Igor Stravinsky . 
 Rimsky @-@ Korsakov noted Lyadov 's talent , as did Mussorgsky , who described Lyadov to Stasov in 1873 as " a new , unmistakable , original and Russian young talent " . Tchaikovsky , however , had been unimpressed . In 1882 , the publisher <unk> asked Tchaikovsky 's opinion about an Arabesque for solo piano that Lyadov had written . Tchaikovsky replied , " It is impossible to envisage any thing more vapid in content than this composer 's music . He has many interesting chords and harmonic sequences , but not a single idea , even of the tiniest sort . " 
 Before meeting Lyadov personally , Tchaikovsky may have been softening this stance . He decided to present the young composer a copy of the score of his Manfred Symphony , and once he had actually met the person whom Tchaikovsky authority David Brown called " indolent , fastidious , very private yet very engaging " , his attitude toward Lyadov took a sharp turn for the better . The younger composer became known as " dear Lyadov " . 
 = = New confidence and advocacy = = 
 Two concerts Tchaikovsky heard in Saint Petersburg in January 1889 , where his music shared the programs with compositions by the New Russian School ( as the Belyayev circle was also called ) , proved a major watershed . Tchaikovsky recognized that while he had maintained good personal relations with some members of the Balakirev circle , and perhaps some respect , he had never been recognized as one of them . Now with his joint participation in these concerts , he realized he was no longer excluded . He wrote to Nadezhda von Meck that while he found Cui to be " an individual deeply hateful to me ... this in no way hinders me from respecting or loving such representatives of the school as Balakirev , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , Lyadov , Glazunov , or from considering myself flattered to appear on the concert platform beside them " . This confession showed a wholehearted willingness for Tchaikovsky to have his music heard alongside that of the nationalists . 
 In giving this opinion , Tchaikovsky showed an implicit confidence in his own music , and the realization that it compared favorably to any number of their compositions . He had nothing to fear from whatever comparisons might result . Nor did he confine his views to private consumption . Tchaikovsky openly supported the musical efforts of Glazunov , Lyadov and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , despite a widely held view that they were musical enemies . In an interview printed in the weekly newspaper Saint Petersburg Life ( <unk> <unk> ' ) in November 1892 , he said , 
 According to the view that is widespread among the Russian music public , I am associated with the party that is antagonistic to the one living Russian composer I love and value above all others — Nikolai Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . ... In a word , despite our different musical identities , it would seem we are following a single path ; and I , for my part , am proud to have such a fellow traveler . ... Lyadov and Glazunov are also numbered among my opponents , yet I sincerely love and value their talent . 
 With this new @-@ found confidence came increased contact between Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle . Rimsky @-@ Korsakov wrote , " In the winter of spring of 1891 [ actually 1890 ] Tchaikovsky came to Saint Petersburg on quite a long visit , and from then dated his closer intimacy with Belyayev 's circle , particularly with Glazunov , Lyadov , and me . In the years following , Tchaikovsky 's visits became quite frequent . " 
 = = Increased acceptance by the Belyayev circle = = 
 Glazunov and Lyadov were friendly with Tchaikovsky and were charmed by him . Glazunov studied Tchaikovsky 's works and " found much that was new ... that was instructive for us as young musicians . It struck me that Tchaikovsky , who was above all a lyrical and melodic composer , had introduced operatic elements into his symphonies . I admired the thematic material of his works less than the inspired unfolding of his thoughts , his temperament and the <unk> perfection . " 
 Taruskin writes , " A sense of what Tchaikovsky meant to Glazunov may be gained by comparing the latter 's Second Symphony , on which he was working at the time of Tchaikovsky 's visit ... and the Third , which he completed after a long gestation in 1890 — and which he dedicated to Tchaikovsky . " Taruskin calls the Second Symphony " a veritable summa of latterday <unk> " , with a number of stylistic fingerprints taken from Balakirev , Borodin and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . With the Third Symphony , Glazunov attempted to reach beyond the nationalist style to reflect what he felt were universal forms , moods and themes . Tchaikovsky 's influence is clear in the work 's lyrical episodes , in its themes and key relations , reminiscent of Tchaikovsky 's Fourth and Fifth Symphonies , and in its orchestration , full of " dark doublings " and subtle instrumental effects hearkening to Tchaikovsky 's style . 
 Glazunov was not the only composer among the Belyayev circle influenced by Tchaikovsky 's music . Rimsky @-@ Korsakov wrote in his memoirs that " a worship of Tchaikovsky and a tendency toward eclecticism " grew stronger among many of the Belyayev composers at this time , along with " a predilection ... for Italian @-@ French music of the time of wig and farthingale [ that is , of the 18th century ] , music introduced by Tchaikovsky in his [ late operas ] The Queen of Spades and Iolanta . " Even Rimsky @-@ Korsakov was not immune . Taruskin writes that the seventh scene of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's opera Christmas Eve , written in 1895 , is " replete with ' wig and farthingale ' music " , based on the second act of The Queen of Spades . 
 While he remained genial in public , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov personally found the situation with Tchaikovsky more conflicting . He was uncomfortable that Tchaikovsky was becoming more popular among Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's followers , and had developed a jealous resentment of Tchaikovsky 's greater fame . He confessed his fears to his friend , the Moscow critic Semyon Kruglikov , writing that if Tchaikovsky followed through with a contemplated move to Saint Petersburg , a group of followers " will immediately form around him , which Lyadov and Glazunov will certainly join , and after them many others ... [ O ] ur youth will drown ( and not only our youth — look at Lyadov ) in a sea of eclecticism that will rob them of their individuality . " About this eclecticism , and Tchaikovsky 's part in it , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov wrote in his memoirs , seemingly matter @-@ of @-@ factly , " By this time quite an accretion of new elements and young blood had accumulated in Belyayev 's circle . New times , new birds , new songs . " Yet to Kruglikov he confessed in 1890 , " New times , new birds , new birds [ sic ] , new songs — except our birds are not so new , and the new songs they sing are worse than the old ones . " 
 Even with these private reservations , when Tchaikovsky attended Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's <unk> party in May 1893 , along with Belyayev , Glazunov and Lyadov , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov asked Tchaikovsky personally if he would conduct four concerts of the Russian Musical Society in Saint Petersburg the following season . After some hesitation , Tchaikovsky agreed . As a condition for Tchaikovsky 's engagement , the Russian Musical Society required a list of works that he planned to conduct . Among the items on the list Tchaikovsky supplied were Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's Third Symphony and Glazunov 's orchestral fantasy The Forest . 
 At the first of these appearances , on October 28 , 1893 , Tchaikovsky conducted the premiere of his Sixth Symphony , along with his First Piano Concerto with Adele aus der Ohe as soloist . Tchaikovsky did not live to conduct the other three concerts , as he died on November 6 , 1893 . Rimsky @-@ Korsakov stood in for him at the second of these events , an all @-@ Tchaikovsky concert in memory of the composer , on December 12 , 1893 . The program included the Fourth Symphony , Francesca da Rimini , Marche Slave and some solo piano works played by Felix Blumenfeld . 
