 = = Legacy = = 
 While the Belyayev circle remained a nationalistic school of composition , its exposure to Tchaikovsky and his music made it more readily amenable to Western practices of composition , producing works that were a synthesis of nationalist tradition and Western technique . Overall , however , the degree of influence Tchaikovsky 's music had on the Belyayev composers was short @-@ lived . They generally continued stylistically from where The Five stopped , falling back on clichés and mannerisms taken from the works of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov and Balakirev . Even in the case of Glazunov , who was deeply influenced by Tchaikovsky 's music when he wrote his Third Symphony , the shadow of Tchaikovsky would become less prevalent with his subsequent symphonies , and he would reconcile it , along with the earlier influences of Balakirev , Borodin and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , into an eclectic mature style . This eclecticism , according to musicologist Boris Schwarz , would effectively rob Glazunov 's music of " the ultimate stamp of originality " , and its academicism would tend to overpower Glazunov 's inspiration . These traits would hold true for works by other Belyayev composers , as well , with the " gradual <unk> of the Russian school " leading to " the emergence of production @-@ line ' Russian style ' pieces , polished and correct , but lacking originality " . 
 Tchaikovsky 's music remained popular in Russia as well as abroad , and his scholarly prowess was admired by the Belyayev circle ; however , these composers chose not to emulate his style . Composers who wished to be part of this group and desired Belyayev 's patronage had to write in a musical style approved by Glazunov , Lyadov and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . That approved style , Maes writes , included harmonies from the coronation scene in Mussorgsky 's opera Boris Godunov , the colorful harmonization and <unk> of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's operas Mlada and Sadko , and Balakirev 's folk @-@ song stylizations . These elements " served as a store of recipes for writing Russian national music . In the portrayal of the national character ... these techniques prevailed over the subjects portrayed . " Taruskin writes that echoing this style of writing became the prime order of business , with absolute music such as symphonies and chamber works preferred over the program music favored by The Five , and quasi @-@ oriental themes such as those used in Balakirev 's <unk> and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's Scheherazade scoffed at . The trend toward writing in the preferred style would continue at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory after Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's retirement in 1906 , with his son @-@ in @-@ law Maximilian Steinberg in charge of composition classes at the Conservatory through the 1920s . Dmitri Shostakovich would complain about Steinberg 's musical conservatism , typified by such phrases as " the inviolable foundations of the kuchka " , and the " sacred traditions of Nikolai Andreyevich [ Rimsky @-@ Korsakov ] " . ( <unk> , short for Moguchaya kuchka or " Mighty Handful " , was another name for The Five . ) Eventually , the Belyayev aesthetic spread as more of its composers took up academic posts in music conservatories throughout Russia . Mikhail <unk> @-@ Ivanov became director of the Moscow Conservatory , where Tchaikovsky had once exerted great influence , and Reinhold Glière likewise in Kiev , ensuring that these institutes " retained a direct link with the Belyayev aesthetic " . 
 The triumph of the Belyayev circle could be seen as the worst of both worlds from The Five and Tchaikovsky for two reasons . First , from Tchaikovsky and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , the <unk> realized the importance of a solid academic grounding , but they took the importance of their conservatory training to extremes , and devolved into academicism and <unk> . They failed to take into account that Tchaikovsky transcended what authority David Brown calls " the heavy conditioning of his conservatory training " through his " innate Russianness and his love of his own country 's folk music " , and that Rimsky @-@ Korsakov similarly transcended a period of extremely pedantic music writing to arrive at a more balanced style . Second , the <unk> got the idea from The Five of a school to which all members would adhere , but they took adherence to their school to the point of mediocrity , with " a safe conformism " becoming " increasingly the rule " . This was the point that composer César Cui , a former member of The Five , made in his article " Fathers and Sons " in 1888 , when he wrote , " Despite the frequent contact of all the fathers with one another , each of them preserved intact his individuality . It is enough to glance at a single page of music by one of the fathers to say with certainty that it is the work of Borodin , Balakirev , Mussorgsky , Tchaikovsky , or [ Rimsky- ] Korsakov . The music of the sons is the music of clones . " Taruskin adds , 
 The institutionalization and professionalization of musical life against which Stasov had fought tooth and nail in the 1860s was now a fait accompli , and composers of the New Russian School occupied all seats of authority . They " extended despotic power over the style and form " of their students ' work , attempting to " force it into a certain academic mold . " They presided over " a fruitless distribution of awards and prizes " and oversaw the " proliferation of volumes of worthless compositions . " 
 = Beyond the First Amendment = 
 Beyond the First Amendment : The Politics of Free Speech and Pluralism is a book about freedom of speech and the First Amendment to the United States Constitution , written by author Samuel Peter Nelson . It was published by Johns Hopkins University Press in 2005 . In it , Nelson discusses how the more general notion of free speech differs from that specifically applied to the First Amendment in American law . 
 The book was positively received in reviews from academic and legal journals . Choice : Current Reviews for Academic Libraries recommended the book due to its thought @-@ provoking propositions , and a review in The Journal of Politics described it as " a nice effort to explore free speech issues not covered by the First Amendment or constitutional law " . A review in the journal Political Communication concluded of the author 's argumentation : " His is indeed a theory fraught with possibilities both favorable and unfavorable to an expanded scope for the contents of free speech " . Law and Politics Book Review concluded " Beyond the First Amendment is an intriguing and important contribution to the literature on free speech " . 
 = = Author = = 
 Samuel Peter Nelson graduated from Northwestern University with a Bachelor of Arts degree . He subsequently obtained a PhD from the University of Wisconsin @-@ Madison . Nelson is an associate professor in the department of political science and public administration at the University of Toledo , having joined the department in 2001 . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Nelson 's work discusses the differences between concepts in the United States involving the First Amendment to the United States Constitution , and the larger notion of freedom of speech . The author discusses complex problems involving cyberspace communications and discourse which takes place on the Internet , and puts forth the supposition that such speech is not as easily addressed by the United States Constitution . Nelson points out that legal matters dealing with free speech in society often occur outside the United States or through regulation of online parties by sovereign state entities , and thus do not always directly fall within the jurisdiction of the United States government and American law . Nelson introduces the concept of a " pluralist framework " to address the various factors which drive free speech . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Beyond the First Amendment is cited as a reference in the Encyclopedia of American Civil Liberties edited by Paul Finkelman , and Self @-@ Examination : The Present and Future of Librarianship by John M. Budd . The book received a positive reception from a review in Choice : Current Reviews for Academic Libraries by M. W. Bowers of the University of Nevada , Las Vegas , who wrote : " The work is recommended reading for its provocative argument " . 
 In a review of the book in The Journal of Politics , Mark A. Graber of the University of Maryland pointed out how the book 's author highlights areas of free speech which fall outside the jurisdiction of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution , and commented : 
 " This effort to highlight important free speech issues in areas that are not governed by the First Amendment offers a particularly promising avenue for political scientists interested in American constitutionalism . Doctrinal scholarship is dominated by law professors who have special training in making legal arguments . By comparison , the constitutional issues that arise outside of constitutional law discussed in Beyond the First Amendment require the sort of special training in political theory and public policy that marks education in the social sciences . " 
 Graber concluded , " Beyond the First Amendment highlights how most crucial questions in institutional settings concern the value that ought to be placed on certain expressions rather than the legal right to engage in that expression " . 
 Peter G. Fish of Duke University reviewed Beyond the First Amendment for Political Communication , and wrote that Nelson 's arguments within the book " provide able and well @-@ crafted analyses of identifiable problems in communications " . Fish analyzed the nature of Nelson 's argumentation , and commented " Nelson is seemingly offering a cost ( injury to society ) <unk> analysis for specific exercises of all kinds of speech in the context of all sorts of social values and relationships irrespective of whether such relationships are found in the public or private sphere " . Fish discussed Nelson 's concepts within the framework of changing viewpoints on free speech through varying mediums of communication including online fora and speech in other venues : " How to weigh these elements also figures in Nelson 's consideration of the Internet with its capacity for international communications — how to weigh the intent of an Internet speaker against an unintended hostile foreign audience shielded by its own local laws or even remote , but culturally distinctive , domestic audiences for that matter " . He posits that Nelson 's plurality theory contains elements which would impact free speech in the future : " What Nelson terms ' incommensurable values ' embedded in remote legal cultures not perceived by the speaker requires close attention to context , speaker 's intention or lack thereof , and ' uptake ' on the part of distant audiences . His is indeed a theory fraught with possibilities both favorable and unfavorable to an expanded scope for the contents of free speech " . 
 Professor Steven B. Lichtman of the department of political science at the University of Vermont reviewed the book for the Law and Politics Book Review , and identified Nelson 's pluralist theory as a significant contribution . Lichtman commented , " The most important contribution of Beyond the First Amendment is its attempt to offer up a new model for understanding and safeguarding free speech " . He praised the author for supporting his model with case history : " As a purely philosophical matter , Nelson ’ s pluralist framework is certainly intriguing . The model must be more than a mere talking point , though , and Nelson wisely endeavors to show how the pluralist framework can be deployed as a means of resolving actual cases " . Lichtman concluded by recommending the work for academic scholars : " Beyond the First Amendment is an intriguing and important contribution to the literature on free speech . While it is likely beyond the grasp of all but the most talented undergraduates , its overview of First Amendment theory is an excellent resource for graduate students beginning to explore the field . For scholars , it is a challenging and provocative work sure to cause us to reassess how we teach and write about the subject " . 
 = Michael Symes = 
 Michael Symes ( born 31 October 1983 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker . 
 He started his career as a trainee with Everton , playing in attack with future England international Wayne Rooney . He moved to Bradford City after he failed to break into the Everton side but after two injury @-@ ravaged seasons with Bradford he moved to Shrewsbury Town , following a short loan spell . He spent three seasons with Shrewsbury , then joined Accrington Stanley in July 2009 after a loan period the previous season . 
 His most successful campaign in terms of goals was with Accrington , which resulted in a summer move to newly promoted Bournemouth in 2010 . After two years there , he moved on to Leyton Orient , then Burton Albion , initially on a temporary deal , before being released in 2014 . He played two matches for Southport in 2015 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Everton = = = 
 Symes was born in Great Yarmouth , in East Anglia , but moved to Liverpool as a young child , he attended St johns junior school before moving on to Holy rosary / <unk> High School . Symes started his career as a trainee at his boyhood heroes , Everton , with whom he reached the final of the 2002 FA Youth Cup , playing up @-@ front with Wayne Rooney . Symes scored 31 goals from 51 games at youth level for Everton , including 5 goals in 9 games for the reserves , however injuries over the next season and a half restricted his progress to the Everton first team , In March 2004 , he joined Crewe Alexandra on loan for the rest of the 2003 – 04 season making his debut as a substitute against Nottingham Forest on 27 March . He played four games during his loan spell , starting once against Coventry City when he scored his first senior goal in a 3 – 1 win . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 Crewe manager Dario Gradi decided not to offer a contract to Symes , who instead spent a period on trial at Bradford City , which included an 8 – 1 pre @-@ season friendly win over Farsley Celtic . He signed for the League One side in July 2004 with fellow former Everton trainee Steven Schumacher , with whom he lived during his spell at Bradford . Symes made his Bradford debut in a 2 – 1 defeat at Hartlepool United on the opening day of the 2004 – 05 season . Three days later he missed a late penalty which would have secured Bradford victory over Peterborough United in a game in which Symes was also booked . Symes was dropped from the first team after Bradford signed Dele <unk> . When Bradford were allowed special dispensation to sign Neil Roberts , Bradford tried to give Symes a loan transfer to Darlington but the deal was blocked by the Football League . The following month , Symes scored his first goals for Bradford when he came off the bench at half @-@ time to score twice in a 3 – 1 victory over Sheffield Wednesday on 23 October 2004 . They were the only goals he scored that season from just 15 games . 
 Before the following season started , Symes was loaned out to Macclesfield Town for six months , but in July he suffered an ankle injury keeping him out until September . He never played for Macclesfield meaning his action in 2005 was limited to just 35 minutes on New Year 's Day . Instead he joined Stockport County in another loan deal in January 2006 , where he made his one and only appearance in a 1 – 1 draw with Torquay United on 31 January 2006 . He returned to Bradford and played another three games , scoring in a 1 – 1 draw with Brentford on 8 April 2006 . However his season again ended early when he pulled his hamstring during the draw with Brentford . Symes later admitted " it never happened " for him at City and that his confidence was shattered by manager Colin Todd . 
 = = = Shrewsbury Town = = = 
 At the start of the 2006 – 07 season , Symes was kept on at Bradford but started the season on loan at Shrewsbury Town . He made his Town debut as a late substitute in the opening game of the season in a 2 – 2 draw with Mansfield Town . He scored in his second appearance , when he again came on as substitute , as Shrewsbury defeated Boston United 5 – 0 . He started his first game in the League Cup against Birmingham City as Shrewsbury lost 1 – 0 . His move from Bradford was made permanent by the end of the August transfer window . He had started just six games in two seasons with Bradford . He scored the second brace of his career to give Shrewsbury a 2 – 1 victory over Hereford United in the Football League Trophy first round , a competition in which Shrewsbury eventually reached the southern section semi @-@ final stage . In January 2007 , his contract was extended further , lasting until summer 2009 . He scored 13 goals in his first season at Shrewsbury , but was also given the first red card of his career in a game against Mansfield Town , as they missed out on promotion when they lost 3 – 1 to Bristol Rovers in the play @-@ off final at Wembley Stadium . 
 Symes was not a regular in the Shrewsbury side at the start of the 2007 – 08 season , making 12 starts and nine substitute appearances as he scored just three goals . In January 2008 , he rejoined Macclesfield Town with defender Neil Ashton on loan until the end of the season . Despite his exit , Shrewsbury manager Gary Peters said the pair could both return to Shrewsbury at the end of the season . He played his first Macclesfield game in a 1 – 0 defeat to Peterborough on 12 January , and scored his first goal as Macclesfield drew 1 – 1 with Milton Keynes Dons on 29 January . It was his only goal in his first eight games and he was dropped for Macclesfield 's 3 – 0 defeat against Peterborough on 23 February when he came on as a substitute in the 44th minute . He returned to the side a week later for new manager Keith Alexander 's first match against Notts County when Macclesfield were denied a victory by a late goal from Richard Butcher . While Symes was on loan at Macclesfield , Shrewsbury manager Peters left the club and was replaced with Paul Simpson , who promised Symes and other players out on loan that he would monitor their progress and build his own opinion of them . Macclesfield were involved in a relegation fight during Symes ' stay and it was not until a 1 – 0 victory over Chesterfield on the penultimate weekend of the season that Macclesfield ensured they would be in the league the following season . Symes played 14 games , four as substitute , but scored just one goal during his stay with Macclesfield . 
 Symes returned to Shrewsbury and started pre @-@ season training ahead of the 2008 – 09 season , having been told by Simpson that he would be given the same chance as any other player at Shrewsbury to impress , and also personally vowing to force his way into the manager 's first @-@ team plans . However , Simpson signed new strikers during the summer including Grant Holt , who cost a club record £ 170 @,@ 000 , and Symes spent the start of the season out of the team . After scoring six goals in two consecutive reserve games , Symes earned his first game for the first team , when he came off the bench to score a late equaliser and earn Shrewsbury a 2 – 2 draw with Notts County on 30 August . After starting in a 2 – 1 Football League Trophy victory against Exeter City , he was again sidelined when he picked up a knee injury . He returned to action in mid @-@ October , when he came on as substitute to give Shrewsbury a late equaliser against Port Vale , only for Vale to score another goal to give them victory . 
 In November 2008 , he was again sent out on loan , this time to Bournemouth , also in League Two , for one month . Simpson said : " We have a big squad and I felt that the opportunity for Michael to go and get a month out on loan at Bournemouth would do him the world of good . " Symes made his debut for Bournemouth on 15 November , as they lost 3 – 0 to Accrington Stanley . He returned to Shrewsbury at the end of his month loan spell , in which he failed to score from five appearances . He was immediately recalled to the Shrewsbury squad and came on as a second @-@ half substitute in a 1 – 0 defeat to league leaders Wycombe Wanderers the following weekend . Because of injury problems , Symes played only three more games , before he moved on loan , this time to Accrington Stanley , another League Two side . He made his Accrington debut the day following his transfer , helping them to a 2 – 1 victory at home to Exeter City . Symes scored with a headed goal to give Accrington a 1 – 0 victory against Grimsby Town , which proved to be the only goal he recorded in seven games for Accrington , before he returned to Shrewsbury Town at the end of the season . However he was one of seven players released by Simpson after they lost the play @-@ off final . 
 = = = Accrington Stanley = = = 
 As a result of his loan spell at Accrington , Symes was one of five signings made by their manager John Coleman on the same day at the start of pre @-@ season training in July 2009 . Symes scored his first goal of the new season with a late consolation goal for Accrington in a 2 – 1 League Cup defeat to Queens Park Rangers , before scoring his first league goal later the same week against former team Shrewsbury Town but in another defeat . After an improved run of form , Symes ' first two @-@ goal haul for Accrington in a 5 – 3 victory over another of his former teams , Crewe Alexandra , helped his new side into the top @-@ half of the League Two table . Symes also scored goals in the FA Cup and the Football League Trophy , helping Accrington to the third round of the former competition and into the northern zone semi @-@ finals against Leeds United in the latter . 
 His goals helped Symes land December 's League Two Player of the Month and an offer of a contract extension by Accrington to fend off reported interest from other clubs during the January 2010 transfer window . However , Symes announced he would not sign a new contract during the transfer window increasing the chance he could leave on a free transfer during the summer on a Bosman ruling transfer . Two weeks later , Accrington announced they had rejected two bids from fellow League Two side Grimsby Town for their striker . One bid included striker Barry Conlon moving in the opposite direction . The second bid was reported to be a six @-@ figure sum . Symes continued his rich vein of form as his 14th goal of the season — making it his most productive season to date — levelled the scoring against Premier League Fulham in the FA Cup fourth round . A victory would have given Stanley a fifth round place for the first time in their history , but they eventually lost 3 – 1 . In the crowd at the club 's following game was Preston North End 's new manager Darren Ferguson to become Symes ' latest suitor . Despite the interest in Symes , no further bids were reported by Accrington for him or for midfielder Bobby Grant as the January transfer window closed . Symes finished the season with 19 goals — his best return of his career to that point — with 13 of those coming in the league . 
 = = = Bournemouth = = = 
 With his contract at Accrington having expired , Symes turned down Accrington 's contract offer and instead rejoined Bournemouth on 4 June 2010 ahead of their first season back in League One . Symes was one of three players signed on the same day — they were Bournemouth 's first permanent signings in 17 months after the Football League lifted the club 's transfer embargo . 
 Symes was injured during pre @-@ season but made his second Bournemouth debut on the opening day of the 2010 – 11 season against Charlton Athletic as a half @-@ time substitute . Bournemouth lost the game 1 – 0 but played against ten @-@ men for the last half @-@ hour after defender José Semedo was sent off for a bad tackle on Symes . He was again a substitute for his side 's League Cup match before he made his first start the following weekend as Bournemouth defeated Peterborough United 5 – 1 and a week later he grabbed his first Bournemouth goal with a penalty in a 3 – 0 win against Tranmere Rovers . However , Symes soon suffered a shoulder injury , which required specialist treatment and kept him out for nearly a month . With Bournemouth 's form pushing them towards the top of the league , Symes admitted he would have to prove himself again to manager Eddie Howe . Bournemouth , however , suffered a number of injuries to strikers , and they risked bringing Symes back early . He was brought on as a half @-@ time substitute against Carlisle United and helped lead his side to a 2 – 0 victory by scoring the second goal . He instantly won a place in Bournemouth 's starting team and followed up his goal @-@ scoring performance by netting twice against Exeter City to put Bournemouth second in the table . He soon spent another six weeks on the sidelines because of a shoulder injury before returning in November . His injury problems continued during the winter and he struggled to gain a run of games in the team meaning he did not score again until February at which point he scored in three successive matches . 
 On the final day of the January 2012 transfer deadline window , Symes rejoined his former Accrington manager John Coleman by joining Rochdale on loan for the rest of the season . He made his debut on 14 February , replacing Ashley Grimes in the 58th minute of a 1 – 0 loss to Scunthorpe United at Glanford Park . His first goals for the Dale came on 17 March in a 3 – 2 win over neighbours Oldham Athletic , a hat @-@ trick concluding with a penalty which he won after being fouled by James <unk> . Two weeks later , he scored the only other goal of his 15 @-@ match loan spell , an 82nd @-@ minute penalty in a 3 – 3 draw with Walsall at Spotland , having earlier missed an open goal when set up by Jean @-@ Louis <unk> <unk> . On 14 May , he was one of four players released by new Bournemouth manager Paul Groves . 
 = = = Leyton Orient / Burton Albion = = = 
 On 28 June 2012 , along with Mathieu <unk> , completed a free transfer to fellow League One club Leyton Orient on a two @-@ year deal after being released by Bournemouth . On 14 August , he made his debut in the first round of the League Cup away to Charlton Athletic , replacing David Mooney in the 64th minute of a 1 – 1 draw at The Valley and converting his attempt in the subsequent penalty shootout which his team won 4 – 3 . Four days later on his league debut , he replaced Kevin <unk> with 21 minutes remaining and scored a penalty consolation in a 3 – 1 loss at Tranmere Rovers . On 5 December , he scored his only other goal for the O 's , another penalty to confirm a 3 – 0 win at Northampton Town in the second round of the Football League Trophy , seven minutes after replacing Mooney . 
 Symes was loaned to League Two Burton Albion on 31 January 2013 , until the end of the season . He made his debut two days later , away to bottom @-@ placed AFC Wimbledon , and equalised for a 1 – 1 draw in the 36th minute . He scored 4 goals in 15 appearances as the team made the play @-@ offs , being eliminated by his former employers Bradford . 
 On 29 July 2013 , Symes signed a permanent deal for Burton . He came on as a 78th @-@ minute substitute for Rene Howe in a League Cup second round game against Championship team Fulham at the Pirelli Stadium on 27 August , and nearly scored the winning goal , which was disallowed for offside . When the game finished 1 – 1 after 90 minutes , he headed the Brewers into the lead in the 102nd , and when it finished 2 – 2 and went to penalties , he scored the first attempt although his team lost 5 – 4 nonetheless . On 28 May 2014 , he was released by manager Gary Rowett . 
 Returning to Merseyside , Symes played two matches as late substitute for Southport in the Conference in April 2015 , his debut coming on the 3rd , when he replaced Richard Brodie for the final 13 minutes of a 2 – 0 loss at Altrincham . Eight days later , he came on at the same point for a loss by the same score at Bristol Rovers . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Updated to 15 January 2013 . 
 = Andriamasinavalona = 
 King Andriamasinavalona ( 1675 – 1710 ) , also known as <unk> , was a King of Imerina in the central highlands of Madagascar . He made significant and enduring contributions to the social , political and economic life of Imerina . Chief among these was the expansion of his territories and the pacification and unification of certain principalities that had become locked in violent conflict ; Andriamasinavalona established and ruled over the largest extent of the Kingdom of Imerina . He gave the name of Antananarivo to the capital city that was rapidly expanding around the royal palace on the hill of Analamanga , created a large public square at Andohalo outside the gates of the city , and named a series of other locations within the city . He also took possession of a distant hill he renamed Ambohimanga as a lodging for his son Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana ; the royal city that developed there has been declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 The innovations of Andriamasinavalona were numerous and enduring . He created two additional noble castes and defined their associated rights , responsibilities and restrictions , and was responsible for introducing the tradition of the red parasol as an indicator of royalty ; he also decreed that all women had the right to choose their husbands . Trade with the Sakalava kingdom enabled this king to increase the firearms , cannons and gunpowder available for the defense of the kingdom , and expanded the availability of luxury items like silver piastres and porcelain dishes . The dikes around the Betsimitatatra rice fields of Antananarivo were expanded and raised to help ensure against famine . 
 In the interest of strengthening the defenses of the kingdom , Andriamasinavalona divided his realm into four quadrants to be ruled by his four favorite sons . This decision had the opposite effect , however ; each was interested in expanding his own realm , prompting one son to kidnap the king and hold him hostage for seven years . After the king 's eventual release , he famously committed a mock human sacrifice to re @-@ sanctify his authority . Upon his death , Andriamasinavalona 's sons launched military campaigns against one another to seize each other 's territories , triggering 77 years of civil war in Imerina . In Madagascar today , Andriamasinavalona 's reign is remembered as a golden age of justice , harmony and prosperity . 
 = = Early life and accession to throne = = 
 Andriamasinavalona was born Prince <unk> in the historic Merina capital of Alasora to his father King <unk> and mother <unk> . He was made Prince of Alasora upon his father 's death in 1670 ; his older brother , Andrianjaka <unk> , was named king . Andriamasinavalona ascended to the kingship of Imerina upon the deposition of his brother in 1675 . The deposed king fled to the Sakalava kingdom to the west and attempted unsuccessfully to secure military support there to regain the throne . 
 Two enduring royal traditions emerged in Imerina as a consequence of the power struggle between Andriamasinavalona and his older brother . Some versions of oral history describe a combat between their armies at <unk> in which Andriamasinavalona emerged victorious . He erected a commemorative stone at the battle site that he named <unk> , designating it the site where newly enthroned kings would stand to receive their first expression of hasina ( homage , affirmation of authority ) from their subjects . Andriamasinavalona also introduced the practice of gathering his subjects to consult them and obtain their consent before making certain decisions . This practice was continued by subsequent rulers in Imerina . 
 = = Family and descendents = = 
 Andriamasinavalona married twelve wives and produced nine sons and one daughter . The children of four of his wives would go on to rule their own kingdoms : <unk> gave birth to Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana at Ambohimanga ; <unk> gave birth to Andriantomponimerina at Ambohidratrimo ; <unk> had her son <unk> at Antananarivo ; and <unk> had Andrianavalonimerina near Ambohitrabiby . The children of four other wives would renounce all claims to the throne : <unk> and <unk> , born to <unk> in <unk> ; <unk> , born to Ranavalona in <unk> ; <unk> , born to <unk> in Isoraka ; and <unk> , born to <unk> in <unk> . The descendents of Andriamasinavalona 's wives who renounced claim to the throne were ennobled by him as the royal Andriamasinavalona class . The remaining four marriages ( to wives <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) would not produce children , but one of these wives - <unk> - adopted a girl named <unk> . She was housed with her adoptive mother at <unk> and died without producing children of her own , although she likewise adopted a child named <unk> , who was most likely the son of her sister . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Andriamasinavalona is remembered in Imerina as a king of significant achievements . He is credited with unifying a number of warring principalities in Imerina and expanding the territory of the kingdom to its largest extent . He created the Andohalo town square outside the gate of Antananarivo , where all successive sovereigns delivered their royal speeches and announcements to the public . Andriamasinavalona gave the city - previously called by the name of its hill , Analamanga - its current name of Antananarivo , and assigned the names of numerous locations within the city , based on the names of similar sites in the nearby village of <unk> . During his reign the production of the Betsimitatatra rice fields around Antananarivo was dramatically increased . He also increased the number of guns and quantity of gunpowder in Imerina through trade with neighboring kingdoms , and imported the kingdom 's first cannons for its defense . Other innovations included the importation and fabrication of plates made from sea turtle skin . He strengthened the social order by creating two new noble castes , putting in place further restrictions and responsibilities for each , and decreeing the right of every woman to choose her own husband . 
 Under Andriamasinavalona 's rule , the political administration of Imerina became more clearly defined . The number of andriana ( noble ) sub @-@ castes was expanded from four to six and additional roles and specific territories were designated for each group , both within the neighborhoods of Antananarivo and in the countryside surrounding the capital . These territorial divisions were strictly enforced : members of subcastes were required to live within their designated territories and were not authorized to stay for extended periods in the territories reserved for others . Andriamasinavalona decentralized governance and strengthened the power of local administrators by creating a series of new decrees that further formalized the relationship between the andriana and the hova ( commoners ) they ruled . 
 The king 's reign was marked by a drought lasting seven years that caused a famine in much of Imerina . According to oral history , the king attempted to purchase rice from his fief at <unk> . The town had a surplus but the local leader refused to sell rice to Andriamasinavalona , claiming none was available . The king then sent porters to purchase rice from <unk> , where the residents declared that while the land was his and it was thus unnecessary for the king to purchase what already belonged to him , there was no rice available to share . Finally Andriamasinavalona sought to purchase rice in <unk> . His money was refused by the local leader , Andriandrivotra , who willingly gave the king large shares of food and a tribute of silver . To reward the leader of the fief , Andriamasinavalona promised to give him anything he liked . Andriandrivotra declared that all he desired was the love of his sovereign . To show his appreciation , Andriamasinavalona declared that he would make <unk> into a great fief , and gave Andriandrivotra a large piece of land to the west of the territory . He then undertook a major expansion of the Betsimitatatra rice fields around Antananarivo , significantly increasing their rice production to feed the populace . 
 = = = Sociopolitical restructuring = = = 
 Andriamasinavalona 's reorganization and refinement of the subdivisions of the noble class took into account the precedents set by earlier Merina kings Andrianjaka and Ralambo . He declared that only members of the Zazamarolahy ( " Numerous Children " ) caste , composed of nobles descended from Andrianjaka 's children , could be shaded by the red parasol of royalty ; the tradition of the royal parasol was introduced to Imerina during Andriamasinavalona 's reign and persisted until the dissolution of the monarchy in 1897 . He also decreed that their tombs should be topped with a tranomasina , a small wooden house without windows or hearth and containing their worldly riches , where their spirit could return to visit after death . Unlike other noble subcastes , the Zazamarolahy were not constrained to inhabit a particular neighborhood , as Andriamasinavalona acknowledged the privilege of future sovereigns to determine the proximity of these most influential nobles according to the particularities of changing circumstances . Andriamasinavalona also narrowed the pool of potential future sovereigns by restricting this right to a new sub @-@ group within the Zazamarolahy , which he termed <unk> <unk> ( " Children of the Sovereign " ) . This group comprised all the descendents of the royal wives who had given birth to the king 's four designated heirs . New rulers could only be selected from among this new sub @-@ class of nobles . 
 The four wives of King Andriamasinavalona whose children were not chosen to rule one of the four districts of Imerina were assigned the noble sub @-@ caste of " Andriamasinavalona " and transferred this ranking to their descendents . The king declared that members of this sub @-@ caste would inhabit <unk> , at the southern limit of the neighborhood of Andohalo in Antananarivo , just outside the walls of the royal palace . Although not authorized to rule the kingdom , the Andriamasinavalona were deemed societal elders and gained the right to become " masters of the fief " ( tompo @-@ menakely ) and construct tranomasina on their tombs . They were also assigned the honor of burying deceased sovereigns and carrying out sacrifices requested by the king . Outside of Antananarivo , the Zazamarolahy and the Andriamasinavalona settled throughout Imerina in the individual fiefs centered around the hill towns that they governed . In this way , nobles always lived in close proximity to the people they ruled , ensured their defense and provided for their livelihood . 
 Andriamasinavalona established new rules to strengthen the authority of the tompo @-@ menakely over their subjects . Inhabitants of the fief paid taxes ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) to the local lord , and offered him the hindquarters of all slaughtered zebu as tribute . Parents who adopted or disowned a child paid a fee of one silver piastre to the lord , and the property of those who died without children would revert to the king , who would share it with him . The inhabitants of a fief were bound to execute any work or task ordered by the tompo @-@ menakely . The authority of the lord was highly independent and interference of the king was infrequent , in part due to the close kinship ties uniting the king to the Zazamarolahy and Andriamasinavalona sub @-@ castes . 
 The Zana @-@ tompo ( or Andriantompokoindrindra ) were also considered elders , and Andriamasinavalona decreed that kings would henceforth select their wives and royal food tasters from among this caste . The rites pertaining to circumcision were another honor reserved for the Zana @-@ tompo . The king decreed that they should inhabit the countryside south of the capital extending from <unk> southward to Ambatolampy . Outside of Antananarivo , the Zana @-@ tompo lived in the village of <unk> . 
 The Andriamboninolona ( or <unk> ) , Andriandranando ( or <unk> ) and Zanaralambo were considered junior nobles . They were excluded from most of the rules imposed on other noble castes and exempted from fanampoana ( forced labor in lieu of monetary tax payment ) . Instead , they were made responsible for maintaining a key dike that supported irrigation of the capital 's rice paddies , producing the silk used to make the king 's clothing , and conscripting soldiers for the king 's army . They were also responsible for gathering used hoes for the royal blacksmiths to melt down and then supervise the artisans as the metal was crafted into nails , shackles and other forged objects . 
 Within Antananarivo , the territory of the Andriamboninolona , designated generations before by King Andrianjaka , included the neighborhood of <unk> ( east of Andohalo ) and extended from Ambohitantely eastward to Ambatolampy and north to the principal road that led to Ambavahadimasina . The neighborhoods reserved in Antananarivo for the Andriandranando , also decreed by Andrianjaka , laid to the northeast of Andohalo and extended from Ambavahadimasina in the west to <unk> in the east , and from the road to Ambavahadimasina northward to <unk> . King Andriamasinavalona decreed that within the capital city , the Zanaralambo would live in the area delimited by <unk> to the southwest , <unk> to the east , and <unk> in the north . Outside the capital , each group had its designated villages . The Andriamboninolona lived in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The Andriandranando lived in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Finally , the Zanaralambo inhabited <unk> , Ambatofotsy and <unk> . 
 In addition to these new roles for noble sub @-@ castes , Andriamasinavalona singled out the Antehiroka as sacred royal advisers and custodians of ancestral traditions related to circumcision . This clan was formed of the descendents of <unk> and his two sons , themselves descendents of a <unk> king . <unk> befriended King Ralambo and played an integral part in establishing the tradition of circumcision in Imerina . The collection of water gourds and arranging of freshly woven mats for use in the ceremony were made the responsibility of this clan . The Antehiroka were also tasked with delivering royal benedictions , receiving hasina ( tribute ) on behalf of the king , and wrapping deceased sovereigns in the traditional <unk> shroud . In Antananarivo , the Antehiroka were placed in <unk> , the location of their clan tomb . In the countryside , Andriamasinavalona decreed that they should inhabit <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Expansion of realm = = = 
 At the time of Andriamasinavalona 's reign , the highlands around Imerina were wracked with violent conflict among minor princedoms centered around fortified hill towns . Andriamasinavalona successfully united a number of these principalities in the territory bordering his own , thereby expanding the boundaries of Imerina to include <unk> to the west , <unk> to the north , Ombifotsy to the east and <unk> to the south . As he brought each territory under his control , he restricted the autonomy of its original rulers and imposed strict submission to his own authority . His diplomatic and political conquests enabled Andriamasinavalona to extend his kingdom to its fullest historical extent , making him the first Merina sovereign to rule over the entire province of Imerina . 
 The first of these four territories to be incorporated into Imerina was <unk> , then a principality ruled by Andriampanarivofomanjaka . Continual threats to his kingdom 's security led Andriampanarivofomanjaka to secretly travel to the Rova of Antananarivo to pledge submission to Andriamasinavalona . He was accompanied by seven advisers who eloquently communicated their master 's willingness to acknowledge Andriamasinavalona as his king . Andriamasinavalona accepted this offer and sealed the union of their territories by marrying Andriampanarivofomanjaka to his sister , <unk> . Andriampanarivofomanjaka then returned to his realm , announced the union to his people , and then spoke with the leaders of the neighboring Bezanozano people to successfully persuade them to join the kingdom and benefit from Andriamasinavalona 's protection . 
 The territory of Ombifotsy was ruled by Andriambahoakafovoanitany , who had a friendly relationship with Andriamasinavalona . The two agreed to a challenge : each would leave his palace simultaneously on a chosen Friday night , and walk toward the other 's palace until the two met . They crossed paths at the Ombifotsy ( " White Zebu " ) river , so named because the two sacrificed a white zebu there in honor of their friendship and the peace agreement between their two territories of Imamo and Imerina . Andriambahoakafovoanitany 's son dug a trench along the river , where he erected a stone to commemorate the agreement . Imamo was divided into four parts , each administered by one of Andriambahoakafovoanitany 's sons . 
 In addition , Andriamasinavalona is credited with founding Ambohimanga , a site of spiritual and historical significance that was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2001 . Oral history recounts that Andriamasinavalona first remarked a distant hill named <unk> when he noticed a bonfire lit on its southern face 24 kilometers away from his rova at Antananarivo ; the visibility of the site from his capital led Andriamasinavalona to desire the hill as a residence for his son , Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana . Andriamasinavalona gave the hill its current name , and when he divided the Kingdom of Imerina into four quadrants in 1710 , he gave the eastern quadrant of Avaradrano to Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana , who transformed his rova at Ambohimanga into its capital . 
 = = = Division of Imerina = = = 
 The greatest point of controversy in Andriamasinavalona 's reign was his decision to divide his kingdom among his four favorite sons : <unk> , <unk> , Andriantomponimerina I and Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana , who received the largest share of the land and was the most powerful of the four young sovereigns . Andriamasinavalona furthermore declared that his nephew Andriambonimena , his sister 's son , would replace his own sons and succeed him as king after his death to rule all of Imerina as a united whole . The controversial decision to divide Imerina into four sub @-@ kingdoms may have been rooted in the desire to reorganize the kingdom in accordance with traditional notions of symbolic unity as represented by the four cardinal points surrounding a unifying center termed the " heart of Imerina " ( Imerina <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . Andriamasinavalona believed the kingdom would be better defended by four brothers than by one alone , and that they could support one another in warding off attackers from the outside . 
 According to oral history , Andriamasinavalona asked the guardian of <unk> , one of the three most prominent royal idols , to ask the idol which of his sons should rule after him . The guardian hesitated to declare the idol 's choice , but after the king promised no ill reaction to the decision , the man declared the successor to be Andrianavalonimerina . However , the king had hoped that the successor would be another son , Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana . He decided to test the prophecy by sending one of his wives to the guardian 's house , where the population showed her respect by offering zebu for her to eat . The zebu cooked inconsistently , and the king interpreted this as a sign that the guardian was dishonest and intended to seize power himself , so Andriamasinavalona ordered him put to death and had the idol <unk> discarded in a lake . He then asked the guardians of the two other idols ( Kelimalaza and <unk> ) to declare a successor ; the guardian of <unk> fled , while the guardian of Kelimalaza stated that only the king could choose his successor . 
 Oral history relates that Andriamasinavalona then gathered the people at Andohalo to announce his decision . He requested the presence of his respected adviser and elder , Andriamampandry , who rebuffed the messenger by stating " I have no lamba . " The king sent him a lamba to wear , and the elder sent it back with the four corners torn off . The king again returned the lamba , and this time the elder trampled it in the mud . Nonetheless , Andriamampandry dressed in the lamba , declaring " What 's been torn can be mended , and what 's been dirtied can be cleaned , " then attended the king 's kabary . There , the king declared that he would divide his kingdom into four parts , each one a fief to be inhabited by his four favorite sons , who would participate in royal decision @-@ making without being made kings themselves . The two northern principalities had their capitals at Ambohimanga and Ambohidrabiby , while the capital of the western principality was located at Ambohidratrimo . The southern principality was ruled from Antananarivo by Andriantomponimerina . 
 Andriamampandry tried on several occasions to warn Andriamasinavalona of the danger of administering the kingdom in this way . In one instance , he placed a hen in the middle of a room , then set one red rooster free in each corner . The roosters attacked one another viciously , leaving the king speechless . On another day , the elder brought four eagles to the king in a basket . When the basket was opened , the eagles flew wildly about the room , creating havoc . Andriamampandry warned the king that his realm would be no better off once his four sons got a taste of power . Andriamasinavalona recognized the danger but could not bear to choose which among his sons should be excluded from having a part in the decision @-@ making responsibilities of the kingdom , so ignored the elder 's advice . Finally Andriamampandry decided to give the king a very explicit warning . Andriamasinavalona had gathered his people in Andohalo to give a speech , when Andriamampandry set a bull loose into the crowd . In the panic that ensued , numerous people were gored or trampled to death , several pregnant women miscarried , and the gathering dispersed in chaos . The king demanded to know who had loosed the bull so that he may be executed , but when Andriamampandry took responsibility he warned the king that yet more blood would be spilled before the earth would be quenched . He then criticized the king for his concern over the relatively few deaths at the gathering , in light of the number of people who would die as a consequence of his division of Imerina . He further predicted that the prince at Ambohimanga would unite Imerina and lead it back to greatness . Andriamasinavalona reportedly had no response to give Andriamampandry , but instead hung his head in shame . 
 The 19th century transcription of Merina oral history , Tantara ny Andriana eto Madagasikara , relates that Andriamampandry privately assessed the leadership qualities of each of the four selected sons , with disappointing results . He presented Andriambonimena of Alasora with a beautiful parrot , which the prince killed and served as food . The elder concluded that he was " a gun that loads itself . " The oldest son , <unk> , was given a pot of honey , which he smashed in order to eat every last drop . Afterward Andriamampandry remarked that the kingdom had become a pot of honey without a lid , implying the first one to come along would be free to reach his hand inside and take all its bounty for himself . He visited Andriantomponimerina at Ambohidratrimo and offered him a zebu kidney ( considered unpalatable ) , which the prince ordered to be prepared as a meal nonetheless , leading the elder to remark , " This man can 't even resist the temptation to eat the kidney . " He visited Andrianavalonimerina at Ambohitrabiby carrying a lemon and a weaver 's stake , which the prince 's wife demanded he give to them , demonstrating their greediness . Andriamampandry also visited prince Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana at Ambohimanga , carrying an axe and a rope . The prince asked to borrow the two items , then ordered a servant to use the axe and rope to butcher a zebu , put some of the best meat in a basket , cook the rest of the good meat for their meal , and set aside the neck and the ribbed part of the tripe in a second basket . The elder dined with the prince and spent the night at the village . When Andriamampandry was about to leave , the prince returned the rope and axe , gave him the basket of fine meat for his wife , and gave him the second basket , declaring " These are the parts for the axe ( i.e. the neck ) and the rope ( i.e. the striated omasum ) . " Andriamampandry was deeply impressed by the hospitality and foresight of the prince . He related these incidents to Andriamasinavalona , who decided to test his sons in turn by calling them together to his house , then observing how they slept on the bed they shared there . Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana had his head highest on the pillow , but Andriamasinavalona failed to understand the significance of this , and Andriamampandry rebuked him , remarking " You are the king , and yet you do not understand ? " 
 = = = Imprisonment = = = 
 According to oral history , Andriamasinavalona was temporarily usurped through the trickery of his son Andriantomponimerina , who ruled the western territory from his rova at Ambohidratrimo . Once Andriamasinavalona 's sons had been installed in their territories , Andriantomponimerina tested his authority by imposing a particular hairstyle upon the Marovatana people he ruled , in disregard of the promise that the king had made to respect the diverse customs and taboos of Imerina . The Marovatana reminded the king of this vow and refused to submit , prompting the king and his sons to prepare for war against the people of the fief . This conflict provided the prince with an opportunity to seize power . Upon the suggestion of the prince 's half @-@ brother , <unk> , the prince hid himself in a trench he dug into the dirt floor of his royal residence at Ambohidratrimo , then ordered his people to send word to his father that he was " in the ground " . Believing his son to be buried alive by the Marovatana as a punitive measure , Andriamasinavalona hurried to Ambohidratrimo carrying reeds as a symbol of peace ; upon the king 's entrance into the residence , however , Prince Andriantomponimerina locked Andriamasinavalona inside and refused to release him for the next seven years . During this time the prince repeatedly offered to free the king on the condition that Andriamasinavalona accept to transfer power to him , which the king repeatedly refused . Andriantomponimerina prevented his brothers from taking action against him by telling their messengers that the king simply preferred his company and had decided to reside with him at Ambohidratrimo . 
 After some time , the king 's designated successor , Andriambonimena , launched a retaliatory attack against the prince 's half @-@ brother <unk> at <unk> and successfully chased him from his fief . Andriantomponimerina recognized the need to take more dramatic action to consolidate his grip on power and sent a messenger to the Sakalava king requesting his support . The Sakalava reaffirmed their loyalty to Andriamasinavalona , however , and threatened to attack the prince if the rightful king was not released from his captivity . According to one version of the oral history , having failed to use the king as a pawn to gain power , the prince decided to ransom his father for 7 @,@ 000 piastres to increase his personal wealth . Every citizen of Imerina was obligated to contribute , and those who had no money sold their children or themselves into slavery in order to raise the necessary funds . The money was placed in seven baskets and transported by dugout canoe to the prince at Ambohidratrimo , who released the king . According to another version of the story , Prince Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana of Ambohimanga sent two hunters of the Tsimahafotsy clan to free the king by digging an escape passage under the wall of his heavily guarded enclosure . After returning to Antananarivo , Andriamasinavalona sent a messenger who announced that the king had decided to hand power to Andriantomponimerina and invited the prince to the capital to be enthroned . The prince hurried to the palace , and throughout the city he was greeted with cheers , singing and dancing . When Andriamasinavalona received him , however , he publicly condemned the prince and stripped him of his rank and power . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Two stories exist around a ritual of human sacrifice that Andriamasinavalona conducted after his imprisonment . In one version of the oral history , Andriamampandry and his fellow royal advisers were concerned that the king 's imprisonment had weakened his authority and could lead the population to revolt against him . They suggested the king test his people by claiming to be ill and requesting a human sacrifice ; if a citizen offered his life for the king , this gesture would indicate the public was still loyal to him . Andriamasinavalona followed this recommendation and gathered the people to request a volunteer who was willing to have his throat slit with a long dagger to sanctify the king . In another version of the story , this proposal was made to sanctify the new Besakana palace that the king ordered rebuilt at the rova in Antananarivo . A man named <unk> stepped forward to sacrifice his life . In the first version of the story , royal advisers bound him with ropes and laid him on the ground to the west of the Masoandro palace within the rova compound at Antananarivo , but rather than kill the man they symbolically " sacrificed " him by pouring rooster blood mixed with water onto his throat . In the second , he was bound and hoisted to the top of the central pillar of the new building , and his ear was nicked to allow several drops of blood to fall on the top of the pillar to sanctify it . <unk> was then released and the king asked him to name a reward for his courageous gesture . The man requested that he and his descendents would forever after be exempted from the death penalty for any crime they might commit ; Andriamasinavalona agreed to grant this reward . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Andriamasinavalona died in 1710 when one of his wives , <unk> , inadvertently pushed him from the elevated bed where they slept . He was buried in the royal tombs located at the Rova of Antananarivo . In opposition to Andriamasinavalona 's intentions , after the king 's death his sons forsook the concept of unity and instead fought one another in an effort to expand their realms . As a consequence of this decision , Imerina fragmented and was wracked with conflict for 77 years , until the kingdom was once again united during the reign of Andrianampoinimerina ( 1787 – 1810 ) . 
 The reign of Andriamasinavalona is remembered in Madagascar as a golden age of prosperity , justice , abundance and harmony . He is described in oral histories as a talented politician and kind and just ruler . His name is often traditionally invoked in Imerina when paying tribute to the ancestors or making a binding pledge . Regarding Andriamasinavalona 's legacy , Ellis ( 1832 ) remarked , " The character of this chieftain is held in the highest veneration and esteem . He is said to have exercised great care over his district , and to have introduced many important improvements . His memory , laws and customs are still held in the greatest respect , and his name is always mentioned in the public <unk> with a degree of reverence . " 
 = Interstate 70 in West Virginia = 
 Interstate 70 ( I @-@ 70 ) is a portion of the Interstate Highway System that runs from near Cove Fort , Utah , at a junction with Interstate 15 to Baltimore , Maryland . It crosses the Northern Panhandle of West Virginia through Ohio County and the city of Wheeling . This segment is the shortest of all states ' through which I @-@ 70 passes , crossing West Virginia in only 14 @.@ 45 miles ( 23 @.@ 26 km ) . The longest segment is Colorado 's , which measures 451 @.@ 04 miles ( 725 @.@ 88 km ) . The Fort Henry Bridge carries I @-@ 70 from Wheeling Island across the Ohio River and into downtown Wheeling before the freeway enters the Wheeling Tunnel . I @-@ 470 , a southerly bypass of Wheeling and the lone auxiliary Interstate Highway in West Virginia , is intersected near Elm Grove . Before crossing into Pennsylvania , I @-@ 70 passes The Highlands , a major shopping center in the panhandle , and the Bear Rock Lakes Wildlife Management Area . On average , between 27 @,@ 000 and 53 @,@ 000 vehicles use the freeway every day . 
 The first road that entered Wheeling was a post road completed in 1794 that connected Wheeling to Morgantown . The National Road was the first interstate road , completed in 1818 , that connected Wheeling to Cumberland , Maryland . When the United States Numbered Highway System was created in 1926 , the National Road was designated U.S. Route 40 . The I @-@ 70 designation was brought to the Northern Panhandle with the passage of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 , and it was built as a controlled @-@ access highway , bypassing portions of the old National Road . The first portions of I @-@ 70 in West Virginia were opened in 1963 , and construction was completed in 1971 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Entering West Virginia from Ohio , I @-@ 70 crosses the western channel of the Ohio River onto Wheeling Island , the most populated island along the Ohio River . The freeway passes above a light commercial zone , and has an interchange with Zane Street . US 40 and US 250 become concurrent with I @-@ 70 at this interchange , before traveling east toward the Fort Henry Bridge . The bridge crosses the main channel of the river and the Greater Wheeling Trail , a rail trail that parallels the eastern banks of the river . Elevated above the city of Wheeling , a complex interchange provides access to the downtown area and <unk> . Traveling eastbound , US 40 departs the freeway at this interchange and becomes concurrent with West Virginia Route 2 ( WV 2 ) northbound . US 40 and WV 2 travel through downtown Wheeling on a one @-@ way pair , the southbound lanes passing under I @-@ 70 and the northbound lanes passing over I @-@ 70 . After the interchange , I @-@ 70 enters the approximately 1 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 400 m ) Wheeling Tunnel which passes through Wheeling Hill . Immediately east of the tunnel , a directional T interchange provides access to WV 2 southbound near homes north of the highway . US 250 departs I @-@ 70 at this interchange . A stub ramp present at this interchange would have carried WV 2 north of I @-@ 70 had it been extended . 
 As I @-@ 70 curves to the south , it intersects US 40 and WV 88 with the ramps from the eastbound lanes of US 40 and WV 88 crossing underneath I @-@ 70 , parallel to Wheeling Creek . The interchange just west of the Wheeling Tunnel and this interchange are complicated by the fact that both are abutted by hills . Wheeling Jesuit University 's southeastern border is formed by the freeway as I @-@ 70 approaches the neighborhood of Elm Grove . Washington Avenue provides access to the college as the highway continues south before meeting the eastern terminus of I @-@ 470 , which is a bypass of Wheeling and the only auxiliary interstate highway in West Virginia . Between the directional T interchange and I @-@ 470 , I @-@ 70 is paralleled by the eastern branch of the Greater Wheeling Trail . A final interchange within Wheeling city limits provides access to US 40 and WV 88 . Leaving the city , the highway turns further east and enters a deep valley . The highway climbs over Two @-@ Mile Hill , and intersects Cabela Drive ( County Route 65 ) , which provides access to The Highlands , a large shopping destination . Past The Highlands , I @-@ 70 continues northeast though woodlands to an interchange with the Dallas Pike ( County Route 41 ) . I @-@ 70 passes north of the Bear Rock Lakes Wildlife Management Area before crossing the Pennsylvania state line into Washington County southwest of West Alexander . 
 Out of the ten states I @-@ 70 passes through , the 14 @.@ 45 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 23 @.@ 26 km ) segment in West Virginia is the shortest . By comparison , the longest stretch of I @-@ 70 through a single state is the 451 @.@ 04 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 725 @.@ 88 km ) segment in Colorado . Every year , the West Virginia Department of Transportation ( WVDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2012 , WVDOT calculated that as few as 27 @,@ 000 vehicles traveled over the Fort Henry Bridge over the Ohio River , and as many as 53 @,@ 000 vehicles used the highway near its junction with US 40 in Elm Grove . These counts are of the portion of the freeway in West Virginia and are not reflective of the entire Interstate . As part of the Interstate Highway System , the entire route is listed on the National Highway System , a system of roads that are important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The first recorded road to reach what was then Wheeling , Virginia , was a post road linking it with Morgantown , to the southeast . The post road was completed in 1794 . The National Road was the first interstate road that served Wheeling , linking the town to Cumberland , Maryland , in the east . The National Road started construction under order of then President Thomas Jefferson in 1806 and was completed in 1818 . In 1926 the United States Numbered Highway System was established , and the National Road through the Northern Panhandle was designated US 40 . US 40 linked Vallejo , California , in the west to Atlantic City , New Jersey , in the east . Passage of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 formed the Interstate Highway System , designating as I @-@ 70 a then unconstructed controlled @-@ access highway across the panhandle by 1957 . Since it was constructed as a separate controlled @-@ access highway , much of I @-@ 70 is separate from the old National Road and US 40 . 
 The first portion of what is now known as I @-@ 70 to be completed across West Virginia was the Fort Henry Bridge across the main channel of the Ohio River , built in 1955 . WVDOT began obtaining right @-@ of @-@ way for I @-@ 70 in 1961 . The Wheeling Tunnel , linking downtown Wheeling and the Fort Henry Bridge to the eastern suburb of Elm Grove , was completed in 1967 at a cost of $ 7 million ( equivalent to $ 90 million in 2015 ) . The bridge that carries I @-@ 70 from the Ohio state line onto Wheeling Island was completed in 1968 . Construction of I @-@ 70 across the panhandle was almost completed in September 1971 , with only one of the two carriageways completed in the final one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ fifth @-@ mile @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 900 m ) segment of freeway near Elm Grove . Then Governor Arch A. Moore , Jr. and Senator Jennings Randolph were present for the opening of this $ 17 million ( equivalent to $ 169 million in 2015 ) portion of freeway . The second carriageway was completed by the end of 1971 . 
 The Fort Henry Bridge , the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Bridge ( which carries I @-@ 470 ) , and the Wheeling Suspension Bridge were all closed in January 2005 , stopping any traffic from Ohio or Wheeling Island from entering mainland West Virginia for a few days because barges broke loose during heavy flooding along the Ohio River . The Wheeling Tunnel was closed for reconstruction work in 2007 , 2008 , and 2010 , causing motorists who wished to travel through on I @-@ 70 to detour . The two detour routes were city streets in downtown Wheeling and the I @-@ 470 loop . 
 After traffic issues during the 2008 reconstruction work on the Wheeling Tunnel , local politicians suggested closing the twin tunnels altogether and building the freeway over Wheeling Hill instead . After opposition from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , which represented the affected Wheeling Hill residents , the suggestions were dropped . The cost of completing the tunnel replacement project was estimated at between $ 60 and $ 80 million . The total $ 13 @.@ 7 million cost of the tunnel reconstruction project was over double the original bid of $ 5 @.@ 7 million , due in part to the work delays . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Ohio County . 
 = Richard de Southchurch = 
 Sir Richard de Southchurch ( <unk> , <unk> ) ( died 1294 ) was a knight and part of the landowning aristocracy of Essex in the thirteenth century . He was High Sheriff of Essex and of Hertfordshire in the years 1265 – 67 , and as such became involved in the Second Barons ' War ( 1264 – 1267 ) . Southchurch has earned a special place in the historiography of the period due to an episode during the war where he allegedly planned to attack London with incendiary cocks . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Little is known of Southchurch 's background , but his family came from the manor of Southchurch , now part of Southend @-@ on @-@ Sea . Richard de Southchurch held this manor of the Prior and Convent of Christ 's Church , Canterbury . He also held other land in the county of Essex , including <unk> , which he held in fee of the king . He served as sheriff of the combined <unk> of Essex and Hertfordshire from 27 October 1265 to 12 June 1267 . In 1279 , he received a pardon and was acquitted of a fine of 100 shilling for being present at the theft of a hart at the king 's forest of Chelmsford . In 1289 he was also acquitted of the great sum of 1000 pounds for perjury , in return for releasing the manor of Hatfield Peverel to the king . Southchurch was dead by 2 April 1294 , when the escheator was ordered to deliver his lands to his son and heir , Peter de Southchurch . 
 = = Involvement in Barons ’ War = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1260s , England found herself in a state of civil war between king Henry III and members of his aristocracy , a conflict known as the Second Barons ' War . In April 1267 , Gilbert de Clare entered London with the baronial forces . The city welcomed him , and king Henry III had to set up camp at Stratford , besieging the capital . Orders were sent out to the sheriffs of Kent and Essex to procure supplies for the royal army . It was in this situation that Southchurch , in his capacity as sheriff , levied requisitions on Chafford Hundred of ; 
 ... oats and wheat , of bacon , beef , cheese and pease , ' pur <unk> le ost au Rey ' ; of chickens to feed the wounded and tow and eggs to make dressings for their wounds and linen for bandages , of chord to make ropes for the catapults , of picks and <unk> and spades to lay low the walls of London , and finally of cocks , forty and more , to whose feet he declared he would tie fire , and send them flying into London to burn it down . 
 The story survives through the Hundred Rolls , the great survey of the English hundreds made by Edward I , in 1274 @-@ 5 , on returning to his new kingdom from crusade . The scheme , impractical as it might seem , was supposedly based on contemporary sagas of Viking heroes . But the complaints of the local community were based on the fact that Southchurch had taken all the supplies home to his own manor of Southchurch , received 200 marks from the exchequer , yet never paid out any of what the owners of the goods were entitled to . 
 = = Historical transmission = = 
 The account of Southchurch 's provisioning was first made available to a wider audience through the writings of the English historian Helen Cam . Cam was responsible for groundbreaking work on the Hundred Rolls , and their relevance to English local government , through her Studies in the Hundred Rolls ( 1921 ) and The Hundred and the Hundred Rolls ( 1930 ) . In both of these she made mention of what she calls ' ... the most picturesque series of extortions recorded in the Essex returns . ' It was , however , in a paper published in the English Historical Review as early as 1916 that she gave the most detailed account of Southchurch 's plot . Here she traced the dissemination of the Viking legend through Geoffrey of Monmouth , and speculated that Southchurch could have been acquainted with a later version by Gaimar , Wace or Layamon , or through a local , popular legend . 
 The story was later retold by Sir Maurice Powicke in his King Henry III and the Lord Edward ( 1947 ) . Yet even though both Cam and Powicke had included the tale as a humorous anecdote , it was not until Michael Prestwich wrote his monograph of Edward I in 1988 that anyone considered the possibility that the story of the incendiary roosters was simply a ' confidence trick ' on Southchurch 's part . Powicke , in Prestwich 's words ; ' is to be counted among those who fell for the sheriff ’ s <unk> 
 = Pont du Gard = 
 The Pont du Gard is an ancient Roman aqueduct that crosses the Gardon River in southern France . Located near the town of Vers @-@ Pont @-@ du @-@ Gard , the bridge is part of the Nîmes aqueduct , a 50 @-@ kilometre ( 31 mi ) system built in the first century AD to carry water from a spring at Uzès to the Roman colony of Nemausus ( Nîmes ) . Because of the uneven terrain between the two points , the mostly underground aqueduct followed a long , winding route that called for a bridge across the gorge of the Gardon River . The Pont du Gard is the highest of all elevated Roman aqueducts , and , along with the Aqueduct of Segovia , one of the best preserved . It was added to UNESCO 's list of World Heritage Sites in 1985 because of its historical importance . 
 The bridge has three tiers of arches , standing 48 @.@ 8 m ( 160 ft ) high . The whole aqueduct descends in height by only 17 m ( 56 ft ) over its entire length , while the bridge descends by a mere 2 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 1 in ) – a gradient of only 1 in 3 @,@ 000 – which is indicative of the great precision that Roman engineers were able to achieve , using only simple technology . The aqueduct formerly carried an estimated 200 @,@ 000 m3 ( 44 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of water a day to the fountains , baths and homes of the citizens of Nîmes . It continued to be used possibly until the 6th century , with some parts used for significantly longer , but lack of maintenance after the 4th century meant that it became increasingly clogged by mineral deposits and debris that eventually choked off the flow of water . 
 After the collapse of the Roman Empire and the aqueduct 's fall into disuse , the Pont du Gard remained largely intact , due to the importance of its secondary function , as a toll bridge . For centuries the local lords and bishops were responsible for its upkeep , in exchange for the right to levy tolls on travellers using it to cross the river , although some of its stones were looted and serious damage was inflicted on it in the 17th century . It attracted increasing attention starting in the 18th century , and became an important tourist destination . It underwent a series of renovations between the 18th and 21st centuries , commissioned by the local authorities and the French state , that culminated in 2000 with the opening of a new visitor centre and the removal of traffic and buildings from the bridge and the area immediately around it . Today it is one of France 's most popular tourist attractions , and has attracted the attention of a succession of literary and artistic visitors . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Route of the Nîmes aqueduct = = = 
 The location of Nemausus ( Nîmes ) was somewhat inconvenient when it came to providing a water supply . Plains lie to the city 's south and east , where any sources of water would be at too low an altitude to be able to flow to the city , while the hills to the west made a water supply route too difficult from an engineering point of view . The only real alternative was to look to the north and in particular to the area around <unk> ( Uzès ) , where there are natural springs . 
 The Nîmes aqueduct was built to channel water from the springs of the Fontaine d 'Eure near Uzès to the castellum <unk> ( repartition basin ) in Nemausus . From there , it was distributed to fountains , baths and private homes around the city . The straight @-@ line distance between the two is only about 20 km ( 12 mi ) but the aqueduct takes a winding route measuring around 50 km ( 31 mi ) . This was necessary to circumvent the southernmost foothills of the Massif Central , known as the Garrigues de Nîmes . They are difficult to cross , as they are covered in dense vegetation and <unk> and indented by deep valleys . It was impractical for the Romans to attempt to tunnel through the hills , as it would have required a tunnel of between 8 and 10 kilometres ( 5 and 6 mi ) , depending on the starting point . A roughly V @-@ shaped course around the eastern end of the Garrigues de Nîmes was therefore the only practical way of transporting the water from the spring to the city . 
 The Fontaine d 'Eure , at 76 m ( 249 ft ) above sea level , is only 17 m ( 56 ft ) higher than the repartition basin in Nîmes , but this provided a sufficient gradient to sustain a steady flow of water to the 50 @,@ 000 inhabitants of the Roman city . The aqueduct 's average gradient is only 1 in 3 @,@ 000 . It varies widely along its course , but is as little as 1 in 20 @,@ 000 in some sections . The Pont du Gard itself descends 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) in 456 m ( 1 @,@ 496 ft ) , a gradient of 1 in 18 @,@ 241 . The average gradient between the start and end of the aqueduct is far shallower than was usual for Roman aqueducts – only about a tenth of the average gradient of some of the aqueducts in Rome . 
 The reason for the disparity in gradients along the aqueduct 's route is that a uniform gradient would have meant that the Pont du Gard would have been <unk> high , given the limitations of the technology of the time . By varying the gradient along the route , the aqueduct 's engineers were able to lower the height of the bridge by 6 metres ( 20 ft ) to 48 @.@ 77 metres ( 160 @.@ 0 ft ) above the river – still exceptionally high by Roman standards , but within acceptable limits . This height limit governed the profile and gradients of the entire aqueduct , but it came at the price of creating a " sag " in the middle of the aqueduct . The gradient profile before the Pont du Gard is relatively steep , descending at 0 @.@ 67 metres ( 2 ft 2 in ) per kilometre , but thereafter it descends by only 6 metres ( 20 ft ) over the remaining 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) . In one section , the winding route between the Pont du Gard and St Bonnet required an extraordinary degree of accuracy from the Roman engineers , who had to allow for a fall of only 7 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 28 in ) per 100 metres ( 330 ft ) of the conduit . 
 It is estimated that the aqueduct supplied the city with around 200 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 44 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of water a day that took nearly 27 hours to flow from the source to the city . The water arrived in the castellum <unk> at Nîmes – an open , shallow , circular basin 5 @.@ 5 m in diameter by 1 m deep . It would have been surrounded by a balustrade within some sort of enclosure , probably under some kind of small but elaborate pavilion . When it was excavated , traces of a tiled roof , Corinthian columns and a fresco decorated with fish and dolphins were discovered in a fragmentary condition . The aqueduct water entered through an opening 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 ft 11 in ) wide , and ten large holes in the facing wall , each 40 centimetres ( 16 in ) wide , directed the water into the city 's main water pipes . Three large drains were also located in the floor , possibly to enable the nearby amphitheatre to be flooded rapidly to enable naumachia ( mock naval battles ) to be held . 
 The spring still exists and is now the site of a small modern pumping station . Its water is pure but high in dissolved calcium carbonate leached out of the surrounding limestone . This presented the Romans with significant problems in maintaining the aqueduct , as the carbonates precipitated out of the water during its journey through the conduit . This caused the flow of the aqueduct to become progressively reduced by deposits of calcareous sinter . Another threat was posed by vegetation penetrating the stone lid of the channel . As well as obstructing the flow of the water , dangling roots introduced algae and bacteria that decomposed in a process called <unk> , producing concretions within the conduit . It required constant maintenance by <unk> , workers responsible for the aqueduct 's upkeep , who crawled along the conduit scrubbing the walls clean and removing any vegetation . 
 Much of the Nîmes aqueduct was built underground , as was typical of Roman aqueducts . It was constructed by digging a trench in which a stone channel was built and enclosed by an arched roof of stone slabs , which was then covered with earth . Some sections of the channel are tunnelled through solid rock . In all , 35 km ( 22 mi ) of the aqueduct was constructed below the ground . The remainder had to be carried on the surface through conduits set on a wall or on arched bridges . Some substantial remains of the above @-@ ground works can still be seen today , such as the so @-@ called " Pont Rue " that stretches for hundreds of metres around Vers and still stands up to 7 @.@ 5 m ( 25 ft ) high . Other surviving parts include the Pont de <unk> , three arches carrying the aqueduct 17 m ( 56 ft ) across a stream ; the Pont de <unk> , near the Pont du Gard , which covers 32 m ( 105 ft ) across a small valley ; and three sections of aqueduct tunnel near <unk> , measuring up to 66 m ( 217 ft ) long . However , the Pont du Gard is by far the best preserved section of the entire aqueduct . 
 = = = Description of the bridge = = = 
 Built on three levels , the Pont is 49 m ( 161 ft ) high above the river at low water and 274 m ( 899 ft ) long . Its width varies from 9 m ( 30 ft ) at the bottom to 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) at the top . The three levels of arches are recessed , with the main piers in line one above another . The span of the arches varies slightly , as each was constructed independently to provide flexibility to protect against subsidence . Each level has a differing number of arches : 
 The first level of the Pont du Gard adjoins a road bridge that was added in the 18th century . The water conduit or <unk> , which is about 1 @.@ 8 m ( 6 ft ) high and 1 @.@ 2 m ( 4 ft ) wide , is carried at the top of the third level . The upper levels of the bridge are slightly curved in the upstream direction . It was long believed that the engineers had designed it this way deliberately to strengthen the bridge 's structure against the flow of water , like a dam wall . However , a <unk> survey carried out in 1989 showed that the bend is caused by the stone expanding and contracting by about 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) a day under the heat of the sun . Over the centuries , this process has produced the current deformation . 
 The Pont du Gard was constructed largely without the use of mortar or clamps . It contains an estimated 50 @,@ 400 tons of limestone with a volume of some 21 @,@ 000 m3 ( 740 @,@ 000 cu ft ) ; some of the individual blocks weigh up to 6 tons . Most of the stone was extracted from the local quarry of Estel located approximately 700 metres ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) downstream , on the banks of the Gardon River . The coarse @-@ grained soft reddish shelly limestone , known locally as " Pierre de Vers " , lends itself very well to dimension stone production . The blocks were precisely cut to fit perfectly together by friction alone , eliminating the need for mortar . The builders also left inscriptions on the stonework conveying various messages and instructions . Many blocks were numbered and inscribed with the required locations , such as <unk> <unk> or <unk> <unk> ( front right or front left ) , to guide the builders . 
 The method of construction is fairly well understood by historians . The patron of the aqueduct – a rich individual or the city of Nîmes itself – would have hired a large team of contractors and skilled labourers . A surveyor or <unk> planned the route using a <unk> for sighting , the <unk> for levelling , and a set of measuring poles five or ten Roman feet long . His figures and perhaps diagrams were recorded on wax tablets , later to be written up on scrolls . The builders may have used templates to guide them with tasks that required a high degree of precision , such as carving the standardised blocks from which the water conduit was constructed . 
 The builders would have made extensive use of cranes and block and tackle pulleys to lift the stones into place . Much of the work could have been done using simple <unk> operated by a windlass . For the largest blocks , a massive human @-@ powered treadmill would have been used ; such machines were still being used in the quarries of Provence until as late as the start of the 20th century . A complex scaffold was erected to support the bridge as it was being built . Large blocks were left protruding from the bridge to support the frames and scaffolds used during construction . The aqueduct as a whole would have been a very expensive undertaking ; Émile <unk> estimated the cost to be over 30 million sesterces , equivalent to 50 years ' pay for 500 new recruits in a Roman legion . 
 Although the exterior of the Pont du Gard is rough and relatively unfinished , the builders took care to ensure that the interior of the water conduit was as smooth as possible so that the flow of water would not be obstructed . The walls of the conduit were constructed from dressed masonry and the floor from concrete . Both were covered with a stucco incorporating minute shards of pottery and tile . It was painted with olive oil and covered with <unk> , a mixture of slaked lime , pork grease and the viscous juice of unripe figs . This produced a surface that was both smooth and durable . 
 Although the Pont du Gard is renowned for its appearance , its design is not optimal as the technique of stacking arches on top of each other is clumsy and inefficient ( and therefore expensive ) in the amount of materials it requires . Later aqueducts had a more sophisticated design , making greater use of concrete to reduce their volume and cost of construction . The Aqueduct bridge of Segovia and the Pont de les <unk> are of roughly similar length but use far fewer arches . Roman architects were eventually able to do away with " stacking " altogether . The Acueducto de los Milagros in Mérida , Spain and the <unk> <unk> aqueduct bridge , near <unk> , Algeria utilise tall , slender piers , constructed from top to bottom with concrete @-@ faced masonry and brick . 
 = = History = = 
 The construction of the aqueduct has long been credited to Augustus ' son @-@ in @-@ law and aide , Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa , around the year 19 BC . At the time , he was serving as aedile , the senior magistrate responsible for managing the water supply of Rome and its colonies . <unk> , writing in 1926 , linked the construction of the aqueduct with Agrippa 's visit to Narbonensis in that year . Newer excavations suggest the construction may have taken place between 40 and 60 AD . Tunnels dating from the time of Augustus had to be bypassed by the builders of the Nîmes aqueduct , and coins discovered in the outflow in Nîmes are no older than the reign of the emperor Claudius ( 41 – 54 AD ) . On this basis , a team led by Guilhem Fabre has argued that the aqueduct must have been completed around the middle of the 1st century AD . It is believed to have taken about fifteen years to build , employing between 800 and 1 @,@ 000 workers . 
 From the 4th century onwards , the aqueduct 's maintenance was neglected as successive waves of invaders disrupted the region . It became clogged with debris , encrustations and plant roots , greatly reducing the flow of the water . The resulting deposits in the conduit , consisting of layers of dirt and organic material , are up to 50 cm ( 20 in ) thick on each wall . An analysis of the deposits originally suggested that it had continued to supply water to Nîmes until as late as the 9th century , but more recent investigations suggest that it had gone out of use by about the sixth century , though parts of it may have continued to be used for significantly longer . 
 Although some of its stones were plundered for use elsewhere , the Pont du Gard remained largely intact . Its survival was due to its use as a toll bridge across the valley . In the 13th century the French king granted the seigneurs of Uzès the right to levy tolls on those using the bridge . The right later passed to the Bishops of Uzès . In return , they were responsible for maintaining the bridge in good repair . However , it suffered serious damage during the 1620s when Henri , Duke of Rohan made use of the bridge to transport his artillery during the wars between the French royalists and the Huguenots , whom he led . To make space for his artillery to cross the bridge , the duke had one side of the second row of arches cut away to a depth of about one @-@ third of their original thickness . This left a gap on the lowest deck wide enough to accommodate carts and cannons , but severely weakened the bridge in the process . 
 In 1703 the local authorities renovated the Pont du Gard to repair cracks , fill in ruts and replace the stones lost in the previous century . A new bridge was built by the engineer Henri Pitot in 1743 – 47 next to the arches of the lower level , so that the road traffic could cross on a purpose @-@ built bridge . The novelist Alexandre Dumas was strongly critical of the construction of the new bridge , commenting that " it was reserved for the eighteenth century to dishonour a monument which the barbarians of the fifth had not dared to destroy . " The Pont du Gard continued to deteriorate and by the time Prosper Mérimée saw it in 1835 it was at serious risk of collapse from erosion and the loss of stonework . 
 Napoleon III , who had a great admiration for all things Roman , visited the Pont du Gard in 1850 and took a close interest in it . He approved plans by the architect Charles <unk> to repair the bridge in a project which was carried out between 1855 – 58 , with funding provided by the Ministry of State . The work involved substantial renovations that included replacing the eroded stone , infilling some of the piers with concrete to aid stability and improving drainage by separating the bridge from the aqueduct . Stairs were installed at one end and the conduit walls were repaired , allowing visitors to walk along the conduit itself in reasonable safety . 
 There have been a number of subsequent projects to consolidate the piers and arches of the Pont du Gard . It has survived three serious floods over the last century ; in 1958 the whole of the lower tier was submerged by a giant flood that washed away other bridges , and in 1998 another major flood affected the area . A further flood struck in 2002 , badly damaging nearby installations . 
 The Pont du Gard was added to UNESCO 's list of World Heritage Sites in 1985 on the criteria of " Human creative genius ; testimony to cultural tradition ; significance to human history " . The description on the list states : " The hydraulic engineers and ... architects who conceived this bridge created a technical as well as artistic masterpiece . " 
 = = Tourism = = 
 The Pont du Gard has been a tourist attraction for centuries . The outstanding quality of the bridge 's masonry led to it becoming an obligatory stop for French journeymen masons on their traditional tour around the country ( see <unk> du Tour de France ) , many of whom have left their names on the stonework . From the 18th century onwards , particularly after the construction of the new road bridge , it became a famous staging @-@ post for travellers on the Grand Tour and became increasingly renowned as an object of historical importance and French national pride . 
 The bridge has had a long association with French monarchs seeking to associate themselves with a symbol of Roman imperial power . King Charles IX of France visited in 1564 during his Grand Tour of France and was greeted with a grand entertainment laid on by the Duc d <unk> . Twelve young girls dressed as nymphs came out of a cave by the riverside near the aqueduct and presented the king with pastry and preserved fruits . A century later , Louis XIV and his court visited the Pont du Gard during a visit to Nîmes in January 1660 shortly after the signature of the Treaty of the Pyrenees . In 1786 his great @-@ great @-@ great @-@ grandson Louis XVI commissioned the artist Hubert Robert to produce a set of paintings of Roman ruins of southern France to hang in the king 's new dining room at the Palace of Fontainebleau , including a picture depicting the Pont du Gard in an idealised landscape . The commission was meant to reassert the ties between the French monarchy and the imperial past . Napoleon III , in the mid @-@ 19th century , consciously identified with the Roman emperor Augustus and accorded great respect to Roman antiquities ; his patronage of the bridge 's restoration in the 1850s was essential to its survival . 
 By the 1990s the Pont du Gard had become a hugely popular tourist attraction but was congested with traffic – vehicles were still allowed to drive over the 1743 road bridge – and was cluttered with illegally built structures and tourist shops lining the river banks . As the architect Jean @-@ Paul <unk> put it , the " appetite for gain " had transformed the Pont du Gard into " a fairground attraction " . In 1996 the General Council of the Gard département began a major four @-@ year project to improve the area , sponsored by the French government , in conjunction with local sources , UNESCO and the EU . The entire area around the bridge was pedestrianised and a new visitor centre was built on the north bank to a design by Jean @-@ Paul <unk> . The redevelopment has ensured that the area around the Pont du Gard is now much quieter due to the removal of vehicle traffic , and the new museum provides a much improved historical context for visitors . The Pont du Gard is today one of France 's top five tourist attractions , with 1 @.@ 4 million visitors reported in 2001 . 
 = = = Literary visitors = = = 
 Since it became a tourist destination , many novelists and writers have visited the Pont du Gard and written of the experience . Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau was overwhelmed when he first visited it in 1738 : 
 I had been told to go and see the Pont du Gard ; I did not fail to do so . It was the first work of the Romans that I had seen . I expected to see a monument worthy of the hands which had constructed it . This time the object surpassed my expectation , for the only time in my life . Only the Romans could have produced such an effect . The sight of this simple and noble work struck me all the more since it is in the middle of a wilderness where silence and solitude render the object more striking and the admiration more lively ; for this so @-@ called bridge was only an aqueduct . One asks oneself what force has transported these enormous stones so far from any quarry , and what brought together the arms of so many thousands of men in a place where none of them live . I wandered about the three storeys of this superb edifice although my respect for it almost kept me from daring to trample it underfoot . The echo of my footsteps under these immense vaults made me imagine that I heard the strong voices of those who had built them . I felt myself lost like an insect in that immensity . While making myself small , I felt an indefinable something that raised up my soul , and I said to myself with a sigh , " Why was I not born a Roman ! " 
 The novelist Henry James , visiting in 1884 , was similarly impressed ; he described the Pont du Gard as " unspeakably imposing , and nothing could well be more Roman . " He commented : 
 The hugeness , the solidity , the unexpectedness , the monumental rectitude of the whole thing leave you nothing to say – at the time – and make you stand gazing . You simply feel that it is noble and perfect , that it has the quality of greatness ... When the vague twilight began to gather , the lonely valley seemed to fill itself with the shadow of the Roman name , as if the mighty empire were still as erect as the supports of the aqueduct ; and it was open to a solitary tourist , sitting there sentimental , to believe that no people has ever been , or will ever be , as great as that , measured , as we measure the greatness of an individual , by the push they gave to what they undertook . The Pont du Gard is one of the three or four deepest impressions they have left ; it speaks of them in a manner with which they might have been satisfied . 
 The mid @-@ 19th @-@ century writer Joseph Méry wrote in his 1853 book Les <unk> <unk> , contes nocturnes that on seeing the Pont du Gard : 
 [ O ] ne is struck dumb with astonishment ; you are walking in a desert where nothing reminds you of man ; cultivation has disappeared ; there are ravines , heaths , blocks of rock , clusters of rushes , oaks , massed together , a stream which flows by a melancholy strand , wild mountains , a silence like that of Thebaid , and in the midst of this landscape springs up the most magnificent object that civilization has created for the glory of the fine arts . 
 Hilaire Belloc wrote in 1928 that : 
 [ W ] hen one sees the thing all that is said of it comes true . Its isolation , its dignity , its weight , are all three awful . It looks as though it had been built long before all record by beings greater than ourselves , and were intended to stand long after the dissolution of our petty race . One can repose in it . I confess to a great reluctance to praise what has been praised too much ; but so it is . A man , suffering from the unrest of our time , might do worse than camp out for three days , fishing and bathing under the shadow of the Pont du Gard . 
 = Potcake dog = 
 The potcake dog is a mixed @-@ breed dog type found on several Caribbean islands . Its name comes from the congealed rice and pea mixture that local residents traditionally fed dogs . Although appearance varies , potcake dogs generally have smooth coats , cocked ears , and long faces . 
 = = History = = 
 Dogs on various Caribbean islands share a common ancestry ; many residents of Turks and Caicos were originally from nearby islands and took their dogs with them . Three types may have contributed to development : dogs the Arawak brought with them to the Bahamas ; terriers protecting supplies from rodents on ships that arrived in Eleuthera , New Providence , and the Abaco Islands ; and dogs from North Carolina that arrived with Loyalists during the American Revolutionary War period . It is also likely that the early Spanish settlers may have introduced their own dogs . As these could have included fighting dogs , the Arawak dogs may have been killed off . In addition , many breeds were imported in the 20th century which interbred with the local dogs , so making the mix of breeds in the potcake dynamic . DNA studies have shown no residue of early dog DNA in today 's potcakes . Any such remaining DNA has become inconsequential due to the constant imports of dogs with the arrival of colonizers . 
 The type 's name is derived from the term " potcake " , which refers to the congealed rice mixture at the bottom of the family cooking pot that Bahamians have traditionally fed dogs In Nassau alone , there are an estimated 5 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 stray potcakes . In the late 1970s , The Bahamas named the type the " Royal Bahamian Potcake " . As of February 2011 , the Bahamas Kennel Club lists it separately from the mixed @-@ breed dog within Group 9 – Non @-@ Registered . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 Although described as having a " shepherd @-@ mix " look , the potcake dog 's appearance varies by island . It may resemble a typical pariah dog or have hound , mastiff , spaniel , terrier , or retriever characteristics . The type typically has cocked ears , a long face , and a smooth coat without undercoat , or less commonly , a " shaggy " or rough coat . As a result of their mixed heritage , potcakes vary widely in terms of color , with many being brown , white , black , and far more with mixed coats . On average , a potcake dog will stand approximately 24 inches ( 61 cm ) at the withers . Healthy dogs typically weigh from 45 to 50 pounds ( 20 to 23 kg ) , while strays may weigh only 25 pounds ( 11 kg ) . 
 According to Jane Parker @-@ <unk> , potcake dogs are intelligent , loyal , calm , and hardy . Unlike many dog breeds , potcakes are able to eat many foods that would be upsetting to most dogs . Their stomachs are incredibly hardy , . However , they tend to wander if not properly confined or supervised . 
 = = <unk> and rescue efforts = = 
 The number of stray potcake dogs on the Turks and Caicos Islands has apparently increased , despite <unk> @-@ and @-@ neuter programmes designed to minimise their numbers . Because the territory is dependent on tourism , officials consider the dogs nuisances , and police have shot and poisoned them . <unk> have a median age of three years In the Bahamas , misconceptions about spaying and neutering dissuade residents from altering their pets . According to The Bahamas Advocates for Animal Rights group , there are 11 @,@ 000 unowned dogs in New Providence . Forty five percent of tourists report seeing roaming dogs , and two percent state they were " scared " by their presence . 
 Local organisations adopt out stray potcake dogs to alleviate the overpopulation problem . In 2005 , Turks and Caicos @-@ based rescue organisation Potcake Place became a registered charity . After running out of families to adopt to on Providenciales , volunteers connected with potential adopters through the rescue 's website <unk> and Facebook page . Puppies are vaccinated and sent on airlifts free of charge to adopters . Additionally , several no @-@ kill United States shelters accept potcake puppies . The Humane Society of Grand Bahama , located in Freeport , ships them to Florida on ferries . 
 Additional rescue programs exist in Puerto Rico and St. Croix . 
 = = Notable dogs = = 
 A potcake dog named Amigo is the mascot of the Humane Society of Grand Bahama and the <unk> Campaign , a collaboration with the HSUS to bring greater attention to animal welfare issues . He was also an Ambassador of Hope for homeless animals until his death due to cancer in 2007 . Amigo has appeared on MSNBC , Fox News , and CNN , and received the Ambassador of Goodwill and Hollywood Life Breakthrough of the Year 2007 awards . In 2009 , he was one of four potcake dogs honoured in a series of commemorative stamps . 
 Potcake dogs Daisy and Dusty , born in Providenciales and owned by Andy <unk> , are trained to locate fish through scent on the water and distant cries of feeding sea birds . They have been featured on television and in magazines , including Northeast Boating Magazine . 
 = The X @-@ Files ( season 8 ) = 
 The eighth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files commenced airing in the United States on November 5 , 2000 , concluded on May 20 , 2001 , and consisted of twenty @-@ one episodes . Season eight takes place after Fox Mulder 's ( David Duchovny ) alien abduction in the seventh season . The story arc for the search of Mulder continues until the second half of the season , while a new arc about Dana Scully 's ( Gillian Anderson ) pregnancy is formed . This arc would continue , and end , with the next season . The season explores various themes such as life , death , and belief . 
 For this season , Duchovny elected to return only as an intermittent main character , appearing in only half of the episodes . Actor Robert Patrick was hired as a replacement for Mulder , playing John Doggett . The season also marked the first appearance of Annabeth Gish as Monica Reyes , who would become a main character in the ninth season . In addition to the cast change , series creator Chris Carter updated the opening credits , which had remained unchanged since the first season . 
 Season eight was received well by critics but was less warmly received by fans , many of whom were unhappy that Duchovny reduced his role and that Patrick took over as co @-@ lead alongside Anderson . Ratings for the season were initially strong , but it eventually averaged a total of 13 @.@ 53 million viewers , down from the seventh season 's 14 @.@ 2 million . Concurrent with the airing of this season , Carter and The X @-@ Files production team created and aired a short @-@ lived spinoff titled The Lone Gunmen . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 At the end of the seventh season finale , " Requiem " , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) was abducted by aliens . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) meets Special Agent John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , the leader of an FBI taskforce organized to conduct a search for Mulder . Although the search ultimately proves unsuccessful , Doggett is assigned to the X @-@ Files and works with Scully to look for explanations to several cases . When Scully learns that several women have reportedly been abducted and impregnated with alien babies , she begins to question her own pregnancy and fears for her unborn child . 
 Doggett introduces Scully to Special Agent Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , an FBI specialist in ritualistic crime , shortly before Mulder 's deceased body suddenly appears in a forest at night . Following Mulder 's funeral , Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) is threatened by Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) that he must kill Scully 's baby before it is born . Billy Miles ( Zachary Ansley ) , a multiple abductee who disappeared on the same night as Mulder , is returned deceased but his dead body is resurrected and restored to full health . Mulder also returns from death , with Scully supervising his recovery . Fully rejuvenated , Mulder investigates several X @-@ Files , against orders to do so , but soon gets fired , leaving Doggett in charge of the cases . Mulder continues to provide input in an unofficial capacity . 
 Reluctantly accepting Krycek 's assistance , Mulder , Doggett and Skinner learn that an alien virus recently created in secret by members of the United States government has replaced several humans , including Miles and several high @-@ ranking FBI personnel , with so @-@ called alien " Super Soldiers " . Krycek claims that the soldiers are virtually unstoppable aliens who want to make sure that humans will not survive the colonisation of Earth . They have learned that Scully 's baby is a miraculously special child and are afraid that it may be greater than them . They have only recently learned of the baby 's importance , which is why Krycek told Skinner to kill the unborn child earlier . When Miles arrives at the FBI Headquarters , Mulder , Doggett , Skinner and Krycek help Scully to escape along with Reyes who drives her to a remote farm . Shortly after Skinner kills Krycek , Scully delivers an apparently normal baby while the alien super soldiers surround her . Without explanation , the aliens leave the area as Mulder arrives . While Doggett and Reyes report to the FBI Headquarters , Mulder takes Scully and their newborn son , William , back to her apartment . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 The eighth season of The X @-@ Files takes place in a science fiction environment and employs the common science fiction concepts of strongly differentiated characters fighting an unequivocally evil enemy , in this case , the alien Colonists . The first episode of the season , " Within " explores " loss " , " loneliness " and " pain " after the disappearance of Mulder . " Per Manum " included basic themes common in the series , such as " dark , foreboding terror " , an " overriding sense of paranoia " , and " the fear of the unknown " , among others . Later on , death and resurrection emerged as a major sub @-@ theme during the season , starting with " The Gift " , wherein John Doggett is killed and resurrected , and later in " Deadalive " when Mulder is brought back to life after apparently being dead for three months . This sub @-@ theme would continue well into the ninth season . The main story arc of the season dealt with the idea that , at times , humanity is a greater danger to itself . This theme is made manifest by the Syndicate and the human conspiracy with the aliens . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The series ' original title sequence , crafted in 1993 during the show 's first season had remained unchanged for seven seasons . With the partial loss of Duchovny after the seventh season finale , the decision was made to update the credits , which were first featured in the premiere episode of season eight , " Within " . The opening sequence now included new images , updated FBI badge photos for Duchovny and Anderson , and the addition of Patrick to the main cast . Duchovny 's badge features in the opening credits only when he appears in an episode . The opening contains images of Scully 's pregnancy and , according to Frank Spotnitz , shows an " abstract " explanation for Mulder 's absence in this season , with him falling into an eye . 
 After the partial departure of Duchovny , Carter decided to focus almost solely on the character of Doggett during the first half of the season . This led to some unhappiness from the cast and critics , most notably Duchovny and Anderson . According to Tom Kessenich in his book Examinations , Anderson reportedly " wasn 't thrilled " with the lack of attention her character was getting ; instead , the writers were crafting episodes solely for Doggett because he was the show 's new " voice " . Duchovny , on the other hand , was unhappy because Mulder 's abduction was never properly examined . Reportedly , Duchovny offered to write and direct an episode based around the conceit of Mulder being trapped in the alien spaceship , as seen in the season opener " Within " and " Without " . Carter , however , nixed the idea because " it was not about Doggett . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The show 's seventh season was a time of closure for The X @-@ Files . Characters within the show were written out — including Cigarette Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) and Mulder 's mother ( Rebecca Toolan ) — and several plot threads were resolved , including the fate of Fox Mulder 's sister Samantha . Furthermore , after settling his contract dispute , Duchovny quit the show . This contributed to uncertainties over the likelihood of an eighth season . Carter and most fans felt the show was at its natural endpoint with Duchovny 's departure , and Carter penned " Requiem " , the finale episode of the seventh season , as a possible series finale . However , at the last minute , a new season was ordered and Duchovny agreed to star part @-@ time , returning for 12 episodes instead of 21 . Due to this change , the producers found it difficult to write Duchovny 's character out of the script , but also eventually explain Mulder 's absence if there were to be an upcoming season . Eventually , it was decided to have the character abducted by aliens . 
 Hoping to continue the series , Carter introduced a new central character to replace Mulder : John Doggett . More than 100 actors auditioned for the role , with only about ten considered by the producers . Lou Diamond Phillips and Hart Bochner were among the auditionees , and Phillips , Bochner and Bruce Campbell ( who played Wayne Weinsider in a previous episode of The X @-@ Files ) were considered for the role , but the producers eventually choose Robert Patrick . The season also introduced Monica Reyes ( portrayed by Annabeth Gish ) , who would become a main character in the following season . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Chris Carter , who also served as executive producer and showrunner during the season , wrote or co @-@ wrote the bulk of the episodes for the season , with nine of the twenty one episodes . Of the nine , four were co @-@ written with executive producer Frank Spotnitz . Carter also wrote five episodes solo , and Spotnitz wrote four episodes solo . The rest of the writing staff contributed one or two episodes . Vince Gilligan was promoted to executive producer and wrote one episode . John Shiban was promoted to co @-@ executive producer and wrote one episode . David Amann was promoted to producer and wrote one episode . Jeffrey Bell was promoted to executive story editor and wrote one episode . Greg Walker was promoted to executive story editor and wrote two episodes . Steven Maeda was promoted to story editor and wrote two episodes . Daniel Arkin , who wrote a freelance episode for the series previously , returned to contribute to the story for one episode . 
 Kim Manners was promoted to co @-@ executive producer and directed the most of episodes of the season with seven . Directors who directed multiple episodes for the season included Tony Wharmby who directed four , Rod Hardy directed three , and Richard Compton directed two . Peter Markle , Terrence O 'Hara , and Barry K. Thomas each directed one episode . Carter directed a single episode , while writer Spotnitz made his directorial debut . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 David Duchovny as Special Agent Fox Mulder ( 12 episodes ) a 
 Gillian Anderson as Special Agent Dana Scully ( 20 episodes ) b 
 Robert Patrick as Special Agent John Doggett ( 21 episodes ) 
 a ^ Although appearing in only 12 episodes , Duchovny is listed credited as " starring " in the opening credits for the episodes in which he appeared . 
 b ^ She does not appear in " The Gift " , except in archived footage . 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = = = Also starring = = = = 
 Mitch Pileggi as Walter Skinner ( 12 episodes ) 
 Annabeth Gish as Monica Reyes ( 4 episodes ) 
 Nicholas Lea as Alex Krycek ( 3 episodes ) 
 = = = = Guest starring = = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Episodes marked with a double dagger ( ) are episodes in the series ' Alien Mythology arc . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Reportedly , Patrick was cast due to the hopes that his featured role in Terminator 2 : Judgment Day ( 1991 ) would attract a great 18- to 35 @-@ year @-@ old male demographic to the show . Early on , Fox executives reported a 10 percent overall increase in the demographic , solely due to Patrick 's casting . " Within " , the season 's first episode , earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 5 , meaning that it was seen by 9 @.@ 5 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 15 @.@ 87 million viewers , which marked an 11 % decrease from the seventh season opener , " The Sixth Extinction . " The highest @-@ rated episode of the season was " This is Not Happening " , which was viewed by 16 @.@ 9 million viewers , making it the most @-@ watched episode of the series , in terms of viewers , since " The Sixth Extinction " . The season finale , " Existence " , earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 4 , meaning that it was seen by 8 @.@ 4 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was watched by 14 million viewers , overall . The nine episodes of the season that did not feature Mulder averaged only 13 million viewers , whereas the twelve episodes that did feature Mulder averaged 13 @.@ 93 million viewers , almost a difference of one million . The season averaged a total of 13 @.@ 53 million viewers , down from the seventh season 's 14 @.@ 2 million . 
 During 2000 , companies were paying Fox $ 225 @,@ 000 for every 30 @-@ second spot that would air between acts of The X @-@ Files . Many Information technology ( IT ) companies were buying commercials during the show , largely due to the fact that " many [ ' coders IT geeks ' ] get their weekly fix of science fiction from this prime @-@ time show . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The show 's eighth season received mixed to positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club noted that the first eight seasons of The X @-@ Files were " good @-@ to @-@ great " , and that the eighth season of the show was " revitalized by the new ' search for Mulder ' story @-@ arc . " John C. Snider of <unk> gave the season a favorable review , calling it " great " and describing its episodes as " pretty strong " . Collin <unk> of DVD Times said that the season included " more hits than misses overall " but was throughout negative about the mythology episodes claiming them to be the " weakest " episodes in the season . Many critics eventually accepted Doggett 's character . Anita Gates of The New York Times said that most fans had " accepted " the introduction of the character and further stated that he actually looked " Like a Secret Service Agent . " Carter commented on the character , saying " Everybody likes Robert Patrick and the character " , but further stating that the fans " miss " Duchovny 's character , Mulder . Dave Golder of SFX called Patrick " superb " and noted that his entrance in the series " inject [ ed ] a sense of pragmatism and good old @-@ fashioned plain @-@ speaking in to the show which we didn 't realise was missing until we got it . " Entertainment Weekly reviewer Ken Tucker said that Patrick 's portrayal of Doggett was " hardboiled alertness " , giving mostly positive reviews about his inclusion . Cynthia Littleton of The Hollywood Reporter described the season as the show 's " swan song " . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Jesse Hassenger from PopMatters gave a negative review to the season , claiming that Patrick was mis @-@ cast and calling David Duchovny 's appearances as Fox Mulder shallow . Golder criticized the season for " recycling plots with gusto " and for featuring Mulder falling into Scully 's eye in the opening credits , noting that it " gives Duchovny too much of a lingering presence on the show , reinforcing prejudices against Patrick as some kind of ' imposter ' . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 " This Is Not Happening " was nominated for an American Society of Cinematographers award for cinematography . Robert Patrick won a Saturn Award in the category " Best Television Actor " in 2001 for his role as Doggett , that year Gillian Anderson was nominated in the category " Best Actress on Television " and the series itself was nominated in the category " Best Network Television Series " in the Saturn Awards , but failed to win . Anderson was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild award the very same year in the category " Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series " . The X @-@ Files won its last Emmy Award with " Deadalive " , and Bill Roe received a nomination for " Outstanding Cinematography for a Single @-@ Camera Series " . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 = Emmett Till = 
 Emmett Louis Till ( July 25 , 1941 – August 28 , 1955 ) was an African @-@ American teenager who was lynched in Mississippi at the age of 14 after reportedly flirting with a white woman . 
 Till was from Chicago , Illinois , and visiting relatives in Money , a small town in the Mississippi Delta region . He spoke to 21 @-@ year @-@ old Carolyn Bryant , the married proprietor of a small grocery store there . Several nights later , Bryant 's husband Roy and his half @-@ brother J. W. Milam went to Till 's great @-@ uncle 's house and abducted the boy . They took him away and beat and mutilated him before shooting him and sinking his body in the Tallahatchie River . Three days later , Till 's body was discovered and retrieved from the river . 
 Till 's body was returned to Chicago . His mother , who had mostly raised him , insisted on a public funeral service with an open casket to show the world the brutality of the killing . " The open @-@ coffin funeral held by Mamie Till Bradley exposed the world to more than her son Emmett Till 's bloated , mutilated body . Her decision focused attention not only on American racism and the barbarism of lynching but also on the limitations and vulnerabilities of American democracy " . Tens of thousands attended his funeral or viewed his casket and images of his mutilated body were published in black @-@ oriented magazines and newspapers , rallying popular black support and white sympathy across the U.S. Intense scrutiny was brought to bear on the condition of black civil rights in Mississippi , with newspapers around the country critical of the state . Although initially local newspapers and law enforcement officials decried the violence against Till and called for justice , they soon began responding to national criticism by defending Mississippians , which eventually transformed into support for the killers . 
 In September 1955 , Bryant and Milam were acquitted of Till 's kidnapping and murder . Protected against double jeopardy , Bryant and Milam publicly admitted in an interview with Look magazine that they killed Till . Problems identifying Till affected the trial , partially leading to Bryant 's and Milam 's acquittals , and the case was officially reopened by the United States Department of Justice in 2004 . As part of the investigation , the body was exhumed and autopsied resulting in a positive identification . He was reburied in a new casket , which is the standard practice in cases of body exhumation . His original casket was donated to the Smithsonian Institution . 
 The trial of Bryant and Milam attracted a vast amount of press attention . Till 's murder is noted as a pivotal catalyst to the next phase of the Civil Rights Movement . Events surrounding Emmett Till 's life and death , according to historians , continue to resonate . Some writers have suggested that almost every story about Mississippi returns to Till , or the region in which he died , in " some spiritual , homing way " . 
 = = Early childhood = = 
 Emmett Till was the son of Mamie Carthan ( 1921 – 2003 ) and Louis Till ( 1922 – 1945 ) . Emmett 's mother was born in the small Delta town of Webb , Mississippi . The Delta region encompasses the large , multi @-@ county area of northwestern Mississippi in the watershed of the Yazoo and Mississippi rivers . When Carthan was two years old , her family moved to Argo , Illinois , as part of the Great Migration of rural black families out of the South to the North to escape lack of opportunity and unequal treatment under the law . Argo received so many Southern migrants it was named " Little Mississippi " ; Carthan 's mother 's home was often used as a way station for people who had just moved from the South as they were trying to find jobs and housing . Mississippi was the poorest state in the U.S. in the 1950s , and the Delta counties were some of the poorest in Mississippi . 
 In Tallahatchie County , where Mamie Carthan was born , the average income per household in 1949 was $ 690 ( $ 6 @,@ 755 in 2013 dollars ) ; for black families it was $ 462 ( $ 4 @,@ 523 in 2013 dollars ) . Economic opportunities for blacks were almost nonexistent . Most of them were sharecroppers who lived on land owned by whites . Blacks had essentially been excluded from voting and the political system since the white @-@ dominated legislature passed a new constitution in 1890 , and had very few legal rights . 
 Till was born in Chicago and nicknamed " Bobo " as an infant by a family friend . His mother Mamie largely raised him with her mother ; she and Louis Till separated in 1942 after she discovered he had been unfaithful . Louis later choked her to unconsciousness , to which she responded by throwing scalding water at him . For violating court orders to stay away from Mamie , Emmett 's father Louis was forced by a judge to choose between jail or enlisting in the U.S. Army in 1943 ; he was executed in Italy in 1945 after being convicted of rape and murder by a court @-@ martial . At the age of six Emmett contracted polio , leaving him with a persistent stutter . Mamie and Emmett moved to Detroit , where she met and married " Pink " Bradley in 1951 . Emmett preferred to live in Chicago , so he relocated to live with his grandmother ; his mother and stepfather rejoined him later that year . After the marriage dissolved in 1952 , Bradley returned to Detroit . 
 Mamie Till Bradley and Emmett lived together in a busy neighborhood in Chicago 's South Side , near extended relatives . She began working as a civilian clerk for the U.S. Air Force for a better salary and recalled that Emmett was industrious enough to help with chores at home , although he sometimes got distracted . His mother remembered that he did not know his own limitations at times . Following his and Mamie 's separation , Bradley visited and began threatening her . At eleven years old , Emmett , with a butcher knife in hand , told Bradley he would kill him if Bradley did not leave . Usually , however , Emmett was happy . He and his cousins and friends pulled pranks on each other ( Emmett once took advantage of an extended car ride when his friend fell asleep and placed the friend 's underwear on his head ) , and spent their free time in pickup baseball games . He was a <unk> dresser and often the center of attention among his peers . 
 In 1955 , Emmett was stocky and muscular , weighing about 150 pounds ( 68 kg ) and standing 5 feet 4 inches ( 1 @.@ 63 m ) . Despite his being 14 years old , whites in Mississippi claimed Till looked like an adult . Mamie Till Bradley 's uncle , 64 @-@ year @-@ old Mose Wright , visited her and Emmett in Chicago during the summer and told Emmett stories about living in the Mississippi Delta . Emmett wanted to see for himself . Bradley was ready for a vacation and planned to take Emmett with her , but after he begged her to visit Wright , she relented . Wright planned to accompany Till with a cousin , Wheeler Parker , and another , Curtis Jones , would join them soon . Wright was a sharecropper and part @-@ time minister who was often called " Preacher " . He lived in Money , Mississippi , a small town in the Delta that consisted of three stores , a school , a post office , a cotton gin , and a couple hundred residents , 8 miles ( 13 km ) north of Greenwood . Before Emmett departed for the Delta , his mother cautioned him that Chicago and Mississippi were two different worlds , and he should know how to behave in front of whites in the South . He assured her he understood . 
 Since 1882 , when statistics on lynchings began to be collected , more than 500 African Americans had been killed by extrajudicial violence in Mississippi alone , and more than 3 @,@ 000 across the South . Most of the incidents took place between 1876 and 1930 ; though far less common by the mid @-@ 1950s , these racially motivated murders still occurred . Throughout the South , whites publicly prohibited interracial relationships ( while indulging in affairs with black women ) as a means to maintain white supremacy . This was meant to " protect " white women from black men . Even the suggestion of sexual contact between black men and white women could carry severe penalties for black men . A resurgence of the enforcement of such Jim Crow mores was evident following World War II , when African @-@ American veterans started pressing for equal rights in the South . 
 Racial tensions increased further after the United States Supreme Court 's 1954 decision in Brown v. Board of Education to end segregation in public education , which it ruled as unconstitutional . Many segregationists believed the ruling would lead to interracial marriage . Whites strongly resisted the court 's ruling , in the case of a Virginia county , closing all the public schools to prevent integration . Other jurisdictions simply ignored the ruling . In other ways , whites used stronger measures to keep blacks politically disenfranchised , which they had been since the turn of the century. in the South was to constrain blacks forcefully from any semblance of social equality . 
 A week before Till arrived in Mississippi , a black activist named Lamar Smith was shot and killed in front of the county courthouse in Brookhaven for political organizing . Three white suspects were arrested , but they were soon released . 
 = = Encounter between Till and Carolyn Bryant = = 
 Till arrived in Money , Mississippi on August 21 , 1955 . On August 24 , he and cousin Curtis Jones skipped church where his great @-@ uncle Wright was preaching , joining some local boys as they went to Bryant 's Grocery and Meat Market to buy candy . The teenagers were children of sharecroppers and had been picking cotton all day . The market was owned by a white couple , 24 @-@ year @-@ old Roy Bryant and his 21 @-@ year @-@ old wife Carolyn ; it mostly served the local sharecropper population . Carolyn was alone in the store that day ; her sister @-@ in @-@ law was in the rear of the store watching children . Jones left Till with the other boys while Jones played checkers across the street . 
 According to Jones , the other boys reported that Till had a photograph of an integrated class at the school he attended in Chicago , and Till bragged to the boys that the white children in the picture were his friends . He pointed to a white girl in the picture , or referred to a picture of a white girl that had come with his new wallet , and said she was his girlfriend . One or more of the local boys dared Till to speak to Bryant . 
 The facts of what took place in the store are still disputed . According to several versions , including comments from some of the kids standing outside the store when Till walked in , Till may have wolf @-@ whistled at Bryant . A newspaper account following his disappearance stated that Till sometimes whistled to alleviate his stuttering . His speech was sometimes unclear ; his mother said he had particular difficulty with pronouncing " b " sounds , and he may have whistled to overcome problems asking for bubble gum . According to other stories , Till may have grabbed Bryant 's hand and asked her for a date , or said " Bye , baby " as he left the store , or " You needn 't be afraid of me , baby , I 've been with white women before . " 
 Bryant testified during the murder trial that Till grabbed her hand while she was stocking candy and said , " How about a date , baby ? " She said that after she freed herself from his grasp , the young man followed her to the cash register , grabbed her waist and said , " What 's the matter baby , can 't you take it ? " Bryant said she freed herself , and Till said , " You needn 't be afraid of me , baby , " used " one ' unprintable ' word " and said " I 've been with white women before . " Bryant also alleged that one of Till 's companions came into the store , grabbed him by the arm , and ordered him to leave . 
 Till 's cousin , Simeon Wright , writing about the incident decades later , challenged Carolyn Bryant 's account . Entering the store " less than a minute " after Till was left inside alone with Bryant , Wright saw no inappropriate behavior and heard " no lecherous conversation . " Wright said Till " paid for his items and we left the store together . " The FBI noted in their 2006 investigation of the cold case that a second anonymous source , who was confirmed to have been in the store at the same time as Till and his cousin , supported Wright 's account . 
 In any event , Bryant was allegedly so alarmed she ran outside to a car to retrieve a pistol from under the seat . Upon seeing her do this , the teenagers left immediately . It was acknowledged that while Bryant was running to her car , Till whistled . However , it is disputed whether Till whistled toward Carolyn or toward a checkers game that was occurring just across the street . 
 One of the other boys ran across the street to tell Curtis Jones what happened in the store . When the older man with whom Jones was playing checkers heard the story , he urged the boys to leave quickly , fearing violence . Bryant told others of the events at the store , and the story spread quickly . Jones and Till declined to tell his great @-@ uncle Mose Wright , fearing they would get in trouble . Till said he wanted to return home to Chicago . Carolyn 's husband Roy Bryant was on an extended trip hauling shrimp to Texas and did not return home until August 27 . 
 = = Murder = = 
 When Roy Bryant was told of what had happened , he aggressively questioned several young black men who entered the store . That evening , Bryant , with a black man named J. W. Washington , approached a young black man walking along a road . Bryant ordered Washington to seize the young man , put him in the back of a pickup truck , and took him to be identified by a companion of Carolyn 's who had witnessed the episode with Till . Friends or parents vouched for the young men in Bryant 's store , and Carolyn 's companion denied that the young man Bryant and Washington seized was the one who had accosted her . Somehow , Bryant learned that the young man in the incident was from Chicago and was staying with Mose Wright . Several witnesses overheard Bryant and his 36 @-@ year @-@ old half @-@ brother John William " J. W. " Milam discussing taking Till from his house . 
 In the early morning hours — between 2 : 00 am and 3 : 30 am — on August 28 , 1955 , Bryant , Milam , and another man ( who may have been black ) drove to Mose Wright 's house . Milam was armed with a pistol and a flashlight . He asked Wright if he had three boys in the house from Chicago . Till shared a bed with another cousin ; there were eight people in the small two @-@ bedroom cabin . Milam asked Wright to take them to " the nigger who did the talking " . When they asked Till if it was him , he replied , " Yeah " , for which they threatened to shoot him and told him to get dressed . The men threatened to kill Wright if he reported what he had seen . Till 's great @-@ aunt offered the men money , but they did not respond . 
 They put Till in the back of a pickup truck and drove to a barn at the Clint <unk> Plantation in Drew . Till was pistol @-@ whipped and placed in the bed of the pickup truck again and covered with a tarpaulin . Throughout the course of the night , Bryant , Milam , and witnesses recall their being in several locations with Till . According to some witnesses , they took Till to a shed behind Milam 's home in the nearby town of Glendora , where they beat him again and tried to decide what to do . Witnesses recall between two and four white men and two and four black men who were either in or surrounding the pickup truck where Till was seated . Others passed by Milam 's shed and heard someone being beaten . Accounts differ as to when Till was shot ; either in Milam 's shed or by the Tallahatchie River . The group drove with him in the truck to Bryant 's store , where several people noticed blood pooling in the truck bed . Bryant explained he killed a deer , and in one instance showed the body to a black man who questioned him , saying " that 's what happens to smart niggers " . 
 In an interview with William Bradford Huie , published in Look magazine in 1956 , Bryant and Milam said they intended to beat Till and throw him off an embankment into the river to frighten him . They told Huie that while they were beating Till , he called them bastards , declared he was as good as they , and had had sexual encounters with white women . They put Till in the back of their truck , drove to a cotton gin to take a 70 @-@ pound ( 32 kg ) fan — the only time they admitted to being worried , thinking that by this time in early daylight they would be spotted and accused of stealing — and drove for several miles along the river looking for a place to dispose of Till . They shot him by the river and weighted his body with the fan . 
 Mose Wright stayed on his front porch for twenty minutes waiting for Till to return . He did not go back to bed . He and another man went into Money , got gasoline , and drove around trying to find Till . Unsuccessful , they returned home by 8 : 00 am . After hearing from Wright that he would not call the police because he feared for his life , Curtis Jones placed a call to the Leflore County sheriff and another to his mother in Chicago . Distraught , she called Emmett 's mother Mamie Till Bradley . Wright and his wife also drove to Sumner , where Elizabeth Wright 's brother contacted the sheriff . 
 Bryant and Milam were questioned by Leflore County sheriff George Smith . They admitted they had taken the boy from his great @-@ uncle 's yard but claimed they had released him the same night in front of Bryant 's store . Bryant and Milam were arrested for kidnapping . Word got out that Till was missing , and soon Medgar Evers , Mississippi state field secretary for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) and <unk> Moore , head of the Bolivar County chapter , became involved . They disguised themselves as cotton pickers and went into the cotton fields in search of any information that might help find Till . 
 Three days after his abduction , Till 's swollen and disfigured body was found by two boys fishing in the Tallahatchie River . His head was very badly damaged . He had been shot above the right ear , an eye was dislodged from the socket , there was evidence that he had been beaten on the back and the hips , and his body weighted by the fan blade , which was fastened around his neck with barbed wire . He was nude , but wearing a silver ring with the initials " L. T. " and " May 25 , 1943 " carved in it . 
 Confusion about Till 's whereabouts and a positive identification of the body retrieved from the river compounded issues in the case that eventually influenced the trial . <unk> Carter in the Delta Democrat @-@ Times , a local Mississippi newspaper , reported that Till may have been hidden by his relatives or perhaps returned to Chicago for his safety . The body 's face was unrecognizable due to trauma and having been submerged in water . Mose Wright was called to the river and identified Till . The silver ring Till wore was removed and returned to Wright , and further passed to the district attorney . Stories from witnesses , both black and white , conflict about whether the ring was on Till 's body and who knew he had worn it previously . 
 = = Funeral and reaction = = 
 Although lynchings and racially motivated murders had occurred throughout the South for decades , the circumstances surrounding Emmett Till and the timing acted as a catalyst to attract national attention to the case of a 14 @-@ year @-@ old boy who had unknowingly defied a severe social caste system . Till 's murder aroused feelings about segregation , law enforcement , relations between the North and South , the social status quo in Mississippi , the NAACP , White Citizens ' Councils , and the Cold War , all of which were played out in a drama staged in newspapers all over the U.S. and abroad . 
 When Till went missing , a three @-@ paragraph story was printed in the Greenwood Commonwealth and quickly picked up by other Mississippi newspapers . They reported on his death when the body was found , and the next day , when a picture of him his mother had taken the previous Christmas showing them smiling together appeared in the Jackson Daily News and Vicksburg Evening Post , editorials and letters to the editor were printed expressing shame at the people who had caused Till 's death . One read , " Now is the time for every citizen who loves the state of Mississippi to ' Stand up and be counted ' before hoodlum white trash brings us to destruction . " The letter said that Negroes were not the downfall of Mississippi society , but whites like those in White Citizens ' Councils that condoned violence . 
 Till 's body was clothed , packed in lime , and put in a pine coffin and prepared for burial . It may have been embalmed while in Mississippi . Mamie Till Bradley demanded that the body be sent to Chicago ; she later said that she worked to halt an immediate burial in Mississippi and called several local and state authorities in Illinois and Mississippi to make sure that her son was returned to Chicago . A doctor did not examine Till post @-@ mortem . 
 Mississippi 's governor , Hugh L. White , deplored the murder , asserting that local authorities should pursue a " vigorous prosecution " . He sent a telegram to the national offices of the NAACP promising a full investigation and assuring them " Mississippi does not condone such conduct " . Delta residents , both black and white , also distanced themselves from Till 's murder , finding the circumstances abhorrent . Local newspaper editorials denounced the murderers without question . Leflore County Deputy Sheriff John Cothran stated , " The white people around here feel pretty mad about the way that poor little boy was treated , and they won 't stand for this . " 
 Soon , however , discourse about Till 's murder became more complex . Robert B. Patterson , executive secretary of the segregationist White Citizens ' Council , lamented Till 's death by reiterating that racial segregation policies were in force for blacks ' safety and that their efforts were being neutralized by the NAACP . In response , NAACP executive secretary Roy Wilkins characterized the incident as a lynching and said that Mississippi was trying to maintain white supremacy through murder . He said , " there is in the entire state no restraining influence of decency , not in the state capital , among the daily newspapers , the clergy , nor any segment of the so @-@ called better citizens " . Mamie Till Bradley told a reporter that she would seek legal aid to help law enforcement find her son 's killers and that the State of Mississippi should share the financial responsibility . She was misquoted ; it came out as " Mississippi is going to pay for this " . 
 The A. A. Rayner Funeral Home in Chicago received Till 's body . Upon arrival , Bradley insisted on viewing it to make a positive identification , later stating that the stench from it was noticeable two blocks away . She decided to have an open @-@ casket funeral , saying , " There was just no way I could describe what was in that box . No way . And I just wanted the world to see . " Tens of thousands of people lined the street outside the mortuary to view Till 's body , and days later thousands more attended his funeral at Roberts Temple Church of God in Christ . 
 Photographs of his mutilated corpse circulated around the country , notably appearing in Jet magazine and The Chicago Defender , both black publications , and drew intense public reaction . According to The Nation and Newsweek , Chicago 's black community was " aroused as it has not been over any similar act in recent history " . Till was buried on September 6 in Burr Oak Cemetery in <unk> , Illinois . 
 News about Emmett Till spread to both coasts . Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley and Illinois Governor William Stratton also became involved , urging Governor White to see that justice be done . The tone in Mississippi newspapers changed dramatically . They falsely reported riots in the funeral home in Chicago . Bryant and Milam appeared in photos smiling in military uniforms and Carolyn Bryant 's beauty and virtue were extolled . Rumors of an invasion of outraged blacks and northern whites were printed throughout the state so that the Leflore County sheriff took them seriously . Local businessman , surgeon , and civil rights proponent T. R. M. Howard , one of the wealthiest blacks in the state , warned of a " second civil war " if " slaughtering of Negroes " was allowed . Following Wilkins ' comments , white opinion began to shift . According to historian Stephen Whitfield , a specific brand of xenophobia in the South was particularly strong in Mississippi , urging whites to reject the influence of Northern opinion and agitation . This independent attitude was profound enough in Tallahatchie County that it earned the nickname " The Freestate of Tallahatchie " , according to a former sheriff , " because people here do what they damn well please " , making the county often difficult to govern . 
 Tallahatchie County Sheriff Clarence Strider , who initially positively identified Till 's body and stated that the case against Milam and Bryant was " pretty good " , on September 3 announced his doubts that the body pulled from the Tallahatchie River was that of Till , who , he speculated , was probably still alive . Strider suggested that the recovered body had been planted by the NAACP : a cadaver stolen by T. R. M. Howard , who colluded to place Till 's ring on it . Strider changed his account after the comments made in the press about the people of Mississippi , later saying , " The last thing I wanted to do was to defend those <unk> . But I just had no choice about it . " 
 Bryant and Milam were indicted for murder . The grand jury 's prosecuting attorney , Hamilton Caldwell , was not confident that he could get a conviction in a case of white violence against a black male accused of insulting a white woman . A local black paper was surprised at the indictment and praised the decision , as did the New York Times . The high @-@ profile comments made in Northern newspapers and by the NAACP concerned the prosecuting attorney , Gerald Chatham ; he worried that his office would not be able to secure a guilty verdict , despite their compelling evidence . Having limited funds , Bryant and Milam initially had difficulty finding attorneys to represent them , but five attorneys at a Sumner law firm offered their services pro bono . Collection jars were placed in stores and other public places in the Delta , eventually gathering $ 10 @,@ 000 for the defense . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The town of Sumner in Tallahatchie County served as the venue for the trial as the body had been found there . Sumner had one boarding house ; the small town was besieged by reporters from all over the country . David Halberstam called it " the first great media event of the civil rights movement " . A reporter who had covered the trials of Bruno Hauptmann and Machine Gun Kelly remarked that this was the most publicity for any trial he had ever seen . No hotels were available for black visitors . Mamie Till Bradley arrived to testify and the trial also attracted black congressman Charles Diggs from Michigan . Bradley , Diggs , and several black reporters stayed at Howard 's home in Mound Bayou . Located on a large lot and surrounded by Howard 's armed guards , it resembled a compound . The day before the start of the trial , a young black man named Frank Young arrived to tell Howard he knew of two witnesses to the crime . Levi " Too Tight " Collins and Henry Lee Loggins were black employees of Leslie Milam , J. W. ' s brother , in whose shed Till was beaten . Collins and Loggins were spotted with J. W. Milam , Bryant , and Till . The prosecution team was unaware of Collins and Loggins . Sheriff Strider , however , booked them into the Charleston , Mississippi jail to keep them from testifying . 
 The trial was held in September 1955 , lasting for five days ; and attendees remember the weather being very hot . The courtroom was filled to its 280 @-@ spectator capacity , and as a matter of course was racially segregated . Press from major national newspapers attended , including black publications ; black reporters were made to sit segregated from the white press , farther from the jury . Sheriff Strider welcomed black spectators coming back from lunch with a cheerful , " Hello , Niggers ! " Some visitors from the North found the court to be run with surprising informality . Jury members were allowed to drink beer on duty , and many white men in the audience wore handguns holstered to their belts . 
 The defense 's primary strategy was arguing that the body pulled from the river could not be positively identified , and they questioned whether Till was dead at all . The defense asserted that Bryant and Milam had taken Till , but had let him go . They attempted to prove that Mose Wright — who was addressed as " Uncle Mose " by the prosecution and " Mose " by the defense — could not identify Bryant and Milam as the men who took Till from his cabin . Only Milam 's flashlight was in use , and no other lights in the house were turned on . Milam and Bryant identified themselves to Wright the evening they took Till — the third man did not speak — but Wright only saw Milam clearly . Wright 's testimony was considered remarkably courageous and a first in the state for a black man implicating the guilt of a white man in court . 
 Journalist James Hicks , who worked for the black news wire service , the National Negro Publishers Association , ( later renamed the National Newspaper Publishers Association ) , was present in the courtroom ; he was especially impressed that Wright stood to identify Milam , pointing to him and saying " Thar he " ( There he is ) , calling it a historic moment and one filled with " electricity " . A writer for the New York Post noted that following his identification , Wright sat " with a lurch which told better than anything else the cost in strength to him of the thing he had done " . A reporter who covered the trial for the New Orleans Times @-@ Picayune stated it was " the most dramatic thing I saw in my career " . 
 Mamie Till Bradley testified that she instructed her son to watch his manners in Mississippi and that should a situation ever come to his being asked to get on his knees to ask forgiveness of a white person , he should do it without a thought . The defense questioned her identification of her son in the casket in Chicago and a $ 400 life insurance policy she had taken out on him . 
 While the trial progressed , Leflore County Sheriff George Smith , Howard , and several reporters , both black and white , attempted to locate Collins and Loggins . They could not , but found three witnesses who had seen Collins and Loggins with Milam and Bryant on Leslie Milam 's property . Two of them testified that they heard someone being beaten , blows , and cries . One testified so quietly the judge ordered him several times to speak louder ; he said he heard the victim call out , " Mama , Lord have mercy . Lord have mercy . " Judge Curtis <unk> allowed Carolyn Bryant to testify , but not in front of the jury , after the prosecution objected that her testimony was irrelevant to Till 's abduction and murder . It may have been leaked in any case to the jury . Sheriff Strider testified for the defense his theory that Till was alive , and that the body retrieved from the river was white . A doctor from Greenwood stated on the stand that the body was too decomposed to identify , and therefore had been in the water too long for it to be Till . 
 In the concluding statements , one prosecuting attorney admitted that what Till did was wrong , but it warranted a spanking , not murder . Gerald Chatham passionately called for justice and mocked the sheriff and doctor 's statements that alluded to a conspiracy . Mamie Bradley indicated she was very impressed with his summation . The defense stated that the prosecution 's theory of the events the night Till was murdered were improbable , and said the jury 's " forefathers would turn over in their graves " if they convicted Bryant and Milam . Only three outcomes were possible in Mississippi for capital murder : life imprisonment , the death penalty , or acquittal . On September 23 the all @-@ white jury acquitted both defendants after a 67 @-@ minute deliberation ; one juror said , " If we hadn 't stopped to drink pop , it wouldn 't have taken that long . " 
 In post @-@ trial analyses , blame for the outcome varied . Mamie Till Bradley was criticized for not crying enough on the stand . The jury was noted to have been picked almost exclusively from the hill country section of Tallahatchie County , which , due to its poorer economic make @-@ up , found whites and blacks competing for land and other agrarian opportunities . Unlike the population living closer to the river ( and thus closer to Bryant and Milam in Leflore County ) , who possessed a noblesse oblige toward blacks , according to historian Stephen Whitaker , those in the eastern part of the county were virulent in their racism . The prosecution was criticized for dismissing any potential juror who knew Milam or Bryant , for the fear that such a juror would vote to acquit . Afterward , Whitaker noted that this was a mistake , as anyone who had personally known the defendants usually disliked them . One juror voted twice to convict , but on the third discussion , acquiesced and voted with the rest of the jury to acquit . In later interviews , the jurors acknowledged that they knew Bryant and Milam were guilty , but simply did not believe life imprisonment or the death penalty fit punishment for whites who had killed a black man . This is somewhat disputed by later interviews with two jurors who stated as late as 2005 that they believed the defense 's case , that the prosecution had not proven that Till had died , nor that it was his body that was removed from the river . 
 In November 1955 , a grand jury declined to indict Bryant and Milam for kidnapping , despite the testimony given that they had admitted taking Till . Mose Wright and a young man named Willie Reed , who testified to seeing Milam enter the shed from which screams and blows were heard , both testified in front of the grand jury . T. R. M. Howard after the trial paid to relocate to Chicago Wright , Reed , and another black witness who testified against Milam and Bryant , to protect them from reprisal for testifying . Reed , who later changed his name to Willie Louis to avoid being found , continued to live in the Chicago area until his death on July 18 , 2013 . He avoided publicity and kept his history secret from his wife until she was told by a relative . Reed began to speak publicly about the case in the PBS documentary The Murder of Emmett Till in 2003 . 
 = = Media discourse = = 
 Reactions from newspapers in major international cities and Catholic , Protestant , Jewish , and socialist publications were furious about the verdict and very critical of American society . Southern newspapers , particularly in Mississippi , wrote that the court system had done its job . Till 's story continued to make news for weeks following the trial , especially sparking debate between Southern , Northern , and black newspapers , the NAACP and various high @-@ profile segregationists about justice for blacks and the propriety of Jim Crow society . 
 In October 1955 , the Jackson Daily News reported facts about Till 's father that had been suppressed by the U.S. military . While serving in Italy , Louis Till raped two women and killed a third . He was court @-@ martialed and hanged by the Army near Pisa in July 1945 . Mamie Till Bradley and her family knew none of this , having been told only that Louis had been killed for " willful misconduct " . Mississippi senators James Eastland and John C. Stennis probed Army records to uncover Louis Till 's crimes . Although Emmett Till 's murder trial was over , news about his father remained on the front pages of Mississippi newspapers for weeks in October and November 1955 , further engaging debate about Emmett Till 's actions and Carolyn Bryant 's integrity . Stephen Whitfield writes that the lack of attention paid to identifying or finding Till is " strange " compared to the amount of published discourse about his father . Emmett Till 's urges , to white Mississippians , were genetic instincts that were violently expressed by his father Louis Till . According to historians Davis Houck and Matthew <unk> , " Louis Till became a most important rhetorical pawn in the high @-@ stakes game of north versus south , black versus white , NAACP versus White Citizens ' Councils " . 
 Protected against double jeopardy , Bryant and Milam struck a deal with Look magazine in 1956 to tell their story to journalist William Bradford Huie for between $ 3 @,@ 600 and $ 4 @,@ 000 . The interview took place in the law firm of the attorneys who had defended Bryant and Milam . Huie did not ask the questions ; Bryant and Milam 's own attorneys did . Neither attorney had heard their clients ' accounts of the murder before . According to Huie , the older Milam was more articulate and sure of himself than the younger Bryant . Milam admitted to shooting Till and neither of them thought of themselves as guilty or that they had done anything wrong . 
 Reaction to Huie 's interview with Bryant and Milam was explosive . Their brazen admission that they had slain Till caused prominent civil rights leaders to push the federal government harder to investigate the case . Till 's murder was one of several reasons the Civil Rights Act of 1957 was passed ; it allowed the U.S. Department of Justice to intervene in local law enforcement issues when civil rights were being compromised . Huie 's interview , in which he said that Milam and Bryant had acted alone , overshadowed inconsistencies in earlier versions of the stories . Details about Collins and Loggins and anyone else who had possibly been involved in Till 's abduction , murder , or the clean @-@ up of it , were , according to historians David and Linda Beito , forgotten . 
 = = Representation in culture = = 
 The story of Emmett Till began to seep into the consciousness of Americans through media and literature . Langston Hughes dedicated an untitled poem ( eventually to be known as " Mississippi — 1955 " ) to Till in his October 1 , 1955 column in The Chicago Defender . It was reprinted across the country and continued to be republished with various changes from different writers . Author William Faulkner , a prominent Mississippi native who often focused on racial issues , wrote two essays on Till : one before the trial in which he pleaded for American unity and one after , a piece titled " On Fear " that was published in Harper 's in 1956 . In it he questioned why the tenets of segregation were based on irrational reasoning . 
 Till 's murder was the focus of a 1957 television episode for the U.S. Steel Hour titled " Noon on Doomsday " written by Rod Serling , who was fascinated by how quickly Mississippi whites supported Bryant and Milam . Although the script was rewritten to avoid mention of Till , and did not say that the murder victim was black , White Citizens ' Councils vowed to boycott U.S. Steel . The eventual episode bore little resemblance to the Till case . 
 Gwendolyn Brooks wrote a poem titled " A Bronzeville Mother <unk> in Mississippi . Meanwhile , A Mississippi Mother Burns Bacon " ( 1960 ) . The same year Harper Lee published To Kill a Mockingbird , in which a white attorney is committed to defending a black man named Tom Robinson , accused of raping a white woman . Lee , whose novel had a profound effect on civil rights , has not publicly stated Robinson 's origins . Literature professor Patrick Chura notes several compelling similarities between Till 's case and that of Robinson . Writer James Baldwin loosely based his 1964 drama Blues for Mister Charlie on the Till case . He later divulged that Till 's murder had been bothering him for several years . 
 Bob Dylan recorded a song titled " The Death of Emmett Till " in 1962 . Till was mentioned in the 1968 autobiography of Anne Moody , Coming of Age in Mississippi , in which she states she first learned to hate during the fall of 1955 . Audre Lorde 's poem " <unk> " ( 1981 ) focuses on the perspective of a black woman thinking of Carolyn Bryant 24 years after the murder and trial . Bebe Moore Campbell 's 1992 novel Your Blues Ain 't Like Mine centers on the events of Till 's death . Toni Morrison 's only play as of 2010 is Dreaming Emmett ( 1986 ) , a feminist look at the roles of men and women in black society , which she was inspired to write while considering " time through the eyes of one person who could come back to life and seek vengeance " . Emmylou Harris includes a song called " My Name is Emmett Till " on her 2011 album , Hard Bargain . According to scholar Christopher Metress , Till is often reconfigured in literature as a specter that haunts the white people of Mississippi , causing them to question their involvement in evil , or silence about <unk> 2002 book Mississippi Trials , 1955 is a fictionalized account of Till 's death . 
 = = Later events = = 
 After Bryant and Milam admitted to Huie that they had killed Till , their support base in Mississippi eroded . Many of their former friends and supporters , including those who had contributed to their defense funds , cut them off . Their shops went bankrupt and closed after blacks boycotted them , and banks refused them loans to plant crops . After struggling to secure a loan and find someone who would rent to him , Milam managed to secure 217 acres and a $ 4 @,@ 000 loan to plant cotton , but blacks refused to work for him . He was forced to pay whites higher wages . Eventually , Milam and Bryant relocated to Texas , but their infamy followed them , and they continued to generate extreme animosity from locals . After several years , they returned to Mississippi . Milam found work as a heavy equipment operator , but ill health forced him into retirement . Over the years , Milam was tried for offenses such as assault and battery , writing bad checks , and using a stolen credit card . He died of spinal cancer in 1980 , at the age of 61 . 
 Bryant worked as a welder while in Texas , until increasing blindness forced him to give up this employment . At some point , he and Carolyn divorced ; he remarried in 1980 . He opened a store in <unk> , Mississippi , and was convicted in 1984 and 1988 of food stamp fraud . In a 1985 interview , he denied that he had killed Till , but said : " if Emmett Till hadn 't got out of line , it probably wouldn 't have happened to him . " Fearing economic boycotts and retaliation , Bryant lived a private life and refused to allow himself to be photographed or reveal the exact location of his store , explaining : " this new generation is different and I don 't want to worry about a bullet some dark night " . He died of cancer in 1994 , at the age of 63 . 
 Till 's mother married Gene Mobley , became a teacher , and changed her surname to Till @-@ Mobley . She continued her life as an activist working to educate people about her son 's murder . In 1992 , Till @-@ Mobley had the opportunity to listen while Bryant was interviewed about his involvement in Till 's murder . With Bryant unaware that Till @-@ Mobley was listening , he asserted that Till had ruined his life , expressed no remorse , and said , " Emmett Till is dead . I don 't know why he can 't just stay dead . " 
 In 1996 , documentary filmmaker Keith Beauchamp , who was greatly moved by Till 's open @-@ casket photograph , started background research for a feature film he planned to make about Till 's murder . He asserted that as many as 14 people may have been involved , including Carolyn Bryant Donham ( who had remarried ) . Mose Wright heard someone with " a lighter voice " affirm that Till was the one in his front yard immediately before Bryant and Milam drove away with the boy . Beauchamp spent the next nine years producing The Untold Story of Emmett Louis Till , released in 2003 . That same year , PBS aired an installment of American Experience titled The Murder of Emmett Till . In 2005 , CBS journalist Ed Bradley aired a 60 Minutes report investigating the Till murder , part of which showed him tracking down Carolyn Bryant at her home in Greenville , Mississippi . 
 A 1991 book written by Stephen Whitfield , another by Christopher Metress in 2002 , and Mamie Till @-@ Mobley 's memoirs the next year all posed questions as to who was involved in the murder and cover @-@ up , leading federal authorities to try to resolve the questions about the identity of the body pulled from the Tallahatchie River . 
 In 2004 , the U.S. Department of Justice announced that it was reopening the case to determine whether anyone other than Milam and Bryant was involved . David T. Beito , a professor at the University of Alabama , states that Till 's murder " has this mythic quality like the Kennedy assassination " . It was one of a number of cold cases dating to the Civil Rights era that Justice was investigating . 
 The body was exhumed and an autopsy conducted by the Cook County coroner in 2005 . Using DNA from Till 's relatives , dental comparisons to images taken of Till , and anthropological analysis , the body exhumed was positively identified as Till 's . It had extensive cranial damage , a broken left femur , and two broken wrists . Metallic fragments were found in the skull consistent with being shot with a .45 caliber gun . 
 In February 2007 , a Leflore County grand jury , composed primarily of black jurors and empaneled by Joyce Chiles , a black prosecutor , found no credible basis for Beauchamp 's claim that 14 people took part in Till 's abduction and murder . Beauchamp was angry with the finding , but David Beito and Juan Williams , who worked on the reading materials for the Eyes on the Prize documentary , were critical of Beauchamp for trying to revise history and taking attention away from other cold cases . The grand jury failed to find sufficient cause for charges against Carolyn Bryant Donham . Neither the FBI nor the grand jury found any credible evidence that Henry Lee Loggins , identified by Beauchamp as a suspect who could be charged , had any role in the crime . Other than Loggins , Beauchamp refused to name any of the people he alleged were involved . 
 " When it comes to a lynching , it is not just the actual killers who are guilty , " Till @-@ Mobley wrote , in her book . " It is the dominant culture , the entire society that permits such a thing , that encourages it . Bryant and Milam were not the only guilty parties in the lynching of my son . Witnesses have pointed to at least six or seven people . But , in a way , there were so many thousands more . People who were responsible , powerful , influential . People who could have chosen to lead , and chose instead to incite . People who could have condemned hate crimes and chose instead to condone them . People who could have come clean and chose instead to live the rest of their lives with blood on their hands . " 
 = = Influence on civil rights = = 
 Through the constant attention it received , Till 's case became emblematic of the disparity of justice for blacks in the South . In 1955 The Chicago Defender urged its readers to react to the acquittal by voting in large numbers , a reminder that most blacks in the South had been disfranchised since the turn of the century under laws passed by white Democrat @-@ dominated legislatures . Myrlie Evers , widow of Medgar Evers , stated in 1985 that Till 's case resonated so strongly because it " shook the foundations of Mississippi — both black and white , because ... with the white community ... it had become nationally publicized ... with us as blacks ... it said , even a child was not safe from racism and bigotry and death . " The NAACP asked Mamie Till Bradley to tour the country relating the events of her son 's life , death , and the trial of his murderers . It was one of the most successful fundraising campaigns the NAACP had ever known . Journalist Louis Lomax acknowledges Till 's death to be the start of what he terms the " Negro revolt " and scholar <unk> Hudson @-@ Weems characterizes Till as a " sacrificial lamb " for civil rights . NAACP operative <unk> Moore considers Till the start of the Civil Rights Movement , at the very least , in Mississippi . 
 The 1987 14 @-@ hour Emmy award @-@ winning documentary Eyes on the Prize begins with the murder of Emmett Till . Accompanying written materials for the series , Eyes on the Prize and Voices of Freedom ( for the second time period ) exhaustively encompass the major figures and events of the Civil Rights Movement . Furthermore , Stephen Whitaker states , as a result of the attention Till 's death and the trial received , 
 Mississippi became in the eyes of the nation the epitome of racism and the citadel of white supremacy . From this time on , the slightest racial incident anywhere in the state was spotlighted and magnified . To the Negro race throughout the South and to some extent in other parts of the country , this verdict indicated an end to the system of noblesse oblige . The faith in the white power structure waned rapidly . Negro faith in legalism declined , and the revolt officially began on December 1 , 1955 , with the Montgomery , Alabama , bus boycott . 
 In Montgomery , Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat to a white bus rider , sparking a year @-@ long well @-@ organized grassroots boycott of the public bus system , designed to force the city to change its segregation policies . Parks later said when she did not get up and move to the rear of the bus , " I thought of Emmett Till and I just couldn 't go back . " According to author <unk> Carson , Till 's death and the widespread coverage of the students integrating Little Rock Central High School in 1957 were especially profound for younger blacks : " It was out of this festering discontent and an awareness of earlier isolated protests that the sit @-@ ins of the 1960s were born . " After seeing pictures of Till 's mutilated body , in Louisville , Kentucky , young Cassius Clay ( later famed boxer Muhammad Ali ) and a friend took out their frustration by vandalizing a local railyard , causing a locomotive engine to derail . It is thought that Till 's story influenced Harper Lee to create the character Tom Robinson in her novel To Kill A Mockingbird . 
 In 1963 , Sunflower County resident Fannie Lou Hamer , herself a sharecropper , was jailed and beaten for attempting to register to vote . The next year , she led a massive voter registration drive in the Delta region , and volunteers worked on Freedom Summer throughout the state . Before 1954 , 265 black people were registered to vote in three Delta counties , where they were a majority ; they made up 41 % of the total state population . The summer Emmett Till was killed , the number of registered voters in those three counties dropped to 90 . By the end of 1955 , fourteen Mississippi counties had no registered black voters . The Mississippi Freedom Summer of 1964 registered 63 @,@ 000 black voters in a simplified process administered by the project ; they formed their own political party because they were closed out of the Democratic Regulars in Mississippi . 
 Till continues to be the focus of literature and memorials . A statue was unveiled in Denver in 1976 ( and has since been moved to Pueblo , Colorado ) featuring Till with Martin Luther King , Jr . Till was included among the forty names of people who had died in the Civil Rights Movement ( listed as martyrs ) on the granite sculpture of the Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery , Alabama , dedicated in 1989 . In 1991 , a 7 @-@ mile ( 11 km ) stretch of 71st Street in Chicago , was renamed " Emmett Till Road " . Mamie Till @-@ Mobley attended many of the dedications for the memorials , including a demonstration in Selma , Alabama on the 35th anniversary of the march over the Edmund Pettis Bridge . She later wrote in her memoirs , " I realized that Emmett had achieved the significant impact in death that he had been denied in life . Even so , I had never wanted Emmett to be a martyr . I only wanted him to be a good son . Although I realized all the great things that had been accomplished largely because of the sacrifices made by so many people , I found myself wishing that somehow we could have done it another way . " Till @-@ Mobley died in 2003 , the same year her memoirs were published . 
 James McCosh Elementary School in Chicago , where Till had been a student , was renamed the " Emmett Louis Till Math And Science Academy " in 2005 . The " Emmett Till Memorial Highway " was dedicated between Greenwood and <unk> , Mississippi , the same route his body took to the train station on its way to Chicago . It intersects with the H. C. " Clarence " Strider Memorial Highway . In 2007 , Tallahatchie County issued a formal apology to Till 's family , reading " We the citizens of Tallahatchie County recognize that the Emmett Till case was a terrible miscarriage of justice . We state candidly and with deep regret the failure to effectively pursue justice . We wish to say to the family of Emmett Till that we are profoundly sorry for what was done in this community to your loved one . " The same year , Georgia congressman John Lewis , whose skull was fractured while being beaten during the 1965 Selma march , sponsored a bill that provides a plan for investigating and prosecuting unsolved Civil Rights era murders . The Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crime Act was signed into law in 2008 . 
 = = = Casket = = = 
 On July 9 , 2009 , a manager and three laborers at Burr Oak Cemetery were charged with digging up bodies , dumping them in a remote area , and reselling the plots . Till 's grave was not disturbed , but investigators found his original glass @-@ topped casket rusting in a dilapidated storage shed . When Till was reburied in a new casket in 2005 , there were plans for an Emmett Till memorial museum , where his original casket would be installed . The cemetery manager , who administered the memorial fund , pocketed donations intended for the memorial . It is unclear how much money was collected . Cemetery officials also neglected the casket , which was discolored , the interior fabric torn , and bore evidence that animals had been living in it , although its glass top was still intact . The Smithsonian 's National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington , D.C. acquired the casket a month later . According to director Lonnie Bunch III , it is an artifact with potential to stop future visitors and make them think . 
 = <unk> guitarfish = 
 The bowmouth guitarfish ( Rhina ancylostoma ) , also called the shark ray or mud skate , is a species of ray and the sole member of the family Rhinidae . Its evolutionary affinities are not fully resolved , though it may be related to true guitarfishes and skates . This rare species occurs widely in the tropical coastal waters of the western Indo @-@ Pacific , at depths of up to 90 m ( 300 ft ) . Highly distinctive in appearance , the bowmouth guitarfish has a wide and thick body with a rounded snout and large shark @-@ like dorsal and tail fins . Its mouth forms a W @-@ shaped undulating line , and there are multiple thorny ridges over its head and back . It has a dorsal color pattern of many white spots over a bluish gray to brown background , with a pair of prominent black markings over the pectoral fins . This large species can reach a length of 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) and weight of 135 kg ( 298 lb ) . 
 Usually found near the sea floor , the bowmouth guitarfish prefers sandy or muddy areas near underwater structures . It is a strong @-@ swimming predator of bony fishes , crustaceans , and molluscs . This species gives live birth to litters of two to eleven pups , which are nourished during gestation by yolk . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the bowmouth guitarfish as Vulnerable because it is widely caught by artisanal and commercial fisheries for its valuable fins and meat . It is viewed as a nuisance by trawlers , however , because its bulk and thorny skin cause it to damage netted catches . Habitat degradation and destruction pose an additional , significant challenge to this ray 's survival . The bowmouth guitarfish adapts well to captivity and is displayed in public aquariums . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 German naturalists Marcus Elieser Bloch and Johann Gottlob Schneider described the bowmouth guitarfish in their 1801 Systema <unk> . Their account was based on a 51 cm ( 20 in ) long specimen , now lost , collected off the Coromandel Coast of India . The genus name Rhina comes from the Greek rhinos ( " snout " ) ; the specific epithet ancylostoma is derived from the Greek <unk> ( " curved " or " crooked " ) and stoma ( " mouth " ) . Although Block and Schneider wrote the epithet as <unk> and that form appears in some literature , most modern sources regard the correct form to be ancylostoma . Other common names for this species include shark ray , mud skate , <unk> mud skate , bow @-@ mouthed angel fish , and bow @-@ mouthed angel shark . 
 The evolutionary relationships between the bowmouth guitarfish and other rays are debated . Morphological evidence generally points to a close relationship between Rhina and Rhynchobatus , which are a group of rays known as the wedgefishes that also have large , shark @-@ like fins . Morphological analyses have tended to place these two genera basally among rays , though some have them as basal to just the guitarfishes ( Rhinobatidae ) and skates ( <unk> ) while others have them basal to all other rays except sawfishes ( <unk> ) . A 2012 study based on mitochondrial DNA upheld Rhina and Rhynchobatus as sister taxa related to the guitarfishes , but also unexpectedly found that they formed a clade with the sawfishes rather than the skates . 
 In terms of classification , Bloch and Schneider originally placed the bowmouth guitarfish in the order <unk> , a now @-@ obsolete grouping of fishes defined by the positioning of their pelvic fins directly behind the pectoral fins . Modern sources have included it variously in the order Rajiformes , <unk> , <unk> , or the newly proposed <unk> . The placement of the bowmouth guitarfish in the family Rhinidae originates from the group " <unk> " , consisting of Rhina and Rhynchobatus , in Johannes Müller and Jakob Henle 's 1841 Systematische Beschreibung der Plagiostomen . Later authors have also assigned this species to the family Rhinobatidae or <unk> . Joseph Nelson , in the 2006 fourth edition of Fishes of the World , placed this species as the sole member of Rhinidae in the order Rajiformes , which is supported by morphological but not molecular data . 
 = = Description = = 
 The bowmouth guitarfish is a heavily built fish growing to 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) long and 135 kg ( 298 lb ) in weight . The head is short , wide , and flattened with an evenly rounded snout ; the front portion of the head , including the medium @-@ sized eyes and large spiracles , is clearly distinct from the body . The long nostrils are transversely oriented and have well @-@ developed skin flaps on their anterior margins . The lower jaw has three protruding lobes that fit into corresponding depressions in the upper jaw . There are around 47 upper and 50 lower tooth rows arranged in winding bands ; the teeth are low and blunt with ridges on the crown . The five pairs of ventral gill slits are positioned close to the lateral margins of the head . 
 The body is deepest in front of the two tall and falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) dorsal fins . The first dorsal fin is about a third larger than the second and originates over the pelvic fin origins . The second dorsal fin is located midway between the first dorsal and the caudal fin . The broad and triangular pectoral fins have a deep indentation where their leading margins meet the head . The pelvic fins are much smaller than the pectoral fins , and the anal fin is absent . The tail is much longer than the body and ends in a large , crescent @-@ shaped caudal fin ; the lower caudal fin lobe is more than half the length of the upper . 
 The entire dorsal surface of the bowmouth guitarfish has a grainy texture from a dense covering of tiny dermal denticles . A thick ridge is present along the midline of the back , which bears a band of sharp , robust thorns . There are also a pair of thorn @-@ bearing ridges in front of the eyes , a second pair running from above the eyes to behind the spiracles , and a third pair on the " shoulders " . This species is bluish to brownish gray above , lightening towards the margins of the head and over the pectoral fins . There are prominent white spots scattered over the body and fins , a white @-@ edged black marking above each pectoral fin , and two dark transverse bands atop the head between the eyes . The underside is light gray to white . Young rays are more vividly colored than adults , which are browner with fainter patterning and proportionately smaller spots . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 While uncommon , the bowmouth guitarfish is widely distributed in the coastal tropical waters of the western Indo @-@ Pacific . In the Indian Ocean , it is found from KwaZulu @-@ Natal in South Africa to the Red Sea ( including the Seychelles ) , across the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia ( including the Maldives ) , to Shark Bay in Western Australia . Its Pacific range extends northward to Korea and southern Japan , eastward to New Guinea , and southward to New South Wales . Found between 3 and 90 m ( 10 and 300 ft ) deep , this ray spends most of its time near the sea floor but can occasionally be seen swimming in midwater . It favors sandy or muddy habitats , and can also be found in the vicinity of rocky and coral reefs and shipwrecks . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The bowmouth guitarfish is a strong swimmer that propels itself with its tail like a shark . It is more active at night and is not known to be territorial . This species feeds mainly on demersal bony fishes such as croakers and crustaceans such as crabs and shrimp ; bivalves and cephalopods are also consumed . Its bands of flattened teeth allow it to crush hard @-@ shelled prey . Curiously , two bowmouth guitarfishes examined in a 2011 stable isotope study were found to have fed on pelagic rather than demersal animals , in contrast to previous observations . 
 The tiger shark ( Galeocerdo cuvier ) is known to prey on the bowmouth guitarfish . The ray is protected by the thorns on its head and back , and it may ram perceived threats . Parasites documented from this species include the tapeworms <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Nybelinia <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Tylocephalum <unk> , the leech <unk> macrothela , the trematode <unk> <unk> , the monogeneans <unk> <unk> and Monocotyle <unk> , and the copepods Nesippus vespa , Pandarus cranchii , and P. smithii . There is a record of a bowmouth guitarfish being cleaned by bluestreak cleaner wrasses ( Labroides dimidiatus ) . 
 Reproduction in the bowmouth guitarfish is viviparous , with the developing embryos sustained to term by yolk . Adult females have a single functional ovary and uterus . The litter size varies between two and eleven pups , and newborns measure 45 – 51 cm ( 18 – 20 in ) long . Sexual maturity is attained at lengths of 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 8 m ( 4 @.@ 9 – 5 @.@ 9 ft ) for males and over 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) in females . Females grow larger than males . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Throughout its range , the bowmouth guitarfish is caught incidentally or intentionally by artisanal and commercial fisheries using trawls , gillnets , and line gear . The fins are extremely valuable due to their use in shark fin soup , and are often the only parts of the fish kept and brought to market . However , the meat may also be sold fresh or dried and salted , and it is highly esteemed in India . When caught as bycatch in trawls , the bowmouth guitarfish is considered a nuisance because its strength and rough skin make it difficult to handle , and as the heavy ray thrashes in the net it can damage the rest of the catch . In Thailand , the enlarged thorns of this species are used to make bracelets . 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the bowmouth guitarfish as Vulnerable . It is threatened by fishing and by habitat destruction and degradation , particularly from blast fishing , coral bleaching , and siltation . Its numbers are known to have declined substantially in Indonesian waters , where it is one of the large rays targeted by a mostly unregulated gillnet fishery . The IUCN has given this species a regional assessment of Near Threatened in Australian waters , where it is not a targeted species but is taken as bycatch in bottom trawls . The installation of turtle excluder devices on some Australian trawlers has benefited this species . Since it is rare and faces many conservation threats , the bowmouth guitarfish has been called " the panda of the aquatic world " . 
 It is a popular subject of public aquariums and fares relatively well , with one individual having lived for seven years in captivity . In 2007 , the Newport Aquarium in Kentucky initiated the world 's first captive breeding program for this species . Newport Aquarium announced in January 2014 that the female , " Sweet Pea " , had become pregnant and given birth to seven pups . By February 2014 , all seven pups had died . On January 7 , 2016 , Sweet Pea gave birth to nine shark pups which were eating on their own and still gaining weight by February 10 , 2016 . Newport Aquarium later announced that the pups would be moved into a coral reef exhibit where they can be viewed by the public starting on June 24 . 
 = <unk> Caballero = 
 Ralph Joseph " <unk> " Caballero ( born November 5 , 1927 ) is a retired infielder in Major League Baseball . Caballero played eight seasons in Major League Baseball , all for the Philadelphia Phillies during the Whiz Kids era , and holds the record as the youngest person in major league history to appear at third base . 
 After graduating high school at age 16 , the Phillies signed Caballero to a contract worth $ 10 @,@ 000 . After a few short stints at the major league level and playing parts of three seasons in the minor leagues , Caballero was named the starter at third base in 1948 . In his one season as an everyday player , Caballero batted .245 in 380 plate appearances at age 20 . After another stint in the minors in 1949 , he was a backup infielder , pinch hitter , and pinch runner for the 1950 season , and continued in that role through 1952 . After three more seasons in the minors , Caballero retired from baseball after the 1955 season . 
 After baseball , Caballero worked as an exterminator . His Louisiana home was destroyed in 2005 during Hurricane Katrina , and he lives in Lakeview , New <unk> . 
 = = Early career and minor leagues = = 
 Caballero attended Jesuit High School in New Orleans , Louisiana , where he played baseball during the 1943 and 1944 seasons . During his first season , the Jesuit High team won both the city championship and the American Legion championship . The Philadelphia Phillies signed Caballero as an amateur free agent on September 9 , 1944 , the same year that fellow Whiz Kid shortstop Granny Hamner joined the organization . Caballero planned on attending Louisiana State University , where he had been offered a scholarship to play baseball and basketball . Mel Ott , a scout for the New York Giants and former outfielder , wanted Caballero to sign with the Giants , but counseled him to sign with " ' whoever offers you the most money ' " . The Phillies offered Caballero a $ 10 @,@ 000 signing bonus ( $ 169 @,@ 000 today ) , and his father advised him to sign the contract offered by general manager Herb Pennock and owner Bob Carpenter . At 16 years old , Caballero appeared in four games for the 1944 Phillies , getting four at @-@ bats without reaching base . In so doing , Caballero became the youngest third baseman ever to play in Major League Baseball , a record he still holds . 
 For the 1945 season , the Phillies sent Caballero to the Class @-@ A Utica Blue Sox of the Eastern League , where he played in 130 games at third base , batting .272 with 132 hits , 9 doubles , and 10 triples . While there , he was managed by Eddie Sawyer , and played with Hamner and Richie Ashburn , with whom he lived for two seasons . Caballero appeared in nine games with the Phillies in 1945 , scoring his first major league run and batting in a run as well . In 1946 , Caballero lost playing time as he and Hamner were both summoned to military service ; however , he did play in 76 games with the Terre Haute Phillies in the Class @-@ B Three @-@ I League and 1 game with the Blue Sox . That year , Caballero hit the first two home runs of his minor league career with Terre Haute , along with nine doubles and four triples . 
 Most of Caballero 's 1947 season was played at Utica as well , where he posted a .287 batting average , 114 hits , and 13 doubles while splitting time with Hamner at second base . His last cup of coffee with the Phillies came at the end of 1947 , when he notched his first major league hit and first walk in eight at @-@ bats . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = 1948 – 1949 = = = 
 1948 was Caballero 's first full season in the major leagues ; he played 79 games during the year at third base — where he was the regular starter over Willie " Puddin ' Head " Jones — and 23 games at second base . At the plate , Caballero had a .245 batting average , the second @-@ lowest among the team 's starters that season — higher only than catcher Andy Seminick . He posted 86 hits ( 13 for extra bases ) in 380 plate appearances . In the field , Caballero played 102 games , he made 18 errors in 363 chances for a <unk> fielding percentage . He started a triple play in a game against Cincinnati when Virgil <unk> hit a sharp line drive to third base ; Caballero forced Ted <unk> out at second base with a throw to Hamner and Danny <unk> was picked off first trying to return to complete the third out . Additionally , Caballero notched the team 's only hit in a one @-@ hit pitching performance by Brooklyn Dodgers starting pitcher Rex Barney . 
 In the middle of the season , the Phillies promoted Caballero 's former manager Eddie Sawyer from their Triple @-@ A farm team , the Toronto Maple Leafs of the International League , to replace Ben Chapman at the helm . Teammate Robin Roberts described Caballero , as well as Hamner , Ashburn , and catcher Stan Lopata , as having " the highest respect for [ Sawyer ] " — all having played under his tutelage at Utica ; Caballero himself gave Sawyer the credit for his development , along with that of several other Whiz Kids . Caballero regressed in 1949 , playing 22 games with the Phillies but spending the majority of his season playing second base for the Maple Leafs in Triple @-@ A. He played in 48 games , amassing a .318 batting average ( the second @-@ highest total on the team ) and eight extra @-@ base hits . 
 = = = 1950 : The " Whiz Kids " = = = 
 Entering the Phillies ' 1950 season at 22 years old , Caballero was described as having " great potential " , but the Phillies wanted Mike Goliat to take over as the everyday second baseman . Caballero went to the major league club 's spring training as a non @-@ roster invitee ; his .379 average in the Grapefruit League won him a roster spot and a utility infield role with the Phillies . Media reports speculated that the Phillies would challenge the Dodgers for the National League pennant , and one of Caballero 's most valuable roles as a utility player was as a pinch runner off of the bench . In the second game of a July 25 doubleheader against the Chicago Cubs at Shibe Park , starting pitcher Roberts batted in the bottom of the ninth in a 0 – 0 shutout . With Bob Rush on the mound for Chicago , Roberts managed a walk and was replaced on base by Caballero , who promptly took second base on a hit and run groundout by first baseman Eddie <unk> . A single to center field by Richie Ashburn allowed the speedy Caballero to score from second and completed the doubleheader sweep for Philadelphia — Bubba Church having pitched a three @-@ hit shutout in the first game earlier in the day . 
 As a pinch hitter , Caballero came through with hits in clutch situations , notably against the St. Louis Cardinals on August 30 . Behind 6 – 3 at Sportsman 's Park in St. Louis , the Phillies sent Caballero to the plate to pinch hit in the top of the seventh inning . He led off the inning with a single , scoring the first run of a seesaw come @-@ from @-@ behind rally that ended with a 9 – 8 Phillies victory , closer Jim Konstanty 's 13th of the season . Caballero displayed his running skills again in September , replacing Goliat in the ninth inning of another game against the Cardinals , and scoring a late @-@ inning run in place of Lopata against the Cincinnati Reds several days later to tie a close game that the Phillies eventually lost in 18 innings . On September 26 , Caballero scored another crucial run against the Boston Braves when he pinch @-@ ran for outfielder Dick Sisler . Waiting on third base after advancing from first on a Del Ennis single to center field , Jones hit a high ground ball to Boston shortstop <unk> <unk> , who booted the ball and allowed Caballero to score the game @-@ tying run ; the Phillies won , 8 – 7 . 
 In the final game of the season , in which the Phillies defeated the Dodgers , Caballero appeared as a pinch @-@ runner , replacing catcher Andy Seminick in the ninth inning . Philadelphia advanced to the 1950 World Series to play the New York Yankees , where they were defeated , four games to none . In the series , Caballero made three appearances : two as a pinch @-@ runner — for Seminick in Game 2 , and for Goliat in Game 3 — and one as a pinch @-@ hitter for Konstanty in Game 4 , where he struck out . For the season , Caballero appeared in 46 games and posted a .167 batting average . 
 = = = 1951 – 1952 = = = 
 Caballero continued as a utility player after the Whiz Kids ' defeat in the World Series , but the talented young players would never return to the Fall Classic with the Phillies . He played mostly second base during the 1951 season , fielding the position in 54 games . He posted a <unk> batting average at the plate and hit his only major league home run , along with 3 doubles and 2 triples in 84 games played . With 10 hits in 42 at @-@ bats in what would be his final season in the major leagues , Caballero achieved a .238 average in the 1952 season , hitting three doubles . On June 15 , Caballero had a three @-@ hit game against the Pittsburgh Pirates in the second game of a doubleheader , one of the top performances of his career . He also batted in three runs in one game against the Giants on September 27 . 
 = = Return to the minors = = 
 In 1953 , Caballero played for the minor league Baltimore Orioles , where he batted .268 in 133 games , the most played in his professional career . He added 25 doubles , 2 triples , and 5 home runs to his total , but did not earn a promotion back to the major leagues . He returned to the Phillies system , playing for the Syracuse Chiefs . After batting .258 with 2 home runs and 41 runs batted in during the 1954 season and declining to a .225 average in 1955 , Caballero retired from baseball . 
 = = After baseball = = 
 After retiring from baseball , Caballero returned to Louisiana , where he worked as a salesman for an exterminating company , partnering with E.J. D ’ <unk> in 1963 . Eventually , he opened his own company in Metairie , Louisiana . Caballero lives in Lake View , Louisiana , where his home was destroyed by Hurricane Katrina . He lost memorabilia signed by Babe Ruth , Eddie Mathews , and Pete Rose in the flood , calling the hurricane damage " a catastrophe " . He lives with his wife , Clare ; they have seven children and nine grandchildren . Caballero rejoined some of his old teammates in 2008 to celebrate the Whiz Kids on Alumni Weekend . 
 = Theodosius ( son of Maurice ) = 
 Theodosius ( Greek : <unk> ; August 4 , 583 / 585 – after November 27 , 602 ) was the eldest son of Byzantine Emperor Maurice ( r . 582 – 602 ) and was co @-@ emperor from 590 until his deposition and execution during a military revolt in November 602 . Along with his father @-@ in @-@ law Germanus , he was briefly proposed as successor to Maurice by the troops , but the army eventually favoured Phocas instead . Sent in an abortive mission to secure aid from Sassanid Persia by his father , Theodosius was captured and executed by Phocas 's supporters a few days after Maurice . Nevertheless , rumours spread that he had survived the execution , and became popular to the extent that a man who purported to be Theodosius was entertained by the Persians as a pretext for launching a war against Byzantium . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Theodosius was the first child of Maurice and his wife , the Augusta Constantina . He was born on August 4 , 583 ( according to the contemporary John of Ephesus and other chroniclers ) or 585 ( according to the later histories of Theophanes the Confessor and Kedrenos ) . He was the first son to be born to a reigning emperor since Theodosius II in 401 , and was accordingly named after the previous ruler . The papal envoy , or <unk> , to Constantinople , the future Pope Gregory the Great , acted as his godfather . The scholar Evagrius Scholasticus composed a work celebrating Theodosius ' birth , for which he was rewarded by Maurice with the rank of consul . 
 A few years after his birth , possibly in 587 , Theodosius was raised to the rank of Caesar and thus became his father 's heir @-@ apparent , while on March 26 , 590 , he was publicly proclaimed as co @-@ emperor . 
 In November 601 or early February 602 , Maurice married Theodosius to a daughter of the patrician Germanus , a leading member of the Byzantine Senate . The historian Theophylact Simocatta , the major chronicler of Maurice 's reign , also records that on February 2 , 602 , Germanus saved Theodosius from harm during food riots in Constantinople . 
 Later in the same year , during the revolt of the Danubian armies in autumn , Theodosius and his father @-@ in @-@ law were hunting in the outskirts of Constantinople . There they received a letter from the mutinous troops , in which they demanded Maurice 's resignation , a redress of their grievances , and offered the crown to either of the two . They presented the letter to Maurice , who rejected the army 's demands . The emperor however began suspecting Germanus of playing a part in the revolt . Theodosius promptly informed his father @-@ in @-@ law of this and advised him to hide , and on 21 November Germanus fled first to a local church and then to the Hagia Sophia , seeking sanctuary from the Byzantine emperor 's emissaries . 
 On the very next day however , Maurice and his family and closest associates fled the capital before the advancing rebel army under Phocas , and crossed over to Chalcedon . From there , Theodosius was dispatched along with the praetorian prefect Constantine <unk> to seek the aid of Khosrau II , the ruler of Sassanid Persia . Maurice however soon recalled him , and on his return Theodosius fell into the hands of Phocas ' men and was executed at Chalcedon . His father and younger brothers had been executed a few days earlier on November 27 . 
 = = = Rumours of survival and pseudo @-@ Theodosius = = = 
 Subsequently , rumours emerged of Theodosius 's survival and spread far and wide . It was alleged that his father @-@ in @-@ law Germanus had bribed his executioner , a leading Phocas supporter named Alexander , to spare his life . In this story , Theodosius then fled , eventually reaching Lazica , where he died . Theophylact Simocatta reports that he thoroughly investigated these rumours and found them false . 
 However , the general Narses , who rose against Phocas in Mesopotamia , exploited these rumours : he produced a false Theodosius , and claimed to be fighting in his name . The imposter was then presented to Khosrau II by Narses . The Persian ruler in turn used him as a pretext for his own invasion of Byzantium , claiming that it was done in order to avenge the murder of Maurice and his family and place the " rightful " heir Theodosius on the throne . 
 = = = Coinage = = = 
 Theodosius does not appear on most of the regular coinage of Maurice 's reign , with two exceptions : the copper nummi of the Cherson mint , which show him along with his father and mother , and a special silver siliqua issue ( apparently cut in 591 / 592 to celebrate his proclamation as co @-@ emperor ) from the Carthage mint . 
 = Bruce Straley = 
 Bruce Straley is an American game director , artist and designer for the video game developer Naughty Dog , known for his work in the video games The Last of Us and Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End . Straley 's first video game work was as an artist at Western Technologies Inc , where he worked on two titles . Following this , he worked as a designer on titles for different companies , prior to his employment at Crystal Dynamics , where he worked as a designer on Gex : Enter the Gecko and Gex 3 : Deep Cover Gecko . 
 Straley was employed at Naughty Dog in 1999 . He worked as an artist on Crash Team Racing and the Jak and Daxter series . Following this , he became co @-@ art director on Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune , and was appointed to game director of Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves . He was later chosen to lead development on The Last of Us as game director , a role he continued during the development of Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End . Straley has received praise for his work . In particular , his work on The Last of Us was highly praised , and the game received several awards and nominations . 
 = = Career = = 
 Straley worked in the art and design department on two games at Western Technologies Inc : the Menacer 6 @-@ game cartridge in 1992 , and X @-@ Men in 1993 . Following this , he worked as designer on Pacific <unk> 's Generations Lost in 1994 , and on <unk> Incorporated 's Mr. Bones in 1996 . He was later employed at Crystal Dynamics , where he worked alongside Amy Hennig , who later became creative director of the Uncharted series , and Evan Wells , who later became co @-@ president of Naughty Dog , as well as other future Naughty Dog employees . At Crystal Dynamics , Straley worked as designer on Gex : Enter the Gecko ( 1998 ) , and provided additional art for Gex 3 : Deep Cover Gecko ( 1999 ) . Following the release of Gex 3 in March 1999 , Straley was employed at Naughty Dog . 
 At Naughty Dog , Straley worked as an artist on Crash Team Racing in 1999 . Although he was employed as a texture artist , the small size of the team resulted in Straley performing various jobs , including design , background modeling and foreground animating , among others . As the size of the studio grew , the tasks became more specific . Straley acted as artist on Jak and Daxter : The Precursor Legacy ( 2001 ) , Jak II ( 2003 ) and Jak 3 ( 2004 ) . Straley is credited with creating the technology that managed the appearance of the Jak and Daxter series , and having the knowledge to understand the technical and artistic features , bridging the communication gap between the two departments . For Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune ( 2007 ) , Straley was appointed the role of co @-@ art director , alongside Bob Rafei , which involved advancing the team 's technology from the PlayStation 2 to the PlayStation 3 . He was then given the role of game director for Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves , which was released in 2009 . 
 Following the development of Uncharted 2 , Naughty Dog split into two teams to work on projects concurrently . With one team working on Uncharted 3 : Drake 's Deception ( 2011 ) , co @-@ presidents Evan Wells and Christophe Balestra chose Straley and Neil Druckmann to lead development on a new game ; Straley was selected to lead the project , as game director , based on his experience and his work on previous projects . Though they were originally set to develop a new game in the Jak and Daxter series , the team felt that they " weren 't doing service to the fans of [ the ] franchise " , and decided to create a new game , titled The Last of Us . 
 Straley and Druckmann had previously worked together on Uncharted 2 , and found that they shared similar interests . During the development of The Last of Us , Straley and Druckmann often joked that their relationship was " like a marriage " , in which they have many differing ideas , but ultimately wish to achieve the same goal . Straley 's role in developing The Last of Us was to handle gameplay . However , in the final weeks of development , Straley undertook roles from different departments that were busy with other tasks ; for example , he was seen hand @-@ arranging the texts on the game 's training screens , a task that lead artist Nate Wells found unusual . " I have never even heard of a game director doing that ! That 's like ... an intern task , " Wells said . At the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2012 , Straley showcased a gameplay demonstration of The Last of Us at Sony 's press conference ; his stance on the stage became an Internet meme , and was referred to as " The Bruce " . The game was released on June 14 , 2013 to critical acclaim . For his work on the game , Straley and Druckmann were nominated for Best Director from The Daily Telegraph ; it was ultimately awarded to Davey <unk> for his work on The Stanley Parable ( 2013 ) . Straley later continued his role as game director for the downloadable expansion pack The Last of Us : Left Behind ( 2014 ) . 
 Following Hennig 's departure from Naughty Dog in March 2014 , it was announced that Straley and Druckmann were working on Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End ( 2016 ) as game director and creative director , respectively . Initial reports claimed that Hennig was " forced out " of Naughty Dog by Straley and Druckmann , though co @-@ presidents Evan Wells and Christophe Balestra later denied this . Straley presented gameplay demonstrations of Uncharted 4 at the PlayStation Experience in December 2014 , and at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in June 2015 . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 = William Pantulf = 
 William Pantulf ( died 16 April probably in 1112 ) was an Anglo @-@ Norman nobleman and Baron of Wem . He was born in Calvados , a region of Normandy , where his family had lived since around 1030 . Pantulf held lands in Shropshire following the Norman Conquest of England . A vassal of Roger of Montgomery , the Earl of Shrewsbury , Pantulf was accused of murdering Roger 's wife but proved his innocence of the charge by a trial by ordeal . When Roger 's son Robert of Belleme rebelled against King Henry I of England , Pantulf did not take part and sided with the king . Upon his death , which most likely occurred in 1112 , William 's eldest son Philip inherited his Norman lands , and his second son Robert received the English lands . 
 = = Background and family = = 
 Pantulf was from Noron in the Calvados region of Normandy . His family had lived there since at least around 1030 , as a charter of Jumièges Abbey shows the family as vassals of the House of Montgomery in the Montgomery lands near Sées . Pantulf 's mother was named Beatrice , and his sister was named <unk> , but his father 's name and other siblings are not known . 
 = = After the Conquest = = 
 After the Norman Conquest of England , Pantulf held lands in Shropshire from Earl Roger de Montgomery . The earl settled a number of his Norman vassals , including Pantulf , on his new lands in Sussex and Shropshire . Pantulf 's grants totalled eleven manors located in Hodnet Hundred . Pantulf 's lands in England were centered on Wem , and are considered a feudal barony , making Pantulf the first Baron of Wem . 
 Pantulf was present at the consecration of the church at Bec Abbey on 23 October 1077 , along with King William the Conqueror of England . Pantulf lost his lands temporarily because he was suspected of murdering Roger 's wife Mabel de Bellême , around 1077 . Pantulf came under suspicion because Mabel had seized a castle at <unk> en <unk> held by Pantulf . When he was accused of the murder , Pantulf was in southern Italy , which had also been conquered by Normans . Pantulf sought refuge at the Abbey of Saint @-@ Evroul in Normandy while he was under suspicion ; he and his family were under the protection of the abbot . 
 Pantulf regained his lands after he cleared himself of the charge , through the mechanism of a trial by ordeal . It is not clear why the ordeal was required , with the historian David Bates speculating that either the evidence of Pantulf 's involvement was not conclusive or that murder victim 's family demanded the ordeal because they suspected any evidence pointing to Pantulf 's innocence . By 1086 he held 29 manors in Shropshire , along with other lands in Staffordshire and Warwickshire . When Roger 's son Robert de Bellême became Earl of Shrewsbury in 1098 , Pantulf was once more deprived of those lands he held as a vassal of the Earl . 
 = = Role in rebellion = = 
 In 1102 Robert de Bellême rebelled against King Henry I of England . Although Pantulf was still deprived of his previous holdings , he offered to support Robert , but was rebuffed and instead supported the king . Henry placed Stafford Castle in Pantulf 's custody . Besides controlling Stafford Castle , Pantulf mediated between Henry and some of the Welsh princes , who had previously sided with Robert , and helped secure their support for the king . Later Pantulf again acted as an envoy for the king , being sent to secure the switch of sides of Robert 's men who were holding Bridgnorth . Pantulf won their change of sides by offering the men lands worth a 100 pounds on the king 's behalf . His services to the king earned Pantulf the restoration of his confiscated estates as well as the grant of further lands — including the fief of Roger de Courcelles . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Pantulf married <unk> and they had four sons – Philip , Ivo , <unk> and Robert . He and his wife founded Noron Priory , in 1073 . This was located in Normandy and was founded as a small dependent priory of Saint Evroul . Besides Noron , Pantulf was also a benefactor of the Saint @-@ Evroul . In 1092 Pantulf journeyed to southern Italy again , this time to secure a relic of Saint Nicholas for his foundation at Noron . During this visit , he was offered extensive lands in Apulia by Robert Guiscard , but declined the offer and returned to the north . Pantulf died on 16 April , probably in 1112 , when his English lands were transferred to his second son Robert . The Norman lands went to the eldest son , Philip . Pantulf and his wife were buried at Noron in the cloister of his priory there . 
 = 2007 – 2008 Nazko earthquakes = 
 The 2007 – 2008 Nazko earthquakes were a series of small volcanic earthquakes measuring less than 4 @.@ 0 on the Richter magnitude scale . They took place in the sparsely populated Nazko area of the Central Interior of British Columbia , Canada starting on October 9 , 2007 and ending on June 12 , 2008 . They occurred just west of Nazko Cone , a small tree @-@ covered cinder cone that last erupted about 7 @,@ 200 years ago . 
 No damage or casualties resulted from the Nazko earthquakes , which were too small to be felt by people , but local seismographs recorded them . The earthquake swarm occurred at the eastern end of a known volcanic zone called the Anahim Volcanic Belt . This is an east @-@ west trending line of volcanic formations extending from the Central Coast to the Central Interior of British Columbia . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The 2007 – 2008 Nazko earthquake swarm is interpreted to have originated 25 km ( 16 mi ) below the surface . The character of the seismic waves indicated that the swarm originated from a magmatic source . It could have formed as a result of rock fracturing at the tip of a dike and / or by movement along fault planes due to changes in the local stress field by the expansion and movement of magma . This magmatic activity is potentially linked to the hypothesized Anahim hotspot , a mantle plume that is probably responsible for older volcanism throughout the Anahim Volcanic Belt . This volcanic belt includes the Rainbow , Ilgachuz and Itcha range shield volcanoes west of the Nazko swarm . Individual Anahim volcanoes generally become older to the west of the Nazko swarm , indicating that the North American Plate is moving in a westerly direction with respect to the hotspot , carrying the volcanoes along with it at a rate of 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) to 3 @.@ 3 cm ( 33 mm ) per year . Because the area where the 2007 – 2008 Nazko earthquake swarm originated is at the eastern end of the volcanic belt , it probably represents the youngest portion of the hotspot track . This suggests any future volcanic earthquakes will occur in the Nazko region or further to the east . 
 Before the Nazko earthquake swarm began in 2007 , the Anahim hotspot was not known to be an earthquake zone . On October 10 of the following year , a swarm of earthquakes occurred . These earthquakes were normally no more than magnitude 1 @.@ 0 on the Richter magnitude scale , but at least one earthquake was as strong as magnitude 3 @.@ 9 . Since the appearance of the Nazko swarm , Natural Resources Canada has expressed interest in the adjacent 7 @,@ 200 ‑ year ‑ old Nazko Cone . 
 Even though earthquake swarms can be dangerous , scientists are able to model such events to analyze their structure . During the earthquake swarm in 2007 , a group of scientists investigated the possibility that a volcanic eruption would occur . Five additional seismographs were placed in the earthquake zone , and scientists closely monitored the seismic activity . After additional data were gathered , scientists with the United States Geological Survey , the University of Washington , and other organizations , agreed that the Nazko earthquakes probably originated from movement of magma beneath the surface near Nazko Cone . However , because of the number and small size of the Nazko earthquakes , no volcanic eruption is likely . Other recent earthquakes in North America that have been attributed to magma but did not result in a volcanic eruption include the 2003 earthquakes under Lake Tahoe in the U.S. state of California and a 2004 earthquake swarm at Jordan Craters in the U.S. state of Oregon . 
 = = Number of earthquakes = = 
 More than 1 @,@ 000 earthquakes were recorded by regional seismic networks within three weeks of October 20 , 2007 . Because the seismometers that recorded the Nazko swarm were more than 25 km ( 16 mi ) away from where the earthquakes took place , the locations of the <unk> were measured with poor resolution . Following the earthquake , five seismometers were placed by the Geological Survey of Canada from September 2007 to June 2008 close to the hypocenter . Analysis of the data recorded by these seismometers indicates a much larger total number of earthquakes . For example , at least 597 earthquakes were recognized during a period of only six hours . 
 At least two episodes of earthquakes constitute the Nazko swarm . In the first seismic phase from October 29 to November 1 , 2007 , a total of 153 earthquakes took place . During the second seismic phase between September 25 , 2007 and June 12 , 2008 , 4 @,@ 428 earthquakes occurred . These two seismic episodes were cross @-@ correlated by scientists to understand changes in the development of the earthquake swarm . Correlation coefficients were around 1 @.@ 0 for the beginnings of the periods of activity , indicating almost identical situations , and then decayed to around 0 @.@ 5 , indicating a decrease in similarity between the later stages of the two events . 
 = = Scientific response = = 
 The earthquake swarm was noted on October 12 , 2007 in the Prince George Citizen by citizen staff , three days after the earthquakes began . Scientists mentioned in the report were seismologist John Cassidy of Natural Resources Canada and volcanologist Catherine Hickson , who was part of the Geological Survey of Canada at the time . At the time of the report , scientists did not know the origin of the swarm . Seismologist John Cassidy stated , " the depth is enough to rule out hydrothermal but it 's up in the air as to whether the cause is tectonic shifts or volcanic activity . If it is volcanic there are certain characteristics that we would expect , there 's a tremor @-@ like character to it . And so we 'll be looking for the types of events that we see beneath volcanoes and we 'll be looking to see if they 're getting closer to the surface or if they 're migrating at all . " 
 Even if the Nazko swarm were a warning of a volcanic eruption , Hickson doubted it would turn out to be a highly explosive eruption like those that can occur in subduction @-@ zone volcanoes . " We 're not talking about an injection of tonnes of ash many kilometers into the air like the 1980 Mount St. Helens eruption or the 1991 Mount Pinatubo eruption . We 're talking about something very small , relatively localized that should have a fairly limited impact ... but it 'll be extremely exciting " , Hickson said . If an eruption were to occur , Hickson suggested that it would be characterized by a lava fountain that sends globs of lava 100 m ( 330 ft ) into the air . This is similar to those that occur in Hawaii . Hickson said that a Nazko eruption could be a tourist attraction , but warned that noxious gases such as carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide would be released during the event . 
 = = Preparedness and hazards = = 
 Because no seismographs were close enough to the Nazko swarm zone before the earthquakes began , employees of Natural Resources Canada placed seismographs in the area to monitor future earthquakes in the area more clearly . An infrasound station is also being established , which is able to measure sound waves that would normally go unnoticed by human hearing . These stations can detect volcanic eruptions and the release of gas at volcanic vents , and can be used in combination with other geophysical data to monitor fluid flow within volcanoes . Employees of Natural Resources Canada have also visited two communities that were adjacent to the 2007 – 2008 earthquake swarm to renew information about the Nazko swarm , collect samples , and examine some of the more poorly studied volcanic deposits in the Nazko region . The Natural Resources Canada employees also measured carbon dioxide levels during the earthquake swarm . Carbon dioxide is usually discharged at faults in volcanically active areas and can collect in soil and under snow . Because of this , carbon dioxide concentrations can provide information on volcanic activity in the subsurface . The Nazko swarm did not cause any discernible discharge of carbon dioxide , which is normal for non @-@ eruptive events . 
 The 2007 – 2008 Nazko earthquake swarm is one of numerous seismic events that have occurred near volcanoes in British Columbia . Volcanoes that have experienced volcanic earthquakes include Mount Meager ( seventeen events ) , Mount Cayley ( four events ) , Mount Garibaldi ( three events ) , Silverthrone Caldera ( two events ) , Castle Rock ( two events ) , Hoodoo Mountain ( eight events ) , Crow Lagoon ( four events ) , The Volcano ( five events ) , and the Mount Edziza volcanic complex ( eight events ) . Seismic data suggest that these volcanoes still contain active magma chambers , indicating possible future eruptive activity . Although the available data do not allow a clear conclusion , these observations are indications that some of Canada 's volcanoes may be active , with significant potential dangers . This seismic activity correlates both with some of Canada 's most youthful volcanoes and with long @-@ lived volcanoes with a history of significant explosive activity , such as Hoodoo Mountain and the Mount Edziza volcanic complex . 
 If magma were to rise towards the surface of Nazko , new earthquake swarms would occur , with a significant increase in the size and number of earthquakes . An eruption in the Nazko area would probably create a small cinder cone , similar to what formed Nazko Cone 7 @,@ 200 years ago . Immediate hazards related to cinder cone eruptions in the Nazko area would probably be forest fires and , if an eruption column were produced , redirection of nearby air traffic . 
 = The City ( 2008 TV series ) = 
 The City is an American reality television series that originally aired on MTV from December 29 , 2008 , until July 13 , 2010 . Developed as the spin @-@ off of The Hills , the series aired two seasons and focused on the personal and professional lives of several young women residing in New York City , New York . Its premise was conceived by Adam DiVello , while Liz Gateley and Sean Travis served as executive producers . 
 The series originally focused on Whitney Port , who appeared in its predecessor , as she began employment with Diane von Fürstenberg . It additionally placed emphasis on her workplace rival Olivia Palermo , Port 's boyfriend Jay Lyon , his roommate Adam Senn , and her friend Erin Lucas . The latter three were replaced by Port 's roommate Roxy Olin and Palermo 's enemy Erin Kaplan for the second half of the first season . 
 The City received generally mixed reviews from critics , and proved less successful than The Hills . Like its predecessor , the series was often criticized for tending towards a narrative format more commonly seen in scripted genres including soap operas , and appearing to fabricate much of its storyline . The show has distributed all seasons to DVD . 
 = = Conception = = 
 In 2004 , the reality television series Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County premiered on MTV . The program was created by Liz Gateley and documented the lives of several students attending Laguna Beach High School as they completed secondary education . The series proved among the network 's most successful programming , though the entire original cast left after the second season and were replaced by another group of teenagers for the following season . Television producer Adam DiVello developed the spin @-@ off program The Hills to follow one of its predecessor 's original cast members Lauren Conrad as she moved to Los Angeles to pursue a career in the fashion industry . After The Hills itself became similarly successful , DiVello developed The City upon the conclusion of the parent series ' fourth season , which saw one of its primary cast members Whitney Port move to New York City to begin employment with Diane von Fürstenberg . 
 = = Series synopsis = = 
 = = = Overview and casting = = = 
 The City chronicles the lives of several young women living in New York City , New York . Every installment commences with a voice @-@ over narrative from series lead Whitney Port , foreshadowing the theme of the episode . Each season concludes with a finale , typically involving a major event such as a progressing relationship or the departure of a cast member . Most installments revolve around the women 's everyday lives , with the intention of balancing coverage of their personal and professional endeavors . The City : Live After Show was occasionally aired following the broadcast of an episode ; the program followed the The After Show format used by other MTV programs , including The Hills , where Jessi Cruickshank and Dan Levy served as hosts while the audience commented on the episode . 
 Throughout its run , the series was led by four ( season 2 ) and five ( season 1 ) primary cast members , who were credited by their first names . Its original main cast members were Port , Erin Lucas , Jay Lyon , Olivia Palermo , and Adam Senn . Lucas , Lyon , and Senn were replaced by Erin Kaplan and Roxy Olin beginning in the second half of the first season . The aforementioned women 's storylines were largely developed by a number of supporting cast members . Alexandra Crandell was credited as " Adam 's girlfriend " , while Samantha <unk> was labeled " Whitney 's friend " . Kelly Cutrone was featured the owner of the PR firm People 's Revolution and the employer of Port and Olin , while Joe Zee was credited as Palermo 's boss at Elle . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 In its series premiere , The City first introduces Whitney Port , who moved from Los Angeles , California to New York City , New York to begin employment for fashion designer Diane von Fürstenberg . She reunited with her friend Erin Lucas and love interest Jay Lyon , and befriended co @-@ worker Olivia Palermo against her companions ' advice . Port became irritated the feelings Lyon had for his ex @-@ girlfriend Danielle and his unwillingness to commit to a relationship , and eventually severed ties with him . Lyon 's distaste for his housemate Adam Senn 's girlfriend Allie Crandell ultimately ruined their friendship , while Senn and Crandell 's relationship was strained by rumors of his alleged infidelity . Lucas ' long @-@ distance boyfriend Duncan Davies , who lived in Toronto , Canada , broke up with Lucas after discovering that she had become friendly with her ex @-@ boyfriend JR . Meanwhile , the companionship between Port and Palermo dissolved after growing tensions in the workplace . 
 Prior to production of the second half of the season , Lucas , Lyon , and Senn departed from the series . Port also left her position at Diane von Fürstenberg and resumed working at her previous employer Kelly Cutrone 's PR firm People 's Revolution . As the season resumed , Port 's friend Roxy Olin was introduced as a new main cast member , and was hired at People 's Revolution . Palermo had left Diane von Fürstenberg for a position with Elle , where she clashed with co @-@ worker and new main cast member Erin Kaplan . With Cutrone 's guidance , Port begins designing a fashion line , while Kaplan becomes increasingly displeased with Palermo 's under @-@ performance . Port also began dating friend Freddie <unk> , but was dismayed to learn that he had a girlfriend . By the season finale , Port had presented the " Whitney Eve " <unk> to <unk> Goodman , and decided to further publicize her collection through a fashion show at Bryant Park . 
 In the beginning of the second season , Joe Zee attempted to salvage the relationship between Palermo and Kaplan by reassigning the former to work on <unk> However , the strategy proved unsuccessful as the women continue to clash with one another . Meanwhile , Olin begins a flirtatious friendship with photographer Zach Hyman . Cutrone cautions Port that Olin 's lack of professionalism and inexperience in the industry may damage Port 's reputation . However , Olin 's under @-@ performance ultimately strained their friendship , and culminated in Olin moving into an apartment with their friend Samantha <unk> . The season finale sees Palermo promoted as the new face of <unk> after a successful business trip to Japan , while Port contemplates leaving People 's Revolution after she and Cutrone clash over the development of her fashion line . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The City received generally mixed reviews from critics . Melissa Camacho of Common Sense Media criticized the program for featuring a near @-@ identical plotline to its predecessor The Hills , where Lauren Conrad was similarly shown to pursue a career in the fashion industry while addressing difficulties among her friends . Ginia <unk> from The New York Times suggested that the series was purposely produced sub @-@ par to its parent series , commenting that it " is not the advertisement for New York that The Hills , with its dreamily shot opening @-@ credit sequence , is for Los Angeles " . An editor from The Village Voice questioned if Port was interesting enough to lead her own spin @-@ off series , describing her personality as featuring " unavoidable , inexorable ordinariness " . 
 = = = Scripting allegations = = = 
 The City was often criticized for appearing to fabricate much of its storyline . In one instance , Diane von Fürstenberg workers were reportedly angered that Port " doesn 't really work " and was " hardly ever in the office " , elaborating that series producers would inhibit normal work operations by not allowing employees to move items in their offices . Freddie <unk> , Port 's former love interest , commented that the network " never asked the cast to say or do anything " , though the editing that followed portrayed him as a " womanizing jerk " . 
 An additional source of suspicion arose in the second half of the first season , where Palermo allegedly purchased counterfeit accessories on Canal Street for a work assignment ; the non @-@ discreet nature of the transaction led to speculation that the scene was staged for the segment . In 2009 , Palermo commented that she was " disappointed " by the " villainous " manner in which she was portrayed on the program . She added that she was " super friendly " with Port at work , whereas the series depicted a more strained relationship . In 2012 , she added that her character was " not [ her ] at all " , further opining that her time on television was " ridiculous " . 
 = = = U.S. television ratings = = = 
 The series opening of The City premiered to 1 @.@ 6 million viewers , significantly less than the 2 @.@ 6 million viewers attracted by the fourth season finale of The Hills . The second half of the season premiered with 2 million viewers , a 43 % increase from its debut . The remainder of the season maintained an average 1 @.@ 9 million viewers , with the finale peaking at 2 @.@ 3 million . Upon the conclusion of the second season in July 2010 , rumors were widespread that The City would be cancelled . In October 2010 , Port commented that " it doesn 't really look like we 're doing it anymore " , with MTV later adding that the series would not be renewed for a third season . 
 = = Broadcast history and distribution = = 
 The City 's first season commenced airing on December 29 , 2008 , one week after the fourth season finale of The Hills . The series continued to air on Monday evenings until its midseason finale on March 16 , 2009 , at which point it had aired thirteen episodes . Rather than ordering an official second season , MTV included an additional ten episodes to the first season . The extension premiered on September 29 , 2009 , where it was moved to the Tuesday night timeslot , and concluded on December 1 , 2009 . The second season premiered on April 27 , 2010 , after the sixth season premiere of The Hills . Both programs held the Tuesday evening timeslot ; both concluded after twelve episodes on July 13 , 2010 . 
 The City episodes aired regularly on MTV in the United States . All episodes are approximately thirty minutes , and were broadcast in standard definition . The series ' episodes are also available for download at the iTunes Store . Episodes were previously available for viewing through the official MTV website , though they have since become unavailable since the series ' conclusion . Since its debut , Paramount Pictures has released both seasons of The City onto DVD , to regions 1 , 2 , and 4 . Each product includes all episodes of the respective season , in addition to deleted scenes and interviews of series personnel . 
 = Amanita onusta = 
 Amanita onusta , commonly known as the loaded Lepidella or the gunpowder Lepidella , is a species of fungus in the Amanitaceae family of mushrooms . It is characterized by its small to medium @-@ sized fruit bodies that have white to pale gray caps crowded with roughly conical , pyramidal , or irregular gray warts . The stipe is whitish @-@ gray with woolly or wart @-@ like veil remnants , and at the base is a spindle- or turnip @-@ shaped base that is rooted somewhat deeply in the soil . The species is distributed in eastern North America , from Nova Scotia to Mexico , and may be found growing on the ground in deciduous forests , particularly those with oak , hickory and chestnut . Fruit bodies smell somewhat like bleaching powder , and their edibility is unknown , but possibly toxic . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Amanita onusta was first described in 1874 by American mycologist Elliot Calvin Howe as Agaricus <unk> . Later , in 1891 , Pier Andrea Saccardo transferred the species to the genus Amanita . Amanita authority Cornelis Bas , writing in his extensive 1969 monograph on the genus , placed the species in his stirps <unk> , subsection Solitariae , section <unk> . This grouping of Amanita mushroom species also includes A. abrupta , A. atkinsoniana , A. costaricensis ( a provisionally named species authored by Tulloss , Halling , & G.M. <unk> . ) , A. nitida ( as Coker described the species ) and A. <unk> . 
 The Latin epithet <unk> means " charged , load @-@ carrying , burdened " , and a regular adjective derived from onus , " burden " ( the same word that gave the English onus ) . A. onusta is commonly known as the " loaded Lepidella " , or the " gunpowder Lepidella " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of Amanita onusta have caps that are initially broadly convex but flatten out as they mature , reaching diameters of 5 to 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) . The cap surface , grayish @-@ white in color , is ornamented with conical or pyramidal raised warts , or flattened , symmetrically arranged gray to brownish gray , grayish brown or grayish @-@ orange small scales ( squamules ) that are densely arranged over the surface . 
 The squamules are less crowded near the edge of the cap ( the margin ) . The margin does not have striations , and is typically fringed with remnants of the veil . The gills on the underside of the cap are spaced closely together , and either free or narrowly attached to the stipe . They are white to cream color , and are interspersed with short lamellulae ( gills that do not extend completely from cap margin to stipe ) . The gills may look as if they are waterlogged . 
 The stipe is 5 @.@ 5 to 12 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) long , 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick , and tapers slightly upwards . It is solid gray to brownish @-@ gray near base , paler towards the top , and appears cottony ( floccose ) or hairy ( fibrillose ) . The bulb at the base of the stipe is roughly spindle- to turnip @-@ shaped , and may root deeply into the soil , especially if the soil is loose . The short @-@ lived partial veil is white , and attached just below the top of the stipe . It is sticky and in maturity often clings to the upper part of the stipe , or may have some meagre remnants hanging from the cap margin . The universal veil remains are arranged in rows of warts and patches of gray to brownish @-@ gray small scales over the upper portion of the bulb ; below this , the color is a dirty white . The flesh is firm and white . Fruit bodies can range in smell from mild to " slightly unpleasant " . The odor has been described as resembling " chloride of lime " , a smell similar to some bathroom disinfectants containing bleach . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 Viewed in deposit , such as with a spore print , the spores are white . Viewed with a microscope , the spores are broadly ellipsoid to elongate , <unk> , thin @-@ walled , amyloid , and have dimensions of 8 @.@ 3 – 11 @.@ 6 by 4 @.@ 9 – 6 @.@ 6 µm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 38 – 46 by 9 – 11 µm , club @-@ shaped , mostly 4 @-@ spored but some are 2- or 3- spored , with clamps . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia found on the edge of a gill ) are 23 @.@ 3 – 31 @.@ 5 by 11 @.@ 6 – 15 @.@ 7 µm , ellipsoid , club- to pear @-@ shaped cells , partly in short rows . The cap cuticle is up to 168 µm thick , and consists of thin @-@ walled interwoven hyphae that are 2 – 5 @.@ 3 µm diameter , and gelatinized . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of this species — these are short branches connecting one cell to the previous cell to allow passage of the products of nuclear division . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 The edibility of A. onusta is unknown , but the mushroom has been described as " possibly poisonous " . In general , species of Amanita are best avoided for consumption because of the prevalence of toxic species in that genus . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Amanita onusta may be confused with A. cinereoconia because of the similar gray powdery veil remnants on the cap surface . A. cinereoconia is distinguished from A. onusta by the absence of clamps , its powdery @-@ wooly to powdery @-@ warty cap , as well as the absence of warts or scales at the base of the stipe . A. cinereoconia also smells distinctly of chloride of lime . Another similar species is A. costaricensis , found only in Costa Rica . A. atkinsoniana , another North American species , has shorter warts that are spaced further apart than those of A. onusta , and the warts on the basal bulb are arranged in parallel rows . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Amanita onusta grows solitary or scattered on the ground in mixed oak , hickory and chestnut forests from southern New England to Texas . The species has a preference for sandy or loose soils . Its range extends north to Nova Scotia , Canada , and south to Mexico . 
 = = = Cited books = = = 
 Jenkins DB . ( 1986 ) . Amanita of North America . Eureka , California : Mad River Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 916422 @-@ 55 @-@ 4 . 
 = Divine Heresy = 
 Divine Heresy is an American technical death metal band formed by founder of Fear Factory guitarist Dino Cazares and Devolved drummer John Sankey . Although the band 's origins trace back to 2002 , Divine Heresy was officially formed in 2006 . The band currently consists of guitarist Cazares , former Vital Remains drummer and current World Under Blood drummer Tim Yeung , former Nile bassist Joe Payne and vocalist Travis Neal . Tommy " Vext " Cummings was fired from Divine Heresy following an onstage altercation on April 26 , 2008 . After holding auditions for a new frontman for the band , it was announced on August 14 that The <unk> vocalist Travis Neal is to fill the position . 
 The band 's debut album Bleed the Fifth was released on August 28 , 2007 , and sold 2 @,@ 700 copies in its first week . Receiving generally positive reviews , Eduardo Rivadavia of Allmusic commented the album " strikes a near @-@ perfect balance between confirmation and innovation " , while Dom Lawson of Metal Hammer commented " All in all , the portly pioneer [ Cazares ] has hit the bull 's @-@ eye " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 2002 – 2007 ) = = = 
 Following his departure from Fear Factory in 2002 , guitarist Dino Cazares was looking for a drummer that " fit in " with the band . First he tried drummers John Sankey from Devolved and Nicholas Barker from the bands Cradle of Filth and Dimmu Borgir . But both drummers had to return to their homelands of Australia and England respectively due to visa issues . He then met former Vital Remains drummer Tim Yeung . Cazares and Yeung recorded the material they wrote and sent tapes to Cummings for his vocal audition . Cazares comments " We heard passion and anger in his voice , which was something we wanted . It was also very aggressive . " Divine Heresy held auditions for a permanent bassist — Tony Campos of Static @-@ X played bass on three songs and Cazares acted as bassist on the remaining songs . Following unsuccessful auditions , Cazares was contacted by former Nile bassist Joe Payne . Cazares knew Joe Payne from seeing him play live with Nile . After auditioning Joe Payne joined Divine Heresy as the permanent bass guitarist . 
 = = = Bleed the Fifth ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = 
 The band recorded its debut album , Bleed the Fifth in early 2007 with production duties handled by former Machine Head guitarist Logan Mader . The title of the album is a play on words , Cazares comments " You have the right to keep your mouth shut , but on this record we believe we ’ re saying a lot " . Cummings wrote the majority of the lyrics , which are about personal strifes and how people overcome them . Much of the lyrical content was influenced by the Book of Revelation , natural disasters , war , and terrorism . Cazares stated the album is a " big fuck you " to the people who want his projects to fail . 
 Released on August 28 , 2007 , in the United States , Bleed the Fifth sold 2 @,@ 700 copies in its first week . Dom Lawson of Metal Hammer summarized his review by saying " All in all , the portly pioneer has hit the bull 's @-@ eye and it 's going to be fascinating to see what happens next " , awarding an 8 out of a possible 10 . Eduardo Rivadavia of Allmusic felt the album " strikes a near @-@ perfect balance between confirmation ( reminding fans of Cazares ' abilities and unique vision ) and innovation ( he even plays a few guitar solos ! ) " . Scott Alisoglu of Blabbermouth.net summarized his review claiming the album is " one tough son of a bitch that may still have you humming melodies long after you 've ejected the disc . " Chad Bowar of About.com commented " Great musicianship , good songs and excellent production make this a very respectable debut . " 
 After recording was completed , Cazares announced the band signed a North American deal with Century Media Records , and a licensing deal with Roadrunner Records in Europe . His decision to choose Century Media was based on the creative freedom the label gave him , whereas Roadrunner would ask him to produce radio and commercial songs when he was in Fear Factory . However , Yeung claims Roadrunner were not interested and said he did not want to be on a label that is " sort of interested " . 
 = = = Departure of Tommy Vext ( 2008 ) = = = 
 Lead singer Tommy Vext left the band following an on @-@ stage altercation on April 26 , 2008 . Cause of the altercation remains controversial . According to Dino Cazares , Vext was fired because of a conflict during a live show . " We felt that he wanted to end the show early to go hang out at the New England Metal Fest , which we were supposed to be performing at the next day " coming up with all sorts of excuses to make this happen . The band continued to play after what Vext said was supposed to be the last song . Vext then began screaming at Dino and argued with him before he pushed Dino across the stage . Vext was kicked out of the band immediately . In a video interview Vext explained that he wanted to prevent ruining his voice for the next show by ending the set early because the PA system went out during the show . 
 In exclusive " Metal Injection " interview Tommy explained the real reasons behind his departure from the band : 
 I ’ ve been suffering the indignities of Dino ’ s massive ego for as long as I ’ ve worked with him , and unfortunately everything I ’ ve heard about him had eventually come to fruition , and he is exactly as he ’ s been portrayed as by his ex @-@ band members . And this happening now is the same reason why he ’ s not in Fear Factory anymore . It was a stepping stone in my life and I ’ m moving on . 
 = = = Bringer of Plagues and hiatus ( 2009 – 2015 ) = = = 
 Divine Heresy 's follow @-@ up to 2007 's Bleed the Fifth was the group 's first release with new vocalist Travis Neal , formerly of Pushed . He is also currently a member of the Swedish band The <unk> and the band Hate Times Nine from San Diego / LA . The album , titled Bringer of Plagues , was released on July 28 release via Century Media Records . Dino co @-@ produced the album with the acclaimed producing team Dirty Icon ( Logan Mader and Lucas Banker ) . 
 As of November 25 , 2010 , Divine Heresy cannot be found on the Century Media Records website . 
 Dino has also given interviews that during breaks from the current Fear Factory tour , Dino and drummer Tim Yeung have started writing new material for the next Divine Heresy record . 
 On January 26 , 2011 , it was announced that bassist Joe Payne had left Divine Heresy . It is still unknown whether anybody has been found to replace him . 
 On 10 May 2011 , Dino announced via Divine Heresy 's Facebook page and through his own personal account that Divine Heresy are still together and that there will be a new album in 2012 . He also said that they were planning a tour along the US east coast . On August 17 , 2012 , guitarist Dino Cazares via Twitter commented on the status of Tim Yeung as a DH drummer : 
 On July 27 , 2015 , in an interview with MetalSucks , Cazares confirmed that he is the only remaining member of Divine Heresy and the band is currently inactive due to his commitments with Fear Factory . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Current members = = = 
 Dino Cazares – guitars ( 2005 – present ) , bass ( 2007 ) 
 = = = Former members = = = 
 Jose <unk> – vocals ( 2005 ) 
 John Sankey – drums ( 2005 ) 
 Tim Yeung – drums ( 2006 – 2012 ) 
 Tommy " Vext " Cummings – vocals ( 2006 – 2008 ) 
 Joe Payne – bass , backing vocals ( 2007 – 2011 ) 
 Travis Neal – vocals ( 2008 – 2013 ) 
 = = = Live members = = = 
 Risha <unk> – bass ( 2006 – 2007 ) 
 Jake <unk> – vocals ( 2008 ) 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Bleed the Fifth ( 2007 ) 
 Bringer of Plagues ( 2009 ) 
 = = Music videos = = 
 " Failed Creation " ( The only video with Tommy " Vext " Cummings ) 
 " Bleed The Fifth " ( This track is on the first album with Tommy . However , due to his early departure before the video was complete , Travis Neal appeared instead and recorded his vocals over Tommy 's , marking his first appearance as their new vocalist ) 
 " Facebreaker " 
 = Hilbert space = 
 The mathematical concept of a Hilbert space , named after David Hilbert , generalizes the notion of Euclidean space . It extends the methods of vector algebra and calculus from the two @-@ dimensional Euclidean plane and three @-@ dimensional space to spaces with any finite or infinite number of dimensions . A Hilbert space is an abstract vector space possessing the structure of an inner product that allows length and angle to be measured . Furthermore , Hilbert spaces are complete : there are enough limits in the space to allow the techniques of calculus to be used . 
 Hilbert spaces arise naturally and frequently in mathematics and physics , typically as infinite @-@ dimensional function spaces . The earliest Hilbert spaces were studied from this point of view in the first decade of the 20th century by David Hilbert , Erhard Schmidt , and Frigyes Riesz . They are indispensable tools in the theories of partial differential equations , quantum mechanics , Fourier analysis ( which includes applications to signal processing and heat transfer ) — and ergodic theory , which forms the mathematical underpinning of thermodynamics . John von Neumann coined the term Hilbert space for the abstract concept that underlies many of these diverse applications . The success of Hilbert space methods ushered in a very fruitful era for functional analysis . Apart from the classical Euclidean spaces , examples of Hilbert spaces include spaces of square @-@ integrable functions , spaces of sequences , Sobolev spaces consisting of generalized functions , and Hardy spaces of holomorphic functions . 
 Geometric intuition plays an important role in many aspects of Hilbert space theory . Exact analogs of the Pythagorean theorem and parallelogram law hold in a Hilbert space . At a deeper level , perpendicular projection onto a subspace ( the analog of " dropping the altitude " of a triangle ) plays a significant role in optimization problems and other aspects of the theory . An element of a Hilbert space can be uniquely specified by its coordinates with respect to a set of coordinate axes ( an orthonormal basis ) , in analogy with Cartesian coordinates in the plane . When that set of axes is countably infinite , this means that the Hilbert space can also usefully be thought of in terms of the space of infinite sequences that are square @-@ summable . The latter space is often in the older literature referred to as the Hilbert space . Linear operators on a Hilbert space are likewise fairly concrete objects : in good cases , they are simply transformations that stretch the space by different factors in mutually perpendicular directions in a sense that is made precise by the study of their spectrum . 
 = = Definition and illustration = = 
 = = = Motivating example : Euclidean space = = = 
 One of the most familiar examples of a Hilbert space is the Euclidean space consisting of three @-@ dimensional vectors , denoted by <unk> , and equipped with the dot product . The dot product takes two vectors x and y , and produces a real number x · y . If x and y are represented in Cartesian coordinates , then the dot product is defined by 
 <formula> 
 The dot product satisfies the properties : 
 It is symmetric in x and y : x · y 
 = y · x . 
 It is linear in its first argument : ( ax1 + <unk> ) · y = 
 ax1 · y + <unk> · y for any scalars a , b , and vectors x1 , x2 , and y . 
 It is positive definite : for all vectors x , x · x ≥ 0 , with equality if and only if x 
 = 0 . 
 An operation on pairs of vectors that , like the dot product , satisfies these three properties is known as a ( real ) inner product . A vector space equipped with such an inner product is known as a ( real ) inner product space . Every finite @-@ dimensional inner product space is also a Hilbert space . The basic feature of the dot product that connects it with Euclidean geometry is that it is related to both the length ( or norm ) of a vector , denoted | | x | | , and to the angle θ between two vectors x and y by means of the formula 
 <formula> 
 <unk> calculus in Euclidean space relies on the ability to compute limits , and to have useful criteria for concluding that limits exist . A mathematical series 
 <formula> 
 consisting of vectors in <unk> is absolutely convergent provided that the sum of the lengths converges as an ordinary series of real numbers : 
 <formula> 
 Just as with a series of scalars , a series of vectors that converges absolutely also converges to some limit vector L in the Euclidean space , in the sense that 
 <formula> 
 This property expresses the completeness of Euclidean space : that a series that converges absolutely also converges in the ordinary sense . 
 Hilbert spaces are often taken over the complex numbers . The complex plane denoted by <unk> is equipped with a notion of magnitude , the complex modulus | z | which is defined as the square root of the product of z with its complex conjugate : 
 <formula> 
 If z = 
 x + iy is a decomposition of z into its real and imaginary parts , then the modulus is the usual Euclidean two @-@ dimensional length : 
 <formula> 
 The inner product of a pair of complex numbers z and w is the product of z with the complex conjugate of w : 
 <formula> 
 This is complex @-@ valued . The real part of ⟨ z , w ⟩ gives the usual two @-@ dimensional Euclidean dot product . 
 A second example is the space <unk> whose elements are pairs of complex numbers z 
 = ( z1 , z2 ) . Then the inner product of z with another such vector w = 
 ( w1 , w2 ) is given by 
 <formula> 
 The real part of ⟨ z , w ⟩ is then the four @-@ dimensional Euclidean dot product . This inner product is Hermitian symmetric , which means that the result of interchanging z and w is the complex conjugate : 
 <formula> 
 = = = Definition = = = 
 A Hilbert space H is a real or complex inner product space that is also a complete metric space with respect to the distance function induced by the inner product . To say that H is a complex inner product space means that H is a complex vector space on which there is an inner product <formula> associating a complex number to each pair of elements x , y of H that satisfies the following properties : 
 The inner product of a pair of elements is equal to the complex conjugate of the inner product of the swapped elements : 
 <formula> 
 The inner product is linear in its first argument . For all complex numbers a and b , 
 <formula> 
 The inner product of an element with itself is positive definite : 
 <formula> 
 where the case of equality holds precisely when x = 0 . 
 It follows from properties 1 and 2 that a complex inner product is antilinear in its second argument , meaning that 
 <formula> 
 A real inner product space is defined in the same way , except that H is a real vector space and the inner product takes real values . Such an inner product will be bilinear : that is , linear in each argument . 
 The norm is the real @-@ valued function 
 <formula> 
 and the distance d between two points x , y in H is defined in terms of the norm by 
 <formula> 
 That this function is a distance function means ( 1 ) that it is symmetric in x and y , ( 2 ) that the distance between x and itself is zero , and otherwise the distance between x and y must be positive , and ( 3 ) that the triangle inequality holds , meaning that the length of one leg of a triangle xyz cannot exceed the sum of the lengths of the other two legs : 
 <formula> 
 This last property is ultimately a consequence of the more fundamental Cauchy – Schwarz inequality , which asserts 
 <formula> 
 with equality if and only if x and y are linearly dependent . 
 Relative to a distance function defined in this way , any inner product space is a metric space , and sometimes is known as a pre @-@ Hilbert space . Any pre @-@ Hilbert space that is additionally also a complete space is a Hilbert space . Completeness is expressed using a form of the Cauchy criterion for sequences in H : a pre @-@ Hilbert space H is complete if every Cauchy sequence converges with respect to this norm to an element in the space . Completeness can be characterized by the following equivalent condition : if a series of vectors <formula> converges absolutely in the sense that 
 <formula> 
 then the series converges in H , in the sense that the partial sums converge to an element of H. 
 As a complete normed space , Hilbert spaces are by definition also Banach spaces . As such they are topological vector spaces , in which topological notions like the openness and <unk> of subsets are well @-@ defined . Of special importance is the notion of a closed linear subspace of a Hilbert space that , with the inner product induced by restriction , is also complete ( being a closed set in a complete metric space ) and therefore a Hilbert space in its own right . 
 = = = Second example : sequence spaces = = = 
 The sequence space ℓ2 consists of all infinite sequences z = ( z1 , z2 , ... ) of complex numbers such that the series 
 <formula> 
 converges . The inner product on ℓ2 is defined by 
 <formula> 
 with the latter series converging as a consequence of the Cauchy – Schwarz inequality . 
 Completeness of the space holds provided that whenever a series of elements from ℓ2 converges absolutely ( in norm ) , then it converges to an element of ℓ2 . The proof is basic in mathematical analysis , and permits mathematical series of elements of the space to be manipulated with the same ease as series of complex numbers ( or vectors in a finite @-@ dimensional Euclidean space ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the development of Hilbert spaces , other generalizations of Euclidean spaces were known to mathematicians and physicists . In particular , the idea of an abstract linear space had gained some traction towards the end of the 19th century : this is a space whose elements can be added together and multiplied by scalars ( such as real or complex numbers ) without necessarily identifying these elements with " geometric " vectors , such as position and momentum vectors in physical systems . Other objects studied by mathematicians at the turn of the 20th century , in particular spaces of sequences ( including series ) and spaces of functions , can naturally be thought of as linear spaces . Functions , for instance , can be added together or multiplied by constant scalars , and these operations obey the algebraic laws satisfied by addition and scalar multiplication of spatial vectors . 
 In the first decade of the 20th century , parallel developments led to the introduction of Hilbert spaces . The first of these was the observation , which arose during David Hilbert and Erhard Schmidt 's study of integral equations , that two square @-@ integrable real @-@ valued functions f and g on an interval [ a , b ] have an inner product 
 <formula> 
 which has many of the familiar properties of the Euclidean dot product . In particular , the idea of an orthogonal family of functions has meaning . Schmidt exploited the similarity of this inner product with the usual dot product to prove an analog of the spectral decomposition for an operator of the form 
 <formula> 
 where K is a continuous function symmetric in x and y . The resulting <unk> expansion expresses the function K as a series of the form 
 <formula> 
 where the functions φn are orthogonal in the sense that ⟨ φn , <unk> ⟩ = 0 for all n ≠ m . The individual terms in this series are sometimes referred to as elementary product solutions . However , there are <unk> expansions that fail to converge in a suitable sense to a square @-@ integrable function : the missing ingredient , which ensures convergence , is completeness . 
 The second development was the Lebesgue integral , an alternative to the Riemann integral introduced by Henri Lebesgue in 1904 . The Lebesgue integral made it possible to integrate a much broader class of functions . In 1907 , Frigyes Riesz and Ernst Sigismund Fischer independently proved that the space L2 of square Lebesgue @-@ integrable functions is a complete metric space . As a consequence of the interplay between geometry and completeness , the 19th century results of Joseph Fourier , Friedrich Bessel and Marc @-@ Antoine Parseval on trigonometric series easily carried over to these more general spaces , resulting in a geometrical and analytical apparatus now usually known as the Riesz – Fischer theorem . 
 Further basic results were proved in the early 20th century . For example , the Riesz representation theorem was independently established by Maurice Fréchet and Frigyes Riesz in 1907 . John von Neumann coined the term abstract Hilbert space in his work on unbounded Hermitian operators . Although other mathematicians such as Hermann Weyl and Norbert Wiener had already studied particular Hilbert spaces in great detail , often from a physically motivated point of view , von Neumann gave the first complete and axiomatic treatment of them . Von Neumann later used them in his seminal work on the foundations of quantum mechanics , and in his continued work with Eugene Wigner . The name " Hilbert space " was soon adopted by others , for example by Hermann Weyl in his book on quantum mechanics and the theory of groups . 
 The significance of the concept of a Hilbert space was underlined with the realization that it offers one of the best mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics . In short , the states of a quantum mechanical system are vectors in a certain Hilbert space , the observables are <unk> operators on that space , the symmetries of the system are unitary operators , and measurements are orthogonal projections . The relation between quantum mechanical symmetries and unitary operators provided an impetus for the development of the unitary representation theory of groups , initiated in the 1928 work of Hermann Weyl . On the other hand , in the early 1930s it became clear that classical mechanics can be described in terms of Hilbert space ( Koopman – von Neumann classical mechanics ) and that certain properties of classical dynamical systems can be analyzed using Hilbert space techniques in the framework of ergodic theory . 
 The algebra of observables in quantum mechanics is naturally an algebra of operators defined on a Hilbert space , according to Werner Heisenberg 's matrix mechanics formulation of quantum theory . Von Neumann began investigating operator algebras in the 1930s , as rings of operators on a Hilbert space . The kind of algebras studied by von Neumann and his contemporaries are now known as von Neumann algebras . In the 1940s , Israel Gelfand , Mark <unk> and Irving Segal gave a definition of a kind of operator algebras called C * <unk> that on the one hand made no reference to an underlying Hilbert space , and on the other extrapolated many of the useful features of the operator algebras that had previously been studied . The spectral theorem for self @-@ adjoint operators in particular that underlies much of the existing Hilbert space theory was generalized to C * <unk> . These techniques are now basic in abstract harmonic analysis and representation theory . 
 = = Examples = = 
 = = = Lebesgue spaces = = = 
 Lebesgue spaces are function spaces associated to measure spaces ( X , M , μ ) , where X is a set , M is a σ @-@ algebra of subsets of X , and μ is a countably additive measure on M. Let L2 ( X , μ ) be the space of those complex @-@ valued measurable functions on X for which the Lebesgue integral of the square of the absolute value of the function is finite , i.e. , for a function f in L2 ( X , μ ) , 
 <formula> 
 and where functions are identified if and only if they differ only on a set of measure zero . 
 The inner product of functions f and g in L2 ( X , μ ) is then defined as 
 <formula> 
 For f and g in L2 , this integral exists because of the Cauchy – Schwarz inequality , and defines an inner product on the space . Equipped with this inner product , L2 is in fact complete . The Lebesgue integral is essential to ensure completeness : on domains of real numbers , for instance , not enough functions are Riemann integrable . 
 The Lebesgue spaces appear in many natural settings . The spaces L2 ( R ) and L2 ( [ 0 @,@ 1 ] ) of square @-@ integrable functions with respect to the Lebesgue measure on the real line and unit interval , respectively , are natural domains on which to define the Fourier transform and Fourier series . In other situations , the measure may be something other than the ordinary Lebesgue measure on the real line . For instance , if w is any positive measurable function , the space of all measurable functions f on the interval [ 0 , 1 ] satisfying 
 <formula> 
 is called the weighted L2 space <unk> ( [ 0 @,@ 1 ] ) , and w is called the weight function . The inner product is defined by 
 <formula> 
 The weighted space <unk> ( [ 0 @,@ 1 ] ) is identical with the Hilbert space L2 ( [ 0 @,@ 1 ] , μ ) where the measure μ of a Lebesgue @-@ measurable set A is defined by 
 <formula> 
 Weighted L2 spaces like this are frequently used to study orthogonal polynomials , because different families of orthogonal polynomials are orthogonal with respect to different weighting functions . 
 = = = Sobolev spaces = = = 
 Sobolev spaces , denoted by Hs or W s , 2 , are Hilbert spaces . These are a special kind of function space in which differentiation may be performed , but that ( unlike other Banach spaces such as the Hölder spaces ) support the structure of an inner product . Because differentiation is permitted , Sobolev spaces are a convenient setting for the theory of partial differential equations . They also form the basis of the theory of direct methods in the calculus of variations . 
 For s a non @-@ negative integer and Ω ⊂ Rn , the Sobolev space Hs ( Ω ) contains L2 functions whose weak derivatives of order up to s are also L2 . The inner product in Hs ( Ω ) is 
 <formula> 
 where the dot indicates the dot product in the Euclidean space of partial derivatives of each order . Sobolev spaces can also be defined when s is not an integer . 
 Sobolev spaces are also studied from the point of view of spectral theory , relying more specifically on the Hilbert space structure . If Ω is a suitable domain , then one can define the Sobolev space Hs ( Ω ) as the space of Bessel potentials ; roughly , 
 <formula> 
 Here Δ is the Laplacian and ( 1 − Δ ) − s / 2 is understood in terms of the spectral mapping theorem . Apart from providing a workable definition of Sobolev spaces for non @-@ integer s , this definition also has particularly desirable properties under the Fourier transform that make it ideal for the study of <unk> operators . Using these methods on a compact Riemannian manifold , one can obtain for instance the Hodge decomposition , which is the basis of Hodge theory . 
 = = = Spaces of holomorphic functions = = = 
 Hardy spaces 
 The Hardy spaces are function spaces , arising in complex analysis and harmonic analysis , whose elements are certain holomorphic functions in a complex domain . Let U denote the unit disc in the complex plane . Then the Hardy space H2 ( U ) is defined as the space of holomorphic functions f on U such that the means 
 <formula> 
 remain bounded for r < 1 . The norm on this Hardy space is defined by 
 <formula> 
 Hardy spaces in the disc are related to Fourier series . A function f is in H2 ( U ) if and only if 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> 
 Thus H2 ( U ) consists of those functions that are L2 on the circle , and whose negative frequency Fourier coefficients vanish . 
 Bergman spaces 
 The Bergman spaces are another family of Hilbert spaces of holomorphic functions . Let D be a bounded open set in the complex plane ( or a higher @-@ dimensional complex space ) and let L2 , h ( D ) be the space of holomorphic functions f in D that are also in L2 ( D ) in the sense that 
 <formula> 
 where the integral is taken with respect to the Lebesgue measure in D. Clearly L2 , h ( D ) is a subspace of L2 ( D ) ; in fact , it is a closed subspace , and so a Hilbert space in its own right . This is a consequence of the estimate , valid on compact subsets K of D , that 
 <formula> 
 which in turn follows from Cauchy 's integral formula . Thus convergence of a sequence of holomorphic functions in L2 ( D ) implies also compact convergence , and so the limit function is also holomorphic . Another consequence of this inequality is that the linear functional that evaluates a function f at a point of D is actually continuous on L2 , h ( D ) . The Riesz representation theorem implies that the evaluation functional can be represented as an element of L2 , h ( D ) . Thus , for every z ∈ D , there is a function <unk> ∈ L2 , h ( D ) such that 
 <formula> 
 for all f ∈ L2 , h ( D ) . The integrand 
 <formula> 
 is known as the Bergman kernel of D. This integral kernel satisfies a reproducing property 
 <formula> 
 A Bergman space is an example of a reproducing kernel Hilbert space , which is a Hilbert space of functions along with a kernel K ( ζ , z ) that verifies a reproducing property analogous to this one . The Hardy space H2 ( D ) also admits a reproducing kernel , known as the Szegő kernel . Reproducing kernels are common in other areas of mathematics as well . For instance , in harmonic analysis the Poisson kernel is a reproducing kernel for the Hilbert space of square @-@ integrable harmonic functions in the unit ball . That the latter is a Hilbert space at all is a consequence of the mean value theorem for harmonic functions . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Many of the applications of Hilbert spaces exploit the fact that Hilbert spaces support generalizations of simple geometric concepts like projection and change of basis from their usual finite dimensional setting . In particular , the spectral theory of continuous self @-@ adjoint linear operators on a Hilbert space generalizes the usual spectral decomposition of a matrix , and this often plays a major role in applications of the theory to other areas of mathematics and physics . 
 = = = Sturm – Liouville theory = = = 
 In the theory of ordinary differential equations , spectral methods on a suitable Hilbert space are used to study the behavior of eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of differential equations . For example , the Sturm – Liouville problem arises in the study of the harmonics of waves in a violin string or a drum , and is a central problem in ordinary differential equations . The problem is a differential equation of the form 
 <formula> 
 for an unknown function y on an interval [ a , b ] , satisfying general homogeneous Robin boundary conditions 
 <formula> 
 The functions p , q , and w are given in advance , and the problem is to find the function y and constants λ for which the equation has a solution . The problem only has solutions for certain values of λ , called eigenvalues of the system , and this is a consequence of the spectral theorem for compact operators applied to the integral operator defined by the Green 's function for the system . Furthermore , another consequence of this general result is that the eigenvalues λ of the system can be arranged in an increasing sequence tending to infinity . 
 = = = Partial differential equations = = = 
 Hilbert spaces form a basic tool in the study of partial differential equations . For many classes of partial differential equations , such as linear elliptic equations , it is possible to consider a generalized solution ( known as a weak solution ) by enlarging the class of functions . Many weak formulations involve the class of Sobolev functions , which is a Hilbert space . A suitable weak formulation reduces to a geometrical problem the analytic problem of finding a solution or , often what is more important , showing that a solution exists and is unique for given boundary data . For linear elliptic equations , one geometrical result that ensures unique solvability for a large class of problems is the Lax – Milgram theorem . This strategy forms the <unk> of the <unk> method ( a finite element method ) for numerical solution of partial differential equations . 
 A typical example is the Poisson equation − <unk> = g with Dirichlet boundary conditions in a bounded domain Ω in R2 . The weak formulation consists of finding a function u such that , for all continuously differentiable functions v in Ω vanishing on the boundary : 
 <formula> 
 This can be recast in terms of the Hilbert space H1 
 0 ( Ω ) consisting of functions u such that u , along with its weak partial derivatives , are square integrable on Ω , and vanish on the boundary . The question then reduces to finding u in this space such that for all v in this space 
 <formula> 
 where a is a continuous bilinear form , and b is a continuous linear functional , given respectively by 
 <formula> 
 Since the Poisson equation is elliptic , it follows from Poincaré 's inequality that the bilinear form a is coercive . The Lax – Milgram theorem then ensures the existence and uniqueness of solutions of this equation . 
 Hilbert spaces allow for many elliptic partial differential equations to be formulated in a similar way , and the Lax – Milgram theorem is then a basic tool in their analysis . With suitable modifications , similar techniques can be applied to parabolic partial differential equations and certain hyperbolic partial differential equations . 
 = = = <unk> theory = = = 
 The field of ergodic theory is the study of the long @-@ term behavior of chaotic dynamical systems . The <unk> case of a field that ergodic theory applies to is thermodynamics , in which — though the microscopic state of a system is extremely complicated ( it is impossible to understand the ensemble of individual collisions between particles of matter ) — the average behavior over sufficiently long time intervals is tractable . The laws of thermodynamics are assertions about such average behavior . In particular , one formulation of the zeroth law of thermodynamics asserts that over sufficiently long timescales , the only functionally independent measurement that one can make of a thermodynamic system in equilibrium is its total energy , in the form of temperature . 
 An ergodic dynamical system is one for which , apart from the energy — measured by the Hamiltonian — there are no other functionally independent conserved quantities on the phase space . More explicitly , suppose that the energy E is fixed , and let ΩE be the subset of the phase space consisting of all states of energy E ( an energy surface ) , and let <unk> denote the evolution operator on the phase space . The dynamical system is ergodic if there are no continuous non @-@ constant functions on ΩE such that 
 <formula> 
 for all w on ΩE and all time t . Liouville 's theorem implies that there exists a measure μ on the energy surface that is invariant under the time translation . As a result , time translation is a unitary transformation of the Hilbert space L2 ( ΩE , μ ) consisting of square @-@ integrable functions on the energy surface ΩE with respect to the inner product 
 <formula> 
 The von Neumann mean ergodic theorem states the following : 
 If Ut is a ( strongly continuous ) one @-@ parameter semigroup of unitary operators on a Hilbert space H , and P is the orthogonal projection onto the space of common fixed points of Ut , { x ∈ H | <unk> = x for all t > 0 } , then 
 <formula> 
 For an ergodic system , the fixed set of the time evolution consists only of the constant functions , so the ergodic theorem implies the following : for any function f ∈ L2 ( ΩE , μ ) , 
 <formula> 
 That is , the long time average of an observable f is equal to its expectation value over an energy surface . 
 = = = Fourier analysis = = = 
 One of the basic goals of Fourier analysis is to decompose a function into a ( possibly infinite ) linear combination of given basis functions : the associated Fourier series . The classical Fourier series associated to a function f defined on the interval [ 0 , 1 ] is a series of the form 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> 
 The example of adding up the first few terms in a Fourier series for a sawtooth function is shown in the figure . The basis functions are sine waves with wavelengths λ / n ( n = integer ) shorter than the wavelength λ of the sawtooth itself ( except for n = 1 , the fundamental wave ) . All basis functions have nodes at the nodes of the sawtooth , but all but the fundamental have additional nodes . The oscillation of the summed terms about the sawtooth is called the Gibbs phenomenon . 
 A significant problem in classical Fourier series asks in what sense the Fourier series converges , if at all , to the function f . Hilbert space methods provide one possible answer to this question . The functions en ( θ ) = <unk> form an orthogonal basis of the Hilbert space L2 ( [ 0 @,@ 1 ] ) . Consequently , any square @-@ integrable function can be expressed as a series 
 <formula> 
 and , moreover , this series converges in the Hilbert space sense ( that is , in the L2 mean ) . 
 The problem can also be studied from the abstract point of view : every Hilbert space has an orthonormal basis , and every element of the Hilbert space can be written in a unique way as a sum of multiples of these basis elements . The coefficients appearing on these basis elements are sometimes known abstractly as the Fourier coefficients of the element of the space . The abstraction is especially useful when it is more natural to use different basis functions for a space such as L2 ( [ 0 @,@ 1 ] ) . In many circumstances , it is desirable not to decompose a function into trigonometric functions , but rather into orthogonal polynomials or <unk> for instance , and in higher dimensions into spherical harmonics . 
 For instance , if en are any orthonormal basis functions of L2 [ 0 @,@ 1 ] , then a given function in L2 [ 0 @,@ 1 ] can be approximated as a finite linear combination 
 <formula> 
 The coefficients { aj } are selected to make the magnitude of the difference | | ƒ − <unk> | | 2 as small as possible . Geometrically , the best approximation is the orthogonal projection of ƒ onto the subspace consisting of all linear combinations of the { ej } , and can be calculated by 
 <formula> 
 That this formula minimizes the difference | | ƒ − <unk> | | 2 is a consequence of Bessel 's inequality and Parseval 's formula . 
 In various applications to physical problems , a function can be decomposed into physically meaningful eigenfunctions of a differential operator ( typically the Laplace operator ) : this forms the foundation for the spectral study of functions , in reference to the spectrum of the differential operator . A concrete physical application involves the problem of hearing the shape of a drum : given the fundamental modes of vibration that a drumhead is capable of producing , can one infer the shape of the drum itself ? The mathematical formulation of this question involves the Dirichlet eigenvalues of the Laplace equation in the plane , that represent the fundamental modes of vibration in direct analogy with the integers that represent the fundamental modes of vibration of the violin string . 
 Spectral theory also underlies certain aspects of the Fourier transform of a function . Whereas Fourier analysis decomposes a function defined on a compact set into the discrete spectrum of the Laplacian ( which corresponds to the vibrations of a violin string or drum ) , the Fourier transform of a function is the decomposition of a function defined on all of Euclidean space into its components in the continuous spectrum of the Laplacian . The Fourier transformation is also geometrical , in a sense made precise by the Plancherel theorem , that asserts that it is an isometry of one Hilbert space ( the " time domain " ) with another ( the " frequency domain " ) . This isometry property of the Fourier transformation is a recurring theme in abstract harmonic analysis , as evidenced for instance by the Plancherel theorem for spherical functions occurring in noncommutative harmonic analysis . 
 = = = Quantum mechanics = = = 
 In the mathematically rigorous formulation of quantum mechanics , developed by John von Neumann , the possible states ( more precisely , the pure states ) of a quantum mechanical system are represented by unit vectors ( called state vectors ) residing in a complex separable Hilbert space , known as the state space , well defined up to a complex number of norm 1 ( the phase factor ) . In other words , the possible states are points in the <unk> of a Hilbert space , usually called the complex projective space . The exact nature of this Hilbert space is dependent on the system ; for example , the position and momentum states for a single non @-@ relativistic spin zero particle is the space of all square @-@ integrable functions , while the states for the spin of a single proton are unit elements of the two @-@ dimensional complex Hilbert space of <unk> . Each observable is represented by a self @-@ adjoint linear operator acting on the state space . Each eigenstate of an observable corresponds to an eigenvector of the operator , and the associated eigenvalue corresponds to the value of the observable in that eigenstate . 
 The inner product between two state vectors is a complex number known as a probability amplitude . During an ideal measurement of a quantum mechanical system , the probability that a system collapses from a given initial state to a particular eigenstate is given by the square of the absolute value of the probability amplitudes between the initial and final states . The possible results of a measurement are the eigenvalues of the operator — which explains the choice of self @-@ adjoint operators , for all the eigenvalues must be real . The probability distribution of an observable in a given state can be found by computing the spectral decomposition of the corresponding operator . 
 For a general system , states are typically not pure , but instead are represented as statistical mixtures of pure states , or mixed states , given by density matrices : self @-@ adjoint operators of trace one on a Hilbert space . Moreover , for general quantum mechanical systems , the effects of a single measurement can influence other parts of a system in a manner that is described instead by a positive operator valued measure . Thus the structure both of the states and observables in the general theory is considerably more complicated than the idealization for pure states . 
 = = = Color perception = = = 
 Any true " physical " color can be represented by a combination of pure spectral colors . As physical colors can be composed of any number of physical colors , the space of physical colors may aptly be represented by a Hilbert space over spectral colors . Humans have three types of cone cells for color perception , so the " human perceivable " colors can be represented by 3 @-@ dimensional Euclidean space . The non @-@ unique linear mapping from the Hilbert space of physical colors to the Euclidean space of human perceivable colors explains why many distinct physical colors may be perceived by humans to be identical ( e.g. , pure yellow light versus a mix of red and green light ) . 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Pythagorean identity = = = 
