 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The most widespread member of its family in the Indo @-@ Pacific , the longtail butterfly ray is found from the Red Sea and Somalia , westward across India and Sri Lanka , to China and southern Japan , the Philippines , and the western islands of Indonesia ( including Borneo , Sumatra , and Java ) . It has also been reported from French Polynesia ( see taxonomic note above ) . It is fairly common in some areas . This bottom @-@ dwelling species inhabits coastal waters at depths of 10 – 30 m ( 33 – 98 ft ) , preferring sandy or muddy bottoms . It does not appear to migrate seasonally . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The longtail butterfly ray feeds on bony fishes , in particular <unk> of the genus <unk> , as well as molluscs and crustaceans . It is not known to shoal in large numbers . Known parasites of this ray include the nematode Hysterothylacium <unk> and the tapeworm Acanthobothrium <unk> . Like other butterfly rays , this species is viviparous with the young sustained initially by yolk , and later by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother . Adult females have two functional ovaries and uteruses . Reproductive activity proceeds throughout the year , with a peak from April to October . The gestation period is unknown , though it is possible that females bear more than one litter per year . The litter size is at least seven pups and is not correlated with female size . The newborns measure 20 – 26 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 – 10 @.@ 2 in ) across and look like stingless miniatures of the adult ; siblings may differ from each other in color . Males and females mature sexually at roughly 45 and 41 cm ( 18 and 16 in ) across respectively . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The longtail butterfly ray is widely caught for meat and as bycatch in artisanal and commercial fisheries , including in India , Thailand , and Indonesia . It is taken using bottom trawls , bottom @-@ set gillnets , and to a lesser degree trammel nets and other fishing gear . Though specific population and catch data are lacking , the longtail butterfly ray is thought to be susceptible to overfishing due to its low reproductive rate and the fact that pregnant females often abort their young when captured . Given the high intensity of fishing pressure across most of its range , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Near Threatened . 
 = 2010 AAA 400 = 
 The 2010 AAA 400 was a NASCAR Sprint Cup Series stock car race held on September 26 , 2010 , at Dover International Speedway in Dover , Delaware . The 400 lap race was the twenty @-@ eighth in the 2010 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series , as well as the second race in the ten @-@ race Chase for the Sprint Cup , which ends the season . The race was won by Jimmie Johnson , of the Hendrick Motorsports team . Jeff Burton finished second , and Joey Logano , who started nineteenth , clinched third . 
 Pole position driver Jimmie Johnson maintained his lead on the first lap to begin the race , as A. J. Allmendinger , who started in the second position on the grid , remained behind him . Fourteen laps later Allmendinger became the leader of the race . Chase for the Sprint Cup participants Clint Bowyer , and Tony Stewart were in the top ten for most of the race , but in the closing laps all of them suffered spins or other problems . Afterward , Johnson became the leader of the race , once Allmendinger made a pit stop because of a loose wheel . Johnson maintained the first position to lead the most laps of 191 , and to win his sixth race of the season . 
 There were four cautions and eighteen lead changes among ten different drivers throughout the course of the race . It was Jimmie Johnson 's sixth win in the 2010 season , and the fifty @-@ third of his career . The result moved Johnson up to second in the Drivers ' Championship , thirty @-@ five points behind Denny Hamlin and ten ahead of Kyle Busch . Chevrolet maintained its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , thirty @-@ five ahead of Toyota and eighty ahead of Ford , with eight races remaining in the season . A total of 88 @,@ 000 people attended the race , while 3 @.@ 966 million watched it on television . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Dover International Speedway is one of five short tracks to hold NASCAR races ; the others are Bristol Motor Speedway , Richmond International Raceway , Martinsville Speedway , and Phoenix International Raceway . The NASCAR race makes use of the track 's standard configuration , a four @-@ turn short track oval that is 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at twenty @-@ four degrees . The front stretch , the location of the finish line , is banked at nine degrees with the backstretch . The racetrack has seats for 135 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 Before the race , Denny Hamlin led the Drivers ' Championship with 5 @,@ 230 points , and Kevin Harvick stood in second with 5 @,@ 185 . Kyle Busch was third in the Drivers ' Championship with 5 @,@ 168 , thirteen ahead of Jeff Gordon and twenty @-@ four ahead of Kurt Busch in fourth and fifth . Jimmie Johnson with 5 @,@ 138 was three points ahead of Carl Edwards , as Greg Biffle with 5 @,@ 122 points , was four ahead of Jeff Burton , and sixteen in front of Tony Stewart . Matt Kenseth and Clint Bowyer was eleventh and twelfth with 5 @,@ 094 and 5 @,@ 045 points . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet was leading with 197 points , thirty @-@ two points ahead of their rival Toyota . Ford , with 123 points , was fourteen points ahead of Dodge in the battle for third . Jimmie Johnson was the race 's defending champion . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — one on Friday , and two on Saturday . The first session lasted 90 minutes , while the second session lasted 45 minutes . The third and final session lasted 60 minutes . During the first practice session , Ryan Newman , for the Stewart Haas Racing team , was quickest ahead of Carl Edwards in second and Kasey Kahne in the third position . Clint Bowyer was scored fourth and Greg Biffle managed fifth . Matt Kenseth , Kyle Busch , A. J. Allmendinger , Mark Martin , and Jeff Gordon rounded out the top ten quickest drivers in the session . 
 Forty @-@ five cars were entered for qualifying , but only forty @-@ three could race because of NASCAR 's qualifying procedure . Jimmie Johnson clinched his twenty @-@ fifth pole position in the Sprint Cup Series , with a time of 23 @.@ 116 seconds . He was joined on the front row of the grid by A. J. Allmendinger . Mark Martin qualified third , Martin Truex , Jr. took fourth , and Denny Hamlin started fifth . Tony Stewart , one of the drivers in the Chase for the Sprint Cup , qualified twenty @-@ sixth , while Kevin Harvick was scored thirty @-@ fourth . 
 The three drivers that failed to qualify for the race were Ted Musgrave , Josh Wise , and Jeff Green . Once the qualifying session ended , Johnson said , " This is certainly a step in the right direction for momentum . Last weekend , we ran much better than where we finished . It stinks that we finished where we did , but there is nothing we can really do about it . " Mark Martin , who originally qualified third , started forty @-@ second , after having his time disallowed where the right rear shock exceeded the maximum allowable gas pressure . 
 On the next morning , David Reutimann was quickest in the second practice session , ahead of Kyle Busch and Kurt Busch in second and third . Juan Pablo Montoya was fourth quickest , and Jimmie Johnson took fifth . Greg Biffle , Clint Bowyer , Jamie McMurray , Jeff Burton , and Jeff Gordon followed in the top @-@ ten . Other drivers in the chase , such as Carl Edwards , was twentieth , and Kevin Harvick , who was twenty @-@ sixth . During the third , and final practice session , Joey Logano , with a fastest time of 23 @.@ 802 , was quickest . Clint Bowyer and Jeff Burton followed in second and third with times of 23 @.@ 844 and 23 @.@ 851 seconds . Matt Kenseth managed to be fourth fastest , ahead of Martin Truex , Jr. and Marcos Ambrose . Denny Hamlin was scored seventh , Jimmie Johnson took eighth , A. J. Allmendinger was ninth , and Brad Keselowski . 
 During the third practice session , Denny Hamlin and Kevin Harvick collided with each other . Once they both drove to the garage , they were talking out of anger from the comments that Denny Hamlin had about Clint Bowyer 's penalty after New Hampshire . Once the argument ended , Denny Hamlin stated , " There really was just a lot of cursing . That 's all that was being said . There was really nothing logical being said between the two teams . " Richard Childress , the owner of the Bowyer 's racecar , commented , " When you 're talking about comments , you can 't win a pissing match with a skunk . There are two things I 've learned . One thing is that . The other is that you don 't throw stones if you live in a glass house . " Afterward , Robin Pemberton commented about the collision by saying , " They just got together in practice , and that 's fine . Sometimes you get together in practice like that . " 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race , the twenty @-@ eighth out of a total of thirty @-@ six in the season , began at 1 : 00 p.m. EDT and was televised live in the United States on ESPN . Prior to the race , weather conditions were partly cloudy with the air temperature around 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) . Dan Schafer , pastor of Calvary Assembly of God in Hightstown , New Jersey , began pre @-@ race ceremonies , by giving the invocation . Next , Mercury recording <unk> Jessie James performed the national anthem , and Marke Dickinson , senior vice president of AAA Mid @-@ Atlantic , gave the command for drivers to start their engines . 
 Jimmie Johnson retained his pole position lead into the first corner , followed by A. J. Allmendinger in the second position . Denny Hamlin , who started fourth , had fallen into fifth by the second lap . One lap later , Juan Pablo Montoya moved into fourth , as Ryan Newman emerged in twelfth . After the seventh lap , Johnson remained in first , as Jeff Gordon moved into thirteenth . Allmendinger emerged in first after passing Johnson on lap 14 . Mark Martin had gained the most positions , with eleven , by the eighteenth lap . On lap 23 , Allmendinger remained the leader ahead of Johnson and Martin Truex , Jr .. Allmendinger began putting other drivers a lap behind by lap 24 , with Mike Bliss . After 28 consecutive laps under the green flag , Allmendinger was 1 @.@ 2 second ahead of Johnson in the second position . Joe Nemechek was put a lap down on lap 31 ; Bobby Labonte followed Nemechek six laps later . 
 Allmendinger 's lead of 1 @.@ 2 seconds was reduced to nothing when the pace car was on track for the first caution . It was given because a cover for one of a caution light 's cover had loosened . When the drivers made pit stops , Allmendinger remained the leader , but Johnson lost three positions , falling to fifth . Tony Stewart was the only team to change only two tires , which resulted him to move toward the front of the grid . However , once the race resumed he was losing positions quickly . Gordon , who started fifteenth , had gained seven positions to eighth by lap 47 . The second caution followed three laps later because David Reutimann collided into the wall after contact from Newman . Reutimann 's car sustained only minor damages . Kevin Harvick went to pit road under the caution , in which afterward his rear tire changer fell and hurt his wrist . Allmendinger led on the restart , ahead of Martin Truex , Jr. in second . On lap 61 , Montoya moved into the third position after passing Greg Biffle . 
 Johnson followed Montoya , by passing Biffle one lap later for fourth . After the sixty @-@ sixth lap , Allmendinger had led more laps in the race so far than his 107 previous starts . Joey Logano , after starting nineteenth had moved to twelfth by lap 68 . Five laps later , Hamlin fell to the eighth position . Stewart , who chose only two tire changes on his first pit stop , had fallen to twentieth after eighty laps . By lap 85 , Allmendinger had a 2 @.@ 9 second lead over Martin Truex , Jr . Afterward , Scott Speed was put a lap down and Kurt Busch moved to the fifth spot . On lap 93 , Johnson emerged in second after passing Montoya and Truex . Five laps later , Casey Mears went a lap down after Allmendinger passed him . After 104 laps , Carl Edwards rounded out the top @-@ ten positions . 
 Eight laps later , Allmendinger began green flag pit stops . Truex became the new leader , followed by Logano , Reed Sorenson , and Labonte . On lap 122 , Allmendinger reclaimed the first position and extended his lead to over five seconds . On lap 138 , Edwards moved to ninth while Truex remained second . Montoya maintained the seventh position until 145 , when Edwards passed him . After 147 laps , Hamlin was running in sixth , and Jeff Gordon was tenth . By lap 155 , Allmendinger had a 4 @.@ 3 lead over second place . Clint Bowyer collided with the wall three laps later , and only sustained side damage . On lap 162 , Johnson claimed the second position from Truex . Ten laps later , Johnson reclaimed the lead after Allmendinger fell to 27th while making a pit stop . On lap 186 , the third caution was given when Matt Kenseth gathered damage from a flat tire because of missing the entrance of pit road . Johnson maintained the first position under the pit stops , ahead of Truex and Kyle Busch . One lap later , Gordon moved into third , as Hamlin fell to sixth . 
 On lap 202 , Kyle Busch reclaimed third away from Gordon . Truex had a loose wheel after pit stops , resulting in him coming to pit road . Once his pit stop completed , his rear axle broke . Edwards , then , passed Gordon for fifth , as Jeff Burton moved into fourth . On lap 219 , Gordon had fallen to sixth while his teammate Jimmie Johnson had led sixty @-@ four laps to this point in the race . After 230 laps , there were only nineteen drivers on the same lap as Johnson . Five laps later , Edwards passed Jeff Burton to move into fourth . Afterward , Paul Menard passed Jamie McMurray for the tenth position . By the 249th lap , Johnson had a 3 @.@ 21 second lead , ahead of Kyle Busch , who collided with the wall once lap later . On lap 266 , another set of green flag pit stops began . Afterward , Johnson led Kyle Busch by 1 @.@ 95 seconds . On lap 290 , debris prompted the fourth caution of the race . Kyle Busch passed Johnson during pit stops to lead on the restart . 
 Two laps later , Logano passed Johnson for the second position . On lap 299 , Kyle Busch had a 1 @.@ 36 second lead over second place . Three laps later , Paul Menard moved into the seventh position while Kurt Busch challenged Jeff Burton for fourth . Johnson then moved into second after passing Logano on lap 320 . Less than five laps later , Kevin Harvick complained to his crew about his car handling problems . Allmendinger , after his unscheduled pit stop earlier in the race , had moved up to tenth by lap 330 . Seven laps later , Johnson reclaimed the first position from Kyle Busch . Afterward , Jeff Burton moved into the third position . Burton , then passed Kyle Busch for second seven laps later . By the 349th lap , Johnson has a 1 @.@ 23 second lead over Burton , as Harvick made a pit stop . On lap 360 , more green flag pit stops began , as Hamlin and Gordon made pit stops . Three laps later , Johnson made a pit stop , giving the lead to Edwards who subsequently made a pit stop himself , returning the lead to Johnson . On lap 371 , McMurray moved into eleventh after Sam Hornish , Jr . ' s car ignited on pit road . Johnson had a lead of 2 @.@ 37 seconds over Burton after pit stops ended . Jimmie Johnson maintained the lead to win his sixth race of the 2010 season . Jeff Burton finished second , ahead of Joey Logano in third and Kurt Busch in fourth . Carl Edwards clinched the fifth position , after starting tenth . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Jimmie Johnson appeared in victory lane after his victory lap to start celebrating his sixth win of the season , in front of a crowd of 88 @,@ 000 people . Afterward , his crew chief , Chad Knaus said , " We really had our hands full this weekend . " He continued with , " We came in qualifying trim , and as we unloaded , the car wasn ’ t reacting the way we anticipated . So we had to make some pretty significant changes , and when it came time to qualify , we had to put a setup under there that Jimmie hadn ’ t felt yet . For race practice , we weren ’ t where we needed to be then either . Honestly , we could adjust the car and make it do some different things , but we couldn ’ t really make the car better . The difference today was definitely the driver . " 
 " It was a mediocre day . I hate that we didn ’ t run better , but we got close to where we wanted to be leaving Dover . It ’ s frustrating that we still can ’ t get a grasp on this race track and didn ’ t run as well as we did in the spring . But if you told me I ’ d be taking a 35 point lead out of Dover , I ’ d take it , " said ninth @-@ place finisher , Denny Hamlin . Next , Jeff Burton , who finished second , said : 
 " We thought we had a really good car coming into the race today . We took off and struggled a little bit with rear grip , and worked all day to get the grip level right . About halfway through that next to last run , my car got really happy and took off . I ’ m proud of us for getting the car right at the right time . About 15 laps into that next to last run , Jimmie cleared Logano and got really fast . He was just a little quicker than we were today . " 
 Hamlin maintained the Drivers ' championship lead with 5 @,@ 368 points . Johnson stood in second , thirty five points behind Hamlin , and ten ahead of Kyle Busch . Kurt Busch , after finishing fourth in the race , remained in the fourth position with 5 @,@ 309 points . Kevin Harvick was fifth , as Carl Edwards , Burton , Jeff Gordon , Greg Biffle , and Tony Stewart followed in the top @-@ ten positions . The final two positions available in the Chase for the Sprint Cup was occupied with Matt Kenseth in eleventh and Clint Bowyer in twelfth . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet maintained their lead with 206 points . Toyota remained second with 171 points . Ford followed with 126 points , thirteen points ahead of Dodge in fourth . 3 @.@ 966 million people watched the race on television . The race took three hours , two minutes and twenty @-@ seven seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 2 @.@ 637 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Isabella quarter = 
 The Isabella quarter or Columbian Exposition quarter was a United States commemorative coin struck in 1893 . Congress authorized the piece at the request of the Board of Lady Managers of the World 's Columbian Exposition . The quarter depicts the Spanish queen Isabella I of Castile , who sponsored Columbus 's voyages to the New World . It was designed by Bureau of the Mint Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber , and is the only U.S. commemorative of that denomination that was not intended for circulation . 
 The Board of Lady Managers , headed by Chicago socialite Bertha Palmer , wanted a woman to design the coin and engaged Caroline Peddle , a sculptor . Peddle left the project after disagreements with Mint officials , who then decided to have Barber do the work . The reverse design , showing a kneeling woman spinning flax , with a distaff in her left hand and a spindle in her right , symbolizes women 's industry and was based on a sketch by Assistant Engraver George T. Morgan . 
 The quarter 's design was deprecated in the numismatic press . The coin did not sell well at the Exposition ; its price of $ 1 was the same as for the Columbian half dollar , and the quarter was seen as the worse deal . Nearly half of the authorized issue was returned to the Mint to be melted ; thousands more were purchased at face value by the Lady Managers and entered the coin market in the early 20th century . Today , they are popular with collectors and range in value between $ 450 in almost uncirculated and $ 6 @,@ 000 in near @-@ pristine condition according to the 2014 edition of R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins . 
 = = Legislation = = 
 In August 1892 , Congress passed an act authorizing the first United States commemorative coin , a half dollar , to be sold at a premium by the managers of the World 's Columbian Exposition in Chicago . The event had been authorised by Congress two years previously ; that legislation created a Board of Lady Managers and a Board of Gentleman Managers to oversee the fair . The Board of Lady Managers was headed by Bertha Palmer , whose husband Potter owned the Palmer House , the leading hotel in Chicago . The decisions of the Lady Managers were often reversed by their male counterparts on controversial matters : for example , Palmer sought to shut the fair 's " Egyptian Girls " dancing show after deeming it obscene . The show was one of the exposition 's few successful moneymakers , and the Lady Managers were overruled by the men . 
 Authorization for the Board of Lady Managers had been included in the 1890 law giving federal authority for the Exposition at the insistence of women 's advocate , Susan B. Anthony , who was determined to show that women could successfully assist in the management of the fair . To that end , the Lady Managers sought a coin to sell in competition with the commemorative half dollar at the Exposition , which Congress had approved in 1892 . Passage of the half dollar legislation had been difficult , and the Lady Managers decided to wait until the next session of Congress to make their request . When the half dollar appeared in November 1892 , the Lady Managers considered it inartistic and determined to do better . Palmer wanted the Lady Managers " to have credit of being the authors of the first really beautiful and artistic coin that has ever been issued by the government of the United States " . 
 In January 1893 , Palmer approached the House Appropriations Committee , asking that $ 10 @,@ 000 of the funds already designated to be paid over to the Lady Managers by the federal government be in the form of souvenir quarters , which they could sell at a premium . On March 3 , 1893 , Congress duly passed an act authorising the souvenir coin , which was to be to the specifications of the quarter struck for circulation , and with a design to be approved by the Secretary of the Treasury . Total mintage of the special quarter would be limited to 40 @,@ 000 specimens . 
 = = Inception = = 
 Desiring a beautiful coin to sell , Palmer asked artist Kenyon Cox to produce sketches . She was , however , determined to have a woman actually design the coin . She also consulted with Sara Hallowell , who was both the secretary to the fair 's Director of Fine Arts and was helping the Palmers amass a major art collection . Hallowell contacted sculptor Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens , who recommended his onetime student , Caroline Peddle , who was already engaged in exposition work , having been commissioned by Tiffany 's to produce an exhibit . Palmer agreed to have Peddle do the work . 
 After Congress authorized the souvenir quarter , the Director of the Bureau of the Mint , Edward O. Leech , wrote to Palmer on March 14 , 1893 . Although he expressed a willingness to have the Lady Managers select the design , Mint Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber and Philadelphia Mint Superintendent Oliver Bosbyshell had already urged Leech to keep the design process in @-@ house at the Mint . Palmer replied that the Lady Managers had decided that the quarter would bear a portrait of Isabella I , Queen of Castile ( in Spain ) , whose assistance had helped pay for Columbus 's expedition . Palmer indicated that she was consulting artists and suggested that the Mint submit a design for consideration . She also met with Illinois Congressman Allen <unk> , chairman of the House of Representative 's Fair Committee and a former colleague of Secretary of the Treasury John G. Carlisle , Leech 's superior . Palmer suggested to the congressman that he advocate for the Lady Managers with Carlisle and Leech . 
 Palmer , by letter , hired Peddle to do the design work in late March . She instructed the artist that the coin was to have a figure of Isabella on the obverse , and the inscription " Commemorative coin issued for the Board of Lady Managers of the World 's Columbian Exposition by Act of Congress , 1492 – 1892 " on the reverse , as well as the denomination and the name of the country . The chairwoman did not request that Peddle provide the Lady Managers with the design before sending it to the Mint . Palmer informed Carlisle and Leech of her instructions . Carlisle had no objection to a coin being designed by a woman , or to the use of Isabella 's head . The secretary told Palmer that the reverse , with its long inscription , would appear like a business advertising token , and he asked that it be revised . Leech sent a note to Superintendent Bosbyshell informing him that the Lady Managers would likely have an outside sculptor create the obverse and asking him to have Mint Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber create some designs for the reverse for possible use . 
 Obedient to Palmer 's instructions , Peddle sent Leech sketches of a seated Isabella , with the long inscription on the reverse ; she hoped the Mint Director would allow her to shorten it . Leech was unhappy with the reverse , and decided that Barber would design that side of the coin . Barber and Bosbyshell wrote to Leech that Isabella 's legs would appear distorted if the seated figure were used and advocated a head in profile . Carlisle agreed , stating that he had only given permission for a head of Isabella . Peddle was informed that Barber would produce the reverse , though the design would be sent to her for approval , and she would have to change her obverse . Meanwhile , Palmer was growing increasingly anxious : with a timeline of two months from design approval to the availability of the actual coins , she feared that the pieces would not be available for sale until well into the fair 's May to October run . Under pressure from all sides , Peddle threatened to quit the project , writing that she " could not consent to do half of a piece of work " . 
 What finally wore down Peddle 's patience were two letters dated April 7 . One , from Leech , asserted his right as Mint director to prescribe coin designs , and told Peddle that the obverse would be a head of Isabella , while the reverse would be based on sketches by a Mint engraver which she would be free to model . The second , from Bosbyshell , imposed the additional requirement that Isabella not wear a crown , which he deemed inappropriate on an American coin . On April 8 , 1893 , Caroline Peddle withdrew from the project . 
 Following Peddle 's resignation , Leech wrote a conciliatory letter to Palmer , who responded regretting that the three of them had not worked together , rather than at cross @-@ purposes . Palmer had written to suggest an alternative to the inscription reverse : that the coin depict the Women 's Building at the fair . Barber prepared sketches and rejected the idea , stating that the building would appear a mere streak on the coin in the required low relief . Instead , he favored a sketch prepared by Assistant Engraver George T. Morgan , showing a kneeling woman spinning flax , with a distaff in her hands . Leech was not fully satisfied with the proposal , stating that the juxtaposition of Isabella on the obverse and the Morgan reverse was " too much woman " . Before accepting Morgan 's design , Leech wanted Barber to produce some reverses himself , which the chief engraver did , and Bosbyshell forwarded them to Leech on April 11 and 12 . These showed various uses of a heraldic eagle . After considering these efforts , Leech decided on Morgan 's design and wrote to Palmer accordingly , stating that " the distaff is used in art to symbolize patient industry , and especially the industry of women . " In response , the Lady Managers suggested the use of the building 's portal , and asked if it was possible to place a living person on the coin . Leech stated that Secretary Carlisle had selected the distaff reverse , and his determination was binding . 
 Bosbyshell informed Leech by letter that Stewart Cullin , curator at the University of Pennsylvania , possessed a number of medals depicting Isabella , and former general Oliver O. Howard was engaged in writing a biography of the late queen and possessed likenesses of her . Leech agreed that these men be consulted . Carlisle was reluctant to allow an inscription which made distinctions by sex , such as " Board of Lady Managers " , to appear on the coin , but he eventually agreed to that wording . On April 24 , the Mint Director sent Palmer a box containing two plaster models of the obverse , one of Isabella as a young queen , the other showing her more mature . He also informed her that distaff reverse would be used , with the wording agreed to by Carlisle . The obverse models were supposedly made by Barber based on an engraving of Isabella forwarded by Peddle to the Mint at Palmer 's request , but Moran suggests that the period of only a day between receipt of the engraving and completion of the models ( during which Barber also attended the funeral of Bosbyshell 's grandson ) means that Barber was working on them before that . The Board of Lady Managers on May 5 selected the young queen . 
 = = Design and reception = = 
 The obverse of the Isabella quarter depicts a crowned and richly clothed bust of that Spanish queen . According to art historian Cornelius Vermeule , Barber 's obverse design " follow [ s ] Gilbert Scott 's Victorian Gothic tradition of photographic classicism , best summed up by the groups of continents and the reliefs of famous persons on the Albert Memorial in London . " The reverse depicts a kneeling woman with distaff and spindle . Vermeule traces that imagery to the figure of a young female servant , carved upon the east pediment of the Temple of Zeus at Olympia in the 5th century B.C. Nevertheless , a contemporary account in the American Journal of Numismatics compared the reverse to an anti @-@ slavery token with a kneeling woman and the legend " Am I not a woman and a sister " . The art historian , writing in 1971 , noted that " nowadays the coin seems charming for its quaintness and its Victorian flavor , a mixture of cold Hellenism and Renaissance romance . Perhaps one of its greatest joys is that none of the customary inscriptions , mottoes and such , appear on it . " 
 Numismatic historian Don Taxay , in his study of early U.S. commemoratives , dismissed contemporary accounts ( such as in the fair 's official book ) that Kenyon Cox had provided a design for the quarter ; he noted that the artist 's son had strongly denied that his father was involved in the coin 's creation . Taxay deemed the design " commonplace " and " typical of Barber 's style " , stating that " the modeling , though somewhat more highly relieved than on the half dollar , is without distinction " . 
 The American Journal of Numismatics had other criticisms of the quarter : 
 Of its artistic merit , as of the harmony which is reported to have prevailed at the meetings of those [ Lady ] Managers , perhaps the less said the better ; we do not know who designed it , but in this instance , as in the Half Dollar , the contrast between the examples of the numismatic art of the nation , as displayed on the Columbian coins , on the one hand , and the spirited and admirable work of the architects of the [ Exposition 's ] buildings , on the other , is painful . If these two coins really represent the highest achievements of our medallists and our mints ... we might as well despair of its future ... We are not ready to admit this to be true . 
 = = Release and collecting = = 
 Minting of what Barber dubbed " showy quarters " began at the Philadelphia Mint on June 13 , 1893 , six weeks after the exposition opened . Leech had planned to strike the pieces using polished blanks , or planchets , and workers at that mint handled the coins carefully ; unlike the half dollar , surviving specimens display relatively few contact marks from other coins . The first piece struck , along with numbers 400 , 1 @,@ 492 , and 1 @,@ 892 , were struck in proof condition and sent to the Lady Managers along with certificates attesting to their status . A total of 40 @,@ 023 pieces were struck , with the 23 coins over the authorized mintage retained by the Mint for inspection by the 1894 Assay Commission . 
 The pieces did not sell well at the exposition . They were for sale only at the Women 's Building at the fair , or by mail ; the half dollar could be purchased at several outlets . Some 15 @,@ 000 quarters were sold to collectors , dealers , and fairgoers , including several thousand of them purchased by the Scott Stamp and Coin Company . <unk> viewed the quarter as not as good a deal as the half dollar , as both sold for the same price of $ 1 . Of the remainder , approximately 10 @,@ 000 quarters were bought at face value by Palmer and other Lady Managers ; 15 @,@ 809 were returned to the government for melting . After deducting pieces returned for melting , a total of 24 @,@ 214 coins were distributed to the public . 
 The large quantities possessed by the Lady Managers made their way into the market through dealers and other vendors in the 1920s . By 1930 , prices had risen to the original issue price ; by 1955 , uncirculated specimens sold for $ 20 . The pieces are popular among collectors because they are the only U.S. quarter dollars issued strictly as a commemorative , not for circulation . The 2014 edition of R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins lists the piece as ranging between $ 450 in almost uncirculated AU @-@ 50 on the Sheldon coin grading scale and $ 6 @,@ 000 in near @-@ pristine MS @-@ 66 . 
 = History of Edinburgh Zoo = 
 Edinburgh Zoo is a zoological park in Edinburgh , Scotland which opened on 22 July 1913 . Edinburgh had previously been home to a zoological garden which failed to thrive . The new zoo is owned and run by the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland and initially opened as the Scottish National Zoological Park . Modern zoological methods allowed animals to survive in Edinburgh 's cold climate . 
 Edinburgh is the only zoo in the United Kingdom to be incorporated by Royal Charter , and was the first zoo in the world to house and breed penguins . The zoo 's penguins have been famous throughout its history , and since the 1950s have performed a daily parade around the park . 
 The zoo was largely unaffected by war , though some animals were euthanised for safety reasons during the Second World War . After the war the park housed a brown bear named Voytek who had served with the Polish military . In 1972 one of the zoo 's king penguins was adopted by the Norwegian military . 
 In the 21st century Edinburgh Zoo was briefly forced to close by the 2001 foot @-@ and @-@ mouth outbreak , and in 2005 received threats from the Animal Liberation Front . In 2000 a plan for the complete redevelopment of the zoo was begun . 
 = = Precursors = = 
 Scotland 's first zoo was called The Royal Edinburgh Zoological Gardens , and predated the modern Edinburgh Zoo by some 70 years . After the death of James Donaldson , a wealthy Scottish publisher and bookseller , the gardens of his country house , Broughton Hall , were converted into a zoological park . Occupying a 6 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 4 ha ) site , the park was situated about a mile to the north @-@ east of Central Edinburgh , near East Claremont Street . Naturalist John Graham Dalyell was one of the original promoters of the project and eventually president of the board of directors . The Zoological Gardens opened in 1839 with a collection of stock zoo animals including lions , tigers , monkeys , bears and an elephant . 
 At the time , animals in zoos were typically held in poor conditions in small , cramped cages , and the Zoological Gardens presented no exception . As a result , its animals were frequently afflicted by disease , and also suffered from the harsh easterly winds of the Edinburgh climate . Despite these setbacks , the menagerie attempted to maintain its popularity by putting on concerts , acrobatics shows and displays of fireworks and Montgolfier balloons . Children were carried around the park on the back of the zoo 's elephant , giving it a rare opportunity for exercise . Even with these entertainments , the Zoological Gardens were eventually forced to admit defeat . The park was closed and the site sold to a property developer in 1857 . Nothing now remains of the house or its gardens . 
 = = Foundation = = 
 Edinburgh Zoo was created by Thomas Haining Gillespie , a solicitor from Dumfries who dreamed of establishing a zoological park in Scotland . At first he was told that tropical animals would never be able to live in a cold climate like Edinburgh 's — a view that had to some extent been borne out by the failure of the Royal Zoological Gardens . In 1908 , though , he was encouraged to read of the pioneering methods employed by Carl Hagenbeck , which were allowing tropical animals to thrive in the recently opened Tierpark Hagenbeck in Hamburg , Germany . 
 In 1909 , Gillespie and others founded a registered charity which was to become the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland . The Society 's first president was lawyer and politician Edward Theodore Salvesen , son of the Norwegian merchant Christian <unk> — a connection which would prove significant in later years . A series of lectures given to the society by J. Arthur Thomson gave yet more momentum to the modern approach being spearheaded by Hagenbeck in Germany . 
 All that remained was to find a suitable site for the new zoo . Gillespie hoped for a site with plenty of sun and with shelter from the north and east winds . He also intended the zoo to be cheaply and quickly accessible via public transport . The society secured an option to purchase the 75 @-@ acre ( 30 ha ) Corstorphine Hill House estate for £ 17 @,@ 000 . The house had been built in 1793 as the home of Scottish accountant William Keith . Its current Scottish Baronial architecture is mostly thanks to remodelling by the Macmillan family in 1891 . 
 The zoological society found they were having difficulty gathering the necessary funds before the approaching expiry of the purchase option . Edinburgh City Council stepped in , purchasing the site outright in February 1913 . The zoological society was granted full use of the estate in return for a 4 percent annual repayment of the cost . 
 A further £ 8 @,@ 000 , raised with the help of the society 's members , was set aside for the construction and stocking of the park . Initially the zoo occupied only the southernmost 27 acres ( 11 ha ) , while the land to the north was used as a golf course . The park was designed by town planner Patrick Geddes and his son @-@ in @-@ law Frank Mears . Following Gillespie 's vision , they modeled the park after the open designs of zoos like the New York Zoological Park and Hagenbeck 's zoo in Hamburg . These modern zoological parks promoted a more spacious and natural environment for the animals , and stood in stark contrast to the steel cages typical of the menageries built during the Victorian era . The Scottish National Zoological Park , as it was initially called , opened to the public with a large collection of donated and borrowed animals on 22 July 1913 , after only 15 weeks of work . The zoo still occupies very much the same area of land today , though the park is being extensively redeveloped . 
 = = Early history = = 
 In its opening year the zoo was incorporated by Royal Charter — though it was not granted the use of the " Royal " title until 1948 , following a visit by King George VI . As of June 2011 Edinburgh Zoo was the only zoo in Britain with a Royal Charter . The original charter defined the zoological society 's mission as being " to promote , facilitate and encourage the study of zoology and kindred subjects and to foster and develop amongst the people an interest in and knowledge of animal life . " 
 Thanks to the zoological society 's connection with the Salvesen family , some of the zoo 's first animals were three king penguins , arriving from South Georgia with a Christian Salvesen whaling expedition that docked in Leith in early 1914 . They were the first penguins to be seen anywhere in the world outside of the South Atlantic . The zoo successfully hatched the first ever captive king penguin chick in 1919 . Penguins continued to arrive with whaling ships for years afterwards . Today , king penguins are perhaps the zoo 's most famous animals . 
 A tropical bird and reptile house was added in 1925 , followed by an aquarium , paid for by a grant , in 1927 , and an ape house in 1929 . The now famous penguin pool was constructed in 1930 — though it has since been rebuilt , in 1990 , to include a new viewing area . It was in 1928 that the Corstorphine Golf Club finally evacuated the 47 acres ( 19 ha ) to the north of the estate , allowing the zoo to expand significantly . This new area of the park was again designed by Mears , along with his partner Carus @-@ Wilson , and was completed in 1937 . 
 Hagenbeck 's modern zoo techniques proved effective , and Edinburgh quickly gained a reputation for its good animal conditions . 1934 saw the births in captivity of a sea lion and beaver , and in 1936 a baby chimpanzee followed . A litter of wolves was born in 1938 , and soon afterwards the first orangutan to be born in Britain . 
 = = War years = = 
 Edinburgh Zoo was bombed twice during the Second World War , but remained mostly unharmed . One of the bombs , in around 1940 , was reported to have killed a giraffe . Nevertheless , Edinburgh was , like all zoos in Britain , affected by the war . Since bombs could fall at any time , it was not considered safe to keep dangerous animals that might escape if their enclosures were damaged . In 1941 the recently born wolves had therefore to be euthanized , along with a collection of dangerous snakes , to guard against any possible danger to the public . Despite the war the zoo continued to grow , with land to the east being purchased in 1942 and construction of a lake beginning soon afterwards . 
 = = Post @-@ war era = = 
 Gillespie retired from his post as director in 1950 . In 1956 he was succeeded by Gilbert Fisher , who took over as director @-@ secretary of the Zoological Society and effectively gained control of the zoo . 
 It was around this time that Edinburgh Zoo 's now famous Penguin Parade was established . A zookeeper accidentally left a gate to the penguin pool open , and was followed around the zoo by a train of penguins . Visitors were so delighted with the procession that it became a regular occurrence , and today around two thirds of the zoo 's penguins parade round the park every day . 
 One of the zoo 's famous inhabitants during the post @-@ war period was Voytek , a Syrian brown bear . Voytek had been sold to a group of Polish soldiers during the war . He learned to help the soldiers by carrying crates of ammunition , and became an unofficial mascot . In 1944 the Polish II Corps sailed to Italy to join the British 8th Army . Voytek had to be officially drafted into the Polish army in order to secure his passage on a British transport ship . In 1946 the II Corps were demobilised and settled in Scotland , at Winfield Camp near Hutton , Berwickshire . Voytek retired to Edinburgh Zoo in 1947 and lived there until his death in 1963 . During his time in the army Voytek had developed a liking for cigarettes , and this may have contributed to his popularity as an attraction at the zoo . 
 In 1972 the zoo gained yet more military credentials when king penguin Nils Olav was adopted by the Norwegian King 's Guard . Norway 's connection with Edinburgh 's penguins began with the Salvesen family 's links to the zoo , and renewed interest was sparked when a lieutenant called Nils Egelien visited the zoo with the King 's Guard in 1961 . On his return in 1972 Egelien arranged for the unit to adopt one of the penguins . Nils Olav was named after Egelien and in honour of King Olav V of Norway , and given the rank of lance corporal . A statue of the penguin now stands outside the zoo . 
 Three @-@ year @-@ old polar bear Mercedes was given to the zoo in 1984 , after she was rescued in Churchill , Manitoba , Canada . She had begun wandering into the town in search of food . Because of the danger she posed to residents , Mercedes was tagged with a number so she could be tracked . When she could not be persuaded to return to the wild , a decision was taken to shoot her . A member of the Edinburgh Zoological Society collaborated with a cousin in Canada and they were able to rescue Mercedes , finding her a new home at Edinburgh zoo . The bear would become one of the zoo 's most popular attractions . 
 In 1986 , the Society acquired the Highland Wildlife Park , a 259 @-@ acre ( 105 ha ) safari park and zoo near Kingussie , 30 miles ( 48 km ) south of Inverness . When opened in 1972 by Neil Macpherson , the Wildlife Park 's goal was to showcase animals native to the Highlands of Scotland . Today its focus has changed and it primarily houses tundra species , including some animals which have been moved from Edinburgh Zoo itself . 
 = = 21st century = = 
 In October 1999 the zoo had begun to explore the possibility of relocating in order to improve its <unk> . As of February 2000 the zoo had scrapped its plans to relocate , instead announcing a " masterplan " for the redevelopment of the entire site . 
 The foot @-@ and @-@ mouth scare of 2001 forced the zoo to close to protect the animals from possible infection . Since the zoo could not welcome any visitors , it faced significant financial losses . Questions were posed about the zoo 's future , though in the end the park was able to reopen after only five weeks . Further help came in the form of a £ 1 @.@ 9 million donation from an anonymous former resident of the city in early April , just as the zoo reopened . 
 In 2005 the new Budongo chimp house was unveiled , along with the Living Links to Human Evolution Centre , Britain 's first primate behaviour research site . In a scientific breakthrough in 2006 chimpanzees at Edinburgh were found to use word @-@ like vocal labels for food . 
 In late 2005 the Animal Liberation Front ( ALF ) threatened action over the holding in captivity of Mercedes , then Britain 's only polar bear . The zoo had initially planned to retire their polar bear exhibit after Mercedes died . When zoo officials announced plans to create a new attraction , citing their responsibility to ensure the survival of the species , the ALF threatened damage to zoo workers ' property and other scare @-@ tactics . Edinburgh 's treatment of polar bears had often been subject to criticism , punctuated by incidents like the death in 1997 of Mercedes ' partner Barney , who choked on a plastic child 's toy thrown into his enclosure . In 2009 the zoo carried out their plans to create a new exhibit and improve conditions for Mercedes , moving her to the Highland Wildlife Park , where she was joined by a young male polar bear named Walker . Mercedes was euthanized on compassionate grounds in 2011 , suffering from severe arthritis . 
 = = = 2007 council troubles = = = 
 In January 2006 the zoo put forward plans to sell off 15 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 ha ) of land in order to raise funds for the ongoing redevelopment . The plans were rejected by the council in October 2007 by a single vote , leaving the zoological society " extremely disappointed " . In November the zoo announced that it planned to fight the council 's decision . A rumor circulated later that month that the zoo was considering a move to Glasgow , though zoo officials insisted the rumor had no truth to it . Organised opposition to the sale resulted in the zoo being allowed to sell only a small portion of the originally proposed land . 
 = Hibernian F.C. = 
 Hibernian Football Club ( / <unk> / ) , commonly known as Hibs , are a Scottish professional football club based in Leith in the north of Edinburgh , which plays in the Scottish Championship , the second tier of the Scottish Professional Football League ( SPFL ) . It is one of three SPFL clubs in the city , the others being their Edinburgh derby rivals Hearts and Edinburgh City . Hibernian was founded in 1875 by Irish immigrants , but support for the club is now based on geography rather than ethnicity or religion . The Irish heritage of Hibernian is still reflected , however , in its name , colours and badge . 
 The name of the club is usually shortened to Hibs . The team are also called The Hibees ( pronounced / <unk> / ) and The Cabbage , a shortening of the rhyming slang for Hibs of " Cabbage and Ribs " , by fans of the club , who are themselves also known as <unk> . Home matches are played at the Easter Road stadium , in use since 1893 , when the club joined the Scottish Football League . Hibernian have played in the second tier of the Scottish football league system , known as the Scottish Championship , since being relegated in 2014 . 
 Hibernian have won the Scottish league championship four times , most recently in 1952 . Three of those four championships were won between 1948 and 1952 , when the club had the services of The Famous Five , a notable forward line . The club have won the Scottish Cup three times , in 1887 , 1902 and 2016 . Hibs have also won the Scottish League Cup three times , in 1972 , 1991 and 2007 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation and early history ( 1875 – 1939 ) = = = 
 The club was founded in 1875 by Irishmen from the Cowgate area of Edinburgh . The name is derived from Hibernia , the Roman name for Ireland . James Connolly , the famous Irish Republican leader , was a Hibs fan , while the club were " closely identified " with the Irish Home Rule Movement during the 1880s . There was some sectarian resistance initially to an Irish club participating in Scottish football , but Hibs established themselves as a force in Scottish football in the 1880s . Hibs were the first club from the east coast of Scotland to win a major trophy , the 1887 Scottish Cup . They went on to defeat Preston North End , who had won the 1887 FA Cup , in a friendly match described as the Association Football Championship of the World <unk> . 
 <unk> over the next few years led to Hibs becoming homeless and the club temporarily ceased operating in 1891 . A lease on the Easter Road site was acquired in late 1892 and Hibs played its first match at Easter Road on 4 February 1893 . Despite this interruption , the club today views the period since 1875 as one continued history and therefore counts the honours won between 1875 and 1891 , including the 1887 Scottish Cup . The club were admitted to the Scottish Football League in 1893 , although they had to win the Second Division twice before being elected into the First Division in 1895 . 
 A significant change at this time was that players were no longer required to be members of the Catholic Young Men 's Society . Hibs are not seen today as being an Irish or Roman Catholic institution , as it was in the early years of its history . For instance , the Irish harp was only re @-@ introduced to the club badge when it was last re @-@ designed in 2000 . This design reflects the three pillars of the club 's identity : Ireland , Edinburgh ( the castle ) and Leith ( the ship ) . Geography rather than religion is now seen as the primary reason for supporting Hibs , who draw most of their support from the north and east of Edinburgh . 
 Hibs had some success after being reformed , winning the 1902 Scottish Cup and their first league championship a year later . After this , however , the club endured a long barren spell . The club lost its placing in the league , and were relegated for the first time in 1931 , although they were promoted back to the top division two years later . The notorious Scottish Cup drought began as they reached three cup finals , two in consecutive years , but lost each of them . 
 = = = The Famous Five ( 1939 – 1959 ) = = = 
 Hibs ' most successful era by far , was in the decade following the end of the Second World War , when it was " among the foremost clubs in Britain " . The forward line of Gordon Smith , Bobby Johnstone , Lawrie Reilly , Eddie Turnbull and Willie Ormond , collectively known as the Famous Five , is " regarded as the finest ever seen in Scottish football " . The quality of the Famous Five is shown by the fact that all five players scored more than 100 goals for the club , with the north stand at Easter Road now named in their honour . 
 Of the five , only Ormond cost Hibs a transfer fee , £ 1200 from Stenhousemuir . Reilly , Johnstone , Smith and Turnbull were all signed from youth or junior leagues . The first time Hibs used all five in the same team was on 21 April 1949 , in a friendly match against Nithsdale Wanderers . The forward line remained in place until 1955 , when Johnstone was sold to Manchester City . The great forward line , together with players like Bobby Combe and Tommy Younger , largely contributed to the winning of league championships in 1948 , 1951 and 1952 . The team were perhaps unfortunate not to win more trophies , as they finished second to Rangers in 1953 on goal average , and second to Rangers by a point in 1950 . 
 Despite only finishing fifth in the Scottish League in 1955 , Hibs were invited to participate in the first season of the European Cup , which was not strictly based on league positions at that time . Eighteen clubs who were thought would generate interest across Europe and who also had the floodlights necessary to play games at night , were invited to participate . Floodlights had been used at Easter Road for the first time in a friendly match against Hearts on 18 October 1954 . Hibs became the first British club in Europe because the Football League secretary Alan Hardaker persuaded Chelsea , the English champions , not to enter . 
 Hibs played their first tie against Rot @-@ Weiss Essen , winning 4 – 0 in the Georg @-@ <unk> @-@ Stadion and drawing 1 – 1 at Easter Road . They defeated Djurgårdens IF to reach the semi @-@ final , but in that tie they were defeated 3 – 0 on aggregate by Stade Reims , who had the famous France international player Raymond Kopa in their side . Reims lost 4 – 3 to Real Madrid in the Final . 
 = = = Turnbull 's Tornadoes ( 1960 – 1989 ) = = = 
 Hibs frequently participated in the Fairs Cup during the 1960s , famously winning ties against Barcelona and Napoli . However , the club achieved little domestically until former player Eddie Turnbull was persuaded to return to Easter Road as manager in 1971 . The team , popularly known as Turnbull 's Tornadoes , finished second in the league in 1974 and 1975 , and won the League Cup in 1972 . The club also won the Drybrough Cup in 1972 and 1973 , and recorded a 7 – 0 win over Edinburgh derby rivals Hearts , at Tynecastle on 1 January 1973 . 
 Performances went into decline after the mid @-@ 1970s , as Hibs were replaced by the New Firm of Aberdeen and Dundee United as the main challengers to the Old Firm . Turnbull resigned as manager and Hibs were relegated , for the second time in their history , in 1980 . They were immediately promoted back to the Scottish Premier Division in 1981 , but the club struggled during the 1980s , failing to qualify for European competition until 1989 . 
 = = = 1990s : Attempted takeover by Hearts = = = 
 After mismanagement during the late 1980s , Hibs were on the brink of financial ruin in 1990 . Wallace Mercer , the chairman of Hearts , proposed a merger of the two clubs , but the Hibs fans believed that the proposal was more like a hostile takeover . They formed the Hands off Hibs group to campaign for the continued existence of the club . This succeeded when a prominent local businessman , Kwik @-@ Fit owner Sir Tom Farmer , acquired a controlling interest in Hibs . The fans were able to persuade Farmer to take control despite the fact that he had no great interest in football . Farmer was persuaded in part by the fact that a relative of his had been involved in the rescue of Hibs from financial ruin in the early 1890s . After the attempted takeover by Mercer , Hibs had a few good years in the early 1990s , winning the 1991 Scottish League Cup Final and finishing in the top five in the league in 1993 , 1994 and 1995 . Soon after Alex McLeish was appointed as manager in 1998 , Hibs were relegated to the First Division , but immediately won promotion back to the SPL in 1999 . 
 = = = Recent history ( 2000 – present ) = = = 
 Hibs enjoyed a good season in 2000 – 01 , as they challenged the Old Firm until Christmas , eventually finishing third in the league . Hibs also reached the 2001 Scottish Cup Final , but lost 3 – 0 to Celtic . Manager Alex McLeish departed for Rangers in December 2001 ; team captain Franck <unk> was appointed as the new manager , despite the fact that he had no previous coaching experience . A disastrous run of form followed , which was dragging Hibs into a relegation battle by the time he was sacked in February 2002 . <unk> had been manager for just 69 days . 
 Kilmarnock manager Bobby Williamson was then hired , but he proved to be unpopular with Hibs supporters . However , a string of exciting young players emerged , including Garry O 'Connor , Derek Riordan , Kevin Thomson and Scott Brown . These players featured heavily as Hibs eliminated both halves of the Old Firm to reach the 2004 Scottish League Cup Final , only to lose 2 – 0 to Livingston . Williamson departed near the end of that season to manage Plymouth Argyle and was replaced by Tony Mowbray . Mowbray promised fast @-@ flowing , passing football , with which Hibs finished third in his first season as manager , while Mowbray won the SFWA Manager of the Year award . 
 Mowbray left Hibs in October 2006 to manage West Bromwich Albion , and was replaced by former player John Collins . The team won the 2007 Scottish League Cup Final under his management , but the club sold Kevin Thomson , Scott Brown and Steven Whittaker for fees totalling more than £ 8 million . Collins resigned later that year , frustrated by the lack of funds made available to sign new players . Former Hibs player Mixu Paatelainen was hired to replace Collins , but he left after the end of his first full season . 
 Another former Hibernian player , John Hughes , was soon appointed in place of Paatelainen . Hughes , who made high profile signings such as Anthony Stokes and Liam Miller , led Hibs to a good start to the 2009 – 10 season . " <unk> " performances in the early part of 2010 included a Scottish Cup defeat by Ross County . A 6 – 6 draw with Motherwell , in which Hibs had led 6 – 2 midway through the second half , broke the record for most goals scored in a SPL match . A win on the final day meant that Hibs finished fourth and qualified for the 2010 – 11 UEFA Europa League . A poor start to the following season , including first round exits in Europe and the League Cup , led to Hughes leaving the club by mutual consent . Hughes was replaced by Colin Calderwood , who was himself sacked on 6 November 2011 . 
 Pat Fenlon was appointed to replace Calderwood . The club avoided relegation in 2011 – 12 and reached the 2012 Scottish Cup Final , but this was lost 5 – 1 to Hearts . Fenlon largely rebuilt the team after this defeat . This resulted in an improved league position in 2012 – 13 and the team reaching the 2013 Scottish Cup Final , but this was lost 3 – 0 to league champions Celtic . Losing the cup final to the league champions meant that Hibs qualified for the 2013 – 14 UEFA Europa League , but Hibs suffered a Scottish record defeat in European competition , losing 7 – 0 at home and 9 – 0 on aggregate against Malmö . Fenlon resigned on 1 November and was replaced by Terry Butcher . A run of 13 games without a win to finish the 2013 – 14 Scottish Premiership season meant that Hibs fell into a relegation play @-@ off , which was lost after a penalty shootout against Hamilton Academical . Butcher was sacked in June and was replaced by Alan Stubbs . Hibernian remain in the Scottish Championship but the 2015 @-@ 16 season saw considerable cup success , with a League Cup final loss to Ross County followed by victory in the Scottish Cup for the first time since 1902 , culminating in a cup final win against Rangers . 
 = = Colours and badge = = 
 The predominant club colours are green and white , which have been used since the formation of the club in 1875 . The strip typically has a green body , white sleeves and a white collar . The shorts are normally white , although green has been used in recent seasons . The socks are green , usually with some white detail . Hibs have used yellow , purple , black , white and a dark green in recent seasons for their alternate kits . In 1977 , Hibs became the first club in Scotland to bear sponsorship on their shirts . This arrangement prompted television companies to threaten a boycott of Hibs games if they used the sponsored kit , which resulted in the club using an alternate kit for the first time . 
 Hibs wore green and white hooped shirts during the 1870s , which was the inspiration for the style later adopted by Celtic . Hibs then wore all @-@ green shirts from 1879 until 1938 , when white sleeves were added to the shirts . This was similar in style to Arsenal , who had added white sleeves to their red shirts earlier in the 1930s . The colour of the shorts was changed to a green which matched the shirts in 2004 , to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of a friendly win in October 1964 against Real Madrid . Hibs had worn green shorts in that match to avoid a colour clash with the all @-@ white colours of Real Madrid . Hibs have worn green shorts in three seasons since the 2004 – 05 season . For the 2012 – 13 season , Hibs changed the primary colour of the shirts to a darker " bottle " green , instead of the normal emerald green . A darker green had been used until the 1930s . For the 2014 – 15 season , Hibs removed the traditional white sleeves from their home kit as they changed to a darker green shirt in commemoration of the Famous Five forward line . 
 The badge used to identify the club has changed frequently over the years , which has reflected an ongoing debate about its identity . This debate has centred on whether its Irish heritage should be proudly displayed , or ignored for fear of being accused of sectarianism . The Irish harp was first removed in the 1950s , then re @-@ introduced to the club badge when it was last re @-@ designed in 2000 . Scottish Football Museum director Ged O 'Brien said in 2001 , that the current design shows that Hibs " are comfortable with all the strands of their tradition – it has Leith , Edinburgh and Ireland in it . " 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Hibs played on The Meadows for the first two years of their history , before moving to grounds in Newington ( Mayfield Park ) and Bonnington Road , Leith ( <unk> ) , in different spells between 1877 and 1879 . After the lease on Mayfield Park expired , Hibs moved to a ground known as Hibernian Park , on what is now Bothwell Street in Leith . Hibs failed to secure the ground lease and a builder started constructing houses on the site in 1890 . Hibs obtained a lease on a site that is now known as Easter Road in 1892 and have played their home matches there since February 1893 . 
 Before the Taylor Report demanded that the stadium be all @-@ seated , Easter Road had vast banks of terracing on three sides , which meant that it could hold crowds in excess of 60 @,@ 000 . The record attendance of 65 @,@ 860 , which is also a record for a football match played in Edinburgh , was set by an Edinburgh derby played on 2 January 1950 . Such vast crowds were drawn by the success of the Famous Five . 
 The pitch was noted for its pronounced slope , but this was removed in 2000 . The ground is currently all @-@ seated and has a capacity of 20 @,@ 421 . Easter Road is a modern stadium , with all four of its stands having been built since 1995 . The most recent redevelopment was the construction of a new East Stand in 2010 . 
 Scotland have played six of their home matches at Easter Road , all of them since 1998 . The most recent international match played at the ground was a friendly between Scotland and Qatar in June 2015 . The ground has hosted one international not involving Scotland , a friendly played between Ghana and South Korea preceding the 2006 FIFA World Cup . Easter Road has also sometimes been used as a neutral venue for Scottish League Cup semi @-@ final matches and once hosted a Scottish Challenge Cup final . 
 = = Rivalry = = 
 Hibs have a traditional local rivalry in Edinburgh with Hearts ; the Edinburgh derby match between the two clubs is one of the oldest rivalries in world football . Graham Spiers has described it as " one of the jewels of the Scottish game " . The clubs first met on Christmas Day 1875 , when Hearts won 1 – 0 , in the first match ever contested by Hibs . The two clubs became preeminent in Edinburgh after a five @-@ game struggle for the Edinburgh Football Association Cup in 1878 , which Hearts finally won with a 3 – 2 victory after four successive draws . The clubs have met each other in two Scottish Cup Finals , in 1896 and 2012 , both of which were won by Hearts . The 1896 match is also notable for being the only Scottish Cup Final to be played outside Glasgow . 
 Both clubs have been champions of Scotland four times , although Hearts have won more cup competitions and have the better record in derbies , with 273 wins to 198 in 615 matches . Approximately half of all derbies have been played in local competitions and friendlies . Hibs recorded the biggest derby win in a competitive match when they won 7 – 0 at Tynecastle on New Year 's Day 1973 . While it has been noted that religious background lies behind the rivalry , that aspect is " muted " and is a " pale reflection " of the sectarianism in Glasgow . Although the clubs are inescapable rivals , the rivalry is mainly " good @-@ natured " and has had beneficial effects . 
 = = Supporters and culture = = 
 Hibernian are one of only two professional football clubs in Edinburgh , which is the capital of and second largest city in Scotland . The club had the fifth largest average attendance in the SPFL during the 2015 – 16 season , with 9 @,@ 339 . In the period after the Second World War , Hibs attracted average attendances in excess of 20 @,@ 000 , peaking at 31 @,@ 567 in the 1951 – 52 season . Since Easter Road was redeveloped into an all @-@ seater stadium in the mid @-@ 1990s , average attendance has varied between a high of 14 @,@ 488 in 2006 – 07 and a low of 9 @,@ 150 in 2003 – 04 . In the 1980s and 1990s , a minority of the club 's supporters had a reputation as one of Britain 's most prominent casuals groups , known as the Capital City Service . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The works of author Irvine Welsh , particularly Trainspotting , contain several references to Hibernian . The team is often mentioned in casual conversation and is the team many of his characters support . Visual references to Hibs are noticeable in Danny Boyle 's film adaptation of Trainspotting ; Begbie wears a Hibs shirt while he plays five @-@ a @-@ side football , while many Hibs posters and pictures can be seen on the walls of Mark Renton 's bedroom . 
 In the final short story of the trilogy The Acid House , Coco Bryce , a boy from the " Hibs firm " Capital City Service , is struck by lightning while under the influence of LSD in a Pilton park . His soul is then transferred to the body of an unborn child from one of the more affluent areas of Edinburgh . 
 Hibernian are also frequently referred to in the Inspector Rebus series of detective novels by Ian Rankin . Rebus himself is a Raith Rovers fan in the books , but he is a Hibs fan in the 2000s television adaptation of the series . Ironically , that version of Rebus is played by a Hearts supporter , Ken Stott . DS Siobhan Clarke , his colleague in the later books , is a " loyal supporter " of Hibs . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Hibs anthem Glory , Glory to the Hibees was written and performed by Scottish comedian Hector Nicol . Former Marillion singer Fish is a Hibs fan ; Easter Road is mentioned in the song ' Lucky ' , from the album Internal Exile . The Proclaimers are lifelong Hibs fans , and were heavily involved with the " Hands off Hibs " campaign to save the club in 1990 . The title track from their Sunshine on Leith album has become a Hibs anthem , which is traditionally played before big matches at Easter Road and after cup final victories . In their song " Cap in Hand " , also from the Sunshine on Leith album , The Proclaimers sing : 
 The song Joyful Kilmarnock Blues , from the first album released by The Proclaimers , is about a Hibs victory away from home . The song includes the following lyrics : 
 = = Ownership and finances = = 
 Although the football club was formed in 1875 , it was not incorporated until 1903 . The club remained a private company until 1988 , when it was publicly listed on the London Stock Exchange . This public listing , combined with poor financial performance , made Hibs vulnerable to an attempted takeover in 1990 by Hearts chairman Wallace Mercer . This attempt was averted when Mercer was unable to acquire the 75 % shareholding needed to liquidate the company . 
 The club 's parent company , Forth Investments plc , entered receivership in 1991 . Sir Tom Farmer acquired control of the club from the receiver for £ 3 million . Farmer has continued to fund developments of Easter Road and financial losses made by Hibs , although he has delegated control to other figures , such as Rod Petrie . As of 2014 , the club was 98 % owned by its holding company , <unk> Holdings Limited . This holding company is <unk> owned by Farmer ( 90 % ) and Petrie ( 10 % ) . In December 2014 , the club publicised plans to sell up to 51 % ownership of the club to its supporters . By the time the offer closed in August 2015 , supporters increased their shareholding in the club from about 2 % to just under 20 % . 
 = = Current squad and staff = = 
 = = = First @-@ team squad = = = 
 As of 22 : 21 , 11 July 2016 ( UTC ) 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Out on loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Coaching staff = = = 
 = = = Board of directors = = = 
 Source : 
 = = Noted players = = 
 Arthur Duncan holds the record for most league appearances for Hibs , with 446 . All of the Famous Five – Gordon Smith , Eddie Turnbull , Lawrie Reilly , Bobby Johnstone and Willie Ormond – scored more than 100 league goals for Hibs . 
 Hibernian players have been capped at full international level for 18 different national teams , with 59 Hibernian players appearing for Scotland . Hibernian rank fifth amongst all clubs in providing players for Scotland , behind the Old Firm , Queen 's Park and Hearts . James Lundie and James McGhee were the first Hibs players to play for Scotland , in an 1886 British Home Championship match against Wales . Lawrie Reilly holds the record for most international caps earned while a Hibs player , making 38 appearances for Scotland between 1949 and 1957 . In 1959 , Joe Baker became the first player to play for England without having previously played for an English club . 
 To mark the club 's 135th birthday , the club created a Hall of Fame in 2010 . The first group of nominees , including 13 former players , were inducted at a dinner later that year . 
 = = Noted managers = = 
 From 1875 until 1903 , Hibs were managed by a committee , although Dan McMichael , who also acted as treasurer , secretary and a physiotherapist , was effectively the manager when the club won the 1902 Scottish Cup and the 1903 league championship . Willie McCartney took charge of part of the league @-@ winning 1947 – 48 season , but he collapsed and died after a Scottish Cup match in January 1948 . Hugh Shaw inherited that team , and went on to win three league championships in the late 1940s and early 1950s . Alan Stubbs won the Scottish Cup in 2015 – 16 , ending a 114 @-@ year drought in that competition . Eddie Turnbull , Alex Miller and John Collins all won one Scottish League Cup each . Bobby Templeton , Bertie Auld and Alex McLeish all won second tier championships . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 = = = Major honours = = = 
 Scottish league , first <unk> ( 4 ) : 1902 – 03 , 1947 – 48 , 1950 – 51 , 1951 – 52 
 Runners @-@ up ( 6 ) : 1896 – 97 , 1946 – 47 , 1949 – 50 , 1952 – 53 , 1973 – 74 , 1974 – 75 
 Scottish CupWinners ( 3 ) : 1886 – 87 , 1901 – 02 , 2015 – 16 
 Runners @-@ up ( 11 ) : 1895 – 96 , 1913 – 14 , 1922 – 23 , 1923 – 24 , 1946 – 47 , 1957 – 58 , 1971 – 72 , 1978 – 79 , 2000 – 01 , 2011 – 12 , 2012 – 13 
 Scottish League CupWinners ( 3 ) : 1972 – 73 , 1991 – 92 , 2006 – 07 
 Runners @-@ up ( 7 ) : 1950 – 51 , 1968 – 69 , 1974 – 75 , 1985 – 86 , 1993 – 94 , 2003 – 04 , 2015 – 16 
 = = = Minor honours = = = 
 Scottish league , second <unk> ( 5 ) : 1893 – 94 , 1894 – 95 , 1932 – 33 , 1980 – 81 , 1998 – 99 
 Drybrough CupWinners ( 2 ) : 1972 , 1973 
 Summer CupWinners ( 2 ) : 1942 , 1964 
 Southern League CupWinners ( 1 ) : 1943 – 44 
 = = = UEFA ranking = = = 
 As of 12 : 35 , 22 May 2016 ( UTC ) 
 = = Records = = 
 Attendance 
 Highest single game attendance : 65 @,@ 860 vs Hearts , 2 January 1950 
 Highest average home attendance : 30 @,@ 700 in the 1951 – 52 season 
 Highest attendance for any match involving Hibs : 143 @,@ 570 vs Rangers at Hampden Park , 27 March 1948 
 Single game 
 Biggest victory : 22 – 1 vs Black Watch Highlanders , 3 September 1881 
 Biggest competitive victory : 15 – 1 vs Peebles Rovers , 11 February 1961 
 Biggest league victory : 11 – 1 vs Airdrie , 24 October 1959 and vs Hamilton , 6 November 1965 
 Biggest defeat : 0 – 10 vs Rangers , 24 December 1898 
 Caps and appearances 
 Most capped player : Lawrie Reilly , 38 for Scotland 
 Most league appearances : Arthur Duncan , 446 
 Goals 
 Most competitive goals : Reilly , 234 
 Most league goals : Reilly , 187 
 Most competitive goals in a season : Joe Baker , 46 in 1959 – 60 
 Most league goals in a season : Baker , 42 in 1959 – 60 
 Transfers 
 Record fee paid : £ 700 @,@ 000 for Ulises de la Cruz to LDU Quito in 2001 
 Record fee received : £ 4 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 for Scott Brown from Celtic in 2007 
 = M @-@ 36 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 36 is a state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan that runs in a west – east direction from Mason to Whitmore Lake . The trunkline connects US Highway 127 ( US 127 ) south of Lansing and US 23 north of Ann Arbor . The highway connects several smaller communities in the rural areas along its route . M @-@ 36 also runs concurrently with two other roadways , sharing pavement with M @-@ 52 and County Road D @-@ 19 . According to traffic surveys in 2010 , between 650 and 15 @,@ 300 vehicles used the highway on average each day . 
 The current highway to bear the M @-@ 36 moniker is the second to do so . The first was signposted in 1919 north of Pontiac until it was partially replaced by the modern M @-@ 24 in 1926 . The M @-@ 36 designation was moved to the current roadway in 1930 . It has been changed a few times since the highway was completely paved in 1940 . The last change created the M @-@ 52 concurrency in 1969 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 36 starts at an interchange with US 127 northwest of Mason . The highway follows Cedar Street southeast and southerly from exit 66 through commercial and residential areas to Ash Street near downtown . M @-@ 36 turns eastward along Ash Street through downtown . Outside of the city , Ash Street becomes Dansville Road 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) north of Mason Jewett Field , the local airport . The highway continues eastward through mixed fields and woodland . The trunkline follows Mason Street through the village of Dansville . Just south of White Oak Township Park in White Oak Township , M @-@ 36 turns south to run concurrently along M @-@ 52 through Millville . At Topping Road , M @-@ 36 turns east again north of Lowe Lake . Crossing into Livingston County where it becomes Plainfield Road , the highway then passes the Plainfield Cemetery through community of the same name and turns southeasterly toward Gregory . 
 North of town , M @-@ 36 turns south on Gregory Road . The highway continues as Main Street in the community to Carr Street ; the highway turns back eastward on Carr Street in Gregory . As the highway runs easterly , it skirts the northern edge of the Pinckney State Recreation Area and the southern edge of the Timber Trace Golf Club . As Main Street in Pinckney , M @-@ 36 passes through the center of town . At Howell Street , County Road D @-@ 19 merges in from the south . The two designations run concurrently along Main Street to Pearl Street , where D @-@ 19 turns northward . At the intersection with Dexter Street , M @-@ 36 intersects the western terminus of D @-@ 32 , the " Highway to Hell " . East of Pinckney , M @-@ 36 passes between Rush and Bass lakes in the <unk> area . Immediately east of there , the highway passes through woods between Oneida and <unk> lakes in Lakeland . The trunkline passes to the south of Buck Lake and then meanders through Hamburg southeasterly . M @-@ 36 ends as 9 Mile Road at exit 54 on US 23 in Whitmore Lake . 
 M @-@ 36 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 36 were the 15 @,@ 226 vehicles daily in Mason ; the lowest count was 657 vehicles per day east of the M @-@ 52 concurrency . No section of M @-@ 36 has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original designation = = = 
 On July 1 , 1919 , M @-@ 36 was routed along what is now M @-@ 24 between Pontiac and Burnside . In November 1926 , this highway was redesignated as part of M @-@ 24 between Pontiac and Lapeer . In 1930 , the remainder was turned back to local control and removed from the state highway system . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 M @-@ 36 supplanted the former M @-@ 49 designation between Mason and Whitmore Lake in late 1930 ; segments of M @-@ 49 through Stockbridge not used in the new M @-@ 36 were given to M @-@ 92 or M @-@ 106 . The last segments were paved in late 1940 between Plainfield and the eastern terminus . When the Michigan State Highway Department completed a US 127 bypass around Mason in late 1946 or early 1947 , M @-@ 36 was extended westward over a section of highway previously used by US 127 to connect to the bypass ; that segment was designated Bus . US 127 / M @-@ 36 This concurrency was removed in 1962 when the Bus . US 127 designation was decommissioned . The M @-@ 52 concurrency was formed in 1969 when M @-@ 52 was extended northerly to Webberville . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = W.T.F. ( South Park ) = 
 " W.T.F. " is the 10th episode of the 13th season of the American animated television series South Park . The 191st overall episode of the series , it originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on October 21 , 2009 . In the episode , the South Park boys form their own backyard wrestling league , drawing droves of fans more interested in the acting and scripted dramatic storylines than athletic elements . 
 " W.T.F. " was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States . The episode parodied several aspects of professional wrestling , highlighting the sport 's emphasis on such theatrical elements as costumes , back stories and scripted storylines . The episode demonstrated how amateur wrestling is often afforded less respect due to pro @-@ wrestling , and presents pro @-@ wrestling fans as stereotypical rednecks who believe the scripted drama is real . 
 " W.T.F. " specifically parodies World Wrestling Entertainment and its chairman , Vince McMahon . The episode received generally mixed reviews , with several commentators calling professional wrestling too easy a target for South Park satire . According to Nielsen ratings , " W.T.F. " was seen by 1 @.@ 37 million households among viewers aged between 18 and 49 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After watching a live WWE match between WWE superstars Edge and John Cena at the Pepsi Center and being totally enthralled , Kyle , Stan , Cartman , Kenny , Butters , Jimmy and Token decide to join the school 's wrestling team , unaware how different the sport is from professional wrestling . They all feel that the wrestling coach Mr. Connors 's teaching of " real wrestling " , or " <unk> " , is too homoerotic and immediately quit the class to form their own backyard wrestling league called " the Wrestling Takedown Federation " ( W.T.F. ) , much to the frustration of Mr. Connors . The boys ' federation relies heavily on theatrical elements and scripted storylines , with such characters as a Russian who belittles Americans , a veteran of the Vietnam War and a girl who has had fourteen abortions . Their audience grows quickly , and consists mostly of rednecks who believe the action is real and the dialogue reflects actual events . As its popularity increases , the federation add an auditorium , complete with proscenium staging and theater @-@ style lighting , to the back of Cartman 's house . Soon , the events see the performers reciting dramatic monologues more often than engaging in wrestling and stunt work . 
 Mr. Connors is fired by the school board due to the violence associated with wrestling , after the board fails to make a distinction between what he teaches and professional wrestling ( as do the town bar regulars ) . They also find videos of Greco @-@ Roman and freestyle wrestling on his iPhone and mistake them for gay pornography . The boys are excited to learn WWE Chairman Vince McMahon has heard of their federation and will be scouting one of their shows . Mr. Connors sits in his apartment surrounded by awards for wrestling and in tears over his termination and what wrestling has become . <unk> , he plans to sabotage the event in a personal vow to restore the integrity of the wrestling sport . Cartman , Stan , Kyle and Kenny secretly decide to relegate Butters , Jimmy and Token to smaller roles , thinking that it will give themselves a better opportunity to impress McMahon . They hold tryouts in the manner of a theater audition in order to find new talent for their show , which is now more reminiscent of musical theatre than wrestling . 
 Mr. Connors sneaks into the event and unsuccessfully attempts to destroy the wrestling ring with a rocket launcher , killing Kenny instead . He runs into the ring and chastises the crowd with an impassioned monologue about how professional wrestling has ruined real wrestling , and the downward spiral his life has taken since it cost him his job ( as well as everything else ) . The crowd begins to sympathize with him , angrily chanting , " They took his job ! " McMahon is impressed with the speech and decides to sign Mr. Connors to the WWE — much to his delight . The boys are frustrated at losing their latest shot at stardom and began brawling amongst themselves , blaming each other for the lost opportunity . They then start wrestling each other to the ground . Unimpressed by the genuine wrestling and real conflicted drama , the crowd deems it " fake " and begins to leave . 
 = = Theme = = 
 " W.T.F. " was written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States . It first aired on October 21 , 2009 in the United States on Comedy Central . " W.T.F. " parodies several aspects of professional wrestling , a form of theatre involving mock combat and catch wrestling , in which matches , along with pre- and post @-@ match commentary and action , are choreographed and scripted . The South Park episode highlights the theatrical elements of professional wrestling , such as the costumes , back stories and scripted dramatic storylines . The fans are portrayed as far more interested in these theatrical elements than any actual athletic feats . The theatrical aspect of professional wrestling are often over @-@ exaggerated in " W.T.F. " to add comedic emphasis and satire . For example , a try @-@ out involves no actual wrestling at all , but rather dramatic monologues , and resembles the audition scene from the Broadway musical " A Chorus Line " . Similarly , Vince McMahon watches one of the matches from a balcony wearing opera glasses , similar to that of a theatre rather than a traditional wrestling venue . 
 The episode also demonstrates how amateur wrestling , an actual non @-@ choreographed sport with such styles as Greco @-@ Roman and freestyle , is often afforded less respect due to professional wrestling . The boys initially mistake this form of wrestling for the scripted professional wrestling they are used to , and then are uninterested in it when they learn about the actual sport . The moves and holds their teacher tries to teach them are interpreted by the boys as homoerotic and treated with disrespect . The gym teacher , Mr. Connors , is portrayed as showing despair for what professional wrestling has done to harm " real wrestling " , culminating in a final scene in which he makes a tearful rant to the crowd at one of the boys ' wrestling matches . 
 " W.T.F. " also mocks fans of professional wrestling , who are portrayed largely as stereotypical rednecks who believe the scripted storylines are real . The wrestling matches in " W.T.F. " are purposely fake @-@ looking to emphasize the scripted nature of professional wrestling , and utilize elements typically featured in real matches , like the use of metal folding chairs as weapons . The professional wrestling characters created by the South Park boys , such as Cartman 's " the Rad Russian " , are similar to the gimmick @-@ based types of characters created by actual professional wrestling leagues , like The Iron Sheik . These characters , too , are portrayed in an over @-@ the @-@ top way to emphasize the comedic satire of professional wrestling . This is particularly illustrated with the use of one of Cartman 's characters , a female diva who claims to have had so many abortions , she has become addicted to them . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Vince McMahon , the chairman of World Wrestling Entertainment and occasional professional wrestler himself , is featured prominently in " W.T.F. " Various aspects of the World Wrestling Entertainment company are featured in " W.T.F. " John Cena and Edge , professional wrestlers who both work for the WWE , appear in a match against each other . Both are portrayed by voice actors , not the actual wrestlers themselves . The South Park boys host a " W.T.F. Smackdown " event , a reference to the WWE SmackDown television program . Also noted , Token 's <unk> attire is resembled to the attire of WWE wrestler R @-@ Truth . A wrestling try @-@ out held by the boys resembles scenes from the Broadway musical A Chorus Line , which involves Broadway dancers auditioning for spots on a chorus line . One of the people trying out sings a musical number about why he wants to be a wrestler , which parodies the song " Nothing " from A Chorus Line . The episode also includes references to the musical Fame , the film Waiting for <unk> and the reality television series American Idol . When Cartman and Kenny order a meeting with Stan and Kyle to discuss the wrestling league , they meet at a <unk> , a <unk> and seafood @-@ restaurant chain . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on October 21 , 2009 , " <unk> " was watched by 1 @.@ 37 million overall households among viewers aged between 18 and 34 , according to Nielsen ratings . Among that age group , it ranked behind the FX drama series Sons of Anarchy , which drew 1 @.@ 43 million household viewers , as well as game five of the 2009 National League Championship Series on TBS ( 1 @.@ 56 million households ) and a National Football League game between the Denver Broncos and San Diego Chargers on ESPN ( 3 @.@ 57 million households ) . 
 " W.T.F. " received generally mixed reviews . Ramsey Isler of IGN said the professional wrestling parody was " pretty spot on " , but that the target was too easy , and the episode " lacks a lot of the punchy kind of comedy that the show is usually known for " . Nevertheless , Isler said the writing was clever and had funny moments , like Kenny 's " El Pollo Loco " character , and the scene where the gym teacher tries to take down a security guard with a traditional wrestling move . Josh Modell of The A.V. Club gave the episode a C + grade and called it " one of those too @-@ common SP episodes that could 've been cut in half " . Modell said the true @-@ to @-@ life way the boys formed their wrestling company was " great " and that the parody of professional wrestling as on target , but also said they " have been told a million times before . They 're not really jokes at this point . " 
 Carlos Delgado of iF Magazine gave the episode a C + grade , saying professional wrestling seems like a topic South Park should have mocked long ago . Delgado said the best scenes were the first moments of the boys ' wrestling league , but that the " novelty of the idea starts to fade " and the developments become too outrageous . Macleans writer Jamie Weinman criticized the episode and said professional wrestling was " not exactly a timely target " . Not all reviews were negative . Salon.com writer Mary Elizabeth Williams called the show " perennially offensive [ and ] still shockingly funny " , and particularly praised Cartman 's wrestling character " Bad Irene " , who professes a love of and addiction to abortions . Williams called it , " a reminder that the heated debate over choice frequently serves as America 's prime @-@ time entertainment " . 
 = = Home release = = 
 " W.T.F. " , along with the thirteen other episodes from South Park 's thirteenth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set and two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set in the United States on March 16 , 2010 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Parker and Stone for each episode , a collection of deleted scenes , and a special mini @-@ feature Inside Xbox : A Behind @-@ the @-@ Scenes Tour of South Park Studios , which discussed the process behind animating the show with Inside Xbox host Major Nelson . 
 = Albert White ( basketball ) = 
 Albert White ( born June 13 , 1977 ) is an American professional basketball player who last played for the London Lightning of the National Basketball League of Canada . Before joining the Lightning , White had played in a variety of domestic and foreign basketball leagues . In high school , he was one of the most highly decorated basketball players in the United States . In college he achieved success after transferring from University of Michigan to University of Missouri , but his success did not lead him to the National Basketball Association ( henceforth NBA ) . Instead , he went to the Continental Basketball Association ( CBA ) and has since played in various developmental and foreign basketball leagues as a professional . 
 In high school , he was a Street & Smith , Parade , and McDonald 's All @-@ American and in college he became a first team All @-@ Big 12 Conference player and CNN / Sports Illustrated Big 12 Player of the Year . White was implicated in the University of Michigan basketball scandal , but was not named in the final indictments . He transferred from Michigan to Missouri after his freshman year , which included the basketball scandal , for unrelated reasons . He achieved several firsts for Missouri and led the team to their best season in the Big 12 era in 1998 – 99 . 
 He declared himself eligible for the 1999 NBA draft as a redshirt junior and went undrafted . He was drafted in the 1999 CBA draft . He has had multiple stints in the CBA , United States Basketball League ( USBL ) , International Basketball League ( IBL ) and various foreign leagues . As a professional , he once was named to the All @-@ CBA second team . He was selected as an All @-@ star or All @-@ league player and been part of championship teams in several of the professional leagues he played in . 
 = = High school = = 
 born June 13 , 1977 , White went to high school at Metro Detroit 's Inkster High School , where he played basketball . While at Inkster , he placed third in the 1995 Mr. Basketball of Michigan voting , which was won by Robert Traylor . He was named a Parade All @-@ American as a junior according to the Detroit Public School League records , and according to CNN / SI he was honored by Parade as a senior . Prior to his senior season , he was named a Street & Smith All @-@ American . As a senior , he was named a McDonald 's All @-@ American . He was also named Detroit News / Detroit Free Press first @-@ team ( known as Dream Team ) All @-@ State for both his junior and senior seasons . He was part of one of the most star @-@ studded McDonald 's All @-@ American classes with future NBA All @-@ stars Vince Carter , Shareef Abdur @-@ Rahim , Stephon Marbury , Antawn Jamison , Kevin Garnett , Paul Pierce , and Chauncey Billups . During the tenth anniversary of his Street & Smith 1994 – 95 High School All @-@ America Team , eight of the twenty members were still playing in the NBA . 
 = = College = = 
 White was implicated in early investigations of the University of Michigan basketball scandal because he accepted US $ 37 @,@ 000 . He was not named in later indictments and was not named as having been called before the grand jury . It was not clear how much money White received and how much was given to his friends and family to influence his decision to attend Michigan . Although White was one of several players captured on federal wiretaps and interviewed by both the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Internal Revenue Service , he cooperated fully and did not need to hire a lawyer . He was not among the players called before the grand jury ( Robert Traylor , Chris Webber , Jalen Rose , Maurice Taylor , and Louis Bullock ) and was not found to have received large amounts of money . 
 White transferred to the Missouri Tigers men 's basketball team due to a clash with Steve Fisher after his freshman year with the Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team . White left the team for what was described as disciplinary reasons . White , who averaged 9 @.@ 0 points and 4 @.@ 7 rebounds , had been one of the most improved players during the previous season . He averaged eleven points and seven rebounds during the final seven Big Ten Conference games . Nonetheless , he was suspended for the first semester in October 1996 for violating a team rule . 
 White played for the 1995 – 96 Michigan Wolverines team that went to the 1996 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament as a seventh seed , but lost 80 – 76 in the first round to the Texas Longhorns men 's basketball team . He returned to the 1999 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament as an eighth seed with Missouri , but lost 61 – 59 in the first round to the New Mexico Lobos men 's basketball team . However , as a result of the basketball scandal , Michigan has vacated all games from the 1995 – 96 season . As of 2008 , the second place Big 12 finish that season is the only top four placing for the Tigers since the formation of the Big 12 conference during the 1996 – 97 season . 
 During the 1998 – 99 season he became the first Missouri Tigers player to lead the team in scoring , rebounds and assists in the same season , and he placed in the top five in the Big 12 in both scoring and rebounding . That season he helped the Missouri Tigers snap the Kansas Jayhawks men 's basketball team 's 35 game home conference winning streak which had extended from February 20 , 1994 to January 1999 . That season he was twice named Big 12 men 's basketball player of the week and made the official All @-@ Big 12 first team . CNN / Sports Illustrated named White the Player of the Year in the Big 12 . However , he lost the official conference player of the year award to <unk> Hamilton , and he was only listed as a second team All @-@ Big 12 player by the Associated Press . 
 After his redshirt junior season , he declared himself eligible for the 1999 NBA draft with one year of collegiate eligibility remaining , making him the first Missouri Tiger to declare early for the NBA draft . Although some speculated that he was making a mistake declaring early for the draft , he had the burden of child support and some projected him as a likely draft selection . White went undrafted in the NBA draft after surrendering his final year of eligibility . However , that year some other early draft entrants met with better success : the first four selections ( Elton Brand , Steve Francis , Baron Davis , and Lamar Odom ) also had surrendered some remaining collegiate eligibility by declaring themselves eligible to be drafted in the NBA draft and high schoolers Jonathan Bender and Leon Smith were drafted in the first round . Many other underclassmen in his draft year such as Ron Artest , Richard Hamilton , and Corey Maggette have gone on to have successful NBA careers . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 White was drafted in the 1999 CBA draft by the Sioux Falls Skyforce . During the first year , he was a CBA All @-@ rookie selection . He spent the 1999 – 2000 and some of the 2000 – 01 season with the Sioux Falls Skyforce . He also spent some of 2000 – 01 and 2001 – 02 with the Florida Sea Dragons of the USBL . During the 2001 – 02 he spent part of the year with the USBL 's Oklahoma Storm and the Brighton Bears of the British Basketball League ( BBL ) . During the 2002 – 03 regular season as a member of the Rockford Lightning , he finished fourth in the CBA in scoring and seventh in offensive rebounds . That season he was named to the All @-@ CBA second team . During the 2003 – 04 season he played for the Incheon ET Land Black <unk> of the Korean Basketball League ( <unk> ) . During 2005 , he played with the Detroit Pros of the IBL . During the 2007 – 08 season he led the Pittsburgh Xplosion to the playoffs . In 33 regular season games he averaged 12 @.@ 6 points and 4 @.@ 8 rebounds for the 18 – 15 team . He has also played in the National Superior Basketball of Puerto Rico , Liga Profesional de Baloncesto ( <unk> ) of Venezuela and in various leagues in Italy . Over the course of his professional career he was selected as an All @-@ star or All @-@ league player in the CBA , BBL , <unk> and IBL . He has been part of Championship teams in the USBL in 2002 , CBA in 2003 and <unk> in 2007 . 
 On October 21 , 2011 , it was announced that White had made the final twelve @-@ man roster for the National Basketball League of Canada 's London Lightning . He has since been placed on the inactive reserve list . 
 = Episode 7 ( Twin Peaks ) = 
 " Episode 7 " , also known as " The Last Evening " , is the eighth and final episode of the first season of the American mystery television series Twin Peaks . Series co @-@ creator Mark Frost wrote and directed the episode . It features series regulars Kyle MacLachlan , Piper Laurie and Eric Da Re , with guest appearances by Chris Mulkey and Walter Olkewicz . 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) agent Dale Cooper ( MacLachlan ) pays the price for his investigation of a murder in the small mountain town of Twin Peaks , while the local sawmill is burnt in an arson scheme . 
 Like much of the series , " Episode 7 " features unusual set and costume design , including the hallmark use of a strong red palette . Production designer Richard Hoover has explained that the sound stages were constructed with ceilings and functional hallways — an unusual practice for television production — allowing actors to be filmed entering a scene without cuts . First airing on May 23 , 1990 , " Episode 7 " was viewed by approximately 22 percent of the available audience ; it received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The small town of Twin Peaks , Washington , has been shocked by the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer ( Sheryl Lee ) and the attempted murder of her friend Ronette Pulaski ( Phoebe Augustine ) . FBI special agent Dale Cooper ( Kyle MacLachlan ) has come to the town to investigate ; the violent , drug @-@ dealing truck driver Leo Johnson ( Eric Da Re ) is the chief suspect . Meanwhile , local businessman Benjamin Horne ( Richard Beymer ) has been scheming with his lover , Catherine Martell ( Piper Laurie ) , to burn down the town 's sawmill to buy its land cheaply . However , Horne also conspires with the mill 's owner , Josie Packard ( Joan Chen ) , to burn the mill and kill Martell to collect their insurance policies . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 James Hurley ( James Marshall ) and Donna Hayward ( Lara Flynn Boyle ) sneak into the office of psychiatrist Laurence Jacoby ( Russ Tamblyn ) , hoping to find out more about Laura , whom he had been treating . They find a cassette tape she sent him . Meanwhile , Jacoby is distracted by an offer to meet Laura 's cousin , Madeline Ferguson ( Lee ) , who has disguised herself as the dead girl ; before they can meet , however , he is attacked by a masked man and left unconscious . 
 Cooper and Ed Hurley ( Everett McGill ) are undercover in One Eyed Jacks , a Canadian brothel and casino . Cooper speaks to drug smuggler Jacques Renault ( Walter Olkewicz ) , whom he believes is connected to Laura 's death . Posing as a drug financier , Cooper persuades Renault to meet him in the US ; Cooper learns that Renault and Johnson were with Pulaski and Laura on the night she died . Later that night , when Renault arrives to meet Cooper , he is arrested for Laura 's murder . Renault resists and is shot ; he is taken to a hospital where he accuses Johnson of attacking him the night of the murder , claiming to have been unconscious while the killing occurred . Laura 's father , Leland ( Ray Wise ) , learns of the arrest ; he travels to the hospital and fatally smothers Renault . 
 Johnson 's wife , Shelley ( Mädchen Amick ) , is at home when he returns and assaults her . He drives her to the sawmill , ties her up , and rigs a timed device that will set the building on fire . Meanwhile , Packard meets with recently paroled Hank Jennings ( Chris Mulkey ) to give him US $ 90 @,@ 000 ; it is revealed Packard paid Jennings to serve eighteen months in prison . This ensured that neither of them would be implicated in the death of Packard 's husband , from whom she inherited the mill . Jennings later calls Martell to lure her to the mill . As Martell arrives , the device explodes , engulfing the building in flames . At the same time , Johnson attempts to kill Shelley 's lover , Bobby Briggs ( Dana Ashbrook ) , but is shot by Jennings . 
 Cooper returns to his hotel room and orders room service . Before he can read a note that was left earlier by Audrey , Deputy Brennan calls him to inform him that Johnson has been shot . However , a knock on the door draws him away from the phone . When he opens the door , an unseen figure shoots him three times . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Episode 7 " was written and directed by Mark Frost , who created Twin Peaks along with David Lynch . Frost had previously penned " Pilot " , " Episode 1 " and " Episode 2 " with Lynch ; " Episode 5 " was his first solo writing credit . Frost would pen a further six episodes during the second season . This was Frost 's first and only time directing an episode of the series . 
 Production designer Richard Hoover notes that he saw " Pilot " at the Telluride Film Festival before becoming involved with the series ; during that screening , he noticed Mark Frost 's name in the credits and remembered working with his father Warren Frost . After learning that the production designer for " Pilot " was no longer available to work , Hoover contacted the younger Frost and enquired about working on the series ; Hoover was hired almost immediately . Hoover has pointed out the unusual nature of the series ' set designs ; most of the sets feature ceilings and hallways that lead into them — this allows characters to be filmed entering a sound stage set without the use of cuts . 
 Hoover felt that the series ' use of a consistent palette of reds and earth tones allowed the introduction of strong black elements into set and costume design ; he cited elements of Blackie O 'Reilly 's office in One Eyed Jacks as an example : its vibrant red curtains and ruddy wood tones were offset by her stark black outfit and dark hair . The hues in the footage filmed for the series were " sweetened " in post @-@ production , increasing the saturation of the red tones ; this also caused black elements to seem deeper and more striking . This effect was offset by the clothing of several of the law enforcement characters , which had cooler tones and contrasted against the warm palette . 
 The power plant used for exterior shots in Jacques Renault 's arrest scene was in Burbank , California . The location was chosen because of its large and unusually @-@ shaped buildings ; these were lit from behind to enhance their shapes in silhouette . The Hayward house was designed to seem uncharacteristically " normal " ; it featured an increased amount of yellows and greys to offset the red tones , and it made use of several household rooms to enhance its appearance of verisimilitude . The location used for the scenes of the Packard sawmill was in Valencia , Santa Clarita ; this was chosen because it was far from the tree line and thus there was no risk of a forest fire occurring after the arson scenes . In addition , any wood used was treated to burn in a controlled manner , and firefighters were on @-@ hand in case of an emergency . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Episode 7 " was first broadcast on the ABC Network on May 23 , 1990 . In its initial airing , it was viewed by 12 @.@ 6 percent of US households , representing 22 percent of the available audience ; it was the most @-@ viewed broadcast in its time @-@ slot . These ratings marked an increase from the previous episode , which had attracted 10 @.@ 6 percent of the population and 17 percent of the available audience . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Keith Phipps rated the episode an " A " , finding that the multiple cliffhanger plot threads worked well and did not seem over the top or self @-@ parodying . Phipps felt that the first season was " a near @-@ perfect run of television " , further describing it as " a stretch of greatness that , for one reason or another , couldn 't be sustained . But it was terrific while it lasted " . AllRovi 's Andrea LeVasseur awarded the episode four stars out of five , adding that " with several characters meeting their fate in this episode , including the two main suspects ( Jacques and Leo ) , the mystery of Laura Palmer 's murder is even more puzzling " . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Ken Tucker rated the episode an A + , finding that its lack of plot resolution offered " a good kind of annoyance " , showing the level of interest and commitment the series had inspired in its viewers . 
 = Scotland in the early modern period = 
 Scotland in the early modern period refers , for the purposes of this article , to Scotland between the death of James IV in 1513 and the end of the Jacobite rebellions in the mid @-@ eighteenth century . It roughly corresponds to the early modern period in Europe , beginning with the Renaissance and Reformation and ending with the start of the Enlightenment and Industrial Revolution . 
 After a long minority , the personal reign of James V saw the court become a centre of Renaissance patronage , but it ended in military defeat and another long minority for the infant Mary Queen of Scots . Scotland hovered between dominance by the English and French , which ended in the Treaty of Edinburgh 1560 , by which both withdrew their troops , but leaving the way open for religious reform . The Scottish Reformation was strongly influenced by Calvinism leading to widespread iconoclasm and the introduction of a Presbyterian system of organisation and discipline that would have a major impact on Scottish life . In 1569 Mary returned from France , but her personal reign deteriorated into murder , scandal and civil war , forcing her to escape to England where she was later executed and leaving her Protestant opponents in power in the name of the infant James VI . In 1603 he inherited the thrones of England and Ireland , creating a dynastic union and moving the centre of royal patronage and power to London . 
 His son Charles I attempted to impose elements of the English religious settlement on his other kingdoms . Relations gradually deteriorated resulting in the Bishops ' Wars ( 1637 – 40 ) , ending in defeat for Charles and helping to bring about the War of Three Kingdoms . The Scots entered the war in England on the Parliamentary side , helping to turn the tide against the king 's forces . In the Second and Third Civil Wars ( 1648 – 51 ) they took the side of Charles I and after his execution that of his son Charles II , leading to defeat , occupation by a parliamentary army under Oliver Cromwell and incorporation into the Commonwealth . The Restoration of the Monarchy in 1660 saw the return of episcopacy and an increasingly absolutist regime , resulting in religious and political upheaval and rebellions . With the accession of the openly Catholic James VII , there was increasing disquiet among Protestants . After the Glorious Revolution of 1688 – 89 , William of Orange and Mary , the daughter of James , were accepted as monarchs . Presbyterianism was reintroduced and limitations placed on monarchy . After severe economic dislocation in the 1690s there were moves that led to political union with England as the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707 . The deposed main hereditary line of the Stuarts became a focus for political discontent , known as Jacobitism , leading to a series of invasions and rebellions , but with the defeat of the last in 1745 , Scotland entered a period of great political stability , economic and intellectual expansion . 
 Although there was an improving system of roads in early modern Scotland , it remained a country divided by topography , particularly between the Highlands and Islands and the Lowlands . Most of the economic development was in the Lowlands , which saw the beginnings of industrialisation , agricultural improvement and the expansion of eastern burghs , particularly Glasgow , as trade routes to the Americas opened up . The local laird emerged as a key figure and the heads of names and clans in the Borders and Highlands declined in importance . There was a population expanding towards the end of the period and increasing urbanisation . Social tensions were evident in witch trials and the creation of a system of poor laws . Despite the aggrandisement of the crown and the increase in forms of taxation , revenues remained inadequate . The Privy Council and Parliament remained central to government , with changing compositions and importance before the Act of Union in 1707 saw their abolition . The growth of local government saw introduction of Justices of the Peace and Commissioners of Supply , while the law saw the increasing importance of royal authority and professionalisation . The expansion of parish schools and reform of universities heralded the beginnings of an intellectual flowering in the Enlightenment . There was also a flowering of Scottish literature before the loss of the court as a centre of patronage at the beginning of the seventeenth century . The tradition of church music was fundamentally changed by the Reformation , with the loss of complex polyphonic music for a new tradition of metrical psalms singing . In architecture , royal building was strongly influenced by Renaissance styles , while the houses of the great lairds adopted a hybrid form known as Scots baronial and after the Restoration was influenced by Palladian and Baroque styles . In church architecture a distinctive plain style based on a ' T ' -plan emerged . The Reformation also had a major impact on art , with a loss of church patronage leading to a tradition of painted ceilings and walls and the beginnings of a tradition of portraiture and landscape painting . 
 = = Political history = = 
 = = = Sixteenth century = = = 
 = = = = James V = = = = 
 The death of James IV at the Battle of Flodden in 1513 meant a long period of regency in the name of his infant son James V. He was declared an adult in 1524 , but the next year Archibald Douglas , 6th Earl of Angus , the young king 's stepfather , took custody of James and held him as a virtual prisoner for three years , exercising power on his behalf . He finally managed to escape from the custody of the regents in 1528 and began to take revenge on a number of them and their families . He continued his father 's policy of subduing the rebellious Highlands , Western and Northern isles and the troublesome borders . He took punitive measures against the Clan Douglas in the north , summarily executed John Armstrong of Liddesdale and carried out royal progresses to underline his authority . He also continued the French Auld alliance that had been in place since the fourteenth century , marrying first the French noblewoman Madeleine of Valois and then after her death Marie of Guise . He increased crown revenues by heavily taxing the church , taking £ 72 @,@ 000 in four years , and embarked on a major programme of building at royal palaces . He avoided pursuing the major structural and theological changes to the church undertaken by his contemporary Henry VIII in England . He utilised the Church as a source of offices for his many illegitimate children and his favourites , particularly David Beaton , who became Archbishop of Saint Andrews and a Cardinal . James V 's domestic and foreign policy successes were overshadowed by another disastrous campaign against England that led to an overwhelming defeat at the Battle of Solway Moss ( 1542 ) . James died a short time later , a demise blamed by contemporaries on " a broken heart " . The day before his death , he was brought news of the birth of an heir : a daughter , who would become Mary , Queen of Scots . 
 = = = = " Rough Wooing " = = = = 
 At the beginning of the infant Mary 's reign , the Scottish political nation was divided between a pro @-@ French faction , led by Cardinal Beaton and by the Queen 's mother , Mary of Guise ; and a pro @-@ English faction , headed by James Hamilton , Earl of Arran . Failure of the pro @-@ English to deliver a marriage between the infant Mary and Edward , the son of Henry VIII of England , that had been agreed under the Treaty of Greenwich ( 1543 ) , led within two years to an English invasion to enforce the match , later known as the " rough wooing " . This took the form of border skirmishing and several English campaigns into Scotland . In 1547 , after the death of Henry VIII , forces under the English regent Edward Seymour , 1st Duke of Somerset were victorious at the Battle of Pinkie Cleugh , followed up by the occupation of the strategic lowland fortress of Haddington . The Scots responded by sending the five @-@ year @-@ old Mary to France , as the intended bride of the dauphin Francis , heir to the French throne . Her mother , Marie of Guise , stayed in Scotland to look after the interests of Mary – and of France – although Arran acted officially as regent . 
 The arrival of French troops helped stiffen resistance to the English , who abandoned Haddington in September 1549 and , after the fall of Protector Somerset in England , withdrew from Scotland completely . From 1554 , Marie of Guise formally took over the regency , maintaining a difficult position , partly by giving limited toleration to Protestant dissent and attempting to diffuse resentment over the continued presence of French troops . When the Protestant Elizabeth I came to the throne of England in 1558 , the English party and the Protestants found their positions aligned and asked for English military support to expel the French . The arrival of English troops , and particularly the English fleet , in 1560 , led to the besieging of the French forces in Leith , which fell in July . By this point Mary of Guise had died and French and English troops both withdrew under the Treaty of Edinburgh , leaving the young queen in France , but pro @-@ English and Protestant parties in the ascendant . 
 = = = = Protestant Reformation = = = = 
 During the sixteenth century , Scotland underwent a Protestant Reformation that created a predominately Calvinist national kirk ( church ) , which was strongly Presbyterian in outlook , severely reducing the powers of bishops , although not abolishing them . In the earlier part of the century , the teachings of first Martin Luther and then John Calvin began to influence Scotland , particularly through Scottish scholars who had visited continental and English universities and who had often trained in the Catholic priesthood . English influence was also more direct , supplying books and distributing Bibles and Protestant literature in the Lowlands when they invaded in 1547 . Particularly important was the work of the Lutheran Scot Patrick Hamilton . His execution with other Protestant preachers in 1528 , and of the Zwingli @-@ influenced George Wishart in 1546 , who was burnt at the stake in St. Andrews on the orders of Cardinal Beaton , did nothing to stem the growth of these ideas . Wishart 's supporters , who included a number of Fife lairds , assassinated Beaton soon after and seized St. Andrews Castle , which they held for a year before they were defeated with the help of French forces . The survivors , including chaplain John Knox , being condemned to be galley slaves , helping to create resentment of the French and martyrs for the Protestant cause . 
 Limited toleration and the influence of exiled Scots and Protestants in other countries , led to the expansion of Protestantism , with a group of lairds declaring themselves Lords of the Congregation in 1557 and representing their interests politically . The collapse of the French alliance and English intervention in 1560 meant that a relatively small , but highly influential , group of Protestants were in a position to impose reform on the Scottish church . A confession of faith , rejecting papal jurisdiction and the mass , was adopted by Parliament in 1560 , while the young Mary , Queen of Scots , was still in France . Knox , having escaped the galleys and spent time in Geneva , where he had become a follower of Calvin , emerged as the most significant figure . The Calvinism of the reformers led by Knox resulted in a settlement that adopted a Presbyterian system and rejected most of the elaborate trappings of the medieval church . This gave considerable power within the new kirk to local lairds , who often had control over the appointment of the clergy , and resulting in widespread , but generally orderly , iconoclasm . At this point the majority of the population was probably still Catholic in persuasion and the kirk would find it difficult to penetrate the Highlands and Islands , but began a gradual process of conversion and consolidation that , compared with reformations elsewhere , was conducted with relatively little persecution . 
 = = = = Mary , Queen of Scots = = = = 
 While these events progressed Queen Mary had been raised as a Catholic in France , and married to the Dauphin , who became king as Francis II in 1559 , making her queen consort of France . When Francis died in 1560 , Mary , now 19 , elected to return to Scotland to take up the government in a hostile environment . Despite her private religion , she did not attempt to re @-@ impose Catholicism on her largely Protestant subjects , thus angering the chief Catholic nobles . Her six @-@ year personal reign was marred by a series of crises , largely caused by the intrigues and rivalries of the leading nobles . The murder of her secretary , David Riccio , was followed by that of her unpopular second husband Lord Darnley , father of her infant son , and her abduction by and marriage to the Earl of Bothwell , who was implicated in Darnley 's murder . 
 Mary and Bothwell confronted the lords at Carberry Hill and after their forces melted away , he fled and she was captured by Bothwell 's rivals . Mary was imprisoned in Loch Leven Castle , and in July 1567 , was forced to abdicate in favour of her 13 @-@ month @-@ old son James VI . Mary eventually escaped and attempted to regain the throne by force . After her defeat at the Battle of Langside by forces loyal to the regents led by James Stewart , 1st Earl of Moray in 1568 , she took refuge in England , leaving her son in their hands . In Scotland the regents fought a civil war on behalf of the king against his mother 's supporters . In England , Mary became a focal point for Catholic conspirators and was eventually tried for treason and executed on the orders of her kinswoman Elizabeth I. 
 = = = = James VI = = = = 
 James VI was crowned King of Scots at the age of 13 months on 29 July 1567 . He was brought up as a Protestant , while the country was run by a series of regents . In 1579 the Frenchman Esmé Stewart , Sieur d 'Aubigny , first cousin of James ' father Lord Darnley , arrived in Scotland and quickly established himself as the closest of the then 13 @-@ year @-@ old James 's powerful male favourites ; he was created Earl of Lennox by the king in 1580 , and Duke of Lennox in 1581 . Lennox was distrusted by Scottish Calvinists and in August 1582 , in what became known as the Ruthven Raid , the Protestant earls of Gowrie and Angus imprisoned James and forced Lennox to leave Scotland . After James was liberated in June 1583 , he assumed increasing control of his kingdom . Between 1584 and 1603 , he established effective royal government and relative peace among the lords , assisted by John Maitland of Thirlestane , who led the government until 1592 . In 1586 , James signed the Treaty of Berwick with England , which , with the execution of his mother in 1587 , helped clear the way for his succession to the childless Queen Elizabeth I of England . He married Anne of Denmark in 1590 , daughter of Frederick II , the king of Denmark ; she bore him two sons and a daughter . 
 = = = Seventeenth century = = = 
 = = = = Union of Crowns = = = = 
 In 1603 , James VI King of Scots inherited the throne of the Kingdom of England and left Edinburgh for London where he would reign as James I. The Union was a personal or dynastic union , with the crowns remaining both distinct and separate – despite James ' best efforts to create a new " imperial " throne of " Great Britain " . James retained a keen interest in Scottish affairs , running the government by the rapid interchange of letters , aided by the establishment of an efficient postal system . He controlled everyday policy through the Privy Council of Scotland and managed the Parliament of Scotland through the Lords of the Articles . He also increasingly controlled the meetings of the Scottish General Assembly and increased the number and powers of the Scottish bishops . In 1618 , he held a General Assembly and pushed through Five Articles , which included practices that had been retained in England , but largely abolished in Scotland , most controversially kneeling for the reception of communion . Although ratified , they created widespread opposition and resentment and were seen by many as a step back to Catholic practice . Royal authority was more limited in the Highlands , where periodic violence punctuated relationships between the great families of the MacDonalds , Gordons and <unk> and Campbells . The acquisition of the Irish crown along with the English , facilitated a process of settlement by Scots in what was historically the most troublesome area of the kingdom in Ulster , with perhaps 50 @,@ 000 Scots settling in the province by the mid @-@ seventeenth century . Attempts to found a Scottish colony in North America in Nova Scotia were largely unsuccessful , with insufficient funds and willing colonists . 
 = = = = Charles I = = = = 
 In 1625 , James VI died and was succeeded by his son Charles I. Although born in Scotland , Charles had become estranged from his northern kingdom , with his first visit being for his Scottish coronation in 1633 , when he was crowned in St Giles Cathedral , Edinburgh with full Anglican rites . Charles had relatively few important Scots in his circle and relied heavily in Scottish matters on the generally mistrusted and often indecisive James Hamilton , 1st Duke of Hamilton and the bishops , particularly John <unk> , Archbishop of St. Andrews , eventually making him chancellor . At the beginning of his reign , Charles ' revocation of alienated lands since 1542 helped secure the finances of the kirk , but it threatened the holdings of the nobility who had gained from the Reformation settlement . His pushing through of legislation and refusal to hear ( or legal pursuit of ) those raising objections , created further resentment among the nobility . In England his religious policies caused similar resentment and he ruled without calling a parliament from 1629 . 
 = = = = = Bishops ' Wars = = = = = 
 In 1635 , without reference to a general assembly of the Parliament , the king authorised a book of canons that made him head of the Church , ordained an unpopular ritual and enforced the use of a new liturgy . When the liturgy emerged in 1637 it was seen as an English @-@ style Prayer Book , resulting in anger and widespread rioting , said to have been set off with the throwing of a stool by one Jenny Geddes during a service in St Giles Cathedral . The Protestant nobility put themselves at the head of the popular opposition , with Archibald Campbell , Earl of Argyll emerging as a leading figure . Representatives of various sections of Scottish society drew up the National Covenant on 28 February 1638 , objecting to the King 's liturgical innovations . The king 's supporters were unable to suppress the rebellion and the king refused to compromise . In December of the same year matters were taken even further , when at a meeting of the General Assembly in Glasgow the Scottish bishops were formally expelled from the Church , which was then established on a full Presbyterian basis . 
 The Scots assembled a force of about 12 @,@ 000 , some of which were returned veterans of the Thirty Years War , led by Alexander Leslie , formerly the Field Marshal of the Swedish Army . Charles gathered a force of perhaps 20 @,@ 000 , many of which were ill @-@ trained militia . There were a series of minor actions in the north of Scotland , which secured the Covenanter 's rear against Royalist support and skirmishing on the border . As neither side wished to push the matter to a full military conflict , a temporary settlement was concluded , known as the Pacification of Berwick in June 1639 , and the First Bishops ' War ended with the Covenanters retaining control of the country . 
 In 1640 Charles attempted again to enforce his authority , opening a second Bishops ' War . He recalled the English Parliament , known as the Short Parliament , but disbanded it after it declined to vote a new subsidy and was critical of his policies . He assembled a poorly provisioned and poorly trained army . The Scots moved south into England , forcing a crossing of the Tyne at Newburn to the west of Newcastle @-@ upon @-@ Tyne , then occupying the city and eventually most of Northumbria and Durham . This gave them a stranglehold on the vital coal supply to London . Charles was forced to capitulate , agreeing to most of the Covenanter 's demands and paying them £ 830 a month to support their army . This forced him to recall the English Parliament , known as the Long Parliament , which , in exchange for concessions , raised the sum of £ 200 @,@ 000 to be paid to the Scots under the Treaty of Ripon . The Scots army returned home triumphant . The king 's attempts to raise a force in Ireland to invade Scotland from the west prompted a widespread revolt there and as the English moved to outright opposition that resulted in the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642 , he was facing rebellion in all three of his realms . 
 = = = = = Civil wars = = = = = 
 As the civil war in England developed into a long and protracted conflict , both the King and the English Parliamentarians appealed to the Scots for military aid . The Covenanters opted to side with Parliament and in 1643 they entered into a Solemn League and Covenant , guaranteeing the Scottish Church settlement and promising further reform in England . In January 1644 a Scots army of 18 @,@ 000 foot and 3 @,@ 000 horse and guns under Leslie crossed the border . It helped turn the tide of the war in the North , forcing the royalist army under the Marquis of Newcastle into York where it was besieged by combined Scots and Parliamentary armies . The Royalists were relieved by a force under Prince Rupert , the King 's nephew , but the allies under Leslie 's command defeated the Royalists decisively at Marston Moor on 2 July , generally seen as the turning point of the war . 
 In Scotland , former Covenanter James Graham , 1st Marquess of Montrose led a campaign in favour of the king in the Highlands from 1644 . Few Lowland Scots would follow him , but , aided by 1 @,@ 000 Irish , Highland and Islesmen sent by the Irish Confederates under Alasdair MacDonald ( <unk> ) , he began a highly successful mobile campaign , winning victories over local Covenanter forces at <unk> and Aberdeen against local levies ; at Inverlochy he crushed the Campbells ; at Auldearn , Alford and Kilsyth he defeated well @-@ led and disciplined armies . He was able to dictate terms to the Covenanters , but as he moved south , his forces , depleted by the loss of <unk> and the Highlanders , were caught and decisively defeated at the Battle of <unk> by an army under David Leslie , nephew of Alexander . Escaping to the north , Montrose attempted to continue the struggle with fresh troops . By this point the king had been heavily defeated at the Battle of Naseby by Parliament 's reformed New Model Army and surrendered to the Scots forces under Leslie besieging the town of Newark in July 1646 . Montrose abandoned the war and left for the continent . 
 Unable to persuade the king to accept a Presbyterian settlement , the Scots exchanged him for half of the £ 400 @,@ 000 they were owed by Parliament and returned home . Relations with the English Parliament and the increasingly independent English army grew strained and the balance of power shifted in Scotland , with Hamilton emerging as the leading figure . In 1647 he brokered the Engagement with the King , now held by the New Model Army , by which the Scots would support him , along with risings in England as part of a Second English Civil War , in exchange for the imposition of Presbyterianism on England on a three @-@ year trial basis . The more hard @-@ line Covenanters of the Kirk Party were defeated at a skirmish at Mauchline Muir in June 1648 and many Covenanters , including Alexander and David Leslie , declined to join the army of 10 @,@ 000 produced for the Engagement . By the time Hamilton led the Engagement army across the border , most of the English risings been defeated . The Scots were caught by the New Model Army under Cromwell on the march between Warrington and Preston . In the Battle of Preston , the Scots were defeated and many captured , with Hamilton subsequently executed . After the coup of the Whiggamore Raid , the Kirk Party regained control in Scotland . However , the eventual response of Cromwell and the army leaders now in power in England to the second civil war was the execution of the king in January 1649 , despite Scottish protests . 
 = = = = Occupation and the Commonwealth = = = = 
 While England was declared a Commonwealth , as soon as news of Charles I 's execution reached Scotland , his son was proclaimed king as Charles II . In 1650 Montrose attempted another rising in the Highlands in the name of the King , but it ended disastrously , with Montrose being executed . Lacking tangible support from his relatives on the continent or his supporters in England , Charles accepted the offer from the Covenanters , arriving in June 1650 and signing the Covenants . The English responded with an army of 16 @,@ 000 under Cromwell , which crossed the border in July 1650 , while an English fleet acted in support . On 3 September 1650 the English army defeated the Scots under David Leslie at the Battle of Dunbar , taking over 10 @,@ 000 prisoners and then occupying Edinburgh , taking control of the Lowlands . Charles could now more easily make an alliance with the moderate Covenanters . He was crowned at Scone on 1 January 1651 and a new army was assembled . In June 1651 Cromwell advanced against the Scots under Leslie at Stirling . The Scots army with the King set off for England , but there was no rising in their favour and the army was caught at Worcester on 3 September . It was decisively defeated , bringing the civil wars to an end . Charles escaped to the continent , an English army occupied Scotland and Cromwell emerged as the most important figure in the Commonwealth . 
 In 1652 , the English parliament declared that Scotland was part of the Commonwealth . Various attempts were made to legitimise the union , calling representatives from the Scottish burghs and shires to negotiations and to various English parliaments , where they were always under @-@ represented and had little opportunity for dissent . However , final ratification was delayed by Cromwell 's problems with his various parliaments and the union did not become the subject of an act until 1657 . The military administration in Scotland , led by General George Monck , was relatively successful . It managed to enforce law and order , suppressing the banditry of the Moss @-@ troopers and enforcing a form of limited religious toleration , but by introducing English judges largely suspending the Scots law . In 1653 – 55 there was a major Royalist rising in the Highlands led by William Cunningham , 9th Earl of Glencairn and John Middleton , which was defeated at the Battle of Dalnaspidal on 19 July 1654 . 
 = = = = Restoration = = = = 
 After the death of Cromwell in 1658 , Monck remained aloof from the manoeuvring in London that led to the brief establishment of a regime under Richard Cromwell and the subsequent contest for power between army leaders . In 1659 he opened negotiations with Charles II and began a slow march south with his army . He then restored the English Long Parliament , which , having received assurances , voted for a restoration of the monarchy and then dissolved itself , creating a de facto restoration of the monarchy in Scotland , but without safeguards . In the event Scotland regained its system of law , parliament and kirk , but also the Lords of the Articles , bishops and a king who did not visit the country and ruled largely without reference to Parliament through a series of commissioners . These began with Middleton , now an earl and ended with the king 's brother and heir , James , Duke of York ( known in Scotland as the Duke of Albany ) . Legislation was revoked back to 1633 , removing the Covenanter gains of the Bishops ' Wars , but the discipline of kirk sessions , presbyteries and synods were renewed . Only four Covenanters were executed , the most prominent being Argyll . The reintroduction of episcopacy was a source of particular trouble in the south @-@ west of the country , an area with strong Presbyterian sympathies . Abandoning the official church , many of the people here began to attend illegal field assemblies led by excluded ministers , known as conventicles . Official attempts to suppress these led to a rising in 1679 , defeated by James , Duke of Monmouth , the King 's illegitimate son , at the Battle of Bothwell Bridge . In the early 1680s a more intense phase of persecution began , in what was later to be known in Protestant historiography as " the Killing Time " , with dissenters summarily executed by the dragoons of James Graham , Laird of Claverhouse or sentenced to transportation or death by Sir George Mackenzie , the Lord Advocate . In England , the Exclusion crisis of 1678 – 81 divided political society into Whigs ( given their name after the Scottish <unk> ) , who attempted , unsuccessfully , to exclude the openly Catholic Duke of Albany from the succession , and the Tories , who opposed them . Similar divisions began to emerge in Scottish political life . 
 = = = = Deposition of James VII = = = = 
 Charles died in 1685 and his brother succeeded him as James VII of Scotland ( and II of England ) . James put Catholics in key positions in the government and even attendance at a conventicle was made punishable by death . He disregarded parliament , purged the Council and forced through religious toleration to Roman Catholics , alienating his Protestant subjects . The failure of an invasion , led by Archibald Campbell , 9th Earl of Argyll , and timed to co @-@ ordinate with the Duke of Monmouth 's rebellion in England , demonstrated the strength of the regime . It was believed that the king would be succeeded by his daughter Mary , a Protestant and the wife of William of Orange , Stadtholder of the Netherlands , but when in 1688 , James produced a male heir , James Francis Edward Stuart , it was clear that his policies would outlive him . An invitation by seven leading Englishmen led William to land in England with 40 @,@ 000 men , and James fled , leading to the almost bloodless " Glorious Revolution " . William called the Estates in Scotland , and as his supporters proved dominant , James ' support collapsed . The Estates issued a Claim of Right that suggested that James had forfeited the crown by his actions ( in contrast to England , which relied on the legal fiction of an abdication ) and offered it to William and Mary , which William accepted , along with limitations on royal power . The final settlement restored Presbyterianism and abolished the bishops , who had generally supported James . However , William , who was more tolerant than the kirk tended to be , passed acts restoring the Episcopalian clergy excluded after the Revolution . 
 Although William 's supporters dominated the government , there remained a significant following for James , particularly in the Highlands . His cause , which became known as Jacobitism , from the Latin ( Jacobus ) for James , led to a series of risings . An initial Jacobite military attempt was led by John Graham , now Viscount Dundee . His forces , almost all Highlanders , defeated William 's forces at the Battle of Killiecrankie in 1689 , but they took heavy losses and Dundee was slain in the fighting . Without his leadership the Jacobite army was soon defeated at the Battle of Dunkeld . The complete defeat of James in Ireland by William at the Battle of Aughrim ( 1691 ) , ended the first phase of the Jacobite military effort . In the aftermath of the Jacobite defeat on 13 February 1692 in an incident known as the Massacre of Glencoe , 38 members of the Clan MacDonald of Glencoe were killed by members of the Earl of Argyll 's Regiment of Foot , who had accepted their hospitality , on the grounds that they had not been prompt in pledging allegiance to the new monarchs . 
 = = = = Economic crisis and overseas colonies = = = = 
 The closing decade of the seventeenth century saw the generally favourable economic conditions that had dominated since the Restoration come to an end . There was a slump in trade with the Baltic and France from 1689 – 91 , caused by French protectionism and changes in the Scottish cattle trade , followed by four years of failed harvests ( 1695 , 1696 and 1698 – 99 ) , known as the " seven ill years " . The result was severe famine and depopulation , particularly in the north . The Parliament of Scotland of 1695 enacted proposals that might help the desperate economic situation , including setting up the Bank of Scotland . The " Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies " received a charter to raise capital through public subscription . 
 The " Company of Scotland " invested in the Darien scheme , an ambitious plan devised by William Paterson , the Scottish founder of the Bank of England , to build a colony on the Isthmus of Panama in the hope of establishing trade with the Far East . The Darién scheme won widespread support in Scotland as the landed gentry and the merchant class were in agreement in seeing overseas trade and colonialism as routes to upgrade Scotland 's economy . Since the capital resources of the Edinburgh merchants and landholder elite were insufficient , the company appealed to middling social ranks , who responded with patriotic fervour to the call for money ; the lower orders volunteered as colonists . However , both the English East India Company and the English government opposed the idea . The East India Company saw the venture as a potential commercial threat and the government were involved in the War of the Grand Alliance from 1689 to 1697 against France and did not want to offend Spain , which claimed the territory as part of New Granada and the English investors withdraw . Returning to Edinburgh , the Company raised £ 400 @,@ 000 in a few weeks . Three small fleets with a total of 3 @,@ 000 men eventually set out for Panama in 1698 . The exercise proved a disaster . Poorly equipped ; beset by incessant rain ; suffering from disease ; under attack by the Spanish from nearby Cartagena ; and refused aid by the English in the West Indies , the colonists abandoned their project in 1700 . Only 1 @,@ 000 survived and only one ship managed to return to Scotland . The cost of £ 150 @,@ 000 put a severe strain on the Scottish commercial system and led to widespread anger against England , while , seeing the impossibility of two economic policies , William was prompted to argue for political union shortly before his death in 1702 . 
 = = = Early eighteenth century = = = 
 = = = = Union with England = = = = 
 William 's successor was Mary 's sister Princess Anne , who had no surviving children and so the Protestant succession seemed in doubt . The English Parliament passed the Act of Settlement 1701 , which fixed the succession on Sophia of Hanover and her descendants . However , the Scottish Parliament 's parallel Act of Security , merely prohibited a Roman Catholic successor , leaving open the possibility that the crowns would diverge . Rather than risk the possible return of James Francis Edward Stuart , then living in France , the English parliament pressed for full union of the two countries , passing the Alien Act 1705 , which threatened to make all Scotsmen unable to hold property in England unless moves toward union were made and would have severely damaged the cattle and linen trades . A political union between Scotland and England also became economically attractive , promising to open up the much larger markets of England , as well as those of the growing Empire . However , there was widespread , if disunited opposition and mistrust in the general population . Sums paid to Scottish commissioners and leading political figure have been described as bribes , but the existence of direct bribes is disputed . 
 The Scottish parliament voted on 6 January 1707 , by 110 to 69 , to adopt the Treaty of Union . The treaty confirmed the Hanoverian succession . The Church of Scotland and Scottish law and courts remained separate . The English and Scottish parliaments were replaced by a combined Parliament of Great Britain , but it sat in Westminster and largely continued English traditions without interruption . Forty @-@ five Scots were added to the 513 members of the House of Commons and 16 Scots to the 190 members of the House of Lords . It was also a full economic union , replacing the Scottish systems of currency , taxation and laws regulating trade . The Privy Council was abolished , which meant that effective government in Scotland lay in the hands of unofficial " managers " , who attempted to control elections in Scotland and voting by Scottish MPs and lords in line with the prevailing party in Westminster , through a complex process of patronage , venality and coercion . Since the Tories were suspected of Jacobite sympathies , management tended to fall to one of the two groups of Whigs , the " Old Party " or " <unk> " , led by the John Campbell , 2nd Duke of Argyll and the " <unk> " or " Patriots " , initially led by John Ker , 1st Duke of Roxburghe , who became the first Secretary of State for Scotland . Roxburghe was replaced by Argyll in 1725 and he and his brother , who became the Archibald Campbell , 3rd Duke of Argyll on his death in 1743 , dominated Scottish politics in the first half of the eighteenth century . Both wings of the Whig movement were forced together by the Jacobite rising in 1745 and the post of Secretary of State was abolished in 1746 , but Argyll remained the " uncrowned king of Scotland " until his death in 1761 . 
 = = = = Jacobite risings = = = = 
 Jacobitism was revived by the unpopularity of the union . In 1708 James Francis Edward Stuart , the son of James VII , who became known as " The Old Pretender " , attempted an invasion with a French fleet carrying 6 @,@ 000 men , but the Royal Navy prevented it from landing troops . A more serious attempt occurred in 1715 , soon after the death of Anne and the accession of the first Hanoverian king , the eldest son of Sophie , as George I of Great Britain . This rising ( known as The ' Fifteen ) envisaged simultaneous uprisings in Wales , Devon , and Scotland . However , government arrests forestalled the southern ventures . In Scotland , John Erskine , Earl of Mar , nicknamed Bobbin ' John , raised the Jacobite clans but proved to be an indecisive leader and an incompetent soldier . Mar captured Perth , but let a smaller government force under the Duke of Argyll hold the Stirling plain . Part of Mar 's army joined up with risings in northern England and southern Scotland , and the Jacobites fought their way into England before being defeated at the Battle of Preston , surrendering on 14 November 1715 . The day before , Mar had failed to defeat Argyll at the Battle of Sheriffmuir . At this point , James belatedly landed in Scotland , but was advised that the cause was hopeless . He fled back to France . An attempted Jacobite invasion with Spanish assistance in 1719 met with little support from the clans and ended in defeat at the Battle of Glen Shiel . 
 In 1745 the Jacobite rising known as The ' Forty @-@ Five began . Charles Edward Stuart , son of the Old Pretender , often referred to as Bonnie Prince Charlie or the Young Pretender , landed on the island of Eriskay in the Outer Hebrides . Several clans unenthusiastically joined him . At the outset he was successful , taking Edinburgh and then defeating the only government army in Scotland at the Battle of Prestonpans . The Jacobite army marched into England , took Carlisle and advanced as far as south as Derby . However , it became increasingly evident that England would not support a Roman Catholic Stuart monarch . The Jacobite leadership had a crisis of confidence and they retreated to Scotland as two English armies closed in and Hanoverian troops began to return from the continent . Charles ' position in Scotland began to deteriorate as the Whig supporters rallied and regained control of Edinburgh . After an unsuccessful attempt on Stirling , he retreated north towards Inverness . He was pursued by the Duke of Cumberland and gave battle with an exhausted army at Culloden on 16 April 1746 , where the Jacobite cause was crushed . Charles hid in Scotland with the aid of Highlanders until September 1746 , when he escaped back to France . There were bloody reprisals against his supporters and foreign powers abandoned the Jacobite cause , with the court in exile forced to leave France . The Old Pretender died in 1760 and the Young Pretender , without legitimate issue , in 1788 . When his brother , Henry , Cardinal of York , died in 1807 , the Jacobite cause was at an end . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The defining factor in the geography of Scotland is the distinction between the Highlands and Islands in the north and west and the Lowlands in the south and east . The highlands are further divided into the Northwest Highlands and the Grampian Mountains by the fault line of the Great Glen . The Lowlands are divided into the fertile belt of the Central Lowlands and the higher terrain of the Southern Uplands , which included the Cheviot hills , over which the border with England ran . The Central Lowland belt averages about 50 miles in width and , because it contains most of the good quality agricultural land and has easier communications , could support most of the urbanisation and elements of conventional government . However , the Southern Uplands , and particularly the Highlands were economically less productive and much more difficult to govern . The Uplands and Highlands had a relatively short growing season , in the extreme case of the upper Grampians an ice free season of four months or less and for much of the Highlands and Uplands of seven months or less . The early modern period also saw the impact of the Little Ice Age , with 1564 seeing thirty @-@ three days of continual frost , where rivers and lochs froze , leading to a series of subsistence crisis until the 1690s . 
 Most roads in the Lowlands were maintained by justices from a monetary levy on landholders and work levy on tenants . The development of national grain prices indicates the network had improved considerably by the early eighteenth century . In the Highlands and Galloway in the early eighteenth century , a series of military roads were built and maintained by the central government , with the aim of facilitating the movement of troops in the event of rebellion . The extent and borders of the kingdom had been fixed in their modern form by the beginning of the sixteenth century . The exception , the debatable lands at the Western end of the border with England , were settled by a French led commission in 1552 and the Scots ' Dike built to mark the boundary . The accession of James VI to the English throne made the border less significant in military terms , becoming , in his phrase the " middle shires " of Great Britain , but it remained a jurisdictional and tariff boundary until the Act of Union in 1707 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 At the beginning of the era , with difficult terrain , poor roads and methods of transport there was little trade between different areas of the country and most settlements depended on what was produced locally , often with very little in reserve in bad years . Most farming was based on the lowland fermtoun or highland baile , settlements of a handful of families that jointly farmed an area notionally suitable for two or three plough teams , allocated in run rigs to tenant farmers . They usually ran downhill so that they included both wet and dry land , helping to offset the problems of extreme weather conditions . Most ploughing was done with a heavy wooden plough with an iron coulter , pulled by oxen , which were more effective and cheaper to feed than horses . From the mid @-@ sixteenth century , Scotland experienced a decline in demand for exports of cloth and wool to the continent . Scots responded by selling larger quantities of traditional goods , increasing the output of salt , herring and coal . The late sixteenth century was an era of economic distress , probably exacerbated by increasing taxation and the devaluation of the currency . In 1582 a pound of silver produced 640 shillings , but in 1601 it was 960 and the exchange rate with England was £ 6 Scots to £ 1 sterling in 1565 , but by 1601 it had fallen to £ 12 . Wages rose rapidly , by between four or five times between 1560 and the end of the century , but failed to keep pace with inflation . This situation was punctuated by frequent harvest failures , with almost half the years in the second half of the sixteenth century seeing local or national scarcity , necessitating the shipping of large quantities of grain from the Baltic . Distress was exacerbated by outbreaks of plague , with major epidemics in the periods 1584 – 88 and 1597 – 1609 . There were the beginnings of industrial manufacture in this period , often utilising expertise from the continent , which included a failed attempt to use Flemings to teach new techniques in the developing cloth industry in the north @-@ east , but more successful in bringing a Venetian to help develop a native glass blowing industry . George Bruce used German techniques to solve the drainage problems of his coal mine at Culross . In 1596 the Society of Brewers was established in Edinburgh and the importing of English hops allowed the brewing of Scottish beer . 
 In the early seventeenth century famine was relatively common , with four periods of famine prices between 1620 and 1625 . The invasions of the 1640s had a profound impact on the Scottish economy , with the destruction of crops and the disruption of markets resulting in some of the most rapid price rises of the century . Under the Commonwealth , the country was relatively highly taxed , but gained access to English markets . After the Restoration the formal frontier with England was re @-@ established , along with its customs duties . Economic conditions were generally favourable from 1660 to 1688 , as land owners promoted better tillage and cattle @-@ raising . The monopoly of royal burghs over foreign trade was partially ended by and Act of 1672 , leaving them with the old luxuries of wines , silk , spices and dyes and opening up trade of increasingly significant salt , coal , corn and hides and imports from the Americas . The English Navigation Acts limited the ability of the Scots to engage in what would have been lucrative trading with England 's growing colonies , but these were often circumvented , with Glasgow becoming an increasingly important commercial centre , opening up trade with the American colonies : importing sugar from the West Indies and tobacco from Virginia and Maryland . Exports across the Atlantic included linen , woollen goods , coal and grindstones . The English protective tariffs on salt and cattle were harder to disregard and probably placed greater limitations on the Scottish economy , despite attempts of the King to have it overturned . However , by the end of the century the drovers roads , stretching down from the Highlands through south @-@ west Scotland to north @-@ east England , had become firmly established . Scottish attempts to counter this with tariffs of their own , were largely unsuccessful as Scotland had relatively few vital exports to protect . Attempts by the Privy Council to build up luxury industries in cloth mills , soap works , sugar boiling houses , gunpowder and paper works , proved largely unsuccessful . The famines of the 1690s were seen as particularly severe , partly because famine had become relatively rare in the second half of the seventeenth century , with only one year of dearth ( in 1674 ) and the shortages of the 1690s would be the last of their kind . 
 At the union of 1707 England had about five times the population of Scotland , and about 36 times as much wealth , however , Scotland began to experience the beginnings of economic expansion that would begin to allow it to close this gap . Contacts with England led to a conscious attempt to improve agriculture among the gentry and nobility . Haymaking was introduced along with the English plough and foreign grasses , the sowing of rye grass and clover . Turnips and cabbages were introduced , lands enclosed and marshes drained , lime was put down , roads built and woods planted . Drilling and sowing and crop rotation were introduced . The introduction of the potato to Scotland in 1739 greatly improved the diet of the peasantry . Enclosures began to displace the <unk> system and free pasture . The Society of Improvers was founded in 1723 , including in its 300 members dukes , earls , lairds and landlords . The Lothians became a major centre of grain , Ayrshire of cattle breading and the borders of sheep . However , although some estate holders improved the quality of life of their displaced workers , enclosures led to unemployment and forced migrations to the burghs or abroad . 
 The major change in international trade was the rapid expansion of the Americas as a market . Glasgow supplied the colonies with cloth , iron farming implements and tools , glass and leather goods . Initially relying on hired ships , by 1736 it had 67 of its own , a third of which were trading with the New World . Glasgow emerged as the focus of the tobacco trade , re @-@ exporting particularly to France . The merchants dealing in this lucrative business became the wealthy tobacco lords , who dominated the city for most of the century . Other burghs also benefited . Greenock enlarged its port in 1710 and sent its first ship to the Americas in 1719 , but was soon playing a major part in importing sugar and rum . Cloth manufacture was largely domestic . Rough <unk> were produced , but the most important areas of manufacturing was linen , particularly in the Lowlands , with some commentators suggesting that Scottish flax was superior to Dutch . The Scottish members of parliament managed to see off an attempt to impose an export duty on linen and from 1727 it received subsidies of £ 2 @,@ 750 a year for six years , resulting in a considerable expansion of the trade . Paisley adopted Dutch methods and became a major centre of production . Glasgow manufactured for the export trade , which doubled between 1725 and 1738 . The move of the British Linen Company in 1746 into advancing cash credits also stimulated production . The trade was soon being managed by " manufacturers " who supplied flax to spinners , bought back the yarn and then supplied to the weavers and then bought the cloth they produced and resold that . Banking also developed in this period . The Bank of Scotland , founded in 1695 was suspected of Jacobite sympathies and so a rival Royal Bank of Scotland was founded in 1727 . Local banks began to be established in burghs like Glasgow and Ayr . These would make capital available for business and the improvement of roads and trade . 
 = = Society = = 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 Below the king were a small number of dukes ( usually descended from very close relatives of the king ) and earls , who formed the senior nobility . Under them were the barons , who in this period were beginning to merge with the local tenants @-@ in @-@ chief to become lairds a group roughly equivalent to the English gentlemen . Below the lairds were a variety of groups , often ill @-@ defined . These included yeomen , sometimes called " bonnet lairds " , often owning substantial land . The practice of <unk> ( by which a tenant paid an entry sum and an annual feu duty , but could pass the land on to their heirs ) meant that the number of people holding heritable possession of lands , which had previously been controlled by the church or nobility expanded . These and the lairds probably numbered about 10 @,@ 000 by the seventeenth century and became what the government defined as heritors , on whom the financial and legal burdens of local government would increasingly fall . Below the substantial landholders were the husbandmen , lesser landholders and free tenants , who were often described as cottars and grassmen , that made up the majority of the working population . Serfdom had died out in Scotland in the fourteenth century , but was virtually restored by statute law for miners and <unk> . Through the system of courts baron and kirk sessions , landlords still exerted considerable control over their tenants . Society in the burghs was headed by wealthier merchants , who often held local office as a burgess , alderman , bailies , or as a member of the council . Below them were craftsmen and workers that made up the majority of the urban population . At the bottom of society were the masterless men , the unemployed and vagrants , whose numbers were swelled in times of economic downturn or hardship . 
 = = = Kinship and clans = = = 
 Unlike in England , where kinship was predominately cognatic ( derived through both males and females ) , in Scotland kinship was agnatic , with members of a group sharing a ( sometimes fictional ) common ancestor . Women retained their original surname at marriage and marriages were intended to create friendship between kin groups , rather than a new bond of kinship . In the Borders this was often reflected in a common surname . A shared surname has been seen as a " test of kinship " , proving large bodies of kin who could call on each other 's support . At the beginning of the period this could help intensify the idea of the feud , which was usually carried out as a form of revenge for a kinsman and for which a large bodies of kin could be counted on to support rival sides , although conflict between members of kin groups also occurred . From the reign of James VI systems of judicial law were enforced and by the early eighteenth century the feud had been suppressed . In the Borders the leadership of the heads of the great surnames was largely replaced by the authority of landholding lairds in the seventeenth century . 
 The combination of agnatic kinship and a feudal system of obligation has been seen as creating the highland clan system . The head of a clan was usually the eldest son of the last chief of the most powerful sept or branch . The leading families of a clan formed the fine , often seen as equivalent to lowland lairds , providing council in peace and leadership in war , and below them were the daoine usisle ( in Gaelic ) or tacksmen ( in Scots ) , who managed the clan lands and collected the rents . In the isles and along the adjacent western seaboard there were also buannachann , who acted as a military elite , defending the clan lands from raids or taking part in attacks on clan enemies . Most of the followers of the clan were tenants , who supplied labour to the clan heads and sometimes acted as soldiers . In the early modern period they usually took the clan name as their surname , turning it into a massive , if often fictive , kin group . Because the Highland Clans were not a direct threat to the Restoration government , or relations with England , the same effort was not put into suppressing their independence as had been focused on the Borders , until after the Glorious Revolution . Economic change and the imposition of royal justice had begun to undermine the clan system before the eighteenth century , but the process was accelerated after the rebellion of 1745 , with Highland dress banned , the enforced disarming of clansmen , the compulsory purchase of heritable jurisdictions , the exile of many chiefs and sending of ordinary clansmen to the colonies as indentured labour . All of this largely reducing clan leaders to the status of simple landholders within a generation . 
 = = = Demography = = = 
 There are almost no reliable sources with which to track the population of Scotland before the late seventeenth century . Estimates based on English records suggest that by the end of the Middle Ages , the Black Death and subsequent recurring outbreaks of the plague , may have caused the population of Scotland to fall as low as half a million people . Price inflation , which generally reflects growing demand for food , suggests that this probably expanded in the first half of the sixteenth century , levelling off after the famine of 1595 , as prices were relatively stable in the early seventeenth century . Calculations based on Hearth Tax returns for 1691 indicate a population of 1 @,@ 234 @,@ 575 . This level may have been seriously effected by the famines of the 1690s . The first reliable information available on national population is from the census conducted by the Reverend Alexander Webster in 1755 , which showed the inhabitants of Scotland as 1 @,@ 265 @,@ 380 persons . 
 Compared with the situation after the redistribution of population in the later clearances and the industrial revolution , these numbers would have been evenly spread over the kingdom , with roughly half living north of the Tay . Perhaps ten per cent of the population lived in one of many burghs that grew up in the later medieval period , mainly in the east and south . It has been suggested that they would have had a mean population of about 2 @,@ 000 , but many would be much smaller than 1 @,@ 000 and the largest , Edinburgh , probably had a population of over 10 @,@ 000 at the beginning of the modern era and by 1750 , with its suburbs it had reached 57 @,@ 000 . The only other towns above 10 @,@ 000 by the end of the period were Glasgow with 32 @,@ 000 , Aberdeen with around 16 @,@ 000 and Dundee with 12 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In late medieval Scotland there is evidence of occasional prosecutions of individuals for causing harm through witchcraft , but these may have been declining in the first half of the sixteenth century . In the aftermath of the initial Reformation settlement , Parliament passed the Witchcraft Act 1563 , similar to that passed in England one year earlier , which made witchcraft a capital crime . Despite the fact that Scotland probably had about one quarter of the population of England , it would have three times the number of witchcraft prosecutions , at about 6 @,@ 000 for the entire period . James VI 's visit to Denmark , a country familiar with witch hunts , may have encouraged an interest in the study of witchcraft . After his return to Scotland , he attended the North Berwick witch trials , the first major persecution of witches in Scotland under the 1563 Act . Several people , most notably Agnes Sampson , were convicted of using witchcraft to send storms against James ' ship . James became obsessed with the threat posed by witches and , inspired by his personal involvement , in 1597 wrote the Daemonologie , a tract that opposed the practice of witchcraft and which provided background material for Shakespeare 's Tragedy of Macbeth . James is known to have personally supervised the torture of women accused of being witches . After 1599 , his views became more sceptical . 
 In the seventeenth century , the pursuit of witchcraft was largely taken over by the kirk sessions and was often used to attach superstitious and Catholic practices in Scottish society . Most of the accused , 75 per cent , were women , with over 1 @,@ 500 executed , and the witch hunt in Scotland has been seen as a means of controlling women . The most intense witch hunt was in 1661 – 62 , which involved 664 named witches in four counties . From this point prosecutions began to decline as trials were more tightly controlled by the judiciary and government , torture was more sparingly used and standards of evidence were raised . There may also have been a growing scepticism and with relative peace and stability the economic and social tensions that contributed to accusations may have reduced . There were occasional local outbreaks like that in East Lothian in 1678 and 1697 at Paisley . The last recorded executions were in 1706 and the last trial in 1727 . The British parliament repealed the 1563 Act in 1736 . 
 = = = Poverty and vagrancy = = = 
 Population growth and economic dislocation from the second half of the sixteenth century led to a growing problem of vagrancy . The government reacted with three major pieces of legislation in 1574 , 1579 and 1592 . The kirk became a major element of the system of poor relief and justices of the peace were given responsibility for dealing with the issue . The 1574 act was modelled on the English act passed two years earlier and limited relief to the deserving poor of the old , sick and infirm , imposing draconian punishments on a long list of " masterful beggars " , including jugglers , <unk> and unlicensed tutors . Parish deacons , elders or other overseers were to draw up lists of deserving poor and each would be assessed . Those not belonging to the parish were to be sent back to their place of birth and might be put in the stocks or otherwise punished , probably actually increasing the level of vagrancy . Unlike the English act , there was no attempt to provide work for the able @-@ bodied poor . In practice , the strictures on begging were often disregarded in times of extreme hardship . 
 This legislation provided the basis of what would later be known as the " Old Poor Law " in Scotland , which remained in place until the mid @-@ nineteenth century . Most subsequent legislation built on the principles of provision for the local deserving poor and punishment of mobile and undeserving " <unk> beggars " . The most important later act was that of 1649 , which declared that local heritors were to be assessed by kirk session to provide the financial resources for local relief , rather than relying on voluntary contributions . The system was largely able to cope with the general level of poverty and minor crises , helping the old and infirm to survive and provide life support in periods of downturn at relatively low cost , but was overwhelmed in the major subsistence crisis of the 1690s . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = The crown = = = 
 For the early part of the era , the authority of the crown was limited by the large number of minorities it had seen since the early fifteenth century . This tended to decrease the level of royal revenues , as regents often alienated land and revenues . Regular taxation was adopted from 1581 and afterwards was called on with increasing frequency and scale until in 1612 a demand of £ 240 @,@ 000 resulted in serious opposition . A new tax on annual rents amounting to five per cent on all interest on loans , mainly directed at the merchants of the burghs , was introduced in 1621 ; but it was widely resented and was still being collected over a decade later . Under Charles I the annual income from all sources in Scotland was under £ 16 @,@ 000 sterling and inadequate for the normal costs of government , with the court in London now being financed out of English revenues . The sum of £ 10 @,@ 000 a month from the county assessment was demanded by the Cromwellian regime , which Scotland failed to fully supply , but it did contribute £ 35 @,@ 000 in excise a year . Although Parliament made a formal grant of £ 40 @,@ 000 a year to Charles II , the rising costs civilian government and war meant that this was inadequate to support Scottish government . Under William I and after the Union , engagement in continental and colonial wars led to heavier existing taxes and new taxes , including the Poll and Hearth Taxes . 
 In the sixteenth century , the court was central to the patronage and dissemination of Renaissance works and ideas . Lavish court display was often tied up with ideas of chivalry , which was evolving in this period from into an ornamental and honorific cult . Tournaments provided one focus of display and were also pursued enthusiastically by James V , proud of his membership of international orders of knighthood . During her brief personal rule , Mary , Queen of Scots brought many of the elaborate court activities that she had grown up with at the French court , with balls , masques and celebrations , designed to illustrate the resurgence of the monarchy and to facilitate national unity . Under James VI , the court returned to being a centre of culture and learning and he cultivated the image of a philosopher king . 
 James V was the first Scottish monarch to wear the closed imperial crown , in place of the open circlet of medieval kings , suggesting a claim to absolute authority within the kingdom . His diadem was reworked to include arches in 1532 , which were re @-@ added when it was reconstructed in 1540 in what remains the Crown of Scotland . The idea of imperial monarchy emphasised the dignity of the crown and included its role as a unifying national force , defending national borders and interest , royal supremacy over the law and a distinctive national church within the Catholic communion . New Monarchy can also be seen in the reliance of the crown on " new men " rather than the great magnates , the use of the clergy as a form of civil service , developing standing armed forces and a navy . Major intellectual figures in the Reformation included George Buchanan , whose works De Jure Regni apud Scotos ( 1579 ) and Rerum Scoticarum Historia ( 1582 ) were among the major texts outlining the case for resistance to tyrants . Buchanan was one of the young James VI 's tutors , but they failed to intellectually convince him of their ideas about limited monarchy . James asserted the concept of " divine right " , by which a king was appointed by God and thus gained a degree of sanctity . These ideas he passed on to Charles I , whose ability to compromise may have been undermined by them , helping to lead to his political difficulties . When he was executed , the Scottish Covenanters objected , but avoided advancing the sanctity of kings as a reason . In 1689 , when the Scottish Estates had to find a justification for deposing James VII , they turned to Buchanan 's argument on the contractual nature of monarchy in the Claim of Right . 
 = = = Privy council = = = 
 Until 1707 , The Privy Council met in what is now the West Drawing Room at the Palace of Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh . By the early modern period the Privy Council was a full @-@ time body and critical to the smooth running of government . Its primary function was judicial , but it also acted as a body of advisers to the king and as a result its secondary function was as an executive in the absence or minority of the monarchy . After James VI departure to England in 1603 , it functioned as a subservient executive carrying out his instructions from London . Although the theoretical membership of the council was relatively large , at around thirty persons , most of the business was carried out by an informal inner group consisting mainly of the officers of state . After the Restoration , Charles II nominated his own privy councillors and set up a council in London through which he directed affairs in Edinburgh , a situation that continued after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 – 89 . The council was abolished after the Act of Union on 1 May 1708 . 
 = = = Parliament = = = 
 In the sixteenth century , parliament usually met in Stirling Castle or the Old Tolbooth , Edinburgh , which was rebuilt on the orders of Mary Queen of Scots from 1561 . Charles I ordered the construction of Parliament Hall , which was built between 1633 and 1639 and remained the parliament 's home until it was dissolved in 1707 . By the end of the Middle Ages the Parliament had evolved from the King 's Council of Bishops and Earls into a ' colloquium ' with a political and judicial role . The attendance of knights and freeholders had become important , and burgh commissioners joined them to form the Three Estates . It acquired significant powers over taxation , but it also had a strong influence over justice , foreign policy , war , and other legislation . Much of the legislative business of the Scottish parliament was carried out by a parliamentary committee known as the ' Lords of the Articles ' , which drafted legislation which was then presented to the full assembly to be confirmed . Like many continental assemblies the Scottish Parliament was being called less frequently by the early sixteenth century and might have been dispensed with by the crown had it not been for the series of minorities and regencies that dominated from 1513 . 
 Parliament played a major part in the Reformation crisis of the mid @-@ sixteenth century . It had been used by James V to uphold Catholic orthodoxy and asserted its right to determine the nature of religion in the country , disregarding royal authority in 1560 . The 1560 parliament included 100 , predominately Protestant , lairds , who claimed a right to sit in the Parliament under the provision of a failed shire election act of 1428 . Their position in the parliament remained uncertain and their presence fluctuated until the 1428 act was revived in 1587 and provision made for the annual election of two commissioners from each shire ( except Kinross and Clackmannan , which had one each ) . The property qualification for voters was for freeholders who held land from the crown of the value of 40s of auld extent . This excluded the growing class of <unk> , who would not gain these rights until 1661 . The clerical estate was marginalised in Parliament by the Reformation , with the laymen who had acquired the monasteries and sitting as ' abbots ' and ' priors ' . Catholic clergy were excluded after 1567 , but a small number of Protestant bishops continued as the clerical estate . James VI attempted to revive the role of the bishops from about 1600 . They were abolished by the Covenanters in 1638 , when Parliament became an entirely lay assembly . A further group appeared in the Parliament from the minority of James IV in the 1560s , with members of the Privy Council representing the king 's interests , until they were excluded in 1641 . James VI continued to manage parliament though the Lords of the Articles , filling it with royal officers as non @-@ elected members , but was forced to limit this to eight from 1617 . 
 Having been officially suspended at the end of the Cromwellian regime , parliament returned after the Restoration of Charles II in 1661 . This parliament , later known disparagingly as the ' Drunken Parliament ' , revoked most of the Presbyterian gains of the last thirty years . Subsequently Charles ' absence from Scotland and use of commissioners to rule his northern kingdom undermined the authority of the body . James ' parliament supported him against rivals and attempted rebellions , but after his escape to exile in 1689 , William 's first parliament was dominated by his supporters and , in contrast to the situation in England , effectively deposed James under the Claim of Right , which offered the crown to William and Mary , placing important limitations on royal power , including the abolition of the Lords of the Articles . The new Williamite parliament would subsequently bring about its own demise by the Act of Union in 1707 . 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 From the sixteenth century , the central government became increasingly involved in local affairs . The feud was limited and regulated , local taxation became much more intrusive and from 1607 regular , local commissions of Justices of the Peace on the English model were established to deal with petty crimes and infractions . Greater control was exerted over the lawless Borders through a joint commission with the English set up in 1587 . James VI was much more hostile to the culture and particularism of the Highlands than his predecessors . He sent colonists from Fife to parts of the region and forced the Highland chiefs to accept Lowland language and culture through the Statues of Iona 1609 . From the seventeenth century the function of shires expanded from judicial functions into wider local administration . In 1667 Commissioners of Supply were appointed in each sheriffdom or shire to collect the cess land tax . The parish also became an important unit of local government , pressured by Justices in the early eighteenth century , it became responsible for taking care of the destitute in periods of famine , like that in 1740 , to prevent the impoverished from taking to the roads and causing general disorder . Behaviour could be regulated through kirk sessions , composed of local church elders , which replaced the church courts of the Middle Ages , and which dealt with moral and religious conduct . The local court baron remained important in regulating minor interpersonal and property offences . They were held at the behest of the local baron when there was a backlog of cases and could appoint <unk> , usually senior tenants , who would resolve disputes and issues . The combination of kirk sessions and courts baron gave considerable power to local lairds to control the behaviour of the populations of their communities . 
 = = = Law = = = 
 In the late Middle Ages , justice in Scotland was a mixture of the royal and local , which was often unsystematic with overlapping jurisdictions , undertaken by clerical lawyers , laymen , amateurs and local leaders . Under James IV the legal functions of the council were rationalised , with a royal Court of Session meeting daily in Edinburgh to deal with civil cases . In 1514 the office of justice @-@ general was created for the earl of Argyll ( and held by his family until 1628 ) . The study of law was popular in Scotland from the Middle Ages and many students travelled to Continental Europe to study canon law and civil law . In 1532 the Royal College of Justice was founded , leading to the training and professionalisation of an emerging group of career lawyers . The Court of Session placed increasing emphasis on its independence from influence , including from the king , and superior jurisdiction over local justice . Its judges were increasingly able to control entry to their own ranks . In 1605 the professionalisation of the bench led to entry requirements in Latin , law and a property qualification of £ 2 @,@ 000 , designed to limit the danger of bribery , helping to create an exclusive , wealthy and powerful and professional caste , who also now dominated government posts in a way that the clergy had done in the Middle Ages . In 1672 the High Court of Justiciary was founded from the College of Justice as a supreme court of appeal . The Act of Union in 1707 largely persevered the distinct Scottish legal system and its courts , separate from English jurisdiction . 
 = = Warfare = = 
 In the later Middle Ages , Scottish armies were assembled on the basis of common service , feudal obligations and money contracts of bonds of manrent . In 1513 these systems were successful in producing a large and formidable force , but there is evidence that by the mid @-@ sixteenth century the authorities were experiencing increasing difficulty in recruitment . Individuals were expected to provide their own equipment . Heavy armour was abandoned after the Flodden campaign and noblemen became indistinguishable from the majority of troops . Highland lords tended to continue to use lighter chainmail and ordinary highlanders dressed in the plaid . Weapons included various forms of axes and pole arms . Highland troops brought bows and two @-@ handed swords ( <unk> mór ) . The crown took an increasing role in the supply of equipment . The pike began to replace the spear or axe and the bow began to be replaced by gunpowder firearms . The feudal heavy cavalry had begun to disappear from Scottish armies and the Scots fielded relatively large numbers of light horse , often drawn from the borders . James IV brought in experts from France , Germany and the Netherlands and established a gun foundry in 1511 . Gunpowder weaponry fundamentally altered the nature of castle architecture from the mid @-@ fifteenth century . In the period of French intervention in the 1540s and 1550s , Scotland was given a defended border of a series of earthwork forts and additions to existing castles . 
 There were various attempts to create royal naval forces in the fifteenth century . James IV put the enterprise on a new footing , founding a harbour at Newhaven and a dockyard at the Pools of Airth . He acquired a total of 38 ships including the Great Michael , at that time , the largest ship in Europe . Scottish ships had some success against privateers , accompanied the king on his expeditions in the islands and intervened in conflicts Scandinavia and the Baltic , but were sold after the Flodden campaign . From 1516 Scottish naval efforts would rely on privateering captains and hired merchantmen . James V did not share his father 's interest in developing a navy and shipbuilding fell behind the Low Countries . Despite truces between England and Scotland there were periodic outbreaks of a guerre de course . James V built a new harbour at Burntisland in 1542 . The chief use of naval power in his reign were a series of expeditions to the Isles and France . After the Union of Crowns in 1603 conflict between Scotland and England ended , but Scotland found itself involved in England 's foreign policy , opening up Scottish shipping to attack . In 1626 a squadron of three ships were bought and equipped . There were also several marque fleets of privateers . In 1627 , the Royal Scots Navy and accompanying contingents of burgh privateers participated in the major expedition to Biscay . The Scots also returned to West Indies and in 1629 took part in the capture of Quebec . 
 In the early seventeenth century relatively large numbers of Scots took service in foreign armies involved in the Thirty Years War . As armed conflict with Charles I in the Bishops ' Wars became likely , hundreds of Scots mercenaries returned home from foreign service , including experienced leaders like Alexander and David Leslie and these veterans played an important role in training recruits . These systems would form the basis of the Covenanter armies that intervened in the Civil Wars in England and Ireland . Scottish infantry were generally armed , as was almost universal in Western Europe , with a combination of pike and shot . Scottish armies may also have had individuals with a variety of weapons including bows , Lochaber axes , and halberds . Most cavalry were probably equipped with pistols and swords , although there is some evidence that they included lancers . Royalist armies , like those led by James Graham , Marquis of Montrose ( 1643 – 44 ) and in Glencairn 's rising ( 1653 – 54 ) were mainly composed of conventionally armed infantry with pike and shot . Montrose 's forces were short of heavy artillery suitable for siege warfare and had only a small force of cavalry . During the Bishops ' Wars the king attempted to blockade Scotland and planned amphibious assaults from England on the East coast and from Ireland to the West . Scottish privateers took a number of English prizes . After the Covenanters allied with the English Parliament they established two patrol squadrons for the Atlantic and North Sea coasts , known collectively as the " Scotch Guard " . The Scottish navy was unable to withstand the English fleet that accompanied the army led by Cromwell that conquered Scotland in 1649 – 51 and the Scottish ships and crews were split up among the Commonwealth fleet . During the English occupation of Scotland under the Commonwealth , several more fortresses in the style of the trace italienne were built , as at Ayr , Inverness and Leith . 
 At the Restoration the Privy Council established a force of several infantry regiments and a few troops of horse and there were attempts to found a national militia on the English model . The standing army was mainly employed in the suppression of Covenanter rebellions and the guerilla war undertaken by the Cameronians in the East . Pikemen became less important in the late seventeenth century and after the introduction of the socket bayonet disappeared altogether , while matchlock muskets were replaced by the more reliable flintlock . On the eve of the Glorious Revolution the standing army in Scotland was about 3 @,@ 000 men in various regiments and another 268 veterans in the major garrison towns . After the Glorious Revolution the Scots were drawn into King William II 's continental wars , beginning with the Nine Years ' War in Flanders ( 1689 – 97 ) . Scottish seamen received protection against arbitrary impressment by English men of war , but a fixed quota of conscripts for the Royal Navy was levied from the sea @-@ coast burghs during the second half of the seventeenth century . Royal Navy patrols were now found in Scottish waters even in peacetime . In the Second ( 1665 – 67 ) and Third Anglo @-@ Dutch Wars ( 1672 – 74 ) between 80 and 120 captains , took Scottish letters of marque and privateers played a major part in the naval conflict . In the 1690s a small fleet of five ships was established by merchants for the Darien Scheme , and a professional navy was established for the protection of commerce in home waters during the Nine Years War , with three purpose @-@ built warships bought from English shipbuilders in 1696 . After the Act of Union in 1707 , these vessels were transferred to the Royal Navy . By the time of the Act of Union , the Kingdom of Scotland had a standing army of seven units of infantry , two of horse and one troop of Horse Guards , besides varying levels of fortress artillery in the garrison castles of Edinburgh , Dumbarton , and Stirling . As part of the British Army , Scottish regiments took part in the War of the Spanish Succession ( 1702 – 13 ) , the Quadruple Alliance ( 1718 – 20 ) , wars with Spain ( 1727 – 29 ) and ( 1738 – 48 ) and the War of the Spanish Succession ( 1740 – 48 ) . The first official Highland regiment to be raised for the British army was the Black Watch in 1740 , but the growth of Highland regiments was delayed by the 1745 Jacobite Rebellion . The bulk of Jacobite armies were made up of Highlanders , serving in clan regiments . The clan gentlemen formed the front ranks of the unit and were more heavily armed than their impoverished tenants who made up the bulk of the regiment . Because they served in the front ranks , the gentlemen suffered higher proportional casualties than the common clansman . The Jacobites often started campaigns poorly armed , but arms tended to become more conventional as the campaigns progressed . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Protestant reformers shared the humanist concern with widening education , with a desire for a godly people replacing the aim of having educated citizens . In 1560 the First Book of Discipline set out a plan for a school in every parish , but this proved financially impossible . In the burghs the old schools were maintained , with the song schools and a number of new foundations becoming reformed grammar schools or ordinary parish schools . Schools were supported by a combination of kirk funds , contributions from local heritors or burgh councils and parents that could pay . They were inspected by kirk sessions , who checked for the quality of teaching and doctrinal purity . There were also large number of unregulated " adventure schools " , which sometimes fulfilled local needs and sometimes took pupils away from the official schools . Outside of the established burgh schools masters often combined their position with other employment , particularly minor posts within the kirk , such as clerk . At their best , the curriculum included catechism , Latin , French , Classical literature and sports . 
 In 1616 an act in Privy council commanded every parish to establish a school " where convenient means may be had " , and when the Parliament of Scotland ratified this with the Education Act of 1633 , a tax on local landowners was introduced to provide the necessary endowments . A loophole that allowed evasion of this tax was closed in the Education Act of 1646 , which established a solid institutional foundation for schools on Covenanter principles . Although the Restoration brought a reversion to the 1633 position , in 1696 new legislation restored the provisions of 1646 , together with means of enforcement " more suitable to the age " . It took until the late seventeenth century to produce a largely complete network of parish schools in the Lowlands , and in the Highlands basic education was still lacking in many areas by the passing of the Education Act 1696 , which would be the basis of administration of the system until 1873 . In rural communities this act obliged local heritors to provide a schoolhouse and pay a schoolmaster , while ministers and local presbyteries oversaw the quality of the education . In many Scottish towns , burgh schools were operated by local councils . In the Highlands , as well as problems of distance and physical isolation , most people spoke Gaelic which few teachers and ministers could understand . Here the Kirk 's parish schools were supplemented by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge , established in 1709 . Its aim was to teach the English language and to end the Roman Catholicism associated with rebellious Jacobitism . Although the Gaelic Society schools eventually taught the Bible in Gaelic , the overall effect was a contribution to the erosion of Highland culture . 
 After the Reformation , Scotland 's universities underwent a series of reforms associated with Andrew Melville , who returned from Geneva to become principal of the University of Glasgow in 1574 . A distinguished linguist , philosopher and poet , he had trained in Paris and studied law at Poitiers , before moving to Geneva and developing an interest in Protestant theology . Influenced by the anti @-@ Aristotelian Pierre Ramus , he placed an emphasis on simplified logic and elevated languages and sciences to the same status as philosophy , allowing accepted ideas in all areas to be challenged . He introduced new specialist teaching staff , replacing the system of " regenting " , where one tutor took the students through the entire arts curriculum . Metaphysics were abandoned and Greek became compulsory in the first year followed by Aramaic , Syriac and Hebrew , launching a new fashion for ancient and biblical languages . Glasgow had probably been declining as a university before his arrival , but students now began to arrive in large numbers . He assisted in the reconstruction of Marischal College , Aberdeen , and to do for St Andrews what he had done for Glasgow , he was appointed Principal of St Mary 's College , St Andrews , in 1580 . The results were a revitalisation of all Scottish universities , which were now producing a quality of education the equal of that offered anywhere in Europe . 
 After the religious and political upheavals of the seventeenth century , the universities recovered with a lecture @-@ based curriculum that embraced economics and science , offering a high quality liberal education to the sons of the nobility and gentry . It helped them to become major centres of medical education and to put Scotland at the forefront of Enlightenment thinking . Key figures in the Scottish Enlightenment who had made their mark before the mid @-@ eighteenth century included Francis Hutcheson ( 1694 – 1746 ) , who was professor of moral philosophy at Glasgow . He was an important link between the ideas of Shaftesbury and the later school of Scottish Common Sense Realism . Colin Maclaurin ( 1698 – 1746 ) was chair of mathematics by the age of 19 at Marischal College , University of Aberdeen and the leading British mathematician of his era . Perhaps the most significant intellectual figure of this era in Scotland was David Hume ( 1711 – 76 ) whose Treatise on Human Nature ( 1738 ) and Essays , Moral and Political ( 1741 ) helped outline the parameters of philosophical empiricism and <unk> and he would be a major influence of later Enlightenment figures including Adam Smith , Immanuel Kant and Jeremy Bentham . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 By the early modern period Gaelic had been in geographical decline for three centuries and had begun to be a second class language , confined to the Highlands and Islands . It was gradually being replaced by Middle Scots , which became the language of both the nobility and the majority population . It was derived substantially from Old English , with Gaelic and French influences . It was called Inglyshe and was very close to the language spoken in northern England , but by the sixteenth century it had established orthographic and literary norms largely independent of those developing in England . From the mid sixteenth century , written Scots was increasingly influenced by the developing Standard English of Southern England due to developments in royal and political interactions with England . With the increasing influence and availability of books printed in England , most writing in Scotland came to be done in the English fashion . Unlike many of his predecessors , James VI generally despised Gaelic culture . Having extolled the virtues of Scots " poesie " , after his accession to the English throne , he increasingly favoured the language of southern England . In 1611 the Kirk adopted the Authorized King James Version of the Bible . In 1617 interpreters were declared no longer necessary in the port of London because Scots and Englishmen were now " not so far different bot ane understandeth ane uther " . Jenny Wormald , describes James as creating a " three @-@ tier system , with Gaelic at the bottom and English at the top " . 
 After the Union in 1707 and the shift of political power to England , the use of Scots was discouraged by many in authority and education , as was the notion of Scottishness itself . Many leading Scots of the period , such as David Hume , considered themselves Northern British rather than Scottish . They attempted to rid themselves of their Scots in a bid to establish standard English as the official language of the newly formed Union . Many well @-@ off Scots took to learning English through the activities of those such as Thomas Sheridan , who in 1761 gave a series of lectures on English elocution . Charging a guinea at a time ( about £ 100 in today 's money ) they were attended by over 300 men , and he was made a freeman of the City of Edinburgh . Following this , some of the city 's intellectuals formed the Select Society for Promoting the Reading and Speaking of the English Language in Scotland . Nevertheless , Scots remained the vernacular of many rural communities and the growing number of urban working @-@ class Scots . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 As a patron of poets and authors James V supported William Stewart and John Bellenden , who translated the Latin History of Scotland compiled in 1527 by Hector Boece , into verse and prose . Sir David Lindsay of the Mount the Lord Lyon , the head of the Lyon Court and diplomat , was a prolific poet . He produced an interlude at Linlithgow Palace thought to be a version of his play The Thrie Estaitis in 1540 . James also attracted the attention of international authors . When he married Mary of Guise , Giovanni <unk> , an Italian scholar who had been at Kinloss Abbey in Scotland , dedicated to the couple a new edition of his work , On the true significance of comets against the vanity of astrologers . Like Henry VIII , James employed many foreign artisans and craftsmen to enhance the prestige of his renaissance Court . 
 In the 1580s and 1590s James VI promoted the literature of the country of his birth . His treatise , Some Rules and Cautions to be Observed and Eschewed in Scottish Prosody , published in 1584 when he was aged 18 , was both a poetic manual and a description of the poetic tradition in his mother tongue , Scots , to which he applied Renaissance principles . He also made statutory provision to reform and promote the teaching of music , seeing the two in connection . He became patron and member of a loose circle of Scottish Jacobean court poets and musicians , the Castalian Band , which included among others William Fowler and Alexander Montgomerie , the latter being a favourite of the King . By the late 1590s his championing of his native Scottish tradition was to some extent diffused by the prospect of inheriting of the English throne , and some courtier poets who followed the king to London after 1603 , such as William Alexander , began to anglicise their written language . James ' characteristic role as active literary participant and patron in the Scottish court made him a defining figure for English Renaissance poetry and drama , which would reach a pinnacle of achievement in his reign , but his patronage for the high style in his own Scottish tradition largely became sidelined . 
 This was the period when the ballad emerged as a significant written form in Scotland . Some ballads may date back to the late medieval era and deal with events and people that can be traced back as far as the thirteenth century , including " Sir Patrick Spens " and " Thomas the Rhymer " , but which are not known to have existed until the eighteenth century . They were probably composed and transmitted orally and only began to be written down and printed , often as broadsides and as part of chapbooks , later being recorded and noted in books by collectors including Robert Burns and Walter Scott . From the seventeenth century they were used as a literary form by aristocratic authors including Robert Sempill ( c . 1595 @-@ c . 1665 ) , Lady Elizabeth Wardlaw ( 1627 – 1727 ) and Lady Grizel Baillie ( 1645 – 1746 ) . Allan Ramsay ( 1686 – 1758 ) laid the foundations of a reawakening of interest in older Scottish literature , as well as leading the trend for pastoral poetry , helping to develop the Habbie stanza as a poetic form . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The outstanding Scottish composer of the first half of the sixteenth century was Robert Carver ( c . 1488 – 1558 ) , a canon of Scone Abbey . His complex polyphonic music could only have been performed by a large and highly trained choir such as the one employed in the Chapel Royal . James V was also a patron to figures including David Peebles ( c . 1510 – 79 ? ) , whose best known work " Si quis diligit me " ( text from John 14 : 23 ) , is a motet for four voices . These were probably only two of many accomplished composers from this era , whose work has largely only survived in fragments . In this era Scotland followed the trend of Renaissance courts for instrumental accompaniment and playing . James V , as well as being a major patron of sacred music , was a talented lute player and introduced French chansons and consorts of viols to his court , although almost nothing of this secular chamber music survives . 
 The Reformation had a severe impact on church music . The song schools of the abbeys , cathedrals and collegiate churches were closed down , choirs disbanded , music books and manuscripts destroyed and organs removed from churches . The Lutheranism that influenced the early Scottish Reformation attempted to accommodate Catholic musical traditions into worship , drawing on Latin hymns and vernacular songs . The most important product of this tradition in Scotland was The Gude and Godlie Ballatis , which were spiritual satires on popular ballads composed by the brothers James , John and Robert Wedderburn . Never adopted by the kirk , they nevertheless remained popular and were reprinted from the 1540s to the 1620s . Later the Calvinism that came to dominate the Scottish Reformation was much more hostile to Catholic musical tradition and popular music , placing an emphasis on what was biblical , which meant the Psalms . The Scottish Psalter of 1564 was commissioned by the Assembly of the Church . It drew on the work of French musician Clément Marot , Calvin 's contributions to the Strasbourg Psalter of 1529 and English writers , particularly the 1561 edition of the Psalter produced by William Whittingham for the English congregation in Geneva . The intention was to produce individual tunes for each psalm , but of 150 psalms , 105 had proper tunes and in the seventeenth century . Common tunes , which could be used for psalms with the same metre , became more frequent . The need for simplicity for whole congregations that would now all sing these psalms , unlike the trained choirs who had sung the many parts of polyphonic hymns , necessitated simplicity and most church compositions were confined to homophonic settings . There is evidence that polyphony survived and it was incorporated into editions of the Psalter from 1625 , but usually with the congregation singing the melody and trained singers the contra @-@ tenor , treble and bass parts . 
 The return of Mary from France in 1561 to begin her personal reign , and her position as a Catholic , gave a new lease of life to the choir of the Scottish Chapel Royal , but the destruction of Scottish church organs meant that instrumentation to accompany the mass had to employ bands of musicians with trumpets , drums , fifes , bagpipes and tabors . Like her father she played the lute , virginals and ( unlike her father ) was a fine singer . She brought French musical influences with her , employing lutenists and viol players in her household . James VI was a major patron of the arts in general . He made statutory provision to reform and promote the teaching of music , attempting to revive burgh song schools from 1579 . He rebuilt the Chapel Royal at Stirling in 1594 and the choir was used for state occasions like the baptism of his son Henry . He followed the tradition of employing lutenists for his private entertainment , as did other members of his family . When he went south to take the throne of England in 1603 as James I , he removed one of the major sources of patronage in Scotland . The Scottish Chapel Royal was now used only for occasional state visits , beginning to fall into disrepair , and from now on the court in Westminster would be the only major source of royal musical patronage . 
 The secular popular tradition of music continued , despite attempts by the Kirk , particularly in the Lowlands , to suppress dancing and events like penny weddings at which tunes were played . Large numbers of musicians continued to perform , including the fiddler Pattie Birnie and the piper Habbie Simpson ( 1550 – 1620 ) . In the Highlands the seventeenth century saw the development of piping families including the <unk> , MacArthurs , MacGregors and the <unk> of <unk> . There is also evidence of adoption of the fiddle in the Highlands with Martin Martin noting in his A Description of the Western Isles of Scotland ( 1703 ) that he knew of eighteen in Lewis alone . The oppression of secular music and dancing began to ease between about 1715 and 1725 and the level of musical activity was reflected in a flood musical publications in broadsheets and compendiums of music such as the <unk> Allan Ramsay 's verse compendium The Tea Table Miscellany ( 1723 ) and William Thomson 's Orpheus <unk> ( 1725 ) . The Italian style of classical music was probably first brought to Scotland by the Italian cellist and composer Lorenzo Bocchi , who travelled to Scotland in the 1720s , introducing the cello to the country and then developing settings for lowland Scots songs . He possibly had a hand in the first Scottish Opera , the pastoral The Gentle Shepherd , with libretto by Allan Ramsay . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 James V encountered the French version of Renaissance building while visiting for his marriage to Madeleine of Valois in 1536 and his second marriage to Mary of Guise may have resulted in longer term connections and influences . Work from his reign largely disregarded the insular style adopted in England under Henry VIII and adopted forms that were recognisably European , beginning with the extensive work at Linlithgow , the first Scottish royal residence to be described as a palace . This was followed by re @-@ buildings at Holyrood , Falkland , Stirling and Edinburgh , described as " some of the finest examples of Renaissance architecture in Britain " . Rather than slavishly copying continental forms , most Scottish architecture incorporated elements of these styles into traditional local patterns , adapting them to Scottish idioms and materials ( particularly stone and harl ) . Work undertaken for James VI demonstrated continued Renaissance influences , with the Chapel Royal at Stirling having a classical entrance built in 1594 and the North Wing of Linlithgow , built in 1618 , using classical pediments . Similar themes can be seen in the private houses of aristocrats , as in Mar 's Wark , Stirling ( c . 1570 ) and Crichton Castle , built for the Earl of Bothwell in the 1580s . 
 The unique style of great private house in Scotland , later known as Scots baronial , has been located in origin to the period of the 1560s . It kept many of the features of the high walled Medieval castles and may have been influenced by the French masons brought to Scotland to work on royal palaces . It drew on the tower houses and peel towers , which had been built in hundreds by local lords since the fourteenth century , particularly in the borders . These abandoned defensible curtain walls for a fortified refuge , designed to outlast a raid , rather than a sustained siege . They were usually of three stories , typically crowned with a parapet , projecting on corbels , continuing into circular bartizans at each corner . New houses retained many of these external features , but with a larger ground plan , classically a " Z @-@ plan " of a rectangular block with towers , as at Colliston Castle ( 1583 ) and Claypotts Castle ( 1569 – 88 ) . Particularly influential was the work of William Wallace , the king 's master mason from 1617 until his death in 1631 . He worked on the rebuilding of the collapsed North Range of Linlithgow from 1618 , Winton House for George Seton , 3rd Earl of Winton and began work on Heriot 's Hospital , Edinburgh . He adopted a distinctive style that applied elements of Scottish fortification and Flemish influences to a Renaissance plan like that used at Château d 'Ancy @-@ le @-@ Franc . This style can be seen in lords houses built at Caerlaverlock ( 1620 ) , Moray House , Edinburgh ( 1628 ) and Drumlanrig Castle ( 1675 – 89 ) , and was highly influential until the baronial style gave way to the grander English forms associated with Inigo Jones in the later seventeenth century . 
 Calvinists rejected ornamentation in places of worship , with no need for elaborate buildings divided up by ritual , resulting in the widespread destruction of Medieval church furnishings , ornaments and decoration . There was a need to adapt and build new churches suitable for reformed services , particularly putting the pulpit and preaching at the centre of worship . Many of the earliest buildings were simple gabled rectangles , a style that continued to be built into the seventeenth century . A variation of the rectangular church that developed in post @-@ Reformation Scotland was the " T " -shaped plan , often used when adapting existing churches , which allowed the maximum number of parishioners to be near the pulpit . In the seventeenth century a Greek cross plan was used for churches such as Cawdor ( 1619 ) and Fenwick ( 1643 ) . In most of these cases one arm of the cross would have been closed off as a laird 's aisle , meaning that they were in effect " T " -plan churches . 
 During the era of civil wars and the Commonwealth , significant building in Scotland was largely confined to military architecture . After the Restoration , large scale building began again , often incorporating more comprehensive ideas of reviving classicism . Sir William Bruce ( 1630 – 1710 ) , was the key figure in introducing the Palladian style into Scotland , following the principles of the Venetian architect Andrea Palladio ( 1508 – 80 ) . He built and remodelled country houses , including Thirlestane Castle and Prestonfield House . Among his most significant work was his own Palladian mansion at Kinross . As the Surveyor and Overseer of the Royal Works he undertook the rebuilding of the Royal Palace of Holyroodhouse in the 1670s , which gave the palace its present appearance . James Smith worked as a mason on the Bruce 's rebuilding of Holyrood Palace . With his father @-@ in @-@ law , the master mason Robert Mylne , Smith worked on Caroline Park in Edinburgh ( 1685 ) , and Drumlanrig Castle ( 1680s ) . Smith 's country houses followed the pattern established by William Bruce , with hipped roofs and pedimented fronts , in a plain but handsome Palladian style . After the Act of Union , growing prosperity in Scotland led to a spate of new building , both public and private . William Adam ( 1689 – 1748 ) , was the foremost architect of his time in Scotland , designing and building numerous country houses and public buildings . His individual , exuberant , style was built on the Palladian style , but with Baroque details inspired by Vanbrugh and Continental architecture . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 Surviving stone and wood carvings , wall paintings and tapestries suggest the richness of sixteenth century royal art . At Stirling castle stone carvings on the royal palace from the reign of James V are taken from German patterns , and like the surviving carved oak portrait roundels from the King 's Presence Chamber , known as the Stirling Heads , they include contemporary , biblical and classical figures . Scotland 's ecclesiastical art suffered as a result of Reformation iconoclasm , with the almost total loss of medieval stained glass , religious sculpture and paintings . The parallel loss of ecclesiastical patronage created a crisis for native craftsmen and artists , who turned to secular patrons . One result of this was the flourishing of Scottish Renaissance painted ceilings and walls , with large numbers of private houses of burgesses , lairds and lords gaining often highly detailed and coloured patterns and scenes , of which over a hundred examples survive . These include the ceiling at Prestongrange , undertaken in 1581 for Mark Kerr , Commendator of Newbattle and the long gallery at Pinkie House , painted for Alexander Seaton , Earl of Dunfermline in 1621 . These were undertaken by unnamed Scottish artists using continental pattern books that often led to the incorporation of humanist moral and philosophical symbolism , with elements that call on heraldry , piety , classical myths and allegory . The tradition of royal portrait painting in Scotland was probably disrupted by the minorities and regencies it underwent for much of the sixteenth century , but began to flourish after the Reformation . There were anonymous portraits of important individuals , including the Earl of Bothwell ( 1556 ) and George , fifth earl of Seaton ( c . 1570s ) . James VI employed two Flemish artists , Arnold Bronckorst in the early 1580s and Adrian Vanson from around 1584 to 1602 , who have left us a visual record of the king and major figures at the court . The first significant native artist was George Jamesone of Aberdeen ( 1589 / 90 @-@ 1644 ) , who became one of the most successful portrait painters of the reign of Charles I and trained the Baroque artist John Michael Wright ( 1617 – 94 ) . Many painters of the early part of the eighteenth century remained largely artisans , like the members of the Norie family , James ( 1684 – 1757 ) and his sons , who painted the houses of the peerage with Scottish landscapes that were pastiches of Italian and Dutch landscapes . 
 = USS Mahan ( DD @-@ 364 ) = 
 USS Mahan ( DD @-@ 364 ) was the lead ship of the United States Navy 's Mahan @-@ class destroyers . The ship was named for Rear Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan , a 19th @-@ century naval historian and strategic theorist . Her design ushered in major advances over traditional destroyers . Among them were a third set of quadruple torpedo tubes , protective gun shelters , and emergency diesel generators . Along with a steam propulsion system that was simpler and more efficient to operate . 
 Mahan began her service in 1936 . She was first assigned to the US Atlantic Fleet and then transferred to Pearl Harbor in 1937 . When the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 , Mahan was at sea with Task Force 12 . Their mission to Midway Island was aborted to participate in the post @-@ attack search for the enemy strike force . Unable to locate them , the task force returned to Pearl Harbor . 
 Early in World War II , Mahan took part in raids on the Marshall and Gilbert Islands . In the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands , Admirals Chester Nimitz and William Halsey commended the destroyer group ( of which Mahan was a member ) for a stellar effort in screening the aircraft carriers Hornet and Enterprise against heavy odds . During the New Guinea campaign to take the northeast coast from the Japanese , Mahan was engaged in the amphibious landings at Salamaua , Lae , and Finschhafen . She participated in landings at Arawe and Borgen Bay ( near Cape Gloucester ) , New Britain , and provided support for the troop landing at Los Negros Island in the Admiralty Islands . 
 Late in the Pacific War , the Japanese kamikaze relentlessly plagued US Naval operations . On 7 December 1944 , a group of suicide aircraft overwhelmed and disabled Mahan at Ormoc Bay , Leyte , in the Philippine Islands . On fire and exploding , the ship was abandoned , and a US destroyer sank her with torpedoes and gunfire . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Mahan displaced 1 @,@ 500 long tons ( 1 @,@ 524 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 725 long tons ( 1 @,@ 753 t ) at deep load . The ship 's overall length was 341 feet 3 inches ( 104 @.@ 0 m ) , the beam was 35 feet 6 inches ( 10 @.@ 8 m ) and her draft was 10 feet 7 inches ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) . She was powered by two General Electric geared steam turbines that developed a total of 46 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 34 @,@ 000 kW ) for a maximum speed of 37 knots ( 69 km / h ; 43 mph ) . Four Babcock & Wilcox or four Foster Wheeler water @-@ tube boilers generated the superheated steam needed for the turbines . Mahan carried a maximum of 523 long tons ( 531 t ) of fuel oil , with a range of 6 @,@ 940 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 850 km ; 7 @,@ 990 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Her peacetime complement was 158 officers and enlisted men . The wartime complement increased to approximately 250 officers and enlisted men . 
 Mahan had a tripod foremast and a pole mainmast . To improve the anti @-@ aircraft field of fire , the tripod foremast was constructed without nautical rigging . In silhouette , the ship was similar to the larger Porter class that immediately preceded her . She was fitted with the first emergency diesel generators , replacing the storage batteries of earlier destroyers . Gun crew shelters were built fore and aft for the superimposed weapons . A third quadruple set of torpedo tubes was added , with one mount on the centerline and two in the side positions . This required relocating one 5 inch / 38 caliber gun to the aft deckhouse . Mahan incorporated a new generation of land @-@ based steam propulsion machinery . With boiler pressures increasing to 600 PSI ( pounds per square inch ) , and high @-@ pressure turbines that had double reduction gears , which ran faster and more efficient than that of her predecessors . 
 = = Armament = = 
 The main battery of Mahan consisted of five 5 inch / 38 caliber guns , equipped with the Mark 33 ship gun fire @-@ control system . Each gun was dual @-@ purpose , configured for surface and aerial targets . Her anti @-@ aircraft battery originally had four water @-@ cooled .50 caliber machine guns . The ship was fitted with three quadruple torpedo @-@ tube mounts for twelve 21 @-@ inch torpedoes , guided by the Mark 27 torpedo fire @-@ control system . Depth charge roll @-@ off racks were rigged on the stern of the ship . 
 In early 1942 , the Mahan @-@ class destroyers began a wartime armament refitting process , but most of the class was not fully refitted until 1944 . Mahan was refitted in June 1944 at the Mare Island Naval Shipyard . The notable refits to the Mahan @-@ class included the removal of one 5 inch / 38 gun , typically replaced with two twin Bofors 40 mm guns and five 20 mm Oerlikon guns . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Mahan was built by United Dry Docks ( successor to the Morse Dry Dock and Repair Company ) in Staten Island , New York . Her keel was laid down on 12 June 1934 and she was launched on 15 October 1935 , sponsored by Kathleen H. Mahan ( the admiral 's great @-@ granddaughter ) . The ship was commissioned on 18 September 1936 , with Commander J. B. Waller in command . The ship departed for Caribbean and South American ports within two months of her commission , combining her initial training and shakedown cruise with a goodwill tour . She remained in the Atlantic until July 1937 , then headed to the Southern California coast for fleet training before steaming to her new station at Pearl Harbor . 
 Rising tension between Japan and the United States stretched back to 1931 with Japan 's invasion of Manchuria in the Mukden Incident . Japan 's continued aggression , instigating the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War in 1937 and invading French Indochina in 1940 — to which the United States and European powers responded with embargoes on iron and oil imports — further heightened the tension . The Japanese thereafter decided to attack the Western powers in Asia , beginning with a surprise attack on the American naval base at Pearl Harbor . When the Japanese struck Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 , Mahan was at sea with the aircraft carrier Lexington , three cruisers and four destroyers as part of Task Force 12 . Lexington 's mission was to ferry Marine aircraft to reinforce Midway Island . After news of the attack on Pearl Harbor , the task @-@ force commander received orders to terminate the ferry mission and to search for the Japanese strike force . Unable to locate them , the task force returned to Pearl Harbor on 12 December . 
 She put to sea in late December with 103 Marines to reinforce their detachment at Johnston Island ( about 750 nautical miles — 860 miles , or 1 @,@ 390 km — west of Hawaii ) , and evacuated 47 civilians to Hawaii the following month . A convoy assignment took Mahan to Samoa , where she joined Task Force 17 ( including the carrier Yorktown , two cruisers and five destroyers ) . The task force carried out raids on Jaluit Atoll , Mili Atoll and Makin Atoll ( Butaritari ) in the Marshall Islands and Gilbert Islands . Mahan moved on to Canton Island in late February 1942 , temporarily assigned to offshore patrol duty . By early April , she was at sea with a convoy bound for San Pedro , California . The ship then steamed north to the Mare Island Naval Shipyard for overhaul , docking on 18 April 1942 . 
 Mahan was back operating in the waters off Pearl Harbor in August 1942 . By mid @-@ October , she had steamed out of Pearl Harbor as part of Task Force 16 with the carrier Enterprise , the battleship South Dakota , two cruisers and seven destroyers . On 24 October they joined Task Force 17 , which included the carrier Hornet , four cruisers and six destroyers . The two carrier groups formed Task Force 61 under the command of Rear Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid , and was ordered to the Santa Cruz Islands to strike the Japanese if they moved on Guadalcanal . 
 After the task force anchored off the islands on the morning of 26 October , Enterprise 's search planes spotted the enemy carrier force and dropped two 500 @-@ pound bombs on the Japanese aircraft carrier Zuiho , setting the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands in motion . When it subsided , the Navy had lost 74 aircraft , the carrier Hornet and one destroyer ; Enterprise , South Dakota , one cruiser and one destroyer were damaged . The Japanese lost about 100 aircraft , but their ship casualties were much lower . Nimitz and Halsey expressed their satisfaction with Kinkaid 's force and their battle against heavy odds , and the destroyers in the Hornet and Enterprise screens were commended for a stellar effort . 
 En route to Noumea , New Caledonia , on 27 October , a Japanese submarine contact caused the American ships to take evasive action . In the confusion , Mahan and battleship South Dakota collided : both ships were seriously damaged . Commander R. W. Simpson was Mahan 's captain at the time , having taken command in early 1941 . Temporary repairs were made to Mahan at Noumea , and she headed back to Pearl Harbor for a new bow . 
 Fully repaired , Mahan left Pearl Harbor on 9 January 1943 for the South Pacific . In subsequent months she escorted convoys between the New Hebrides and the Fiji Islands , performed patrol assignments off New Caledonia , and engaged in operations in Australian waters . By August her base of operations was Milne Bay , New Guinea , which along with Buna , Papua New Guinea , was used as a staging area for an advance to gain possession of the Japanese @-@ held northeast coast of New Guinea . The operation began in August 1943 , with plans to strike Lae , New Guinea . Two weeks earlier , Mahan , under Lieutenant Commander James T. Smith , and three other US destroyers had cleared the Lae approaches and the waters between Salamaua and Finschhafen , bombarding Japanese installations at Finschhafen . In early September the Lae Task Force , under Rear Admiral Daniel E. Barbey , left Milne Bay for Lae with 8 @,@ 000 Australian troops . By the evening of 4 September , the troop landing was completed . On 11 September Salamaua was under Allied control , and Lae was taken by 16 September . Mahan and other US destroyers had provided cover for the amphibious landings . 
 Defeated at Lae , the Japanese pulled back to Finschhafen , which the Americans and Australians chose as the site of their next offensive . On 21 September an assault force under Barbey left Buna , escorted by US destroyers including Mahan , and stopped at Lae to pick up an Australian infantry brigade . Additional US destroyers were attached to the force , preceding the convoy to the rendezvous point . On 22 September , before daylight , the amphibious force stormed the beach at Finschhafen ; by noon , all troops were ashore . As the destroyers began to withdraw from the area , ten Japanese torpedo planes winged across the water , targeting Mahan and five other US destroyers . The ships returned fire , shooting down eight of the ten planes ; the remaining two escaped . This scrimmage ended without any hits by enemy planes . By 2 October , Finschhafen was in the hands of the Allies . 
 On 14 December 1943 , the amphibious force led by Barbey mustered at Buna , New Guinea , in preparation for the landing at Arawe , New Britain . With it was a bombardment group , composed of Mahan and four other US destroyers . Setting sail on the 14th , the force dropped anchor off Arawe early the next morning , and Mahan and her sister ships bombarded the Japanese shore defenses at the main landing point . The shelling from the 5 " / 38 guns and the bazooka @-@ fired rockets sent the Japanese into retreat , and by mid @-@ morning the beachhead was secured . Christmas 1943 found Mahan steaming with Barbey 's amphibious force to Borgen Bay , near Cape Gloucester , New Britain . The entrance to Borgen Bay was risky , with uncharted waters ; Mahan and Flusser were picked to sound out the channel and mark the way . They moved through the channel , with two minesweepers laying buoys in their wake . The force shadowed the buoys , and made its way through the passage . On the morning of the 26th , the Marines landed on the beach unopposed . The Japanese struck forcefully later that afternoon , but the Americans would not be dislodged . 
 In late February 1944 , Mahan was in action with the Seventh Fleet supporting the troop landing at Los Negros Island in the Admiralty Islands . Although the supporting ships came under heavy fire , the troops made it ashore . Three weeks later , the Japanese force at Los Negros was defeated . 
 In early 1944 , after extended wartime duty in the Pacific , the veteran destroyer was ordered to California for overhaul and moored again at the Mare Island Naval Shipyard . Mahan left the yard in early July for Pearl Harbor , participating in exercises there until 15 August . She returned to New Guinea on 20 October via Eniwetok , Jaluit , Guam , Saipan and Ulithi , escorting convoys between Hollandia ( Jayapura ) and Leyte . By the end of November 1944 , Mahan was performing anti @-@ submarine patrol off Leyte in the Philippines . 
 = = Sinking = = 
 In November 1944 , bad weather and hostile terrain bogged down the ground campaign to seize Leyte from the Japanese . The chief impediment to retaking Leyte was the Japanese ability to reinforce and resupply its headquarters at Ormoc City , on the west side of Leyte , and the Americans ' inability to counter this advantage . Thus , the unavoidable decision was made for an amphibious attack on Ormoc . 
 On the morning of 7 December 1944 , three years to the day after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , troops of the US 77th Infantry Division landed south of Ormoc City . At the same time , Mahan was patrolling the channel between Leyte and Ponson Island . The amphibious strike by the infantry met with little opposition , but nine Japanese bombers and four escort fighters converged on Mahan . In Kamikaze ( 1997 ) , Raymond Lamont @-@ Brown wrote : " Observers were to record of this , one of the most unusual and devastating of kamikaze assaults of 1944 , that the Japanese aircraft used torpedo @-@ launching tactics , but when they had been hit ... they switched to kamikaze attacks , diving on Mahan " . During the assault , US Army fighters downed three Japanese aircraft and damaged two more . Mahan shot down four but took three direct kamikaze hits , as David Sears observed in At War With the Wind ( 2008 ) , " ... the most calamitous [ being ] a direct hit to the superstructure near the No. 2 gun . " 
 Exploding and awash in flames , Mahan was turned by Commander E. G. Campbell toward the picket line in a last hope to save her before issuing the order to abandon ship . The destroyers Lamson and Walke rescued the survivors ; one officer and five men were missing , and thirteen seriously wounded ( including burns ) . A US destroyer sank Mahan with torpedoes and gunfire because she was not salvageable . 
 Mahan ’ s captain praised the performance of his crew during the ordeal . He described their response as disciplined and courageous . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Mahan received five battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = M54 motorway = 
 The M54 is a 23 @-@ mile ( 37 km ) east @-@ west motorway in the English counties of Shropshire and Staffordshire . It is also referred to as the Telford Motorway , after the road 's primary westbound destination , the new town of Telford . The motorway cost £ 65 million to construct , and is two @-@ lane dual carriageway for the majority of its length , with sections of three @-@ lane . 
 The M54 spur connects the M6 motorway near Essington , Staffordshire with the A5 trunk road at Wellington , Shropshire . The motorway forms part of the strategic route to North Wales , roughly following the path of the Roman Watling Street and the A5 north @-@ westwards , towards the port of Holyhead . It is the only motorway in Shropshire , and forms a vital part of the county 's road network . The motorway handles an AADT of between 50 @,@ 300 ( J2 @-@ 3 ) and 41 @,@ 800 ( J4 @-@ 5 ) vehicles . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 The idea of the M54 was originally presented due to the high volumes of traffic on the A5 , London to Holyhead road which was largely constructed by civil engineer Thomas Telford in the early 19th century following the route of the Roman Watling Street , which connected Rochester , Kent with Wroxeter , Shropshire . The initial plan for a motorway following the M54 's present route was therefore designed to alleviate the roads which handled the commercial traffic to the port of Holyhead , destined for Ireland . With the proposal in the early 1960s for a new town to provide an overspill housing area for the West Midlands conurbation , then named Dawley New Town ( designated as Telford in 1967 ) , the M54 was becoming more likely to be built ; the government also wanted to increase transport provision to the rest of Shropshire . 
 In 1967 the Ministry of Transport invited construction company Freeman Fox , Wilbur Smith Associates ( <unk> ) to investigate and report on the impact of the New Town proposals on traffic demand between the proposed New Town site and Wolverhampton , and the best highway solution to meet this demand . The predicted demand was that of 75 @,@ 000 vehicles per day by 1990 and a need for a dual 3 @-@ lane motorway . Two corridors were identified for a possible new motorway route , and a third option to possibly upgrade existing roads . The route could have followed the A5 Corridor to the M6 South of Gailey , at junction 12 , or a new corridor could have been established to the M6 , north @-@ east of Featherstone , at junction 11 . Additionally , it was proposed that the existing A5 could be upgraded to full dual carriageway grade separated standards together with improvements to the A41 and <unk> trunk routes . 
 = = = The Wellington bypass = = = 
 The first section of the M54 was opened in 1975 , then named the A5 Wellington bypass ( bypassing one of the existing towns which formed part of Telford ) , but renumbered the M54 in 1983 when the motorway was extended . The bypass removed traffic from the heavily congested route through the urbanised areas of <unk> and Wellington , and removed one of the country 's most notorious bottlenecks at the Bucks Head crossroads , in Wellington ; delays of up to six hours could be experienced in the summer months . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The Wellington bypass was constructed by contractor M. J. Gleeson Ltd , from 1973 to 1975 . Many problems followed in the two years after completion ; the rigid concrete carriageway broke up , due to the road being built on a poor subbase with rigid concrete along a historically heavily mined route . The aesthetic and constructional design of the bridges was also heavily criticised . Over the next 15 years , almost all of the original carriageway had to be replaced with asphalt . 
 The 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) section between the junction with the M6 , and Telford , excluding the Wellington bypass , was divided into four contracts each awarded to different companies ; all sections remained under the design of Sir Owen Williams and Partners . 
 Contract 1 ( Shifnal ) was given to A Monk & Co . , who utilised a slip @-@ form paver to construct the concrete section , which led to it becoming a standard in future motorway construction . 
 Contract 2 ( Donington ) was awarded to R M Douglas Construction Ltd . The two @-@ year contract was completed in only 18 months , due to the dry weather which allowed the earthworks to be completed ahead of schedule . 
 Contract 3 ( <unk> ) was taken by Alfred McAlpine & Son ( Southern ) Ltd . , and was constructed almost identically to contract 1 . 
 Contract 4 ( Essington ) was the largest contract , and was awarded to Tarmac Construction ( present day Carillion ) . This section took the longest to complete , and faced opposition from Staffordshire County Council who wanted disruption at the junction with the M6 to remain minimal . 
 The Forge junction at Telford Town Centre was awarded relatively late , to the company Norwest Holst . The junction precipitated the construction of Telford Shopping Centre , and the central commercial area , as the exchange was upgraded to allow traffic from the motorway to join and exit in both directions . The Forge to <unk> section , from junction 5 to junction 7 , opened to traffic in December 1975 . The Hilton Park to Forge section , from the M6 to junction 5 , opened in November 1983 . The motorway cost 65 million pounds to build , which when adjusted for inflation would come to approximately 150 million 2006 GBP . 
 To help alleviate opposition to the intrusive motorway design , the 60 feet ( 18 m ) wide carriageway was built to pass below the natural landscape , where possible . Man @-@ made hills were constructed which , along with the planting of 250 @,@ 000 new trees , helped to camouflage the motorway from view , and cut down on the noise level . This aesthetic improvement project took two and a half years to complete and employed over 100 people . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The recent strong economic growth and lower unemployment in the Telford area has been attributed to the construction of the motorway : unemployment in the 1980s was over 20 % , but by 2004 this figure had fallen to 3 @.@ 3 % . The motorway enabled the development of distribution centres in Telford , and industrial estates such as <unk> and Stafford Park have provided employment in the area . 
 Some of the highest pollution levels in the borough of Telford and Wrekin are along the M54 , particularly in the urban area between junctions 5 and 7 . 
 The M54 is particularly busy in mid @-@ August : it carries traffic to the V Festival at Weston @-@ under @-@ Lizard from the south ( via the M6 ) , and to the Shrewsbury Flower Show from the east . 
 = = Route = = 
 The road runs west from junction 10A of the M6 motorway near Essington , Staffordshire ( Map ) . It passes south of Featherstone near junction 1 and then north of <unk> before reaching junction 2 . Just before junction 3 with Albrighton the road enters Shropshire . It then passes to the north of Shifnal . Between junction 4 and junction 5 , the road passes across the Wolverhampton to Shrewsbury railway line , and through the centre of Telford . Between junctions 6 and 7 , the road runs around the south of Wellington before joining the A5 ( Map ) , which continues on to Shrewsbury as dual carriageway . 
 Telford Motorway Service Station opened on 18 March 2003 at junction 4 , and is operated by Welcome Break . It is the only service station on this motorway and , if travelling east , the last before Corley on the M6 or Frankley on the M5 . 
 = = Proposed developments = = 
 = = = Extension of the M54 to Shrewsbury = = = 
 The Department for Transport ( DfT ) is currently investigating the possibility of extending the M54 westward to Shrewsbury , thereby placing the county town on the UK motorway map for the first time . Currently traffic has to continue onto the dual carriageway A5 when the M54 ends at Wellington although the road surface or speed limits do not change at all but the road . It is not motorway standard from the M54 <unk> to the Shrewsbury ring road , because <unk> would need to be removed and a hard shoulder would also need to be built which could cause delays to traffic . 
 = = = M54 to M6 / M6 ( Toll ) Link Road = = = 
 The M54 currently meets the M6 at junction 10A where there is no access to the northbound M6 or to the M6 Toll . Northbound access to the M6 is via the A449 from junction 2 and the most direct route to the M6 Toll is via the congested <unk> from junction 1 . 
 Plans for a link road between the M54 and the M6 Toll ( M6 junction 11a ) were supported in principle by the Secretary of State for Transport in 2003 and were put on display in 2006 with an expected construction date of 2012 . The £ <unk> cost for the scheme would be paid for by The Macquarie Infrastructure Group ( the company that owns Midland Expressway Ltd and operates the M6 Toll ) . 
 = = = Other proposals = = = 
 In February 2009 , local newspaper the Shropshire Star reported plans to create a flyover linking the M54 and <unk> in Telford town centre , just south east of Telford Central railway station . Presently traffic has to travel along a single carriageway portion of the A5 , and pass through two roundabouts to access the M54 . Since Junction 5 of the motorway is only 200 metres ( 220 yd ) from the current bridge across the <unk> , the plans would involve either having two motorway junctions immediately next to each other , or one complex flyover . 
 Proposals for a ' Western Bypasses of Wolverhampton and Stourbridge ' were rejected by the government in 2003 . 
 = = Junctions = = 
 Data from driver location signs are used to provide distance and carriageway identifier information . 
 = Sumarr and Vetr = 
 In Norse mythology , Sumarr ( Old Norse " Summer " ) and Vetr ( Old Norse " Winter " ) are personified seasons . Sumarr and Vetr , personified , are attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In both , the two are given genealogies , while in the Prose Edda the two figure into a number of kennings used by various skalds . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In the stanza 26 of the Poetic Edda poem Vafþrúðnismál , the god Odin ( disguised as " Gagnráðr " ) asks the jötunn Vafþrúðnir from where warm Sumarr and Vetr come from , stating that they arrived " first among the Wise powers " . In stanza 27 , Vafþrúðnir responds : 
 Wind @-@ cool [ Vindsvalr ] he is called , Winter 's [ Vetr 's ] father , 
 and Mild @-@ One [ Svásuðr ] , the father of Summer [ Sumarr ] . 
 The second half of this stanza is missing from early manuscripts , but some later manuscripts feature the addition of : 
 And both of these shall ever be 
 Till the gods to destruction go . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In chapter 19 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , Gangleri ( king Gylfi in disguise ) asks why there 's an evident difference between summer and winter . The enthroned figure of High responds , and ( after scolding him for asking a question everyone knows the answer to ) states that the father of Sumarr is Svásuðr , who is quite pleasant , while the father of Vetr is referred to as Vindsvalr or , alternately , <unk> , and that Vetr derives his countenance from his ancestors , as they are " cruel and cold @-@ hearted kinsmen " . 
 Sumarr and Vetr are additionally personified in the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál , where they are referred to in kennings . Kennings for Sumarr are given in chapter 30 , including " son of Svásuðr " , " comfort of the snakes " , " growth of men " , exemplified in an excerpt given from a work by the skald Egill Skallagrímsson where " Valley @-@ fish 's mercy " points to " Snake 's mercy " , which signifies " Summer " . Kennings are given for Vetr in chapter 26 ; " Son of Vindsvalr " , " snake 's death " , and " storm season " . Excerpts of works by the skalds <unk> <unk> ( who uses the kenning " Vindsvalr 's son " ) and <unk> ( who employs the kenning " snake woe " ) are then given as examples . Both Sumarr and Vetr are given as terms for " times " in chapter 63 . 
 = Lochry 's Defeat = 
 Lochry 's Defeat , also known as the Lochry massacre , was a battle fought on August 24 , 1781 , near present @-@ day Aurora , Indiana , in the United States . The battle was part of the American Revolutionary War ( 1775 – 1783 ) , which began as a conflict between Great Britain and the Thirteen Colonies before spreading to the western frontier , where American Indians entered the war as British allies . The battle was short and decisive : about one hundred Indians of local tribes led by Joseph Brant , a Mohawk military leader who was temporarily in the west , ambushed a similar number of Pennsylvania militiamen led by Archibald Lochry . Brant and his men killed or captured all of the Pennsylvanians without suffering any casualties . 
 Lochry 's force was part of an army being raised by George Rogers Clark for a campaign against Detroit , the British regional headquarters . Clark , the preeminent American military leader on the northwestern frontier , worked with Governor Thomas Jefferson of Virginia in planning an expedition to capture Detroit , by which they hoped to bring an end to British support of the Indian war effort . In early August 1781 , Clark and about 400 men left Fort Pitt in Pennsylvania by boat , floating down the Ohio River a few days ahead of Lochry and his men , who were trying to catch up . 
 Joseph Brant 's force was part of a combined British and Indian army being raised to counter Clark 's offensive . Brant had too few men to challenge Clark , but when he intercepted messengers traveling between Clark and Lochry , he learned about Lochry 's smaller group bringing up the rear . When Lochry landed to feed his men and horses , Brant launched his overwhelmingly successful ambush . Because Clark had been able to recruit only a fraction of the men he needed for his campaign , the loss of Lochry 's men resulted in the cancellation of Clark 's expedition . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the Ohio River valley , the American Revolutionary War was fought primarily between American colonists south and west of the Ohio River ( in present @-@ day Western Pennsylvania , West Virginia , and Kentucky ) and American Indians with their British allies north of the river ( now the Midwestern United States ) . From Detroit , the British recruited and supplied Indian war parties to attack American forts and settlements , hoping to divert American military resources from the primary theater of war in the East as well as keeping the Indians — and the lucrative fur trade — firmly attached to the British Empire . Indians of the Ohio Country , primarily the Shawnee , Mingo , Delaware , and Wyandot , hoped to drive American settlers out of Kentucky and reclaim their hunting grounds , which they had lost in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix ( 1768 ) and Lord Dunmore 's War ( 1774 ) . 
 The Americans sought to hold on to Kentucky and to secure territorial claims to the region by launching sporadic expeditions against hostile Indian settlements north of the Ohio River . George Rogers Clark , a Virginia militia officer in Kentucky , believed that the Americans could ultimately win the border war by capturing Detroit . He laid the groundwork for this objective in 1779 by seizing the British outpost of Vincennes and capturing the British commander of Detroit , lieutenant governor Henry Hamilton . " This stroke " , said Clark , " will nearly put an end to the Indian War . " Clark prepared for a Detroit campaign in 1779 and again in 1780 , but each time called off the expedition because of insufficient men and supplies . " Detroit lost for want of a few Men " , he lamented . 
 = = Planning Clark 's campaign = = 
 In late 1780 , Clark traveled east to consult with Thomas Jefferson , the governor of Virginia , about an expedition in 1781 . Jefferson devised a plan which called for Clark to lead 2 @,@ 000 men against Detroit , with the hope of preventing a rumored British offensive against Kentucky . To avoid potential conflicts over rank with Continental Army colonels while organizing the campaign , Clark requested that Jefferson promote him to brigadier general in the Continental Army . Army rules precluded Clark from receiving a Continental commission , however , because Clark held his colonel 's commission from Virginia rather than the United States . Jefferson instead promoted Clark to the Virginia rank of " Brigadier General of the forces to be embodied on an expedition westward of the Ohio " . In January 1781 , Clark left for Fort Pitt in western Pennsylvania to assemble his men and supplies . His goal was to have the expedition ready for departure from Fort Pitt by June 15 . 
 As with earlier campaigns , recruiting enough men was a problem . Jefferson called for the western counties of Virginia to provide militia manpower for Clark 's campaign , but county officials protested that they could not spare the men . Militiamen did not want to set out on a lengthy expedition — they would be gone for six months to a year — while their families and homes were threatened by Lord Cornwallis 's army in the east , by Indian raids from the north , and by Loyalists at home . Because of this resistance , Jefferson called for volunteers rather than ordering the militia to accompany the expedition . 
 In addition to volunteers , Jefferson also arranged for a regiment of 200 regular Continental soldiers under Colonel John Gibson to accompany Clark . Longstanding tensions between Continental Army officers and the militia made such cooperation problematic , however . Colonel Daniel Brodhead , the Continental Army commander at Fort Pitt , refused to detach men for Clark 's campaign because he was staging his own expedition against the Delaware Indians , who had recently entered the war against the Americans . Brodhead marched into the Ohio Country and destroyed the Delaware Indian capital of Coshocton in April 1781 . This resulted in the Delaware becoming more determined enemies , and deprived Clark of badly needed men and supplies for the Detroit campaign . 
 Clark also had problems recruiting men from Pennsylvania : lingering resentment due to the recently settled border dispute between Virginia and Pennsylvania meant that few Pennsylvanians were willing to participate in an expedition headed by a Virginian . Clark 's controversial attempt to draft Pennsylvanians into service created even more ill will . One Pennsylvanian who supported Clark was Colonel Archibald Lochry , commander of the Westmoreland County militia . On July 4 , 1781 , Lochry wrote to Joseph Reed , the President of the Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania : 
 We have very distressing times Here this summer . The Enemy are almost constantly in our County Killing and <unk> the Inhabitants . I see no way we can have of defending ourselves other than by offensive operations . General Clarke [ sic ] has Requested our assistance to Enable him to carry an Expedition into the Indian Country . 
 With Reed 's approval , Lochry began recruiting men for Clark 's expedition . Many Westmoreland men did not want to leave their homes undefended , and so Lochry was only able to enlist about 100 volunteers for the campaign . 
 When Clark finally left Fort Pitt in August 1781 , he was accompanied by only 400 men , although he expected to meet Lochry and his Pennsylvanians at Fort Henry ( present Wheeling , West Virginia ) . Clark was angry about the lack of support given his campaign , but he still hoped that the Kentucky militia , who were to rendezvous with him at Fort Nelson ( Louisville , Kentucky ) , would provide additional men . He intended to at least carry out an expedition against enemy Indians if he did not have enough men to attack Detroit . 
 = = Indian and British preparations = = 
 Thanks to an effective intelligence network , British officials and their American Indian allies were aware of Clark 's planned expedition as early as February 1781 . In April , a council was held at Detroit in order to prepare a defense . The commander at Detroit was Major Arent DePeyster , Henry Hamilton 's replacement , who reported to Sir Frederick Haldimand , the Governor General of British North America . DePeyster used agents of the British Indian Department such as Alexander McKee and Simon Girty , both of whom had close relations with American Indians of the Ohio Country , to coordinate British and Indian military operations . 
 Joining the Detroit conference was an Iroquois delegation headed by Joseph Brant ( or <unk> ) , a military leader of the Mohawks , one of the Six Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy . Brant was a minor war chief when the war began , but his ability to speak English and his connections with British officials made him prominent in British eyes . When Brant traveled to London in 1775 to discuss Mohawk land grievances , Lord George Germain , the colonial secretary , vaguely promised him that if the Iroquois supported the Crown during the war , native land grievances would be redressed after the rebellion had been suppressed . Brant returned home and encouraged the Iroquois , who lived mostly in upstate New York , to enter the war as British allies . Four tribes of the Six Nations eventually did so . 
 Brant became a skilled partisan commander during the war , initially leading about 100 men known as " Brant 's Volunteers " . Because the traditional Iroquois leaders regarded Brant as an upstart who was too closely connected to the British , most of his volunteers were white Loyalists . Brant gained additional native followers during the war and was perhaps the only Indian to be commissioned as a British captain , but he was not , as has sometimes been claimed , the head war chief of the Iroquois . Brant took part in a joint British @-@ Indian invasion of New York in 1777 , which for the British ended in a disastrous surrender at Saratoga . Afterwards , he led numerous frontier raids , both before and after the massive American invasion of 1779 , which left the Iroquois lands devastated . 
 In April 1781 , with the New York frontier in ruins , the British transferred Brant to Detroit . The official reason for the move was that Brant was needed to help rally Indian support to counter Clark 's anticipated campaign . An apparent unofficial cause was that Brant , who was usually a moderate drinker , had been transferred after getting into a drunken fistfight with an Indian Department officer at Fort Niagara . Although the " Western Indians " of the Ohio Country and Detroit region had strained relations with the Iroquois , they cautiously welcomed Brant 's help . 
 At the Detroit council , DePeyster encouraged the Indians to unite and to send a force to oppose Clark 's expedition . In May 1781 , Indian leaders and Indian Department officials began to gather warriors at the Wyandot town of Upper Sandusky for this purpose . In mid @-@ August , Brant and George Girty , Simon 's brother , headed south to the Ohio River with about 90 Iroquois , Shawnee , and Wyandot warriors , as well as a few white men , while McKee and Simon Girty continued to collect reinforcements . 
 = = Lochry follows Clark = = 
 In early August , Clark moved his troops by boat down the Ohio River to Wheeling , where he was to rendezvous with Lochry and his men . After waiting five days longer than planned , Clark decided to leave Wheeling without Lochry because men were deserting the expedition , and Clark believed that if he got them further away from home , they would be less inclined to run off . When Lochry finally reached Wheeling on August 8 , he found that Clark had departed only a few hours earlier . Lochry sent the following message to Clark : 
 My dear General . I arrived at this Post this moment . I find that there is neither Boats , provisions or ammunition left . I have sent a small canoe after you to know what is to be done . If you send back these articles mentioned and with directions where I will overtake you , I will follow . We are upwards of one hundred strong including Light Horse . 
 Writing from Middle Island on August 9 , Clark replied to Lochry : 
 I am heartily sorry that after waiting so long for you I would set out but a day before your arrival .... I am exceeding unhappy at our not joining at <unk> [ Wheeling ] , but don 't know that either of us are to blame , the militia with us continue to desert , and consequently I cannot remain long in one place <unk> should be happy in forming a junction here .... I shall move on slowly for the reasons before recited and you will use the greatest industry as you cannot possibly pass us without our knowledge . I have suffered much lately but you again encourage me . 
 After building boats , Lochry and his men set off from Wheeling , hoping to catch up with the main body of the expedition . Meanwhile , Clark left Major Charles Cracraft with provisions and a small group of men on Camp Three Island to await Lochry 's arrival . Further down the Ohio , Clark stopped at the mouth of the Kanawha River , but again he decided to keep moving in order to prevent desertion . Clark left a letter fastened to a pole which instructed Lochry to keep following . 
 On August 14 , Lochry wrote to Clark that his men were " in great spirits and determined to go where ordered " , and that he had even apprehended 16 deserters from Clark 's force and were bringing them along . The next day , Lochry found Major Cracraft on Camp Three Island . Cracraft turned over a large horse boat to Lochry , and then left by canoe to rejoin Clark 's troops . The following day , on August 16 , Lochry sent Captain Samuel Shannon and seven men with a letter to Clark . In the letter , Lochry asked Clark to leave more provisions because he was running short of flour and did not want to be delayed by having to send out hunters . Lochry sent two men out to hunt the next day , but they never returned . 
 = = Ambush on the Ohio = = 
 On the night of August 18 , 1781 , Clark and his men floated past the mouth of the Great Miami River , near the present @-@ day border between Ohio and Indiana . Brant 's party was hidden on the northern bank of the Ohio , but with too few men to confront Clark 's larger force , Brant remained silent and let Clark pass unhindered . This was a missed opportunity for the British and Indian war effort : had McKee and Simon Girty not been delayed while gathering reinforcements , they would have been able to ambush Clark , whom the Indians feared more than any other commander , at a moment when desertion had made him vulnerable . According to historian Randolph Downes , " Students of the life of George Rogers Clark have never sufficiently emphasized how close he and his expedition came to utter destruction as they descended the Ohio River in 1781 . " 
 Although he missed a chance to ambush Clark , Brant soon found another target . On August 21 , Brant captured Major Cracraft and six men who were trying to catch up with Clark . Brant also captured a few men from Captain Shannon 's detachment . From the letters his prisoners carried , Brant learned that Lochry 's party was not far behind . Brant sent a letter to McKee , urging him to hurry because " whilst the enemy are <unk> [ scattered ] we can easy manage them " . Brant prepared to attack Lochry regardless of whether McKee 's reinforcements arrived in time . 
 At about 8 : 00 a.m. on August 24 , the day of the battle , Lochry 's party landed on the northern bank of the Ohio River , near the mouth of a creek about 11 miles ( 18 km ) below the mouth of the Great Miami . According to some brief accounts , Lochry was lured ashore in a ruse by Brant , who left captured Americans in sight and attacked after Lochry landed . According to more detailed accounts , however , Brant had planned this deception , but the Pennsylvanians happened to land a short distance upriver without having seen the captives . Nevertheless , Lochry 's men came ashore close enough that Brant , who had not yet been reinforced by McKee , was still able to make his attack . 
 Although Lochry knew that he was in hostile territory , he landed his little flotilla after two days of nonstop travel because he needed to feed his men and horses . After landing , the Americans cooked fresh buffalo meat for breakfast and cut grass for their horses , apparently not taking proper security precautions . Concealed in the nearby woods , Brant repositioned his men and then opened fire , taking the Americans completely by surprise . Some Americans fought until their ammunition ran out , although others apparently did not have their weapons ready when the attack began . Some of the Americans attempted to escape by boat , but Brant had anticipated this and had positioned men in canoes to cut off any retreat . Seeing that he was hopelessly trapped , Lochry called for his men to surrender . 
 Although the two sides were about even in number , Brant had won a lopsided victory . All of the Americans were killed or captured ; none of Brant 's men were injured . According to a detailed list prepared by Brant and sent to Detroit , 37 Americans were killed and 64 were captured . Some of the American dead — some sources say most — had been executed after surrendering . This included Lochry , who was sitting on a log after the battle when a Shawnee warrior killed him with a tomahawk blow to the head . According to some accounts , Brant prevented the Indians from killing even more of the prisoners . The dead were scalped and left unburied . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the battle , the native warriors and rangers hesitated to close on Clark 's main force . Brant marched the prisoners up the Miami River . On August 27 , he rendezvoused with about 300 Indians led by McKee and about 100 Butler 's Rangers led by Captain Andrew Thompson . Leaving a detachment to guard the prisoners , the combined Indian and British force of about 500 set off towards Fort Nelson in pursuit of Clark 's main army . On September 9 , two captured Americans revealed that Clark 's expedition had been called off because of a shortage of men . Satisfied that the campaign had been successfully concluded , most of the British @-@ Indian army dispersed , although McKee convinced 200 men to accompany him on a raid into Kentucky , which culminated in what Kentuckians called the " Long Run Massacre " . 
 The 64 American prisoners were divided between the tribes . A few of these prisoners were subsequently killed . As was their custom , the Indians took some of the prisoners home and ritually adopted them in order to replace fallen warriors . Most , however , were sold to the British in Detroit and then transferred to a prison in Montreal . A few managed to escape from captivity ; the remainder were released after the war ended in 1783 . Of the 100 or more men who had taken part in Lochry 's expedition , the number who eventually made it back home has been estimated from " less than half " to " more than half . " 
 Lochry 's Defeat , as the battle generally came to be called in American history , was a devastating blow to the people of Westmoreland County . Nearly every home was affected . Residents of the county were alarmed at having lost so many of their most experienced soldiers at a time when they were needed to defend the frontier . On December 3 , 1781 , General William Irvine , the new commander at Fort Pitt , wrote to Joseph Reed : 
 I am sorry to inform your Excellency that this Country has got a severe stroke by the loss of Colonel Lochry and about one hundred ( tis said ) of the best men of Westmoreland County , including Captain <unk> & his Company of Rangers . They were going down the Ohio on General Clarke 's Expedition , many accounts agree that they were all killed or taken at the mouth of the <unk> [ sic ] River . I believe [ they were ] chiefly killed . This misfortune , added to the failure of General Clarke 's Expedition , has filled the people with great dismay . Many talk of retiring to the East side of the Mountain early in the Spring . Indeed there is great reason to apprehend that the Savages , & perhaps the British from Detroit will push us hard in the Spring , and I believe there never were Posts — nor a Country — in a worse state of defence . 
 The loss of Lochry 's detachment proved to be the fatal setback to Clark 's 1781 campaign . In early September , Clark held a series of councils with Kentucky militia officers at Fort Nelson . Clark still advocated carrying out an expedition into the Ohio Country , saying that " I am ready to lead you on to any Action that has the most distant prospect of Advantage , however daring it may appear to be . " Given the lateness of the season and the shortage of available men , the council overruled Clark and decided instead to remain on the defensive , although they proposed that another campaign against Detroit should be carried out the next year . On October 1 , 1781 , a disappointed Clark wrote , " My chain appears to have run out . I find myself enclosed with a few troops , in a trifling fort , and shortly expect to bear the insults of those who have for several years been in continual dread of me . " Clark led an expedition against the Shawnee towns on the Great Miami River in 1782 , one of the last actions of the war , but he was never able to mount an expedition against Detroit . 
 Sometime after Lochry 's Defeat , Brant and Simon Girty got into an altercation along the Ohio River . According to contemporary gossip , Girty took exception to Brant 's boasting about the success of the expedition , perhaps because Girty believed his brother George deserved more credit . The two men , who were reportedly drunk , came to blows , which ended when Brant slashed Girty in the head with his sword . The wound , which took several months to heal , left a scar on Girty 's forehead . When Brant returned to Detroit in October , he had a sword cut on his leg , which had become infected and initially looked as if it would result in amputation . The wound was officially reported as accidentally self @-@ inflicted , although <unk> said that it was the result of the fight with Girty . Brant 's Iroquois companions returned home , but Brant was compelled to stay in Detroit over the winter in order to recover . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Bailey , De Witt . " British Indian Department " . The American Revolution , 1775 – 1783 : An Encyclopedia 1 : 165 – 77 . Ed . Richard L. Blanco . New York : Garland , 1993 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8240 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Belue , Ted Franklin . " Lochry 's Defeat " . The American Revolution , 1775 – 1783 : An Encyclopedia 1 : 954 – 55 . Ed . Richard L. Blanco . New York : Garland , 1993 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8240 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Boatner , Mark Mayo , III . " Lochry 's Defeat " . Encyclopedia of the American Revolution : Library of Military History , 2nd ed . , 1 : 645 . Edited by Harold E. <unk> . Detroit : Scribner 's , 2006 . ISBN 0 @-@ 684 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Duff , William A. " Chapter 12 , Christian Fast " . History of North Central Ohio , Vol . 1 : 97 @-@ 102 . Historical Publishing Co . , Topeka KS and Indianapolis IN , 1931 . 
 Hunter , W. H. " The Pathfinders of Jefferson County . " Ohio Archaeological and Historical Quarterly 6 , no . 2 ( 1898 ) : 140 – 42 ; 384 – 92 . Accessed online through the Ohio Historical Society 's online archive . Hunter 's initial account of the expedition was expanded and corrected in an addenda . 
 Maurer , C. J. " The British Version of Lochry 's Defeat . " Bulletin of the Historical and Philosophical Society of Ohio 10 ( July 1952 ) : 215 – 230 . 
 Pershing , Edgar J. " The Lost Battalion of the Revolutionary War . " National Genealogical Society Quarterly 16 , no . 3 ( 1928 ) : 44 – 51 . Includes captured correspondence and the British list of men killed and taken prisoner . Available online through Fisher Family Genealogy , which also provides a PDF copy of the original article . 
 Sugden , John . " Joseph Brant " . Encyclopedia of North American Indians , 83 – 85 . Ed . Frederick E. Hoxie . Boston : Houghton Mifflin , 1996 . ISBN 0 @-@ 395 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Warnes , Kathleen . " Lochry 's Defeat " . The Encyclopedia of the American Revolutionary War : A Political , Social , and Military History . 2 : 726 . Gregory Fremont @-@ Barnes and Richard Alan Ryerson , eds . Santa Barbara , California : ABC @-@ CLIO , 2006 . ISBN 1 @-@ 85109 @-@ 408 @-@ 3 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 <unk> , John . Background to Glory : The Life of George Rogers Clark . Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press , 1957 . Bison Book printing , 1992 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Butterfield , Consul Willshire . History of the <unk> . Cincinnati : Clarke , 1890 . 
 Downes , Randolph C. Council Fires on the Upper Ohio : A Narrative of Indian Affairs in the Upper Ohio Valley until 1795 . Pittsburgh : University of Pittsburgh Press , 1940 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 ( 1989 reprint ) . 
 English , William Hayden . Conquest of the Country Northwest of the River Ohio , 1778 – 1783 , and Life of Gen. George Rogers Clark . Vol 2 . Indianapolis : Bowen @-@ Merrill , 1896 . 
 Hassler , Edgar W. Old Westmoreland : A History of Western Pennsylvania during the Revolution . Pittsburgh : Weldon , 1900 . 
 James , James Alton . The Life of George Rogers Clark . University of Chicago Press , 1928 . 
 <unk> , Isabel Thompson . Joseph Brant , 1743 – 1807 , Man of Two Worlds . Syracuse , New York : Syracuse University Press , 1984 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8156 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 ( hardback ) ; ISBN 0 @-@ 8156 @-@ 0208 @-@ 1 ( 1986 paperback ) . 
 Lancaster , Bruce ( 1971 ) . The American Revolution . New York : American Heritage . ISBN 0 @-@ 618 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Mann , Barbara Alice . George Washington 's War on Native America . Westport , Connecticut : Praeger , 2005 . ISBN 0 @-@ 275 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Martindale , Charles . Loughery 's Defeat and Pigeon Roost Massacre . Indianapolis : Bowen @-@ Merrill , 1888 . Indiana Historical Society Publications 2 , no . 4 : 97 – 127 . Pamphlet which includes Anderson 's journal and other documents . 
 Nelson , Larry L. A Man of Distinction among Them : Alexander McKee and the Ohio Country Frontier , 1754 – 1799 . Kent , Ohio : Kent State University Press , 1999 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 620 @-@ 5 ( hardcover ) . 
 Nester , William . The Frontier War for American Independence . Mechanicsburg , Pennsylvania : Stackpole , 2004 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8117 @-@ 0077 @-@ 1 . 
 Sugden , John . Blue Jacket : Warrior of the Shawnees . Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press , 2000 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Taylor , Alan . The Divided Ground : Indians , Settlers , and the Northern Borderland of the American Revolution . New York : Knopf , 2006 . ISBN 0 @-@ 679 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Van Every , Dale . A Company of Heroes : The American Frontier , 1775 – 1783 . New York : Morrow , 1962 . 
 = = = Published primary sources = = = 
 Several letters of Lochry , Joseph Reed , and General Irvine are published in the Pennsylvania Archives , 1st series , vol . 9 ( Philadelphia 1854 ) . Anderson 's journal is in the Pennsylvania Archives , 6th series , 2 : 403 – 410 , ( Harrisburg 1906 ) , and is available online through Fisher Family Genealogy , which also has a PDF copy of the pages from the Pennsylvania Archives . Many other letters about the campaign are printed in James A. James , ed . , George Rogers Clark Papers , 2 vols . ( 1912 ; reprint New York , AMS Press , 1972 ) . 
 British letters relating to Lochry 's Defeat were published in Pioneer Collections : Collections and Researches Made by the Pioneer Society of the State of Michigan 2nd ed . , vols . 10 and 19 ( Lansing , 1908 – 13 ) , and are online at the American Memory website , published by the Library of Congress . Highlights include : 
 Brant to McKee August 21 , 1781 . Brant writes that Clark has just passed and that Lochry is approaching . 
 Thompson and McKee to DePeyster August 29 , 1781 Thompson and McKee report Brant 's victory and forward captured American correspondence . 
 De Peyster to Captains Thompson and McKee , September 13 , 1781 . De Peyster expresses satisfaction at Brant 's victory , mixed with disappointment that the Indians did not move against Clark . 
 John Macomb to Colonel Claus , September 14 , 1781 . A merchant at Detroit reports news of Brant 's victory . 
 Thompson to DePeyster September 26 , 1781 . Thompson reports on the dispersal of the Indians after news that Clark 's expedition is cancelled . 
 McKee to DePeyster September 26 , 1781 . McKee relays his activities after the battle , and the difficulty in getting the Indians to pursue Clark . 
 DePeyster to McKee October 4 , 1781 . DePeyster instructs McKee to tell the Indians that no rum will be distributed at Detroit until he is sure Clark is finished for the season . 
 Haldimand to DePeyster October 6 , 1781 . Haldimand expresses hope that Brant 's example will inspire the Indians to make further efforts against Clark . 
 Haldimand to Germain , October 23 , 1781 . Haldimand sends word to London about Brant 's victory . 
 Haldimand to unknown November 1 , 1781 . Haldimand complains that the money spent on the Indians this year had been " thrown away " , with the exception of Brant and his 100 men . 
 = Lewis Archer = 
 Lewis Archer is a fictional character from the British soap opera Coronation Street , played by Nigel Havers . The character was created and introduced as a love interest for Audrey Roberts ( Sue Nicholls ) . Executive producer Kim Crowther revealed the team wanted an actor who was slightly younger than Audrey and who was very charming . Various actors were considered for the part , but the casting director suggested Havers as she knew he was a big fan of the show . The actor said he could not turn down a chance to appear in Coronation Street as his character had an interesting story arc . Havers was contracted until July 2010 and he made his debut as Lewis in the episode broadcast on 18 December 2009 . 
 Lewis is a gentleman escort , who is described as being suave , charming and charismatic . He is first seen accompanying Claudia Colby ( Rula Lenska ) to a Christmas ball . He is introduced to Audrey , who falls for his charm and later hires him to be her companion to another event . In March 2010 , Lewis was seen advertising his services in The Lady , as part of a crossover between the society magazine and Coronation Street . Rita Sullivan ( Barbara Knox ) sees the advert and books Lewis for a date , forming a love triangle storyline between them and Audrey . Lewis eventually declares his feelings for Audrey , and they plan to leave Weatherfield together . 
 As their plans to emigrate step up a gear , Lewis forges a plan to steal money from Peter Barlow 's ( Chris Gascoyne ) betting shop by cashing fraudulently franked betting slips . His scam is successful , and he cheats on Audrey when he kisses Deirdre Barlow ( Anne Kirkbride ) . Lewis flees the UK ; he made his last appearance on 13 August 2010 . Just over a year later , it was announced Havers would reprise his role as Lewis and return to Coronation Street in February 2012 . Havers believed Lewis would be a changed man who wanted to apologise to those he had hurt . The character 's first period in the show was well received by television critics . On 22 January 2013 , it was announced that Havers would be leaving Coronation Street once again and Lewis departed on 1 February 2013 . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 On 14 October 2009 , Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy announced Havers had joined the cast of Coronation Street as Lewis , a potential love interest for Audrey Roberts ( Sue Nicholls ) . A writer for What 's on TV said Havers was to make a one @-@ off appearance in December before continuing in the role throughout 2010 . The show 's executive producer , Kim Crowther , told Gareth McLean of the Radio Times that while the team was planning the Audrey and Lewis storyline , they decided they wanted to introduce someone who was very charming , and slightly younger than Audrey . Casting director June West considered various actors for the part , including Anthony Head , but she suggested Havers for the role as she knew he was a big fan of the show . Crowther quipped , " When you think of Nigel , you think of someone suave enough to charm you out of your high heels . Half the work is done . " Havers said he could not refuse the part because his character was fascinating and had an interesting story arc , and that being on the show had always been his ambition . Havers was initially contracted until July 2010 and he made his debut screen appearance as Lewis on 18 December 2009 . In March 2010 , Havers stated that he was keen to renew his contract , as he was enjoying his time with the soap . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation and Audrey Roberts = = = 
 Gareth McLean of the Radio Times said that Lewis was a gentleman escort and he deemed him a " suave companion . " A spokeswoman for the show said , " There is no suggestion that Lewis is anything more than a companion escort for his clients . " A writer for the Metro described Lewis as " charming " and " charismatic " , and a reporter from the Daily Record wrote that he was " Weatherfield 's answer to American Gigolo . " The soap 's official website lists " <unk> behaviour " as something Lewis dislikes . Havers believed Lewis would eventually display " a real dark side " , though he was unaware of what that could be . Lewis is first seen accompanying Claudia Colby ( Rula Lenska ) to a Christmas ball . He is introduced by Audrey Roberts ; Digital Spy 's Daniel Kilkelly stated that she was " immediately bowled over by his charming ways . " Claudia informs Audrey that she booked Lewis through an agency and Audrey decides to hire Lewis to be her companion to another event . Lewis goes to the Rovers Return Inn and pretends not to know Audrey . He then proceeds to chat her up in front of her friends , causing them to wonder how she attracted him . Havers thought the scenes were funny and called the storyline between Lewis and Audrey " fantastic " . In March 2010 , Lewis was seen advertising his escort service in society magazine , The Lady . A reporter for The Belfast Telegraph revealed the character 's classified advert would be seen in the real life magazine in a crossover with the show . A spokeswoman for Coronation Street stated " The Lady heard the magazine was going to feature in an episode , and they approached us with the idea of using the advert in the actual magazine . " In the advert , Lewis claims to have " years of experience " and is " suitable to accompany ladies in any social or corporate event " . On screen , Audrey 's friend Rita Sullivan ( Barbara Knox ) notices the advert and books Lewis for a date . 
 A love triangle storyline between Audrey , Rita and Lewis then formed and was played out over Easter 2010 . Rita hires Lewis to accompany her to a ball , despite knowing that her friend has fallen for him . Audrey becomes jealous when she tries to book Lewis herself and he explains someone has already hired him . Audrey attends the ball with a friend and is shocked to see Rita with Lewis . The two woman insult each other and Lewis and Rita leave . Susan Hill , writing for the Daily Star said that despite Lewis ' apology for attending an event with Rita , Audrey is furious and confronts her friend . Rita tells Audrey she is " acting like an old fool as Lewis can never be hers " and Audrey slaps Rita across the face . Of Lewis ' view of the situation , Havers commented , " I think Lewis is genuinely concerned about Audrey . When Rita gets involved , he has to box clever , but he 's very good at that . " Audrey decides to stop all contact with Lewis after realising she has fallen in love with him . Audrey 's decision is prompted by her falling out with Rita and the fact she has read Lewis ' diary , which contains details about his clients . Not wanting to get hurt by him , Audrey tells Lewis that she wants end their arrangement . Lewis is shocked and cannot understand why Audrey would want to stop seeing him . A show spokesperson commented , " In the end she has to come clean and tell him how she really feels – which prompts Lewis to kiss her . He then tells her he 's developed feelings for her too . " Audrey is shocked by the kiss and Lewis ' declaration of love . 
 As their relationship progresses , Audrey invites Lewis to move in with her . Nicholls told Suzanne Byrne of RTÉ Ten that Lewis appears to brush Audrey off , before eventually agreeing to move in . Nicholls said , " And then in his usual charming style he brings her breakfast in bed on her birthday , which she adores him for . He 's clever like that , he knows how to bring the balance back to the relationship . " In May 2010 , the Daily Mirror 's Brian Roberts reported that a new plot for Audrey and Lewis could see them leaving Weatherfield for a new life in Greece . The couple go on holiday to a Greek island and Audrey is taken with Lewis ' idea of opening a hotel and living a glamorous life out there . Roberts likened the plot development to that of the 1989 film , Shirley Valentine . Roz Laws of the Sunday Mercury noted that Lewis seemed uncomfortable with the plan ; Nicholls said that Audrey is unaware of his doubts . Laws also compared the plot to a similar one in another ITV soap opera , Emmerdale , involving Diane Sugden ( Elizabeth <unk> ) and Charlie Haynes ( George Costigan ) , and predicted that both storylines would end in heartache . Nicholls wanted Audrey and Lewis to leave together and have a happy ending , and wanted to see a spin @-@ off series focusing on the pair and their new life in Greece . Olivia Buxton from the Daily Mirror questioned whether Lewis would go through with the plan ; she wrote that two endings to his story arc had been filmed , one of which showed him making a dramatic exit . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 Lewis departed the show on 13 August 2010 . In his exit storyline , he leaves the UK after stealing a large sum of money from Peter Barlow 's ( Chris Gascoyne ) betting shop . Lewis carries out his plan to place fraudulently franked betting slips in the till while Audrey arranges to have her money transferred into a bank account for them to purchase their hotel . On the day of their farewell party in the Rovers , Lewis slips out to collect his money from the betting shop and kisses employee Deirdre Barlow ( Anne Kirkbride ) when she becomes suspicious about his motives for being in the shop . Kate Woodward , writing for Inside Soap , said while Deirdre is attracted to Lewis , she ends their kiss and tells him to return to the party . However , Lewis flees the country , but decides not to take Audrey 's money as well and he writes her a letter ending their relationship . Havers filmed his final scenes on 21 June 2010 at a Manchester hotel , which doubled as an airport bar . While he is at the airport , Lewis meets a businesswoman , Lydia Radcliffe ( Lysette Anthony ) . Chris Johnson of the Daily Mail thought Lydia was a welcome distraction for Lewis , who is feeling guilty about what he has done . Lewis flirts with Lydia and " rolls out some of his well @-@ known chat @-@ up lines " , which she falls for . Lydia mentions she is travelling to Barbados and Lewis reveals he is going there too , so they board the plane together . 
 = = = Return = = = 
 Havers returned to Coronation Street on 17 February 2012 . While appearing on Loose Women the previous year , Havers revealed that he had been in talks with Coronation Street producers about a return to the show . He stated that he had adored his role as Lewis and that he had to return and apologise to Audrey . Later that year , ITV announced that Havers would return to Coronation Street in 2012 to reprise his role as Lewis . Series producer Phil Collinson said that Havers had started filming his scenes in January 2012 and he would return on @-@ screen from February . Collinson also said that Lewis would have a lot of ground to cover to win Audrey back , that the character is " a great hoot " and that it was wonderful to have Havers back . Peter Dyke and Katie Begley of the Daily Star wrote that Lewis ' return storyline would show Audrey and her daughter , Gail Platt ( Helen Worth ) , unexpectedly meeting Lewis at a country pub . Havers told Allison Jones of Inside Soap that Lewis then tries to convince them he is his own twin brother , Hugh . Havers said , " Audrey is totally floored to see him again — as you can imagine . And if I said that Gail is angry when they bump into Lewis , it would be a massive understatement ! " Lewis begs Audrey and Gail not to call the police and he decides to return to Weatherfield . 
 Havers said Lewis was a changed man who wanted to apologise to those he had hurt and to make amends . He said , " There 's always that danger Lewis could fall back into his old ways , and he is down to his last penny . But at the moment , Lewis is trying his hardest and has no ulterior motive — just an awful lot of ice to break instead ! " Lewis returns the money he took from Peter , adding an extra thousand pounds as compensation . Havers said that Lewis feels desperately bad about what he did . Upon entering the Rovers , Lewis is punched by Deirdre . Havers stated that Lewis wants Audrey to forgive him and give him a second chance . Lewis finds Audrey charming and honest and he likes being mothered by her to an extent . Havers said that Lewis did fall in love with Audrey while they were together , but no one believes him as he has told so many lies , and thought Lewis ' one redeeming feature was not taking Audrey 's money when he had the chance . Havers added , " He 's been feeling terrible because he did the dirty on her and he wants to make amends . " 
 Lewis ' presence on the Street infuriates Gail , who still holds a grudge for the way he treated Audrey . Gail hopes Lewis may have left for good when he attends court on charges of fraud . However , Lewis charms the judge with a speech about the way he let Audrey down , and he is sentenced to community service . The animosity between Gail and Lewis , reaches a peak at The <unk> ; and as Audrey defends Lewis , a food critic from the Weatherfield Gazette walks in . A show spokesperson told Inside Soap 's Katy Moon that Lewis turns on the charm and quickly wins the reviewer over . Audrey 's grandson Nick Tilsley ( Ben Price ) , who owns The Bistro , realises Lewis ' communication skills could be good for his business and he employs Lewis for a trial period at the restaurant . 
 = = = Reuniting with Audrey = = = 
 Lewis and Audrey decide to rekindle their relationship in March 2012 . Kate White from Inside Soap wrote that Audrey finds Lewis hard to resist , especially after he has apologised for his previous actions . When Lewis is wrongly accused of taking some money from The Bistro , he plans to leave Weatherfield . Nicholls told White that Audrey feels awful that she too accused Lewis and it is a wake up call for her as she does trust him . The actress said Audrey still fancies Lewis and does not want to lose him again . Lewis and Audrey spend the night together and decide to keep their relationship a secret , especially from Audrey 's family , as his " past indiscretions still loom over them like a dark cloud " . Nicholls said Audrey could be making a mistake , and added , " You read this sort of thing in the papers all the time , women of a certain age being charmed by these men . I 'd ask her to think about what she 's doing . " A writer for Inside Soap said that Audrey and Lewis are very happy as they " bask in the warmth of their revived romance . " However , they have to resort to sneaky measures to spend time together to avoid upsetting Audrey 's family . When Audrey calls in sick at the salon to spend time with Lewis , Gail and David become concerned and check up on her . They see Lewis leaving her house and realise the pair are back together . 
 Lewis and Audrey decide to go on holiday together and Lewis offers to pay for himself . Digital Spy 's Daniel Kilkelly wrote that Lewis ' renewed relationship with Audrey and their plans to go on a round @-@ the @-@ world cruise would cause a feud between her and David . Audrey 's money is tied up in the salon , so she asks David to sign it back to her so she can pay for the holiday . However , David refuses to sign the salon back as he thinks Lewis might be planning another fraud . Kilkelly said Lewis tries to play peacemaker and suggests postponing the trip until he can save the money himself , but Audrey insists David will co @-@ operate and she tears up their contract . 
 = = = Departure ( 2013 ) = = = 
 On 22 January 2013 , Kilkelly confirmed that Havers would leave Coronation Street following the conclusion to the Lewis and Gail storyline on 1 February . The scenes lead to Lewis ' departure from Weatherfield , but Kilkelly commented that " fans will have to wait and see whether Gail loses everything thanks to Lewis " . The door was left open by producers if Havers wanted to reprise the role of Lewis again in the future . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Lewis is hired by Claudia Colby to accompany her to the Weatherfield Traders ' Association Christmas party . Claudia introduces Lewis to her friend , Audrey Roberts , and he flirts with her . Audrey learns Lewis is a male escort and she later hires him to be her date for the Stylists ' Dinner . Audrey contacts Lewis again and invites him to have dinner with her , but she becomes apprehensive and pretends to be ill when he arrives . Lewis persuades Audrey to let him into her home and he listens while she talks about her late husband . They then go out for dinner . Lewis visits the Rovers Return in Coronation Street and pretends not to know Audrey . Norris Cole ( Malcolm Hebden ) recognises Lewis from the Christmas party and when he sees Lewis kissing Audrey , he jumps to the conclusion that they are having an affair . 
 Rita Sullivan contacts Lewis and they attend the theatre together . Lewis charms Rita and she books him for the Chamber of Commerce Easter Dinner Dance . Lewis is surprised when Audrey turns up at the dance with Claudia . Audrey becomes jealous of Rita , and the women insult each other until Lewis intervenes . Lewis leaves his diary containing his clients ' details in Audrey 's salon . When he returns to collect it , he finds Audrey has read it . Audrey tells Lewis that they cannot continue to be together , but Lewis kisses Audrey and tells her he has feelings for her . They begin dating , despite Rita telling Audrey it will end in tears . After noticing Audrey is not happy with his occupation , Lewis quits and tells Audrey that he is beginning to feel too old for the job . Audrey invites Lewis to move in with her ; and although he hesitates at first , Lewis eventually accepts . 
 Lewis and Audrey go on holiday to Greece together and Lewis suggests they move there and open a hotel . Audrey agrees and gets a £ 100 @,@ 000 loan towards the purchase of the hotel . Lewis , needing money of his own , decides to steal from Peter Barlow 's betting shop with fraudulently franked betting slips . He begins flirting with Deirdre Barlow , an employee at the betting shop . Lewis sends Deirdre out of the shop to get a corkscrew so they can share a bottle of wine . He places his fraudulent betting slips in the till and when Deirdre returns , he kisses her to distract her . Lewis slips out of Audrey 's farewell party to collect his money and he leaves for the airport . Peter discovers Lewis has stolen from him and Audrey is devastated by his disappearance . She discovers Lewis has left her money alone and she finds a photograph of them with the words ' I tried ' written on the back . While he is in the airport bar waiting for his flight to Barbados , Lewis introduces himself to Lydia Radcliffe and offers to sit with her during the flight . 
 Lewis enters a country pub and unexpectedly meets Audrey and her daughter Gail . Upon seeing them , he pretends he is his own identical twin brother . Neither Audrey or Gail are fooled and Lewis offers to pay for their drinks . He then leaves the pub and heads to Coronation Street . Lewis visits Peter Barlow , apologises for stealing from him and returns the money he took with an extra £ 1000 as compensation . Lewis then goes to Audrey 's salon and he tells her he did not mean to hurt her . He asks Audrey to drive him to the police station to prove how sorry he is . After he is given bail , Lewis enters the Rovers Return and is punched by Deirdre . Lewis faces hostility from Audrey 's grandson , David ( Jack P. Shepherd ) upon his return to the salon . He begs Audrey for forgiveness but she throws him out . Lewis sends her flowers and Audrey visits his address and finds he is living in a bedsit . David 's wife , Kylie ( Paula Lane ) , introduces herself to Lewis and he defends her against Brian Packham 's ( Peter Gunn ) accusations that she is giving her son the wrong food . 
 Lewis attends court , where he is found guilty and sentenced to perform forty hours community service . While dining at The Bistro , Lewis charms a food critic and Nick Tilsley offers him a two @-@ week trial as head waiter . Gail disapproves but Audrey defends Lewis and he later buys Audrey a bracelet as a gift of thanks . When Nick finds some money missing from the till , he and Gail believe Lewis took it . Audrey also doubts Lewis but when she learns that Eva Price ( Catherine Tyldesley ) took the money , she tries unsuccessfully to stop Lewis from leaving . Lewis returns for his wages and tells Nick that his community service has finished and he is leaving for good . Audrey arrives to see Lewis , asks him to stay and professes her love for him . They spend the night together at Audrey 's house and agree to keep their relationship secret . Once David and Gail find out about their relationship , Audrey and Lewis make it public . Lewis suggests they go on holiday together to the Mediterranean and Audrey agrees . She asks David to sign her salon back to her so she can help pay for the holiday , but he refuses . 
 Audrey and David begin feuding over the rights to the salon and Lewis notices that the arguing is taking its toll on Audrey 's health . He suggests they go to Wales for a few days instead . When Audrey serves David with an injunction to try and reclaim her business , an argument breaks out and Audrey suffers a heart attack . Lewis comforts Audrey until the ambulance arrives and stays with her at the hospital . Lewis and Audrey go on holiday . On her return , Audrey reveals to her family that Lewis disappeared from the Eurostar on the way home . Lewis later turns up at the salon to see Audrey and explains that he disappeared because he saw Penny Thornley ( Susan Hanson ) , a woman he once conned . Lewis asks Audrey to run away with him and she agrees . While they are packing , Audrey 's family and Penny arrive . Penny reveals that she is going to call the police , but Audrey stops her and gives her the money Lewis took . When Nick refuses to give Lewis his job back , Gloria Price ( Sue Johnston ) hires him to work at The Rovers Return . 
 Gloria confides in Lewis that she is dying and he provides her with support . When she asks him to run away with her , he turns her down and tells her he loves Audrey . Lewis then learns that Gloria is not ill and she and Gail were testing his loyalty to Audrey . Lewis is outraged when he realises Audrey knew what was going on and breaks up with her . He then gets revenge on Gloria by revealing that she has cheated in the local pub of the year competition . Lewis gets his job back at The Bistro and he moves into a flat on Victoria Street . Lewis begins to formulate a plan to get back at Gail for ruining his relationship with Audrey . He decides to use her guilt against her . One night at the Bistro , he pretends to slip and hurt his back . Gail takes pity on Lewis and allows him to stay with her , while she cares for him . During his time with Gail , Lewis offers her his support and advice about her problems . Lewis is not happy when he sees Audrey on a date with another man . 
 While sharing a bottle of wine with Gail , Lewis tries to kiss her . He later introduces her to his friend , Patrick ( Simon Rouse ) , and pretends to turn down a job opportunity in Italy because he loves her . Lewis pays Patrick for his help and tells him that Gail ruined his life , so he is going to do the same to her . Lewis and Gail grow closer and begin dating in secret , although Lewis resists taking things further because of his feelings for Audrey . Lewis attempts to drive a wedge between Gail and her family , before telling her that he has been offered a new life in Italy , running a small hotel . Lewis asks Gail to come with him and she agrees . Audrey is devastated when she learns about their relationship , after catching them together . Gail takes out a £ 40 @,@ 000 loan against her house to fund her trip to Italy , which Lewis plans on taking . He overhears Kylie speaking about a one @-@ night stand she had with Nick and blackmails her into getting Gail 's bank account password for him . Gail gathers her family together to tell them about Italy , but Lewis does not turn up . He instructs them by text message to watch a DVD he has made detailing his revenge plan . He reveals that he has taken Gail 's money and that he deeply loved Audrey . The police later inform Gail that Lewis fled to Belize . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail called Havers ' casting " inspired " and wrote that he had become " synonymous with upper @-@ class cads " following his role as Ralph Ernest Gorse in The Charmer . Stephen wrote , " It 's not often that someone like Lewis strays onto the cobbles . Suave and charming , he 's in a different class to Jack Sugden ( sic ) and co . Although at least none of Weatherfield 's men folk have charged ladies for their company , as , despite his plummy veneer , Lewis is just a gigolo . " In March 2012 , Stephen wrote that Lewis is " charm personified , even if he is a reformed fraudster . " A writer for the Liverpool Daily Post wrote , " Since Lewis ( Nigel Havers ) waltzed into the street , things with the over fifty club ( Rita , Audrey and now Deirdre ) haven 't been the same . " Steve Pratt , writing for The Northern Echo , said , " As love rat scumbags go , Lewis Archer is up there with that chap who tried to push Rita under a tram in Blackpool . " 
 Sue Crawford of the Daily Mirror said , " playing a ladies ' man comes naturally to Nigel Havers so it 's hardly surprising he 's playing a flirt in Coronation Street . " Crawford 's colleague , Simon Boyle , wrote that Lewis was " charming but devious . " Havers ' role in the soap proved popular with female viewers . The actor told entertainment website Digital Spy that he had been sent <unk> of fan mail and underwear . However , other viewers were unhappy with Havers ' character 's treatment of Audrey and the actor received abuse in the street . In November 2011 , Jon Horsley of Yahoo ! said viewers should be excited about Lewis ' return to Coronation Street . <unk> added " It 'll be great to see the old <unk> back on the cobbles . We 're really looking forward to Audrey 's reaction to him , too . " Lewis ' return to Coronation Street was selected for Digital Spy 's Picture of the Day feature . 
 In 2013 , Havers won Best Exit at The British Soap Awards for his portrayal of Lewis . He was also nominated for Villain of the Year . 
 = Rick Ferrell = 
 Richard Benjamin " Rick " Ferrell ( October 12 , 1905 – July 27 , 1995 ) was an American former professional baseball player , coach , scout , and executive . He played for 18 seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) as a catcher for the St. Louis Browns , Boston Red Sox , and Washington Senators , from 1929 through 1947 . His brother , Wes Ferrell , was a major league pitcher for 15 seasons , and they were teammates from 1933 through part of 1938 on the Red Sox and Senators . Following his three seasons in minor league baseball , he appealed to the Commissioner of Baseball to become a free agent , claiming that he was being held in the minors though he deserved promotion . The Commissioner agreed , and he was granted free agency ; he signed with the St. Louis Browns . 
 Ferrell was regarded as one of the best catchers in baseball during the 1930s and early 1940s . While playing for the Red Sox in 1933 , he and his brother Wes were selected to play for the American League ( AL ) team in the inaugural 1933 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game held on July 6 , 1933 . His 1 @,@ 806 games played as a catcher set an AL longevity record which stood for more than 40 years . A seven @-@ time All @-@ Star , Ferrell was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1984 by the Veterans Committee . After his playing career , he became a coach with the Senators , and later a scout and general manager with the Detroit Tigers . He died in July 1995 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Richard Benjamin Ferrell was born on October 12 , 1905 in Durham , North Carolina , to Rufus and Alice , and grew up on a 160 acre dairy farm near Greensboro , North Carolina . He was one of seven boys , and two of his brothers enjoyed long careers in baseball . Wes Ferrell reached the major leagues as a pitcher while another brother , George Ferrell , played as an outfielder in minor league baseball . Rick attended Guilford College in Greensboro where he played both baseball and basketball . 
 In 1926 , he was signed by the Detroit Tigers of the American League ( AL ) , and was assigned to play for the Kinston Eagles of the Virginia League . Shortly afterward , he was promoted to the Columbus Senators of the American Association , and in 1928 he posted a .333 batting average with them . His performance that season earned him an American Association All @-@ Star position . During the season , he personally asked Detroit 's owner , Frank Navin , if the organization had a plan in place to bring him up to the Tigers . Navin told him to be patient and return to Columbus . When the season concluded , another Columbus catcher , Hugh McMullen , was called up to the major leagues , but to the Cincinnati Reds instead of the Tigers . Confused as who actually owned his contract , Ferrell inquired the Reds about his status with the organization , and was again told to return to Columbus . After reading through is contract , he believed he was being unfairly held in the minor leagues , so he petitioned the Commissioner of Baseball , Kenesaw Mountain Landis , to grant him a hearing . It was discovered that Columbus owner , Joseph Carr , had been shopping Ferrell 's contract , receiving offers as high as $ 50 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 689 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , though none were formally presented on paper . Navin protested to Landis , claiming he was unaware of what Carr was doing . After the Commissioner completed his investigation , he determined that the Tigers and Reds had colluded to keep Ferrell in the minor leagues , and directed Carr to shop for buyers . This move by the two teams effectively hid him from the other major league teams ' draft rights to increase Ferrell 's sale price . This was a common , although illegal , practice during this era , so Landis declared Ferrell a free agent , allowing him to sign a contract with any team he chose , except the Tigers . After receiving offers from many major league clubs , he signed a contract with the St. Louis Browns of the AL for $ 25 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 345 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . 
 = = Major leagues = = 
 Ferrell made his major league debut with the Browns on April 19 , 1929 . He spent the 1929 season as a reserve catcher backing up veteran Wally Schang , and had a .229 batting average in 64 games . New Browns manager and former catcher , Bill Killefer , made Ferrell his starting catcher for the next three seasons , and he would catch in more than 100 games in each . His batting average rose to .306 in 1931 , elevating him one to one of the best catchers in the American League . Although he led the league 's catchers in errors and passed balls , he also led the league in assists . In 1932 , Ferrell hit .315 , the best among American League catchers , with 30 doubles and 65 runs batted in . He ended the season ranked thirteenth in voting for the 1932 American League Most Valuable Player Award . 
 On May 10 , 1933 , the financially strained Browns traded Ferrell , along with Lloyd Brown to the Boston Red Sox , in exchange for Merv Shea and some cash . Two months later , Ferrell was selected along with his brother to play for the American League team in the inaugural Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game held on July 6 , 1933 . American League manager Connie Mack used Ferrell to catch the entire game in a 4 – 2 American League victory , even though future Baseball Hall of Fame catchers Mickey Cochrane and Bill Dickey were also on the team . When the Red Sox played the Cleveland Indians two weeks later on July 19 , 1933 , Ferrell hit a home run against his brother Wes , who later hit a home run off Boston pitcher Hank Johnson , marking the first time in major league history that brothers on opposing teams had hit home runs in the same game . Ferrell ended the year with a .290 batting average along with a career @-@ high 77 runs batted in . Although Ferrell once again led American League catchers in errors , he also led in assists and in baserunners caught stealing . Despite the Red Sox ' seventh @-@ place finish , Ferrell ranked twelfth in voting for the 1933 American League Most Valuable Player Award . 
 In 1934 , the Red Sox signed Ferrell 's brother Wes , forming a formidable battery for the next three and half seasons . Rick ended the year with a .297 batting average and led the league 's catchers in fielding percentage and in putouts and finished second in assists . With Ferrell calling the pitches in 1935 , his brother pitched to a 25 – 14 won – loss record , and was runner @-@ up to Hank Greenberg in voting for the 1935 American League Most Valuable Player Award . Ferrell posted a .301 batting average for the year and led the league in baserunners caught stealing . 
 Ferrell had another good year in 1936 , leading the league with a .439 batting average at the beginning of May to earn the starting catcher 's berth for the American League team in the 1936 All @-@ Star Game . He ended the season with a .312 batting average along with career @-@ highs in home runs ( 8 ) and in on @-@ base percentage ( .406 ) . He also led the league 's catchers in putouts and finished second in fielding percentage . In June 1937 , Ferrell was hitting for a .308 batting average when he was traded to the Washington Senators along with his brother and Mel Almada for pitcher Bobo Newsom and outfielder Ben Chapman . Between 1933 and 1936 , Ferrell broke Red Sox catchers ' records in batting average , doubles , home runs and runs batted in . His .302 batting average with Boston is currently 15th on the club 's all @-@ time list . 
 Playing with a broken right hand , he ended the year with the Senators and batted .244 over the course of the season . Ferrell rebounded in 1938 with a .298 batting average and led the league in baserunners caught stealing . The Senators released his brother Wes in August 1938 . In May 1941 , Ferrell was traded back to the St. Louis Browns , in exchange for Vern Kennedy , and went on to catch 100 games for the sixth @-@ place Browns . In 1942 , the 36 @-@ year @-@ old Ferrell shared catching duties with Frankie Hayes as the Browns improved to an 82 @-@ 69 won @-@ loss record to finish the year in third place . 
 Ferrell was once again traded ; this time he returned to the Senators in March 1944 . He earned a reputation as one of the best knuckleball catchers in baseball when he had the arduous task of catching for a Senators ' starting pitching staff made up entirely of knuckleball pitchers . Dutch Leonard , Johnny <unk> , Roger Wolff , and Mickey Haefner all threw the notoriously difficult @-@ to @-@ catch knuckleball , making Ferrell the first catcher in major league history to accomplish the feat . Although Ferrell led the league in passed balls due to the unpredictability of the knuckleball , he was still named to his seventh All @-@ Star Game . The Senators ended the season in last place while Ferrell 's former team , the St. Louis Browns won the 1944 American League pennant . 
 Ferrell shared catching duties with Al Evans in 1945 as the Senators started to win regularly . On July 6 , 1945 , Ferrell broke Ray Schalk 's American League record for most games caught with 1 @,@ 721 . The 1945 All @-@ Star Game which was supposed to be played on July 10 was cancelled on April 24 due to wartime travel restrictions , and no All @-@ Stars were officially named that season . In place of the All @-@ Star Game , seven out of eight scheduled interleague games were played on July 9 and 10 that raised funds for the American Red Cross and War Relief Fund . In the final week of the 1945 season , the Senators came within one and a half games of winning the American League pennant , ultimately clinched by the Detroit Tigers . Ferrell retired as a player to become a Senators ' coach for the 1946 season . However , he returned to play as a catcher for 37 games in 1947 , hitting for a .303 batting average . He played his final major league game on September 14 , 1947 at the age of 41 . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career and legacy = = 
 In an 18 @-@ year career , Ferrell played in 1 @,@ 884 games , accumulating 1 @,@ 692 hits in 6 @,@ 028 at bats for a .281 career batting average along with 28 home runs , 734 runs batted in and an impressive on @-@ base percentage of .378 . He hit over .300 four times during his career , and his on @-@ base percentage is eighth all @-@ time among the 50 catchers with 3 @,@ 000 at bats . A patient hitter , Ferrell logged just 277 strikeouts during his career , along with 931 bases on balls . He ended his career with a <unk> fielding percentage . An eight @-@ time All @-@ Star with a strong throwing arm , he led American League catchers four times in baserunners caught stealing , and twice in assists and putouts . Ferrell retired having caught 1 @,@ 806 games , an American League record that stood until Carlton Fisk surpassed it in 1988 . He currently ranks 12th all @-@ time in games played as a catcher . 
 Ferrell continued as a coach for the Senators in 1948 and 1949 . He then joined the Detroit Tigers as a coach from 1950 to 1954 before retiring from the field altogether . Afterwards , he served as a scout then as the scouting director for the Tigers before becoming the general manager and vice president in 1959 . During his tenure as a Tigers executive , the team won two World Series championships , in 1968 and in 1984 , and won two American League Eastern Division titles in 1972 and in 1987 . 
 In his book , The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract , baseball historian Bill James ranked Ferrell as the third best catcher in the American League during his career , behind only Mickey Cochrane and Bill Dickey . Ferrell was elected by the Veterans Committee , along with Pee Wee Reese , to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1984 . He retired in 1992 at the age of 87 after 42 years with the Tigers organization . 
 Ferrell was married to Ruth Virginia Wilson from 1941 until her death in 1968 . Together they had four children , two sons and two daughters . His family first lived in Greensboro , then later in Grosse Pointe , Michigan . He lived in Troy , Michigan for the remaining 18 years of his life , until he was admitted into a nursing home in Bloomfield Hills , Michigan . It was here that he died of arrhythmia on July 27 , 1995 , and is interred at New Garden Cemetery in Greensboro , North Carolina . 
 = Brien Taylor = 
 Brien <unk> Taylor ( born December 26 , 1971 ) is a former pitcher in minor league baseball . He spent seven seasons in the minor leagues , primarily with the New York Yankees organization . In his career , he had a win – loss record of 22 – 30 , a 5 @.@ 12 earned run average ( ERA ) , and 425 strikeouts . 
 Born in Beaufort , North Carolina , Taylor attended East Carteret High School , where his pitching ability caused him to be chosen by the New York Yankees with the first overall selection in the 1991 Major League Baseball Draft . After two full seasons in the minor leagues , he injured his shoulder in a fight , and was ineffective after returning to baseball . He retired in 2000 , having never played a game above Class AA . Taylor is one of two players to be picked first overall in the MLB draft to never reach the major leagues , the other one being Steve Chilcott . 
 = = Early life and MLB draft = = 
 Taylor was born in Beaufort , North Carolina to parents Willie Ray , who worked as a mason , and Bettie , who was a crab picker at the local seafood plant . He was the second of four children , and was named for the lead character in the movie Brian 's Song . Taylor attended East Carteret High School in Beaufort and played on the school baseball team . In high school , Taylor had a win – loss record of 29 @-@ 6 and an earned run average ( ERA ) of 1 @.@ 25 . He also struck out 213 hitters in 88 innings pitched while walking 28 . His fastball often hit 98 and 99 mph . The New York Yankees selected Taylor with the first overall selection in the 1991 Major League Baseball Draft , and he signed Scott Boras as an advisor , who said of him in 2006 , " Brien Taylor , still to this day , is the best high school pitcher I 've seen in my life . " 
 The Yankees offered Taylor $ 300 @,@ 000 to sign a minor league contract , the typical amount given to the first overall draft choice at that time . However , Boras advised the Taylor family that the previous year 's top @-@ rated high school pitcher , Todd Van Poppel , was given more than $ 1 @.@ 2 million to sign with the Oakland Athletics , and gave up a scholarship to the University of Texas in the process . The Taylors held out for a three @-@ year $ 1 @.@ 2 million contract , even though they had less leverage because Brien 's poor grades in high school prevented him from getting a major college scholarship offer . They threatened the Yankees that Taylor would not sign and instead attend Louisburg College , a local junior college , to get the Yankees to agree to their terms . The Yankees were without the official services of owner George Steinbrenner , who was serving a suspension at the time , but through the media , Steinbrenner said that if the Yankees let Taylor get away , " they should be shot . " Taylor signed for $ 1 @.@ 55 million on August 26 , the day before his classes were set to begin . Further delay would have meant the deal could not be signed until after the school year ended , which coincided with the following year 's draft . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 The Yankees originally planned to bring Taylor up through the minor leagues rapidly , like the Mets did with Dwight Gooden . However , they found he needed a better move to first base to hold base runners , and chose not to expedite his major league debut . Before even playing a game , he was named the game 's top prospect by Baseball America before the 1992 season . He began his professional career with the Fort Lauderdale Yankees , the Yankees ' Class @-@ A Advanced minor league affiliate . His performances with Fort Lauderdale included throwing nine strikeouts against the Osceola Astros in an 8 – 5 victory , as well as a 12 @-@ strikeout , two @-@ hit performance in September against the West Palm Beach Expos . For the season , Taylor had a 6 – 8 win @-@ loss record , a 2 @.@ 57 ERA , and 187 strikeouts in 161 @.@ 1 innings pitched . 
 The next year , Taylor pitched for the Double @-@ A Albany @-@ Colonie Yankees , where the Yankees planned to have Taylor work on his curveball , as they already felt that his fastball was good enough for the major leagues . Entering the season , he was named baseball 's second @-@ best prospect behind Chipper Jones . That year , Taylor had a 13 – 7 record , a 3 @.@ 48 ERA , and 150 strikeouts in 163 innings , and also led the Eastern League with 102 walks . In 1994 , he was expected to pitch for the Triple @-@ A Columbus Clippers of the International League , and start for the Yankees to begin the 1995 season at the latest , dependent on how he would have performed in spring training . After the season ended , the Yankees wanted Taylor to take part in an instructional league to work on his fundamentals . Taylor declined to attend the camp , and instead chose to return to his home in North Carolina . 
 On December 18 , 1993 , Taylor was injured while defending his brother Brenden in a fistfight . The New York Times reported that Brenden confronted a man named Ron Wilson , who he had fought with in Harlowe , North Carolina . Brenden suffered head lacerations in his fight with Wilson . Once Brien found out his brother had been hurt , he and a cousin went to Wilson 's trailer home to confront him . There , Taylor got into an altercation with Jamie Morris , Wilson 's friend , and Taylor fell on his shoulder . According to Wilson , Taylor attempted to throw a <unk> at Morris , and missed , which caused the injury . In the hours following the altercation Boras told reporters the injury was a bruise . However , when the Yankees had Taylor visit Dr. Frank Jobe , he called the injury one of the worst he 'd seen . The following week , Jobe repaired a torn capsule and a torn glenoid labrum in Taylor 's shoulder , which caused him to miss the 1994 season . 
 Taylor returned to baseball in 1995 , and spent the season with the Rookie @-@ level Gulf Coast Yankees . When he returned to the game , after surgery , he had lost 8 mph off his fastball and was unable to throw a curveball for a strike . As a result , in his first season back , he had two wins , five losses , a 6 @.@ 08 ERA , and 54 walks in 40 innings pitched . The Yankees planned to have Taylor spend the 1996 season with the Double @-@ A Norwich Navigators , but he continued to struggle with his control in spring training , saying at one point , " Sometimes I get the ball across the plate , sometimes I feel like I 've never held a ball in my life " . He instead spent the year with the Single @-@ A Greensboro Bats and walked 43 batters in 16 @.@ 1 innings , going 0 – 5 with an 18 @.@ 73 ERA in nine games ; the Yankees removed him from their 40 @-@ man roster as a result . 
 Taylor spent the next two seasons in Greensboro . In 1997 , he walked 52 batters in 27 innings , going 1 @-@ 4 with a 14 @.@ 33 ERA in eight games , and in 1998 , he went 0 @-@ 1 with a 9 @.@ 59 ERA in 13 games . He was released by the Yankees at the end of the 1998 season , and signed with the Seattle Mariners the following year . With the Mariners , Taylor took part in extended spring training , and was released in June due to his inconsistency . After the 1999 season , the Cleveland Indians signed him to a contract and placed him with the Class @-@ A Columbus <unk> . In 2 @.@ 2 innings pitched over five games for Columbus , he gave up 5 hits and 9 walks for a 27 @.@ 00 ERA . 
 = = After baseball = = 
 After retiring from baseball , Taylor moved to Raleigh , North Carolina with his five daughters and worked as a UPS package handler , then worked as a beer distributor . By 2006 , he had moved back home and was working as a bricklayer with his father . In January 2005 , police charged Taylor with misdemeanor child abuse for allegedly leaving four of his children ( ages from 2 to 11 ) alone for more than eight hours . He did not show up for his court date , and at one point there were four outstanding warrants for his arrest . 
 In March 2012 , Taylor was charged with cocaine trafficking after undercover narcotics agents purchased a large quantity of cocaine and crack cocaine from him over a period of several months . He was federally indicted on cocaine trafficking charges in June 2012 . Taylor plead guilty in August 2012 and was sentenced to 38 months in prison , followed by three years ' supervised release . Taylor was Federal Inmate number <unk> @-@ 056 , and was released on September 12 , 2014 . 
 = Mato Dukovac = 
 Mato Dukovac ( 23 October 1918 – September 1990 ) was the leading Croatian fighter ace of World War II , credited with between 40 and 44 confirmed kills . He joined the Air Force of the Independent State of Croatia following the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , and then the Luftwaffe , with which he flew combat missions on the Eastern Front . His tours of the Eastern Front spanned October and November 1942 , February to June 1943 , and October 1943 to March 1944 . He defected to the Soviet Union on 20 September 1944 , and was returned to Yugoslavia in November 1944 . He worked as a flight instructor for the Yugoslav Air Force in Pančevo and Zadar before defecting to Italy in April 1945 . 
 Dukovac left Italy in 1946 and became a captain in the Syrian Air Force . During the 1948 Arab – Israeli War , he flew combat missions against Israel in an American T @-@ 6 Texan . Following the war , he emigrated to Canada and started a family there . He died in Toronto in 1990 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dukovac was born on 23 October 1918 in the town of Surčin , near Zemun , then part of the Kingdom of Croatia @-@ Slavonia , Austria @-@ Hungary . He was an avid glider pilot before he entered the 67th class of the Royal Yugoslav Military Academy in Belgrade in 1937 . He graduated on 1 April 1940 with the rank of <unk> , and commenced pilot training at the 1st Pilot School in Pančevo in October of that year . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Croatian Air Force Legion = = = 
 During the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , Dukovac served with the 2nd Squadron of the Royal Yugoslav Air Force ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Vazduhoplovstvo Vojske Kraljevine Jugoslavije , VVKJ ) at an airfield in Velika Gorica . After the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was defeated and occupied by the Axis powers , Dukovac became a member of the armed forces of the newly created Independent State of Croatia ( Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska , NDH ) . He joined the Air Force of the Independent State of Croatia ( Croatian : Zrakoplovstvo Nezavisne Države Hrvatske , ZNDH ) on 29 April 1941 with the rank of <unk> , and was initially posted to the personnel department of ZNDH headquarters . 
 On 27 June 1941 , the Croatian Legion ( Croatian : Hrvatska Legija ) was formed to fight alongside Germany during its invasion of the Soviet Union , and on 12 July the air component of the Legion was formed . Known as the Croatian Air Force Legion ( Croatian : Hrvatska <unk> Legija , HZL ) it consisted of a bomber group and a fighter group . The HZL formed part of the German Luftwaffe ; its members swore an oath of loyalty to Adolf Hitler , were subject to German disciplinary regulations and wore Luftwaffe uniforms . After attending Luftwaffe training schools , the fighter group was sent to the Eastern Front and designated as 15 . ( Kroatische ) Staffel ( squadron ) of III . Gruppe ( Group ) of Jagdgeschwader 52 ( 52nd Fighter Wing , or JG 52 ) . Meanwhile , Dukovac was transferred to the Luftwaffe <unk> A / B 120 ( pilot school 120 ) in Prenzlau , Germany in September or October . In April 1942 he underwent advanced training , and in June he was transferred to <unk> 4 ( fighter pilot school 4 ) at Fürth . In October 1942 , Leutnant Dubovac and seven other pilots joined 15 . / JG 52 , which was operating in the Caucasus flying Messerschmitt Bf 109G @-@ 2 fighters . On 29 October , Dubovac had his first 15 @-@ minute familiarisation flight , and by the afternoon of that day the new members of the unit were flying as wingmen to the veteran pilots of the Staffel . 
 = = = First victory = = = 
 On 11 November 1942 , Dukovac was flying his 12th mission , escorting Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive bombers to <unk> . During the mission he and his companion were intercepted by Polikarpov I @-@ 16 Rata fighters , and Dubovac downed one of the attackers over the city of Tuapse to register his first confirmed aerial victory . Dukovac was unable to build upon his success at this time , as four days later the whole Staffel rotated back to the NDH because most of the personnel had endured a year of constant combat . The men of 15 . / JG 52 had a break of three months , commencing their return journey on 12 February 1943 , collecting their aircraft at Kraków in German @-@ occupied Poland on 18 February then flying to Lvov . They flew on to Nikolayev on 21 February . The Eastern Front had changed significantly during their absence , with the strategic initiative passing to the Soviets . 
 = = = Second tour = = = 
 On 30 March 1943 , 15 . / JG 52 transferred from Nikolayev to Kerch , and it flew the first missions of its second tour the following day . On 15 April , Dukovac and Feldwebel Viktor <unk> took off on a patrol of the <unk> – <unk> area , and Dukovac shot down a US @-@ made Bell P @-@ 39 Airacobra . Five days later , Dukovac was late taking off and was catching up to his Schwarm when he downed a LaGG @-@ 3 fighter during an engagement with four of the Soviet aircraft , but there were no witnesses to confirm his claim . Later that day , he and three other pilots were escorting a group of Ju 87s and Junkers Ju 88 medium bombers when they came across 25 Soviet fighters and flying boats over the Black Sea . Dukovac claimed another LaGG @-@ 3 , but again no @-@ one witnessed it . The following morning , Dukovac was on patrol with another pilot near <unk> when they came across six Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 3 fighters . Dukovac claimed one , but the other pilot 's aircraft was hit and they had to retire . Later that day , Dukovac and another pilot engaged several LaGG @-@ 3s between Novorossiysk and Gelendzhik ; Dukovac claimed two , one of which was not witnessed . On 22 April , Dukovac was attacking shipping in Novorossiysk when he had to force @-@ land his aircraft with engine problems . He flew another mission in a different aircraft later that day over the Black Sea , downing a Ilyushin DB @-@ 3 bomber . 
 On 25 April , Dukovac and two others flew an escort mission for Henschel Hs 129 ground @-@ attack aircraft and Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 fighters attacking shipping near <unk> @-@ <unk> , during which the Croat pilots assisted in the sinking of two small vessels . On 27 April , Dukovac accounted for another LaGG @-@ 3 between <unk> and <unk> during a Heinkel He 111 escort . Dukovac claimed a victory over another LaGG @-@ 3 during a patrol three days later , but it was not seen by his wingman , as they had become separated during the fight . On 1 May Dukovac sank a small vessel . The following day , he and three other Croat pilots were escorting a group of He 111s when two LaGG @-@ 3s tried to intercept the formation . Dukovac and another pilot both claimed one of the Soviet fighters each , but their destruction was not witnessed . On 3 May , a morning mission saw Dukovac claim one of four LaGG @-@ 3s encountered near <unk> . 
 In the afternoon of 3 May , Dukovac and another pilot were escorting Hs 129s when they encountered a group of seven Ilyushin Il @-@ 2 ground attack aircraft and six fighters . During the engagement , Dukovac 's aircraft was damaged and he force @-@ landed , but not before claiming one of the Il @-@ 2s . The following morning , Dukovac and two others sortied on a He 111 escort mission , after which Dukovac again force @-@ landed , this time near <unk> . On 5 May , Dukovac made three claims : two LaGG @-@ 3s in the morning , and another during a Ju 87 escort mission in the evening . The following evening , Dukovac shot down another LaGG @-@ 3 while escorting Ju 87s . On 8 May , he claimed yet another LaGG @-@ 3 during an escort mission for a Fieseler Fi 156 Storch liaison aircraft . On 12 May , reinforcements arrived for 15 . / JG 52 , in the form of some of the pilots that had served on the first tour of the Eastern Front in 1942 , along with more former VVKJ pilots . 
 Dukovac did not meet further success until 25 May , when he claimed two Supermarine Spitfire V fighters southeast of <unk> . Two days later , he and two other pilots surprised eight LaGG @-@ 3s west of <unk> , all of them claiming one , although Dukovac 's claim not witnessed . On 30 May , he was on another He 111 escort mission when he accounted for another LaGG @-@ 3 . At this juncture there were a spate of defections from 15 . / JG 52 , with pilots flying to Soviet airfields . The remaining pilots were questioned by the Luftwaffe , the Staffel was withdrawn from the front , and the commander of the HZL was replaced . This was the end of the second tour of 15 . / JG 52 on the Eastern Front , during which Dukovac had claimed 14 confirmed and six unconfirmed kills , five of which were later confirmed . 
 = = = Third tour = = = 
 The Luftwaffe decided to replace most of the remaining pilots of 15 . / JG 52 with newly trained men , and several veterans of the Staffel joined them during their fighter training at Fürth . Twelve graduated on 1 October 1943 , and under newly promoted <unk> Oberleutnant Dukovac , they and another two pilots arrived at Nikolayev on 21 October , where they were equipped with eight Bf <unk> and G @-@ 6s . They deployed to their airfield at <unk> and commenced combat missions on 26 October . Three days later , Dukovac scored the first victory of the tour by downing a LaGG @-@ 3 south of Kerch . Over the next two days he claimed an Il @-@ 2 and another LaGG @-@ 3 , then a Ju 87 . 1 November was the most successful day for 15 . / JG 52 for the entire war , with pilots claiming eleven aircraft with no loss , including two Il @-@ 2s for Dukovac . He claimed another two Il @-@ 2s the next day , but his aircraft was badly damaged by the escorting fighters and he crash @-@ landed near <unk> , escaping unhurt . He followed this up with a claim for a DB @-@ 3 on 6 November . On 15 November , the Staffel moved to <unk> , and four days later Dukovac downed yet another LaGG @-@ 3 . At the end of November , the approach of winter reduced flying operations almost to a halt , but Dukovac downed two Il @-@ 2s on 6 December near <unk> for his 30th and 31st confirmed aerial victories . 
 It was not until 12 January that Dukovac added to his tally , a Yakovlev Yak @-@ 1 . On 25 February , Dukovac flew five sorties . On the first he and his wingman downed a Yak @-@ 1 each , and on the second he shot down a Yak and a P @-@ 39 . During his fifth mission , he was shot down by P @-@ 39s and crash @-@ landed , injuring his spine . He was evacuated to a field hospital , but returned to 15 . / JG 52 as soon as he could walk , ten days later , only to find that he had just three pilots fit for duty . Despite the pending arrival of newly trained pilots , the loss of another two pilots by mid @-@ March led the Luftwaffe to decide that attempting to maintain 15 . / JG 52 was futile , and the men were sent home to the NDH . During its three tours , the Staffel had accounted for a total of 297 Soviet aircraft , of which Dukovac had 37 confirmed and eight unconfirmed aerial victories , seven of which were later confirmed . At the beginning of July , the Luftwaffe reconsidered its decision , and the newly promoted Hauptmann Dukovac and a group of veteran and fresh pilots began to make their way back to the Eastern Front . They were transported to Romania and then the Slovak Republic , but no aircraft were provided , and on 21 July the pilots were advised that the HZL was to be disbanded . Despite this , in August they were moved to an airfield in East Prussia , where they took delivery of ten Bf 109G @-@ 14s . At the beginning of September they flew to Lithuania in preparation to rejoin the fray . 
 = = = Defections = = = 
 On 20 September 1944 , Dukovac and another pilot defected to the Soviets after taking off from <unk> airfield . His defection was soon announced by the Red Army . This spelled the end of the Staffel , and the remaining members were withdrawn to East Prussia and retrained as infantry . These men were eventually released from infantry duties in early 1945 and were allowed to return to the NDH , where they were assigned to the ZNDH . In November 1944 , the Soviets handed Dukovac over to the Yugoslav Partisans , who offered him the position of flight instructor with the Yugoslav Air Force ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Jugoslovensko <unk> <unk> , JRV ) . The following month , Dukovac returned to Belgrade as a <unk> in the JRV , and after a conversion to fly Yakovlev fighters , he worked as a flight instructor in Pančevo . By February 1945 , constant provocations and insults directed at him by fellow JRV personnel owing to his service with the ZNDH prompted him to apply for a transfer . In April he was posted to the 1st Pilot Training School in Zadar as an instructor . 
 On 8 August , Dukovac commandeered a de Havilland Tiger Moth biplane , flew it across the Adriatic and defected again , this time to Italy . He was first placed in a refugee camp in Modena , and then one in Bagnoli del Trigno . 
