 The team completed their league programme with a 1 – 0 defeat away to champions Stevenage . York finished in fifth place in the Conference Premier table , which meant they would play Luton in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final . Brodie scored on ninety @-@ minutes to give York a 1 – 0 home win first leg . York won the second leg 1 – 0 away with a Carruthers goal , meaning the tie ended 2 – 0 on aggregate . Following the match , the squad were forced to leave Kenilworth Road through the back of a stand after having missiles thrown at them by a section of Luton fans . The team lost the play @-@ off final 3 – 1 to Oxford at Wembley , in which York scored from an own goal conceded by goalkeeper Ryan Clarke . 
 = = Summary and aftermath = = 
 York spent most of the season in a play @-@ off place , and rose as high as second in February 2010 while they were as low as seventeenth in August 2009 . Their defensive record of thirty @-@ five goals conceded was the third @-@ best in the division , while their record of two home league defeats was the joint second @-@ best . Meredith made the highest number of appearances during the season , appearing in fifty @-@ six of York 's fifty @-@ seven matches . Brodie was York 's top scorer in the league and in all competitions , with twenty @-@ six league goals and thirty @-@ four in total . Rankine was the only other player to reach double figures , with ten goals . 
 York released Clarke , Gall , Mimms , Nelthorpe , O 'Hare and Pacquette at the end of the season , while Graham , Purkiss , Russell and Smith left for Kettering , Oxford , Cambridge and Mansfield respectively . Mackin and Sangaré signed new contracts . York 's summer signings were goalkeeper David Knight on a season @-@ long loan from Histon , defenders Duane Courtney from Kidderminster and Greg Young from Altrincham , midfielder Jonathan Smith from Forest Green , wingers David McDermott from Kidderminster and Peter Till from and Walsall , and striker George Purcell from Braintree Town . York handed professional contracts to two two youth team players , winger Jamie Hopcutt and Lisles . 
 = = Match details = = 
 = = = Conference Premier = = = 
 = = = League table ( part ) = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 = = = FA Trophy = = = 
 = = = Conference Premier play @-@ offs = = = 
 = = Transfers = = 
 = = = In = = = 
 Brackets around club names denote the player 's contract with that club had expired before he joined York . 
 = = = Out = = = 
 Brackets around club names denote the player joined that club after his York contract expired . 
 = = = Loans in = = = 
 = = = Loans out = = = 
 = = Appearances and goals = = 
 Source : 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . 
 Players with names struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Players with names in italics and marked * were on loan from another club for the whole of their season with York . 
 Players listed with no appearances have been in the matchday squad but only as unused substitutes . 
 Key to positions : GK – Goalkeeper ; DF – Defender ; MF – Midfielder ; FW – Forward 
 = Patchway railway station = 
 Patchway railway station is on the South Wales Main Line , serving the Bristol suburbs of Patchway and Stoke Gifford in South Gloucestershire , England . It is 6 miles ( 10 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . Its three letter station code is <unk> . As of 2015 it is managed by Great Western Railway , which is the third franchise to be responsible for the station since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , mainly a train every hour in each direction between Cardiff Central and Taunton . 
 The station was opened by the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway in 1863 with a single platform , 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) west of the current location , but was resited in 1885 when the line was widened to double track . The station once had large buildings and a goods yard , but these were demolished in the late 20th century , with small brick shelters built in their place . The line through Patchway is due to be electrified by 2016 as part of the 21st @-@ century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line . The line from Bristol Parkway to Severn Tunnel Junction is due to be closed for several weeks in Autumn 2016 so Network Rail can upgrade the Patchway Tunnels and the Severn Tunnel . 
 = = Description = = 
 Patchway railway station is located in the Patchway area of South Gloucestershire , within the Bristol conurbation . There is a large Rolls @-@ Royce industrial area to the west of the station , while the area to the north and east is primarily residential . To the south is a large amount of railway land , including the Filton Triangle depot . The station is on the South Wales Main Line between Bristol Parkway and Newport ( South Wales ) , and just off the Cross Country Route north of Filton Abbey Wood and the east end of the Henbury Loop Line . It is 5 miles 77 chains ( 9 @.@ 6 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads and 114 miles 5 chains ( 183 @.@ 6 km ) from London Paddington via Bristol Parkway . The station is just north of Patchway Junctions 1 and 2 , where the lines from Bristol Parkway , Filton Abbey Wood and Henbury converge . The next station east is Bristol Parkway , the next station south is Filton Abbey Wood , and the next station west is Pilning . 
 The station is on a rough north / south alignment , curving towards the west at the north end . There are two platforms , separated by two running lines and connected by an open footbridge . Platform 1 , on the east side of the station and adjacent to the Up Tunnel track , is for trains towards Filton Abbey Wood and Bristol Parkway . Platform 2 , on the west side and adjacent to the Down Tunnel track , is for trains towards Pilning . Both platforms are 121 metres ( 132 yd ) long , and the tracks have a speed limit of 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) . The line through Patchway has a loading gauge of W8 , and handles over 15 million train tonnes per year . It is not electrified , though it is planned to be electrified as part of the 21st @-@ century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line . 
 The main access to the station is from Station Road to the east , however there is also a set of steps and a turnstile into the industrial estate to the west . Facilities at the station are minimal – there are small brick shelters on each platform , but no facilities for buying tickets . There are customer help points , giving next train information for both platforms , as well as dot @-@ matrix displays showing the next trains on each platform . A pay and display car park with 15 spaces , and racks for four bicycles , are on the east side of the station on Station Road . CCTV cameras are in operation at the station . Access to the eastern platform is step @-@ free from the car park , however there is no step @-@ free access to trains . The only public access to the western platform is via the stepped footbridge . 
 From 2002 to 2014 , annual passenger numbers at Patchway more than quintupled , from 16 @,@ 898 to 92 @,@ 540 , and the station was noted in 2013 as having a high growth trend . However , these numbers are still fairly low : Patchway is the <unk> busiest station in Great Britain ( of 2 @,@ 540 ) ; and the fifth busiest station in South Gloucestershire , busier only than Pilning . 
 = = Services = = 
 Patchway is managed by Great Western Railway , which operates most services from the station . The basic service from Monday to Friday is one train per hour in each direction between Cardiff Central and Taunton , with some trains extended beyond Taunton to Exeter St Davids , Paignton or Plymouth . In addition , there is one early morning service to Portsmouth Harbour and a late night service to Westbury , with similar return workings . There is also an early morning CrossCountry service from Cardiff to Manchester Piccadilly via Bristol Temple Meads , and a return working in the evening . On Saturdays there is a similar level of service throughout most of the day , with one train per hour in each direction between Cardiff and Taunton , in addition to the single CrossCountry return service . On Sundays a more limited service operates , with roughly one train every three hours between Cardiff and Westbury , with trains terminating at either Portsmouth Harbour , Brighton or Warminster . Throughout each day , Great Western Railway services between London Paddington and South Wales pass through non @-@ stop , two trains per hour in each direction on weekdays , one train per hour at weekends . 
 All trains southbound call next at Filton Abbey Wood , and almost every train westbound calls next at Severn Tunnel Junction . Despite being the next station along the South Wales Main Line , there is only one weekday service which calls at both Patchway and Bristol Parkway , that being an early morning service from Taunton to Cardiff ; and there is only one train per week in each direction which calls at both Patchway and Pilning , that being a Saturdays @-@ only service . 
 The local services described above are formed using Class 150 , 153 and 158 diesel multiple unit trains . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . The CrossCountry services are operated using Class 220 and 221 Voyager diesel @-@ electric multiple units , and the non @-@ stop services between London and Wales use High Speed Train sets . 
 The standard journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is 13 minutes , and to Cardiff Central is 45 minutes . 
 = = History = = 
 Patchway railway station first opened on 8 September 1863 when services began on the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway ( BSWUR ) , which ran from Bristol Temple Meads to New Passage Pier , north of Bristol on the banks of the River Severn . At New Passage , passengers were transferred to a ferry to cross the Severn to continue on in to Wales . The line , engineered by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , was built as single track 7 ft 1 ⁄ 4 in ( 2 @,@ 140 mm ) broad gauge . Patchway was 6 miles 37 chains ( 10 @.@ 4 km ) from Temple Meads , adjacent to the Bristol to Gloucester road , what is now the A38 Gloucester Road . The station was only a small structure , and very little is known about it . There were initially six trains per day on weekdays in each direction , with three trains per day on Sundays . The BSWUR was amalgamated with the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) , which had from the beginning operated all BSWUR services , in 1868 ; and in 1873 the line was converted to 1 @,@ 435 mm ( 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ) standard gauge . Although the line made travel from Bristol to Wales easier , the change from train to ferry to train was inconvenient , and so a tunnel was built under the Severn . To cope with the anticipated increase in demand , it was decided that the line should be increased to twin track . However , the gradient between Pilning and Patchway , 1 in 68 , was considered undesirably steep for trains heading up the hill towards Bristol , particularly for heavy coal trains , and so a three @-@ mile deviation was built with a 1 in 100 gradient between Pilning and a point south of Patchway . Trains uphill towards Bristol would use the new line , while trains downhill towards Wales would continue to use the steeper , original track . The deviation left the two tracks at Patchway at significantly different levels , and so made the original site impractical for a station . The station was rebuilt 40 chains ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) south along the line at its present site , 5 miles 77 chains ( 9 @.@ 6 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . A boulder and information board marks the site of the original station . 
 The new station opened on 10 August 1885 , and was originally known as " Patchway & Stoke Gifford " , but reverted to " Patchway " from 27 October 1908 . The station was on a north / south alignment and had two platforms , separated by two running lines , with a third line , a goods loop , behind the western platform . There was a goods yard to the south of the station on the eastern side , with an adjacent signal box . As now , the eastern platform was for trains towards Bristol , the western platform for trains towards Wales . The station buildings were of a standard 1880s GWR design , with tall chimneys and fretted wooden canopies . The main building was on the eastern platform , containing the booking office , toilets , and waiting rooms . A matching brick shelter with canopy was built on the western platform . The eastern platform also had a " bicycle house " at the northern end . A large covered and glazed footbridge linked the two platforms . The goods yard included two sidings : a short , south @-@ facing one adjacent to a loading dock ; and a longer north @-@ facing one . There was also a weigh bridge , coal office . At the north end of the station was a south @-@ facing siding and an oil store . The station did not have a dedicated approach road as it was adjacent to the road between Gloucester Road to the west and Gypsy Patch Lane to the south . The road subsequently became known as Station Road . At the time of construction , the station was mostly surrounded by fields , with the Bristol conurbation almost 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) away . 
 In 1900 , almost all trains from London to Wales travelled via Bath and Bristol , with some still routed via Gloucester . However , the final 15 miles ( 24 km ) to Bristol were relatively slow and congested , so a new route was built further north , the GWR 's Badminton Line , now part of the South Wales Main Line , running from Wootton Bassett to a junction just south of Patchway . The new line opened in 1903 , and allowed faster services to Wales . There was a new triangular junction between Patchway and Filton , with the new line coming in from the east . As part of the work , the station signal box was closed , replaced by a larger one closer to the junction on 19 October 1902 . The signal box would later become one of only a few to be double glazed , due to the noise from jet engine testing from the Bristol Siddeley Aero @-@ Engines factory ( now the Rolls Royce factory ) opposite the box . The Henbury Loop Line opened in 1910 , connecting Avonmouth to the main lines south of Patchway . From 1928 , some trains from Bristol would travel in loops via Patchway and Severn Beach . 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , Patchway came under the aegis of the Western Region of British Railways . In 1949 , there were 11 trains towards South Wales and 13 towards Bristol each weekday , with three trains per day in each direction on Sundays . However , by 1965 this had reduced to eight trains on weekdays towards South Wales and six towards Bristol , with no Sunday service . Traffic levels fell - the station was closed to goods traffic on 5 July 1965 , and subsequently had all staff withdrawn on 14 October 1968 . The goods loop was taken up and the station buildings demolished , replaced by small brick shelters . The structure of the footbridge remained , but the roof was removed . The goods yard was repurposed as vehicle storage . 
 In 1974 , when the Local Government Act 1972 came into effect , the southern part of Gloucestershire , including the district of Patchway , became part of the new county of Avon . Avon was disbanded in 1996 , with the region now governed by South Gloucestershire council . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Patchway passed to Regional Railways . When the railway was privatised in 1997 , local services were franchised to Wales & West , which was succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , and rebranded as Great Western Railway in 2015 . From December 2006 , Virgin CrossCountry began operating a single daily service Newcastle Central to Cardiff Central via Bristol Temple Meads and Patchway . This service was taken over by Arriva CrossCountry when the CrossCountry franchise changed hands in 2007 , and then replaced by a daily service each direction between Cardiff Central and Manchester Piccadilly . 
 Since the mid @-@ 2000s , the Severnside Community Rail Partnership have been working to enhance Patchway station . One of the first acts was installing new community notice boards . A local working group was formed to " adopt " the station , and the group negotiated with Rolls Royce to use their CCTV system to cover the station . A successful bid was made to the Department for Transport 's " Access for All " scheme , which provided for improved signage , lighting and seats . A station garden was created in partnership with nearby Patchway Community College , and two decorative mosaics were installed . The disused railway land adjacent to the station was cleared through a Community Payback scheme . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . The CrossCountry franchise is also due to expire in 2019 . 
 The South Wales Main Line from London to Cardiff is due to be electrified by 2016 , as is the line to Bristol Temple Meads . However , the lines to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare and Southampton will not be electrified , so services at Patchway will still be provided by diesel trains , with " Sprinter " units to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing to Weston , as does MP for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . The station footbridge is expected to be replaced with a higher bridge to allow the installation of overhead electrification , and it is hoped that adjacent railway land could be used to expand the car park . There are also calls for the station to be made accessible to disabled users . 
 = 2015 E3 Harelbeke = 
 The 2015 E3 Harelbeke was the 58th edition of the E3 Harelbeke cycling race . It took place on 27 March and was the sixth race of the 2015 UCI World Tour . The defending champion was Peter Sagan ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , who won the 2014 edition in a four @-@ man sprint . The race , while important in its own right as part of the spring classics season , is seen as an important part of riders ' preparation for 2015 Tour of Flanders , one of the cycling monuments that takes place on many of the same roads the following week . 
 The E3 Harelbeke takes place on roads in Flanders , starting and ending in the town of Harelbeke . The primary difficulty in the race is the series of short climbs known as <unk> , some of which are cobbled ; most of these came in the middle part of the race , with a fairly flat final part . 
 The key move of the race was made on the Oude Kwaremont by Geraint Thomas ( Team Sky ) , Zdeněk Štybar ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and Peter Sagan . The three riders rode together for over 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) , maintaining a gap to the chasing peloton . With approximately 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) remaining , Thomas attacked and was able to take a solo victory . He became the first British rider to win the race . Štybar chased and was able to take second place , but Sagan was caught by the main peloton . Štybar 's teammate Matteo Trentin won the bunch sprint for third place . 
 The other major feature of the race was a succession of crashes . Sep Vanmarcke ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) slipped on the Paterberg , though this resulted in nothing worse than a broken shoe ; however , a major crash early in the race caused significant problems for a number of riders . The worst affected was Fabian Cancellara ( Trek Factory Racing ) , one of the major favourites for victory ; he broke two vertebrae , ruling him out of the remainder of the classics season . 
 = = Poster controversy = = 
 About a month before the race took place , in February 2015 , the race organisers published a publicity poster for the race . This poster showed a woman , with her dress raised and underwear with the race logo visible . A cyclist 's gloved hand was reaching out apparently to pinch the woman 's bottom . The poster bore the caption Wie <unk> ze in Harelbeke ? ( " Who squeezes them in Harelbeke ? " ) . This was a reference to Peter Sagan 's actions after the 2013 Tour of Flanders , when he pinched the bottom of Maja <unk> during the podium ceremony after the race . 
 The poster caused significant controversy , especially as the 2011 race had also featured a poster viewed as sexist . The 2015 poster was described as " demeaning " and " misogynistic " . The poster was criticised by the Union Cycliste Internationale ( UCI ) and by the Belgian Jury of Advertising Ethics . In March , a few weeks before the race was held , the poster was withdrawn and replaced . 
 = = Route = = 
 The 2015 edition of the E3 Harelbeke was 215 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 133 @.@ 8 mi ) in length . It started in the Belgian municipality of Harelbeke , where there was a 2 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) neutral zone before the official start . Initially , the route headed north , but after a short distance it turned south @-@ east to reach the town of <unk> after 12 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 0 mi ) . The route then turned north @-@ east through Oudenaarde and reached the first climb , the Katteberg , after 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) . The route briefly went south @-@ east again to reach the second climb , the Leberg , 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) later . Between the Katteberg and the Leberg , there were two flat sections of cobbles , the <unk> and the Haaghoek . The race then entered a long loop without any significant climbs , though it did include the Paddestraat , another flat section of cobbles . This loop first went north @-@ east , reaching Burst after 62 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 38 @.@ 8 mi ) , then south to <unk> @-@ <unk> . The loop turned west at this point , travelling through Geraardsbergen after 86 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 53 @.@ 4 mi ) . 
 The third climb came after 99 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 62 @.@ 1 mi ) at La Houppe . This was the longest climb of the day at 3 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) . The course then turned north to reach the Berg <unk> climb after 108 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 67 @.@ 4 mi ) . The next four climbs came in quick succession over the next 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) : the Boigneberg , the Eikenberg ( the first of the cobbled climbs ) , the <unk> and the Taaienberg . A 15 @-@ kilometre ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) flat section followed , as the course travelled south @-@ west through Ronse , before a turn to the north to tackle the next climb . This was the <unk> , which came after 142 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 88 @.@ 6 mi ) , and it was followed by another turn to the east and the climb of the <unk> after 146 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 91 @.@ 1 mi ) . The <unk> ( after 155 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 96 @.@ 3 mi ) ) and the Kortekeer ( after 156 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 97 @.@ 3 mi ) ) were the next two climbs as the route again approached Oudenaarde . 
 After turning south at <unk> , there were 53 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 32 @.@ 9 mi ) remaining . With 46 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 28 @.@ 7 mi ) remaining , the riders climbed the <unk> . The next section was expected to be the key part of the race : the climbs of the Paterberg and the Oude Kwaremont . The Oude Kwaremont was the final cobbled climb of the day ; at the top of the climb there were 37 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 23 @.@ 4 mi ) left to the end of the race . In past editions of the race this was the section where a decisive breakaway was formed ; the combination of the two climbs is also a major feature of the Tour of Flanders . 
 The route continued south to the penultimate climb of the day , the Karnemelkbeekstraat , with 29 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 18 @.@ 5 mi ) remaining , then turned north @-@ west for the final part of the race . This section was mostly flat ; the only climb was the Tiegemberg with 18 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 11 @.@ 6 mi ) to the finish line . It was expected that riders dropped in the hilly section of the course would try to regain contact on this section . The route continued west and finished where it had started in Harelbeke . 
 = = Teams = = 
 As the E3 Harelbeke is a UCI World Tour event , all 17 UCI WorldTeams were invited automatically and were obliged to send a squad . Seven Professional Continental teams received wildcard invitations . 
 = = Pre @-@ race favourites = = 
 The E3 Harelbeke is part of the spring classics season . It is therefore suited to the riders who ride in the several other similar races through the early part of the season , such as the Omloop Het Nieuwsblad , the Tour of Flanders and the Dwars door Vlaanderen , which are often raced over the same roads . 
 The winner of the 2014 E3 Harelbeke , Peter Sagan ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) was one of the major pre @-@ race favourites , although his early @-@ season form had been mixed and he had won just one race so far in the year . The team 's preparation for the race was also affected by the suspension of the team manager , Bjarne Riis , by the owner Oleg Tinkov , following the team 's poor results . 
 The other principal favourite was Fabian Cancellara ( Trek Factory Racing ) , who won the race in 2013 , 2011 and 2010 . Although he too had had a relatively unsuccessful Milan – San Remo , finishing seventh , he had shown good form in other races in the season . However , one of his most important teammates , Stijn Devolder , crashed in the Dwars door Vlaanderen earlier in the week , potentially affecting Cancellara 's chances . 
 The Etixx – Quick @-@ Step team was also expected to feature in the race . Although Tom Boonen , the leader of the team and a five @-@ time winner of the race , had crashed at Paris – Nice and was absent with injury , the team had several other riders who could compete for the win . These included Niki Terpstra , who was second in 2014 , Zdeněk Štybar and Stijn Vandenbergh . 
 Other favourites included Greg Van Avermaet ( BMC Racing Team ) , Sep Vanmarcke ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) , Alexander Kristoff ( Team Katusha ) and Ian Stannard and Geraint Thomas ( both Team Sky ) . Nairo Quintana ( Movistar Team ) also entered the race as he had the Dwars door Vlaanderen ; he was preparing for cobbled stages at the Tour de France rather than competing for the win . 
 = = Race report = = 
 = = = Early stages = = = 
 The race started without Filippo Pozzato ( Lampre – Merida ) , the 2009 champion , who missed the race due to illness . Shortly after the start , a breakaway was formed by six riders . These were Sjoerd van Ginneken ( Team Roompot ) , Sean De Bie ( Lotto – Soudal ) , Dries Devenyns ( IAM Cycling ) , Sébastien Turgot ( AG2R La Mondiale ) , Kristian Sbaragli ( MTN – Qhubeka ) and Andrea Dal Col ( Southeast Pro Cycling ) . The first significant event took place on the Haaghoek cobbles after about 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) . A water bottle came loose and caused a large crash in the main peloton . A large number of riders crashed , including Fabian Cancellara ( Trek Factory Racing ) , Sebastian <unk> ( Cannondale – Garmin ) , Robert Wagner ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) , Lars Boom ( Astana ) and John Degenkolb ( Giant – Alpecin ) . Most of the riders were able to continue , but Cancellara , one of the favourites to win the race , was forced to abandon it in significant pain . It was immediately clear that he would miss Gent – Wevelgem ; soon afterwards it was announced that he had two broken vertebrae and would miss the rest of the spring classics season . 
 Over the next 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) , the breakaway continued to build their lead over the peloton ; with 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) to race , they had a lead of around six minutes , although Dal Col was dropped . Shortly afterwards , the peloton climbed the Taaienberg , where Daniel Oss ( BMC Racing Team ) , Matteo Trentin ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and Matti Breschel ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) attacked and were soon joined by Tiesj Benoot ( Lotto – Soudal ) . This breakaway was soon brought back by Team Katusha . Nairo Quintana was dropped during this period of racing and abandoned the race . Tinkoff – Saxo , along with Team Sky , took up the chase in earnest and reduced the breakaway 's lead to under two and a half minutes with 67 kilometres ( 42 mi ) left . BMC Racing Team joined in the chase and halved the lead over the next 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) . Van Ginneken was dropped , leaving three riders in the leading group . 
 = = = Paterberg − Oude Kwaremont = = = 
 The riders then entered the crucial section of the Paterberg and Oude Kwaremont . Devenyns attacked alone from the breakaway group , while Sep Vanmarcke ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) attacked the peloton . Vanmarcke was riding the climb in the gutter to one side of the road . He slipped in the mud and had to put a foot down on the cobblestones ; this damaged his shoe and left him unable to clip into his pedal , reducing his ability to apply power on the climbs . He continued with the broken shoe over the Paterberg and Oude Kwaremont until he was able to change it on a flat section of road . Vanmarcke was in a small group of riders that earned a gap on the Paterberg , but they were caught soon afterwards . At this point there a chase group of around 30 riders , half a minute behind Devenyns as they entered the Oude Kwaremont . 
 Marcus Burghardt ( BMC Racing Team ) led the peloton on the first part of the climb , until he was attacked by Geraint Thomas ( Team Sky ) , who was followed by Zdeněk Štybar ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) . After a brief period , Peter Sagan ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) bridged across to Thomas and Štybar ; the three riders then caught and dropped Devenyns . The gap between the leading three and the peloton quickly reached 25 seconds , then was reduced to 15 seconds by BMC . 
 = = = Final stages = = = 
 The gap expanded again to 45 seconds at the foot of the final climb , the Tiegemberg ; on the climb , BMC 's pressure reduced the lead by 20 seconds and dropped several riders from the chasing group . At the top , with 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) left , Oss was leading the group , while Greg Van Avermaet , BMC 's team leader , was a couple of places further back . Van Avermaet was riding on the wheel of Alexandr Kolobnev ( Team Katusha ) , who missed a corner and was forced to brake . Van Avermaet also braked ; this action caused him to somersault over his handlebars and crash , injuring him and taking him out of contention for the rest of the race . 
 With Van Avermaet injured , BMC were no longer riding at the front of the group and the breakaway 's lead quickly grew to 50 seconds , with only Team Katusha 's Luca Paolini leading the chase . The gap was reduced slightly to 40 seconds as the riders entered the last 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) . With 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) left , Thomas attacked the lead group and Štybar waited for Sagan to respond . Sagan , however , was unable to chase Thomas , who built a gap ahead of the other two . Štybar eventually gave chase , but he was unable to catch Thomas . After the race , he attributed his loss to two seconds ' hesitation . Thomas continued alone to win the race ahead of Štybar by 25 seconds . Sagan , meanwhile , was both caught and left behind by the main chase group and finished 30th , over a minute behind Thomas . In the main peloton , Matteo Trentin was led out by his teammates Stijn Vandenbergh and Yves Lampaert . Another teammate , Niki Terpstra , was able to block Alexander Kristoff as he attempted the sprint and Trentin took the third podium place , 38 seconds behind Thomas and 13 behind Štybar . 
 = = Result = = 
 = Tadeusz Rejtan = 
 Tadeusz <unk> ( or Tadeusz Rejtan , rarely <unk> ; 20 August 1742 – 8 August 1780 ) was a Polish @-@ Lithuanian nobleman . He was a member of the Polish Sejm from the constituency of Nowogródek ( today Navahrudak , Belarus ) . Rejtan is remembered for a dramatic gesture he made in September 1773 , as a deputy of the Partition Sejm . There , Rejtan tried to prevent the legalization of the first partition of Poland , a scene that has been immortalized in the painting Rejtan by Jan Matejko . He has been the subject of many other art works , and is a symbol of patriotism in Poland . Despite his efforts , the partition of Poland was legalized soon afterwards . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Tadeusz Rejtan was born on 20 August 1742 in Hruszówka ( now , <unk> , Belarus ) ( date as given in the Polish Biographical Dictionary , some other sources give other dates ) . He was the son of a minor , but relatively wealthy noble , Dominik Rejtan , podkomorzy of Nowogródek ( today Navahrudak , Belarus ) and Teresa Wołodkowicz . He was likely the oldest of five brothers . His brother , Michał , would come to hold the position of <unk> ( scribe ) of Nowogródek . His grandfather , also named Michał , was the <unk> ( treasurer ) of <unk> . The family had been aligned to the powerful Radziwiłł family , and Tadeusz would also pledge his allegiance to them . 
 Afterwards , he served in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania cavalry , in a chorągiew unit of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania . He might have participated in the Confederation of Bar ( 1768 – 72 ) , but historians are not certain about the validity of that claim . 
 In 1773 , in the aftermath of the War of the Bar Confederation , a special session of the Sejm ( Polish parliament ) was convened in Warsaw , capital of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth by its three neighbours ( Russian Empire , Prussia and Austria ) in order to legalize their First Partition of Poland . That Sejm became known as the Partition Sejm . Rejtan was one of the deputies that tried to prevent the legalization of the first partition of Poland , despite threats from the foreign ambassadors . For example , Russian ambassador , Otto von Stackelberg , declared that in the face of refusal the whole capital of Warsaw would be destroyed by the Russians ; other threats included executions , confiscation of estates , and increase of partitioned territory . 
 Rejtan was a deputy to that Sejm , from the constituency of Nowogródek , and the local sejmik gave him very explicit instructions to defend the Commonwealth . On the Sejm 's first day ( 19 April ) , and possibly even in the discussions on the previous days , Rejtan , working together with the Stanisław Bohuszewicz and Samuel Korsak , strongly protested against the proposal of Adam Poniński who wanted to form a confederated sejm ( such as sejm would be immune to the threat of liberum veto ) . Rejtan 's arguments were primarily legal ; he argued that Poniński had no right to be the Sejm Marshal , and that there are no grounds to form a confederated sejm . He also appropriated one of the two Marshal 's staffs . During a discussion with another deputy , Rejtan stated that he was aware that the foreign powers can force the issue , but his intention was to make it clear that any treaty they force through the Sejm would not be unanimously accepted . Rejtan was thus able to disrupt the proceedings on that day . He would attempt to delay and disrupt the proceedings , but he was ignored , overruled and threatened by other deputies , as on 20 April Poniński returned to the Sejm with an escort of Russian and Prussian soldiers . A quickly convened Sejm court begun deliberating on the potential illegality of Rejtan 's actions , but little discussion occurred on that day . 
 The next day , the court sentenced him to imprisonment and confiscation of goods ; that was challenged by Rejtan . Eventually , on 21 April , most of the deputies had signed the act of the confederation , which was accepted by the king . Troops made it difficult for the other deputies to be present in the Sejm chambers , although a dwindling number of deputies , including Rejtan , still were present . To finish forming the confederation and elect Poniński its marshal , some confederation deputies entered the Chambers , passed a motion , and were attempting to leave . This is when Rejtan , in a dramatic gesture , is said to have bared his chest and laid himself down in a doorway , blocking the way with his own body in a dramatic attempt to stop the other members from leaving the chamber where the debate was being held ( leaving of the chamber signified the end of the discussion , and the acceptance of the motion ) . Others tried to block the passage too . Their gesture was dramatic but futile , as the leaving deputies just stepped over Rejtan , and in a commotion pushed through the others . Eventually , just a few deputies , including Rejtan , were left inside ; they refused to leave , hoping to be removed by foreign troops , which would be a symbol of the foreign intervention . Around 22 April , Rejtan and the remaining colleagues left the Sejm chamber after about 36 hours of having little sleep and food ( Rejtan is said to have refused to eat in the Sejm chamber , saying it would disrespect it ) . Eventually however , they left in return for a guarantee from the foreign diplomats that the sentence passed on him would be nullified , and no other repercussions would be carried out . 
 Nonetheless Rejtan would face some difficulties , many orchestrated by Poniński , and had asked general Rupert Scipio von Lentulus , commander of the Prussian garrison stationed in Warsaw for an escort , which he received . Rejtan would remain in Warsaw during the next few years ( the Partition Sejm lasted till 1776 ) , but his influence diminished . He issued a print manifesto in December of 1773 , criticizing the current confederated sejm , and supportive of the Bar Confederation , but it received little publicity . 
 After the partition Rejtan withdrew from political life . He never married . He spent the rest of his days in a small estate at Hruszówka , where he died on August 8 , 1780 . His mental health had deteriorated ; according to some due to distress with the loss of a part of his homeland , but rumours about his erratic behavior date to soon after the Partition Sejm begun in 1773 , before its final motions were passed in 1776 . He is said to have been escorted by his brothers from Warsaw on 19 March 1775 after he had a fit , and was locked in a small family 's mansion which he would never leave up till his death . Eventually he committed suicide , cutting himself with glass ( most detailed accounts say he swallowed it , to prevent being taken by imaginary Russian soldiers he thought were coming for him ) . His exact place of burial is unknown , and exhumation in Hruszówka in 1930 failed to conclusively find his grave . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Rejtan 's dramatic attempt to prevent the partition earned him lasting recognition in Poland , one that began even during the proceedings , as he was lauded by some other deputies . His action was also praised as patriotic and respectable by the Prussian and Russian military commanders in Warsaw , who offered him a military escort to protect him from some confederates ( particularly Poniński was holding a grudge against him ) . Soon , brochures and newspaper articles spread the information about his patriotic gesture throughout Poland and abroad . During the Great Sejm of 1788 – 92 , a decree was passed , commending Rejtan , and deputies discussed a project to put a plaque to his name in the Sejm Chambers . His gesture in the Sejm was less famously repeated by Jan Suchorzewski during that period . 
 He was , and to the present day is , considered a shining example of a patriot . He has been the subject of many art works , poems , songs and books . Writers who mentioned him included Stanisław Staszic , Franciszek D. <unk> , Adam Mickiewicz , Józef Szujski , Leon Wegner , Seweryn <unk> , Jan Lechoń , Artur <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Maria Konopnicka , Kazimierz <unk> , Wiktor <unk> , Marian <unk> , and Jerzy Zawieyski . A bust of Rejtan was funded by his family in 1860 , and is in the National Museum in Kraków . A small monument of him is said to have collapsed in Kraków in 1946 , soon after World War II , and was not rebuilt until 2007 . A medal with his face was issued in the Grand Duchy of Poznań in 1860 . Several portraits of him exist , including one by Franciszek Smuglewicz . However , his most famous depiction is that by Jan Matejko , who showed a more fictionalized version of the events at the Partition Sejm in his 1866 painting , Rejtan na <unk> <unk> 21 <unk> 1773 – <unk> Polski ( Rejtan at the Warsaw Sejm of 21 April 1773 — the Fall Of Poland ) . Numerous schools , streets and military units in Poland bear his name as well . 
 = Branch Closing = 
 " Branch Closing " is the seventh episode of the third season of the American comedy television series The Office and the show 's 35th overall . It was written by co @-@ executive producer Michael Schur and directed by Tucker Gates . An edited version of the episode first aired on November 9 , 2006 on NBC ; later that night , a longer " producer 's cut " edition was released , with deleted scenes edited into the full episode and broadcast on the website NBC.com. This uncut episode is the version included on the Season 3 DVD set . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton and Stamford branches of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , the Scranton branch has varied reactions to news that their branch will close . Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) head to the CFO 's house to convince him not to . When head of the Stamford branch Josh Porter ( Charles Esten ) announces he is quitting , the employees find that the company 's plans have changed . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , an estimated 8 @.@ 05 million viewers watched " Branch Closing " on its first broadcast . Critical reception to the episode was very positive , with one reviewer opining that it " expertly combines character @-@ driven and situational humor , while realistically presenting a major change that advances the stories of all the characters . The result is a fantastically funny , enjoyable and realistic half @-@ hour . " 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) informs Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) that the Scranton branch will close , with a few people transferred to Stamford and the rest laid off . Michael takes the news badly , and soon tells the rest of the office prematurely . 
 Michael and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) decide to confront the CFO at his home . Back at the office , Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) takes this opportunity to break up with Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) , Meredith Palmer ( Kate Flannery ) tries to remember a promise that she made about sleeping with someone on the last day of work , Creed Bratton ( Creed Bratton ) begins selling off the office equipment for profit , and Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) begins relishing the thought of retiring with severance . 
 Stamford branch manager Josh Porter ( Charles Esten ) reveals that he has leveraged the situation to obtain a better position at Staples , throwing the restructuring into disarray . The new plan is to close Stamford instead , and Jan offers Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) the number two position in Scranton , but he is reluctant to accept it . 
 The Scranton branch is relieved when they hear they are saved , and Kelly is thrilled that she and Ryan don 't have to break up after all . When Michael and Dwight get the news , they celebrate their success , believing , erroneously , that they accomplished it . After agonizing over the decision , Jim accepts the position and suggests to Karen Filippelli ( Rashida Jones ) that she join him in Scranton . In a talking head interview , Karen admits that even though she does not think he is " into her , " she is " kind of into him " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Branch Closing " was written by co @-@ executive producer Michael Schur and directed by Tucker Gates . On her MySpace blog , actress Jenna Fischer urged readers to watch the episode , declaring that " The stuff [ Michael and Dwight ] do together is the absolute funniest thing ever on our show . And also the most touching ... The entire episode is amazing . I can 't wait for you to see it . " The episode featured recurring guest stars Ed Helms , Rashida Jones , Craig Robinson , and Charles Esten . This episode also marks as Esten 's last appearance in the series . 
 The same night the episode first aired , NBC.com released a " producer 's cut " , which contained additional scenes and extra footage not shown in the first broadcast . Vivi Zigler , the executive vice president NBC digital entertainment and new media , explained that " this is a first @-@ of @-@ its @-@ kind and a real bonus for fans of The Office . It 's also a natural for this show which has continually pushed the envelope in the digital landscape . We 're seeing an incredible audience reaction to the evolving digital extensions of our programming and anticipate this being one of their favorites . " 
 In her weekly blog post for TV Guide , actress Kate Flannery wrote of the producer 's cut , " Isn 't that cool ? I think the Office fans are going to really dig it . I love the Stamford characters . Everyone is so much fun to work with . " This version contained two new story lines and other minor additions and changes , including Meredith remembering an agreement to have sex with a coworker on the final day of employment , Creed selling electronics and furniture from the office , Andy having a plan in case he gets laid off , and Ryan admitting that Kelly has a strange power over him . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Branch Closing " first aired on NBC in the United States on November 9 , 2006 . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by an estimated 8 @.@ 05 million viewers . The episode was broadcast again on March 1 , 2007 in its normal timeslot , receiving a viewership of 6 @.@ 5 million people and a 3 @.@ 0 / 8 rating share among adults aged 18 to 49 . This was consistent with other repeat airings of the series on Thursday nights ; the episode also retained 100 percent of its adult audience from its lead @-@ in , My Name Is Earl . 
 " Branch Closing " has received generally positive reviews from television critics . IGN 's Brian Zoromski rated it 10 out of 10 , making it only one of two third season episodes he deemed a " masterpiece " . He explained that the episode " is a perfect example of why The Office is the best @-@ written comedy currently on the air . The episode expertly combines character @-@ driven and situational humor , while realistically presenting a major change that advances the stories of all the characters . The result is a fantastically funny , enjoyable and realistic half @-@ hour . " Michael Sciannamea of AOL TV felt that because of the poor economy , the episode " surely hit home with quite a number of people , " and added that it shows that Michael " does have a soul ... you ended up rooting for him to save the day . " Sciannamea highlighted Stanley 's reaction to the branch closure as one positive element , though he criticized the Ryan @-@ Kelly storyline as " tiresome . " 
 Entertainment Weekly columnist Abby West lauded the episode , writing that it " had almost everything we could want : all the major players in the mix , an unexpected ( not @-@ really ) twist , a juicy little revelation , and the short @-@ term promise of a Jim / Pam reunion . " She was pleased with the emphasis on Jim and the way he " wonderfully bookended the conflicting emotions Michael inspires . " West also believed that the " writers did a great job of creating the sense of crisis that resulted in the Scranton branch instead absorbing Stamford ( I never trusted that Josh guy ) even though fans of the original knew it was going to end up that way . " Television Without Pity graded " Branch Closing " with an A. 
 = Spotted sandgrouse = 
 The spotted sandgrouse ( Pterocles <unk> ) is a species of ground dwelling bird in the Pteroclididae family . It is found in arid regions of northern and eastern Africa and across the Middle East and parts of Asia as far east as northwest India . It is a gregarious , diurnal bird and small flocks forage for seed and other vegetable matter on the ground , flying once a day to a waterhole for water . In the breeding season pairs nest apart from one another , the eggs being laid in a depression on the stony ground . The chicks leave the nest soon after hatching and eat dry seed , the water they need being provided by the male which saturates its belly feathers with water at the waterhole . The spotted sandgrouse is listed as being of " least concern " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature in its Red List of Threatened Species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The spotted sandgrouse reaches a length of about 33 centimetres ( 13 in ) . The male has a small reddish @-@ brown nape surrounded by a band of pale grey that extends to the bill and round the neck in a collar . The chin , neck and throat are orange and the breast grey . The upper parts are pinkish @-@ grey with dark flight feathers and dark patches on the wings , tail and lower belly . The primaries are pale with dark trailing edges , a fact that distinguishes this species from the crowned sandgrouse ( Pterocles coronatus ) which has completely dark primaries . The female also has an orange throat region but is generally duller in plumage than the male . The body colour is greyish @-@ brown liberally spotted with small dark markings and with dark patches on the wings , tail and lower belly . The central tail feathers in both sexes are elongated but not to the extent that they are in the pin @-@ tailed sandgrouse ( Pterocles <unk> ) . When flying overhead , a dark belly stripe is visible . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The spotted sandgrouse is found in North Africa and the Middle East . In Africa its range extends through Morocco , Algeria , Tunisia , Libya , Sudan , Egypt , Eritrea , Somalia , Ethiopia , Djibouti , Mali , Mauritania , Chad and Niger . In the Middle East it is native to Oman , Saudi Arabia , Israel , Jordan , Syria , Iran , Iraq and Afghanistan and its range extends as far as Pakistan and north west India . It has also been recorded as a vagrant in Italy , the United Arab Emirates and Turkey . It inhabits deserts and semi @-@ arid countryside and is largely resident although there is some local movement of flocks . The population size has not been firmly established but it seems to be stable and the bird seems to be common over most of its extensive range . It is listed as being of " least concern " by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The spotted sandgrouse has a rapid wing beat and flies swiftly . Its call is a musical " <unk> @-@ <unk> " which distinguishes it from other species of sandgrouse with similar plumage . 
 The spotted sandgrouse is a ground @-@ dwelling bird and feeds on seeds and other plant material that it finds among the scrubby vegetation of its dry habitat . During the breeding season it is solitary but at other times of year it is gregarious . Flocks move in to a new feeding ground after a storm has stimulated new green growth . In the Sahara the spotted sandgrouse are particularly fond of a species of spurge and concentrate on this until the foliage begins to <unk> , after which the birds return to their normal diet of seeds . These are abundant on the desert floor , remaining in a dormant state until rain occurs . The birds are very wary and easily frightened . Their chief enemy is the lanner falcon which flies rapidly just above the ground and scoops up any unwary bird . The sandgrouse strategy is to have one bird flying high overhead . When it sees an approaching falcon it gives a warning call and the other sandgrouse freeze . So good is their camouflage that the raptor is unable to detect them and flies on . Sandgrouse need to make a daily journey to a drinking hole , which may be many kilometres from their feeding ground . They land a short distance from the water and maintain a sentinel system here too as , beside the falcons , mammal predators may lurk nearby and nomads may water their herds . When all is safe , another distinctive call from the sentinel bird sends all the others to the pool where their daily water needs are taken up within about fifteen seconds . 
 The journey to the waterhole is undertaken at around dawn when the air is cool . Later in the day , when the air temperature may reach over 50 ° C , the birds are inactive and have the ability to increase their thermal insulation when the air temperature exceeds their body temperatures . At very high temperatures they also resort to gular fluttering and gaping to cool themselves . At night , several flocks coalesce and fly off into the rocky desert far away from any vegetation . Each bird scrapes itself a shallow sleeping hollow by moving from side to side . There are no jerboas or other small mammals in these barren wastes so foxes and jackals do not roam there at night and the birds are safe . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 In the Sahara , breeding takes place in the hottest part of the summer on a stony desert plain . When choosing a nest site , the female scrapes several trial hollows before selecting one of them . The main criterion for selection seems to be the porous nature of the underlying rock . Spongy rock heats up less in the sun and provides a cool spot to nest . Also desirable are one or two " cover stones " close by , chosen because their dense structure attracts dew at night , moisture which drains into the soil and gets absorbed by the porous rock which helps keep the nest cool by day . The nest is made in a shallow depression in the ground without any bedding material and two , occasionally three , eggs are laid . The eggs are elongated ovals in shape , buff with grey and brown blotches and speckles . Their colour and shape makes them difficult to distinguish from the pebbles lying around them . Both parents incubate the eggs and their cryptic colouration makes them almost invisible when sitting on the nest . The eggs hatch after about 20 days . 
 The young are precocial and already covered in down when they emerge from the eggs . Soon after they are hatched the female leads the chicks to one of the many wadis that wind across the plains and there she teaches them to peck at and ingest seeds . It is four or five weeks before they are fledged and able to fly . Meanwhile , the problem of supplying them with water is solved by the male which has specially adapted , absorbent down on his belly . While at the waterhole he immerses himself in the water to saturate the plumage which absorbs a quantity that is sufficient for the chicks to last them until the following day . When he leaves the waterhole with his water @-@ laden feathers , the male emits a repeated high @-@ pitched " queet - queet - queet " calls . When the female and chicks pick up the sounds of his approach , they reciprocate , and by this means the male can find his family even when they have moved away from the nest . On his arrival he assumes an upright posture and raises his wings , displaying the wet belly feathers . This is the sign for the chicks to approach and stand underneath him with their beaks upturned and suck the fluid from between the feathers . 
 If danger threatens , the chicks crouch under a plant or any cover that offers , their dappled brown down merging into the desert scene . The parents are very vigilant in defence of their family . If a jackal approaches , an adult gives a warning cry and all crouch down and freeze . Usually the enemy fails to notice them and passes by . If it gets too close , one of the parents tries to lure it away by flapping along the ground , pretending to be injured and helpless . When the jackal has been led far enough away , the adult " recovers " and flies off . After three or four days , the chicks can be left alone while both parents visit the water hole , and the chicks can guide them back with their " queet - queet " cries . 
 = Armero tragedy = 
 The Armero tragedy ( Spanish : Tragedia de Armero [ <unk> ðe <unk> ] ) was one of the major consequences of the eruption of the Nevado del Ruiz stratovolcano in Tolima , Colombia , on November 13 , 1985 . After 69 years of dormancy , the volcano 's eruption caught nearby towns unaware , even though the government had received warnings from multiple volcanological organizations to evacuate the area when volcanic activity had been detected in September 1985 . 
 As pyroclastic flows erupted from the volcano 's crater , they melted the mountain 's glaciers , sending four enormous lahars ( volcanically induced mudslides , landslides , and debris flows ) down its slopes at 50 kilometers per hour ( 30 miles per hour ) . The lahars picked up speed in gullies and coursed into the six major rivers at the base of the volcano ; they engulfed the town of Armero , killing more than 20 @,@ 000 of its almost 29 @,@ 000 inhabitants . Casualties in other towns , particularly Chinchiná , brought the overall death toll to 23 @,@ 000 . Footage and photographs of Omayra Sánchez , a young victim of the tragedy , were published around the world . Other photographs of the lahars and the impact of the disaster captured attention worldwide and led to controversy over the degree to which the Colombian government was responsible for the disaster . A banner at a mass funeral in Ibagué read , " The volcano didn 't kill 22 @,@ 000 people . The government killed them . " 
 The relief efforts were hindered by the composition of the mud , which made it nearly impossible to move through without becoming stuck . By the time relief workers reached Armero twelve hours after the eruption , many of the victims with serious injuries were dead . The relief workers were horrified by the landscape of fallen trees , disfigured human bodies , and piles of debris from entire houses . This was the second @-@ deadliest volcanic disaster of the 20th century , surpassed only by the 1902 eruption of Mount Pelée , and is the fourth @-@ deadliest volcanic event recorded since 1500 AD . The event was a foreseeable catastrophe exacerbated by the populace 's unawareness of the volcano 's destructive history ; geologists and other experts had warned authorities and media outlets about the danger over the weeks and days leading up to the eruption . Hazard maps for the vicinity were prepared , but poorly distributed . On the day of the eruption , several evacuation attempts were made , but a severe storm restricted communications . Many victims stayed in their houses as they had been instructed , believing that the eruption had ended . The noise from the storm may have prevented many from hearing the sounds from Ruiz until it was too late . 
 Nevado del Ruiz has erupted several times since the disaster , and continues to threaten up to 500 @,@ 000 people living along the Combeima , Chinchina , Coello @-@ Toche , and Guali river valleys . A lahar ( or group of lahars ) similar in size to the 1985 event could potentially travel as far as 100 kilometers ( 60 mi ) from the volcano , and could be triggered by a small eruption . To counter this threat , the Colombian government established a specialized office which promotes awareness of natural threats . The United States Geological Survey also created the Volcano Disaster Assistance Program and the Volcano Crisis Assistance Team , which evacuated roughly 75 @,@ 000 people from the area around Mount Pinatubo before its 1991 eruption . In 1988 , three years after the eruption , Dr. Stanley Williams of Louisiana State University stated that , " With the possible exception of Mount St. Helens in the state of Washington , no other volcano in the Western Hemisphere is being watched so elaborately " as Nevado del Ruiz . Additionally , many of Colombia 's cities have programs to raise awareness of natural disaster planning programs which have helped save lives in natural disasters . Near Nevado del Ruiz in particular , locals have become wary of volcanic activity : when the volcano erupted in 1989 , more than 2 @,@ 300 people living around it were evacuated . 
 = = Background = = 
 Armero , located 48 kilometers ( 30 mi ) from the Nevado del Ruiz volcano and 169 kilometers ( 105 mi ) from Colombia 's capital of Bogotá , was the third largest town in Tolima Department , after Ibagué and <unk> . A prominent farming town before the eruption , it was responsible for roughly one @-@ fifth of Colombia 's rice production , and for a large share of the cotton , sorghum , and coffee crops . Much of this success can be attributed to Nevado del Ruiz , as the fertile volcanic soil had stimulated agricultural growth . 
 Built on top of an alluvial fan that had been host to historic lahars , the town was previously destroyed by a volcanic eruption in 1595 and by mudflows in 1845 . In the 1595 eruption , three distinct Plinian eruptions produced lahars that claimed the lives of 636 people . During the 1845 event , 1 @,@ 000 people were killed by earthquake @-@ generated mudflows near the Magdalena River . 
 Nevado del Ruiz has undergone three distinct eruptive periods , the first beginning 1 @.@ 8 million years ago . During the present period ( beginning 11 @,@ 000 years ago ) , it has erupted at least twelve times , producing ashfalls , pyroclastic flows , and lahars . The historically recorded eruptions have primarily involved a central vent eruption ( in the caldera ) followed by an explosive eruption , then the formation of lahars . Ruiz 's earliest identified Holocene eruption was in about 6660 BC , and further eruptions occurred around 1245 , 850 , 200 BC and in about 350 , 675 , in 1350 , 1541 ( perhaps ) , 1570 , 1595 , 1623 , 1805 , 1826 , 1828 ( perhaps ) , 1829 , 1831 , 1833 ( perhaps ) , 1845 , 1916 , December 1984 through March 1985 , 1987 through July 1991 , and possibly in April 1994 . Many of these eruptions involved a central vent eruption , a flank vent eruption , and a phreatic ( steam ) explosion . Ruiz is the second @-@ most active volcano in Colombia after Galeras . 
 One week before the eruption , the Palace of Justice siege took place . The assailants ( M @-@ 19 a Marxist , Terrorist Insurgency group ) planned to hold a trial involving Colombian President Belisario Betancur . He refused to participate and sent the national army into the building . The attackers were holding several hundred hostages , including the 24 Supreme Court justices and 20 other judges . In the ensuing battle between the two forces , more than 75 hostages died ( including 11 judges ) . This disaster , coupled with the Armero tragedy , spurred the Colombian government to predict and prepare for a broad range of threats . 
 = = 1985 activity = = 
 = = = Precursor = = = 
 In late 1984 , geologists noticed that seismic activity in the area had begun to increase . Increased fumarole activity , deposition of sulfur on the summit of the volcano , and phreatic eruptions also alerted geologists to the possibility of an eruption . Phreatic events , when rising magma encounters water , continued well into September 1985 ( one major event took place on September 11 , 1985 ) , shooting steam high into the air . Activity began to decline in October , probably because the new magma had finished ascending into Nevado del Ruiz 's volcanic edifice . 
 An Italian volcanological mission analyzed gas samples from fumaroles along the Arenas crater floor and found them to be a mixture of carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide , indicating a direct release of magma into the surface environment . Publishing a report for officials on October 22 , 1985 , the scientists determined that the risk of lahars was unusually high . To prepare for the eruption , the report gave several simple preparedness techniques to local authorities . Another team gave the local officials seismographs , but no instructions on how to operate them . 
 Volcanic activity increased again in November 1985 as magma neared the surface . Increasing quantities of gases rich in sulfur dioxide and elemental sulfur began to appear in the volcano . The water content of the fumaroles ' gases decreased , and water springs in the vicinity of Nevado del Ruiz became enriched with magnesium , calcium and potassium , leached from the magma . 
 The thermodynamic equilibration temperatures , corresponding to the chemical composition of the discharged gases , ranged from 200 to 600 ° C ( 400 to 1 @,@ 100 ° F ) ; this is a measure of the temperature at which the gases equilibrated within the volcano . The extensive degassing of the magma caused pressure to build up inside the volcano in the space above the magma , which eventually resulted in the explosive eruption . 
 = = = Preparation and attempted evacuation = = = 
 In September 1985 , as earthquakes and phreatic eruptions rocked the area , local officials began planning for an evacuation . In October , a hazard map was finalized for the area around Nevado del Ruiz . This map highlighted the danger from falling material — including ash and rock — near Murillo , Santa Isabel , and <unk> , as well as the threat of lahars in Mariquita , Guayabal , Chinchiná and Armero . 
 The map was poorly distributed to the people at high risk from Ruiz : many survivors had never heard of it , even though several of the country 's major newspapers featured versions of the map . Henry Villegas of INGEOMINAS ( Colombian Institute of Mining and Geology ) stated that the hazard maps clearly demonstrated that Armero would be affected by the lahars , but that the map " met with strong opposition from economic interests . " He added that because the map was not prepared long before the eruption , mass production and distribution of it in time was difficult . 
 At least one of the hazard maps published in the prominent El Espectador newspaper in Bogotá included glaring errors . Without proper graphic scaling , it was unclear how big the map 's hazard zones really were . The lahars on the map did not have a distinct ending point , and the main threat seemed to be from pyroclastic flows , not from mudflows . Though the map was colored blue , green , red , and yellow , there was no key to indicate what each color represented , and Armero was located in the green zone ( believed to indicate the safest area . 
 Another map published by the El Tiempo newspaper featured illustrations which " gave a perception of topography to the public unfamiliar with maps , allowing them to relate hazard zones to the landscape . " In spite of this presentation that was keyed to the audience , the map ended up a more artistic representation of the risk than a purely scientific one . 
 The day of the eruption , black ash columns erupted from the volcano at approximately 3 : 00 pm local time . The local Civil Defense director was promptly alerted to the situation . He contacted INGEOMINAS , which ruled that the area should be evacuated ; he was then told to contact the Civil Defense directors in Bogotá and Tolima . Between 5 : 00 and 7 : 00 pm , the ash stopped falling , and local officials instructed people to " stay calm " and go inside . Around 5 : 00 pm an emergency committee meeting was called , and when it ended at 7 : 00 pm , several members contacted the regional Red Cross over the intended evacuation efforts at Armero , Mariquita , and Honda . 
 The Ibagué Red Cross contacted Armero 's officials and ordered an evacuation , which was not carried out because of electrical problems caused by a storm . The storm 's heavy rain and constant thunder may have overpowered the noise of the volcano , and with no systematic warning efforts , the residents of Armero were completely unaware of the continuing activity at Ruiz . At 9 : 45 pm , after the volcano had erupted , Civil Defense officials from Ibagué and Murillo tried to warn Armero 's officials , but could not make contact . Later they overheard conversations between individual officials of Armero and others ; famously , a few heard the Mayor of Armero speaking on a ham radio , saying " that he did not think there was much danger " , when he was overtaken by the lahar . 
 = = = Eruption = = = 
 At 9 : 09 pm , on November 13 , 1985 , Nevado del Ruiz ejected dacitic tephra more than 30 kilometers ( 20 mi ) into the atmosphere . The total mass of the erupted material ( including magma ) was 35 million metric tons – only three percent of the amount that erupted from Mount St. Helens in 1980 . The eruption reached 3 on the Volcanic Explosivity Index . The mass of the ejected sulfur dioxide was about 700 @,@ 000 metric tons , or about two percent of the mass of the erupted solid material , making the eruption unusually sulfur rich . 
 The eruption produced pyroclastic flows that melted summit glaciers and snow , generating four thick lahars that raced down river valleys on the volcano 's flanks , destroying a small lake that was observed in Arenas ' crater several months before the eruption . Water in such volcanic lakes tends to be extremely salty , and may contain dissolved volcanic gases . The lake 's hot , acidic water significantly accelerated the melting of the ice , an effect confirmed by the large amounts of sulfates and chlorides found in the lahar flow . 
 The lahars , formed of water , ice , pumice , and other rocks , incorporated clay from eroding soil as they traveled down the volcano 's flanks . They ran down the volcano 's sides at an average speed of 60 kilometers ( 40 mi ) per hour , dislodging rock and destroying vegetation . After descending thousands of meters down the side of the volcano , the lahars followed the six river valleys leading from the volcano , where they grew to almost four times their original volume . In the Gualí River , a lahar reached a maximum width of 50 meters ( 160 ft ) . 
 Survivors in Armero described the night as " quiet " . Volcanic ash had been falling throughout the day , but residents were informed it was nothing to worry about . Later in the afternoon , ash began falling again after a long period of quiet . Local radio stations reported that residents should remain calm and ignore the material . One survivor reported going to the fire department to be informed that the ash was " nothing " . 
 During the night , the electrical power suddenly turned off and the radios went silent . Just before 11 : 30 pm , a huge stream of water swept through Armero ; it was powerful enough to flip cars and pick up people . A loud roar could be heard from the mountain , but the residents were panicked over what they believed to be a flood . 
 At 11 : 30 pm , the first lahar hit , followed shortly by the others . One of the lahars virtually erased Armero ; three @-@ quarters of its 28 @,@ 700 inhabitants were killed . Proceeding in three major waves , this lahar was 30 meters ( 100 ft ) deep , moved at 12 meters per second ( 39 ft / s ) , and lasted ten to twenty minutes . Traveling at about 6 meters ( 20 ft ) per second , the second lahar lasted thirty minutes and was followed by smaller pulses . 
 A third major pulse brought the lahar 's duration to roughly two hours . By that point , 85 percent of Armero was enveloped in mud . Survivors described people holding on to debris from their homes in attempts to stay above the mud . Buildings collapsed , crushing people and raining down debris . 
 The front of the lahar contained boulders and cobbles which would have crushed anyone in their path , while the slower parts were dotted by fine , sharp stones which caused lacerations . Mud moved into open wounds and other open body parts – the eyes , ears , and mouth – and placed pressure capable of inducing traumatic asphyxia in one or two minutes upon people buried in it . Martí and Ernst state in their work Volcanoes and the Environment that they believe that many who survived the lahars succumbed to their injuries as they were trapped , or contracted hypothermia – though the latter is unlikely , given that survivors described the water as warm . 
 Another lahar , which descended through the valley of the Chinchina River , killed about 1 @,@ 800 people and destroyed 400 homes in Chinchina . In total , more than 23 @,@ 000 people were killed , approximately 5 @,@ 000 were injured , and 5 @,@ 000 homes throughout thirteen villages were destroyed . Some 230 @,@ 000 people were affected , 27 @,@ 000 acres ( 110 km2 ) were disrupted , and there were nearly 20 @,@ 000 survivor @-@ refugees . The Armero tragedy , as the event came to be known , was the second @-@ deadliest volcanic disaster of the 20th century , surpassed only by the 1902 eruption of Mount Pelée , and is the fourth @-@ deadliest volcanic eruption recorded since 1500 AD . It is also the deadliest lahar , and Colombia 's worst natural disaster . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 The loss of life was exacerbated by the lack of an accurate timeframe for the eruption and the unwillingness of local authorities to take costly preventative measures without clear signs of imminent danger . Because its last substantial eruption had occurred 140 years earlier , in 1845 , it was difficult for many to accept the danger presented by the volcano ; locals even called it the " Sleeping Lion . " 
 Hazard maps showing that Armero would be completely flooded after an eruption were distributed more than a month before the eruption , but the Colombian Congress criticized the scientific and civil defense agencies for scaremongering . The eruption occurred at the height of guerrilla warfare in Bogotá , Colombia 's capital , and so the government and army were occupied at the time of the eruption . 
 The day after the eruption , relief workers were appalled at its impact . The lahars had left behind a gray mass which covered the entire town . Armero was dotted with broken trees and horribly disfigured human bodies . Debris from huts and homes protruded from beneath the gray mud . A few bags filled with crops were discovered in the mud . Workers described an acrid smell of " rotting bodies , [ ... ] wood smoke and decaying vegetables . " To the horror of these workers , who were scrambling to begin relief efforts , survivors let out moans of pain and agony . The damages were assessed at six billion dollars , an amount approximately one @-@ fifth of Colombia 's 1985 Gross National Product . 
 As news of the catastrophe spread around the world , the ongoing Colombian presidential election stopped , and the guerrilla fighters stopped their campaign " in view of the painful tragedy that has befallen our [ the Colombian fighters ] nation . " Tickets for Colombian national championship soccer games added a surcharge of five cents to go to relief efforts . 
 Scientists who later analyzed the seismograph data noticed that several long @-@ period earthquakes ( which begin strongly and then slowly die out ) had occurred in the final hours before the eruption . Volcanologist Bernard Chouet said that , " the volcano was screaming ' I 'm about to explode ' " , but the scientists who were studying the volcano at the time of the eruption were not able to read the signal . 
 = = Relief efforts = = 
 The eruption occurred at the same time as the 1985 Mexico City earthquake , limiting the amount of supplies that could be sent to each of the disasters . Efforts were organized in Ibagué and Bogotá for Armero and in Cali for Chinchina , where medical teams gathered . Makeshift triage stations were established in <unk> , Guayabal , and Mariquita , and soon were overwhelmed with the sheer number of victims . The remaining victims were directed to Ibagué 's hospitals , as local institutions had already been destroyed or were at risk from further lahars . 
 The US government spent over $ 1 million in aid , and US Ambassador to Colombia Charles S. Gillespie , Jr. donated an initial $ 25 @,@ 000 to Colombian disaster assistance institutions . The Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance of the US Agency for International Development ( AID ) sent one member of the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) , along with an AID disaster @-@ relief expert and 12 helicopters with support and medical personnel from Panama . 
 The US subsequently sent additional aircraft and supplies , including 500 tents , 2 @,@ 250 blankets , and several tent repair kits . Twenty @-@ four other nations contributed to the rescue and assistance of survivors . Ecuador supplied a mobile hospital , and Iceland 's Red Cross sent $ 4 @,@ 650 . The French government sent their own medical supplies with 1 @,@ 300 tents . Japan sent $ 1 @.@ 25 million , along with eight doctors , nurses , and engineers , plus $ 50 @,@ 000 to the United Nations for relief efforts . Another $ 50 @,@ 000 was donated by the Lions Clubs International Foundation . 
 Rescue efforts were hindered by the soft mud that was up to 4 @.@ 6 meters ( 15 ft ) deep in some places , making it virtually impossible for anyone to traverse it without sinking in . To make the situation worse , the highway connected to Armero and several bridges to it had been demolished by the lahars . It took twelve hours for the first survivors to be rescued , so those with serious but treatable injuries probably died before the rescuers arrived . 
 Because Armero 's hospital was destroyed in the eruption , helicopters moved survivors to nearby hospitals . Six local towns set up makeshift emergency relief clinics , consisting of treatment areas and shelters for the homeless . To help with the treatment , physicians and rescue teams came from all over the country . Of the 1244 patients spread over the clinics , 150 died from infection or associated complications . Had antibiotics been readily available and all of their lacerations been thoroughly cleaned , many of these people could have been saved . 
 On November 20 , 1985 , one week later , rescue efforts began to cease . Nearly 4 @,@ 000 relief workers and rescue team members were still searching for survivors , with little hope of finding any . By then , the official death toll was registered at 22 @,@ 540 people ; additional counts showed that 3 @,@ 300 were missing , 20 @,@ 000 homeless , and 4 @,@ 000 injured . Looters raided the ruins and survivors faced concerns of typhus and yellow fever . For most of the relief workers , their job was over . 
 The eruption was used as an example for psychiatric recuperation after natural disasters by Robert <unk> and Leon Eisenberg in their work World Mental Health : Problems and Priorities in Low @-@ Income Countries . The authors were concerned that only initial treatment for the survivors ' psychological trauma was conducted . One study showed that the victims of the eruption suffered from anxiety and depression , which can lead to alcohol abuse , marital problems and other social issues . 
 Rafael Ruiz , an Army Major who briefly served as Armero 's provisional mayor after the disaster , stated that there were survivors who , due to the trauma of the event , were " jittery " , experienced " nightmares " , and suffered from " emotional problems . " He added that the progress made by Christmas of 1985 was considerable , but that there was " still a long way to go . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 A lack of preparation for the disaster contributed to the high death toll . Armero had been built on an alluvial fan that had been overrun by historic mudflows ; authorities had ignored a hazard @-@ zone map that showed the potential damage to the town from lahars . Residents stayed inside their dwellings to avoid the falling ash , as local officials had instructed them to do , not thinking that they might be buried by the mudflows . 
 The disaster gained international notoriety due in part to a photograph taken by photographer Frank Fournier of a young girl named Omayra Sánchez , who was trapped beneath rubble for three days before she died . Following the eruption , relief workers gathered around the girl , speaking with her and listening to her responses . She attracted the attention of the reporters at the site because of her sense of dignity and courage , and caused controversy when people wondered why the media workers had not saved her ( which was impossible without equipment ) . 
 An appeal to the government for a pump to lower the water around her was left unanswered , and she succumbed to gangrene and hypothermia after 60 hours of being trapped . Her death epitomized the tragic nature of the Armero disaster – she could have been saved had the government responded promptly and addressed the concerns over the volcano 's potency . The photograph earned the World Press Photo of the Year for " capturing the event of greatest journalistic importance " . 
 Two photographers from the Miami Herald won a Pulitzer Prize for photographing the effects of the lahar . Dr. Stanley Williams of Louisiana State University said that following the eruption , " With the possible exception of Mount St. Helens in the state of Washington , no other volcano in the Western Hemisphere is being watched so elaborately . " In response to the eruption , the USGS Volcano Crisis Assistance Team was formed in 1986 , and the Volcano Disaster Assistance Program . The volcano erupted several more times between 1985 and 1994 . 
 = = = Anger over government negligence = = = 
 Concerns over the alleged negligence of local officials to alert locals of the volcano 's threat led to controversy . The mayor of Armero , Ramon Rodriguez and other local officials had tried to bring the volcano 's potential eruption to the attention of the Colombian government , but to no avail . For months , Rodriguez appealed to various officials , including congressmen and the Governor of Tolima Department . Rodriguez once referred to the volcano as a " time bomb " and told reporters that he believed an eruption would disrupt the natural dam above Armero , resulting in floods . 
 Despite his persistence , only one congressman managed to inquire about the reality of the situation . Reports from the Colombian Minister of Mines , Minister of Defence , and Minister of Public Works " all asserted that the government was aware of the risk from the volcano and was acting to protect the population " . The lack of responsibility for the disaster prompted lawmakers to campaign for Tolima 's governor ( Eduardo <unk> Garcia ) to resign . In the media , similar thoughts and questions were hotly debated . One of the most aggressive campaigns came from a mass funeral in Ibagué for the victims , claiming that " The volcano didn 't kill 22 @,@ 000 people . The government killed them . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The volcano continues to pose a serious threat to nearby towns and villages . Of the threats , the one with the most potential for danger is that of small @-@ volume eruptions , which can destabilize glaciers and trigger lahars . Although much of the volcano 's glacier mass has retreated , a significant volume of ice still sits atop Nevado del Ruiz and other volcanoes in the Ruiz – Tolima massif . Melting just 10 percent of the ice would produce lahars with a volume of up to 200 million cubic meters – similar to the lahar that destroyed Armero in 1985 . In just hours , these lahars can travel up to 100 km along river valleys . 
 Estimates show that up to 500 @,@ 000 people living in the Combeima , Chinchina , Coello @-@ Toche , and Guali valleys are at risk , with 100 @,@ 000 individuals being considered to be at high risk . Lahars pose a threat to the nearby towns of Honda , Mariquita , <unk> , Chinchina , Herveo , Villa Hermosa , <unk> and La Dorada . Although small eruptions are more likely , the two @-@ million @-@ year eruptive history of the Ruiz – Tolima massif includes numerous large eruptions , indicating that the threat of a large eruption cannot be ignored . A large eruption would have more widespread effects , including the potential closure of Bogotá 's airport due to ashfall . 
 As the Armero tragedy was exacerbated by the lack of early warnings , unwise land use , and the unpreparedness of nearby communities , the government of Colombia created a special program , the Oficina Nacional para la Atención de Desastres ( National Office for Disaster Preparedness ) , now known as the Dirección de Prevención y Atención de Desastres ( Directorate for Disaster Prevention and Preparedness ) – to prevent such incidents in the future . 
 All Colombian cities were directed to promote prevention planning to mitigate the consequences of natural disasters , and evacuations due to volcanic hazards have been carried out . About 2 @,@ 300 people living along five nearby rivers were evacuated when Nevado del Ruiz erupted again in 1989 . When another Colombian volcano , Nevado del <unk> , erupted in April 2008 , thousands of people were evacuated because volcanologists worried that the eruption could be another " Nevado del Ruiz " . 
 The lessons from the Armero tragedy have inspired a lahar warning system for Mt . Rainier , which has a similar potential for lahars . 
 Armero was never rebuilt after the tragedy . Instead , the survivors were relocated to the towns of Guayabal and <unk> , rendering Armero a ghost town . 
 = = = Commemorations = = = 
 A little less than one year later , Pope John Paul II flew over Armero and then visited <unk> 's refugee camps with Colombian President Belisario Betancur . He spoke about the disaster and declared the site of Armero " holy land " . Although many victims of the disaster were commemorated , Omayra Sanchez in particular was immortalized by poems , novels , and music pieces . One work ( Adios , Omayra ) by Eduardo Santa illustrated the girl 's last days of life and her symbolism of the catastrophe . Survivors were also recognized in Germán Santa María Barragán 's dramatized television special titled " No <unk> " ( You Will Not Die ) . Much of the cast was composed of victims of the tragedy who appeared at the cast calls to be extras . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 At the end of 2015 , it was announced that Armero , a film about the tragedy , would be released sometime in 2016 . Directed by Christian Mantilla , the movie tells the story of the events that took place in November 1985 . 
 = Hurricane Ismael ( 1983 ) = 
 Hurricane Ismael was responsible for significant flooding throughout the Inland Empire of the United States in August 1983 . The origins of Hurricane Ismael were from a northward bulge of the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) in early August , which resulted in the formation of a tropical depression on August 8 . Six hours later , it was upgraded into Tropical storm Ismael . Continuing to intensify , Ismael was upgraded into a hurricane late on August 10 and subsequently developed an eye . After bypassing the Revillagigedo Islands , the storm reached its peak wind speed of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . Late on August 11 , Hurricane Ismael began to weaken as it encountered cooler waters . The following day , Ismael was downgraded into a tropical storm . On August 14 , the storm was downgraded into a tropical depression approximately 250 mi ( 400 km ) west of Point Ensenada . After turning north , Ismael dissipated later that day near Guadalupe Island . 
 While still out at sea , Ismael brought 6 – 9 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 7 m ) waves to Southern California , though waves from the storm were less than expected . One person was swept away at a beach . The remnants of the storm later moved over the region , resulting in moderate rainfall . The Yucca Valley was the worst hit by the storm , where nearly every road was washed out . Almost 50 @,@ 000 residents were isolated due to rains . A tornado was spotted near Los Angeles , causing minor damage . In San Bernardino , many buildings were destroyed . Around 80 @,@ 000 homes were left without power across the Inland Empire . Moreover , three interstates were closed . In all , minor injuries were reported , three people died in San Bernardino when their car swept into a channel , and an engineer was killed returning to China Lake when her car was swept into a wash . Damage in the region totaled $ 19 million ( 1983 USD ) . After affecting California , the remnants of the hurricane moved into Nevada . Many parking lots in Laughlin were flooded ; two small towns in Clark County were also isolated . Furthermore , several major streets along the outskirts of Las Vegas were closed because of flooding . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Ismael originated from a northward bulge of the ITCZ in early August . On August 7 , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) reported that this bulge had resulted in the formation of a tropical disturbance centered 500 mi ( 800 km ) south of Acapulco . Late on August 8 , the system was upgraded into a tropical depression . Initially , the storm was expected to turn west and remain at sea ; however , the depression turned northwest instead . Six hours after becoming a tropical cyclone , the low was upgraded into Tropical storm Ismael . 
 After remaining a marginal tropical storm for 18 hours , Ismael began to deepen and by August 10 , it was approaching hurricane intensity . By this time , the storm was forecast to accelerate and approach Guadalupe Island in three days . At 1800 UTC on August 10 , Ismael was upgraded into a hurricane . At <unk> UTC the next day , an eye began to form as the system passed east of the outer Revillagigedo Islands . Nine hours later , the EPHC upgraded the storm into a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) ; simultaneously , the storm reached its peak of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . At the time of its peak , Hurricane Ismael was located about 400 mi ( 640 km ) west of Cabo San Lucas . Sandwiched between a ridge to the west of the hurricane and a trough off the coast of California , Ismael turned west north @-@ west and accelerated . 
 Late on August 11 , Hurricane Ismael began to weaken as it encountered cooler waters . According to the EPHC , the storm was downgraded to a Category 1 on the SSHWS late on August 11 . The following day , Ismael was downgraded into a tropical storm about 380 mi ( 610 km ) west of the Baja California Peninsula . On August 13 , Hurricane Hunters flew through the storm , penetrating the center of circulation twice . During its first penetration , the aircraft reported winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) just east of the center and also noted that the weakening system had a poorly defined eye . Two hours later , the aircraft made its second pass through Tropical Storm Ismael , with the aircraft reporting winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Based on this , the storm was downgraded into a tropical depression while centered about 250 mi ( 400 km ) west of Point Ensenada . After turning north and entering even cooler waters , the storm made landfall on Guadalupe . The depression dissipated later on August 14 about 20 mi ( 30 km ) southwest of Guadalupe Island which is not normally affected by tropical cyclones . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = California = = = 
 While still out at sea , Ismael brought rough seas that lead to one home on the Capistrano Beach being ruled unsafe . Although waves from the storm were less than expected , swells of 6 – 9 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 7 m ) were estimated along south @-@ facing beaches near Santa Barbara . In Malibu , one home was damaged due to the increased surf . In Laguna Beach , in southern Orange County , a 20 @-@ year @-@ old woman was swept off rocks and later died . Overall , Hurricane Ismael was one of six tropical cyclones to bring high waves to the state within a span of a month . 
 On August 11 , the outer rainband 's of Hurricane Ismael brought unseasonably high humidity and thunderstorms to Southern California . Subsequently , flash flood watches were posted for much of Southern California . The remnants of the storm eventually moved over the area , resulting in significant flooding . Some areas sustained 2 in ( 50 mm ) of rain , leading to water depths of 2 to 4 ft ( 61 to 122 cm ) on roadways . The towns of Joshua Tree , Yucca Valley , Twentynine Palms , California , and Landers were the hardest hit . Nearly every road was washed out in the Yucca Valley . 
 Almost 50 @,@ 000 residents in Palm Springs were isolated due to brief , but heavy rains . In addition , a tornado damaged two homes and over seven chimneys near Los Angeles . Heavy rains also drenched the cities of Riverside and San Bernardino while flooding several homes . In the latter , many buildings were destroyed , forcing widespread evacuations . In Rancho Mirage , 24 homes were damaged . One woman had to be rescued after she was swept 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) downstream a river in Los Angeles . Around 80 @,@ 000 homes were left without power across the Inland Empire , though within 24 hours after the outage , power was restored to all but 4 @,@ 000 residents . Moreover , portions of Interstate 10 , 14 , and 215 were closed . The highway the lead into Palm Springs was closed as well , resulting in major traffic jams . In all , minor injuries were reported . However , three people died in San Bernardino when their car swept into a channel . Damage from the storm totaled $ 19 million ( 1983 USD ) . 
 = = = Nevada = = = 
 Heavy rains that preceded the storm forced thousands of gamblers along the Las Vegas Strip to be evacuated and left two people missing . The remnants of the storm later moved into the region , bringing additional flooding . Many parking lots in the resort town of Laughlin were flooded . Furthermore , the villages of Searchlight and Blue Diamond were isolated due to flooding . Several major streets in Paradise were closed because of flooding and sandbag barriers were erected alongside Caesars Palace to prevent further flood damage . In addition , record river levels were measured along the Amargosa River near Death Valley . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 In the Mexican states of Baja California and Baja California Sur , the storm brought high clouds over the region for several days . In Ensenada , minor flooding was recorded . Along the peninsula , waves up to 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) were measured . 
 Residents of Davis County , Utah that were in close proximity of streams were put on alert due to the threat of flooding . The remnants of Hurricane Ismael ultimately brought thunderstorms to Arizona and Utah . In Mohave County , up to 3 in ( 76 mm ) of rain was recorded . Further south and west , in Phoenix , a thunderstorm flooded streets and brought down power lines . 
 = Buildings and architecture of Bristol = 
 Bristol , the largest city in South West England , has an eclectic combination of architectural styles , ranging from the medieval to 20th century brutalism and beyond . During the mid @-@ 19th century , Bristol Byzantine , an architectural style unique to the city , was developed , and several examples have survived . 
 Buildings from most of the architectural periods of the United Kingdom can be seen throughout Bristol . Parts of the fortified city and castle date back to the medieval era , as do some churches dating from the 12th century onwards . Outside the historical city centre there are several large Tudor mansions built for wealthy merchants . Almshouses and public houses of the same period survive , intermingled with areas of more recent development . Several Georgian @-@ era squares were laid out for the enjoyment of the middle class . As the city grew , it merged with its surrounding villages , each with its own character and centre , often clustered around a parish church . 
 The construction of the city 's Floating Harbour , taking in the wharves on the River Avon and Frome , provided a focus for industrial development and the growth of the local transport infrastructure . Key elements of which include the Isambard Kingdom Brunel designed Clifton Suspension Bridge and Temple Meads terminus ; the latter served from 2002 to 2009 as the British Empire and Commonwealth Museum , but is now closed . 
 The 20th century saw further expansion of the city , the growth of the University of Bristol and the arrival of the aircraft industry . During World War II , the city centre was extensively bombed in the Bristol Blitz . The redevelopment of shopping centres , office buildings , and the harbourside continues to this day . 
 = = Medieval ( 11th – 14th century ) = = 
 = = = Defensive = = = 
 The city was defended in medieval times by Bristol Castle , a Norman fortification built on the site of a wooden predecessor . The castle played a key role in the civil wars that followed the death of Henry I. Stephen of Blois reconnoitred Bristol in 1138 and claimed that the town was impregnable . After Stephen 's capture , in 1141 , he was imprisoned in the castle . The castle was later taken into royal hands , and Henry III spent lavishly on it , adding a barbican before the main west gate , a gate tower , and a magnificent hall . By the 16th century , the castle had fallen into disuse , but the city authorities had no control over royal property , and so the castle became a refuge for lawbreakers . In 1630 , the city purchased the castle ; Oliver Cromwell ordered its destruction in 1656 . An area outside the castle , known as Old Market , was used as a mustering point for troops . It later became a market for the country people to set up stalls and sell their wares . Old Market was also the site of an autumn fair . The market may have existed as early as the 12th century , and was the site of the first suburb outside the city walls . It had side roads which could accommodate the traffic on market days . 
 The city had extensive walls built by Geoffrey de Montbray , Bishop of Coutances . These have now largely disappeared , although parts remain on properties in King Street . A gateway in the old wall can now be seen under the tower of the Church of St John the Baptist . 
 = = = Religious = = = 
 The earliest surviving church in Bristol is St James ' Priory in <unk> , Whitson Street . It was founded in 1129 , as a Benedictine priory , by Robert Rufus . The 12th century also saw the founding of All Saints and St Philip and Jacob churches . Temple Church , now in ruins , was built on the site of the oval church of the Knights Templar , a Christian military order forcibly disbanded in 1312 . Either just before or just after the disappearance of the Templars , the church was rebuilt on a rectangular plan and served as a parish church . 
 Bristol Cathedral was founded as St Augustine 's Abbey in 1140 by Robert Fitzharding , along with its associated school , with the building works continuing in the Gothic style until about 1420 . St Mark 's Church was built around 1220 . Soon after , the foundations were laid for Holy Trinity Church in Westbury on Trym . The 12th century also saw the foundation of St Mary Redcliffe , renowned as one of the finest examples of the 15th century Perpendicular style , and the tallest building in the city . Elizabeth I , on a visit to the city in 1574 , described it as the " fairest , goodliest and most famous parish church in England " . These 12th century churches were followed in the 14th century by the construction of Church of St John the Baptist and St Stephen 's Church . 
 Westbury College was a 13th @-@ century College of Priests located in Westbury @-@ on @-@ Trym . A gatehouse , now a National Trust property , was added in the 15th century . 
 = = Tudor ( 15th – early 17th century ) = = 
 The Tudor architectural period , which lasted from the late 15th century into the early 17th century , saw the development of large estates such as Ashton Court . They were built for the local merchants , who gained much of their wealth from the trade passing through Bristol Harbour . Red Lodge was constructed in 1580 for John Yonge as the lodge for a great house that once stood on the site of the present Colston Hall . In 1615 , a number of houses were demolished for the development of the new Fishmarket . 
 During the English Civil War , the Royal Fort was considered the strongest part of Bristol 's defences , and it was to the fort that the Royalists retreated when they found themselves under siege from the Parliamentarians . It fell to the parliamentary forces in 1645 and was subsequently demolished . St Nicholas 's Almshouses were built in 1652 to provide care for the poor . Several public houses were also built in this period , including the Llandoger Trow on King Street and the Hatchet Inn . More churches were built , including St Michael on the Mount Without . It served the St Michaels hill area , one of the first areas outside the city walls to be colonised by the wealthy merchants who were by then trying to escape the overcrowded and unhealthy conditions in the city centre . The city was by this time beginning to expand rapidly beyond its traditional city walls , and the surrounding villages were starting to become suburbs , such as the villages of Horfield and Brislington . Both had their own churches , the Church of the Holy Trinity with St Edmund and St Lukes respectively . 
 = = Stuart ( 1666 – 1713 ) = = 
 The Stuart or English Baroque period ( 1666 – 1713 ) saw more expansion of the city . Large mansions such as Kings Weston House and Goldney Hall were constructed . The needs of the poor and destitute became the responsibility of institutions such as <unk> and the Merchant Venturers Almshouses . The King Street area was developed outside the " Back Street Gate " of the city , home to the King William and Naval Volunteer Public Houses . The nearby Queen Square was planned during this era . In 1669 , a series of four flights of steps , now called Christmas Steps , was constructed to replace a steep , muddy , and narrow street formerly known as Queene Street . Many of the larger houses of this period , including Queen Square , were built for merchant families who were heavily involved in the slave triangle , importing goods from slave plantations . A few African and creole ( American / Caribbean @-@ born ) slaves came to Bristol as servants . 
 = = Georgian ( 18th to 19th century ) = = 
 In 1732 , John Strachan built Redland Court for John Cossins . It now forms one of the buildings making up Redland High School for Girls . In 1760 , the Bristol Bridge Act was carried through parliament by the Bristol MP Sir <unk> Smyth . That led to the demolition of St Nicholas 's Gate , along with the original St Nicholas church , part of the Old Shambles , and thirty houses that stood on the old bridge . The original bridge was a medieval wooden structure , lined with houses on both sides . A 17th @-@ century illustration shows that these were five stories high , including the attic rooms , and that they overhung the river much as Tudor houses would overhang the street . At the time of the Civil War the bridge was noted for its community of goldsmiths , who may have been attracted by the unusually secure premises . The current St Nicholas church was rebuilt in 1762 – 9 by James Bridges and Thomas Paty , who rebuilt the spire . Part of the old church and town wall survives in the 14th century crypt . 
 The 1766 Theatre Royal , which claims to be the oldest continually operating theatre in England , joined with the Coopers ' Hall , from 1744 and designed by architect William Halfpenny , to form the Bristol Old Vic . 
 During the period of Georgian architecture ( about 1720 – 1840 ) the main architects and builders working in Bristol were James Bridges , John Wallis , and Thomas Paty with his sons John and William Paty . They put up hundreds of new buildings , reflecting the increased prosperity that came with the new Floating Harbour and trade based at The Exchange , built in 1741 – 43 by John Wood the Elder . Their early work included the Royal Fort , Blaise Castle House and Arno 's Court estate , with the associated Arno 's Court Triumphal Arch and Black Castle Public House . More modest terraces and squares grew up in the new suburbs such as Hotwells and north into Clifton , including 7 Great George Street , now the Georgian House Museum . It was built around 1790 for John Pinney a successful sugar merchant , and is believed to be the house where the poets William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge first met . It was also home to Pinney 's slave , Pero , after whom Pero 's Bridge at Bristol Harbour is named . 
 In addition to evidence of the wealth brought by the slave trade there are several significant links to the abolitionists . Bristol 's Hannah More was an influential member of the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the African Slave Trade . In the Seven Stars Public House Thomas Clarkson collected evidence for William Wilberforce on the cruelty of the trade in humans . Bristol Cathedral contains several memorials to people active in the abolition cause , including a bust of Robert Southey . John Wesley opposed the trade in humans and in 1774 his sermon at the New Room against slavery was disturbed by explosion . Several plays adopted by the abolitionists were performed at the Bristol Old Vic , including <unk> , the story of an enslaved African and The Padlock , which was praised by Clarkson for its importance to the abolition cause . 
 Several residential squares with terraces of three @-@ storey houses were laid out around central gardens . An example is Portland Square , which was built between 1789 and 1820 , and is now largely occupied by offices . In the 1830s , much of Queen Square was rebuilt following damage caused during the Bristol Riots , and to the north of the city , Kings Square . The most fashionable areas were at the top of the hill , as in wet weather the cesspits overflowed down the hill . Further development , though in a less formal manner , continued along the radial roads to Stokes Croft and Cheltenham , towards Horfield and in the St Phillips , Redcliffe and Bedminster areas . 
 Religious needs in the expanding city were met for several denominations with Redland Chapel and other Church of England buildings appearing , including Christ Church and St Werburghs . Whitefield 's Tabernacle , Kingswood was the first Methodist chapel and a Quaker meeting house known as Quakers Friars was built in 1749 . 
 = = = Regency ( early 19th century ) = = = 
 The term Regency architecture refers primarily to buildings of the early 19th century , when George IV was still Prince Regent , and also to later buildings of the Victorian period which were designed in the same style . It follows closely on from the neo @-@ classical Georgian style of architecture , adding an elegance and lightness of touch . Many buildings in the Regency style have a white painted stucco facade and an entryway to the main front door — usually coloured black — framed by two columns . Regency houses were typically built as terraces or crescents , often in a setting of trees and shrubs . Elegant wrought iron balconies and bow windows were also fashionable . An instigator of this style was John Nash , whose most notable work in Bristol is Blaise Hamlet , a complex of small cottages surrounding a green . It was built around 1811 , for the retired employees of Quaker banker and philanthropist John Scandrett Harford , who owned Blaise Castle House . The cottages are now owned by the National Trust . 
 The Clifton and Cotham areas provide examples of the developments from the Georgian to the Regency style , with many fine terraces and villas facing the road , and at right angles to it . In the early 19th century , the romantic medieval gothic style appeared , partially as a backlash to the symmetry of Palladianism , and can be seen in buildings such as Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery , Royal West of England Academy , and The Victoria Rooms . St Mary on the Quay church was built between 1839 and 1843 , by Richard Shackleton Pope , as a Catholic apostolic chapel for the <unk> congregation : it is now a Roman Catholic church . 
 = = Victorian ( late 19th century ) = = 
 The Victorian era saw further expansion of the city , both in its industrial heartland around the docks and in the suburbs , particularly in Clifton . 
 Palatial squares were developed for the prosperous middle classes . Italianate and Grecian villas , made with Bath Stone and sitting in their own gardens , were built in areas such as Clifton Down . At the same time , hundreds of acres of working class and artisan homes were built , especially in the south and east of the city . To support the growing population , public service buildings such as the Beaufort Hospital ( now Glenside ) , schools such as Clifton College and public houses such as the Mauretania Public House were constructed . 
 Between 1849 and 1870 , five large stone buildings were erected by George Müller to care for 2 @,@ 050 orphans in his Ashley Down orphanage . 
 Cabot Tower is situated in a public park on Brandon Hill . It was built in 1897 by William Venn Gough in memory of John Cabot , 400 years after he set sail from Bristol and landed on what is now Canada . 
 = = = Industrial = = = 
 A notable feature of Bristol 's architecture is the Bristol Byzantine style . Characterised by complicated polychrome brick and decorative arches , this style was used in the construction of factories , warehouses and municipal buildings built in the Victorian era . Surviving examples include the Colston Hall , the Granary on Welsh Back , and the Gloucester Road Carriage Works , along with some of the buildings around Victoria Street . Several of the warehouses around the harbour have also survived , including the Arnolfini , which now houses an art gallery . Clarks Wood Company warehouse , the St Vincent 's Works in Silverthorne Lane , and the Wool Hall in St Thomas Street , are other survivors from the 19th century . 
 The local Pennant sandstone is frequently used as walling material , often with limestone dressings , as found on the old Temple Meads railway station and Clifton Down railway station . Pennant sandstone is also used as large rock @-@ faced squared blocks , described as Pennant rubble , which are used alone , eked out with plain brickwork , or incorporated into the more rugged examples of Bristol Byzantine . Much of the local transport infrastructure including the Clifton Suspension Bridge and the original Temple Meads railway station — now used as the British Empire and Commonwealth Museum — were designed or built by Isambard Kingdom Brunel . 
 In 1864 , after over 100 years of planning , the Clifton Suspension Bridge over the Avon Gorge linked the city to the Ashton Court estate . However , development to the west of the River Avon remained limited . 
 Edward Everard 's printing works with its detailed ceramic frontage was constructed in 1900 . 
 = = 20th century = = 
 In the early part of the 20th century further expansion took place in residential districts increasingly distant from the city centre . Bristol Hippodrome was designed by Frank Matcham , and opened on 16 December 1912 . 
 The Wills Memorial Building was commissioned in 1912 by George Alfred Wills and Henry Herbert Wills , the magnates of the Bristol tobacco company W. D. & H. O. Wills , in honour of their father , Henry Overton Wills III , benefactor and first Chancellor of the University of Bristol . Sir George Oatley was chosen as architect and told to " build to last " . He produced a design in the Perpendicular Gothic style , to evoke the famous university buildings of Oxford and Cambridge . The university also took over several existing houses such as Royal Fort , Victoria Rooms , Clifton Hill House , Goldney Hall , Wills Hall and buildings on Berkeley Square , Park Street and the surrounding areas . Oatley was also involved in the design or restoration of other buildings in Bristol in the early part of the 20th century , including the restoration of John Wesley 's original Methodist chapel , the New Room . 
 The 1930s saw the construction of the Employment Exchange and the planning of the new Council House , although this was not completed until 1956 . As a centre of aircraft manufacturing , Bristol was a target for bombing during the Bristol Blitz of World War II . Bristol 's city centre was severely damaged , especially in November and December 1940 , when the Broadmead area was flattened , and Hitler claimed to have destroyed the city . The original central area , near the bridge and castle , is now a park featuring two bombed @-@ out churches and fragments of the castle . A third bombed church has been given a new lease of life as the St Nicholas ' Church Museum . Slightly to the north , the Broadmead shopping centre was built over bomb @-@ damaged areas . Clifton Cathedral , to the north of the city centre , was built during the early 1970s . 
 Like much of British post @-@ war development , the regeneration of Bristol city centre was characterised by Mid @-@ Century Modern towers such as <unk> , Modernist architecture , and improvement and expansion to road infrastructure . The world 's oldest shot tower in Redcliffe was lost to road development in 1968 , being replaced the following year by the Cheese Lane Shot Tower on a different site . Since the 1990s this trend has been reversing , limiting access with the closure of a number of main roads , whilst the Broadmead shopping centre has been further developed . In 2006 , one of the city centre 's tallest Mid @-@ Century Modern towers was lost , with further historic 20th century structures being destroyed more recently . The transfer of the docks to Avonmouth , 7 miles ( 11 km ) downstream from the city centre , relieved congestion in the centre of Bristol and allowed substantial redevelopment of the old central dock area ( the Floating Harbour ) . The continued existence of the central docks was for some time in jeopardy , as they were seen to be remnants of a derelict industry instead of an asset to be developed for public use . 
 In the 1990s , a harbourside concert hall designed by architects Behnisch & Partners was planned , but an Arts Council decision cut the funding and the project has not been revived . This has left At @-@ Bristol , which mixes art , science and nature , with its all @-@ reflective planetarium , as the centrepiece of the Harbourside development . 
 = = 21st century = = 
 The Broadmead shopping centre was redeveloped in the early years of the century , involving the demolition of one the city 's tallest mid @-@ century towers , Tollgate House , in the construction of Cabot Circus . The former Bristol and West Tower was reworked into a glass skyscraper with glass panels in place of its concrete outer cladding . In 2005 , the city council undertook extensive consultations about the future of tall buildings in Bristol , and identified support for new tall buildings so long as they are well designed , sustainable , distinctive and ' fit ' into the existing urban landscape . 
 In May 2007 , proposals were announced to build approximately 753 @,@ 000 square feet ( 70 @,@ 000 m ² ) net of homes , offices , and business premises in the St Pauls area . The development , if it had been approved , would have included a 600 feet ( 183 m ) , 40 @-@ storey tower next to the M32 motorway , acting as a new entrance to the city . The tower would have been a similar shape to the Swiss Re " Gherkin " tower in London . 
 Planning for the large <unk> Reach development across the Floating Harbour from Castle Park , including the old Georges Brewery buildings , was first granted in 2006 but progress was hampered by the recession and the developers went into receivership . By 2015 the development is part complete with the historic waterfront facade still awaiting regeneration . Since 2013 , Bristol has seen an increase in buildings being built or office blocks being converted for student accommodation . These include <unk> House , St. Lawrence House ( a former office block ) in Broad Street , the former Magistrates Court site and New Bridewell Tower . 
 = = Tallest buildings = = 
 A roster of the tallest buildings constructed in Bristol includes : 
 = Heartbreaker ( Mariah Carey song ) = 
 " Heartbreaker " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey . It was released on September 21 , 1999 by Columbia Records as the lead single from Carey 's seventh studio album , Rainbow ( 1999 ) . The song was written by Carey and Jay @-@ Z and produced by the former and DJ Clue . " Heartbreaker " pushed Carey even further into the R & B and hip @-@ hop market , becoming her first commercial single to feature a hip @-@ hop artist . Lyrically , the song talks about a relationship from the female perspective , and how the protagonist incessantly returns to her lover , even though he continuously cheats on her and breaks her heart . 
 The song received mixed reviews from music critics , many of which felt it was not original or innovative in terms of a creative step forward . Additionally , it was compared heavily to Carey 's previous song " Fantasy " ( 1995 ) , which also built its hook from a sampled beat . " Heartbreaker " topped the charts in Canada and US Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Carey 's 14th chart topper there . Across Europe and Australia , the song topped the charts in New Zealand , and was a top five single in France and the United Kingdom . 
 Carey performed " Heartbreaker " live on several television and award show appearances around the world , as well as on her concert tours . The song 's music video , directed by Brett Ratner , is one of the most expensive ever made , costing over $ 2 @.@ 5 million . The video features Carey and her friends visiting a film theater and catching her boyfriend ( played by Jerry O 'Connell ) on a date with another woman . Carey played herself and a brunette villainess named Bianca , during a physical altercation scene in between the two women . Due to contractual agreements at the time of its filming , Jay @-@ Z was unable to make an appearance in the video , instead being portrayed as an animated cartoon . The video was inspired by several films including Grease and Enter the Dragon . 
 = = Background = = 
 With her sixth studio album , Butterfly ( 1997 ) , Mariah Carey started infusing hip @-@ hop music elements in her songs , working with different and younger record producers and songwriters . After the album 's success , and the release of her first compilation album # 1 's ( 1998 ) , Carey began to work on her seventh studio album , Rainbow ( 1999 ) . Her main focus on the album was to continue on the same path she began with on Butterfly , producing a subtle combination between inspirational ballads and hip @-@ hop beats . " Heartbreaker " marked the first time in Carey 's career that a hip @-@ hop star was included on a lead single , following O.D.B who was featured on the official remix of " Fantasy " in 1995 . While recording the album in Capri , Italy , Carey claimed to have spent most of the time developing what she felt to be a strong lead single . 
 Originally , " Heartbreaker " was intended to be part of Carey 's debut film soundtrack Glitter , however , after the film 's delay , it was included on Rainbow . Prior to the song 's radio release , Carey spoke of it in an interview : " It 's pretty much [ in ] the classic style of my up @-@ tempo classics like ' Fantasy ' or ' Dreamlover , ' [ ... ] But it 's kind of fun and has a new edge to it , I think , and definitely having Jay @-@ Z takes it to a whole ' nother level . And [ DJ ] Clue makes it really fun and stuff . " 
 = = Recording and lyrics = = 
 While developing Rainbow , Carey had different ideas for the lead single . After writing the song 's core lyrics and producing the main idea and melody , DJ Clue , one of the earlier producers in the project , suggested to Carey the use and incorporation of the hook from " Attack of the Name Game " by Stacy Lattisaw . After agreeing to it , they incorporated Carey 's lyrics and melody to the hook , and began recording the song . However , after completing " Heartbreaker " , Carey felt it needed a strong male verse , hoping for a rising hip @-@ hop artist . She chose to work with Jay @-@ Z and began re @-@ arranging the song as he wrote out his verse . Jay @-@ Z wrote his entire verse , and helped produce some of the song 's core instrumentals . In an interview with Fred Bronson , Carey spoke of her experience working with Jay @-@ Z : 
 " It 's fun when you can find someone that you can relate to and that you respect . Jay @-@ Z is someone I admire as a writer and as an artist . We could be sitting in the studio , and he can freestyle a rhyme that would be incredible just off the top of his head . He doesn 't need a pen and paper . I equate that to a singer who can pick up the mike and riff and ad @-@ lib over a song and take you to a totally new place . " 
 Aside from her work with Clue and Jay @-@ Z , Carey 's longtime friend and background singer Trey Lorenz also took part in the song 's production . He provided the back @-@ up vocals in the song , and took part in several small areas of the development of Rainbow . When interviewed by Bronson , Carey spoke highly of Lorenz , " He 's an amazing writer and singer , he 's so influenced by the old school stuff , yet he 's so current . He 's known me since before my first album , and he 's a great , loyal friend . " Aside from the use of the sample and Jay @-@ Z 's verses , " Heartbreaker " contains strong female @-@ empowering lyrics , which Carey wrote as a sort of anthem , especially because she felt that she personally has been in a similar predicament in the past . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Heartbreaker " is a moderately slow , mid @-@ tempo dance @-@ pop track , with hip @-@ hop and R & B influences . According to the music sheet published at Musicnotes.com , the song is written in the key of D ♭ major , while the beat is set in common time which moves at a moderate pace of 92 bpm . It has a sequence of D ♭ – B ♭ m – D ♭ as its chord progression . Carey 's vocals in the song span from the note of D3 to the high note of C7 . The song has a " percolating beat " over which Carey sings with nasal , silken and declarative vocals . The verses are melismatic , meaning , there are multiple notes sung per word or syllable with rapid yet seamless transitions . For example , Carey starts the second verse already in mid @-@ belt " It 's a shame to be " while then going off into a whispering coo for " so euphoric and weak . " 
 Aside from background vocal stylings from Lorenz and other females , Carey added her own lowered vocals into the song , giving the impression of a " doubled voice . " " Heartbreaker " samples R & B and dance singer Stacy Lattisaw 's " Attack of the Name Game " . The song 's hook and loop were taken and incorporated into the melody of " Heartbreaker " , as well as being used as its main instrumental components . The lyrics are constructed in the verse @-@ pre @-@ chorus @-@ chorus form . Carey starts with the hook " Gimme your love , gimme your love , " repeated eight times . Carey repeats the chorus four times , ending the song with a final " Gimme your love , gimme your love . " Chuck Taylor from Billboard described its instrumentation as a " persistent guitar lick " and wrote " There 's an identifiable chorus here , and some semblance of verses , but more than anything , this song comes across as a blur of jumbled in the background , including Carey 's own repetitive harmonies , which in this case sound more like a competition than a compliment . " 
 = = Remix = = 
 The song 's main remix , titled Desert Storm Remix , features female rappers Da Brat and Missy Elliott . It is the first of Carey 's remixes that was produced by Desert Storm Records producer and rapper DJ Clue , who makes an introduction on the remix . The remix contains lyrical interpolations and an instrumental sample from " Ain 't No Fun ( If the Homies Can 't Have None ) " by Snoop Dogg . In an interview with MTV News , Carey spoke of the song 's remix before its official release in August 1999 : " And then the remix . I 'm so excited about the remix . It 's also gonna go on the album , and it features Missy Elliott and Da Brat , and it 's kinda like a girl @-@ power answer record , and it 's to the loop of Snoop [ Dogg ] ' s ' Ain 't No Fun . ' They 're not ready for that one ! " . A separate music video was filmed for the remix , shot in black and white and featuring a cameo appearance by Dogg . The Desert Storm Remix received mixed reviews from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine chose the song as one of the top three cuts on Rainbow , alongside the original . Danyel Smith from Entertainment Weekly called it " [ an ] overblown [ ... ] miscalculation " and wrote " Missy Elliott 's and Da Brat 's bad sexual politics sink the tired ' Heartbreaker [ Remix ] . ' Larry Flick from Billboard , called the remix " muscular " and " street @-@ savvy " and wrote " Missy Elliott and Da Brat lace rhymes into the track , which is enhanced by the sample from Snoop Dogg 's ' Ain 't No Fun ( If The Homies Can 't Have None ) ' . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Heartbreaker " received mixed reviews from contemporary music critics , some of whom compared it heavily to Carey 's previous lead singles . Dara Cook from MTV called the song " airy ditty " and wrote " [ On the song ] Mariah exudes as much sentiment as hollowed @-@ out driftwood . " Cook continued onto the song 's production , writing " By texturing it into the song , producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis have finally found productive use ( other than song closing spectacle ) for Mariah 's high octave shriek . " Allmusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine named " Heartbreaker " as one of his top three choices from the album . Danyel Smith from Entertainment Weekly called the song a " delectable confection " and wrote " she smartly uses Jay @-@ Z 's droll rap about a bratty girlfriend as tart counterpoint to her creamy tones , " however calling it a recycled version of Carey 's previous songs " Dreamlover " ( 1993 ) and " Fantasy " ( 1995 ) . Elysa Gardner from the Los Angeles Times called the song " breezy " and noted how Carey " brings a similarly light , sensuous touch " to " Heartbreaker " . Additionally , Gardner complimented Jay @-@ Z 's rap verses , calling them " sly . " Editor from Rolling Stone Arion Berger , called it " nasal , silken and declarative " while " riding the percolating beat . " Additionally , Berger also compared it to Carey 's " Fantasy " , for its similar usage of a sampled hook . Tom Sinclair from Entertainment Weekly reviewed the song individually , giving it an F. He called it a " rehash " of " Fantasy " and wrote " What self @-@ respecting artist would have the gall to recycle the Tom Tom Club 's ' Genius of Love ' ( the source of ' Fantasy ' ) for a second time in four years ? It 's a given that pop will eat itself , but this sort of self @-@ cannibalization should be illegal . " Chuck Taylor from Billboard gave the song a mixed review , writing " Yes it 's a hit , and her voice is in fine form , but ' Heartbreaker ' is a disappointment in terms of what we know she 's capable of writing . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Heartbreaker " was released on September 21 , 1999 . The song became Carey 's fourteenth chart topper in the US , spending two weeks atop the Billboard Hot 100 . It extended Carey 's lead as the female artist with the most number one singles in the country . The only acts still ahead of Carey were Elvis Presley with seventeen ( a record she surpassed in 2008 with Touch My Body becoming her eighteenth number one single ) and The Beatles with twenty . The song was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Additionally , " Heartbreaker " finished at number thirty @-@ five on the Billboard Year @-@ End of 1999 . In Canada , the song peaked at number one on the Canadian Singles Chart , becoming Carey 's tenth chart topper in the country . In Australia , it entered the Australian Singles Chart at number eleven , on the issue dated October 10 , 1999 . The next week , the song ascended to its peak of number ten , where it stayed for one week , before fluctuating inside the chart for a total of seventeen weeks . " Heartbreaker " was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of over 70 @,@ 000 units within the country . In New Zealand , " Heartbreaker " was met with strong success , debuting at number four on October 10 , 1999 , and topping the singles chart the following week . It spent a total of eleven weeks fluctuating in the singles chart , and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting shipments of over 15 @,@ 000 units . 
 In Europe , the song charted throughout several markets . In Austria , it debuted at number thirty @-@ seven on the singles chart , eventually peaking at number seventeen . In total , " Heartbreaker " spent twelve weeks on the Austrian chart . In the two Belgium territories , Wallonia and Flanders , the song peaked at numbers nine and twenty @-@ seven , and spent nineteen and sixteen weeks on the chart , respectively . In France , the song entered the singles chart at number seventy @-@ seven on October 9 , 1999 . Eventually , it peaked at number four , becoming Carey 's highest charting single there since " Without You " ( 1993 ) , which peaked at number two . The song charted for twenty @-@ five weeks , and was certified gold by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) , denoting shipments of over 400 @,@ 000 units . In Germany , " Heartbreaker " peaked at number nine , spending twenty weeks inside the singles chart . On October 2 , 1999 , it entered the Dutch Single Top 100 at number sixteen , eventually peaking at number seven , and spending a total of eighteen weeks in the chart . In Norway , the song 's success was limited , only peaking at number fourteen and spending only four weeks charting in the countries chart . " Heartbreaker " entered the Swedish Singles Chart at number thirty , on the issue dated October 7 , 1999 . It charted for a total of fourteen weeks , and attained a peak of number eighteen . In Switzerland , it spent twenty @-@ three consecutive weeks in the singles chart , attaining a peak position of number seven , where it stayed for two weeks . On the UK Singles Chart , " Heartbreaker " debuted at its peak position of number five , during the week of November 6 , 1999 . It spent a total of thirteen weeks charting inside the chart , exiting on January 9 , 2000 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video , directed by Brett Ratner , began airing on MTV on August 16 , 1999 following its premiere on the network 's Making the Video series . According to Carey , the goal for the video was to mirror the lyrical content of the song , as well as showing it from a female perspective . Additionally , the video was filmed in a comedic fashion , intended to remain something " fun and exciting . " The video became one of the most expensive ever made , costing over $ 2 @.@ 5 million . Due to its strong female empowering message and nature , the video remains " a fan favorite , " according to MTV News . Carey claimed that two films were used as inspirations , Grease and Enter the Dragon . Prior to filming the video , it became clear that Jay @-@ Z would be unable to appear in the video , due to a contractual agreement not allowing him from appearing in a video for two weeks after he shot for " Girl 's Best Friend , " his track off the soundtrack to the movie " Blue Streak . " Carey then thought of creating the animated section in the video , which was quickly drawn and animated by Ratner 's team . 
 The video begins with Carey driving up to a large movie theater , the Los Angeles Theatre in downtown Los Angeles , with several of her female friends . As they pull up to the front doors , they tell Carey that her boyfriend is inside with another woman , leading her to try to convince them to abort the plan of confrontation . After convincing her , they enter the theater and begin a series of small dance routines alongside some of the theater employees . As the music begins , scenes of them dancing and Carey entering the movie projection room inter @-@ cut . Carey sits behind her boyfriend ( played by Jerry O 'Connell ) and the woman he is cheating with , and spy on them in a comedic way with her female lackeys . Soon after , the still unidentified woman walks towards the bathroom , prompting Carey to follow her during a short interlude in the video . After running into each other by the washroom , the woman appears to be Carey sporting a short brown wig and red seductive clothing . Carey pokes her , starting a large brawl in between the two women . Afterwards , Carey appears to have defeated the woman named Bianca , and heads back towards the movie room . During this scene , Jay @-@ Z 's rap verse is played , while an animated clip of Jay @-@ Z and Carey is projected onto the screen . Later a version of the video leaked where Jay @-@ Z was rapping his verse in a jacuzzi . During the verse , Carey 's friends begin throwing <unk> and other candies at O 'Connell , prompting a small food fight in between them . As they halt their attack on him , Carey walks towards O 'Connell 's seat and acts as though she is Bianca . After she sits next to him and he notices who it is , Carey spills a large soda on his lap and bids him farewell , leaving the theater with her friends smiling . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In order to promote " Heartbreaker " , Carey performed the song live on several television and award show appearances , as well as recorded her own Fox Broadcasting Company special . Titled The Mariah Carey Homecoming Special , it was a mini @-@ concert filmed at Carey 's old high school in Huntington , New York . The special aired on Fox on December 21 , 1999 and featured Jay @-@ Z live on stage for his verses . Carey performed " Heartbreaker " and its accompanying remix at the MTV European Music Awards , held on November 11 , 1999 in Dublin , Ireland . For the performance , Da Brat and Missy Elliott both joined Carey on @-@ stage . Additionally , the song was performed on The Oprah Winfrey Show , which again featured the female duo live on stage , British music chart program Top of the Pops , French program Vivement Dimanche , and The Today Show . 
 For Rainbow , Carey embarked on her fourth and third worldwide tour , titled the Rainbow World Tour ( 2000 ) . Throughout it , Carey performed the song live during every show . The synopsis behind each performance was a wrestling match in between Carey and Bianca , where Carey would sing the remix and original versions of the song throughout each small interlude of the fight . Carey was brought out with boxing gloves to the stage , performing the remix version of the song . After she began wrestling and boxing with Bianca , she defeated her , prompting her to begin the original version of the song . " Heartbreaker " featured a very different set up for Carey 's Charmbracelet World Tour : An Intimate Evening with Mariah Carey ( 2002 – 03 ) . During the tour , Carey wore a sparkling , Swarovski bikini number , and performed both the remix and original versions back @-@ to @-@ back . Several male and female dancers were on stage during the performances , as well as different musicians and back @-@ up vocalists . During Carey 's following tour , The Adventures of Mimi Tour , " Heartbreaker " was once again performed at each of the shows . For the song 's recital , Carey 's donned a black bikini and matching silk cape , as well as Christian Louboutin platform pumps . Several male dancers were present on stage , wearing black overalls and jackets while performing heavy dance routines . For the show at Madison Square Garden in New York City , Carey was joined by both Da Brat and Jay @-@ Z for the remix and original versions , respectively . During the Angels Advocate Tour , the song was paired with Love Hangover by Diana Ross , and performed in a mash @-@ up , the same as she did in VH1 Divas in 2000 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Rainbow liner notes . 
 Mariah Carey – co @-@ production , songwriting , vocals 
 Jay @-@ Z – songwriting , vocals 
 DJ Clue – co @-@ production 
 Narada Michael Walden – songwriting 
 Jeff Cohen – songwriting 
 Shirley Elliston – songwriting 
 Lincoln Chase – songwriting 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Kasim Reed = 
 Mohammed Kasim Reed ( born June 10 , 1969 ) is an American attorney and politician who is the 59th and current mayor of Atlanta , Georgia 's state capital and largest city . 
 A Democrat , Reed was a member of the Georgia House of Representatives from 1998 to 2002 and represented the 35th District in the Georgia State Senate from 2003 to 2009 . He served as campaign manager for Shirley Franklin 's successful Atlanta mayoral campaign in 2001 . After Franklin was term limited from the mayor 's office , Reed successfully ran for the position in 2009 . Inaugurated on January 4 , 2010 , Reed was elected to a second term in 2013 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Reed was born in Plainfield , New Jersey , but his family moved to Fulton County , Georgia , when he was an infant . He was born and raised in a United Methodist household . His father had considered converting to Islam around the time the boy was born , during the early years of desegregation , and named his son Mohammed Kasim , to the consternation of his minister grandfather . Reed graduated from Fulton County 's <unk> Springs Elementary School and Westwood High School , now Westlake High School . 
 According to a DNA analysis , he is a descendant through African ancestral lines of the Igbo people of Nigeria . 
 = = = Howard University = = = 
 Reed attended Howard University in Washington , D.C. , graduating in 1991 with a degree in political science . Students took over the Howard administration building in 1989 , protesting having Republican National Committee Chairman Lee Atwater on the university 's board of trustees , saying that he had contributed to " growing anti @-@ black sentiment in America " through his management of President George H.W. Bush 's campaign . Atwater resigned from the board . Reed disagreed with their action , saying there was nothing wrong with having the Republican Party try to win the votes of black students . He felt it would have been better if Atwater had met with the protesting students , as he might have learned more about their position . For instance , " [ he ] might have gained insight into a generation of students portrayed as destitute and in need of more federal support . " Reed noted " that 85 percent of Howard 's 12 @,@ 000 students receive federal aid . " 
 An early entrepreneur , by 1989 Reed made $ 40 @,@ 000 running a jewelry business which he started at age sixteen . In 1990 he was invited to comment on the Persian Gulf War military buildup on the MacNeil / Lehrer NewsHour . Also , in November of that year he was featured in Black Enterprise . 
 While at college , Reed interned for Congressman Joseph Patrick Kennedy II . During his internship he learned about a federal dollar @-@ for @-@ dollar matching grant program . In his senior year and as the undergraduate trustee on the University 's Board of Trustees , he instituted a $ 15 @-@ per @-@ semester student fee increase to be matched by the federal grant , with monies to be earmarked for the university 's endowment . The fees were expected to total nearly $ 300 @,@ 000 per semester . The estimate was conservative in the sense that it only assumes the fees from slightly more than 75 % of the 12 @,@ 000 students . The four @-@ year totals would approach a $ 2 @.@ 4 million addition to the endowment . Reed earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science in 1991 . He earned his juris doctorate from Howard University School of Law in 1995 . In 2002 Reed was appointed as the youngest General Trustee to serve on Howard 's Board of Trustees and continues to serve on that board . 
 = = Legal career = = 
 After graduation from law school Reed joined the law firm of Paul , Hastings , <unk> & Walker LLP , and later became a partner at Holland & Knight LLP , an international law firm with offices in Atlanta . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Georgia State Representative = = = 
 In 1998 Henrietta Canty ( 1975 – 80 , 1990 – 98 ) , resigned her Georgia House of Representatives 52nd district seat to run for Georgia State Insurance Commissioner . Seven candidates vied for her seat in the July 21 , 1998 Democratic primary election . Reed was the leading vote @-@ getter with 36 @.@ 6 % of the vote , finishing well ahead of community leaders Horace Mann Bond and Eric V. Thomas , the second and third @-@ place finishers , respectively . This resulted in a head @-@ to @-@ head August 11 run @-@ off election , which Reed won with 60 @.@ 6 % of the vote , against the second @-@ place finisher , Horace Mann Bond II , who had received 19 @.@ 1 % of the vote in July . Reed ran unopposed in the November 3 general election and won the Assembly seat . 
 Reed ran a re @-@ election campaign in 2000 , when he was challenged by Clarence Canty , the son of Henrietta Canty , contested the seat , Reed won the July 18 , 2000 Democratic primary by a large margin , with 77 @.@ 0 % & <unk> of the vote . He won by a 12 @.@ 7 % margin . In the November 7 , 2000 general election , he ran unopposed . In the House of Representatives , he represented a predominately African @-@ American constituency in south Atlanta . Reed served as a member of the House Judiciary , Education , and Congressional and Legislative <unk> Committees . 
 While in office , in 2001 Reed served as the campaign manager in Shirley Franklin 's successful election campaign to become the 58th Mayor of Atlanta . As a campaign manager in an election occurring in the shadow of the September 11 attacks , he surveyed potential voters ' perceptions of the propriety of the campaign 's advertising broadcasts . At the time certain ads were thought to focus on sensitive topics . After winning the election , Franklin chose Reed as one of two co @-@ chairs on her transition team . In this role he was charged with identifying and reviewing candidates for cabinet @-@ level positions . 
 In the 2000 election the 52nd House district had been entirely contained in Fulton County . After the <unk> redistricting , the district by this number was entirely within DeKalb County , Georgia , in the November 5 , 2002 election , which was won by Fran Millar . 
 = = = Georgia State Senator = = = 
 In 2000 the 35th Georgia State Senate District was entirely contained in Fulton County , and State Senator <unk> James was an uncontested Democrat in the November 7 general election . In 2002 four @-@ term incumbent Senator James vacated the seat and contested David Scott and an other contenders for the Georgia 's 13th congressional district , which was created after the 2000 census when Georgia added two new congressional districts . When Reed first ran for election in the 35 state senate district in the 2002 Democratic primary , it included 19 precincts in Douglas County , Georgia , and 333 in Fulton County . The district includes the southern portion of Fulton County ( Atlanta , Alpharetta , College Park , East Point , Fairburn , Hapeville , Mountain Park , Palmetto , Roswell , Sandy Springs , and Union City ) and the northeast portion of Douglas County ( Douglasville , and Lithia Springs ) . Reed won the district 's five @-@ way primary on August 20 , 2002 , with 65 @.@ 8 % of the vote , and then he was uncontested in the November 5 , 2002 general election . In 2004 James challenged Reed for the seat she had held before him , but he won the July 20 , 2004 Democratic primary election by a 58 @.@ 8 % – 41 @.@ 2 % margin . He ran unopposed in the November 2 , 2004 general election , and he also ran unopposed in his 2006 and 2008 primary and general elections . 
 In January 2006 , Reed introduced a bill to authorize scholastic teaching of the textbook The Bible and Its Influence by the non @-@ partisan , ecumenical Bible Literacy Project . The bible curriculum bill , which came a few years after Democrats opposed Republican attempts to promote teaching a translation of the scriptures , was an attempt to preempt a Republican attempt to display the Ten Commandments in schools . Faith is an area where Georgia Democrats differ from the national party . The bill passed in the State Senate by a 50 – 1 margin on February 3 , and it eventually became law . 
 Reed 's committee assignments were the following : Senate Judiciary Committee , Special Judiciary Committee , Ethics Committee , Transportation Committee and the State and Local Government Operations Committee . He also serves as vice @-@ chairman of the Georgia Senate Democratic Caucus . He has also served the Georgia Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee as its chairman . In addition , he was a partner at Holland & Knight LLP . Previously , he worked in the music industry for Paul , Hastings , <unk> & Walker LLP . 
 = = = Mayor of Atlanta = = = 
 A month before the February 5 , 2008 Super Tuesday Georgia Democratic primary , Reed endorsed Barack Obama . In March 2008 , Reed announced an exploratory committee , named ONE Atlanta , to investigate his viability as a candidate in the 2009 Atlanta mayoral election . Two @-@ term incumbent Mayor Franklin was term limited and could not run again . His exploratory committee announcement was coupled with an announcement that he would be pursuing a Hillary Clinton @-@ style coalition @-@ building tour . During the summer of 2008 , ONE Atlanta announced that the exploratory committee had become a formal campaign committee . 
 On September 1 Reed resigned from the Georgia Senate to run for mayor . No candidate won a majority in the November 3 general election , and <unk> James defeated Torrey O. Johnson in the runoff election on December 1 to replace Reed . 
 In the November 3 , 2009 election , Reed qualified for a December 1 runoff election against Mary Norwood . According to The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution , Reed had a winning majority in the runoff election that seemed destined to be contested by a recount . The New York Times described the race as too close to call with 98 to 99 percent of the votes counted and Reed leading by only 620 of the 84 @,@ 000 votes cast . On December 9 after the completion of a recount Reed was declared the winner by a margin of 714 votes , after which Mary Norwood officially conceded . Reed took office on January 4 , 2010 . 
 Thomas Friedman has praised Reed in the New York Times for balancing the city 's budget by limiting the pensions of city employees . This money was instead spent on the police force , as well as on community centers in poor neighborhoods ( rather than on reversing the 42 % increase in property taxes passed in 2009 ) . He praises Reed as " combining a soft touch with a hard head . " 
 Reed announced his campaign for re @-@ election as mayor on August 26 , 2013 . He was elected to a second term on November 5 , 2013 . 
 = = Policy positions = = 
 = = = Georgia state flag = = = 
 Since the 1990s , the official State Flag of Georgia had been a center of controversy as it incorporated the historic Confederate flag dating to the American Civil War , which among some people is thought to symbolize resistance to cultural changes in the state . After 2001 changes to the flag which removed this , Governor of Georgia Roy Barnes , who had led the flag @-@ redesign effort , was defeated for re @-@ election ; many thought it was the result of the political backlash . The 1956 version with the Confederate States of America battle emblem , known as a St. Andrew 's cross , was a continuing topic of debate for southern heritage proponents . Reed served as one of Governor Sonny Perdue 's floor leaders in debates that led to the ratification of the current ( 2003 ) version of the state flag . Reed 's leadership in <unk> with Senate Republicans kept the 1956 version of the flag off Perdue 's statewide referendum on the flag in 2003 . The referendum was originally a two @-@ part referendum pitting the 2001 version of the flag against the proposed version and conditional on failed ratification of a new flag considering other flags including the 1956 version . Under this format if the legislators did not approve the newly designed flag over the existing one they could have pursued other designs including the one with the controversial 1956 version of the flag . Reed and a contingent of black legislators from Atlanta limited the referendum to a single vote of preference between the 2003 version and the 2001 version . 
 = = = Gay marriage = = = 
 On May 21 , 2009 , Reed caused controversy in Atlanta 's LGBT community when he stated that he supported civil unions for gays , but not gay marriage . In December 2012 , however , Reed announced his support for marriage equality for same @-@ sex couples . 
 In January 2015 , Reed fired Atlanta Fire Chief Kelvin Cochran following Cochran 's self @-@ publication and distribution of a book without permission from Reed or the City 's Ethics Department . However , Cochran did obtain permission from Nina Hickson , the City of Atlanta 's Ethics Officer . The book , in expressing his interpretation of Christian teaching , describes homosexuality as a " perversion . " Cochran wrote and self @-@ published the book in 2013 . There remain questions regarding whether Mayor Reed knew of the book and its contents before Cochran was fired . Cochran has since filed suit in federal court alleging wrongful termination . 
 In June 2015 , Reed praised the Supreme Court 's ruling in favor of same @-@ sex marriage and ordered Atlanta City Hall to be lit in rainbow colors in celebration of what he called " a momentous victory for freedom , equality , and love . " 
 = = = Transportation investment tax = = = 
 Along with Georgia Governor Nathan Deal , Reed was a major proponent of a campaign for a transportation special @-@ purpose local @-@ option sales tax , which would have levied a 1 % local sales tax for ten years , from 2013 until 2022 , to fund transportation infrastructure projects . Reed said that the passage of the referendum would add jobs and alleviate congestion in the city , while " failing to pass the measure would be economically damaging " for Atlanta . The proposal was defeated in a referendum , however . Reed stated that he would " work with opponents on the next plan to ease congestion . " 
 = = Support of Hillary Clinton presidential candidacy = = 
 Reed came to national attention for his support of the candidacy of Hillary Clinton for the U.S. Democratic Party nomination for president . A column published under his name on CNN.com saying that Clinton 's main opponent was " out of step " with Democrats was written by <unk> Johnson , a lobbyist for the <unk> Group , Honda , MGM Resorts International and other corporate clients . It was then edited by Correct the Record , a Clinton @-@ supporting Super PAC , before publication . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 Mayor Reed 's civic leadership and service have been nationally recognized in publications such as the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution , the Washington Post , the New York Times , Ebony , and Black Enterprise . He was selected as one of Georgia Trend magazine 's " 40 under 40 Rising Stars " in 2001 , one of " 10 Outstanding Atlantans " in Outstanding Atlanta , a member of the Leadership Georgia Class of 2000 , and a Board Member of the Metropolitan Atlanta Arts Fund . 2011 , he received an honorary degree in Doctor of Laws from Oglethorpe University . 
 = Bidi Bidi Bom Bom = 
 " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " is a song recorded by American Tejano singer , Selena . It was released as the second single from her fourth studio album , Amor Prohibido ( 1994 ) . Originally written about a cheerful fish swimming freely in the ocean , the song 's title is an onomatopoeic phrase suggesting the palpitating heartbeat of a person lovestruck by the object of their affection . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " was written by Selena , her backup vocalist and dancer Pete Astudillo , and her brother , music producer A.B. Quintanilla . 
 " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " is a Mexican cumbia pop song with rock en español and reggae influences . It received widespread acclaim for its musically diverse sounds , and the effects it had on listeners . The single peaked at number one on the United States Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart and remained there for four consecutive weeks , the singer 's second consecutive number one single . Selena began dominating the Latin music charts , and " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " contributed to her commercial success . It is believed by musicologist Ilan Stavans to have marked the beginning of the dominance of Latin pop , and was a bridge to the Tejano market . The song is considered to be one of the best compositions recorded by Selena , one of her most popular recordings , and has been cited as one of her signature songs . Her Astrodome concert performance of the song has been called one of the highlights of her musical career . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " was ranked at number 54 on the list of the Best Texas Songs of All @-@ time , and given honorable mention as one of the top ten best Tejano recordings of all @-@ time . 
 After the shooting death of Selena in 1995 , the song 's title became a popular verb to describe a fan 's admiration for the singer . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " won the Tejano Music Award for Song of the Year , while Broadcast Music Inc. recognized it as the most played Latin song of 1996 . Since Billboard began monitoring music downloads in 2010 , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " has remained on the Regional Mexican Digital Songs chart for 280 non @-@ consecutive weeks , second to the number of consecutive weeks for her 1992 single " Como la Flor " . Many musicians have since recorded the song or performed it as a tribute to the singer including : Jennifer Lopez , Selena Gomez , Alejandra Guzmán , Kat Von D , and Jennifer Peña . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " originated at her band 's rehearsals starting off as an improvised song with few if any lyrics . According to Selena 's brother , and principal music producer A.B. Quintanilla , the song came about shortly after Chris Pérez was hired as the band 's guitarist in 1990 . A.B. spoke out against the " filler songs " that their father and manager Abraham Quintanilla , Jr. wanted on their recordings , and began playing a groove that gradually became a song . Suzette Quintanilla , the band 's drummer , said " we were goofing off " and insisted that after A.B. began playing on his guitar , Selena started singing , coming up with lyrics " as ideas came to her " . Pérez , who later eloped with Selena in 1992 , wrote that the lyrics Selena came up with were unfamiliar to him despite the singer 's habit of spontaneously writing ideas in a notebook and leaving it " wherever around the house " . The song was originally used for sound checks during the band 's rehearsals and was then transformed into a short recording by Selena about a cheerful fish swimming freely in the ocean . Pérez said that what was then called " Little Bidi Bubbles " came easily " for everyone in the band . " In a 2002 interview he said that he played a riff using a crybaby ( which gave off a wah @-@ wah sound ) and that A.B. gave him a " look " that suggested he was impressed with the sound that he had improvised . The riff became the basis of the song before the writing process began . 
 Before A.B. began co @-@ writing , Selena and backup vocalist Pete Astudillo were in the process of writing the song in Spanish . A.B. , who arranged the piece with Roger Emerson , said in a 2002 interview that " it was kinda a little scary " because the song " had never been done or seen before " . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " served as the second single released from Amor Prohibido on July 31 , 1994 . A.B. confessed to wanting the song released as the lead single but found that Selena and EMI Latin pushed for the title track instead . 
 = = Composition and lyrical content = = 
 " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " is a Spanish @-@ language upbeat , cumbia pop song with rock en español and reggae influences . It is set in common time , and makes use of electric guitar riffs and <unk> percussions influenced by Colombian and Caribbean music . The song uses " richer " scoring , less @-@ driven synthesizers , and treble @-@ heavy arrangements than the first four songs on Amor Prohibido . The song is written in the key of B @-@ flat major and is played in a moderate groove of 90 beats per minute . The song 's chord progression has a basic form I @-@ IV @-@ V @-@ IV , an ostinato ( repetitive beat ) that continues through its verses and chorus . Ramiro Burr of Billboard magazine called the song a " reggae @-@ tinged tune " and suggested that it could have worked well with French lyrics . Writing for Billboard , Paul Verna called the recording a " spunky cumbia " . In his book Encyclopedia of Recorded Sound , Frank Hoffman called the song " reggae @-@ inflected dance fare " . Mexican newspaper Milenio , enjoyed the track 's fusion of cumbia and reggae sounds . 
 According to author José E. Limón , the song consists of " playful cumbia @-@ rhythms " with lyrics speaking of " young kids falling in love " . In " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , Selena is overwhelmed and lovestruck by a man who happened to walk near her . The onomatopoeic title suggests the sound of a heart palpitating when a person longs to be the protagonist 's object of affection . Italian essayists Gaetano Prampolini and Annamaria Pinazzi called the song a " happy love story " , which is contradicted by Maria Celeste <unk> , in her 1997 book Selena 's Secrets , who feels the song is about unrequited love . Bob Smithouser and Bob Waliszewski wrote in Chart Watch that " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " explores a volatile relationship . Texas Monthly editor Joe Nick Patoski asserted the lyrics are : " about a boy who makes a girl 's heart go thump @-@ thump @-@ thump " . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " is musically similar to Selena 's 1994 song " El Chico del Apartamento 512 " ; author James E. Perone called them recurring themes where the protagonist is " attracted to a young man " . Bill Ramsey of the San Antonio Current , noted how the lyrics were an " innocuous ditty " . Ashley Velez of Neon Tommy believed that most people who " ever had a crush " are able to relate to the palpitations of " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 At the time of its release , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " was a favorite of Selena 's younger fan base . Posthumous reviews have cited the song as being " catchy " . Ramiro Burr of Billboard magazine believed that the song could have easily been successful in European clubs thanks to its striking resemblance to Euro @-@ pop and Eurodance songs that were popular in Europe at the time . Tom Whitehurst Jr. of the Corpus Christi Caller Times wrote that he did not know what " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " meant but , after a friend played him a tape of the recording , he became a fan of the singer . Andrew Mitchell , also from the Corpus Christi Caller Times , called the song " happy " and said that it was " only natural to want to know the meaning of [ the song ] , not just memorize [ the ] lyrics to sing along . Music can teach . It can remove barriers of the mind and soul . " Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle , called the song " bouncy " . Musicologists Ilan Stavans and Harold Augenbraum called " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , " No Me Queda Más " , and " Techno Cumbia " the " key hits of [ Amor Prohibido ] " . Peter Watrous of The New York Times called the song " lightweight " but found it to be : " better than [ Selena 's English @-@ language recordings ] " . Sue Anne Pressley of the Washington Post wrote that " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " was " sprightly carefree " , and " infectious " . Writing for the San Antonio Express @-@ News , Michael Clark complimented A.B. ' s addition of " world @-@ music flourishes " to the song . Katherine Seligman , also from the San Antonio Express News , described the recording as an : " infectiously happy song " . Sun Sentinel contributor , Steve Bennett also called the recording " infectious " . 
 Author Veda Boyd Jones wrote that " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " is a : " catchy song with nonsensical words " . This was echoed by Joe Nick Patoski in his book , Texas Monthly on Texas Women , where he called Selena " savvy enough " to record a song that has a " catchy " , " nonsensical but eminently hummable " melody . According to Ed Morales who wrote in his book The Latin Beat , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " is an easily " forgettable throwaway " for the average listener , but found the it " catchy " and said it " sticks in your gut " . The Spanish @-@ language magazine <unk> , enjoyed the song 's ability to " make everyone dance " . Jessica Lucia Roiz of the Latin Times called the recording a " happy @-@ go @-@ lucky tune " . John LaFollette of the The Monitor called the track " playful " . <unk> Estevez of Vibe called it a : " sassy dance track " . Eliza Thompson of Cosmopolitan asserted that Selena 's songs — particularly " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " — resonate a " fun atmosphere " . Canadian magazine Tribute , called " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " an " upbeat hit " . Writing for Out magazine , <unk> Olivares explained how " universal " it is , and " that you can 't help but feel nostalgic " after listening to a few notes of " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " . John <unk> of Entertainment Weekly , called the song a " beach @-@ blanket anthem " and a " novelty hit " . Dita Quinones of NBC San Diego , called it a " feel @-@ good spirit " track . Ashley Velez called " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " a " feel good song " and noted how the " fun [ track ] " is " one of Selena 's most memorable contributions to the Latin music world . " According to Mario Tarradell of the Dallas Morning News , the song contains the " bubbly , effervescent personality , the <unk> @-@ del @-@ barrio ( the girl from the barrio ) charm " in her recording , and believed the remixed version , found on the posthumous release Dreaming of You , was done so that it was " palatable club play " . Taradell believed that remixing the song was fruitless , claiming that cumbia music is " more danceable " than reggae . 
 " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " was ranked number 54 on the Dallas Observer 's list of the Best Texas Songs of All @-@ time . It was listed as an honorable mention of the top ten best Tejano songs of all @-@ time by Ramiro Burr . Warta <unk> , an Indonesian business @-@ focus magazine , named " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " one of the top Spanish @-@ language songs of 1995 . Cosmopolitan ranked the song first among their top ten best songs for a summer BBQ , and ranked the song atop their list of the best Latin songs : " you forgot you were obsessed with . " Since its release , the song has been included on many music critics " best of Selena songs " lists including the Latino Post ( at number three ) , OC Weekly ( at number three ) , BuzzFeed ( at number three ) , Latina ( at number four ) , and Neon Tommy ( at number one ) . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " debuted at number 30 on August 13 , 1994 on the United States Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . In its eleventh week , it peaked at number one ; her second as a solo artist . John Lannert wrote that in its second week atop the Hot Latin Songs chart , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " had " no challenger in sight " . In an October 1994 report , the song was the second most played song in Los Angeles , fifth most played song in New York City , sixth most played recording in San Francisco , and ninth most played in Washington , D.C. on Latin music radio stations . In its third week atop the Hot Latin Songs chart , Billboard announced that its new airplay measuring system for the music chart would be based on Nielsen ratings beginning with the November 12 , 1994 issue . Nonetheless , Lannert predicted that " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " would remain atop the Hot Latin Songs chart and , during the first week the Nielsen rating system was used it did so , while Selena 's song " No Me Queda Más " debuted at number 40 . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " fell to the third slot on the Hot Latin Songs chart in its fifteenth week . In the following week , " No Me Queda Más " took the fifth slot while " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " fell to the sixth position on the Hot Latin Songs chart the week of November 26 , 1994 . After spending 20 weeks on the Hot Latin Songs chart , and peaking at number one for four consecutive weeks , the song finished the year as the seventh best @-@ performing single on the chart . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " re @-@ entered the Hot Latin Songs chart on January 14 , 1995 ( after a week 's departure from the chart ) at number 30 . 
 Selena was shot and killed by Yolanda Saldívar on March 31 , 1995 . Four of her singles , " No Me Queda Más " , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , " Como la Flor " , and " Amor Prohibido " , re @-@ entered Billboard magazine 's Hot Latin Tracks and the Regional Mexican Airplay chart on April 15 , 1995 . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " was positioned at number six the week of April 15 , 1995 , and remained on the chart for an additional three weeks . Billboard magazine posthumously named Selena the Top Latin Artist of the 1990s the result of her fourteen top @-@ ten singles on the Hot Latin Songs chart ( including seven number @-@ one hits ) . On the now defunct <unk> chart , which monitored airplay spins , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " remained on the chart for 181 weeks before Billboard ended its run in 2003 . Billboard magazine began monitoring digital downloads of Latin songs the week ending January 23 , 2010 . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " made its debut on the newly formed digital genre @-@ specific charts following the fifteenth anniversary of the singer 's death ; positioned at number 48 on the Latin Digital Songs chart and number 23 on the Latin Pop Digital Songs chart . The song did not debut on the Regional Mexican Digital Songs chart until the week ending on September 4 , 2010 , debuting at number ten . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " peaked at number one on the Regional Mexican Digital Songs chart in the week ending March 19 , 2011 , staying atop the chart for four consecutive weeks . In the week ending April 9 , 2012 , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " sold over 2 @,@ 000 digital units after the unveiling of a U.S. postage stamp with a portrait of the singer . The song has remained on the Regional Mexican Digital Songs chart for 280 non @-@ consecutive weeks , second behind Selena 's " Como la Flor " with 323 consecutive weeks . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Some of Selena 's performances of the song have since been regarded as highlights of her musical career . Ramiro Burr , of Billboard , called the singer 's tour for her album Amor Prohibido a : " tour de force " . Most notably , Selena 's performance at the Houston Astrodome on February 26 , 1995 , has been called one of her best performances of the song . Selena 's " leg kicks " at the Astrodome performance were replicated by Jennifer Lopez in the 1997 biopic film . Selena 's performance on the Johnny Canales Show in 1994 was later released as part of the host 's " favorite songs " . Selena 's performance of " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " on July 31 , 1994 at Six Flags <unk> was the subject of a video released by the Houston Chronicle for their segment " On This Forgotten Day " . Selena also performed the track in a November 1994 episode of <unk> Gigante ; the event was ranked among the most memorable moments of the show 's 53 @-@ year history . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " is considered to have been one of the best , most popular songs recorded by Selena , and is cited as one of her signature numbers . Selena dominated the Latin music charts in the United States in the early 1990s , with " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , " Como la Flor " , and " Amor Prohibido " contributing to her commercial success . According to musicologist Stavans , the three aforementioned singles were considered to have bridged and merged Tejano music and Latin pop thanks to the songs ' popularity . This was reiterated by musicologist Michael Joseph Corcoran , who found that Tejano music " was a blend of two cultures " and Selena was " a bridge between them " . Corcoran called the track a : " seamless blend of convex styles " . Stavans further explains how the popularity of the singles shone a " brighter spotlight " on Tejano music and : " marked the beginning of the genre of Latin pop " . He notes that Selena 's contributions to Tejano music were " significant " , because she adapted a new style of Tejano cumbia ( or Mexican cumbia ) with " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " . The song was recognized by Lori Beth Rodriguez in her guide to Tejano music as being responsible for catapulting Selena into fame . Authors Michelle <unk> @-@ <unk> and Mary Romero feel that " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " " shook ] up " the historical boundaries of Tejano music 's : " non @-@ normative genders and sexualities to the symbolic periphery of the dance floor . " During her tour in Mexico , the song " inundated the airwaves " in Vera Cruz . 
 As of 2016 , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " continues to have strong radio airplay throughout the United States . The song remains a staple at Latin American quinceañeras , Hispanic weddings , and at Cinco de Mayo celebrations . The song has since become a popular verb to describe a fan 's love for Selena . In April 2015 , the city of San Antonio hosted a " Bidi Bidi Fun Run " , a 5K marathon with proceeds being donated to the Selena Foundation which helps children in crisis . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " has been favored by the LGBT community and it was added to the set list for a Long Beach , California pride event in 2011 . The song has received a number of awards and nominations including winning the Tejano Music Award for Song of the Year in 1995 . Broadcast Music , Inc . ( BMI ) recognized " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " at the its Pop Music Awards as one of the most performed Latin songs of 1996 . During the Tejano Music Awards decade @-@ ballot ceremony , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " was recognized as the Best 1990s Song . 
 = = = Cover versions and usage in media = = = 
 Within two months of Selena 's death , Astudillo performed the track during a Memorial Day concert held in Houston , Texas . American Tejano performer Jennifer Pena performed " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " at a live event , impressing music executives . Peña became a professional singer after her performance of the song reached Selena 's father Abraham , who signed the artist to Q @-@ Productions . Sara Tavares covered the song in Portuguese for her album Mi Ma Bo ( 1999 ) . In 2000 , Veronica Vasquez was chosen to play Selena in the Selena Forever musical . Ricardo Baca of the Corpus Christi Caller Times , noted that the lyricist added " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " ( among others ) because of its " strong sense of familiarity for her fans . " Puerto Rican boy band , Tick Tock , covered the song , as well as releasing a music video to promote it in 2004 . Mexican singer Tatiana recorded the song for the tribute album Mexico Recuerda a Selena ( 2005 ) . Mexican pop singer Alejandra Guzmán performed and recorded " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " for the live televised tribute concert Selena ¡ VIVE ! in April 2005 . John Powell Metz of the Corpus Christi Caller Times , called Guzmán 's version " spirited " and her performance of the song " risqué " . Burr predicted in the Houston Chronicle that Guzmán would perform a " rock version " of the song for her performance at the Selena ¡ VIVE ! concert . Haitian singer Wyclef Jean sampled the song for his tribute to the singer on his album , Carnival Vol . II : Memoirs of an Immigrant ( 2007 ) , featuring singer Melissa Jiménez on the track . Joey Guerra called the track a " disappointment " that " could @-@ have @-@ been [ a ] great tribute " . He called the song a : " cheesy show tune from the misguided musical chronicling the Tejano singer 's life . " Nonetheless he did enjoy hearing Jean sample the song . In 2007 , Lole – <unk> recorded the song in Haitian Creole entitled " Sensation " . Global Rhythm magazine called Lole — <unk> 's version " playful " and called it an " Afro @-@ Caribbean treat " . Mexican singer Ely Guerra released her version of the song for the soundtrack film to Los Campeones de la Lucha Libre in 2008 . 
 American actress Ana Isabelle performed " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " live during Univision 's <unk> Show in 2009 . American entertainer Selena Gomez performed the song during a 2010 Reliant Stadium concert . Guerra called her performance " spirited " and she later recorded the song as a duet with Selena for the 2012 remix album Enamorada de Ti . The Belfast Telegraph wrote that Gomez had done an " amazing job " . At the Billboard Latin Music Awards in Miami , A.B. told E ! that Gomez gave a " fantastic vocal performance on the record " . Guerra , however , wrote that the new version of " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " was : " virtually the same arrangement as the original . It would have been more effective reshaped as a poppy club track . " He found Gomez ' vocals " curiously lackluster " , as if she was " scared of the song " and " intimidated by her idol " . Lovelace commented that it was " obvious that Spanish isn 't Gomez ' first language , and comes in a distant second " , and that " Gomez ' odd voice " came across as sometimes " much higher and very squeaky when speaking Spanish " , concluding that it : " doesn ’ t match the rest of the song and momentarily brings everything to a halt " . Gomez later released the track on her first greatest hits album For You ( 2014 ) . American singer @-@ songwriter Jay Brannan recorded his version of the track for his 2013 extended play Around the World in 80 Jays . On America 's Got Talent , mariachi singer Alondra Santos performed " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " to rave reviews . Radio personality host , Howard Stern , who had mocked Selena 's mourners and poked fun at the singer 's death in April 1995 , praised Santos ' performance . On May 1 , 2015 , Jennifer Lopez performed " A Selena Tribute " which included " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " . Lopez ' performance was praised by music critics who enjoyed the singer 's Selena @-@ esque costumes she wore onstage . Tattoo artist and reality television personality Kat Von D covered the song as a tribute to the singer in January 2016 . 
 Jackie Guerra , who played Selena 's sister in the 1997 biopic film , called " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " her favorite song . Former state senator Hillary Clinton has used the recording for her 2016 presidential campaign in San Antonio , which was well received by Hispanics . Clinton played the song at the Sunset Station where Selena recorded her music video for " No Me Queda Más " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 US Single 
 " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " – 4 : 14 
 Mexico Single 
 " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " – 4 : 14 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 All credits were taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Teso Dos Bichos = 
 " Teso Dos Bichos " is the eighteenth episode of the third season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on March 8 , 1996 . It was written by John Shiban , and directed by Kim Manners . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Teso Dos Bichos " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 7 , being watched by 17 @.@ 38 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly negative reviews . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a series of deaths that occur immediately after an ancient artifact is brought to Boston from an excavation site in South America . According to Scully , the deaths appear to be the result of political terrorism , but Mulder suspects something more improbable . 
 The production for " Teso Dos Bichos " , which was strongly disliked by the cast and crew of The X @-@ Files , was plagued by several issues . Director Kim Manners , who had particular disdain for the episode , later made T @-@ shirts and gave them to the cast and crew that read " Teso Dos Bichos Survivor . " The episode 's title translates from archaic Portuguese into English as " Burial Mound of Small Animals , " although other translations have been proposed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At an archaeological dig in the Ecuadorian highlands , two archaeologists , Dr. Bilac and Dr. Roosevelt , get into an argument over the removal of a burial urn that contains an Amaru , or a female shaman . Roosevelt argues that the urn must be taken from the site and preserved in a museum , much to the chagrin of Bilac and the tribespeople present . Later , a native shaman distributes <unk> to the local villagers and Bilac . During this ritual , a jaguar spirit kills Roosevelt in his tent . 
 Later , in Boston , Fox Mulder and Dana Scully investigate the disappearance of Dr. Decker , an archaeologist from a local history museum , after a security guard discovers a large amount of blood in Decker 's lab . They interview both the curator , Dr. Lewton , and graduate student Mona <unk> . They also visit a reclusive Bilac . After closing , Lewton is killed by the jaguar spirit after his car doesn 't start . During an investigation of the crime scene , Scully comes across rat corpses in the engine compartment of Lewton 's vehicle . Mona denies that anything unusual has happened in the museum . 
 Mulder and a group of police search for Lewton 's remains . Scully sees blood dripping on Mulder 's face from above and , upon looking up , they see a portion of Lewton 's intestine hanging from a tree . Scully , about to perform an autopsy on the intestine , is interrupted when Mona suddenly calls and reports that Bilac was under the influence of <unk> . At the museum , Mona hears noises from a restroom and , upon opening a toilet lid , she sees rats forcing their way out of the sewer . When the two agents arrive , they discover Bilac crying beside one of the toilets , saying that Mona is dead . 
 Later , Bilac escapes from the room in which he is being held without exiting through the only door . Mulder notices a large drag mark through the dust on the floor , discovering a hatch leading to the museum 's old steam tunnels . While exploring the tunnels , the agents find the remains of the victims and are attacked by a multitude of feral cats . As they try to escape , they come across Bilac 's mutilated body . The two agents make their way out and close the hatch on the pursuing cats . The episode closes with Mulder suspecting that the animal attacks were associated with the burial urn that had been removed against the wishes of the Ecuadorian tribespeople ; it is shortly returned to the burial grounds , where the local shaman watches the urn 's reburial with jaguar @-@ like eyes . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Teso Dos Bichos " was taken by John Shiban , the episode 's writer , from an ancient chant . The words translate into archaic Portuguese as " Burial Mound of Small Animals , " although other translations have been proposed . In Colombia and Venezuela , the word " <unk> " is a euphemism for testicles , something Shiban was unaware of when writing the script . Shiban later joked that this " controversy " would be good for ratings . 
 The production of the episode was plagued with issues . At the last minute the ending of the episode had to be rewritten ; originally , the script called for " hordes " of common house cats to attack Mulder and Scully . Unfortunately , the cats refused to attack under direction and did " pretty much nothing " . To further complicate matters , Gillian Anderson revealed to the producers that she was severely allergic to cats . Thus , the whole sequence was nixed . Director Kim Manners called the first three acts of the episode " the best three acts of televisions I ever directed " , whereas he referred to the fourth act as " an absolute disaster . " Manners later revealed that he asked series creator Chris Carter for permission to focus on a leopard during the fourth act instead of the cats , saying " I begged Carter ' Please let 's revisit the leopard in the teaser because I 'm never going to make these cats scary . ' " 
 " Teso Dos Bichos " was strongly disliked by the cast and crew of The X @-@ Files , including both David Duchovny and Kim Manners . Manners , most notably , was not pleased with the plot and felt " pussycats are not scary . " He later made T @-@ shirts and gave them to the cast and crew that read " Teso Dos Bichos Survivor . " The episode earned two distinctive nicknames courtesy of Manners . The first , " Second Salmon , " referred to the number of re @-@ writes the episode went through . Every time an episode was re @-@ written , the color of the script changed accordingly . " Teso Dos Bichos " went through so many re @-@ writes that the cast ended up with two salmon colored copies . The second nickname , again , courtesy of Manners , was " Teso Dos Bitches . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Teso Dos Bichos " premiered on the Fox network on March 8 , 1996 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 7 , with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 7 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 17 @.@ 38 million viewers . 
 The episode received negative reviews from critics . A writer from Entertainment Weekly gave " Teso Dos Bichos " a C , and sardonically wrote , " No es <unk> ! " Reviewer Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave the episode a C − and criticized the laziness of the writing , saying , " Maybe I 'm missing something here . There could be some subtext in , um , yeah , I got nothing . The dead rats in the toilet were freaky , right ? And they did kill that dog off , so that 's hardcore . Really , though , I 'm just too disappointed to say much else . This is paint @-@ by @-@ numbers at its most tedious , and while it 's nice to have evident proof of how far the show has come since it started , that doesn 't make it any easier to sit through . " Critical Myth 's John Keegan gave the episode a scathing review , only awarding it 1 / 10 . He criticized the seriousness of the plot and wrote , " Overall , this has to be one of the worst episodes of the series . In nearly every possible way , the episode fails to live up to the usual expectations . Perhaps aware of how silly the whole thing sounds , the cast and crew seem weary of it all from beginning to end . Even some of the bad ideas in the later seasons don ’ t fall to this level of inadequacy . " Cyriaque Lamar from i09 called the Jaguar Spirit one of " The 10 Most Ridiculous X @-@ Files Monsters " and wrote , " In this fairly ridiculous Season 3 episode , an Ecuadorian artifact possessed by a Jaguar Spirit ( or something ) causes <unk> to go bonkers and murder people . This scene of Scully fighting a cat deserves the GIF treatment . Make it happen , folks ! " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one stars out of five , calling the premise " achingly unambitious " . The two roundly criticized the plot , calling it a " retread of a cursed mummy movie without a mummy " , as well as the performances of Trevino , Duchovny , and Anderson . Despite the overall negativity , Shearman and Pearson noted that the " much derided " cat sequence was not " that badly handled . " 
 = 2011 FA Cup Final = 
 The 2011 FA Cup Final was the 130th final of the FA Cup , the world 's oldest domestic football cup competition . The final took place on 14 May 2011 at Wembley Stadium in London in front of 88 @,@ 643 spectators and a British television audience of more than eight million . The clubs contesting the final were Premier League clubs Manchester City and Stoke City . The match was Stoke City 's first FA Cup final , and Manchester City 's ninth . 
 As Premier League clubs , they entered the competition in the third round . Manchester City made an unconvincing start , contesting two replays against lower league opposition in the third and fourth rounds but gained momentum and kept three consecutive clean sheets en route to the final . Stoke City played one replay in the third round , before beating all opponents in a run which culminated in a 5 – 0 victory over Bolton Wanderers in the semi @-@ final at Wembley Stadium – the biggest winning margin at Wembley since 1939 . Manchester City entered the final as favourites , with Stoke City as underdogs . 
 Manchester City began the match the brighter of the two teams with the majority of possession and a number of shots forcing saves from goalkeeper Thomas Sørensen but the first half remained goalless . Stoke improved after the half @-@ time interval but failed to score from their only shot on target in the 62nd minute , which was saved by goalkeeper Joe Hart after a one @-@ on @-@ one with striker Kenwyne Jones . In the 74th minute , Manchester City midfielder , Yaya Touré fired a loose ball in the Stoke City penalty area past goalkeeper Sørensen to give Manchester City the lead . Stoke attempted to equalise after Manchester City 's goal without success and the final finished 1 – 0 with Manchester City claiming their fifth FA Cup . The result gave Manchester City their first major trophy for 35 years , ending the longest trophy drought in the club 's history . Stoke City manager Tony Pulis said " Manchester City were the better team and deserved to win " , but expressed " disappointment " at his team 's display . Manchester City manager Roberto Mancini dedicated the victory to the Manchester City supporters , declaring , " I am happy for the fans , they deserved to win this Cup . For a long time they didn 't win . " 
 The medals were handed out by Prime Minister David Cameron . As winners , Manchester City won a place in the 2011 FA Community Shield and the 2011 – 12 UEFA Europa League but as they had already qualified for the UEFA Champions League via their league position , the Europa League place was given to Stoke City as runners @-@ up . To celebrate their victory , Manchester City held an open @-@ top bus parade on 23 May 2011 , beginning at Manchester Town Hall and ending at the City of Manchester Stadium ; it attracted a crowd of up to 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 As a Premier League team , Manchester City entered the competition in the third round . Their opening match was an away draw at Leicester City . Following a supporter campaign , Manchester City dedicated the match to former striker Neil Young , who was terminally ill . Young scored the winning goal when Manchester City and Leicester City met in the 1969 FA Cup Final . Manchester City fell behind after 46 seconds when Sol Bamba scored for Leicester following a corner . Manchester City took the lead by half @-@ time through James Milner and Carlos Tevez , but Andy King equalised midway through the second half to make the score 2 – 2 . The tie was replayed at the City of Manchester Stadium the following week . Tevez gave Manchester City the lead after quarter of an hour , but the lead was brief . Four minutes later , Paul Gallagher 's penalty levelled the score , after Patrick Vieira had fouled Lloyd Dyer . Before half @-@ time , two Manchester City goals in 90 seconds shifted the momentum of the match . In the second half , Tevez missed a penalty and a goal by Dyer made the score 3 – 2 . Leicester then pushed for an equaliser , but instead Aleksandar Kolarov scored on a counter @-@ attack to make the final score 4 – 2 . 
 For the fourth round Manchester City were drawn against League One Notts County at Meadow Lane . On a pitch described by the BBC as " pudding @-@ like " , lower division County threatened an upset when Neal Bishop scored from a corner in the 59th minute . However , ten minutes from time Micah Richards crossed for Edin Džeko to score his first Manchester City goal , ensuring a replay at the City of Manchester Stadium . Notts County started the rematch brightly , but faded as the game progressed . The score remained 0 – 0 for most of the first half , but Vieira scored either side of half @-@ time to give Manchester City a two @-@ goal lead . From that point , the match proved less even , and Manchester City scored three more goals for a 5 – 0 win . From there on , City kept consecutive clean sheets on the way to winning the cup . Manchester City 's fifth round match was against Aston Villa at the City of Manchester Stadium . Villa manager Gérard Houllier rested several senior players , in contrast to a near full @-@ strength Manchester City line @-@ up . Manchester City took the lead after less than five minutes through Yaya Touré , and further goals from Mario Balotelli and David Silva resulted in a comfortable 3 – 0 win . 
 In the sixth round , Manchester City were again at home , and faced Reading , the only non @-@ Premier League team left in the competition . Micah Richards scored the only goal , a header from a corner in the 73rd minute . In the semi @-@ final , at Wembley Stadium , City defeated rivals Manchester United 1 – 0 with a Yaya Touré goal , and continued their FA Cup semi @-@ final record of nine victories out of 11 , reaching the FA Cup Final for the first time since 1981 . 
 = = = Stoke City = = = 
 Stoke are also a Premier League side and thus entered the competition at the third round stage , where they were drawn at home to Welsh side Cardiff City . Stoke City made seven changes to the team that played their previous match . Michael Chopra gave Cardiff an early lead , but Stoke 's Tuncay <unk> levelled the score just before half time . Stoke had a number of chances in the later stages of the match , but Cardiff held out for a replay . In the replay at the Cardiff City Stadium Stoke again used several reserves , changing all but one of the players from the previous league match . Few chances occurred during the game ; the score was 0 – 0 after 90 minutes , prompting extra time . In the added period , Jonathan Walters scored twice to secure a 2 – 0 Stoke City win ; the first goal was a header from a corner , the second a near @-@ post rebound . Stoke City then travelled to fellow Midlands team Wolverhampton Wanderers for the fourth round , in one of five all @-@ Premier League ties . Stoke defender Robert Huth was a central figure in the match . Ten minutes from time he gave Stoke a 1 – 0 lead with a header from a free @-@ kick , but in the final minute he conceded a penalty for tripping Nenad <unk> . <unk> took the spot @-@ kick himself , but his effort was saved by Thomas Sørensen . 
 Stoke 's fifth round match was at home against League One leaders Brighton & Hove Albion . Three first half goals by John Carew , Jonathan Walters , Ryan Shawcross led Stoke to a 3 – 0 win . Stoke then faced West Ham United in the sixth round . Stoke scored an early goal from a set @-@ piece , when long throw @-@ in specialist Rory Delap delivered the ball into the penalty area for Huth to score with a header . Controversial refereeing decisions then provoked the ire of both teams . When Frédéric <unk> equalised for West Ham , the decision to award the goal infuriated Stoke ; in controlling the ball <unk> committed what Stoke manager Tony Pulis called a " stonewall " handball . West Ham themselves felt aggrieved in the first minute of the second half when Stoke were awarded a penalty . Matthew Etherington was adjudged to have been fouled by Scott Parker though , as the BBC correspondent wrote , " there appeared to be minimal contact " . Robert Green saved Etherington 's penalty to keep the score level . The winning goal also came from a set piece . Danny Higginbotham 's free @-@ kick was reached by Green but could not be stopped , and Stoke won 2 – 1 to reach the semi @-@ finals for the first time since 1972 . In the semi @-@ final , Stoke beat Bolton Wanderers comfortably , winning 5 – 0 . Stoke took a three @-@ goal lead in less than half an hour after goals from Etherington , Huth and Kenwyne Jones . Walters scored twice in the second half to complete the win . The margin of victory was the biggest in an FA Cup semi @-@ final since 1939 , and secured Stoke 's first ever FA Cup Final appearance . By reaching the final , Stoke qualified for the 2011 – 12 UEFA Europa League before the final , as Manchester City had beat Tottenham days before the final to secure fourth position in the Premier League and consequently Champions League qualification . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 Manchester City were appearing in the final for the ninth time . They had won the cup four times previously ( in 1904 , 1934 , 1956 and 1969 ) , and had been beaten in the final four times ( in 1926 , 1933 , 1955 and 1981 ) . Stoke City were making their first appearance in the final . Their previous best was participation in the semi @-@ finals , which had occurred three times . 
 The 2011 final faced scheduling problems . The match clashed with top flight League fixtures for the first time since 1934 , which disappointed football traditionalists . The 2011 UEFA Champions League Final was being hosted at Wembley on 28 May 2011 and UEFA rules stipulate that the host stadium for the final must not have a fixture played two weeks prior to the final . Therefore , the FA Cup final had to be moved forward , and for the first time since 1989 was played before the English football domestic season ended . 
 Many of the weekend 's Premier League fixtures were rescheduled to avoid a clash with the final , with some kicking off at 12 : 45 on Saturday and others on Sunday . By coincidence , Manchester City and Stoke City were scheduled to meet in the league on cup final day . The league match was rearranged for the Wednesday after the final . This prompted criticism from Tottenham Hotspur manager Harry Redknapp , whose team was challenging Manchester City for a place in the 2011 – 12 Champions League . Redknapp stated that if Manchester City won the final , it would then be in Stoke City 's interest to lose against Manchester City in the league match , as it would make Europa League qualification for Stoke more likely . Stoke City refuted this accusation strongly , but ultimately this scenario was avoided . Champions League qualification was settled four days before the final , when Manchester City beat Tottenham Hotspur 1 – 0 in a league match . 
 Both clubs received an allocation of approximately 25 @,@ 000 tickets , fewer than the 32 @,@ 000 received for the semi @-@ finals . The allocation was enough for the 21 @,@ 000 Stoke City season ticket holders , but not for Manchester City 's 36 @,@ 000 season ticket holders . Consequently , some supporters felt aggrieved at the lack of tickets , including Stoke City chairman Peter Coates who expressed his disappointment and suggested an allocation in the region of 30 @,@ 000 for both clubs . Ticket prices for the final exceeded £ 100 for the first time . The most expensive tickets cost £ 115 , an increase of 22 per cent on the previous season . The cheapest tickets available at £ 45 , up £ 5 from 2010 . 
 As for every match in the 2010 – 11 FA Cup , the ball for the final was provided by Nike @-@ owned , Manchester @-@ based sports equipment company Umbro . The Umbro Neo Pro features a 14 @-@ panel design , and is patterned in blue and red . The majority of the balls to be used in the game arrived on the previous Wednesday , while the ball to be used at kick @-@ off was delivered to the stadium on the day of the game . 
 The traditional Cup Final hymn , " Abide with Me " , was sung by Tenors Unlimited , a trio of male vocalists , and former X Factor contestant Stacey Solomon performed the national anthem , " God Save the Queen " . 
 = = Match = = 
 Stoke City went into their first FA Cup Final as underdogs according to their manager Tony Pulis , while Manchester City manager Roberto Mancini saw in @-@ form Stoke 's underdog tag as a risk for complacency from his side . There were fitness doubts over key players for both teams , Carlos Tevez for Manchester City , and Matthew Etherington for Stoke City , who suffered a hamstring tear only 17 days prior to the final , but both were able to start the match . However , Stoke City 's underdog tag proved true as Mancini 's Manchester City side had the better of the match , with a 59 per cent share of ball possession and 23 attempts on goal to Stoke City 's nine , only one of which was on target . 
 Both teams were able to play in their respective home colours without any colour clash : Stoke City played in their red @-@ and @-@ white stripes , and Manchester City played in their sky blue colours with the Manchester coat of arms on their shirt numbers , keeping up a long @-@ standing club tradition of wearing the city 's coat of arms for cup finals . 
 = = = Report = = = 
 Manchester City set up in a 4 – 2 – 3 – 1 formation , with Mario Balotelli , David Silva and Yaya Touré playing behind lone striker Carlos Tevez , and Nigel de Jong and Gareth Barry in defensive midfield roles . Stoke City set up in a rigid 4 – 4 – 2 formation , with two wingers in Jermaine Pennant and Matthew Etherington to support strikers Kenwyne Jones and Jonathan Walters . 
 Manchester City started sprightly , managing to create some chances which forced saves from Stoke goalkeeper Thomas Sørensen and steady defending to keep Stoke City in the game in the first half . Yaya Touré unleashed a 30 @-@ yard strike in the 11th minute which went only inches wide of the top corner of the goal , while Mario Balotelli had a curling shot from the corner of the penalty area in the 24th minute which was destined for the goal but for a strong , one @-@ handed save from Sørensen . 
 Stoke improved after the break , but Manchester City had a key opportunity in the 56th minute when a counter @-@ attack led by Carlos Tevez , who drifted out to the right flank , allowed David Silva to find space outside the Stoke City penalty area as the Stoke defence vanished . Tevez managed to pass to Silva , but Silva was guilty of over @-@ elaboration instead of shooting first @-@ time , and the Stoke City defence managed to regroup , <unk> Silva before he could adjust himself to shoot at goal . 
 Only six minutes later , in the 62nd minute , Stoke had their key chance and only shot on target of the match with Kenwyne Jones in the 61st minute . A looping ball over the top of the Manchester City defence by Matthew Etherington allowed Jones a one @-@ on @-@ one , but he failed to convert , firing straight at goalkeeper Joe Hart with the ball ricocheting off both striker and keeper before <unk> to safety . Doubts over Matthew Etherington 's fitness resurfaced when he was taken off in the 63rd minute , with Stoke City still in the game at 0 – 0 as it stood . 
 However , in the 74th minute , Sørensen was powerless to prevent Yaya Touré 's effort from ten yards when he pounced on a stray ball in the penalty area to thrash his thunderous shot with his left foot past Sørensen in front of the travelling thousands of Manchester City supporters . Stoke City attempted to get a goal back , resorting to direct long balls into the Manchester City penalty area but struggled to create any concrete chances . Despite Yaya Touré clinching the winning goal , enigmatic striker Mario Balotelli – who claimed he had a " shit " season in a post @-@ match interview – was named man of the match for his efforts . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Tony Pulis commented after the game that " Manchester City were the better team " and that " they deserved to win the game " , while Roberto Mancini dedicated the victory to the Manchester City supporters . Pundits Graham Taylor and Mark Lawrenson agreed that Manchester City deserved to win but expressed disappointment at Stoke City 's under @-@ par performance in the final . 
 As President of the FA since 2006 , Prince William , Duke of Cambridge is a frequent guest of honour at the FA Cup final , attending the 2007 and 2010 finals , but his recent marriage to Catherine , Duchess of Cambridge meant he could not attend . Instead , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , David Cameron awarded the medals to individual players at Wembley Stadium . Presenting the trophy was British Army Corporal Mark Ward , a lifelong Manchester City supporter who served in Afghanistan and whose bravery was rewarded with the Military Cross . Corporal Ward presented the trophy to the winning captain , Carlos Tevez , after the game . 
 Manchester City 's victory set up a Community Shield match against rivals Manchester United – who City had beaten in the semi @-@ finals – after United clinched the Premier League shortly before kick @-@ off in the Final . The FA Cup winners are usually awarded qualification for the UEFA Europa League , but because Manchester City qualified for the UEFA Champions League via their league position , the Europa League place was passed to Stoke City as runners @-@ up . In the 2011 FA Community Shield match in August , the FA Cup winners Manchester City lost 3 – 2 to Manchester United after creating a 2 – 0 lead at half time . 
 Manchester United winning the 2010 – 11 Premier League title earlier in the day meant double pride for Manchester as its teams claimed both of English football 's blue ribbon competitions . Some football pundits debated whether the joint win – along with City 's qualification for the Champions League – would mark the start of new era similar to the late 1960s when both City and United dominated English football ; during that period , both clubs won the league championship once , with United winning the European Cup and City winning the FA Cup , League Cup and European Cup Winners ' Cup within four years . The ' 35 years ' banner that had stood at Old Trafford , home of Manchester United which referenced to Manchester City 's long trophy drought , was taken down in recognition of City 's victory . 
 The match was broadcast live in the United Kingdom by both ITV and ESPN , with ITV providing the free @-@ to @-@ air coverage and ESPN being the pay @-@ TV alternative . Television viewing figures were collated after the final , with a peak of 8 @.@ 5 million viewers recorded across both channels . ITV held the majority of the viewership , with a peak audience of 8 @.@ 1 million during the last 30 minutes of the final and averaged at 6 @.@ 68 million , their highest viewing figures for an FA Cup since the competition moved to ITV from the BBC in 2009 . The pay @-@ to @-@ view alternative ESPN averaged 412 @,@ 000 viewers throughout the day with a peak of 476 @,@ 000 . 
 Manchester City and Stoke City had been scheduled to play in a Premier League fixture on the day of the FA Cup Final , but instead the match had to be moved to the following Tuesday , making it the last mid @-@ week game of the Premier League season , a match Manchester City won , 3 – 0 . Despite it being Manchester City 's final home game of the season , they postponed their homecoming celebrations until the post @-@ season out of respect for the opposition . 
 Manchester City elected not to parade the trophy at the match as they did not wish to be seen as ' crass ' in front of the visiting Stoke City supporters . Instead , Manchester City were invited by Manchester City Council to host an open @-@ top bus parade through the City of Manchester in celebration of their victory . The parade took place on 23 May 2011 and began at 18 : 00 starting at Albert Square outside Manchester Town Hall where 10 @,@ 000 people were present to see the team set off on the bus parade with various streets of the city centre closed by 12 : 00 in preparation for the parade . The open @-@ top bus then travelled out of Manchester city centre via Princess Street , Portland Street , Piccadilly Gardens , Newton Street on onto Great Ancoats Street . The parade finally reached Ashton New Road where thousands supporters were waiting at the gates of the City of Manchester Stadium to welcome the team home . The parade culminated in a special reception at the stadium , where 40 @,@ 000 who claimed free tickets for the event were waiting . Greater Manchester Police estimated that the parade attracted a crowd in excess of 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = Dungeons & Dragons ( album ) = 
 Dungeons & Dragons is a studio album by Midnight Syndicate , released August 12 , 2003 by Entity Productions . The album is designed as a soundtrack to the role @-@ playing game Dungeons & Dragons and was produced by Midnight Syndicate at the request of Wizards of the Coast , the company which owns the rights to the Dungeons & Dragons franchise . Midnight Syndicate were approached by game designers at a gaming convention where they had set up stall , and they agreed to produce the album . 
 After an initial meeting with Wizards of the Coast , the two members of Midnight Syndicate — Edward Douglas and Gavin Goszka — were left to write and produce the album themselves . They went their separate ways and produced tracks independently of one another , but came back together to arrange the album and master the tracks . The album was a change in style for Midnight Syndicate , because most of it had a fantasy feel , whereas their earlier works had been almost entirely horror @-@ based . Artwork within the album booklet came from Dungeons & Dragons sourcebooks , including works from prominent game designers such as Skip Williams . The album was well received by Wizards of the Coast , with positive reviews from music critics and the gaming community . It is reputedly the only official Dungeons & Dragons soundtrack . 
 = = Conception and production = = 
 According to Bob Ignizio of Utter Trash , an ezine featuring " music , movies and more " , Midnight Syndicate 's older albums had already been used as background music to role @-@ playing sessions for many years . Wizards of the Coast described the band 's music as " the perfect accompaniment to role @-@ playing game sessions " . Support for Midnight Syndicate 's music as a role @-@ playing aid grew so much that the band decided to set up stalls at gaming conventions . At their first convention , Midnight Syndicate was approached by Wizards of the Coast , which subsequently asked if they would be interested in recording an official soundtrack , to which they agreed . 
 Before the band started writing or recording music they sat down with the Dungeons & Dragons designers who informed them of several elements that were essential on the album . According to Ed Stark , special project manager of Wizards of the Coast , this consisted of " a chase scene and a fight scene and things like that " . This was new to the band who had never written music to fit someone else 's ideas before . Stark said , however , that " ... they really got that . We were very impressed , because we 're in sort of a niche industry , and we 're not always used to people getting exactly what we need right away " . After this , the band was mostly left to deal with the music themselves . The designers were already familiar with Midnight Syndicate 's music and knew what to expect from the album . As inspiration for earlier albums had sometimes come from Dungeons & Dragons gaming sessions , Douglas said that writing the album came very naturally . 
 After the initial meeting with game designers , the album was written in the same way Midnight Syndicate conventionally write . First , Douglas and Goszka agreed on the setting they were trying to create with the album and then filled in details about the setting . Once this was done , they worked on music separately , in their own different studios . They remained in contact throughout the writing process to ensure that their work was cohesive and appropriate for the album . Once writing was complete , they worked together on arranging , mastering and mixing the tracks . 
 Douglas said that , for him , instrument choice came naturally and that " sounds and sometimes even melodies fall in line themselves " . The band had a wide number of instruments at their disposal , as all the music is produced on synthesizers . To ensure Douglas stayed true to creating the musical landscape he intended , his studio was covered with Dungeons & Dragons artwork and module covers throughout recording . 
 Joseph Vargo , executive producer on Midnight Syndicate 's albums Born of the Night and Realm of Shadows , as well as the author of <unk> , says that he was the one who initiated the first contact between Wizards of the Coast and the band . Vargo claims that , in 1999 , he sent a copy of Born of the Night to Dungeons & Dragons game designer Jason Carl , at the time employed by TSR , who described the album as " terrific gaming music " . Vargo also says that he sent a copy of Realm of Shadows to Carl a year later , and this communication helped forge the link between the band and Dungeons & Dragons game designers . 
 = = = First soundtrack = = = 
 Wizards of the Coast claimed that the album was the first official Dungeons & Dragons soundtrack , one that was mirrored by other groups , including Metropolis Mail Order , GamingReport.com and <unk> Game Store . It was not , however , the first official Dungeons & Dragons music . Years earlier another album , First Quest : The Music , was released by <unk> and licensed by TSR , then owners of Dungeons and Dragons , for Advanced Dungeons & Dragons . The album was released both as a cassette and a record and came with a pre @-@ printed module . Both formats proved unpopular and are difficult to find today . The music on First Quest was keyed specifically to the module that came with it , rather than as a soundtrack to the game in general . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 According to Mario Mesquita Borges of Allmusic , Midnight Syndicate typically create " darkly blended compositions " , described both as " gloomy " and " brooding " . Leonard <unk> of Haunted Attraction Magazine stated that " each year , the band 's music becomes more a part of America 's Halloween culture " , and stated that the band had " literally formed their own musical genre " . For Douglas , however , Dungeons & Dragons was a different style of music from other albums and soundtracks that the band had produced . Originally , he had described Midnight Syndicate 's music as " Gothic Nightmare Soundtracks " , but claimed that Dungeons & Dragons had a more fantasy feel than previous releases which focused more on horror , meaning that he now describes the band 's music as " Gothic Fantasy Nightmare Soundtracks " . Chris Harvey of Movement Magazine — a magazine supporting " underground " music and arts — described the album as being symphonic , which he claimed added to the feel of the album . Sounds were also sampled , including the sounds of battle on " Final Confrontation " , and spoken words in " Craft of the Wizard " . 
 Peter @-@ Jan Van Damme , owner of the alternative music ezine Darker than the Bat , described Dungeons & Dragons as going more in the direction of contemporary classical composers such as Trevor Jones , while still retaining the horror sound typical of Midnight Syndicate . The album has been categorized into many genres by various reviewers , including neoclassical , Gothic ambient , ethereal , and Gothic rock . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wizards of the Coast were happy with the resulting album with Anthony <unk> , RPG category manager , saying that Midnight Syndicate " have succeeded at capturing the magic of D & D through music " . Numerous critics picked up on the idea that new subject matter had resulted in a new feel for the music , with reviewers claiming that the fantasy influence had given the album a different sound to Midnight Syndicate 's classic Gothic horror soundtracks . An unnamed writer for the now defunct Living Dead Girls ezine said that Dungeons & Dragons " brings a wider range of songs than Midnight Syndicate produces for their Gothic horror soundtracks " , meaning the album " displays for the first time the diversity and musical craft [ of which ] Midnight Syndicate is capable " . GamingReport.com claimed that the album " furthered the band 's establishment as the leading producer / supplier of music to the hobby game industry " . The band became the best @-@ selling role @-@ playing game soundtrack ever in its first month of release , and Leonard <unk> of Haunted Attraction Magazine claimed that the album helped spread the band 's popularity to Europe where " Halloween and Haunted Attractions are just beginning to take hold " . 
 The album was criticized by Marc <unk> , of hobby gaming news site GamingReport.com , for focusing too much on combat and ambiance . He explained that there was only one track that felt triumphant and no tracks suitable for traveling or character " down time " , which are standards in fantasy gaming . Despite these perceived gaps , he did call it the " ultimate " gaming soundtrack . The album was further criticized by Gene <unk> of the National Gamers Guild who said that it lacked a lot of the " oomph " that Vampyre had , and thought Wizards of the Coast may have been to blame for it . He did think its being composed explicitly for D & D made it superior to music not specifically composed for games ( e.g. film soundtracks ) as a gaming aid . He criticized the soundtrack for being less original than Vampyre , and sounding much like The Lord of the Rings soundtracks . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The album was written and produced by Edward Douglas and Gavin Goszka , the only two members of Midnight Syndicate . The album 's graphical design was executed by Mark <unk> and Jeff <unk> , with " additional design " credited to " Stan ! " The album heralded a change in production in that it was the first album in which the band hired a professional writer to write the descriptions in the album booklet and the blurb . Before this point the descriptions had been written by Douglas or by Joseph Vargo , who had been responsible for artwork in some earlier albums . Artwork for the album was taken from Dungeons & Dragons role @-@ playing sourcebooks . Douglas said that he was " a huge fan of Dungeons & Dragons artwork , so having free reign [ sic ] on that material was fun " . This artwork was praised by Gene <unk> who described it as " one plus to the possible Wizards of the Coast interference " and said that the " CD jacket was done very nicely and has some cool artwork throughout " . The album contains artwork by game designers Todd Lockwood and Skip Williams , as well as from artists Scott Fischer , Brian Snoddy , Lars Grant @-@ West , Wayne Reynolds , Mark <unk> , and Sam Wood . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 There is a final 36 @-@ second bonus track , which sometimes receives no title , and sometimes is named " <unk> ! " The Midnight Syndicate website does not mention the track at all . It is a joke track in which a hapless D & D player summons something from the game into the real world . Chris Harvey of Movement Magazine found the dice @-@ rolling sound effects " hilarious " . 
 = Operation Kita = 
 Operation Kita ( <unk> , Hoku @-@ gō <unk> , " North " ) was conducted by the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) during the Pacific War in February 1945 . Its purpose was to return two Ise @-@ class hybrid battleship @-@ aircraft carriers and four escort ships to Japan from Singapore , where they had been based since November the previous year . The movement of the Japanese force was detected by the Allies , but all attempts to attack it with submarines and aircraft failed . Nevertheless , as a result of the intensifying Allied blockade of Japan , the Ise @-@ class battleship @-@ carriers and their escorts were among the last IJN warships to safely reach the country from the Southwest Pacific before the end of the war . 
 Before departing Singapore , the Japanese ships , which were designated the Completion Force , were loaded with supplies of oil and other important raw materials . This formed part of an effort to run increased quantities of supplies through the Allied blockade of Japan before the country was cut off from its empire . The Allies had learned of the Completion Force 's composition and goals through intelligence gained from decrypting Japanese radio signals , and plans were developed for coordinated attacks on it by submarines and United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) aircraft . As part of these preparations , 26 submarines were eventually positioned along the ships ' expected route . 
 The Completion Force sailed on 10 February 1945 and was sighted leaving port by a Royal Navy submarine . However , attempts by it and several United States Navy submarines to attack between 11 and 14 February were unsuccessful . More than 88 USAAF aircraft attempted to bomb the Completion Force on 13 and 14 February , but were unable to do so because of bad weather . A further submarine attack on 16 February did not damage any of the Japanese ships . As a result , the Completion Force reached its destination of Kure in Japan on 20 February without having suffered any casualties . Despite this success , the Japanese Government was forced to discontinue its efforts to ship oil from Southeast Asia to Japan in March due to the heavy losses Allied submarines were inflicting on oil tankers , and all the ships of the Completion Force were sunk in or near Japanese home waters before the end of the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 During 1944 , Allied submarine attacks effectively cut off the supply of oil from Southeast Asia to Japan and greatly reduced Japanese imports of other commodities . By this stage of the war , the oil reserves in Japan had been largely depleted . U.S. Navy submarines sank many Japanese warships during 1944 , including the battleship Kongō , seven aircraft carriers , two heavy and seven light cruisers . In early 1945 , the Japanese Government assessed that all convoy routes from the south would eventually be cut , and attempted to supplement the supplies of oil brought in by tankers by loading drums of oil on freighters . Several IJN aircraft carriers were also used to transport drums of oil from Singapore to Japan . On 11 November 1944 , the two Ise @-@ class hybrid battleship @-@ aircraft carriers — Ise and Hyūga , which were grouped as Carrier Division 4 and under the command of Rear Admiral Matsuda Chiaki — sailed from the Japanese home islands to join the main body of the IJN in the Southwest Pacific . This deployment was made to both reinforce the remaining elements of the IJN in the area and place the ships near a source of fuel . During their voyage from Japan , each of the battleship @-@ carriers was loaded with about 1 @,@ 000 short tons ( 910 t ) of munitions for the units defending Manila in the Philippines . Due to heavy Allied air attacks on Manila , the two warships unloaded their supplies in the Spratly Islands from 14 November . They sailed for Lingga Roads near Singapore on the 20th of the month and arrived there two days later . The Allies learned from intelligence gained by decrypting Japanese radio signals that the battleship @-@ carriers had sailed . Allied submarines were ordered to keep watch for the ships , but did not intercept Ise or Hyūga during their voyage to Singapore . The two battleship @-@ carriers were deployed to Cam Ranh Bay in Indochina during December and returned to Singapore on 11 January 1945 . The U.S. Third Fleet raided the South China Sea between 10 and 20 January in search of the Japanese fleet , but did not locate Ise or Hyūga . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In early February 1945 , Ise , Hyūga and an escort of smaller warships received orders to sail to Japan in what was designated Operation Kita . The goal of this operation was to return some of the IJN warships in the Southwest Pacific to Japan loaded with important supplies . The ships selected to accompany the battleship @-@ carriers were the light cruiser Ōyodo ( which became part of Carrier Division 4 from 10 February ) and destroyers Asashimo , Hatsushimo and Kasumi . Carrier Division 4 and its escorts was designated the Completion Force . 
 The ships of the Completion Force departed the Lingga Roads on 6 February and began loading their cargoes in Singapore the next day . Shortly before docking , Ise sustained a small amount of damage when she struck a mine which had been dropped by Allied aircraft . During the Completion Force 's period at Singapore all six ships were loaded with supplies and Ise received temporary repairs . Hyūga embarked 4 @,@ 944 drums of aviation gasoline as well as 326 drums of standard gasoline and 440 oil field workers . Ise was loaded with 5 @,@ 200 drums of aviation gasoline and 551 oil workers ; each of the battleship @-@ carriers also embarked 1 @,@ 750 short tons ( 1 @,@ 590 t ) of rubber , 1 @,@ 750 short tons of tin and 200 short tons ( 180 t ) of other metals . Ōyodo was loaded with 120 short tons ( 110 t ) of tin , 70 short tons ( 64 t ) of tungsten , 70 tons of aviation gasoline , 50 short tons ( 45 t ) of rubber , 40 short tons ( 36 t ) of zinc and 20 short tons ( 18 t ) of mercury . A further 140 short tons ( 130 t ) of rubber and tin was split among the three destroyers . 
 Through code breaking , Allied intelligence was aware of the Completion Force 's composition and objectives . Allied signals intelligence units carefully monitored radio transmissions in the Singapore region , and the resulting " Ultra " intelligence provided details of the two battleship @-@ carriers ' movements to Singapore , preparations to return to Japan and planned route . The commander of Allied submarines in the South @-@ West Pacific Area ( Task Force 71 ) , Rear Admiral James Fife , Jr . , placed a high priority on stopping Ise and Hyūga from reaching Japan , and stationed 15 submarines along their expected route . A plan for coordinated attacks on the ships by the U.S. Navy and USAAF was developed . At the time , the U.S. Seventh Fleet was assigned four battleships in Filipino waters to guard the Allied beachhead at Lingayen Gulf in Luzon against attacks by the Japanese forces based at Lingga Roads and the Inland Sea until the USAAF forces in the region were strong enough to assume this responsibility . As of early February , the USAAF units in the Philippines were focused on supporting the United States Army – led Philippines Campaign and attacking Japanese facilities in Formosa . An intensive campaign against Japanese shipping in the South China Sea had been planned , but was yet to begin . 
 = = Voyage = = 
 The Completion Force sailed from Singapore on the evening of 10 February . The timing of its departure was set by a long @-@ term forecast of bad weather for the voyage to Japan . The British submarine HMS Tantalus observed the ships leaving port and attempted to attack them on 11 February , but was driven off by a Japanese aircraft . Following this action , Tantalus radioed a contact report to Fife 's headquarters . The four U.S. Navy battleships at Lingayen Gulf sailed on 10 February bound for U.S. bases in the Pacific where they were to receive repairs and undertake preparations ahead of their role supporting the invasion of Okinawa . The ships left the Philippines area on 14 February without having played any part in efforts to intercept the Completion Force . 
 U.S. Navy submarines unsuccessfully attempted to attack the Japanese ships on 12 February . At about 1 : 45 pm , USS <unk> detected the Completion Force at a distance of 9 mi ( 7 @.@ 8 nmi ; 14 km ) using her radar and transmitted a contact report . An hour later , USS <unk> made radar contact with the Japanese ships at a range of 15 mi ( 13 nmi ; 24 km ) . Over the next 14 hours the submarines <unk> , <unk> , Flounder , <unk> and Tuna attempted to reach a position where they could attack the Japanese ships , but were unable to do so . A group of submarines to the north — comprising USS <unk> , <unk> and <unk> — was unable to reach a position where they could attack the Completion Force . 
 USAAF patrols made contact with the Completion Force on 12 February ; following this , it was tracked almost continuously by radar @-@ equipped Army Air Forces and U.S. Navy aircraft . On the morning of 13 February , a force of B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers and 40 B @-@ 25 Mitchell medium bombers escorted by 48 P @-@ 51 Mustang fighters was dispatched from several bases on the islands of Leyte and Mindoro to attack the Japanese ships . While the aircraft successfully rendezvoused near the Completion Force , heavy cloud cover kept them from spotting any of the ships . As radar @-@ directed blind bombing was prohibited to avoid accidental attacks on the Allied submarines in the area , the strike force returned to its bases without attacking . On the same day , the Australian destroyers HMAS Arunta and Warramunga departed Lingayen Gulf and proceeded to a position about 300 mi ( 260 nmi ; 480 km ) west of Manila where they were held in readiness to rescue the crews of any aircraft downed while attacking the Completion Force . 
 More submarines attempted to attack the Japanese force on 13 February . A group of three boats — comprising USS <unk> , Blower and <unk> — was deployed along its route , and <unk> sighted the Japanese ships at 12 : 30 pm . The submarine was submerged at the time and attempted to maneuver into a firing position , but could not get any closer to the ships than 4 @,@ 800 yd ( 4 @,@ 400 m ) . Nevertheless , it fired six torpedoes at the Japanese force , all of which missed . Blower attempted a submerged attack , but the five torpedoes it fired at one of the battleship @-@ carriers and Ōyodo missed . USS Bashaw and <unk> , the northernmost submarines that Rear Admiral Fife had deployed , encountered the Completion Force during the afternoon of 13 February . Bashaw sighted the Japanese ships as they emerged from a rain squall at 3 : 15 pm , but one of the battleship @-@ carriers spotted the submarine and launched an aircraft to attack it . Bashaw was forced to dive when the battleship @-@ carrier began shelling it with her main battery , and neither it nor <unk> was able to intercept the Completion Force . During this period the other submarines in the area continued to chase the Japanese ships but did not regain contact with them . 
 An air attack was attempted against the Completion Force on 14 February . The number of B @-@ 24s , B @-@ 25s and escorting P @-@ 51s dispatched on this day was smaller than the force which had been used on 13 February , as the Japanese ships were now beyond the range of aircraft based at Leyte . Once again , cloud cover over the Completion Force prevented the Allied aircraft from sighting the Japanese ships , and they were unable to attack due to the prohibition on radar @-@ aimed bombing . This was the USAAF 's last attempt to bomb the Japanese force . As a result , the only successes gained by the USAAF aircraft involved in the operation were to shoot down a Mitsubishi Ki @-@ 57 " Topsy " transport plane near the Completion Force on 13 February as well as several fighters in the area of the ships between the 12th and 14th of the month . The two Australian destroyers were released for other duties on 15 February . 
 Vice Admiral Charles A. Lockwood — the commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet 's submarine force — followed the unsuccessful attempts to intercept the Completion Force in the South China Sea , and stationed a further eleven submarines along its projected route between the Luzon Strait and Japan . The Completion Force reached the Matsu Islands at the northern end of the Formosa Strait in the evening of 15 February , and anchored there for five hours . The Japanese ships resumed their journey to Kure via Korea and the Shimonoseki Strait at midnight , and the destroyers Kamikaze and <unk> were attached to the force for part of the day . At 5 : 07 am on 16 February , USS <unk> intercepted the Completion Force south of the Chinese city of <unk> and fired six torpedoes at one of the escorts , but all missed . At this time the Japanese ships were sailing at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ) . None of the other American submarines made contact with the Japanese force as it sailed to the east of where they had been positioned by Lockwood . 
 The Completion Force finished its entire voyage in about 10 days ; after slipping the Allied patrols it anchored off Chusan Island near Shanghai from 9 : 06 pm on 16 February until 7 : 00 am on 18 February , when it sailed for <unk> Harbor near <unk> on the southern coast of Korea . It arrived there at 4 : 00 pm that day , and anchored overnight . The Completion Force departed <unk> Harbor at 7 : 00 am on 19 February and reached the Japanese island of <unk> at 4 : 00 pm that day . After anchoring overnight , the Completion Force docked at Kure at 10 : 00 am on 20 February . The ships of the Completion Force were among the last Japanese warships to reach the home islands from the Southwest Pacific . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Allied naval commanders were disappointed by the failure of the 26 submarines directed against the Completion Force to inflict any damage on the ships . Fife concluded that this was due to the Completion Force 's high speed , the poor weather conditions at the time of the operation and the Japanese ships being fitted with equipment that enabled them to detect submarines ' radar signals . In a letter to Lockwood , he wrote that the failure of the submarines under his command " was a bitter pill to take and I make no alibi " . Lockwood attributed the decision to deploy his submarines too far to the west on faulty intelligence , and told Fife that " our dope certainly went sour at the last moment . Perhaps I depended too much on it " . 
 The use of freighters and warships to carry oil was successful in increasing Japanese oil imports , and the total level quality of oil which reached the country during the first quarter of 1945 was greater than the amounts achieved in late 1944 . Nevertheless , Allied submarines sank the majority of the merchant tankers that attempted to sail from Southeast Asia to Japan during February , and in March the Japanese ceased attempting to import oil from this source . Following the departure of the Completion Force , the only major seaworthy Japanese warships remaining in the Southwest Pacific were the heavy cruisers Ashigara and Haguro as well as the light cruiser Isuzu . These three cruisers did not attempt to return to Japan , and all were sunk by Allied submarines and destroyers between April and June . 
 After reaching Japan , Ise and Hyūga were assigned to bolster the anti @-@ aircraft defenses of the city of Kure and its naval base . Due to shortages of fuel and aircraft , the ships did not put to sea again , and both were sunk during the U.S. Navy 's attacks on Kure between 24 and 28 July 1945 . Ōyodo became part of the Kure Training Force and remained in port until she was sunk on 28 July . The three destroyers also failed to survive the war ; Asashimo and Kasumi fell victim to American carrier aircraft while escorting the battleship Yamato during Operation Ten @-@ Go on 6 April , and Hatsushimo sank after striking a mine near Maizuru on 30 July . 
 = Peggy Mitchell = 
 Margaret Ann " Peggy " Mitchell ( also Butcher ) is a fictional character from the BBC soap opera EastEnders . Peggy was initially played by Jo Warne when she first appeared in the episode broadcast on 30 April 1991 , featuring in the series on a recurring basis over several weeks . Peggy was reintroduced in 1994 , recast to Barbara Windsor , who made her first appearance in the episode broadcast on 7 November 1994 . Peggy became a regular character , and Windsor played the role until 2003 . She returned for two episodes in September 2004 , before rejoining as a regular character in 2005 . Windsor announced in October 2009 that she would be leaving the show and departed on 10 September 2010 . Windsor returned to the show for guest appearances on 20 September 2013 , 25 September 2014 , 17 February 2015 ( as part of the show 's 30th anniversary celebrations ; see EastEnders Live Week ) and 15 January 2016 . She then appeared in six episodes between 9 and 17 May 2016 and the character was killed off . Her voice is last heard in the following episode , on 19 May 2016 . Peggy 's funeral aired on 4 July 2016 . 
 Peggy is fiercely protective of her family and the Mitchell name , and has become famous for her catchphrase " Get outta my pub ! " , used when ejecting people from The Queen Victoria , of which she is the landlady . Her storylines have seen her embark on a series of failed romances , including marriages to Frank Butcher ( Mike Reid ) and Archie Mitchell ( Larry Lamb ) . She has been central to several plot strands revolving around health issues , launching a hate campaign against the HIV positive character Mark Fowler ( Todd Carty ) , and going on to make amends with him when she is later diagnosed with breast cancer . Though she recovers from her cancer , it later returns and leads to her suicide . Inside Soap named Peggy the UK 's top soap matriarch in 2009 . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 Peggy married Eric Mitchell because she was pregnant with Phil ( Steve McFadden ) . Eric , a keen boxer , worked for gangster Johnny Allen ( Billy Murray ) . Johnny would taunt Eric , making him do demeaning jobs because Eric was a better boxer than him . Eric fell in love with a woman called Maureen and planned to elope with her , but changed his mind , unable to desert his family , who he grew to resent . Eric took his anger out on Peggy and was often violent towards her and Phil . Peggy considered leaving when her sons , Phil and Grant ( Ross Kemp ) were teenagers , and once even tried to seduce Johnny Allen , but he turned her down . Eric cheated on Peggy with Claudette Hubbard ( Ellen Thomas ) , who he also intended to run away with , but changed his mind , leading to Claudette hating the entire family . Peggy turned to Eric 's younger brother Archie ( Larry Lamb ) because he was there for her when Eric began to abuse her . She tried to save her marriage by having another child in 1975 - her only daughter Samantha ( Danniella Westbrook and Kim Medcalf ) . Her relationship with Eric improved , but only temporarily , and when Kevin Masters ( Colin McCormack ) employed Peggy to work at his minicab firm , they began a secret affair . When Eric developed cancer , Peggy gave up work to care for him , but Kevin returned promptly after Eric 's death in 1985 and Peggy 's children took against him . 
 = = = 1991 = = = 
 Peggy makes her first appearance in Albert Square , when Sam 's desire to escape from her family causes her to elope with Ricky Butcher ( Sid Owen ) , at the age of sixteen . Peggy tries to persuade Sam that getting married at the age of sixteen will ruin her life , but she is unsuccessful . Peggy later accepts Sam and Ricky 's relationship and leaves , after giving the couple her blessing . In 1992 , it is revealed that Peggy is in a relationship with Kevin , whom she had an affair with during her marriage to Eric . 
 = = = 1994 – 2010 = = = 
 Peggy is not seen for three years , during which time her relationship with Kevin ends . She returns to Walford when her sons fall out after Phil 's affair with Grant 's wife , Sharon ( Letitia Dean ) , is revealed . Peggy becomes acting landlady of The Queen Victoria public house and blames Sharon for the affair . Peggy tries to force her out of Walford , resulting in Sharon signing over her share of the pub and leaving the Mitchell family as the sole owners , with Peggy in charge . 
 Peggy starts dating businessman George Palmer ( Paul Moriarty ) , unaware that he is a criminal involved in illegal money laundering . She instigates a hate campaign against local resident Mark Fowler ( Todd Carty ) when she discovers he is HIV positive and begins a feud with his mother Pauline ( Wendy Richard ) . Peggy later realises she was wrong when she is diagnosed with breast cancer . She initially refuses surgery and ends things with George , fearing that he will not be able to handle her illness . However , supported by George and her family , she eventually has a lumpectomy . Peggy and George get engaged but their relationship ends when Phil reveals his criminal nature . Peggy goes on to date local car lot owner , Frank Butcher ( Mike Reid ) , and they become engaged . Peggy has doubts about the wedding when her cancer returns and she has to have a mastectomy , but eventually decides to go through with it . Tension develops between Peggy and Phil when Grant leaves for Rio de Janeiro after a violent fight with his brother . To spite Peggy , Phil sells Grant 's share in the pub to local businessman Dan Sullivan ( Craig Fairbrass ) for £ 5 . Peggy loathes Dan , and the two frequently row over the running of the pub . Eventually , she and Phil call a truce and force Dan out of Walford . Peggy discovers Frank is planning to leave her for his ex @-@ wife , Pat ( Pam St. Clement ) , so she shames them by reading Frank 's Dear Jane letter to the entire pub and then slaps them both . She throws Frank out and he leaves Walford . Afterwards , Peggy becomes depressed and begins to rely heavily on tranquillisers . When Frank 's daughter , Janine ( Charlie Brooks ) , taunts her on Christmas Day about her father moving on , Peggy begins drinking heavily and smashes up the pub with a baseball bat . The next year , Peggy is forced to sell the pub as Frank left her in debt , and is furious to discover the new owner is Sharon . 
 Peggy begins dating Harry Slater ( Michael Elphick ) , who owns a bar in Spain and convinces her to move there with him . They become engaged but break up when it is revealed that Harry is guilty of sexually abusing his niece Kat ( Jessie Wallace ) . When Phil begins dating Sharon again and becomes joint owner of The Queen Vic , Peggy moves back in . She later becomes sole licensee again when Sharon sells her half of the pub back to her . Peggy is briefly reunited with Frank when she travels to Spain to attend his funeral . She discovers he faked his own death to avoid creditors . While she 's in Spain , she shockingly finds her daughter Sam ( now played by Kim Medcalf ) working as a lap dancer and takes her home . Peggy later decides to move to Brazil to be with Grant but visits Walford for Sam 's wedding to Andy Hunter ( Michael Higgs ) before returning to Brazil . 
 When Peggy returns to Walford in 2005 , she is furious to discover Sam has lost possession of The Queen Vic , and that the new licensee Chrissie Watts ( Tracy @-@ Ann Oberman ) has framed Sam for her husband Den 's ( Leslie Grantham ) murder . While trying to exonerate Sam and reclaim ownership of the pub , Peggy ignites a feud with Johnny Allen , who also wishes to buy The Queen Vic . Johnny hires a mobster to assault Peggy , but she is saved by her sons , Phil and Grant . They are able to deal with Johnny , secure Sam 's release from prison , and return Peggy to The Queen Vic . Peggy begins a romance with Jack Edwards ( Nicky Henson ) , the father @-@ in @-@ law of Peggy 's relative Billy ( Perry Fenwick ) . However , when Peggy discovers Billy 's newborn daughter has Down 's syndrome , she declares that the baby should be put up for adoption , causing friction in her relationship with Jack . Although Peggy comes to accept the baby , Jack breaks up with her and leaves Walford . 
 Peggy begins a relationship with her brother @-@ in @-@ law , Archie , father of Ronnie ( Samantha Womack ) and Roxy Mitchell ( Rita Simons ) . They get engaged and Archie begins subtly controlling Peggy . They marry , but it ends a few hours later when it is revealed that Archie lied to Ronnie about her infant daughter 's death . Peggy has Archie evicted from The Queen Vic , and tries unsuccessfully to coerce Phil into murdering him . Peggy files for divorce and Archie plots revenge on the entire Mitchell family . When Peggy loses the bail surety she has paid on behalf of her daughter Sam ( who breaks the conditions of her bail following coercion from Archie ) , the Mitchells are forced to use The Queen Victoria to gain a collateral Loan from Ian Beale ( Adam Woodyatt ) . Archie blackmails Ian to sell the loan to him , and when the Mitchells are unable to meet the loan repayment , Archie evicts them and assumes ownership of the pub . However , Archie is murdered on Christmas Day 2009 by an unknown assailant . Peggy grieves for Archie , but she and various other members of her family become suspects for his murder . Following a police enquiry , Bradley Branning ( Charlie Clements ) is posthumously found guilty of the murder , though unbeknown to everyone , the actual murderer is Bradley 's wife , Stacey Slater ( Lacey Turner ) , after Archie raped her . In his will , Archie leaves The Queen Vic to Roxy , who reinstates Peggy . 
 After being disgusted with the state of the Square and learning that a councillor has stood down , Peggy and Pat both decide to run for council and are interviewed by journalist Harvey Freeman ( Martin Jarvis ) . Eventually they both pull out of the election , but Harvey hears of this and individually invites them both out . They both finally discover his two @-@ timing , and humiliate him in punishment . When Phil prevents his daughter Louise ( Brittany <unk> ) from contacting her mother Lisa ( Lucy Benjamin ) , Peggy interjects and Phil punches her . Believing he is an unfit parent , Peggy takes Louise to Lisa against Phil 's wishes . Although , Lisa promises to allow Phil visitation , she flees with Louise . Phil blames Peggy for the loss of his child and begins using alcohol and crack cocaine . Peggy tries to stop Phil using crack by locking him in her pub , but Phil escapes and in a drunken bid for revenge , he sets fire to Peggy 's pub . Peggy watches in horror as it is destroyed . Realising her role in Phil 's problems , Peggy decides to leave Walford for his sake . After saying tearful goodbyes to her family and making peace with Phil , Peggy takes one last look at The Queen Vic and leaves Albert Square . 
 = = = 2013 – 16 = = = 
 In January 2012 , Peggy misses Pat 's funeral as she is on a cruise , and in 2013 , Phil visits Peggy in Cornwall with Ben 's baby daughter , Lexi Pearce ( <unk> @-@ Beau Cotterill ) . Three months later , Peggy flies in to London to visit Phil in hospital , and encourages him to stand up to Carl White ( Daniel Coonan ) , who is trying to take over the Mitchell business empire . After , she visits Pat 's old house , and leaves a bottle of gin on the doorstep as way of goodbye . In September 2014 , Peggy appears in Portugal , telling Ronnie to go back to Walford and stop Phil from marrying Sharon . In February 2015 , Peggy returns to the square to confront Dot Branning ( June Brown ) , after her son Nick Cotton ( John Altman ) cut the brakes on a car and falsely incriminated Phil . She is also in on the secret that Ben 's mother , Kathy Sullivan ( Gillian Taylforth ) , faked her own death ten years ago and wants to return to Walford . Before returning to Portugal , Peggy visits the Queen Vic and meets its new landlord , Mick Carter ( Danny Dyer ) , who tells her to " get out of my pub " . 
 In January 2016 , Phil calls Sal , wanting Louise 's ( now played by Tilly Keeper ) address , and when he goes to her house , Peggy is there , having returned a week earlier . Peggy is disgusted to see that Phil has returned to alcoholism , but does give him Louise 's address . She then reveals her breast cancer has returned , and she is dying . Phil tries to admit that he has cirrhosis of liver , but she refuses to see him again and he leaves . In May , Peggy turns up on Ronnie 's doorstep , and the next day Sal arrives with the news that Peggy 's chemotherapy is not working and she is dying . A hospital appointment confirms that Peggy 's cancer has spread to her brain and it is terminal . Peggy finally faces Phil , who is in recovery from his alcoholism , and admits she is dying . He is upset that she is refusing any more treatment , and takes her on a boat trip on the Thames , and back to their childhood home , to try and make her fight . However , Peggy is not convinced and asks Phil to help her die . 
 Sharon calls Grant back to Walford , and he persuades Phil not to help Peggy . She tells them both she will not kill herself , and after settling old feuds with Dot , Stacey and Sharon , Peggy receives a vision of Pat . She decides she wants to be remembered as a strong woman , not as weak in her bed , and takes a lethal overdose of pills that she hid from her sons and dies in her sleep that night . Phil is devastated to find her body , and a letter from her urges him to love himself as others love him . Peggy 's funeral takes place on 4 July 2016 , and Phil is due to do an eulogy to her there but gets too emotional and runs home . Sharon later calms him down by revealing that Peggy was the one who sent Eric to prison when Phil was a child , not corrupt police officers as he was previously told , and that she did it to protect him . Phil later works up the courage to finish his eulogy to Peggy at the wake , and then returns to her grave at the church to finish his goodbyes to her , unaware that Grant has secretly left a rose at the grave . 
 = = Creation = = 
 Peggy was introduced as a guest character in April 1991 , by executive producer Michael Ferguson . The character was brought in as the mother of the already established Mitchell clan : Phil ( Steve McFadden ) , Grant ( Ross Kemp ) and Sam ( Danniella Westbrook ) . Specifically , she played a key role in a storyline about the elopement of her daughter Sam with Ricky Butcher ( Sid Owen ) . Peggy was played by actress Jo Warne for a period of three months , but was written out upon the completion of the storyline . Two other actresses had been cast in the part before Warne . The first quit before she could film any scenes , and the second filmed eight episodes , though all of her scenes were scrapped before broadcast . 
 The character did not make another appearance until 7 November 1994 , when she was reintroduced by series producer Barbara Emile as a regular character . The actress was recast , the role being taken over by Barbara Windsor , already well known to viewers as a comic actress , notably appearing in the long @-@ running Carry On films . Scott Matthewman of The Stage commented on the recast in 2006 : " Quite the biggest – and most inexplicable – transformation is that of Peggy Mitchell in EastEnders . While Barbara Windsor has dominated the role ... first appearing in [ 1994 ] , the character had appeared briefly [ three ] years earlier , played by Jo Warne , a lady who physically is as different from our Babs as it 's possible to get . " 
 Steve McFadden and Ross Kemp had attempted to persuade EastEnders writer Tony Jordan to develop a spin @-@ off for their characters , which would star Windsor as Peggy . The idea never advanced beyond informal discussions , but when the producers decided to reintroduce Peggy , McFadden and Kemp suggested Windsor play her . Windsor had previously expressed a desire to join the cast of EastEnders . Chat show host Chris Evans of Channel 4 's The Big Breakfast made a public broadcast instructing viewers to fax or phone the BBC with pleas for Windsor 's instatement . However , Windsor was already in negotiations with the BBC about appearing in the serial . June Deitch , the EastEnders casting director , had met with Windsor to discuss the matter , and was convinced when Windsor declared that she would " like to play my own age for a change " . At the time , the producers had already thought about reintroducing Peggy , and Windsor was cast despite originally being considered too " well @-@ known " . Windsor has spoken of her " terrified " reaction to being asked to audition , commenting : " I had the weekend to prepare and I cried all the time . I didn 't know how to do soap acting . I was so used to using my hands , my eyes . " She auditioned with two scenes , one emotion , one " jolly " which Windsor has described as " agony " , explaining : " I was afraid of playing Barbara Windsor , so when I had to laugh I went ' huh , huh ' . Anything rather than ' tee , hee , hee ' . " In an interview with the Walford Gazette , a US @-@ based newspaper dedicated to EastEnders , Windsor commented on her casting : " I was thrilled , I could rest my tired bones working on a marvelous television show that I deeply respected . I was very excited about the possibility [ of ] playing this feisty lady who would come in and shake up her two boys ' lives . " 
 Windsor has been described as the biggest " name " that EastEnders has ever added to its cast , and her arrival came at a time in the show 's history that has been branded its " worst creative period " . Mark Lawson for The Independent wrote that Windsor 's casting was intended to combat low ratings , commenting : " The Windsor initiative seems to be a direct response to suggestions that EastEnders has become too gloomy : a view heavily advanced by Roy Hattersley , former deputy leader of the Labour Party , and fan of the BBC series ' rival on ITV , Coronation Street . Certainly , Miss Windsor has been associated throughout her career with the lighter touch . " According to Windsor , 27 million viewers watched her first appearance as Peggy on @-@ screen . Mark Lawson for The Daily Telegraph has stated that five million extra viewers watched her first scenes , reporting that initially : " The critics said that she lacked the ' brassiness and vulnerability ' for soap acting and that , stripped of her bubbly image , ' nothing much of interest was revealed ' . Ironically , viewers complained that she was too upmarket . " Windsor has commented of the impact of her pre @-@ existing celebrity status : 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Hilary Kingsley , author of The EastEnders Handbook ( 1991 ) , has described Peggy as tough , with a " knack for getting her own way " . She adds , " Peggy likes to think she looks much younger [ than she is ] . She 's flash , fast @-@ talking and nobody 's fool . She has always done things her own way , and heaven help anyone who crosses her , though her bark 's usually worse than her bite . " 
 When Windsor took over the role in 1994 , she was unhappy with the way Peggy was being scripted . She has commented , " a few things weren 't quite right about Peggy at the beginning . On a purely superficial level , the wig didn 't fit right . And the clothes weren 't right either . They appeared too downmarket . I was particularly worried about how the character was viewed by the producer and writers . I saw her as much ballsier than they did . I think they envisioned Peggy as this rather sad , vulnerable lady who spent all her time worrying about her children . " However , early in 1995 , EastEnders acquired a new executive producer , Corinne Hollingworth , who shared Windsor 's vision of Peggy . It was Hollingworth who decided that Peggy would be a central character , the new landlady of The Queen Victoria public house , one of the soap 's main focal points . Hollingworth stated that Peggy was " not going to be allowed to just sit in some flat polishing her nails " . Windsor has said : " It was like a dream . [ Hollingworth ] let me go out with the costume designer and choose Peggy 's wardrobe , which needed to be a lot more flash and upmarket . Corinne and I worked on getting Peggy right and I finally began to believe ... " . 
 Windsor has described Peggy as " from the old school , the generation which doesn 't put up with rubbish from anybody ... She can get through practically anything because she 's tough , tough , tough . " The character has been classified by Rupert Smith , author of EastEnders : 20 Years in Albert Square , as a matriarch , assuming " papal infallibility . Whatever anybody does — particularly her own children — she knows better . " She has also been branded a " battleaxe " by Dave West of entertainment website Digital Spy , and someone who " wears her heart on her sleeve " by Windsor . Family @-@ orientated , Windsor adds that : " [ Peggy ] loves her family with a passion . Her worst qualities are that she 's blinkered , sometimes wrongly passionate about her family . " 
 It has been speculated that Windsor based Peggy on Violet Kray , mother of the infamous East End gangsters , the Kray twins ; however Windsor has denied this . Instead , she claims that Peggy is based on women she has seen in East End pubs and her own mother : " women whose hair is great and their outfits are more Walthamstow market , they get it wrong slightly ... Some things I 've done with Peggy is from my Mum . She was one of those East End snobs . I drew on all of those experiences . " In a 2009 radio interview with Dale Winton , Windsor said three people have influenced her portrayal of Peggy : Violet Kray ( thus retracting her earlier statement ) , her own mother , and the actor Mike Reid , who played her on @-@ screen husband Frank Butcher . 
 = = Development = = 
 Peggy has been central to numerous high @-@ profile storylines , including a battle with breast cancer , a failed marriage to Frank Butcher , and various business and family upsets . 
 = = = Breast cancer = = = 
 In 1996 , Peggy featured in a storyline about breast cancer . It was the first time that the soap had given one of its characters the illness , though the issue was covered much less substantially in 1987 as a means of promoting breast cancer screening , when Sue Osman ( Sandy Ratcliff ) discovered a lump on her breast , which turned out to be benign . 
 Peggy 's breast cancer storyline was devised at the suggestion of a scriptwriter in a story conference session and , according to the production staff , was an idea " that had been knocking about for a long time . " In Lesley Henderson 's book , Social Issues in Television Fiction , an EastEnders researcher explains that : " A lot of illnesses [ ... ] translate quite readily into strong dramatic material " , and the experience of being hospitalised or waiting on test results is something everyone can identify with . The programme sought expert advice on " storyline visuals " from a variety of sources including cancer organisations , breast cancer charities and medical professionals . There were anticipated problems with running a breast cancer story , such as timing , characterisation , casting , and interweaving the plot with other ongoing storylines . A story editor has explained : " EastEnders is perceived as being an issue @-@ led show , but it isn 't , it 's character and story @-@ led [ ... ] If you haven 't got the character to fulfill that storyline then it won 't work . You 've got to be careful to make sure that the illness actually impacts on the family dynamics and the character development . " 
 Producers decided to use Peggy Mitchell in the breast cancer storyline , conforming to a soap opera tradition of reserving strong roles for a firmly established middle @-@ aged matriarch . The audience were familiar with Peggy 's history , knew that her first husband had died from cancer , consequently making her fear hospitals , and she had : " the right mentality for [ the story theme ] , which was about ' a woman who discovers a lump and then refuses to accept that anything 's wrong ' . An added factor was that in choosing Peggy the programme could avoid appearing too issue driven , and [ the ] storyline could be used as a device to expand and develop her characterisation . " Additionally , as the causes of breast cancer are not attributable to risky behaviour , the disease was deemed " more attractive " in storyline terms . A member of the EastEnders production team explains : 
 In the view of the production team , Peggy 's breast cancer was a catalyst , creating new dynamics and tensions amongst existing characters . Realism was also an issue . As a middle @-@ aged woman , Peggy was <unk> at higher risk for developing breast cancer . In 2001 , it was reported that Peggy 's character was one of only a few media portrayals of older females to be given the disease , and source organisations have praised EastEnders for this . 
 The storyline used elements of suspense , created by the use of " shared secrets " between Peggy and her daughter @-@ in @-@ law Tiffany Mitchell ( Martine McCutcheon ) , who invented elaborate cover stories to mask Peggy 's trips to hospital from her sons and partner . Tension was deliberately built for viewing pleasure , posing the questions of whether Peggy 's lump was benign or malignant and whether she would die , but also in terms of Peggy 's relationships , whether her children would discover the truth or if George would end their relationship . Henderson has suggested that : " such devises [ added ] pathos to Peggy 's treatment path . Audiences [ knew ] that she [ was ] terrified and about to discover her biopsy results , but must watch as she is casually castigated by her son Grant for pestering his wife Tiffany to accompany her to ' the dentist ' . " Hospital scenes were also played for narrative pace to build tension and drama . 
 Because " radical , body @-@ altering " surgery on a long @-@ running character would cause the production team ongoing problems with continuity , it was decided that Peggy would have a " less visible " lumpectomy , rather than a mastectomy . A member of the EastEnders production team explained : " We have to think about costume and what it 's going to look like afterwards and what we 're lumbering ourselves with [ ... ] you have to think of that for a long @-@ term character . " Additionally , giving Peggy a lumpectomy at that stage of her disease was viewed favourably by source organisations , as it helped to spread a message that a mastectomy is not necessary in all breast cancer cases . However , the storyline was revisited several times over the next few years . In August 1997 , Peggy was given the " all @-@ clear " at her follow @-@ up mammogram , and in March 1999 the cancer returned and she underwent a mastectomy , while in 2000 she had a breast reconstruction . It has been reported that Peggy was the first soap opera character to undergo a mastectomy . BBC Production chief executive Matthew Bannister praised Windsor 's portrayal of Peggy coming to terms with a mastectomy , commenting : " It 's brought a good deal of comfort and help to us and a lot of other people . " 
 Oncology nurses and consultants were involved in the development of the storyline , which was based on a real life case study . In Clive Seale 's book , Health and the Media , EastEnders was praised for putting its message across without being " gruelling " . It has also been praised for showing " potent scenes " of a woman coming to terms with her diagnosis , scenes that also provided " rare opportunities " to portray a cancer patient " behaving badly " and depicting " ambivalent feelings ( such as denial or anger ) " — as it had been noted that cancer patients are typically portrayed in the media as " beatific , serene figures " . When Peggy had a mastectomy , hundreds of viewers wrote to the BBC to thank producer , Matthew Robinson for tackling " a difficult subject so sensitively " . However , not all viewers were impressed with the storyline . Felicity Smart , who had undergone a mastectomy , wrote to the BBC on behalf of the Breast <unk> Support Group at St Thomas ' Hospital in London to say that emotionally the storyline " hit the spot " , but medically it was " hopelessly inaccurate " as according to Smart : " No one pulls pints and wisecracks with customers three days after having a mastectomy . " 
 = = = Marriage to Frank Butcher = = = 
 In 1998 , Peggy was romantically paired on @-@ screen with the character Frank Butcher . Their coupling was part of producer Matthew Robinson 's plan to place the focus of the soap back on to the Butcher and Mitchell families , while various other long @-@ running characters were axed following a decline in ratings . The soap was attracting 15 @.@ 74 million viewers in May 1998 , as opposed to rival soap Coronation Street 's 16 million . 
 Played by Mike Reid , Frank had been a regular character in the serial from 1987 to 1994 , and had appeared in a recurring role until 1998 , when Reid agreed to return full @-@ time . Frank 's history on the show included a former marriage to another long @-@ running matriarch , Pat Butcher ( Pam St. Clement ) . Their history as lovers featured prominently in Peggy 's narrative in 1998 , when , after agreeing to marry Frank , Peggy was wrongly told that Frank and Pat were having an affair . A special two @-@ hander episode aired in November 1998 , featuring only Pat and Peggy for the entire duration . It concentrated on Peggy 's reaction to the suspected affair , whilst simultaneously addressing Pat 's unresolved history with Frank and the apparent destruction of Pat 's own marriage to Roy ( Tony Caunter ) , who had also responded badly to the rumours about his wife 's infidelity . The episode , written by Tony Jordan , featured what the Sunday Mirror described as one of " the most vicious fights ever filmed by a soap " , with both throwing glasses at one another and Pat slapping Peggy across the face exclaiming " You bitch ! " and Peggy responding by slapping Pat exclaiming " You cow ! " . According to press reports , the fight scene between the characters was " so powerful that it had to have scenes and dialogue cut so it could be screened before the 9 pm watershed . " Barbara Windsor was reportedly bruised during the filming . Windsor commented , " The writer didn 't want a <unk> pamby cat fight between two silly girls . We were throwing chairs and bottles and the adrenaline was at a high . When I saw the programme I couldn 't believe how good it was . Pam and I were really proud . " The Sunday Mirror described it as : " one of the most impressive episodes of all time " . In the climax of the storyline , both couples resolved their differences , and their relationships remained intact . 
 Peggy and Frank were married on @-@ screen on 1 April 1999 . A " hen night " was thrown for Windsor with the show 's make @-@ up team , and the BBC threw a " massive " party in the show 's Albert Square to celebrate the event . Actors Windsor and Reid joined fellow stars , celebrities and TV executives for a celebration on the programme 's set in Elstree , Hertfordshire . Windsor admitted she had been so nervous before filming the wedding she was sick on set . She commented , " I broke out in spots and threw up in the vestry . I was very nervous – we were both very nervous . The day you stop getting nervous you can hold your hands up . It shows you care . " The soap wedding was filmed in Harrow , North West London in February 1999 . A BBC spokesman commented : " It is one of the best weddings Walford has ever seen but it is not problem free . There are a lot of people who do not want to see Frank and Peggy married – Grant being one of them – and it remains to be seen whether they will get through the day without a major upset . And as if the wedding is not gripping enough , there are certainly shocking revelations back at the Vic . " In the eventual episode , it was actually Grant Mitchell who persuaded his mother to marry Frank – with whom he had been feuding following his accidental killing of wife Tiffany – after Peggy was having second thoughts , thinking that Frank was only marrying her out of pity . Nearly 20 million viewers watched Peggy and Frank marry . 
 Together Frank and Peggy ran The Queen Victoria , and were involved in various family and business crises , including a " tug @-@ of @-@ war " for their public house with " cuckoo @-@ in @-@ the @-@ nest " Dan Sullivan ( Craig Fairbrass ) . After taking time off in 2000 due to ill @-@ health , Reid announced that he was quitting the soap in May 2000 . After Reid publicly declared that he would love Frank to have a last fling with Pat before he left , EastEnders ' bosses granted his wish and an affair was scripted . The pair enjoyed a liaison on a Spanish beach during a week @-@ long August special set on the Costa Blanca , which saw Frank and Peggy go away with Pat and Roy and Terry and Irene Raymond ( Gavin Richards and Roberta Taylor ) . A BBC spokesperson said : " Pat is obviously incredibly torn between her love for her husband , Roy , and her old feelings for Frank . She 's been hurt by Frank in the past , but she 's coming to realise that she still has strong feelings for him and he has made no secret of his soft spot for her . I can confirm they do enjoy a romantic kiss on the beach . " On @-@ screen , Pat and Frank 's affair continued until they decided , in November 2000 , to elope . In the specially extended episode marking Frank 's official exit — which aired on 2 November 2000 , but was Guy Fawkes Night in the on @-@ screen events – Peggy discovered the affair amidst Frank 's attempt to retrieve a letter of confession , following Pat 's change of heart . 
 After revealing their deception to a busy Queen Victoria public house , Peggy slapped both Pat and Frank , rebuffed Frank 's attempt at reconciliation and left him to depart alone . In December 2000 , Ian Hyland of the Sunday Mirror voted the scene in which Peggy slaps both Pat and Frank as one of the " TV fights of the year " , saying " It was Peggy 's speech which really made it a Bonfire Night to remember . But the slaps were equally well dispatched . " Commenting on Reid 's exit , Windsor has said , " We fell out when I found out he was leaving because it was a shock for me . I was really upset . I 've known him 30 odd years and I really like working with him . We had a great relationship as friends as well as performers . I got my own back when I had to slap him after I found out he was fooling around with Pat . I did the slap twice as I didn 't think I did it hard enough the first time . " 
 = = = Sabbatical = = = 
 Peggy was written out of EastEnders in 2003 , sent to live in Rio de Janeiro with her son Grant for two years , while Windsor took a sabbatical from the show after being diagnosed with the Epstein @-@ Barr virus . Windsor had previously never taken more than two weeks leave annually during her eight years on the show , as Peggy was considered such a central character to the series . Windsor 's absence was originally only supposed to be a year long . She stated at the time : " This has been a very hard decision for me to make because I 'm so happy here on EastEnders but it 's been a long time without a proper break . I just feel some time off would be good for me and for the character too . " Louise Berridge , then EastEnders ' executive producer , commented : " Barbara has been an absolute trouper for more than eight years on this show . We hope she has a great time and look forward to bringing her back with a big story in 2004 . " 
 Although Peggy did return briefly in 2004 to attend her daughter Sam 's wedding to Andy Hunter ( Michael Higgs ) , it was not until 2005 that she resumed her role as a series regular . Her full return was announced in January 2005 , with John Yorke , the BBC controller of continuing drama series , stating he was " delighted " as " [ Peggy ] is a hugely loved character and one we think will be stirring things up from the moment she steps back into Walford . " Windsor said that she was " over the moon " to return , adding : " I had a great time when I came back to film for a couple of weeks recently . It really reminded me that the square is where I feel at home . " BBC executives hoped that Peggy 's return would help to revive EastEnders ' ratings . Her absence coincided with a two @-@ year ratings slump for EastEnders , with David Liddiment in The Guardian drawing direct correlation between her return and the show 's " ratings rejuvenation " . The episode in which she returned was watched by 10 million viewers , winning EastEnders a 47 % audience share in the timeslot . 
 = = = Relationship with Archie Mitchell ; running for local government = = = 
 In March 2008 , the BBC announced that Larry Lamb had been cast as Archie Mitchell , the brother of Peggy 's late husband Eric . Archie was scripted as a love @-@ interest for Peggy and Peggy 's backstory was retconned to incorporate a romantic history with Archie . Portrayed as an adulterous villain , Archie began controlling Peggy , changing her clothing and her hair style and instructing her on how to behave . 
 In 2009 Peggy ran as an independent candidate in the local council elections against Archie 's wishes . Writers wanted a storyline that allowed Peggy to stand up for her beliefs , and felt that running for local government would allow her to speak passionately about the community . After a scene showed Janine Butcher ( Charlie Brooks ) asking Peggy , " Where would Tony Blair have been without Alastair Campbell ? " , Campbell responded by giving advice to Peggy in a video blog . A response from Peggy was then recorded , thanking Campbell for his input . Peggy pulled out of the election at Archie 's request ahead of their wedding , however the storyline set up a later episode in which Boris Johnson , Mayor of London made a guest appearance in EastEnders . On 1 October 2009 , Johnson appeared in the show as himself , visiting Walford and The Queen Victoria and conversing with Peggy . Johnson commented on his appearance : " It was , of course , a tremendous honour to step inside that most venerable of London landmarks , The Queen Vic , and share a scene with another of the capital 's icons , the fabulous Barbara Windsor . " Executive producer Diederick Santer stated : " We couldn 't let the visit pass without the Mayor entering London 's most famous pub , The Queen Vic , and meeting its formidable and politically active landlady Peggy Mitchell . " The episode was watched by 8 million viewers , winning EastEnders a 38 % audience share in the timeslot . 
 Peggy and Archie 's wedding was filmed on location in North London in January 2009 and was screened on 2 April 2009 that year in an hour @-@ long special . To promote the storyline , EastEnders screened a trailer showing Peggy being assembled in her wedding outfit by a robot , which symbolised Archie 's control of her . Realising the extent to which Archie had been controlling and trying to change her throughout their engagement , Peggy gave him an ultimatum at the altar : he either accept the real her , or call the wedding off . Archie chose to marry her , though Tim Teeman for The Times commented : " ' [ T ] he real Peggy ' is a hazy concept : there ’ s Peggy the big @-@ hearted East End landlady and Peggy the crone famous for rasping ' Get <unk> my pub ' to anyone who crosses her path . For someone into evil mind control , Archie has brilliant taste . The wedding outfit he had chosen for Peggy was much nicer than the tatty net curtains that even Miss Havisham would have rejected that the ' real Peggy ' chose to marry in . " Peggy and Archie 's wedding was watched by 10 @.@ 6 million viewers , winning EastEnders a 48 % audience share . A further 1 @.@ 2 million viewers watched the episode 's repeat on BBC Three at 10 pm . However , the marriage lasts only as long as the reception ; when Peggy realises Archie has been manipulating other members of his family , Peggy throws him out and a feud ignites between Archie and the Mitchell clan . 
 Peggy resumes her plan to run for council in 2010 , but is furious to discover that Pat is also running . The storyline introduces the character of Harvey Freeman , played by Martin Jarvis , a freelance journalist who is reporting on the election . Harvey is a potential love interest for both Peggy and Pat , and causes friction between the friends . 
 = = = 2010 departure = = = 
 On 28 October 2009 it was announced that Windsor had quit the show and would leave in 2010 after 15 years . She said : " EastEnders has been wonderful to me and it 's no secret that it changed my life all of those years ago . I 'll be so sad to leave Peggy behind ; she 's such a wonderful character to play . I have had the pleasure of working with a marvellous cast and crew and have made many lasting good friends . To have had the honour of showing the Queen around the set is something that will stay with me forever . " Executive producer Diederick Santer said : " Barbara has contributed so much to EastEnders over the last 15 years , plus countless episodes , and countless amazing storylines . Peggy Mitchell is a truly iconic character , and along with Steve McFadden and Ross Kemp , Barbara has made the Mitchells the premier family of British soap . " Windsor filmed her final scene on 16 July 2010 . Peggy 's final episode , which aired on 10 September 2010 , was preceded by a number of television trailers in August and a new section on the EastEnders website dedicated to the character . The episode ended with a special reworking of the piano version of the EastEnders theme tune known as " Julia 's Theme " , called " Peggy 's Theme " . Tribute was then paid to her in a clip programme , Peggy Mitchell : Queen of the Vic . Peggy 's final episode attracted 10 @.@ 1 million viewers , and was the second most @-@ watched programme in the week of 6 – 12 September . 
 At the time of the announcement of Windor 's departure , it was reported she wanted to take a two @-@ year break , but after that would like to make return appearances as Peggy . However , in September 2010 , she ruled out a return , saying , " It was a bit selfish of me but I didn 't want to be killed off . I am never going to go back but I like to think that [ Peggy ] ' s still out there somewhere . " At the recording of the new series of The Rob Brydon Show for BBC Two , Brydon asked if she would consider returning , to which Windsor replied , " Never say never " . 
 = = = Cancer return and death = = = 
 After making three separate returns in September 2013 , September 2014 and another in February 2015 to commemorate 30 years of EastEnders in EastEnders Live Week , Windsor made an unannounced return to EastEnders in 2016 , appearing in the episode broadcast on 15 January . After this , it was announced that the character was to be killed off , losing her battle with breast cancer . The scenes were filmed in secret in November 2015 , following Windsor 's personal decision for Peggy to be killed . She said : " Peggy is a character close to my heart but I made the decision a while ago that I need to say goodbye to Peggy once and for all as otherwise she will always be there , urging me to go back and that is something I need to shut the door on . After thinking long and hard about it , I realised that it is time for me and the audience to say our final farewells to the lady who I have loved for many years and I thought that whilst [ executive producer Dominic Treadwell @-@ Collins ] , who I adore , is still in charge I want him to be the one to oversee it . I am grateful that Dominic has accepted my decision and together , since late last summer , we have been secretly plotting Peggy ’ s last scenes . " Treadwell @-@ Collins said , " when [ Windsor ] told me her decision back in the summer [ 2015 ] , we both had a little cry before getting excited about how Peggy Mitchell , the matriarch to end all matriarchs could bid her final farewell to Albert Square . In Peggy Mitchell , Barbara has created one of the greatest ever characters on British television , someone who has become as synonymous with EastEnders as The Queen Vic itself . So this is the end of an EastEnders era . But it is also an opportunity to send Peggy Mitchell out in style in what will be one of the most heartbreaking , uplifting and epic exits an EastEnders character has ever had . We can 't wait to have Barbara back at EastEnders , even if it is for the final time . The most professional of professionals on set and off , and a true friend , we have all been working harder than ever to make Barbara and Peggy Mitchell proud . " Windsor resumed filming on 21 March 2016 . 
 On 3 May 2016 , it was revealed that Peggy would refuse her cancer treatment and decide to spend time with her family . Windsor said it was a " special week " of episodes with " lots of surprises " that would be " a perfect ending for Peggy " . Peggy 's final scenes aired on 17 May 2016 , but her voice is heard in the following episode , which aired on 19 May 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Peggy has been described by the BBC as one of EastEnders ' " most high @-@ profile characters . " Windsor has won several awards for her performance as Peggy . In 1999 , she was named BBC Personality of the Year . She won Best Actress at the 1999 British Soap Awards , and was granted a Lifetime Achievement award in 2009 . She also won a Lifetime Achievement award at the 2001 Inside Soap awards , and was named the UK 's top soap matriarch in a 2009 Inside Soap poll . She also won the Soap Legend award at the 2009 TV Now Awards . Furthermore , Windsor was nominated for the Outstanding Serial Drama Performance award at the 2008 and 2009 National Television Awards , Best Soap Actress at the 2007 TV Now Awards , Best Actress at the 2009 British Soap Awards , and Best Actress at the 2009 Inside Soap awards . 
 The character was viewed unfavourably by a proportion of viewers in 1996 , when Peggy discovered that Mark Fowler ( Todd Carty ) was HIV positive and subsequently mounted a hate campaign against him . Windsor has since revealed that she was initially opposed to the storyline : 
 Actress and writer Jacquetta May , who played the character Rachel <unk> between 1991 and 1993 , has discussed the storyline and the role of women in an article about EastEnders . According to May , the scriptwriters were faced with a problem once Peggy , " a key figure of the community " , was shown to exhibit such " pig @-@ headed ignorance and appalling prejudice " . In order for Peggy to be redeemed , she had to be seen to be punished , and so the character was given breast @-@ cancer later that year . May comments , " Peggy , malicious gossip and bigot , herself becomes the victim of a life @-@ threatening illness . At Christmas they run a Christian forgiveness story . Peggy calls on Mark and tells him she now knows what it is like to suffer as he has . She apologises , thus underlining one of the basic tenets of the programme : underneath the skin we are all the same , human and vulnerable , and recognition of this should unite us not divide us . Along the way , a great deal of useful information about these illnesses was broadcast . So , although EastEnders endlessly repeats its conservative format , and although all issues are there primarily to feed the great hungry story @-@ beast , its positive by @-@ products cannot be denied . " 
 EastEnders has received praise for the handling of Peggy 's breast cancer storyline , as she was a rare media portrayal of an older matriarchal woman with the disease . Older women are at higher risk of being diagnosed ; however , in 2001 , it was reported that media representation of breast cancer is skewed towards younger women in their 20s or 30s , as they are seen as " more tragic " or " more sexy " in media terms . A 2000 study by Kitzinger and Henderson showed that 94 % of newspaper coverage on non @-@ celebrity women with breast cancer was on those aged under 50 . Source organisations working with EastEnders on the storyline have commented : " [ The team ] decided it was going to be [ Peggy ] and very rightly so . Bang on , the right age [ ... ] perfect dramatic licence in terms of her sons that she was going to have to share this terrible news with , and how would she share it ? Every female would have that problem . How would you tell your children ? And they followed that with her . She was exactly the right person . " The storyline also received media criticism , for the use of a breast care nurse , who was used to counsel Peggy and translate medical terminology into lay terms for viewers ; a character who could provide both a dramatic and educational purpose . However , not all oncology units in the UK offer breast care nurses , and the character presented " particularly positive messages " concerning patient choice and control over treatment options . Because of this , the UK press dubbed the storyline " didactic " . The storyline was also criticised because Peggy received her cancer test results after six days , which prompted cancer charities to warn that not all patients would receive the same treatment . 
 In December 2008 , <unk> doctors criticised UK soaps for presenting unhealthy role models to viewing audiences . Paul Bignell and Cole Moreton for The Independent refuted the accusation , naming Peggy as an acceptable role model for her devotion to her family , protecting her nieces and loving her sons despite their numerous misdemeanours . Peggy Mitchell 's ( Barbara Windsor ) 2010 departure was watched over 11 million viewers . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Peggy has been spoofed in several programmes , including the ITV cartoon sketch show <unk> , and Harry Hill 's TV <unk> . In the BBC 's Big Impression , impressionist Ronni Ancona performs as Peggy , shuffling around on her knees to exaggerate Barbara Windsor 's petite height , and regularly using the catchphrase " Get outta my pub ! " Impressionist Jan Ravens has spoofed her in the BBC 's Dead Ringers , also mimicking her cheeky laugh . Commenting on Ancona 's impersonation , Windsor has said : " she does me brilliantly . I told her it was a great compliment . She made me realise my little hands wave around a lot . " 
 In November 2005 , Peggy appeared in a sketch for Children in Need , which was a crossover between EastEnders and The Catherine Tate Show . The sketch featured Peggy , Little Mo Mitchell ( Kacey Ainsworth ) , Stacey Slater ( Lacey Turner ) and Catherine Tate as her character Lauren Cooper . A 2006 episode of Doctor Who entitled " Army of Ghosts " features a fictional EastEnders scene in which Peggy tells one of the ghosts to " get outta my pub ! " 
 = The Princess and the Pea = 
 " The Princess and the Pea " ( Danish : " <unk> <unk> <unk> " ; literal translation : " The Princess on the Pea " ) is a literary fairy tale by Hans Christian Andersen about a young woman whose royal identity is established by a test of her physical sensitivity . The tale was first published with three others by Andersen in an inexpensive booklet on 8 May 1835 in Copenhagen by C. A. Reitzel . 
 Andersen had heard the story as a child , and it likely has its source in folk material , possibly originating from Sweden , as it is unknown in the Danish oral tradition . Neither " The Princess and the Pea " nor Andersen 's other tales of 1835 were well received by Danish critics , who disliked their casual , chatty style and their lack of morals . 
 In 1959 " The Princess and the Pea " was adapted to the musical stage in a production called Once Upon a Mattress starring Carol Burnett . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story tells of a prince who wants to marry a princess , but is having difficulty finding a suitable wife . Something is always wrong with those he meets , and he cannot be certain they are real princesses because they have bad table manners or they are too fat or thin or not beautiful . One stormy night a young woman drenched with rain seeks shelter in the prince 's castle . She claims to be a princess , so the prince 's mother decides to test their unexpected , unwitting guest by placing a pea in the bed she is offered for the night , covered by 20 mattresses and 20 feather @-@ beds . In the morning , the guest tells her hosts that she endured a sleepless night , kept awake by something hard in the bed that she is certain has bruised her . The prince rejoices . Only a real princess would have the sensitivity to feel a pea through such a quantity of bedding , so the two are married . 
 The story ends with the pea being placed in a museum , where according to the storyteller it can still be seen today , unless someone has removed it . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Andersen deliberately cultivated a funny and colloquial style in the tales of 1835 , reminiscent of oral storytelling techniques rather than the sophisticated literary devices of the fairy tales written by les <unk> , E. T. A. Hoffmann , and other precursors . The earliest reviews criticized Andersen for not following such models . In the second volume of the 1863 edition of his collected works Andersen remarked in the preface : " The style should be such that one hears the narrator . Therefore , the language had to be similar to the spoken word ; the stories are for children , but adults too should be able to listen in . " 
 Although no materials appear to exist specifically addressing the composition of " The Princess and the Pea " , Andersen does speak to the writing of the first four tales of 1835 of which " The Princess on the Pea " is one . New Year 's Day 1835 , Andersen wrote to a friend : " I am now starting on some ' fairy tales for children . ' I am going to win over future generations , you may want to know " , and , in a letter dated February 1835 he wrote to the poet , Bernhard Severin Ingemann : " I have started some ' Fairy Tales Told for Children ' and believe I have succeeded . I have told a couple of tales which as a child I was happy about , and which I do not believe are known , and have written them exactly the way I would tell them to a child . " Andersen had finished the tales by March 1835 and told Admiral Wulff 's daughter , Henriette : " I have also written some fairy tales for children ; Ørsted says about them that if The <unk> makes me famous then these will make me immortal , for they are the most perfect things I have written ; but I myself do not think so . " On 26 March , he observed that " [ the fairy tales ] will be published in April , and people will say : the work of my immortality ! Of course I shan 't enjoy the experience in this world . " 
 = = Publication = = 
 " The Princess and the Pea " was first published in Copenhagen , Denmark by C.A. Reitzel on 8 May 1835 in an unbound 61 @-@ page booklet called Tales , Told for Children . First Collection . First Booklet . 1835 . ( Eventyr , <unk> for <unk> . Første Samling . Første <unk> . 1835 . ) . " The Princess and the Pea " was the third tale in the collection , with " The <unk> " ( " <unk> " ) , " Little Claus and Big Claus " ( " Lille Claus og store Claus " ) , and " Little Ida 's Flowers " ( " Den <unk> <unk> <unk> " ) . The booklet was priced at twenty @-@ four shillings ( the equivalent of 25 <unk> or approximately US $ 5 as of 2009 ) , and the publisher paid Andersen 30 <unk> ( US $ 450 as of 2009 ) . A second edition was published in 1842 , and a third in 1845 . " The Princess and the Pea " was reprinted on 18 December 1849 in Tales . 1850 @.@ with illustrations by Vilhelm Pedersen . The story was published again on 15 December 1862 , in Tales and Stories . First Volume . 1862 . 
 The first Danish reviews of Andersen 's 1835 tales appeared in 1836 , and were hostile . Critics disliked the informal , chatty style , and the lack of morals , and offered Andersen no encouragement . One literary journal failed to mention the tales at all , while another advised Andersen not to waste his time writing " wonder stories " . He was told he " lacked the usual form of that kind of poetry ... and would not study models " . Andersen felt he was working against their preconceived notions of what a fairy tale should be and returned to writing novels , believing it to be his true calling . 
 = = English translation = = 
 Charles Boner was the first to translate " The Princess and the Pea " into English , working from a German translation that had increased Andersen 's lone pea to a trio of peas in an attempt to make the story more credible , an embellishment also added by another early English translator , Caroline Peachey . Boner 's translation was published as " The Princess on the Peas " in A Danish Story @-@ Book in 1846 . Boner has been accused of missing the satire of the tale by ending with the rhetorical question , " Now was not that a lady of exquisite feeling ? " rather than Andersen 's joke of the pea being placed in the Royal Museum . Boner and Peachey 's work established the standard for English translations of the fairy tales , which , for almost a century , as Wullschlager notes , " continued to range from the inadequate to the abysmal " . 
 = = Commentaries = = 
 Wullschlager observes that in " The Princess and the Pea " Andersen blended his childhood memories of a primitive world of violence , death , and inexorable fate , with his social climber 's private romance about the serene , secure and cultivated Danish bourgeoisie , which did not quite accept him as one of their own . Researcher Jack Zipes said that Andersen , during his lifetime , " was obliged to act as a dominated subject within the dominant social circles despite his fame and recognition as a writer " ; Andersen therefore developed a feared and loved view of the aristocracy . Others have said that Andersen constantly felt as though he did not belong , and longed to be a part of the upper class . The nervousness and humiliations Andersen suffered in the presence of the bourgeoisie were mythologized by the storyteller in the tale of " The Princess and the Pea " , with Andersen himself the morbidly sensitive princess who can feel a pea through 20 mattresses . 
 Maria Tatar notes that , unlike the folk heroine of his source material for the story , Andersen 's princess has no need to resort to deceit to establish her identity ; her sensitivity is enough to validate her nobility . For Andersen , she indicates , " true " nobility derived not from an individual 's birth but from their sensitivity . Andersen 's insistence upon sensitivity as the exclusive privilege of nobility challenges modern notions about character and social worth . The princess 's sensitivity , however , may be a metaphor for her depth of feeling and compassion . 
 While a 1905 article in the American Journal of Education recommended the story for children aged 8 @-@ 10 , " The Princess and the Pea " was not uniformly well received by critics . Toksvig wrote in 1934 , " [ the story ] seems to the reviewer not only indelicate but indefensible , in so far as the child might absorb the false idea that great ladies must always be so terribly thin @-@ skinned . " Tatar notes that the princess 's sensitivity has been interpreted as poor manners rather than a manifestation of noble birth , a view said to be based on " the cultural association between women 's physical sensitivity and emotional sensitivity , specifically , the link between a woman reporting her physical experience of touch and negative images of women who are hypersensitive to physical conditions , who complain about trivialities , and who demand special treatment " . 
 Researcher Jack Zipes notes that the tale is told tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek , with Andersen poking fun at the " curious and ridiculous " measures taken by the nobility to establish the value of bloodlines . He also notes that the author makes a case for sensitivity being the decisive factor in determining royal authenticity and that Andersen " never tired of glorifying the sensitive nature of an elite class of people " . 
 “ The Princess and the Pea ” spurred on positive criticism , as well . In fact , critic Paul Hazard pointed out the realistic aspects of the fairy tale that make it easily relatable to all people . He believed that " the world Andersen witnessed — which encompassed sorrow , death , evil , and man 's follies — is reflected in his tales , " and most evidently in " The Princess and the Pea . " Another scholar , Niels Kofoed , noticed that “ since they involve everyday @-@ life themes of love , death , nature , injustice , suffering , and poverty , they appeal to all races , ideologies , classes , and genders . ” Moreover , Celia Catlett Anderson realized that one of the things that makes this story so appealing and relatable is that optimism prevails over pessimism , especially for the main character of the princess . This inspires hope in the readers for their own futures and strength within themselves . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In 1927 , German composer Ernst <unk> published an opera based on " The Princess and the Pea " , with a libretto by Benno <unk> . Reportedly this opera was very popular in the American student repertoires ; the music as well as the English translation ( by Marion Farquhar ) were praised in a review in Notes . The story was adapted to the musical stage in 1959 as Once Upon a Mattress , with comedian Carol Burnett playing the play 's heroine , Princess <unk> the <unk> . The musical was revived in 1997 with Sarah Jessica Parker in the role . A television adaptation of " The Princess and the Pea " starred Liza Minnelli in a Faerie Tale Theatre episode in 1984 . The story has been adapted to two films , one full @-@ length animation film in 2002 , and a six @-@ minute IMAX production in 2001 . 
 The tale was the basis for a story in The Stinky Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid Tales by Jon <unk> and Lane Smith , wherein the prince decides to slip a bowling ball underneath one hundred mattresses after three years of unsuccessful attempts with the pea . In the morning , the princess comes downstairs and tells the queen , " This might sound odd , but I think you need another mattress . I felt like I was sleeping on a lump as big as a bowling ball . " which satisfies the king and the queen . The princess gets married to the prince , and they live happily , though maybe not completely honestly , ever after . American poet Jane Shore published a poem , " The Princess and the Pea " , in the January 1973 issue of Poetry , in which a close dependency between princess and pea is posited : " I lie in my skin as in an ugly coat : / my body owned by the citizens / who ache and turn whenever I turn / on the pea on which so much depends " ( 13 @-@ 16 ) . Russian writer Evgeny <unk> incorporates the story , with two other Andersen stories , in his Naked King . 
 = = Similar tales = = 
 Tales of extreme sensitivity are infrequent in world culture but a few have been recorded . The 11th @-@ century Kathasaritsagara by <unk> tells of a young man who claims to be especially fastidious about beds . After sleeping in a bed on top of seven mattresses , and newly made with clean sheets , the young man rises in great pain . A crooked red mark is discovered on his body , and upon investigation a hair is found on the bottom @-@ most mattress of the bed . An Italian tale called " The Most Sensitive Woman " tells of a woman whose foot is bandaged after a jasmine petal falls upon it . The Brothers Grimm included a " Princess on the Pea " tale in an edition of their Kinder- und <unk> , but removed it after they discovered that it belonged to the Danish literary tradition . A few folk tales feature a boy discovering a pea or a bean assumed to be of great value . After the boy enters a castle and is given a bed of straw for the night he tosses and turns in his sleep , attempting to guard his treasure . Some observers are persuaded that the boy is restless because he is unaccustomed to sleeping on straw , and is therefore of aristocratic blood . 
 In the more popular versions of the tale , only one pea is used . However , Charles Boner added in two more peas in his translation of the story upon which Andersen based his tale . Other differences amongst versions can be seen in various numbers of mattresses as well as feather beds . Versions of the story differ based on whether or not the character of the helper is included . The helper , in some cases , tells the princess to pretend as though she slept badly . In other versions , the helper does not appear at all , and the princess decides to lie all on her own . 
 = Comité National de Secours et d 'Alimentation = 
 The Comité National de Secours et d 'Alimentation ( " National Relief and Food Committee " ; Dutch : Nationaal <unk> en <unk> ) , abbreviated to CNSA , was a relief organization created in 1914 to distribute humanitarian aid to civilians in German @-@ occupied Belgium during World War I. It was directed by the Belgian financier Émile Francqui . The CNSA acted as the network by which the aid brought in by the international Commission for Relief in Belgium ( CRB ) could be distributed within Belgium itself . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before the outbreak of World War I , Belgium relied on supplies of imports for almost three @-@ quarters of all food consumed . With the German invasion in August 1914 , the importation ceased and , as the economic crisis created by the invasion escalated , the distribution of the food that was available began to break down . In particular , the British Royal Navy began a four @-@ year " Blockade of Europe " which , although aimed at Germany , also cut food supplies from neutral countries to German @-@ occupied Belgium . 
 = = Foundation and operation of the CNSA = = 
 The Committee was established in September 1914 , shortly after the German army occupied Brussels , under the name Comité Central de Secours et d 'Alimentation ( " Central Relief and Food Committee " ) . It was supported by voluntary contributions from a small group of notable financiers and businessmen , including Ernest Solvay , Dannie Heineman and Émile Francqui . 
 Initially , the Committee 's activity was restricted to the city of Brussels and its suburbs . However , as the Germans extended their control across Belgium following the fall of the city of Antwerp in October 1914 , and as the threat of famine within Belgium increased , the Committee linked up with similar organizations around the country and took the title " national " . The initial direction of the Committee was given to Francqui . Francqui 's position as head of the Société Générale de Belgique ( " General Company of Belgium " ) , a giant semi @-@ nationalized holdings company , allowed the CNSA access to a nationwide distribution network . From the start , the Committee was organized into two sections : one responsible for providing and selling food and the other for charitable aid such as clothing . Both sections of the CNSA were highly decentralized and relied heavily on local Committees across the country for much of their operations . 
 As an American , and therefore a citizen of a neutral country , Heineman used his contacts abroad to find overseas sources of food which might be shipped to Belgium to resupply the populace . Food from abroad being the only viable immediate solution to Belgium 's food shortage , the Committee 's chief initial difficulty was obtaining the permission of the British and German governments to import food and in providing guarantees that it would not be used for military purposes . The CNSA was also supported in its early activities by Charles de <unk> 's Belgian government in exile . The logistical problems involved in coordinating the huge shipments of food to Belgium meant that the CNSA began to look for foreign assistance in procuring and transporting material to Belgium . Francqui used his personal acquaintance with Herbert Hoover , future President of the United States , to create an external body to assist the management of the CNSA . Hoover became the director of the Commission for Relief in Belgium ( CRB ) , and led successful attempts to raise money abroad in order to improve the humanitarian situation in Belgium . Because the CRB was officially an American organization , the CRB was also necessary to assure that the food , once delivered to the CNSA , was not immediately seized by the Germans . The CRB also provided the international support necessary to convince the British government to permit the shipments . Once received , the food and material from the CRB was distributed through the CNSA 's network of 125 @,@ 000 agents across the country . 
 The CNSA continued to expand throughout the occupation . In April 1915 , the German Government allowed the CNSA to extend its operations to the occupied regions of northern France , under the auspices of a subcommittee called the Comité d 'Alimentation du Nord de la France ( " Food Committee of Northern France " ) . By 1918 , the CNSA had distributed 3 @.@ 4 billion Belgian francs ' worth of aid across Belgium . 
 = = Evaluation = = 
 The work of the CNSA during the war was considered extremely successful by contemporaries and modern historians alike . By providing a network of food distribution , the CNSA and CRB managed to avoid a major famine in Belgium during the occupation . Nevertheless , although the CRB and CNSA were part of the same network , the CRB criticized the CNSA , holding it responsible for occasional thefts of food by the Germans and for providing inadequate security for the shipments . The Belgian arm , however , felt under undue pressure from the CRB . In 1916 , Francqui even petitioned the British to allow the CNSA to take full charge of the international network away from the CRB , although this appeal was dismissed because of the precarious position CNSA held within the occupied country . Nevertheless , relations between the two bodies remained generally good . 
 The Committee also played an important political role . By providing an alternative supply of food , the CNSA prevented the German administration of Belgium from being able to use food as a bargaining tool to force Belgians to work in war industries and contributed to the passive resistance movement within occupied Belgium . However , the CNSA and CRB 's activities meant that the Germans benefitted from having seven million Belgians and two million Frenchmen in their territory fed and consequently did not face major food riots or other disruption that might have arisen if the Germans had had to feed the population of the occupied territories . The Germans also exploited their deal agreeing to give impunity to CNSA food shipments by seizing food produced in Belgium . 
 The Belgian government in exile supported the CNSA , which they hoped , in the words of the Minister Michel <unk> , would become an " underground parliament " and fulfill the day @-@ to @-@ day running of the Belgian state which the occupation made impossible for the official government to carry out . Historians have also described the organisation of the CNSA , with its central committee and local networks , and its activities such as providing unemployment benefits to Belgian workers in 1917 , as echoing those of an official government in peacetime while also serving as a symbol of national unity . 
 = = = Works = = = 
 = History of the New York Giants ( 1994 – present ) = 
 The New York Giants , an American football team which currently plays in the NFL 's National Football Conference , have qualified for the postseason seven times since 1994 . With the retirement of Phil Simms and Lawrence Taylor — two of the most important figures in franchise history – after the 1993 season , the Giants entered a new era . 
 After a successful 1993 season , the Giants struggled under head coach Dan Reeves , and failed to reach the playoffs for three consecutive seasons . With the hiring of Jim Fassel as the team 's new head coach in 1997 , the Giants fortunes improved and they made the playoffs several times . Led by free agent acquisition quarterback Kerry Collins , the Fassel era included an appearance in Super Bowl XXXV , where they lost to the Baltimore Ravens . Although there was success , the Fassel era was also marked by inconsistency , and he was fired after the 2003 season . 
 Fassel was replaced by current coach Tom Coughlin who has coached the team since 2004 , also to inconsistent results and media scrutiny . The Giants acquired their current starting quarterback Eli Manning via a draft day trade from the San Diego Chargers . Manning had been the quarterback at University of Mississippi , and was the first pick in the 2004 NFL Draft . During this period standout Giants players include defensive end Michael Strahan , who set the NFL single season record in sacks in 2001 , and running back Tiki Barber , who set a team record in rushing yards in 2005 . The Giants made the playoffs four consecutive seasons , from 2005 – 2008 ( including a Super Bowl victory during the 2007 season ) , but missed the playoffs in 2009 and 2010 . 
 = = New era : 1994 – 1996 = = 
 After finishing 11 – 5 and reaching the second round of the playoffs in 1993 , the Giants took a step backwards in 1994 . Phil Simms and Lawrence Taylor , the two biggest figures of the 1980s and early 1990s , both retired . Several other key starting players were dropped from the roster due to free agency . In the wake of Simms ' retirement , head coach Dan Reeves named Dave Brown , who had been a No. 1 supplemental draft choice in 1992 , as the Giants ' new starting quarterback . Though Brown led the Giants to wins in their first three games of the season , the Giants lost their next 7 in a row to drop to 3 – 7 . The poor play of Brown received much of the blame from fans and the media . However , the Giants recovered and won their last six games of the season , finishing with a 15 – 10 victory over the Dallas Cowboys at Giants Stadium . During this stretch they never allowed more than 20 points in a game , and the Giants ended the season with a record of 9 – 7 . The team 's stars included Rodney Hampton , who had his 4th straight 1 @,@ 000 yard rushing season ; second @-@ year defensive lineman Michael Strahan , and linebackers Jessie Armstead and Michael Brooks . 
 In 1995 the team regressed further , losing even more players to free agency and finished the season with a 5 – 11 record , their worst since Bill Parcells ' first season in 1983 . Quarterback Dave Brown was particularly disappointing , as he finished with just 2 @,@ 814 yards and 11 touchdowns on the season . Reeves went public with his desire to have more of a say in personnel matters . He controlled the team 's free agency decisions , but feuded with General manager ( GM ) George Young who chose the team 's draft picks . <unk> were a 35 – 0 loss to the Dallas Cowboys in the Monday Night season opener , and the fans pelting the Charger sideline with snowballs in the season 's final game . Though the defense still played well at times , the Giants sent no players to the Pro Bowl for the second straight year . 
 The Giants suffered through yet another poor season in 1996 , finishing 6 – 10 . Though Brown again started every game for the Giants he turned in one of the worst seasons of any starting quarterback in the league that year , throwing for 12 touchdowns against 20 interceptions . The Giants offense was one of the worst in the NFL and , unlike in previous years , the defense was unable to keep the offense afloat . After having one playoff appearance in four years , Reeves was dismissed after the 1996 season . 
 = = Jim Fassel era = = 
 = = = 1997 – 1999 = = = 
 The Giants hired Jim Fassel to replace Reeves before the 1997 season . Fassel had been the offensive coordinator for the Arizona Cardinals and Denver Broncos . After an opening day win against Philadelphia the Giants lost their next three games , including close losses to the Baltimore Ravens and St. Louis Rams . The Giants then won their next five games in a row . One of Fassel 's biggest decisions during this streak was to replace Brown with second year quarterback Danny Kanell . The Giants won their next five game in a row to finish the season at 10 – 5 – 1 , and win the NFC Eastern Division for the first time since 1990 . In the first round , the Giants struggled in the fourth quarter , and the Vikings kicked a late field goal to defeat them , 23 – 22 . After the 1997 season , Young , who as GM had helped build New York into a championship club in the 1980s , left the team to take a job in the NFL front office . He was replaced by Ernie Accorsi , a well @-@ respected , veteran General Manager who had successful stints building the Baltimore Colts and Cleveland Browns . 
 In 1998 , the Giants were unable to build on their successful 1997 season , and needed a four @-@ game winning streak to close out the season at 8 – 8 . The Giants strength was their defense , which featured two Pro Bowlers in Armstead and Strahan . However , the offense continued to be a disappointment . Brown had been jettisoned and replaced by Kanell and Kent Graham . Neither quarterback provided Pro Bowl caliber play , although Graham led the Giants to a 5 – 1 finish ( including an upset of the then @-@ undefeated Denver Broncos in Week 15 ) . 
 Before the 1999 season the Giants signed quarterback Kerry Collins . Collins had been the first @-@ ever draft choice of the expansion Carolina Panthers and in his second season led the Panthers to the NFC Championship game . However , problems with alcohol , conflicts with his teammates and questions about his character led to his release from the Panthers . Mike Ditka , coach of the New Orleans Saints signed him after his release ; however the experiment failed and Collins was released again . Although many people , including Sports Illustrated football beat writer Peter King questioned the wisdom of Accorsi and the Giants giving Collins a US $ 16 @.@ 9 million contract , especially when there was little interest for Collins 's services league @-@ wide , Accorsi was confident that Collins was a wise investment . 
 The 1999 season featured many strong individual performances by the Giants , especially on offense . Receiver Amani Toomer had a breakout season , accumulating over 1100 yards receiving and six touchdowns . Fellow receiver Ike Hilliard also had a solid season , finishing just shy of 1000 yards receiving on the year . Tight end Pete Mitchell contributed 58 receptions , and Tiki Barber emerged as a premiere pass @-@ catching running back , catching 66 passes on the year . The defense was also solid , ranking 11th in the league and sending Armstead and Strahan to the Pro Bowl again . Though the Giants stood at 7 – 6 after 13 games , they lost their final three games of the season to miss the playoffs for the second consecutive season . 
 = = = 2000 : Super Bowl season = = = 
 The 2000 season was considered a make @-@ or @-@ break season for Fassel . Like his predecessor , Dan Reeves , Fassel had enjoyed great success in his first year , but disappointment in the following two seasons . The conventional wisdom was that the Giants needed to have a strong year for Fassel to retain his job . The Giants ' big draft acquisition was running back Ron Dayne , Heisman Trophy winner from the University of Wisconsin – Madison . Before the draft the team was debating whether to select Dayne or Shaun Alexander . The plan for Dayne was that the power running style he had at Wisconsin would complement Barber 's speed and pass @-@ catching ability . The two were dubbed " Thunder and Lightning " . 
 After back @-@ to @-@ back November losses at home against St. Louis and Detroit dropped them to 7 – 4 , the Giants playoff prospects were in question . In what would be his defining moment as Giants head coach , at a press conference following the Giants ' loss to Detroit , Fassel guaranteed that " This team is going to the playoffs . " The Giants responded , winning the next week 's game against Arizona and the rest of their regular season games to finish the season 12 – 4 and earn a bye as the NFC 's top seed . 
 The Giants won their first playoff game against the Philadelphia Eagles , 20 – 10 . In the NFC Championship game faced the Minnesota Vikings , who were appearing in their second NFC Championship game in 3 seasons . Many people predicted that the Vikings and their high powered offense , led by Daunte Culpepper and receivers Randy Moss and Cris Carter would defeat the Giants and go on to the Super Bowl . However , the Giants dominated , winning , 41 – 0 . The win marked the second time the Giants had won a Conference Championship in their home stadium by shutout . After the game Giants co @-@ owner Wellington Mara delivered his famous " worst team ever " speech : 
 This team was referred to as the worst team ever to win the home @-@ field advantage in the National Football League . And today , on our field of painted mud , we proved we 're the worst team ever to win the NFC championship . In two weeks , we 're going to try to become the worst team ever to win the Super Bowl . 
 Though the Giants kept the game close in the first half , and went into halftime down 10 – 0 , the Ravens dominated the second half . Their defense ( led by game MVP Ray Lewis ) frustrated Kerry Collins all game long , resulting in Collins turning in one of the worst playoff performances in Super Bowl history . Collins completed 15 of 39 passes for 112 yards and 4 interceptions . The Ravens won the game 34 – 7 in one of the most lopsided Super Bowls ever . The lone Giants score came on a Ron Dixon kickoff return for a touchdown . On the very next kickoff , the Ravens countered as Jermaine Lewis also returned a kickoff for a touchdown . 
 = = = 2001 – 2003 = = = 
 The Giants were unable to build on their Super Bowl success in 2001 , finishing the season 7 – 9 and out of the playoffs for the third time in four seasons . Kerry Collins continued to have success as the Giants ' starting quarterback , throwing for over 3 @,@ 700 yards and 19 TD 's . Tiki Barber finished as the Giants leading rusher again , while tying Amani Toomer for the team lead with 72 receptions . But the standout player of the Giants 2001 season was Michael Strahan . Strahan set an NFL record by recording 22 @.@ 5 sacks during the season , and won the NFL Defensive Player of the Year Award . He broke the 17 @-@ year @-@ old NFL record held by Mark Gastineau . 
 The 2002 season saw the arrival of tight end Jeremy Shockey from the University of Miami , who provided Kerry Collins with yet another target . Collins would enjoy one of his best seasons as a pro in 2002 , throwing for over 4 @,@ 000 yards . Tiki Barber had his best season to date , rushing for 1386 yards and also catching 69 passes for 597 yards . The Giants started the season at 6 – 6 , after which Fassel removed <unk> duties from offensive coordinator Sean Payton . The team responded to win their final four games to finish the year 10 – 6 , and secure a first @-@ round playoff game against the NFC West champion San Francisco 49ers . 
 The Giants controlled the 49ers throughout the game , and with four minutes left in the third quarter held a 38 – 14 lead , which would have been even larger had not Shockey dropped a touchdown pass in the third quarter . The 49ers rallied however , scoring a field goal and three touchdowns — two on Jeff Garcia touchdown passes , one on a Garcia 14 @-@ yard touchdown run , and two two @-@ point conversions made by Terrell Owens — which gave the 49ers a 39 – 38 lead with a minute to go . Collins then drove the Giants down to the 49ers 23 @-@ yard line with six seconds to play , setting up a 41 @-@ yard potential game @-@ winning field goal attempt by Matt Bryant . However , Bryant never got an opportunity to make the kick . 40 @-@ year @-@ old long snapper Trey Junkin — who had been signed out of retirement for this playoff game — snapped the ball low and punter Matt Allen could not spot the ball for the attempt . With no other options , Allen threw it downfield to offensive lineman Rich Seubert . The Giants were penalized for an illegal man downfield ( Seubert ) , and the game was over . However , after the game , the NFL recognized that San Francisco should have been penalized on that play as well for pass interference . This would have created offsetting penalties and given New York a chance to kick again . After the game a devastated Junkin said " I cost 58 guys a chance to go to the Super Bowl . I 'd give anything in the world , except my family at this point , right now to still be retired . " 
 The loss was Fassel 's second devastating playoff loss in three postseason appearances ; following the season , Payton was not retained as offensive coordinator . The Giants started out the 2003 season 4 – 4 , but lost their final eight games to finish 4 – 12 . This included seven consecutive losses in the second half of the season , in which the Giants failed to score more than 13 points . With two games remaining in the season , Fassel requested a meeting with team management , and asked , if he was to be fired , that they do so now rather than wait until the end of the season . Management complied with his request , and fired Fassel on ( or around ) Dec. 17 , 2003 . However , in an unusual turn of events , the Giants agreed to allow him coach the team for the remainder of the season so long as Fassel assured them that the team would not " quit " on him . 
 = = Tom Coughlin era : 2004 – 2016 = = 
 = = = 2004 NFL Draft and Arrival of Eli Manning = = = 
 After a brief search , Ernie Accorsi hired Tom Coughlin , a one @-@ time assistant of former Giants ' coach Bill Parcells , to be the Giants new head coach . Coughlin had been the inaugural head coach of the Jacksonville Jaguars , and led them to the AFC championship game twice . He became the 16th head coach in franchise history . His stark , disciplinarian methods contrasted with the lax style employed by the departed Fassel . The Giants decided that their primary need was a franchise quarterback . Accorsi — who had coveted John Elway when he was Colts general manager in 1983 — saw University of Mississippi quarterback Eli Manning as a similar talent . Manning 's brother Peyton , and his father Archie , had already established successful careers as NFL quarterbacks . Though Accorsi wanted Manning , and Manning wanted to play in New York , Accorsi was unable to reach a deal to trade up to acquire him with the San Diego Chargers , who then used the first pick on Manning . 
 Manning had indicated before the draft that he did not want to play for the Chargers , and appeared unhappy when selected by them . After the pick was made , Chargers general manager AJ Smith called Accorsi to make a deal . Part of the deal was that the Giants would select quarterback Philip Rivers out of North Carolina State University with the fourth pick overall and trade that pick , plus other selections ( including the Giants first round pick the following year ) , to the Chargers for Manning 's rights and additional considerations . When the trade was announced , the crowd in attendance at the draft ( which was held in New York ) cheered . 
 When Kerry Collins made it known that he did not want to stay with the Giants until they eventually demoted him for Manning , the Giants released Collins . They later signed quarterback Kurt Warner , to serve as the interim quarterback until Manning was deemed ready to play . Warner had led the St. Louis Rams to two Super Bowls , winning one of them . However , Warner had been affected by injuries , specifically a broken hand , which reduced his effectiveness and led to his release by the Rams . 
 = = = 2004 – 2006 : Eli Manning era begins = = = 
 After losing the 2004 season opener , the Giants , behind Warner , went on to win five of their next six games to stand at 5 – 2 . The Giants then lost two close games , to the Bears and Cardinals , to drop to 5 – 4 . It was at this point that Coughlin announced that Eli Manning would become the starter for the rest of the season . Manning struggled in his first four starts , and the Giants did not score more than 14 points in any game . However , they played better in narrow losses to the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Cincinnati Bengals . The Giants won their final game of the year against rival Dallas , to finish the season 6 – 10 . Top performers on the season included Tiki Barber , who established a personal career high in rushing yardage with 1 @,@ 518 yards , and also contributed 52 catches and 15 touchdowns . Following the season Ron Dayne was released . Dayne had experienced several mediocre seasons while Shaun Alexander , who the Giants bypassed to draft Dayne , had developed into a consistent Pro Bowler . 
 The Giants won their first two games of the 2005 season , 42 – 19 , against the Arizona Cardinals and 27 – 10 , against the New Orleans Saints . The Giants lost to the Chargers the following week , 45 – 23 , in a game which was marked by Chargers fans booing and jeering Eli Manning . They rebounded the following week , beating the St. Louis Rams by a score of 44 – 24 . 
 On October 25 , 2005 , Giants patriarch Wellington Mara died at the age of 89 . Mara had been involved with the Giants since he was 9 years old , when he was a ball boy for the Giants . The Giants dedicated their next game to Mara , and shut out the Washington Redskins 36 – 0 . Just twenty days after Mara 's death , on November 15 , 2005 , the other Giants Executive Officer and well @-@ known businessman Preston Robert Tisch died at the age of 79 . The Giants then lost 24 – 21 to the Seahawks when kicker Josh Brown kicked a 36 @-@ yard game @-@ winning field goal . They then defeated the Cowboys 17 – 10 . The Giants defense made opposing QB Drew Bledsoe go 15 of 39 for 146 yards with only one touchdown pass and two interceptions . On December 17 , 2005 , in their 27 – 17 home victory against the Kansas City Chiefs , Tiki Barber set the team 's single game rushing yard record with 220 yards , breaking the previous record of 218 yards , which had been set by Gene Roberts on November 12 , 1950 . 
 The Giants won the NFC East title for the first time since 2000 with a 30 – 21 win against the Oakland Raiders in the final game of the season . The Giants lost 23 – 0 to the Carolina Panthers in the first round of the playoffs however . The 2005 Giants had five pro bowlers , including Barber ( who set a team record in rushing yards during the season ) , Shockey , Strahan , Defensive End Osi Umenyiora , and Special teamer David Tyree . 
 In late September it was also announced that the New York Giants , New York Jets and the New Jersey Sports and Exhibition Authority had reached an agreement where both teams will work together to build a new stadium adjacent to the current Giants Stadium . 
 The Giants regressed to an 8 – 8 season in 2006 . The season featured inconsistent play , criticism of the coaching by the media and players , and inconsistent play from Manning . The Giants won five consecutive games following a 1 – 2 start to gain a two @-@ game advantage in the NFC Eastern Division , but then key injuries to the offense and defense took their toll . <unk> with the lack of production and with head coach Tom Coughlin began to surface as the Giants lost six of eight in the second half the season . The most disappointing loss of the season was a 24 – 21 defeat to Tennessee , in which the team surrendered a 21 @-@ point fourth @-@ quarter advantage . Following a season @-@ ending win at Washington , the Giants claimed a wildcard berth in the NFC playoffs , but were defeated in the first round by Philadelphia . 
 In his final season before retirement , Tiki Barber led the Giants with 1 @,@ 662 yards and over 2 @,@ 000 yards from scrimmage , Eli Manning threw for 3 @,@ 244 yards and 24 touchdowns and Jeremy Shockey led the team in receptions . Defensively the team struggled all season long with pass defense ( 28th in the league ) and with gaining a consistent pass rush . 
 = = = 2007 : Super Bowl Champions = = = 
 In 2007 , the Giants started 0 – 2 before winning their next six , making them only the second team in NFL history to accomplish that feat ( the 1993 Dallas Cowboys were the other ) , and made the playoffs for the third consecutive season . In a game against the Eagles on September 30 , the Giants tied the record for most sacks as a team in an NFL game , after sacking Philadelphia Eagles quarterback Donovan McNabb 12 times , with 6 of these coming from Osi Umenyiora . The Giants became the third NFL franchise to win at least 600 games when they defeated the Atlanta Falcons in an October Monday Night Football game 31 – 10 . The Giants defeated the Miami Dolphins 13 – 10 in week eight in London 's Wembley Stadium ; the game was the first NFL regular @-@ season game to be played outside of North America . The Giants made the NFL Playoffs with a 10 – 6 record and played the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in the NFC Wild Card Playoffs . They avenged a third playoff loss from Buccaneers QB Jeff Garcia by beating them 24 – 14 . Eli Manning earned his first playoff victory and Tom Coughlin picked up his first playoff victory as coach of the Giants . The next week the Giants defeated their division rival and NFC top seed Dallas Cowboys , winning their ninth consecutive road game . In the NFC championship , kicker Lawrence Tynes made a final field goal for a 23 – 20 overtime win over the Packers in Green Bay . This made the Giants 4 – 0 in NFC championship games , and they advanced to Super Bowl XLII . 
 In Super Bowl XLII on February 3 , 2008 , the New York Giants defeated the New England Patriots 17 – 14 . The biggest play of the game was on third down on the Giants 44 @-@ yard line with 1 : 15 remaining . They were down 14 – 10 After the snap , Manning ran back and was surrounded by a cloud of defenders . Escaping three near sacks , he made a miraculous pass to David Tyree , who caught the ball against his own helmet , while being covered by veteran defender Rodney Harrison . This set up the Giants ' final touchdown to win . Eli Manning was named MVP , completing 19 of 34 passes for 255 yards along with two touchdowns . The Giants pulled off one of the biggest upsets in Super Bowl history by handing the New England Patriots their first loss of the season and preventing them from becoming only the second team in the Super Bowl era to finish <unk> Burress hauled in the game @-@ winning touchdown pass with 35 seconds left to play to give the Giants their first Super Bowl win since 1990 . This game was also a rematch of their final regular season game , in which the Patriots came back from a 12 @-@ point deficit to finish the regular season 16 – 0 . 
 A parade was held in the Canyon of Heroes of Lower Manhattan two days after the win , followed by a victory rally across the Hudson River inside Giants Stadium in East Rutherford , New Jersey . 
 = = = 2008 – 2010 : Opening of MetLife Stadium = = = 
 The Giants won their Division again in 2008 , with a record of 12 – 4 and earned themselves a first round bye and the No. 1 seed in the NFC . The Giants won 11 out for their first 12 games before stumbling to lose four of their final five including a 23 – 11 loss to the Eagles in the NFC Divisional Round . Manning was named to the Pro Bowl after the season , in a year where he threw for 3 @,@ 238 yards , 21 touchdowns , and 10 interceptions . Other standouts included Brandon Jacobs and Derrick Ward who both rushed for 1 @,@ 000 yards , as the Giants led the NFL in rushing yards . Justin Tuck led the team with 12 sacks , while Antonio Pierce was the team 's leading tackler . The Giants featured a balanced offense with no receiver topping 600 receiving yards ; the team also set a then @-@ NFL record for fewest turnovers committed in the regular season with 13 . The year marked a changing of the guard on the defensive line as Giants careers sack leader Michael Strahan retired before the season . 
 The 2009 season began with the Giants winning their first five games , but then dropped the next four . After beating the Falcons in overtime , they were routed by the Broncos on Thanksgiving . The Week 13 game with Dallas brought a 31 – 24 victory , but was followed by a 45 – 38 loss to Philadelphia . The Giants nonetheless remained in the playoff picture until being defeated by the Panthers 41 @-@ 9 in Week 16 , in the last Giants home game at Giants Stadium . They then ended the year with an 8 – 8 record after a loss in Minnesota . 
 In the spring of 2010 , the new Meadowlands Stadium was completed and the Giants and Jets opened it in August with their annual preseason match . During the summer , Bob Sheppard , the Giants ' public address announcer from 1956 to 2005 , died on July 11 . The 2010 season would be dedicated to Sheppard 's memory . 
 In the regular season , New York inaugurated their new home by beating Carolina 31 – 18 . Peyton outplayed Eli in the second " Manning Bowl " and the Colts won 38 – 14 in week two . Discipline became a growing problem during the early portion of the season . In the Colts ' game , Jacobs threw his helmet into the stands , and in the next week 's game with Tennessee ( a 29 – 10 loss at home ) New York committed five personal fouls . The Giants next hosted the Bears on Sunday Night and won 17 – 3 . After a win at Houston , the Giants then won their next three games to improve to 6 – 2 . Their Week 14 game with Minnesota was scheduled for Sunday , December 12 , but the Vikings ' stadium roof collapsed , and the game was moved to Detroit , where New York won 21 – 3 . Against the Eagles in the next week , the Giants lost a 21 @-@ point fourth quarter lead and the game when Eagles receiver DeSean Jackson returned it for a 65 @-@ yard game touchdown on the game 's final play , in a match later dubbed the " Miracle at the New Meadowlands . " The Giants finished the season 10 – 6 , but missed the playoffs , the first time since 1988 that the franchise had won ten games in a season without making the playoffs . This was the sixth consecutive season the Giants finished with at least a .500 regular season record ( 2005 – 2010 ) , the team 's longest stretch since the NFL @-@ AFL merger . 
 = = = 2011 : Super Bowl Champions Again = = = 
 As the Giants began 2011 , many NFL analysts predicted that the Philadelphia Eagles were a favorite to win the NFC East title , while the Giants were not expected to make the playoffs . The Giants opened their regular season against the Washington Redskins on September 11 , 2011 , and lost in FedEx Field 28 – 14 . The Giants then won three straight games , including breaking their six @-@ game losing streak to Philadelphia . By Week 9 , New York was 6 – 2 after beating the Patriots in Foxboro for their first encounter since Super Bowl XLII . At this point however , they entered a difficult stretch of games and lost four straight to a resurgent 49ers , followed by the Eagles , Saints , and Packers . By now , the Giants found their chances of beating Dallas to the division title fading and Tom Coughlin 's coaching abilities were increasingly called into question despite reassurances from team president John Mara that there were no plans to fire him . However , the Giants kept their playoff hopes alive in Week 14 by beating the Cowboys in Dallas on a last @-@ second scoring drive led by Eli Manning and extending their win streak in Cowboys Stadium to three straight games . Despite another loss to the Redskins afterwards , the Giants defeated the New York Jets in Week 16 by a final score of 29 @-@ 14 , also eliminating the Eagles from playoff contention , to set up a rematch with the Dallas Cowboys in which the winner would win the NFC East . The game was later flexed into Sunday Night Football . The Giants beat the Cowboys 31 – 14 to win the NFC East with a record of 9 @-@ 7 . Throughout the regular season , Eli Manning ( always viewed as a weak QB compared to his brother ) put up some of the best stats of his career . 
 During the wild card round of the playoffs , the Giants hosted Atlanta Falcons and won 24 – 2 , with the Falcons ' only score from a safety due to Eli Manning being flagged for grounding in the end zone . In the divisional round , the Giants were forced to play the defending champion Green Bay Packers in Lambeau Field . The Packers had finished the regular season with a league @-@ best 15 @-@ 1 record , including a 38 @-@ 35 win against the Giants in Week 13 . In addition , the Packers received a first @-@ round bye , and thus this was their first playoff match . Despite these obstacles , the Giants handily defeated the Packers 37 @-@ 20 to qualify for the NFC Championship Game against the San Francisco 49ers . With the score tied 17 @-@ 17 in regulation , the Giants moved into field goal range in overtime and Lawrence Tynes , the hero of the 2007 postseason , kicked a 20 @-@ yard field goal to send them to Super Bowl XLVI , a rematch against the New England Patriots . 
 = = = = Super Bowl XLVI = = = = 
