 The local services described above are formed using Class 150 , 153 and 158 diesel multiple @-@ unit trains . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . 
 Services between London Paddington and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare call at Nailsea and Backwell in the early morning and evening , running non @-@ stop between Bristol Temple Meads and Nailsea and Backwell , also stopping at Yatton , but not always at Worle or Weston Milton . From Monday to Friday there are five morning services and one evening service to London , with seven services from London , all in the evening . Saturday sees three services to London , all in the morning , and four services from London , all in the evening . There are seven services to and six from London on Sundays , spread throughout the day . These intercity services are formed of High Speed Train sets , which are longer than the station , so passengers in the front carriage have to move to a different carriage to get out . Passengers are prevented from getting out onto the tracks by a selective door @-@ opening system . The typical journey time to London is roughly two hours . 
 In 2008 , one morning northbound CrossCountry service would make a stop at Nailsea and Backwell to serve as a morning peak service , but this operation has ceased . CrossCountry services still pass through the station , but do not stop . Occasional Great Western Railway intercity services between London and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare or Taunton and Exeter also pass through non @-@ stop . 
 The station has an adjacent bus stop , served by the First Somerset & Avon number 362 and 363 buses between Bristol and Clevedon , with an hourly service in each direction providing a public transport link to Nailsea town centre , Tickenham , Flax Bourton and Long Ashton . In addition , a school day only service operated by North Somerset Coaches runs between the station , Nailsea School and Backwell School at the start and end of the school day . The North Somerset Coaches daytime service between Nailsea and Backwell via the station was withdrawn in November 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first section of the Bristol and Exeter Railway 's ( B & ER ) main line opened on 14 June 1841 between Bristol and Bridgwater . Opened as " Nailsea " , it was for a while the first station on the line west of Bristol , the next being Clevedon Road ( which was renamed Yatton in 1847 ) . The line , engineered by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , was built as 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) broad @-@ gauge but it had been reconstructed as a mixed @-@ gauge line to accommodate local 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) -gauge traffic by 1 June 1875 . Services were operated by the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) on behalf of the B & ER until 1 May 1849 . The B & ER then took over its own workings until the company was amalgamated into the GWR on 1 January 1876 . Broad @-@ gauge trains ceased operation on 20 May 1892 . 
 Due to its being built on an embankment , lightweight building materials were used for the station : the platforms originally rested on timber supports for most of their length . Station buildings , including a goods shed and a combined ticket office and waiting room , were built on the eastbound platform in the 1860s . There was a signal box on the eastbound platform by the 1880s which controlled a crossover between the two tracks ; sidings at the west end of the station were controlled by a second signal box , and had a connection to the Nailsea Colliery . A footbridge , built by E. Finch and Co. of Chepstow , was erected in 1907 ; until then access between the two platforms was by a track @-@ level crossing . The station was renamed " Nailsea and Backwell " on 1 May 1905 . 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , the GWR became the Western Region of British Railways . Goods traffic from the station ceased on 1 June 1964 . The main station buildings had been demolished by the 1980s but their foundations can still be seen behind the shelters on the eastbound platform . The shelter on the westbound platform was still present in 1986 . In the 1980s the car park was expanded , and new metal and glass shelters were provided . The station reverted to the name " Nailsea " on 6 May 1974 , and was still known by that name at the end of 1994 . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Nailsea and Backwell passed to Regional Railways . Local services were franchised to Wales & West when the railway was privatised in 1997 , which was in turn succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup . The franchise was rebranded as Great Western Railway in 2015 . 
 Extra seating was provided in 2006 following action by the Severnside Community Rail Partnership , and in 2008 overgrown foliage was cleared from the car park to improve sightlines and help with security . The station was repainted at the same time , and decorated with silhouettes of students from Backwell School . The embankment suffered subsidence in 2013 . 
 In 2012 , the station had a free car park with 120 spaces , but this was frequently full by 7 : 30am on weekdays , leading commuters to park on local roads , prompting complaints from Backwell residents . Plans to extend the car park by 200 spaces were drawn up in 2009 , with North Somerset Council describing the scheme as " necessary " , as the lack of spaces limited the number of people who could feasibly use the station for commuting due to Nailsea being too far from the station to be an easy walk , causing people to drive to the station . That peak passengers filled the car park then meant there are no spaces for <unk> users , limiting leisure travel . North Somerset Council approved the construction of the extension on 17 April 2012 , and further approved the car park becoming pay and display - all car parks in Nailsea had previously been free . Work began in January 2014 , and was completed in June the same year - 162 additional car parking spaces were created , drainage was improved and CCTV was installed . The scheme , which cost £ 700 @,@ 000 , came in £ 50 @,@ 000 under budget and was paid for using money from the Local Transport Plan and Community Infrastructure Levy . 
 There is no wheelchair access to the southbound platform , the ramp to the northbound platform is steeper than 1 in 12 , making it unsuitable for wheelchair users , and there is a large height difference from the train doors to the platform . In 2011 the government announced a £ 37 @.@ 5 million scheme to improve stations under an " Access For All Mid @-@ Tier programme " , of which £ 1 @,@ 023 @,@ 000 was to go towards building new ramps at Nailsea and Backwell . The works were due to start in 2013 , but were delayed until 2014 due to a need to repair subsidence on the embankment and wait for works on the car park to be completed . However , due to the delays the funding was withdrawn . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise ( of which services at Nailsea and Backwell are a part ) beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . The coming years will see the introduction of new Intercity Express Trains , capacity enhancements and smart ticketing . 
 With the coming upgrade to the Great Western Main Line , the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified . However , the electrification will not extend beyond Bristol to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , so Nailsea and Backwell will continue to be served by diesel trains . This could entail the removal of direct London services , as electric trains would not be able to operate beyond Bristol . Services could however continue using bi @-@ mode trains , which have electric engines that can be powered by either electrified tracks , or by on @-@ board diesel generators . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing to Weston , as does MP for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . Local services will still be diesel @-@ operated , with " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . 
 Nailsea and Backwell is on the Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare / Yate corridor , one of the main axes of the Greater Bristol Metro , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . <unk> in the South West has called for the station to be used to serve Bristol Airport via a bus link . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 There have been several railway incidents in the Backwell area . On 20 September 2002 , the 19 : 40 First Great Western service from Plymouth to Gloucester was delayed at Nailsea & Backwell at around 22 : 00 after the British Transport Police were called to deal with two men who assaulted a guard following an altercation about smoking in a non @-@ smoking area . Several passengers were treated for the inhalation of CS gas . Another assault on a guard occurred on 9 October 2009 , when three youths verbally abused and spat at the guard after boarding a train at Parson Street without tickets and refusing to pay for them . A 17 @-@ year @-@ old from Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare was due in court on 23 December 2009 in connection with the incident , having been identified by the use of DNA swab kits , which are available to all Great Western Railway staff . 
 A serious incident occurred on 17 October 2004 , when Wessex Trains Class 143 Pacer DMU <unk> , forming the 20 : 06 <unk> service from Bristol Temple Meads to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare with <unk> , caught fire between the site of the former station at Flax Bourton and Nailsea and Backwell . Fire services took two hours to get the blaze under control . None of the 23 passengers and crew were killed , but three were treated on @-@ site for the effects of smoke inhalation . One carriage was completely burnt out , and the other was badly damaged , causing the train to be written off . The line through Nailsea was closed until 03 : 30 the following morning , when the train was hauled to St Philips Marsh Traction and Rolling Stock Maintenance Depot for examination . The unit was later taken to Crewe Works , where it was stored , then to Cardiff Canton <unk> where it was scrapped . The Rail Safety and Standards Board issued a report into the incident , concluding that the fire was caused by electrical arcing between the live starter motor cable ( which had damaged insulation ) and the unit 's underframe , causing accumulated oily residues to ignite . 
 = Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge = 
 " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge " is the twenty @-@ second episode and season finale of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 22 , 2002 . In the episode , a massive heatwave causes the residents of Springfield to install large air conditioning devices in their homes . This leads the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant to overload , causing two town @-@ wide blackouts to occur . The Springfield Police Department are powerless to the riots that follow , prompting Homer , dissatisfied with the police 's incompetence , to start his own security company called SpringShield . 
 " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge " was directed by Pete Michels and written by Dana Gould , who also pitched the idea for the episode . It features American actor Joe Mantegna as recurring character Fat Tony , and includes references to Dragnet , High Noon and The Sopranos . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 5 @.@ 3 million viewers , finishing in 53rd place in the ratings the week it aired . Following its home video release on August 24 , 2010 , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Springfield is in the midst of a massive heat wave . Every building in the town has installed a large air conditioning device . However , this draws a lot of power from the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant . Despite the safety measures Mr. Burns has taken ( cutting power to the orphanage ) , the plant is at full power . At home , without an air conditioning device , the Simpsons have to follow an old @-@ fashioned fan . Homer decides to give them a taste of winter by plugging in his dancing Santa Claus . This overloads the plant and causes a town @-@ wide blackout . Eventually , widespread rioting and looting occur . The police try to intervene , but are powerless to stop the massive crime wave . 
 The next day , Springfield has been devastated by the crime wave . Mayor Quimby decides to take action by forming a Blue Ribbon Committee . At the Simpsons ' house , someone steals Lisa 's Malibu Stacy collection . Homer decides to take action by looking for it . He finds the culprit , Jimbo Jones , and later foils a robbery by Snake Jailbird at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart . He goes through a very long list of his previous jobs ( during which Marge puts curlers in her hair offscreen ) and decides that he likes the idea of combining his love of helping and hurting people . Homer forms his own security company called " SpringShield " . Although it only has Homer , Lenny , and Carl , it is more efficient and more successful than the Springfield Police Department . When Quimby sees Chief Wiggum trying to shoot a Piñata with a shotgun while blindfolded , he dismisses Wiggum and ( in a fit of rage ) makes Homer the chief of police . 
 After stopping one of Fat Tony 's operations , Homer practically rids Springfield of crime . However , Fat Tony escapes and vows to kill Homer unless he leaves town . Homer is unable to get protection from the citizens he protects ( only Ned Flanders volunteers , but Homer ignores his offer ) and Lenny and Carl lock themselves in a jail cell . When Homer does not leave , Fat Tony arrives with a few of his own henchmen ( including Johnny <unk> ) , as well as mafia muscle — the characters of the Sopranos series . Just before they are about to kill Homer , someone shoots the mobsters and injures them . Safe again , Homer resigns as police chief and offers the job to the first person who comes along , which is Wiggum ( who notes that an identical situation is how he became chief in the first place ) . When Marge thanks him for saving Homer , Wiggum says that he did not shoot anyone , having lost his gun , badge and nearly his squad car . Unbeknownst to them , the person who saved Homer was Maggie , who fires at the mobsters from her window with a scoped sporting rifle . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge " was written by Dana Gould and directed by Pete Michels . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on May 22 , 2002 . The idea for the episode was also pitched by Gould , who had just moved to southern California with his wife . After moving in , the two decided to install an alarm system because , Gould quipped , " the police aren 't enough . Too many people wanna kill you . " When meeting the other writers , Gould pitched an episode in which Homer becomes the owner of a security company , which then became " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge . " Although current showrunner Al Jean found it " very funny , " the episode 's first draft was heavily altered after the first table @-@ read , a process in which the script is read out loud to the other writers . During the blackout , Lenny and Carl accidentally crash their cars into a store , causing a riot to erupt . The sequence was conceived by Gould who , after the 1992 Los Angeles riots , was " somewhat obsessed " with civil unrest issues . In the DVD commentary for the episode , he said " I love the idea of , ' All you need is for the power to go out and slowly the fabric of society unravels . " While trying to determine who stole Lisa 's Malibu Stacy car , Homer holds Bart as his prime suspect . Unbeknownst to Bart , who is eating an apple , Homer tells Lisa " Look at him over there , eating that apple . What is he planning ? " Originally , the scene would show Homer suspecting Lisa , but because it bothered the character 's voice actor , Yeardley Smith , the scene was changed . American actor Joe Mantegna reprises his role as Fat Tony in the episode . 
 In another scene in the episode , Homer shows his family an advertisement for his security company . In it , a monster is seen breaking into an elderly woman 's house . When the woman screams , the screen freezes and Homer is composited to the screen , instructing the audience about SpringShield 's telephone number . In order to <unk> Homer into the screen , director Michels made use of a greenscreen . The advertisement resumes and the monster is subdued by Homer , Lenny and Carl . Confused , the monster turns to Homer and asks , " friend ? " to which Homer replies " the only friend you need is SpringShield , " and holds a business card in front of the camera . The monster then puts the card in his wallet and says " monster put in wallet . " The monster 's last line was written during one of the episode 's rewrites , but none of the writers on The Simpsons ' writing staff has taken credit for it . The line has since become very popular with the series ' writing staff ; Jean said that it was " very funny and unusual for a television show , " and Gould considers it to be his favorite joke in any episode he has ever written . At the end of the episode , Maggie saves Homer by shooting Fat Tony 's gang members with a rifle . The scene was conceived by series co @-@ creator and executive producer James L. Brooks while writing notes during the episode 's first table @-@ read . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In a scene in the episode , Homer tells Marge about all the jobs he has had , referencing several episodes of the series . According to Jean , the scene was added during a rewrite of the episode 's script . In another scene , Homer , in the Springfield church , attempts to recruit companions for his security company . The scene is a reference to the 1952 American western film High Noon , although the line " You all know me " was taken from the American horror / thriller film Jaws . When visiting the clothing store Wooly Bully , Homer has a rapid , monotone conversation with the cashier . The two speak in a similar manner to the characters in the American 1950 's television crime drama Dragnet , of which Gould was a " big fan " . When noticing that one of his ferrets is wearing a wire , Fat Tony tells it " you 're not a pet , and you 're not a friend . You 're nothing to me . " The line parodies a similar conversation between Michael and Fredo Corleone in the American gangster film The Godfather Part II . Near the end of the episode , Fat Tony drives to the Simpsons house in what seems to be a white Dodge Caravan , while shots of Springfield are shown on the way . The scene parodies the title sequence of the American television drama series The Sopranos , and features Alabama 3 's song " Woke Up This Morning , " which is also used in The Sopranos ' title sequence . Michels stated that the parody was " very fun " to animate ; " Being from New Jersey , it was a labor of love , " he said in the episode 's DVD commentary . 
 = = Release = = 
 While " The Frying Game " was originally thought to be the last episode of the season , " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge " was later revealed to be the real season finale . Although new episodes of The Simpsons usually air on Sundays , " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge " aired on Wednesday , May 22 , 2002 . In its original American broadcast , " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge " received a 5 @.@ 0 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 5 @.@ 3 million viewers . The episode finished in 53rd place in the ratings for the week of May 20 @-@ 26 , 2002 . Together with the first half @-@ hour of Celebrity Boxing , the shows averaged a 3 @.@ 9 rating among adults between ages 18 and 49 , pushing Fox to number two for the night , just behind NBC . On August 24 , 2010 , " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge " was released as part of The Simpsons : The Complete Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray set . Al Jean , Matt Selman , Carolyn Omine , Dana Gould , Joe Mantegna and Pete Michels participated in the audio commentary of the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge " received mixed reviews from critics . Writing for 411Mania , Ron Martin gave the episode a mixed review , calling it " passable . " He wrote that " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge " is " far from memorable as season finales should be . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson wrote " Like many S13 episodes , “ Badge ” feels more than a little derivative , " describing the episode as a combination of the season 4 episode " Mr. Plow " and the season 5 episode " Homer the Vigilante " . He continued by writing " That doesn ’ t mean the show lacks amusement , but it ’ s too rehashed to end the year with a real winner . " Nate Boss of Project @-@ Blu described it as " A random episode , without many laughs , " however , he added that it " could have been worse . " Giving the episode a positive review , Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict gave it a B + , billing " Homer 's ' You know I 've had a lot of jobs ' list " as the episode 's " highlight " . Writing for Screen Jabber , Stuart O 'Connor was favorable as well , describing it as a " first @-@ rate ep [ <unk> ] " . 
 = May 2007 tornado outbreak = 
 The May 2007 tornado outbreak was an extended tornado outbreak that started on May 4 , 2007 , affecting portions of the Central United States . The most destructive tornado in the outbreak occurred on the evening of May 4 in western Kansas , where about 95 % of the city of Greensburg in Kiowa County was destroyed by an EF5 tornado . The supercell killed 13 people , including 11 in Greensburg and two from separate tornadoes . At least 60 people were injured in Greensburg alone . It was the strongest tornado of an outbreak which included several other tornadoes reported across Oklahoma , Colorado , Kansas and South Dakota that occurred on the same night . 
 Although the most damaging tornado of the outbreak sequence occurred in Greensburg on the 4th , only 25 tornadoes were confirmed that day . That number exploded to 84 the following day ( May 5th ) , with many tornadoes near the affected area from the previous night . Most were in open country , but there were injuries in at least a couple spots in Kansas , and one death reported near a county lake in Ottawa County . 14 more tornadoes were confirmed on May 6 in the region before the outbreak finally ended . 
 = = Meteorological synopsis = = 
 It is the combination of warm humid air from the Gulf and dry air from the deserts of the Southwest that produce deadly storms . These conditions create an unstable severe storm creating arena . Although tornadoes occur on every continent except Antarctica they are especially common in North America , specifically the United States . 
 This severe weather outbreak can be traced back to a powerful , slow @-@ moving low pressure area with a warm front to the north over Nebraska and Missouri . On May 4 , the low stalled over the High Plains and additional moisture coming from the Gulf of Mexico moved in behind the warm front and increased amounts of instability across much of the region , with CAPE values as high as 5 @,@ 500 J / kg . In addition , the dry line , which marks a divided line between the dry and humid air mass , was positioned over the southern High Plains . This allowed for the initiation of scattered supercells on May 4 . High wind shear also allowed for intense rotation in the atmosphere . All the ingredients were present for the developing of supercell thunderstorms producing damaging wind , large hail and tornadoes . 
 The Storm Prediction Center issued a moderate risk for severe weather across western Kansas and small portions of Oklahoma , Colorado and Nebraska for May 4 , while temperatures were in the mid to high 80s ° F ( near 30 ° C ) . The atmosphere remained capped for much of the day , but storms began to develop in the late afternoon hours in western Oklahoma and the eastern Texas Panhandle . The most intense supercells developed in the early evening hours across northwestern Oklahoma and southwestern Kansas . They eventually produced 25 tornadoes , including the devastating Greensburg tornado and three other extremely large tornadoes which followed the Greensburg tornado late that evening . The supercells remained intact well into the overnight hours as the extremely unstable air mass precluded rapid dissipation expected with the loss of daytime heating which would normally be expected in the Plains . The last tornado of the night did not lift until shortly after 2 : 00 a.m. early on May 5 . 
 On May 5 , the SPC issued a high risk of severe weather for Central Kansas and central Nebraska , while moderate and slight risks for severe weather extended for areas far beyond . The low pressure system in place moved northward , but the extending front had barely moved . The storms were quick to develop . Severe weather reports were already coming in by late morning , and the first tornado reports came in during the early afternoon hours . The most intense activity took place during the late afternoon and evening hours as supercells developed along a long line from South Dakota to North Texas . Over 80 tornadoes were confirmed that day , along with hail as large as softballs and straight – line winds as strong as 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) . The activity weakened in the late evening , but not before the last tornadoes were reported in Iowa in the overnight hours . 
 The low gradually weakened and became less conducive for severe weather development on May 6 . Nonetheless , the SPC issued a moderate risk for severe storms over parts of central Kansas and northern Oklahoma as the trough remained in place . The activity was far less than on the two previous days , however there were still several additional tornadoes across the Plains ( all of them weak , mostly EF0 ) . The system finally left the area on May 7 and did not produce any more significant severe weather . 
 = = Confirmed tornadoes = = 
 = = = The Greensburg tornado family = = = 
 = = = = Storm history and damage = = = = 
 The storm that would produce the EF5 Greensburg tornado began forming after 5 : 00 pm CDT ( 2200 UTC ) in the northeastern corner of the Texas Panhandle , and went through phases in the early evening across the Oklahoma Panhandle with a few isolated tornadoes . It slowly organized itself as it moved northeast through portions of Oklahoma , and then into Kansas . The first tornado warning with this cell was issued at 8 : 35 pm CDT ( <unk> UTC ) for Clark County , Kansas , and the tornado first touched down at about 9 : 00 pm CDT ( 0200 UTC ) . Several storm chasers captured the formation of a tornado southwest of Greensburg around 9 : 20 pm CDT ( 0220 UTC ) . 
 The tornado apparently strengthened as it neared Greensburg and began moving due @-@ north towards the town , and at 9 : 38 pm CDT ( 0238 UTC ) , storm chasers reported that it had grown to over 1 / 2 mile in diameter . Trees were snapped and oil tanks were destroyed in this rural area , with oil strewn across pastures and roads . Several satellite tornadoes were observed as the very large wedge approached the city of Greensburg from the south . At 9 : 41 pm CDT ( <unk> UTC ) the National Weather Service office in Dodge City issued a Tornado emergency for Greensburg . A tornado emergency is an unofficial product used only for extremely life – threatening situations when a large and likely violent tornado is on the ground and approaching a populated area . 
 The massive tornado continued north , following Main Street into the south side of Greensburg . Many homes ( including an entire row of seven adjacent residences ) were swept completely away in this area just south of town , three of which were well @-@ bolted to their foundations . Damage in this area was rated EF5 as a result . The tornado weakened slightly as it entered residential areas in southern Greensburg , but remained violent as numerous homes were destroyed or leveled . Continuing north , downtown Greensburg was completely devastated by the tornado , with numerous businesses destroyed . Two schools , a tractor supply company , the Greensburg City Hall and other businesses fell victim to the violent winds and were destroyed or flattened . A motel on the west side of town was severely damaged , trees throughout the town were completely denuded and debarked , and vehicles were thrown hundreds of feet . The city 's water tower was completely toppled and smashed , and the visitor 's center at the Big Well ( which is the world 's largest hand @-@ dug well ) was completely destroyed . Train cars were also overturned and hazardous materials teams were called to inspect the wreckage . A tank car was carrying about 14 @,@ 000 gallons ( 53 @,@ 000 liters ) of ammonia and the substance started to leak from the tank when workers were starting to lift back the tanker . The courthouse and the grain elevator were spared the worst of the tornado 's effects . Meanwhile , the Greensburg meteorite , which was feared to have been blown away , was found and recovered a few days afterwards . Greensburg High School was mostly destroyed by the tornado , sustaining EF4 damage . Numerous homes were swept away across from the high school , four of which were well @-@ bolted to their foundations , warranting an EF5 rating at those residences . The Kiowa County Memorial Hospital was severely damaged at EF3 intensity , and a 4 @.@ 9 @-@ ton reinforced concrete beam was lifted from the structure and thrown onto a nearby vehicle . Past downtown , neighborhoods in northern Greensburg were flattened before the tornado left the city limits . The tornado continued north of Greensburg , executing a loop in a farm field before dissipating . The total path length was 22 miles ( 35 km ) , and the width of the funnel reached 1 @.@ 7 miles ( 2 @.@ 7 km ) . Overall , 95 % of Greensburg was destroyed . A total of 961 homes and businesses were destroyed , 216 received major damage and 307 received minor damage . 
 After the main Greensburg tornado dissipated , another large wedge tornado developed north of town . This enormous EF3 tornado rapidly grew to about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) in diameter as it moved northeast . Near the beginning of the path , two farms were destroyed at high @-@ end EF3 strength , a combine was tossed 1 / 4 of a mile and smashed to pieces , farm machinery and irrigation pivots were destroyed , along with trees and power lines . The tornado crossed into Edwards County , where additional farms were destroyed , one person was injured , and livestock was killed before the tornado dissipated south of Belpre . A third large EF3 wedge tornado developed north of Haviland , initially causing minor tree and irrigation pivot damage in Kiowa and Edwards Counties as it moved northeast . In Pratt County , this third tornado grew to over a mile wide , killing one person and injuring another as a farmhouse was swept away . Crossing into Stafford County , the tornado destroyed additional farms , killed livestock , and injured another person . One home in this area was swept completely away , and a vehicle was thrown 3 / 4 of a mile and mangled beyond recognition . The tornado then weakened and dissipated south of Macksville . Southeast of Macksville , yet another large EF3 wedge tornado developed and moved northeast . A police cruiser was thrown 1 / 4 of a mile from a road by the tornado and destroyed , killing the officer inside who was watching the previous tornado as it dissipated . Over a dozen farms , trees , pieces of farm machinery , vehicles , irrigation pivots , and power poles were damaged or destroyed by this fourth and final large wedge tornado before it dissipated . 
 After additional surveys , NWS Dodge City had confirmed 12 tornado tracks by the Greensburg supercell in Kansas alone on May 4 , including several weaker and satellite tornadoes that occurred along with the four large wedge tornadoes . The new Enhanced Fujita Scale was implemented on February 1 , 2007 , and the Greensburg tornado was the first tornado to be rated EF5 on it . Including tornadoes from the older Fujita Scale , the most recent F5 to hit the United States had been on May 3 , 1999 during the 1999 Oklahoma tornado outbreak , when a tornado destroyed Bridge Creek and Moore . 
 This tornado event surpassed the number of fatalities registered on May 4 , 2003 during the May 2003 tornado outbreak sequence when eight people were killed by three separate tornadoes that affected areas around Kansas City and points south and west of the city ; the last major deadly outbreak registered in Kansas prior to the Greensburg event . It was also the deadliest day and single tornado to hit the state of Kansas since an F5 tornado ( which was also the last F5 in that state before this event ) , hit Wichita and Andover in Sedgwick and Butler counties , killing 17 during the Andover , Kansas Tornado Outbreak on April 26 , 1991 . The Greensburg event was also the deadliest single tornado in the United States since a tornado hit Volusia County in central Florida on February 2 , 2007 where 13 were killed in an EF3 tornado . It was also the deadliest day for tornadoes since 20 people were killed in six communities on March 1 , 2007 . 
 = = = = Aftermath = = = = 
 Hours after the tornado hit , Greensburg was judged unsafe and was fully evacuated . Some of the injured were transferred to hospitals in Dodge City and Wichita . The Kansas National Guard was called in to assist in the security measures . Over 100 Red Cross officials were called in while some worked with the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the recovery efforts . Shelters were established at the Haviland High School and Barclay College in nearby Haviland , Kansas and the <unk> Lodge in Macksville , Kansas . After the tornado , looting was reported in the community and at least seven suspects , including four soldiers that were not part of the relief effort and went to Greensburg on their own , were arrested and faced charges of burglary and theft . A dusk @-@ to @-@ dawn curfew was put in place in the community after the tornado hit . 
 The American Red Cross maintained a list of " Safe and Well " families at their website <unk> Meanwhile , officials also set a shelter for lost and injured animals as they reported to had found 163 animals alive in Greensburg after the tornado . Kansas Governor Kathleen Sebelius and President George W. Bush both declared Kiowa County a disaster area . 
 Total damage from the outbreak was estimated at about $ 268 million , and insured damage from the Greensburg tornado alone was estimated at $ 153 million . 
 = = Non @-@ tornadic events = = 
 In addition to the tornadoes , widespread flooding occurred across central North America as a result of the same system producing continuous thunderstorms . There were two major reasons for the flooding : The storm system itself moved very slowly , having produced significant tornado outbreaks in almost the same places for three days . In addition , the storms moved along each other 's paths , so one storm dropped heavy rains on the same place that the storm before it did ( this is also known as " training " ) . 
 Across portions of eastern Nebraska and western Iowa , rainfall amounts exceeded locally 6 inches ( 152 mm ) . In northeastern and central Kansas , rainfall amounts approached 5 – 6 inches locally ( 125 – 150 mm ) . In North Dakota , southern Manitoba and southern Saskatchewan , heavy rainfalls of 1 – 3 inches ( 25 – 75 mm ) fell from this system from May 4 to May 7 . Similar amounts were reported in Alberta on May 3 and May 4 . 
 Some of the worst flooding affected Topeka , Kansas , where several rescues had to be made , and the Kansas City Metro Area , where several roads were closed . In neighboring Missouri , levees broke along the Missouri River which caused extensive flooding to hundreds of homes and the northwest and central part of the state . The National Guard were assisting on filling sandbags to protect homes , schools and plants across the state which experienced some of the worst flooding since the Great Flood of 1993 which affected most of the Mississippi River Valley . Torrential rains on May 10 had also caused flooding in parts of southern Missouri as well as in eastern Kansas . The heavy rains also affected activities surrounding the <unk> ( Wichita River Festival ) which postponed some events until May 14 . The Arkansas River reached record levels near Haven when it crested at 13 @.@ 08 feet on May 8 . Some flooding into low @-@ lying areas was also observed in the Wichita Metropolitan Area . Rainfall amounts in southern and southeastern Kansas also exceeded 6 inches ( 152 mm ) over a two @-@ day period on May 6 and May 7 . There were several reports of farmers who lost several cattle who have been toss by the high water levels . 
 In Aberdeen , South Dakota , 7 @.@ 75 inches ( 197 mm ) of rain fell the evening of May 5 into the early morning hours of May 6 , causing significant flooding in some areas around the city . It was also the city 's new 24 ‑ hour record rainfall , breaking the old mark of 5 @.@ 20 inches ( 132 mm ) set in June 1978 . The highest unofficial rainfall total was reported in Epiphany , South Dakota where as much as 10 inches ( 254 mm ) fell during the weekend . The highest official report of rain , 8 @.@ 73 inches ( 222 mm ) at Columbia , South Dakota , set a new official 24 – hour May rainfall record for the entire state of South Dakota . 
 In southern Oklahoma City and surrounding communities , strong straightline winds caused damage to several buildings and downed trees and power lines in the early morning hours of May 7 , with cleanup efforts being complicated due to flooding rains accompanying the storm . About 11 @,@ 000 homes were without power during the event . There were also reports of floods across many other areas in Oklahoma . Oklahoma Governor Brad Henry had declared a state of emergency for all 77 counties across the state due to all the severe weather including the tornadoes , the flash floods and hail . 
 Snow was also reported across higher elevations in Colorado , Wyoming , Nebraska and Utah with local amounts of up to one foot ( 30 cm ) across central Colorado . 
 = Temper ( film ) = 
 Temper is a 2015 Indian Telugu @-@ language action film written by Vakkantham Vamsi and directed by Puri Jagannadh starring N. T. Rama Rao Jr. and Kajal Aggarwal in the lead roles . It was produced by Bandla Ganesh on Parameswara Art Productions banner . Anup Rubens composed the soundtrack while Mani Sharma composed the background score . Shyam K. Naidu and S. R. Sekhar handled the film 's cinematography and editing respectively . 
 The film focuses on two people — Daya , a corrupt police officer earning illegal money by leveraging his capacity as an official and an influential smuggler Waltair Vasu with whom Daya joins hands . Vasu wants to kill a woman named Lakshmi who has an evidence of a crime made by his four brothers . The rest of the film is about the roles of Daya 's girlfriend Shanvi , Lakshmi and an honest constable Murthy in helping Daya become a sincere police officer . 
 The film was made on a budget of ₹ 350 million . Production began on 1 August 2014 at Hyderabad and its principal photography commenced on the next day . After being halted twice because of Film Federation employees ' strike , the film 's shoot was completed by 31 January 2015 , with the film being primarily shot in and around Hyderabad and Goa . 
 The film released worldwide on 13 February 2015 to positive reviews from critics who praised the principal cast 's performances and criticised few portions of the film for being predictable and repetitive . The film was a commercial success , grossing ₹ 743 million and collecting a share of ₹ 431 million in its lifetime . The film also released in Japan on 28 February 2015 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Daya is an orphan who grows up learning that a police 's life is a happy one with lots of money coming in the form of bribes which inspires him to become a police officer . After years , he becomes a corrupt , cunning , manipulative and ruthless sub inspector of police . He is transferred to Vishakhapatnam where he forms an immediate friendship with the local don Waltair Vasu by releasing his four brothers Ravi , Mani , Varun and <unk> from the jail who were arrested for smuggling . Daya 's attitude does not go well with his subordinate Narayana Murthy , a sincere police constable . He tries to oppose Daya 's deeds which go vain . 
 Meanwhile , Daya meets a pet cross member Shanvi and falls in love with her at first sight . With the help of two chain snatchers , Daya manages to steal her pet dogs which are very precious for her . Daya later manages to pose those chain snatchers as police constables and adds that they had to fight with Korean smugglers to retrieve those dogs . He also foils her marriage with a flutist named Vennela Kishore by arresting him at a brothel house adding that he is an ardent dog lover and an exact opposite of Kishore which makes Shanvi fall for him . On her birthday , Vasu 's men kidnap her and Daya rescues her in time . Vasu then scolds his henchmen for kidnapping the wrong person and apologises to both of them . 
 As her birthday gift , Shanvi asks Daya to save that girl 's life who was supposed to be kidnapped and killed by Vasu . <unk> the same , Daya saves that girl named Lakshmi and opposes Vasu . They later reconcile and Daya comes to know that Lakshmi has proof of Vasu 's brothers ' atrocities which if exposed can kill them . Daya meets Lakshmi and comes to know that Deepthi was her sister who was kidnapped , raped , and brutally assaulted to death by Vasu 's four brothers for 40 days and the same was recorded by them . That was stored on a CD which is with Lakshmi now . Daya takes the CD and sends Lakshmi and her mother to United States . 
 Before leaving , Lakshmi 's conversation with him bring a change in his mindset and turns an honest officer after a chain of events with Murthy notifying the change in him . Daya credits Shanvi for bringing the change in him and reveals the truth to her after which she forgives him . After Deepthi 's dead body is found and <unk> by a female doctor , Daya produces the CD as the evidence which turns out to be an empty one . Though no further evidence exists , Daya asks a gap of one day to provide necessary evidence so that Vasu 's brothers should not escape as exonerated . He regrets for not making multiple copies of the CD in a conversation with Shanvi and later , Vasu 's men attack Daya when he is alone . 
 He reaches the court next day and adds that he is also one among the ' five ' men who sexually assaulted Deepthi and convinces the judge to put five of them to death so that those four shall not escape death . In the last minute , Lakshmi reveals Murthy that she has an extra copy and the same is aired in the media . Daya 's death sentence gets cancelled while the remaining four die in the jail , three in the hands of Daya and the remaining one after hanging himself trying to escape Daya . Daya is reinstated into service and he reconciles with Shanvi and Murthy in the end . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Principal cast 
 N. T. Rama Rao Jr. as Daya 
 Kajal Aggarwal as Shanvi 
 Posani Krishna Murali as Narayana Murthy 
 Prakash Raj as Waltair Vasu 
 Supporting cast 
 Madhuurima as Lakshmi 
 Apoorva Srinivasan as Deepthi 
 Pavithra Lokesh as Lakshmi 's mother 
 Kovai Sarala as Shanvi 's mother 
 Ramaprabha as Shanvi 's grandmother 
 Kota Srinivasa Rao as Judge 
 Tanikella Bharani as Venkata Rao 
 Subbaraju as Ravi 
 Vennela Kishore as Vennela Kishore 
 Jaya Prakash Reddy as the Home minister of Andhra Pradesh 
 Ali as one of the two chain snatchers 
 Sapthagiri as the other chain snatcher 
 Sonia Agarwal as doctor ( cameo appearance ) 
 Nora Fatehi in the item number <unk> <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After <unk> ( 2004 ) , Puri Jagannadh and N. T. Rama Rao Jr. tried to collaborate for another movie several times which could not happen . When reports of their second collaboration emerged in early 2014 , neither of them confirmed about the film . During the post release promotions of Heart Attack ( 2014 ) , Jagannadh stated that he planning to make a film based solely on family values in his next venture with Godavari shores and regional backdrop . B. V. S. N. Prasad was expected to produce this film under Sri Venkateswara Cine Chitra banner . He left to Bangkok in the end of March 2014 for writing the story of this project . 
 Bandla Ganesh was confirmed to produce the film under Parameswara Art Productions banner . When Jagannadh was about to begin work on the film , Rama Rao Jr. asked him to listen to a point narrated by Vamsi to him four years back and the former agreed saying that he would definitely do the film if it is good than his story . Jagannadh chose to direct the script written by Vamsi in mid May 2014 which marked the former 's first film whose story was not written by him . The script work was in progress by late May 2014 and film was declared a cop drama . 
 In late June 2014 , Devi Sri Prasad was selected as the music director of the film while the cast and crew were being finalised . The film was confirmed to be launched officially on 1 August 2014 at Jagannadh 's new office Cave at 7 : 00 AM . Shyam K. Naidu was declared as the cinematographer , S. R. Sekhar was declared as the editor , Brahma <unk> was declared as the art director while FEFSI Vijayan was recruited to compose the fights . 
 Devi Sri Prasad was replaced by Anoop Rubens later for unknown reasons while Mani Sharma was selected for composing the background score while Anoop Rubens composed the soundtrack . The titles <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Temper , <unk> with the tagline " Totally Corrupted " and Shamsher were considered by the makers and Temper was finalised and announced on 19 November 2014 . The film was rumoured to be facing financial troubles in December 2014 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Kajal Aggarwal was selected as the heroine of this film in early June 2013 pairing with Rama Rao Jr. after two successful films Brindavanam ( 2010 ) and Baadshah ( 2013 ) whose inclusion was confirmed by Jagannadh in a statement to the media after few days . <unk> Khan was signed as the antagonist of the film in July 2014 . On the day of launch , it was confirmed that Prakash Raj , Madhuurima , Ali , Kota Srinivasa Rao and Posani Krishna Murali would play important roles along with Tanikella Bharani , Subbaraju , Vennela Kishore , Jaya Prakash Reddy , Sapthagiri , Ramaprabha , Pavithra Lokesh and Kovai Sarala . Kajal had shortage of bulk dates to accommodate and it was rumoured that Tamannaah or a new actress would replace her . 
 Ganesh denied those rumours and confirmed Kajal 's inclusion . Though initially planned to shoot simultaneously for a film by Sudhir Mishra , Kajal opted to continue with this film due to certain problems with Mishra 's script . S. Sreesanth and <unk> Khan were speculated to be a part of the film 's cast when they visited Jagannath 's Cave but there was no official confirmation then . <unk> was reported to be considered for a small role . Impressed with his previous works , Jagannadh cast Sapthagiri for a special comedy role in the film . Nora Fatehi replaced Shruti Haasan in an item number . Jagannadh immediately selected her after her intense training to prepare for her role as a commando in the film Roar : Tigers of the Sundarbans ( 2014 ) . 
 R. Narayana Murthy was approached for a special character in the film opposite Rama Rao Jr . Murthy liked the role but declined it as he did not want to move to mainstream cinema and was content making left @-@ oriented films . Sonia Agarwal was signed on to play a significant role in the film . Apoorva Srinivasan was cast for a small yet crucial supporting role marking her debut in Telugu cinema . Junaid Sheikh was selected to play a negative role . 
 = = = Characters and looks = = = 
 N. T. Rama Rao Jr. was reported to be seen as a tough and eccentric police officer in this film . Regarding her character in the film , Madhuurima said that she plays a crucial role which is the turning point in the film . She later added that her role is a small one that changes the course of the protagonist 's character graph . Kajal Aggarwal was confirmed to play the role of an animal lover in this film . For his role , Rama Rao Jr. hired a new trainer who specialises in improving muscle tone and shed few kilograms relying on high protein diet and workout routine to build a hefty body . He also sported a crew cut . A few still images of the film were leaked online on 26 November 2014 which confirmed Rama Rao Jr . ' s look in the film . 
 Those stills were captured during the shoot at Goa and they went viral on social networking sites . However the makers tried to find out who leaked it online as they wanted the pictures to be released to create a buzz before the film 's launch . Another still was leaked on the next day which featured Rama Rao Jr. sitting on a Royal Enfield bike sans shirt sporting his six pack abs . The image was a working still taken on the beach reportedly featuring in a song sequence of the film . However , none from the film 's unit made a statement about the alleged leak . 
 Rama Rao Jr . ' s underwent a drastic physical transformation from head to toe in hairdo , costumes , body and attitude for this role . His stylist Ashwin Mawle shopped for the costumes and accessories from designer stores in Hong Kong and London . Regarding the styling , Ashwin further revealed , " For the hair , we tried getting a few variations of spikes — straight , cross and messy . He ( Rama Rao Jr . ) keeps a tab on the latest trends . He took a lot of references from latest runway looks and zeroed in on an earthy color palette : brown , burgundy and grey . Thick jackets make him look bulkier , so he has gone for slim fit shirts and jackets made of linen " in an interview to <unk> AS of The Times of India . He added that N. T. Rama Rao Jr. trimmed his mustache for sporting a rugged look . 
 Madhuurima said in an interview to Suresh Kavirayani of Deccan Chronicle that she participated in few action sequences with Rama Rao Jr. in the film and added that she has no songs with him . Rama Rao Jr . ' s character was named Daya and he was shown as a sub inspector of police who by his own admission is ruthless , fully corrupted , criminal minded and 100 % cunning . For a particular scene where he had to walk with bare chest , Rama Rao Jr. skipped drinking a glass of water for 18 hours continuously . Kajal said in an interview to IANS that her character would become the reason for the transformation in the protagonist 's character after she forces him to take up an issue . Posani Krishna Murali was seen in the role of a sincere constable who hates Daya because of his corrupt nature . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The regular shooting was planned to commence in April 2014 . In mid @-@ May 2014 , the film 's shooting schedules were planned in July 2014 . On 1 July 2014 it was declared that the film 's shoot would be completed in 100 working days . Principal photography began on 2 August 2014 . Madhuurima joined the film 's sets on 9 August . N. T. Rama Rao Jr. was expected to join the film 's sets on 11 August though he joined on 21 August in the Aluminium Factory at Gachibowli in Hyderabad . Few comedy scenes were shot on Rama Rao Jr . , Vennela Kishore and other supporting cast after a week . The film 's second schedule was planned from 10 September till the completion of the film 's shoot which was postponed to 15 September because of disruption in construction of a large police station set due to rainfall . 
 After being rumoured that the film might be shelved after shooting was stopped midway , Bandla Ganesh has clarified that the shooting would continue from 26 September and the shooting resumed in Aluminium Factory at Gachibowli in Hyderabad and the makers announced that the schedule would continue till the end of the principal photography . The makers selected a house in Begumpet to erect a special police station set to shoot few crucial scenes on which ₹ 2 @.@ 7 million was invested . An item number on Rama Rao Jr. and Nora Fatehi was shot in Hyderabad in early October 2014 . That song was a fast @-@ paced folk song choreographed by Shekhar which Nora termed a " hyper energetic dance number " . 
 25 % of the film 's shoot was wrapped up by then and the next schedule was planned in Vishakhapatnam . Later the makers chose Goa to shoot major parts of the film . Few scenes on Rama Rao Jr . , Kajal Aggarwal and some other actors were shot meanwhile . The film 's Goa schedule was delayed due to the ongoing strike for Non @-@ acceptance of the revised pay hike for the Film Federation Employees . The strike was called off later and the filming continued from 25 October at Goa where major part of the film was shot . The shoot of the interval block was wrapped up by 2 November . Few key scenes on Rama Rao Jr . , Kajal Aggarwal and Prakash Raj were shot later . The Goa schedule came to an end on 24 November and the team returned to Hyderabad the next day . The next schedule started at Ramoji Film City from 27 November . By then , 80 % of the film 's shoot was complete . 
 The film 's shoot was disrupted again due to another strike caused by Film Federation Employees to appoint those technicians who have a membership in the Federation . The makers said that two weeks of filming is pending which would start immediately once the strike is called off . However , the film 's shoot was reported to be progressing in Hyderabad with employees other than the ones from Federation being employed . The strike was called off on 5 December 2014 and the union members took part in the shootings from the next day . Bandla Ganesh called off the film 's shoot for 10 days as Rama Rao Jr. was devastated because of the death of his step brother Nandamuri <unk> . However Rama Rao Jr. chose to continue for ensuring a Sankranthi release and the filming resumed on 10 December 2014 . 
 16 days of shoot was reported to be pending and the filming was expected to come to an end on 31 December 2014 . Meanwhile , Rama Rao Jr. participated in the shoot of some important jail and court scenes at a specially erected set in Aluminium Factory near Gachibowli . Puri Jagannadh informed Bandla Ganesh that the film cannot be completed as planned and that film will not be ready for a Sankranti release . The latter was fine with the decision and gave a break to Rama Rao Jr . The filming resumed from 27 December 2014 in Hyderabad . Scenes on Rama Rao Jr. and others were shot in a police station set and court room set erected in Begumpet . The last song was shot on Rama Rao Jr. and Kajal Aggarwal in late January 2015 . The entire filming came to an end on 31 January 2015 . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 S. R. Sekhar simultaneously completed the editing work so that the film can release on time . Post @-@ production activities progressed in tandem with the filming during the film 's shoot at Goa . Mani Sharma began composing the background score on 4 December 2014 . The film 's dubbing activities began on 9 December 2014 at Hyderabad . Rama Rao Jr. and the film 's cast began dubbing for their roles on 4 February 2015 . The pending DTS mixing and Rama Rao Jr . ' s dubbing were completed by 7 February 2015 . Mani Sharma was completing the rerecording work at the same time and the final copy was planned to be sent to Central Board of Film Certification for censoring on 9 February 2015 . The censoring activities were postponed by a day due to unavailability of slot for censor and delay of final mixing . The special screening for the board began at 4 : 00 PM . The board passed the film with an ' U / A ' certificate . The film 's final length after censoring was 147 minutes and 18 cuts were made in the film including the reduction of the climax by 30 % . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 In an interview with Subhash K. Jha for the newspaper Absolute India , Puri Jagannadh said that the film is basically the story of a bad police officer played by Rama Rao Jr. and is an action @-@ oriented film . He added later that the film about a highly corrupt and cunning police officer who later transforms into an honest one and the title of the film signifies the protagonist 's character has attitude , arrogance and is defiant . He added that the film has a novel theme and is not inspired by anyone in real life . A source from the film 's unit revealed that the confrontation scene in the courtroom was shot on the lines of a similar scene from the film Bobbili Puli ( 1982 ) and features N. T. Rama Rao Jr. delivering dialogues that ridicule the contemporary judicial system and police hierarchy . 
 = = Music = = 
 Anup Rubens was signed in on to compose the film 's soundtrack album after Rama Rao Jr. insisted Jagannadh to bring a relatively new music composer on board when the latter opted for Devi Sri Prasad . It consists of six songs all composed by Rubens and penned by Bhaskarabhatla , <unk> and Viswa . Rahul Kumar , mostly known as Roll Rida , rapped for the songs . The soundtrack was marketed by Aditya Music and was released on 28 January 2015 to positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was initially planned for a worldwide theatrical release on 9 January 2015 as a Sankranthi release . The film 's release was postponed from Sankranthi to a later date due to halt in the film 's shoot post Nandamuri <unk> 's death and an official confirmation was awaited . Later the film was expected to release in February 2015 . The release date was speculated as 13 February 2015 and an official confirmation was awaited . Rama Rao Jr. was expected to announce the film 's release date at the audio launch event . 
 Bandla Ganesh announced at the audio launch that the film would release worldwide on 13 February 2015 at 05 : 07 AM . 90 theatres were booked in Karnataka for the film 's release which is a big number for any Telugu film . Great India Films was expected to release the film in 125 screens across the overseas markets . The film was expected to release in 1500 theatres across the world . Advance booking of tickets began on 10 February and the tickets for the first day in AP / Nizam were sold out completely while Bangalore and Chennai witnessed an advance booking of 50 % each within a day . 
 One of the benefit shows were held at Mallikarjuna 70 MM theatre in <unk> colony at 4 : 00 AM . The other benefit show was held at <unk> 70 MM theatre in <unk> at 5 : 00 AM . The ticket rates of these benefit shows ranged between ₹ 2000 - ₹ 5000 each . The film released in Japan on 28 February 2015 . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 N. T. Rama Rao Jr. and Puri Jagannadh acquired the distribution rights of Nizam region and Vishakhapatnam . Later Vakkantham Vamsi was reported to acquire the distribution rights of Nellore district for an amount of ₹ 20 million ( US $ 300 @,@ 000 ) . Great India Films announced in mid @-@ January 2015 that they acquired the overseas distribution rights of the film . It was their third and fifth film with Puri Jagannadh and Rama Rao Jr. in overseas respectively . DBB Films announced later that they acquired the distribution and theatrical screening rights of the film in Europe except United Kingdom , whose theatrical screening rights were acquired by Colours Media later . <unk> Sunkara acquired the distribution rights of the film in Canada . 
 The film 's distribution rights for different regions have been sold for an amount of ₹ 424 million out of which the highest amount was received from Nizam region rights which were bought by Suresh Movies with an advance of ₹ 110 million followed by overseas rights for an amount of ₹ 630 million and followed by Ceded region rights bought by Siva Shakti films for an amount of ₹ 60 million . Anu Sri films and Suresh Movies acquired the East and West Godavari districts ' distribution rights for an amount of ₹ 25 @.@ 2 million and ₹ 230 million respectively . The distribution rights of Guntur and Nellore districts were acquired by S Creations and Icon for an amount of ₹ 330 million and ₹ 12 @.@ 5 million plus ₹ 4 million advance respectively . <unk> Pictures offered ₹ 30 million advance while Hari Pictures offered ₹ 24 @.@ 5 million for Krishna district rights on NRA basis . <unk> Associates acquired Karnataka distribution rights for ₹ 45 million while SPI acquired Tamil Nadu distribution rights . North India distribution rights were sold for ₹ 5 million . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 On 19 May 2014 , 2 posters of this film bearing the title Production no . 5 were released wishing N. T. Rama Rao Jr. a happy birthday in advance . The makers planned to reveal the film 's first look teaser on Diwali . The makers later decided to unveil the film 's first look poster on 29 November and teaser on 5 December . Bandla Ganesh unveiled the official logo of the film 's title on 27 November . Puri Jagannadh unveiled two posters featuring Rama Rao Jr. on the same day . Another poster featuring Rama Rao Jr. was unveiled on 6 December 2014 . In that poster , he was seen sporting a sky blue cotton shirt , white cargo pants and aviator sunglasses during the film 's shoot at Goa . He posted the autographed version of the same in his official Facebook page a day before which received 30 thousand likes , 2 thousand shares and more than 1 thousand comments upon its release ; all of them being positive . 
 The film 's trailer was expected to be unveiled on or after 17 December 2014 . A new still of Rama Rao Jr. was unveiled on 29 December 2014 . The first look teaser was unveiled on 1 January 2015 . Two posters featuring Rama Rao Jr. were unveiled on the same day . The teaser was successful and the theatrical trailer of 1 minute duration was planned to be unveiled on the eve of Sankranthi . A poster featuring Rama Rao Jr. was unveiled on 24 January 2015 . Six audio release posters all featuring Rama Rao Jr. were unveiled on 27 January 2015 . Another poster featuring Rama Rao Jr. and Kajal Aggarwal was unveiled on the same day . A set of five stills featuring the lead pair and another five stills featuring Rama Rao Jr. were released on the next day . 
 The theatrical trailer with a duration of 116 seconds was unveiled on the night of 28 January 2015 at the audio launch . It received 0 @.@ 25 million views , 3000 likes , 250 dislikes and more than 250 comments within 12 hours of it release in YouTube and received mixed feedback from audience . Deccan Chronicle opined that the trailer promised action and entertainment and would leave the audience asking for more . Oneindia Entertainment wrote " As the trailer depicts him as a police officer , a dancer , a lover and a comedian and thus on a whole , Temper can be told as Jr . NTR in & as " , adding that the trailer raised expectations . IndiaGlitz stated " NTR looks very different and stylish compared to his previous films and he has even changed his body language and dialogue delivery . If the trailer is anything to go by , the film has plenty of action sequences and Puri mark witty dialogues . NTR fans are in for a treat . " In contrast , Subramanian Harikumar of Bollywood Life stated " The obsession for cop roles amongst Telugu filmmakers is refusing to die down , as Jr NTR plays corrupt sub inspector Daya . Overall , Temper seems like it is the same run of the mill action entertainer , which would appeal to die hard Jr NTR fans and nothing more " . Meanwhile , the video promo of the item number <unk> <unk> crossed more than 90 thousand views on the official channel in YouTube within 24 hours of its release . The dance moves of Rama Rao Jr. and Nora Fatehi received praise . 
 The 40 second video promo of the song Temper received praise particularly for Rama Rao Jr . ' s dance movements . The theatrical trailer crossed half a million views within 18 hours of its release in YouTube . It crossed a million views on 1 February 2015 in Puri Jagannadh 's official channel on YouTube making it one of the record breaking Telugu film trailers in YouTube . The video promo of the song One More Time received positive response . Six new stills featuring Rama Rao Jr. along with a set of working stills were released on 4 February 2015 . 60 stills were released by the makers later ; most of them featured Rama Rao Jr. in stylish looks and a few of them featuring the roles played by the remaining star cast . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film satellite rights were sold for an amount of ₹ 77 @.@ 5 million to an undisclosed leading channel thus beating the record set by Rama Rao Jr . ' s previous film <unk> ( 2014 ) . The television broadcast rights were sold to Gemini TV for an amount of ₹ 78 million who faced a stiff competition from MAA TV . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film received positive reviews from critics . Y. Sunita Chowdary of The Hindu praised Rama Rao Jr . ' s performance as one of his finest works and added " The strength of the story lies in Puri Jagan ’ s clarity , at no moment he is in a hurry or tempted to show the hero ’ s softer side . What this film needed desperately was personality and character and this time it gets both " . IBN Live called it the best work of Rama Rao Jr. after Rakhi ( 2006 ) and added " Although the film isn 't targeted mainly at family audience due to overtly dealt perverted ideas , Temper can be a best watch for Nandamuri Fans " . Hemanth Kumar of The Times of India gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and praised Rama Rao Jr . ' s performance and the film 's underlying theme . He wrote " In the end , Temper comes across as a film which was meant for NTR to reinvent himself , for Puri to prove that he hasn 't lost his mojo yet , for NTR 's fans , whose unflinching faith in the actor hasn 't diminished at all " . 
 <unk> <unk> of Oneindia Entertainment gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and stated " It is surely a brave attempt by the team to opt a script like this . Temper deals with a sensitive story and yet conveyed it with all the commercial elements that are needed for a film to click . " IndiaGlitz too gave 3 @.@ 25 out of 5 stars and summarised " All in all , this one has emotion plus action , the former is the raison d ' <unk> . Watch out for NTR . He is different and genuinely different here . " Suresh Kavirayani of Deccan Chronicle gave the film 3 out of 5 stars . He praised the performances of Rama Rao Jr. and Prakash Raj and termed the film as one of the best films of the former 's and also his ideal comeback . Subramanian Harikumar of Bollywood Life gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and stated " Temper is one of those films which ride high on actor ’ s performances and this film is a Jr NTR show from start to finish . Go in with minimum expectations and get ready to be mesmerised by NTR magic . " 
 In contrast , Haricharan Pudipeddi of IANS gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and termed Temper a regular Puri Jagannadh film salvaged by Rama Rao Jr . ' s performance which he called a " terrific " one . Behindwoods gave the film 2 @.@ 25 out of 5 stars and stated " A thin one @-@ liner made into a film with underused artists and a disengaging screenplay ! Thanks to the well @-@ known faces , reasonable songs and Junior NTR 's dance , Temper becomes bearable . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 After including collections from Karnataka , Tamil Nadu , Maharashtra , other parts of North India and international markets apart from AP / Nizam area , the first day total at the global box office stood approximately at ₹ 150 million and became the biggest opener of Rama Rao Jr. after breaking the previous record set by Baadshah ( 2013 ) . The film 's trade witnessed around 50 per cent drop in the morning shows on its second day and improvements in the later shows and collected ₹ 65 million taking its two @-@ day global box office total to approximately ₹ 220 million . Apart from AP / Nizam , the film collected ₹ 35 million in other areas and the three day i.e. first weekend global box office total stood at ₹ 281 @.@ 8 million . 
 The film 's business witnessed a 70 percent drop on its fourth day and collected ₹ 25 million and showed improvement on the next day which was Maha Shivaratri and collected ₹ 32 @.@ 5 million taking its five @-@ day global total to ₹ 339 @.@ 3 million . Trade Analyst Trinath told IANS that the film grossed ₹ 400 million in six days . By the end of its first week , the film collected ₹ 380 million nett at the global box office and its distributors recovered 90 percent of their investments on the film by then . The film stood in the fifth place in the list of highest grossing Telugu film at the global box office in the first week and overtook Gopala Gopala , Race Gurram ( 2014 ) , Baadshah and Gabbar Singh ( 2012 ) . 
 Temper lost many screens across the world due to new releases Bandipotu and <unk> and a couple of dubbed films because of which it witnessed a huge drop in its business . The film collected ₹ 25 million on its eighth day at the global box office taking its eight @-@ day total to ₹ 405 million . The film 's business later witnessed a growth as the new releases received mixed reviews . It collected ₹ 465 million nett by the end of its ten @-@ day run at the global box office with which the film overtook the second week collection of Govindudu Andarivadele ( 2014 ) and the lifetime collections of Gopala Gopala . The film witnessed a huge drop in its business due to new film releases and 2015 Cricket World Cup . It collected ₹ 495 million nett in 14 days at the global box office . 
 By the end of its 20 @-@ day run , the film crossed ₹ 60 crore mark by grossing ₹ 667 @.@ 5 million and collected a distributor share of ₹ 403 @.@ 9 million . The film completed its 50 @-@ day run across several centres on 3 April 2015 . In its lifetime , the film grossed ₹ 743 million and collected a share of ₹ 431 million and was declared a profitable film for its distributors on a whole . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 The film collected ₹ 96 @.@ 8 million at AP / Nizam box office and became the biggest opener for both Rama Rao Jr. in his career and Telugu cinema in 2015 . It overtook the opening day collections of Gopala Gopala at AP / Nizam box office thus emerging as the third highest opener of all time there . It collected ₹ 11 million from 125 shows at Bangalore box office on its first day . It collected ₹ 40 million at AP / Nizam box office on its second day and its two @-@ day AP / Nizam box office total stood at ₹ 136 @.@ 8 million . It collected ₹ 45 million at AP / Nizam box office on its third day taking its three @-@ day total to ₹ 181 @.@ 8 million breaking the opening weekend record of Gopala Gopala . The film continued a steady run on its sixth day collecting ₹ 17 @.@ 8 million at AP / Nizam box office . 
 The film collected approximately ₹ 240 million at AP / Nizam box office in its first week . The film collected ₹ 97 million in ten days in Nizam region making Temper the biggest grosser of Rama Rao Jr. in that area beating the lifetime collections of his previous films <unk> ( 2014 ) , Ramayya Vasthavayya ( 2013 ) , Brindavanam ( 2010 ) and <unk> ( 2012 ) , which collected ₹ 69 million , ₹ 89 million , ₹ 83 million and ₹ 82 million respectively in Nizam region in their lifetime . However it failed to break the records set by Race Gurram and Govindudu Andarivadele in Nizam region . The film grossed ₹ 393 million and collected ₹ 272 @.@ 5 million in ten days at AP / Nizam box office and topped the business charts in that area followed by Bandipotu and Badlapur . 
 The film grossed ₹ 440 million and collected ₹ 290 @.@ 2 million at AP / Nizam box office by the end of its 20 @-@ day run . The film continued to stand in the first spot in the weekend business charts of AP / Nizam box office followed by Maga <unk> , <unk> , Ram Leela and Badlapur . The film grossed ₹ 58 @.@ 5 million and collected ₹ 24 @.@ 5 million at Bangalore box office while the share and gross in the rest of Karnataka were reported as ₹ 23 million and ₹ 45 million respectively . The film grossed ₹ 36 million and collected ₹ 14 million in the rest of India including Tamil Nadu . The film grossed ₹ 506 million and collected ₹ 313 @.@ 5 million at AP / Nizam box office in its lifetime . The lifetime gross and share figures at Karnataka , Tamil Nadu and the rest of India stood at ₹ 115 million and ₹ 51 million , ₹ 14 million and ₹ 5 @.@ 5 million , ₹ 22 million and ₹ 8 @.@ 5 million respectively . 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 Taran Adarsh reported that the film collected US $ 256 @,@ 834 on Thursday preview shows , US $ 228 @,@ 779 on its first day , US $ 203 @,@ 794 on its second day and US $ 163 @,@ 395 on the third day at the United States box office taking its opening weekend total to US $ 852 @,@ 802 in the country . It was equivalent to ₹ 53 million and Adarsh called it a " flying start " . It performed better than the other releases Roy and <unk> which collected US $ 133 @,@ 453 and US $ 105 @,@ 070 equivalent to ₹ 8 @.@ 3 million and ₹ 6 @.@ 53 million respectively . The film was expected to cross the US $ 1 million mark soon . The film collected US $ 934 @,@ 467 in six days at the United States box office which was equivalent to ₹ 58 @.@ 2 million and was declared Rama Rao Jr . ' s biggest success in the country . 
 The film collected US $ 23 @,@ 000 each on 20 and 21 February 2015 at the United States box office and crossed the US $ 1 million mark by collecting US $ 10 @,@ 05 @,@ 000 in 10 days . With this , Temper became Rama Rao Jr . ' s second film to cross the US $ 1 million mark after Baadshah and also the first Indian film in 2015 to cross that mark . The lifetime gross and share figures at the United States stood at ₹ 66 million and ₹ 42 @.@ 5 million respectively . The film grossed ₹ 20 million and collected a share of ₹ 10 million in its lifetime in other international markets . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Sequel and remakes = = 
 Bandla Ganesh announced the film 's sequel titled Temper 2 on 14 February 2015 through his Twitter page . Its feasibility was doubted as Jagannadh shelved the sequels of his films Pokiri ( 2006 ) and Businessman ( 2012 ) in the past . <unk> J Joshi announced that he would bankroll the Tamil and Hindi remakes of the film under his banner <unk> Media & Entertainment Pvt Ltd . He however denied the rumours that he would reprise Ram Rao Jr. in the film 's remakes and clarified that he is in talks with a Bollywood actor for the Hindi remake . Ganesh reportedly sold those rights to Joshi as a part of the compensation to money he owed to him when the latter financed the former 's production Govindudu Andarivadele ( 2014 ) . Vishal will star in the Tamil remake of Temper , which will enter production in late 2016 . 
 = Oswald Danes = 
 Oswald Danes is a fictional character in the science fiction series Torchwood , created by Russell T. Davies and portrayed by American actor Bill Pullman . The character was promoted as one of five new main characters to join Torchwood in its fourth series , Torchwood : Miracle Day ( 2011 ) , as part of a new co @-@ production between Torchwood 's British network , BBC One , and its American financiers on US premium television network Starz . Pullman appears in eight of the ten episodes , and is credited as a series regular . Whilst reaction to the serial and Pullman 's character was mixed , Pullman 's portrayal was praised by critics and in 2012 he received a Saturn Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor on Television . 
 The narrative of Miracle Day focuses on an event in which death ceases to occur across the world and the gravely @-@ wounded continue to remain alive . On the first day of this phenomenon , the so @-@ called Miracle Day , Oswald , a former schoolteacher who molested , raped murdered one of his students , survives his own execution . His survival draws global attention , and he subsequently is released from prison on a legal technicality . After being offered both exposure and protection by Public Relations expert Jilly Kitzinger ( Lauren Ambrose ) , he becomes her client , which helps him gain more publicity . Following a series of events he ends up aiding Torchwood , a team composed of two former alien @-@ hunters and two former CIA agents , on their mission to restore death to the world . Danes is killed off in the final episode of the series ; when death is restored he takes one of the Torchwood team 's enemies out in a murder – suicide . 
 Critics commented upon the character 's resemblance both to horror film killers such as Freddy Krueger and Hannibal Lecter , as well as to American Evangelists and to the biblical Jesus Christ . The series also follows Danes ' rise and fall in the public eye and the precariousness of fame . Though the wisdom of having a paedophile as a character in Torchwood was challenged , the show 's creative team decided to take a strong line on whether the character was likeable or not ; he was not to be . In killing the character off , the creative team did not wish to suggest that the character had been redeemed for his earlier crimes , and made sure that this was emphasised even in his final act of self @-@ sacrifice . Pullman has expressed interest in reprising the role in a future Torchwood series . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 The first scene of Miracle Day depicts Oswald Danes surviving execution by lethal injection due to death spontaneously ceasing . His lawyers successfully advance a force majeure argument ; as a result the Governor of Kentucky is reluctantly forced to release Danes on parole . Oswald accepts an offer of representation from PR guru Jilly Kitzinger ( Lauren Ambrose ) after his fame leads to him being assaulted in public , leading to him becoming a spokesman for <unk> , a drug company hoping to capitalise on the absence of death . During Torchwood 's investigations into <unk> , Jack Harkness ( John Barrowman ) confronts Danes , who admits the falsity of his expressed remorse . Tensions arise between Kitzinger and Danes when he is eclipsed in the media by Tea Party politician Ellis Hartley Monroe ( Mare Winningham ) and her " Dead is Dead " campaign . Danes launches an ad hoc publicity stunt ; a video of Danes holding and comforting a baby girl goes viral and results in Monroe 's media attention waning . At the " Miracle Rally " held by <unk> in Los Angeles Danes gives an impassioned speech , stating his belief that humanity had evolved into " everlasting angels " and revels in the audience chanting his name . 
 Danes ' brief media career comes to an end in " End of the Road " . While at a hotel in Dallas , Texas a prostitute named Claire ( Megan M. Duffy ) tells him that he is due to be classified as " Category Zero " . Jilly reveals that this is a ruling that would have convicted criminals like Danes incinerated , and that Oswald 's moment of fame is over . Following from this , Danes smuggles himself into Wales , where he arrives at the home of Torchwood agent Gwen Cooper ( Eve Myles ) . Having stolen Kitzinger 's laptop , Danes reveals that she left clues to the location of " the Blessing " in mistranslated news stories from China and Argentina . Fearful that Rhys ( Kai Owen ) , Gwen 's husband and father of their daughter , may murder Danes she and Jack take him to Shanghai . In " The Blood Line " Jack straps Oswald with explosives and uses him as insurance against his and Gwen 's lives as they face the Families , the perpetrators of the ' Miracle ' . When death is restored , Oswald detains the Mother ( Frances Fisher ) , the leader of the families , before detonating them both . With his last words he professes that he will again pursue his victim in hell . 
 = = Casting and characterisation = = 
 SFX magazine noted that when the character was first announced , some members of the public questioned the morality of featuring such a character in a science fiction action series . In August 2010 a reporter from entertainment website AfterElton also stated to the shows executive producers that some of their readers had been upset and concerned about details of the storyline . Pullman 's casting as Danes was announced on 15 December 2010 . Prior to his role as Danes , Pullman was best known to audiences for his portrayal of the President of the United States in Independence Day . When Pullman asked executive producer Julie Gardner why the production team sought to cast him in role , she replied that it was because he was perceived as " America 's sweetheart " , which he interpreted to mean they were looking to destabilise viewers . Torchwood 's creator , Russell T Davies , noted that upon expressing an interest in casting Pullman , he was told " you haven 't got a chance . " Though Pullman was aware of Torchwood , having had a friend who 'd " evangelized " the series , he had not watched the series before being cast . Upon reading the scripts , Pullman commented that he had been impressed at how well the series " knows itself " and the strength of each character 's individual voice . In an interview with Zap2it he remarked that he thought he was given the best role in the series . Pullman noted that he was prepared for the role having played other troubled characters in the past and re @-@ iterated that it was the writing that attracted him to the part adding " I don 't think I could do a child murderer just for a child murderer 's sake " . 
 io9 felt the character of Danes to be a cross between Freddy Krueger and Jesus . Commenting on the Christ comparison , Pullman felt that his character was sort of the " doppelganger of Jesus or something . " He stated of Danes : " It 's like he 's been out in the desert , and he comes back in , and there is a certain kind of way in which he still has pride . " SFX described Oswald 's journey as one from a Hannibal Lecter type character to a Billy Graham or messianic figure . Pullman observed that Oswald 's failure to die " becomes the pivot for a whole world that has changed " ; feeling that his character was an intelligent one who knows he can provide a message people want to hear . Discussing Oswald 's fall from grace , series writer Jane Espenson explains that " humanity doesn 't seize on heroes for the long – term " , and that Oswald 's descent from fame was a way to make his arc more realistic . Though Oswald dies helping the Torchwood team , Espenson remarked that " we didn 't want to outright redeem this horrible , horrible man " commenting that his death is intended as " redemption and comeuppance both . " The Independent 's Neela Debnath observed that whilst the character of Danes had " become likeable in an odd @-@ sort of way " his last scenes " reiterated just how despicable he was " and that it was the right time for him to depart the cast . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Charlie Jane Anders of io9 commented enthusiastically on Danes ' portrayal , stating that " perhaps the greatest miracle in Torchwood : Miracle Day is Bill Pullman 's performance . " Anders cited that the character 's journey " seems bizarre and unlikely , but Pullman makes it work . " Mikey O 'Connell from Zap2it likened Pullman 's performance to that of John Lithgow as The Trinity Killer in Dexter , both having the sense of " the familiar , comforting actor you 've watched for decades " being " hijacked by someone else . " In a review of the first episode , Dan Martin from The Guardian opined that Pullman " stole the show as manipulative psychopath Oswald Danes " predicting " his character might give us one of the most compelling narratives . " Reviewing the fifth episode of the series The Independent 's Neela Debnath said of Pullman that " thus far he has given an extraordinary turn as Danes , which at times has veered towards hammy territory but has never entered it . " However , Debnath felt that with a key sequence where Danes makes a public speech " the line was finally crossed " , believing the sequence " clichéd " and that it was " improbable that he could instantaneously win over an angry lynch mob in moments . " 
 The Daily Telegraph 's Gavin Fuller praised Pullman 's portrayal of Danes , singling it out as the strongest of the series next to lead female actor Eve Myles . Fuller also felt that giving such an unlikeable character a prominent focus and allowing him a shot at redemption in the final episode " was certainly a brave move from Davies . " In a post @-@ series review of what worked and what did not during Torchwood 's fourth series , Digital Spy 's Morgan Jeffrey stated that " Bill Pullman made the most of his tenure as Oswald Danes , being both extremely charismatic and utterly repellent throughout . " Jeffrey stated that " we never like Oswald , but Pullman 's layered performance ensures that we do often sympathise with him , before having the rug pulled swiftly out from under us as he commits yet another heinous crime . " For his performance as Danes , Pullman received a Saturn Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor In Television . 
 = Ununoctium = 
 Ununoctium ( symbol Uuo ) is the temporary name of a transactinide chemical element . It was first synthesized in 2002 by a joint team of Russian and American scientists at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research ( JINR ) in Dubna , Russia . With the atomic number 118 in the periodic table , the synthetic element is also known as element 118 , or eka @-@ radon . In December 2015 , it was recognized as one of four new elements by the Joint Working Party of international scientific bodies IUPAC and IUPAP . In June 2016 , the IUPAC suggested the element to be named oganesson / <unk> / ( element symbol : Og ) , a name expected to be formally accepted by the end of 2016 . The proposal is in line with the tradition of honoring a scientist and recognizes nuclear physicist Yuri Oganessian , who has played a leading role in the discovery of the heaviest elements in the periodic table . 
 Ununoctium has the highest atomic number and highest atomic mass of all known elements . The radioactive ununoctium atom is very unstable , and since 2005 , only three or possibly four atoms of the isotope 294Uuo have been detected . Although this allowed very little experimental characterization of its properties and possible compounds , theoretical calculations have resulted in many predictions , including some surprising ones . For example , although ununoctium is a member of group 18 – the first synthetic one to be so – it may possibly not be a noble gas , unlike all the other elements of that group . It was formerly thought to be a gas under normal conditions but is now predicted to be a solid due to relativistic effects . On the periodic table of the elements it is a p @-@ block element and the last one of the 7th period . 
 = = History = = 
 The Danish physicist Niels Bohr was the first to seriously consider the possibility of an element with atomic number as high as 118 , noting in 1922 that such an element would take its place in the periodic table below radon as the heaviest of the noble gases . Following this , Aristid von Grosse wrote an article in 1965 predicting the likely properties of element 118 . These were remarkably early predictions , given that it was not yet known how to produce elements artificially in 1922 , and that the existence of the island of stability had not yet been theorized in 1965 . It took eighty years from Bohr 's initial prediction before ununoctium was first successfully synthesised , although its chemical properties have not yet been investigated to see if it really does behave as the heavier congener of radon . 
 = = = Unsuccessful synthesis attempts = = = 
 In late 1998 , Polish physicist Robert <unk> published calculations on the fusion of atomic nuclei towards the synthesis of superheavy atoms , including ununoctium . His calculations suggested that it might be possible to make ununoctium by fusing lead with krypton under carefully controlled conditions . 
 In 1999 , researchers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory made use of these predictions and announced the discovery of livermorium and ununoctium , in a paper published in Physical Review Letters , and very soon after the results were reported in Science . The researchers reported to have performed the reaction 
 86 
 <unk> + 208 
 82Pb → 293 
 118Uuo + n . 
 The following year , they published a retraction after researchers at other laboratories were unable to duplicate the results and the Berkeley lab could not duplicate them either . In June 2002 , the director of the lab announced that the original claim of the discovery of these two elements had been based on data fabricated by principal author Victor Ninov . 
 = = = Discovery reports = = = 
 The first decay of atoms of ununoctium was observed in 2002 at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research ( JINR ) in Dubna , Russia , by a joint team of Russian and American scientists . Headed by Russian nuclear physicist Yuri Oganessian , the team included American scientists of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , California . On 9 October 2006 , the researchers announced that they had indirectly detected a total of three ( possibly four ) nuclei of ununoctium @-@ 294 ( one or two in 2002 and two more in 2005 ) produced via collisions of californium @-@ 249 atoms and calcium @-@ 48 ions . 
 249 
 98Cf + 48 
 20Ca → 294 
 118Uuo + 3 n . 
 In 2011 , IUPAC evaluated the 2006 results of the Dubna @-@ Livermore collaboration and concluded : " The three events reported for the Z = 118 isotope have very good internal redundancy but with no anchor to known nuclei do not satisfy the criteria for discovery " . 
 Because of the very small fusion reaction probability ( the fusion cross section is ~ 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 6 pb or ( 3 – 6 ) × 10 − 41 m2 ) the experiment took four months and involved a beam dose of 4 × 1019 calcium ions that had to be shot at the californium target to produce the first recorded event believed to be the synthesis of ununoctium . Nevertheless , researchers are highly confident that the results are not a false positive , since the chance that the detections were random events was estimated to be less than one part in 100000 . 
 In the experiments , the alpha @-@ decay of three atoms of ununoctium was observed . A fourth decay by direct spontaneous fission was also proposed . A half @-@ life of 0 @.@ 89 ms was calculated : 294Uuo decays into 290Lv by alpha decay . Since there were only three nuclei , the half @-@ life derived from observed lifetimes has a large uncertainty : 0 @.@ 89 + 1 @.@ 07 
 − 0 @.@ 31 ms . 
 294 
 118Uuo → 290 
 116Lv + 4 
 2He 
 The identification of the 294Uuo nuclei was verified by separately creating the putative daughter nucleus 290Lv directly by means of a bombardment of 245Cm with 48Ca ions , 
 245 
 96Cm + 48 
 20Ca → 290 
 116Lv + 3 n , 
 and checking that the 290Lv decay matched the decay chain of the 294Uuo nuclei . The daughter nucleus 290Lv is very unstable , decaying with a lifetime of 14 milliseconds into <unk> , which may experience either spontaneous fission or alpha decay into <unk> , which will undergo spontaneous fission . 
 In a quantum @-@ tunneling model , the alpha decay half @-@ life of 294Uuo was predicted to be 0 @.@ 66 + 0 @.@ 23 
 − 0 @.@ 18 ms with the experimental Q @-@ value published in 2004 . Calculation with theoretical Q @-@ values from the macroscopic @-@ microscopic model of <unk> – <unk> – <unk> – <unk> gives somewhat lower but comparable results . 
 = = = Confirmation = = = 
 In December 2015 , the Joint Working Party of international scientific bodies International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) and International Union of Pure and Applied Physics ( IUPAP ) recognized the element 's discovery and assigned the priority of the discovery to the Dubna @-@ Livermore collaboration . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 Using Mendeleev 's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements , ununoctium is sometimes known as eka @-@ radon ( until the 1960s as eka @-@ emanation , emanation being the old name for radon ) . In 1979 , IUPAC assigned the systematic placeholder name ununoctium to the undiscovered element , with the corresponding symbol of Uuo , and recommended it to be used until after confirmed discovery of the element . Although widely used in the chemical community on all levels , from chemistry classrooms to advanced textbooks , the recommendations are mostly ignored among scientists in the field , who call it " element 118 " , with the symbol of ( 118 ) or even simply 118 . 
 Before the retraction in 2002 , the researchers from Berkeley had intended to name the element <unk> ( Gh ) , after Albert Ghiorso ( a leading member of the research team ) . 
 The Russian discoverers reported their synthesis in 2006 . According to IUPAC recommendations , the discoverer ( s ) of a new element has the right to suggest a name . In 2007 , the head of the Russian institute stated the team were considering two names for the new element : <unk> , in honor of Georgy Flyorov , the founder of the research laboratory in Dubna ; and <unk> , in recognition of the Moscow Oblast where Dubna is located . He also stated that although the element was discovered as an American collaboration , who provided the californium target , the element should rightly be named in honor of Russia since the Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions at JINR was the only facility in the world which could achieve this result . These names were later proposed for element 114 ( flerovium ) and element 116 ( moscovium ) . However , the final name proposed for element 116 was instead livermorium . 
 Traditionally , the names of all noble gases end in " -on " , with the exception of helium , which was not known to be a noble gas when discovered . The IUPAC guidelines valid at the moment of the discovery approval however required all new elements be named with the ending " -ium " . While the provisional name ununoctium followed this convention , a new IUPAC recommendation published in 2016 recommends using the " -on " ending for new group 18 elements , no matter whether they turn out to be a noble gas or not . 
 In June 2016 IUPAC announced that it plans to give the element the name oganesson ( symbol : Og ) , in honour of the Russian nuclear physicist Yuri Oganessian . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Nuclear stability and isotopes = = = 
 The stability of nuclei decreases greatly with the increase in atomic number after plutonium , the heaviest primordial element , so that all isotopes with an atomic number above 101 decay radioactively with a half @-@ life under a day , with an exception of dubnium @-@ 268 . No elements with atomic numbers above 82 ( after lead ) have stable isotopes . Nevertheless , because of reasons not very well understood yet , there is a slightly increased nuclear stability around atomic numbers 110 – 114 , which leads to the appearance of what is known in nuclear physics as the " island of stability " . This concept , proposed by University of California professor Glenn Seaborg , hypothesizes why superheavy elements last longer than predicted . Ununoctium is radioactive and has a half @-@ life that appears to be less than a millisecond . Nonetheless , this is still longer than some predicted values , thus giving further support to the idea of this " island of stability " . 
 Calculations using a quantum @-@ tunneling model predict the existence of several neutron @-@ rich isotopes of ununoctium with alpha @-@ decay half @-@ lives close to 1 ms . 
 Theoretical calculations done on the synthetic pathways for , and the half @-@ life of , other isotopes have shown that some could be slightly more stable than the synthesized isotope 294Uuo , most likely 293Uuo , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Of these , <unk> might provide the best chances for obtaining longer @-@ lived nuclei , and thus might become the focus of future work with this element . Some isotopes with many more neutrons , such as some located around <unk> could also provide longer @-@ lived nuclei . 
 = = = Calculated atomic and physical properties = = = 
 Ununoctium is a member of group 18 , the zero @-@ valence elements . The members of this group are usually inert to most common chemical reactions ( for example , combustion ) because the outer valence shell is completely filled with eight electrons . This produces a stable , minimum energy configuration in which the outer electrons are tightly bound . It is thought that similarly , ununoctium has a closed outer valence shell in which its valence electrons are arranged in a <unk> configuration . 
 Consequently , some expect ununoctium to have similar physical and chemical properties to other members of its group , most closely resembling the noble gas above it in the periodic table , radon . Following the periodic trend , ununoctium would be expected to be slightly more reactive than radon . However , theoretical calculations have shown that it could be quite reactive , so that it probably cannot be considered a noble gas . In addition to being far more reactive than radon , ununoctium may be even more reactive than elements flerovium and copernicium . The reason for the apparent enhancement of the chemical activity of ununoctium relative to radon is an energetic destabilization and a radial expansion of the last occupied 7p @-@ subshell . More precisely , considerable spin – orbit interactions between the 7p electrons and the inert 7s2 electrons effectively lead to a second valence shell closing at flerovium , and a significant decrease in stabilization of the closed shell of element 118 . It has also been calculated that ununoctium , unlike other noble gases , binds an electron with release of energy — or in other words , it exhibits positive electron affinity , due to the relativistically stabilized 8s energy level . 
 Ununoctium is expected to have by far the broadest polarizability of all elements before it in the periodic table , almost double that of radon . By extrapolating from the other noble gases , it is expected that ununoctium has a boiling point between 320 and 380 K. This is very different from the previously estimated values of 263 K or 247 K. Even given the large uncertainties of the calculations , it seems highly unlikely that ununoctium would be a gas under standard conditions , and as the liquid range of the other gases is very narrow , between 2 and 9 kelvins , this element should be solid at standard conditions . If ununoctium forms a gas under standard conditions nevertheless , it would be one of the densest gaseous substances at standard conditions ( even if it is monatomic like the other noble gases ) . 
 Because of its tremendous polarizability , ununoctium is expected to have an anomalously low ionization energy ( similar to that of lead which is 70 % of that of radon and significantly smaller than that of flerovium ) and a standard state condensed phase . 
 = = = Predicted compounds = = = 
 No compounds of ununoctium have been synthesized yet , but calculations on theoretical compounds have been performed since 1964 . It is expected that if the ionization energy of the element is high enough , it will be difficult to oxidize and therefore , the most common oxidation state will be 0 ( as for other noble gases ) ; nevertheless , this appears not to be the case . 
 Calculations on the diatomic molecule Uuo 
 2 showed a bonding interaction roughly equivalent to that calculated for Hg 
 2 , and a dissociation energy of 6 kJ / mol , roughly 4 times of that of Rn 
 2 . But most strikingly , it was calculated to have a bond length shorter than in Rn 
 2 by 0 @.@ 16 Å , which would be indicative of a significant bonding interaction . On the other hand , the compound <unk> + exhibits a dissociation energy ( in other words proton affinity of Uuo ) that is smaller than that of <unk> + . 
 The bonding between ununoctium and hydrogen in <unk> is predicted to be very limp and can be regarded as a pure van der Waals interaction rather than a true chemical bond . On the other hand , with highly electronegative elements , ununoctium seems to form more stable compounds than for example copernicium or flerovium . The stable oxidation states + 2 and + 4 have been predicted to exist in the fluorides UuoF 
 2 and UuoF 
 4 . The + 6 state would be less stable due to the strong binding of the 7p1 / 2 subshell . This is a result of the same spin @-@ orbit interactions that make ununoctium unusually reactive . For example , it was shown that the reaction of ununoctium with F 
 2 to form the compound UuoF 
 2 would release an energy of 106 kcal / mol of which about 46 kcal / mol come from these interactions . For comparison , the spin @-@ orbit interaction for the similar molecule RnF 
 2 is about 10 kcal / mol out of a formation energy of 49 kcal / mol . The same interaction stabilizes the tetrahedral <unk> configuration for UuoF 
 4 , as distinct from the square planar <unk> one of XeF 
 4 , which RnF 
 4 is also expected to have . The Uuo – F bond will most probably be ionic rather than covalent , rendering the <unk> compounds non @-@ volatile . <unk> is predicted to be partially ionic due to ununoctium 's high electropositivity . Unlike the other noble gases ( except possibly xenon ) , ununoctium was predicted to be sufficiently electropositive to form a Uuo – Cl bond with chlorine . 
 = Way of the Five Pecks of Rice = 
 The Way of the Five Pecks of Rice ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> Dào ) or the Way of the Celestial Master , commonly abbreviated to simply The Celestial Masters , was a Chinese Taoist movement founded by the first Celestial Master Zhang Daoling in 142 CE . At its height , the movement controlled a theocratic state in the Hanzhong valley , north of Sichuan . In 215 CE , the state was incorporated into Cao Cao 's Kingdom of Wei , and the followers of the Celestial Master were dispersed all over China . 
 The Celestial Masters believed that qi pervaded everything , and in order to achieve immortality , the correct balance of qi had to be present within the body . Having a poor quantity of qi in the body , would result in illness , and eventually death . Meditation could be used to restore qi to the body , but sex was to be avoided , as it could result in the loss of qi . If there was the correct balance of qi within the body upon death , an adherent could ' feign death ' and be reborn . If not , an adherent would be transported to an earthly prison where he would face eternal torment . 
 The Hanzhong state was divided into 24 regions which were led by an official . Each district had a civil register which recorded people 's names and ranks . Three times a year , the registers were updated at the same time as an important feast . While a child 's rank rose automatically , adults had to raise their own rank through religious achievement or marriage . Higher ranked people had more divine generals at their command , which could be used to fight demons that caused bad luck or disease . The state had a system of law that encouraged confession and benevolence rather than strict punishment . Criminals were asked to confess their crimes and meditate , and were given public work to do as a sentence . Few texts written by the Hanzhong Celestial Masters survive , with the most important being the Xiang 'er commentary to the Dao De Jing . While the Hanzhong state lasted for only twenty @-@ five years , their beliefs influenced all subsequent Daoist movements . 
 = = History = = 
 In 142 CE Zhang Daoling announced that Laozi had appeared to him and commanded him to rid the world of decadence and establish a new state consisting only of the ‘ chosen people . ’ Zhang became the first Celestial Master , and began to spread his newly founded movement throughout the province of Sichuan . The movement was initially called the Way of the Five Pecks of Rice , because each person wishing to join was required to donate five pecks of rice . The movement spread rapidly , particularly under his son Zhang Heng ( <unk> ) and grandson Zhang Lu . The <unk> were able to convert many groups to their cause , such as the <unk> Man ( belonging to the Ba people ) , which strengthened their movement . In 184 , Zhang Xiu ( <unk> , not related to Zhang Lu ) rebelled against the Han Dynasty . In 191 , Zhang Lu and Zhang Xiu were sent to conquer the Hanzhong valley , just north of Sichuan , which was under Zhang Xiu 's control . During the subsequent battle , Zhang Xiu was killed , and Zhang Lu founded the theocratic state of <unk> , enjoying full independence . 
 In 215 , Cao Cao , the ruler of the Kingdom of Wei attacked the Hanzhong state , and forced Zhang Lu to flee to Eastern Sichuan , where he later surrendered . Zhang was given a title and land , as were several other family members and generals . His followers were forced to resettle in other parts of China , with one group being sent to the Chang 'an area , and another being sent to Luoyang . Zhang and his family relocated to Cao Cao 's administrative headquarters in Ye , located in today 's Henan province . He then used his own popularity as a religious leader to lend legitimacy to the Wei , proclaiming that the Wei court had inherited divine authority from the Daoist church , as well as from Confucian laws . Shortly after the surrender , Zhang Lu died and was succeeded by his son , Fu . After this point there are few historical sources until 255 CE , when a text indicates that the Celestial Master community was fragmenting as a result of the political turmoil within the Wei Kingdom 
 The collapse of the Kingdom of Wei in 260 CE , along with the fall of Northern China to the Huns in 317 , further scattered adherents to the Celestial Master . The Celestial Masters later reemerged in the 4th and 5th centuries as two distinct offshoots , the Northern and Southern Celestial Masters . 
 = = Texts = = 
 The only significant Celestial Master text that survives from the Hanzhong period is the Xiang 'er commentary to the Dao De Jing . This text gives insight into the Celestial Masters ’ physiological beliefs , meditation practices and rituals . In addition , the commentary reinterprets the Dao De Jing to have all of humanity as its intended audience , instead of only a sage . The Taiping Jing , a text attributed to the Yellow Turbans , was not a Celestial Master text , but reflects at least in part some Celestial Master thought and practice . A later text written in 255 CE , known as the Commands and Admonitions for the Families of the Great Dao was composed to a divided Celestial Master community after the dispersal of the Hanzhong population . While written in the persona of Zhang Lu , it is probable that this text was not written by him , as he had probably died by 255 CE . 
 = = Beliefs and practices = = 
 The Celestial Masters believed that there was an upcoming apocalypse that would nearly destroy humanity . Only 18 @,@ 000 adherents of the Celestial Master who had the right balance of qi would survive the disaster . These were the seed people that would repopulate the earth after the destruction . 
 = = = Qi = = = 
 The foundation of Celestial Master belief is that there is an energy source known as qi , that is born from the Dao and is the source of life all things . The human body contains spirits that need to be nourished by the proper balance of qi . There are three types of qi : yin qi , yang qi and blended qi , which is mixed yin / yang qi . The goal of a Daoist is to achieve transcendence to a higher plane . In order to do this , they must preserve and harmonize their internal spirits . Only through meditation that guides qi correctly throughout the body , can the spirits be harmonized correctly . While it is known that the Celestial Masters meditated in order to obtain qi , there is no surviving evidence that describes their meditation practices . 
 = = = Immortality = = = 
 One common goal of early Daoism was to extend life by achieving immortality . The Celestial Masters believed that in order to achieve immortality , one was not supposed to extend life in the current world , but rather ' feign death ' in this world , and be reborn on the other side . In order to feign death , an adept had to have perfectly harmonized internal spirits . When someone with refined internal spirits died in this world , their spirit would venture to the Palace of Grand Darkness where their form would be refined and then reborn in a perfected state on the other side . There are no surviving texts that describe what kind of place the ' other side ' was . Those that failed to harmonize their internal spirits prior to death would be reborn in the underground earth @-@ prisons , where they would be subject to eternal torment and toil . 
 = = = Illness = = = 
 In the Hanzhong community , everyone was regarded as ill in some way . This was because sin caused qi to leave the body , and qi was necessary for life . In order to cure any illness , repentance was a crucial factor in ensuring that the loss of qi could be <unk> . Repentance could be accomplished by spending time in a ' Chamber of Silence , ' and reflecting on one 's sins , or by beating one 's breasts and kowtowing to heaven . Illness could be cured in other ways as well , such as using medicinal herbs and by listening to ritual music . Eating very little was also of extreme importance , and an ideal diet would consist of no food at all , but only of <unk> things such as air , which the person could absorb through meditation . 
 = = = Sexuality = = = 
 Practicing correct sexual practices was one method of perfecting the body 's internal spirits . The Celestial Masters believed that semen is the embodiment of qi . If someone ejaculated too often , their life would be shortened . In fact , the Xiang 'er indicates that people should not even have sex for the purposes of reproduction . The Celestial Masters frowned upon the practice of <unk> ( also known as ' The Union of the <unk> ' ) of not ejaculating during sex in order to ' nourish the brain ' , and advocated non @-@ ejaculation simply as a way to avoid losing qi . In addition , the Celestial Masters thought that the method of stealing a woman 's qi to replenish the man 's own qi was completely wrong , and should not be practiced . Despite their opposition to ' <unk> ' and reproductive sex , there is the possibility that the Celestial Masters supported sex for purposes other than reproduction , and a Celestial Master text from around the 5th century describes an elaborate sexual <unk> Kalinowski ( 1985 ) for a full description of the ritual . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The region governed by the Celestial Masters was divided into 24 regions for both administrative and religious reasons . Each of these 24 regions were connected with one of the Five Phases , one of the 24 periods of the year and with one of the 28 constellations of the zodiac . Depending on their birth signs , each adherent belonged to one of these districts . Each of the 24 regions was administered by 24 officials , who had under their command 240 armies of spirits , composed of 2400 generals , 2400 officers and <unk> soldiers . This system of administration reflected the utopian system of governance described in the <unk> . 
 Administration and religion were closely linked in the system of the Celestial Masters . Adherents were grouped by families , and each was attached to a district . Families and districts , and the gods all held copies of civil registers . The registers were detailed records of the people , and recorded each person 's rank , identity and location . Any changes to those registered had to be accompanied by a monetary contribution known as a ' wage of faith . ' Requests to the gods followed a bureaucratic model , and were drawn up according to specific administrative codes . The effectiveness of these requests depended upon the accuracy of the registers kept by the gods . 
 New members of the sect were divided into groups led by instructors . <unk> were instructed by a catechism similar to that found in the Xiang 'er that was likely a type of proto @-@ meditation that later became widespread in movements such as the Shangqing School of Daoism . These instructors handled religious and administrative duties , receiving taxes , and set up road @-@ side inns for travelers . 
 The rank of each person was determined by how many divine generals they had at their disposal , and by the number of divine scriptures they had obtained . These divine generals were used to fight wandering demons that could bring misfortune or illness on someone . A person received their first general at the age of six years , and in subsequent ceremonies would be given more and generals and achieve a higher ranking until a full complement was achieved at the age of nineteen . Marriage would unite two sets of generals , thus giving a couple use of 150 divine generals . After marriage , further increases in ranking could only be achieved by religious achievement . 
 On certain dates of the year , such as the equinoxes , group ceremonies took place at which masters disseminated their teachings . During these ceremonies , communal feasts often took place , where food was eaten and offered to the gods . The feasts also took place when a birth or death occurred , or in order to bring happiness and prevent evil . The participants in such a feast were organized based on their religious standing , with merit and seniority being the determining factors . During the three important dates known as <unk> , the most important feasts were held . During these thrice @-@ annual feasts , a census would be taken recording births , deaths and peoples ' movements . At this time , adherents were also expected to donate the five pecks of rice that gives the movement its name . 
 = = Law = = 
 In the Hanzhong state , sin and criminal behavior were not differentiated . In order to eliminate sin , an adherent first had to acknowledge his crime , and then would have to go to a ' quiet room ' to meditate . There , he would have to write three confessions which would be offered to the Lord of Heaven , the Lord of Earth and the Lord of Water . For public crimes , an accused would be pardoned three times for his actions and then be sentenced . A sentence depended on the type of crime , but always involved community service . For a minor crime , the sentence was usually to repair a road . A repeat offender might be asked to donate building materials to improve local buildings . Other laws banned alcohol and prohibited the killing of animals during the spring and summer . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The belief and practices of the Hanzhong Celestial Masters had a profound legacy upon future Daoist belief . The movement marked a significant change from earlier , philosophical Daoist movements . No longer was Daoism a philosophical pastime for the literate and wealthy ; it was now promoted to all classes of society , including the illiterate and the non @-@ Chinese . In addition , the Celestial Masters were the first Daoist group to form an organized priesthood that helped spread their beliefs . Being the first organized religious Daoists , the first Celestial Masters are the ancestors of all subsequent Daoist movements such as the Shangqing and Lingbao movements , as well as the medieval Zhengyi Daoists , who claimed affinity to the first Celestial Masters . 
 = ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? = 
 ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? is the second studio album by the English rock band Oasis , released on 2 October 1995 by Creation Records . It was produced by Owen Morris and the group 's guitarist Noel Gallagher . The structure and arrangement style of the album were a significant departure from the group 's previous record Definitely Maybe . Gallagher 's compositions were more focused in balladry and placed more emphasis on huge choruses , with the string arrangements and more varied instrumentation on the record contrasting with the rawness of the group 's debut album . ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? was the group 's first album with drummer Alan White , who replaced Tony McCarroll . 
 The record propelled Oasis from being a crossover indie act to a worldwide rock phenomenon , and according to various critics , was a significant record in the timeline of British indie music . The band 's most commercially successful release , ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? sold a record @-@ breaking 347 @,@ 000 copies in its first week on sale , spent 10 weeks at number one on the UK Albums Chart , and reached number four in the US Billboard 200 . Singles from the album were successful in Britain , America and Australia : " Some Might Say " and " Don 't Look Back in Anger " reached number one in the UK ; " Champagne Supernova " and " Wonderwall " reached number one on the US Modern Rock Tracks chart ; and " Wonderwall " topped the Australian and New Zealand singles charts . 
 Although a commercial smash , the record received lukewarm reviews from mainstream music critics ; many contemporary reviewers deemed it inferior to Definitely Maybe , with the songwriting and production particular points of criticism . In the ensuing years , however , critical opinion towards the album reversed , and it is now generally considered a seminal record of both the Britpop era , and the 1990s in general . Over several months in 1995 and 1996 , the band performed an extensive world tour in support of the album . The most notable of the concerts were two Knebworth House performances in August to a combined crowd of 250 @,@ 000 people . At the 1996 Brit Awards , the album won Best British Album . 
 At the 2010 Brit Awards , ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? was named the greatest British album since 1980 . It has sold over 16 million copies worldwide , and appears on several lists of the greatest albums in rock music . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In May 1995 , in the wake of the critical and commercial success of their 1994 debut album , Definitely Maybe , Oasis began recording Morning Glory at Rockfield Studios in Wales , with Owen Morris and Noel Gallagher producing . By the time they were finished in June 1995 , Oasis were on the brink of becoming one of the most popular bands in the UK : the August 1995 Battle of Britpop incident in which Oasis and Blur had a chart battle over their singles " Roll with It " , and " Country House " , would propel them to mainstream awareness . 
 The band recorded the album quickly : early on , averaging almost one song every twenty @-@ four hours . However , tension arose between songwriter Noel Gallagher and his younger brother , lead singer Liam , when Noel wanted to sing lead vocals on either " Wonderwall " or " Don 't Look Back in Anger " . The younger Gallagher considered this tantamount to a temporary exile from his own group . The issue dissipated momentarily as Noel was pleased with Liam 's vocal take of " Wonderwall " . However , tension returned due to Liam 's strained attempts to sing the high notes on " Champagne Supernova " . When Noel subsequently took his turn to record his vocals for " Don 't Look Back in Anger " , Liam went to a local pub and came back accompanied by a crowd of people , including music journalist John Robb who was producing the band Cable in nearby studio Monnow Valley whilst recording was still underway . After an altercation with Cable that infuriated his brother , the siblings then began fighting viciously , the session was abandoned and recording was suspended . 
 When the Gallagher brothers were reconciled three weeks later , the group spent another two weeks working on the album , followed by post @-@ production work in London . Despite the friction involved between the Gallagher brothers , Owen Morris reflected in 2010 that : " The sessions were the best , easiest , least fraught , most happily creative time I ’ ve ever had in a recording studio . I believe people can feel and hear when music is dishonest and motivated by the wrong reasons . Morning Glory , for all its imperfection and flaws , is dripping with love and happiness . " Paul Weller joined them in the studio and provided lead guitar and backing vocals for " Champagne Supernova " , and harmonica for the two untitled tracks known as " The Swamp Song " . Noel wrote the last song for the album , " Cast No Shadow " , on the train as he returned to the studio . Morris claimed the album was recorded in 15 days ; when it was finished he said it would " wipe the field with any competition ... It 's astonishing . It 's the Bollocks for this decade . " 
 The <unk> mastering technique utilised during the recording of the album has led to some journalists claiming that it was responsible for initiating the loudness war , as its heavy use of compression , first widely used by Morris on Definitely Maybe , was leaps and bounds beyond what any other album up until then had attempted . Music journalist Nick Southall , who has written extensively on the loudness war , commented , " If there 's a jump @-@ the @-@ shark moment as far as CD mastering goes then it 's probably Oasis . " In Britpop and the English Music Tradition Andy Bennet and John Stratton noted that as a result of this technique " the songs were especially loud . [ Liam ] Gallagher 's voice is foregrounded to the point that it appears to grow out of the mixes of the songs , exposing itself to execute a pseudo @-@ live quality . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 John Harris commented in his music history Britpop ! : Cool Britannia and the Spectacular Demise of English Rock that much of the music on ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? seemed to be " little more inspired than a string of musical hand @-@ me @-@ downs " . Among the musical cues Harris noted on the album were Gary Glitter 's " Hello , Hello I 'm Back Again " ( " Hello " , Glitter was an influence on Britpop ) , the theme to the 1970s children 's programme You and Me and The Beatles ' " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " ( " She 's Electric " ) , and the influence of R.E.M 's " The One I Love " on " Morning Glory " . One song , " Step Out " , bore such a close resemblance to the song " Uptight ( Everything 's Alright ) " by Stevie Wonder that it was removed from the album shortly before release due to the threat of legal action . In Britpop ... , Bennet and Stratton analysed Liam Gallagher 's vocal style in significant detail , stressing its importance to the songs of the album ; " [ Liam 's ] Mancunian accent blends into a register and timbre that works the gestural contours of the melody and lyrics . " Bennet and Stratton went on to conclude that Liam 's ' over @-@ personalized ' style on songs such as " Wonderwall " resulted in " a beautiful sense of sentimentality that <unk> the despondency of a generation . This occurs through the narrative structure of the song , vocal production , and the conventions of the singer 's cultural context . " 
 Noel Gallagher summed up his own perspective on the album 's aesthetic in an interview with Rolling Stone in 1995 ; " Whilst [ Definitely Maybe ] is about dreaming of being a pop star in a band , What 's the Story is about actually being a pop star in a band . " The album has a notable anthemic theme to its songs , differing from the rawness and edged rock of Definitely Maybe . The use of string arrangements and more varied instrumentation in songs such as " Don 't Look Back in Anger " and " Champagne Supernova " was a significant departure from the band 's debut . This style had first been implemented by the band on their fifth single , " Whatever " , released in December 1994 . It was produced in conjunction with the London Symphony Orchestra , resulting in a much more pop @-@ oriented and mellower sound ; this would be the template that would come to define many of the songs on What 's the Story . In the BBC documentary Seven Ages of Rock , former NME chief editor Steve Sutherland noted that " with Morning Glory , [ Noel ] began to take seriously the notion of being the voice of a generation " . 
 = = Cover = = 
 The cover is a picture of two men passing each other on Berwick Street in London 's Soho . The two men are London DJ Sean Rowley and album sleeve designer Brian Cannon ( back to the camera ) . The album 's producer Owen Morris can be seen in the background , on the left footpath , holding the album 's master tape in front of his face . The location was chosen because the street was a popular location for record shops at the time . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Whilst " Some Might Say " , a number one hit , had been released in April , the single chosen to directly precede the album 's release was " Roll with It " , planned for release on 14 August , six weeks before the album was due to hit the shelves . This was an unorthodox method for the time , contrasting the standard industry procedure of releasing the lead single three weeks before its parent album . Blur 's management had become worried that this would hinder the chances of the group 's forthcoming " Country House " single reaching number one the following week . As a reaction , Food Records pushed the release of " Country House " back a week and thus started what became known as ' The Battle of Britpop ' . 
 The event triggered an unprecedented amount of exposure for both bands in national newspapers and on television news bulletins , supposedly symbolising the battle between the middle class of the south and the working class of the north . In the midst of the battle a Guardian newspaper headline proclaimed " Working Class Heroes Lead Art School <unk> " . In the event " Country House " outsold " Roll with It " by 54 @,@ 000 , and topped the singles chart for a fortnight . Overall singles sales that week were up by 41 percent . In 2005 , John Harris reflected on the importance of the event in popularising Britpop ; " ( as ) Blur 's " Country House " raced Oasis ' " Roll with It " to the top of the charts , just about every voice in the media felt compelled to express an opinion on the freshly inaugurated age of Britpop . " 
 During a promotional interview in September , the month before the album was released , Noel spoke about the rivalry with Damon Albarn and Alex James from Blur , and was quoted in the 17 September edition of The Observer saying he hoped " the pair of them would catch AIDS and die because I fucking hate them two . " The quote caused a storm of controversy , with Noel having to write a letter of apology ; he later confessed that " my whole world came crashing down in on me then " . However , in an interview with The Guardian in 2005 , Blur 's guitarist Graham Coxon explained that he bore no malice towards Oasis . " At least they were outright about it . They weren 't pretending to like us and then slagging us off , which is what we 'd been used to . In that way , I quite appreciated them . " 
 = = Release = = 
 What 's the Story was released on 2 October 1995 . The album sold quickly ; the Daily Mirror reported the day after release that central London HMV stores were selling copies of the album at a rate of two per minute . At the end of the first week of sales , the album had sold a record @-@ breaking 347 @,@ 000 copies , making it ( at the time ) the second @-@ fastest @-@ selling album in British history , behind Michael Jackson 's Bad . After initially entering the UK charts at number one , it hovered around the top three for the rest of the year before initiating a six @-@ week stay at the top in mid January , followed by a further three weeks at number one in March . In total , the album didn 't leave the top three for an astonishing seven months . 
 After the fourth single from the album , " Wonderwall " , hit the top ten in several countries , including stays at number one in Australia , New Zealand and Spain , and a peak at number eight in the US , the album began to enjoy prolonged international success . Eventually the album had a five @-@ week run at the top of the Australian albums chart and an eight @-@ week run at the top of the New Zealand albums chart before topping charts in Canada , Ireland , Sweden and Switzerland . The album was also making significant waves in the US market as well , thanks in part to the success of the " Wonderwall " and " Champagne Supernova " singles on American modern rock radio . Both songs reached number one on the Modern Rock Chart and stayed there for ten and five weeks respectively . By early 1996 , What 's the Story was selling 200 @,@ 000 copies a week , eventually peaking at number four and being certified four times platinum by the end of the year for shipments of over four million units . 
 = = Tour = = 
 The band embarked on what would become a 103 show world tour in support of the album over a period of several months in 1995 and 1996 . The tour started on 22 June 1995 with a pre @-@ Glastonbury festival warm up gig at the 1 @,@ 400 capacity Bath Pavilion , which featured the debut of new drummer Alan White and several new songs off the album , and ended on 4 December 1996 at the 11 @,@ 800 capacity Mayo Civic Centre in Rochester , Minnesota , USA , and included concerts at Earls Court in November 1995 and Cardiff International Arena in March 1996 . The tour had many disruptions and cancellations due to Noel twice walking out of the group , and Liam pulling out of a US leg . 
 In September 1995 , bass player Paul McGuigan walked out on the group after a flurry of verbal abuse from Liam whilst doing interviews in Paris . ' Guigsy ' cited nervous exhaustion as the reason for his departure . Scott Mcleod of The Ya @-@ Yas was brought in as his replacement ; though , despite playing a string of gigs with the band and appearing in the video for the " Wonderwall " single , Mcleod was unable to adapt to the frenetic celebrity lifestyle , duly returning to Manchester halfway through an American promotional tour for the album . The band played a few dates , including an appearance on Late Show with David Letterman , as a four piece , before McGuigan was convinced to return for the group 's Earls Court shows in early November . When the band broke up for a brief time in late 1996 , several US tour dates and the entire Australia and New Zealand leg had to be cancelled . 
 As the band began to reach the peak of their popularity , several large open @-@ air concerts were organized in the UK during 1996 , including two gigs at Manchester City football stadium Maine Road , two nights at Loch Lomond in Scotland , and two nights at Knebworth House in front of a record 125 @,@ 000 people each night ; an event that would come to be acknowledged as the height of the Britpop phenomenon , with one journalist commenting ; " ( Knebworth ) could be seen as the last great Britpop performance ; nothing after would match its scale . " At the time , the concerts were the biggest gigs ever held for a single band on UK soil , and to date remain the largest demand ever for a British concert ; with reportedly over 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 applications for tickets . The Earl 's Court and Maine Road gigs were filmed and later released as the Oasis VHS / DVD ... There and Then . 
 = = Reception = = 
 What 's the Story was released to lukewarm reviews from the mainstream music press . Many contemporary reviewers expressed disappointment at the album 's inferiority to Definitely Maybe , taking aim at the ' banal lyrics ' and the unoriginal nature of the compositions . David Cavanagh of Q magazine said of the lyrics " They scan ; they fill a hole ; end of story . They [ say ] nothing much about anything . " Andy Gill of The Independent commented that " She 's Electric " is <unk> of a tiresomely generic kind [ whilst ] " Roll With It " is drab and chummy . " Perhaps the most damning review came from David Stubbs of the now @-@ defunct Melody Maker . Despite stating that " Some Might Say " was " the best single of the year " , Stubbs went on to be critical of the album as a whole ; " What 's the Story [ sounds ] laboured and lazy . On this evidence , Oasis are a limited band ... they sound knackered . " 
 In a positive review , Rolling Stone 's Jon Weiderhorn wrote that " What 's the Story is more than a natural progression , it 's a bold leap forward that displays significant musical and personal growth . " Weiderhorn went on to note that the ' stormy ' relationship between Liam and Noel proved to be one of the album 's strengths ; " tension and instability have been inherent traits of great rock teams ... for Oasis , the addition of shared genes gives their songs extra impact and dimension . " NME said that the album shows Oasis pursuing " an altogether different direction ; away from the conscience @-@ free overloaded hedonism towards an understanding of its consequences " . The album finished 10th in the voting for The Village Voice 's annual Pazz & Jop critics poll . 
 In his book Britpop ! , John Harris concluded that the initial negative reviews of the time missed the album 's universal strengths . " Those who fussed about the music 's more artful aspects were missing the point . The fact that [ Noel 's ] songs contained so many musical echoes seemed to couch the album in an air of homely reassurance . " Harris believed that the " ordinary " nature of some of the album 's songs " turned out to be part of its deeply populist appeal " . Rob Sheffield , writing in The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , called the album " a triumph , full of bluster and bravado but also moments of surprising tenderness " . Robert Christgau was less enthusiastic in his retrospective review and gave it a two @-@ star honorable mention , indicating a " likable effort that consumers attuned to its overriding aesthetic or individual vision may well enjoy . " He cited " She 's Electric " and " Roll with It " as highlights and quipped " give them credit for wanting it all — and ( yet another Beatles connection ! ) playing guitars " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As of today the tide of critical opinion has generally turned , and ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? is considered to be a seminal record of the Britpop era and as one of the best albums of the nineties , and it appears in several charts as one of the greatest albums of all time . In 2010 , Rolling Stone commented that " the album is a triumph , full of bluster , bravado and surprising tenderness . Morning Glory capped a true golden age for Britpop . " The magazine ranked the album at 378 on its 2012 list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . The album 's enduring popularity within the UK was reflected when it won the BRITs Album of 30 years at the 2010 BRIT Awards . The award was voted by the public to decide the greatest ' Best Album ' winner in the history of the BRIT Awards . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 What 's the Story went on to become the second @-@ best @-@ selling album of 1995 and 1996 in the UK , as well being the best @-@ selling album of the decade . Its fourteen platinum certifications from the British Phonographic Industry were the highest ever awarded to a single record until Adele 's 21 , released in 2011 . The success of the album resulted in Oasis becoming one of the biggest bands in the United Kingdom , with substantial and considerable press coverage in the mainstream music press and frequent comparisons to the Beatles in the media . Liam and Noel Gallagher both featured prominently in gossip columns and daily tabloids throughout 1996 – 97 , their celebrity wives in Patsy Kensit and Meg Matthews only heightening their popularity with British paparazzi . 
 What 's the Story propelled Oasis from being a crossover indie act to a worldwide rock phenomenon after the momentum gained by the critically acclaimed Definitely Maybe . It has been pinpointed by music critics as a significant record in the timeline of British indie music , demonstrating just how far into the mainstream independent music had ventured . In 2005 , John Harris noted the significance of the album and " Wonderwall " in particular to Britpop 's legacy . " When ( Oasis ) released Wonderwall , the rules of British music were decisively changed . From hereon in , the lighter @-@ than @-@ air ballad became obligatory , and the leather @-@ trousers era of rock 'n'roll was over . " The success of the album in Britain resulted in Oasis becoming a cultural ubiquity for a brief period , featuring in tabloid newspapers on an almost daily basis and breaking sales records for live concerts . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Noel Gallagher , except where noted . 
 = = = Vinyl version = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Noel Gallagher , except where noted . 
 = = = Singles box set = = = 
 The ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? box set was released on 4 November 1996 , featuring four discs of singles , including B @-@ sides , and one disc of interviews . The album charted at number 24 on the UK Albums Chart . 
 All songs written by Noel Gallagher , except " Cum On Feel the Noize " by Noddy Holder and Jim Lea ; " Step Out " co @-@ written by Stevie Wonder , Henry Cosby and Sylvia Moy . 
 = = = 2014 reissue = = = 
 As part of a promotional campaign entitled " Chasing the Sun " , the album was re @-@ released on 29 September 2014 . The 3 @-@ disc deluxe edition includes remastered versions of the album and its associated b @-@ sides from the four UK singles . Bonus content includes 5 demo tracks , and live choices taken from the band 's iconic gigs at Earls Court , Knebworth Park and Maine Road . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Oasis 
 Liam Gallagher – lead vocals , tambourine 
 Noel Gallagher – lead and acoustic guitar , vocals ( lead on " Don 't Look Back in Anger " and " Bonehead 's Bank Holiday " ) , bass guitar , piano , mellotron , e @-@ bow , production 
 Paul " Bonehead " Arthurs – rhythm and acoustic guitar , piano , mellotron , drunk vocals on " Bonehead 's Bank Holiday " 
 Paul McGuigan – bass guitar 
 Alan White – drums , percussion ( except on " Some Might Say " ) 
 Tony McCarroll – drums on " Some Might Say " 
 Additional musician 
 Paul Weller – lead guitar and backing vocals on " Champagne Supernova " and harmonica on " Untitled " ( excerpt 1 and 2 ) . 
 Additional personnel 
 Owen Morris – production 
 Neil <unk> – multichannel mixing ( SACD version ) 
 David Swope – assistant mixing ( SACD version ) 
 Barry Grint – original audio mastering at Abbey Road Studios ( now at Alchemy Soho ) 
 Vlado Meller – mastering ( SACD version ) 
 Michael Spencer Jones – photography 
 Brian Cannon – artwork , design 
 Mathew Sankey – assistant design 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = I Need to Know ( Marc Anthony song ) = 
 " I Need to Know " is a song recorded by American recording artist Marc Anthony for his eponymous fourth studio album . It was released as the lead single from the album on August 15 , 1999 . Written and produced by Anthony and Cory Rooney , " I Need to Know " is a song about a man who longs to know how a woman feels about him . The song blends the musical styles of several genres , including R & B and Latin music ; the instruments used include violin , piano , timbales and congas . Anthony recorded a Spanish @-@ language version of the song , translated by Angie <unk> and Robert Blades , titled " Dímelo " . 
 Upon its release , " I Need to Know " received mostly positive reviews from music critics and was praised for its production and choice of musical styles . It was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance in 2000 . The Spanish @-@ language version of the song won the Latin Grammy Award for Song of the Year in the same year . Both versions of the song won an American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers award in the pop category . Commercially , the song charted in the top five in Canada and the United States . It was certified gold in Australia and the U.S. " Dímelo " peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the U.S. The music video for the song , directed by Paula Walker , was filmed in Los Angeles . 
 In 2007 , American Idol runner @-@ up contestant Blake Lewis performed a cover of " I Need to Know " as part of the Latin round during the show 's sixth season . His performance was praised by the judges ; Simon Cowell called it the best presentation of the night . However , Lewis 's performance received a mixed response from critics ; some praised the choice of song while some criticized Lewis 's vocal delivery . Lewis recorded the song for his eponymous EP , which peaked at number 16 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles . 
 = = Background = = 
 News that Marc Anthony was recording an English @-@ language album began in 1996 when RMM executive Ralph Mercado mentioned the possibility following a joint @-@ venture between RMM ( Anthony 's former record label ) and MCA Records . Anthony said that he would not record in English until he felt he was ready to do so . After the release of his third studio album Contra la Corriente in 1997 , disputes over business practices arose between him and Mercado . Anthony suspected that he was not receiving full payment from his record label for his recordings . Mercado would not allow Anthony to leave the record label because his contract committed Anthony to record four more albums for RMM . 
 Columbia Records executive Tommy Mottola had approached Anthony to sign a contract with the company to record an album in English during the peak period of Latin artists crossing over the Anglophone market . Nonetheless , his contract with RMM denied Anthony the right to perform in Spanish for Colombia Records . This resulted in a lawsuit against Mercado because Anthony did not want to work under him anymore . As part of the settlement , RMM Records retained the rights to his earlier albums and to release a greatest hits collection from them while Anthony no longer had any obligations to RMM . 
 After being signed to Columbia Records , Mottola hired Cory Rooney , Rodney Jenkins , and Walter Afanasieff to produce Anthony 's next album . Anthony co @-@ wrote most of tracks on it with them . He described it as his most personal album to date and rebuffed the idea of being another Latin artist to cross over to the Anglophone market because he had already recorded an English @-@ language album titled When the Night is Over ( 1991 ) . " I Need to Know " was released on August 15 , 1999 , as the album 's lead single . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " I Need to Know " was written and produced by Anthony and Rooney . The song is about a man who longs for a woman 's attention and wants know how she feels about him . The song opens with a synthesized violin and piano riff , which is immediately followed by a mid @-@ tempo beat . It fuses the sound of contemporary R & B and incorporates Latin percussion instruments the timbales , congas , and the trumpet . " I Need to Know " was translated into Spanish by Angie <unk> and Robert Blades ; Anthony recorded it and titled it " Dímelo " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In his review of the album Marc Anthony , Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic called " I Need to Know " a " catchy , mid @-@ tempo single " and said that the music was " gently danceable " . Chuck Taylor of Billboard magazine praised the track as " [ a ] <unk> smashing " , commended the production and musical style of the record and said that Anthony " remains true to his salsa roots with a sexy , swaying cha @-@ cha number " . Barry Walters from Entertainment Weekly gave the song a B + rating , and said the music " flaunts — rather than disguises — its mambo moves " and called it " radical pop waiting to happen . " While reviewing songs that were nominated for Record of the Year at the 1st Annual Latin Grammy Awards , an editor for the Los Angeles Times said the track " is the aural scrapbook of an American artist with Latino roots who found the ideal middle ground to satisfy both Anglo and Latino fans " . Parry Gettelman of the Orlando Sentinel was more critical of the song , describing it as " hooky but disposable " , and he criticized the chorus as " so over @-@ produced " . Although Gettelman was more favorable towards " Dímelo " , he said the drums in the production are " still annoying as all get @-@ out " . 
 In 2000 , " I Need to Know " was nominated Best Male Pop Vocal Performance at the 42nd Annual Grammy Awards , but lost to English musician Sting 's song " Brand New Day " . In the same year , " Dímelo " received two nominations at the inaugural Latin Grammy Awards for Record of the Year and Best Male Pop Vocal Performance and won the award for Song of the Year . At the 12th Lo Nuestro Awards in 2000 , " Dímelo " was nominated in the category for Pop Song of the Year , but lost to " Livin ' la Vida Loca " by Ricky Martin . Anthony and Rooney received an American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) Pop Award for the commercial success of the song in 2001 and 2002 . " Dímelo " was also awarded in the Pop field at the 2001 ASCAP Latin Awards . 
 " I Need To Know " was included on the compilation albums NOW : That 's What I Call Music Vol . 4 and Grammy Nominees 2000 . Likewise , " Dímelo " was included on the compilation album 2000 Latin Grammy Nominees and featured on Anthony 's greatest hits album Sigo Siendo Yo : Grandes Exitos ( 2006 ) . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , the song debuted at number 77 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart on the week of September 11 , 1999 . In its fourth week on the chart , it rose to number 10 . It peaked at number three on the week of November 27 , 1999 , and remained in that position for two weeks . It also peaked at number 21 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary , number seven on the Adult Pop Songs , number 12 on the Hot Dance Club Songs , and number five on the Pop Songs charts . " I Need to Know " ranked at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100 year @-@ end charts in 2000 . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 " Dímelo " became a success on the Latin record charts in the United States , where it peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart — making it Anthony 's third number one song on the chart . " Dímelo " also reached number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs and Tropical Songs charts . It was the eighth best @-@ performing Latin single of 2000 in the United States . 
 In Canada , " I Need to Know " peaked at number five on the RPM magazine chart and at number 11 on the Adult Contemporary chart . In Europe , the song performed moderately well and peaked at number eight in Finland and at number 11 in Norway . In Austria and Switzerland it peaked at number 16 . In Oceania , it peaked at number 20 in Australia and in New Zealand . It was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Marc Anthony first performed " I Need to Know " live on Good Morning America on July 23 , 1999 . He also performed the song — together with " That 's Okay " — on Saturday Night Live . He also sang it at the 42nd Annual Grammy Awards show ; Tom Moon , editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer , called his performance a " sedate reading " . In 2009 , Anthony performed " I need to Know " during the " Fiesta Latina " event at the South Lawn in Washington , D.C. Chris Richards of The Washington Post said that the audience , which was " flat @-@ footed " during Anthony 's previous performances , " was now on its feet " . Anthony performed both " I Need to Know " and " Dímelo " on the promotion tour for the album , with the latter song serving as an encore . He performed the song at Madison Square Garden as an encore ; this performance was included on the video set The Concert from Madison Square Garden . The song was included on set lists for his Marc Anthony 2002 Tour , Nada Personal Tour , El Cantante Tour , <unk> World Tour , and the Vivir Mi Vida World Tour . " Dímelo " served as the main theme for the Colombian telenovela La Baby Sister . 
 The accompanying music video for " I Need to Know " was directed by Paula Walker and was filmed in Los Angeles , California . In the video , Anthony is seen performing the song along with five female dancers in front of an audience at a crowded club . Scenes of him performing the song next to a window and under a staircase to his love interest are interspersed throughout the video . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Marc Anthony liner notes . 
 = = Blake Lewis version = = 
 On the sixth season of American Idol , Blake Lewis performed a cover of " I Need to Know " on April 10 , 2007 , as part of the program 's Latin @-@ themed round . Anthony 's then @-@ wife Jennifer Lopez was the guest mentor for the contestants . Lewis 's cover of the song was well received by the judges — Paula Abdul , Simon Cowell , and Randy Jackson . However , it received mixed reactions from critics . Joey Guerra of Today called Lewis 's choice wise and said Blake " seems like an actual artist " . Craig Berman from Houston Chronicle wrote a positive review ; he said that the risks Lewis took with his vocals " paid off with the best effort of the night " . Michael Slezak of Entertainment Weekly questioned Cowell 's comment that Lewis 's was the best performance of the night . Slezak wrote that Anthony 's cover sounded almost exactly the same as Anthony 's original recording . Ann Powers from the Los Angeles Times said that Lewis " <unk> and wiggled creepily " in contrast to Anthony 's confident performances . Jim Cantiello of MTV wrote that Lewis " finishes each line with an affected orgasmic sigh " and that his performance was " icky " . 
 The studio version of the song was later included on Lewis 's eponymous debut EP as part of the American Idol compilation series . His version peaked at number 19 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . 
 = Traffic ( 2000 film ) = 
 Traffic is a 2000 American crime drama film directed by Steven Soderbergh and written by Stephen Gaghan . It explores the illegal drug trade from a number of perspectives : a user , an enforcer , a politician and a trafficker . Their stories are edited together throughout the film , although some of the characters do not meet each other . The film is an adaptation of the British Channel 4 television series Traffik . 
 20th Century Fox , the original financiers of the film , demanded Harrison Ford play a leading role and that significant changes to the screenplay be made . Soderbergh refused and proposed the script to other major Hollywood studios , but it was rejected because of the three @-@ hour running time and the subject matter — Traffic is more of a political film than most Hollywood productions . USA Films , however , liked the project from the start and offered the film @-@ makers more money than Fox . Soderbergh operated the camera himself and adopted a distinctive cinematography tint for each story so that audiences could tell them apart . 
 Traffic was critically acclaimed and earned numerous awards , including four Oscars : Best Director for Steven Soderbergh , Best Supporting Actor for Benicio del Toro , Best Adapted Screenplay for Stephen Gaghan and Best Film Editing for Stephen Mirrione . It was also a commercial success with a worldwide box @-@ office revenue total of $ 207 @.@ 5 million , well above its estimated $ 46 million budget . 
 In 2004 , USA Network ran a miniseries — also called Traffic — based on the American film and the earlier British television series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Mexico storyline = = = 
 In Mexico , police officer Javier Rodriguez ( del Toro ) and his partner Manolo Sanchez ( Vargas ) stop a drug transport and arrest the couriers . Their arrest is interrupted by General Salazar ( Milian ) , a high @-@ ranking Mexican official who decides to hire Javier . Salazar instructs him to apprehend Francisco Flores ( Collins ) , a hitman for the Tijuana Cartel , headed by the Obregón brothers . 
 Back in Tijuana , Flores , under torture , gives Salazar the names of important members of the Obregón cartel , who are arrested . Javier and Salazar 's efforts begin to cripple the Obregón brothers ' cocaine outfit , but Javier soon discovers Salazar is a pawn for the Juárez Cartel , the rival of the Obregón brothers . That entire portion of the Mexican anti @-@ drug campaign is a fraud , as Salazar is wiping out one cartel because he has aligned with another for profit . 
 Javier 's partner Sanchez attempts to sell the information of Salazar 's true affiliation to the DEA but is killed for his betrayal . Javier , who can no longer stomach working for Salazar , decides to make a deal with the DEA . In exchange for his testimony , Javier requests electricity in his neighborhood so the kids can play baseball at night rather than be tempted by street gangs and crime . Salazar 's secrets are revealed to the public and he is arrested and is seen suffering probable torture in prison . 
 Javier explains to the media about the widespread corruption in the police force and army . In Mexico , Javier watches as children play baseball at night in their new stadium . 
 = = = Wakefield storyline = = = 
 Meanwhile , Robert Wakefield ( Douglas ) , a conservative Ohio judge , is appointed to head the President 's Office of National Drug Control Policy , taking on the title drug czar . Robert is warned by his predecessor ( Brolin ) and several influential politicians that the War on Drugs is unwinnable . Robert 's daughter , Caroline ( Christensen ) , an honors student , has been using cocaine , methamphetamine and heroin which quickly develops into a drug addiction after her boyfriend Seth ( Grace ) introduces her to free @-@ base . Caroline , Seth and Vanessa are all arrested when a fellow student overdoses on drugs and they try to dump him anonymously at a hospital . As Robert and his wife Barbara ( Irving ) struggle to deal with the problem , he discovers that she has known about their daughter 's involvement with drugs for over six months . 
 Robert realizes his daughter Caroline is a drug addict and is caught between his demanding new position and difficult family life . On a visit to Mexico , he is encouraged by the successful efforts of Salazar in hurting the Obregón brothers . When he returns to Ohio , Robert learns his efforts to see Caroline rehabilitated have failed . She ran away to the city of Cincinnati , where no one knows her location . She steals from her parents to procure money for drugs . 
 Robert drags Seth along as he begins to search Cincinnati for his daughter . After a drug dealer who is prostituting Caroline refuses to reveal her whereabouts , Robert breaks into a seedy hotel room and finds a semi @-@ conscious Caroline in the company of an older man . He breaks down in tears as Seth quietly leaves . Robert returns to Washington , D.C. , to give his prepared speech on a " 10 @-@ point plan " to win the war on drugs . In the middle of the speech , he falters as he realizes how futile this all is , then tells the press that the War on Drugs implies a war even on some people 's own family members , which he cannot endorse . He then walks out of the press conference and takes a taxi to the airport . Robert and Barbara go to Narcotics Anonymous meetings with their daughter to support her and others . 
 = = = Ayala / DEA storyline = = = 
 A third story is set in San Diego , where an undercover DEA investigation led by Montel Gordon ( Cheadle ) and Ray Castro ( Guzmán ) leads to the arrest of Eduardo Ruiz ( Ferrer ) , a high @-@ stakes dealer posing as a fisherman . Ruiz decides to take the dangerous road to immunity by giving up his boss : drug lord Carl Ayala ( Bauer ) , the biggest distributor for the Obregón brothers in the United States . Ayala is indicted by a tough prosecutor , hand @-@ selected by Robert to send a message to the Mexican drug organizations . 
 As the trial against Carl Ayala begins , his pregnant wife Helena ( Zeta @-@ Jones ) learns of her husband 's true profession from his associate , Arnie Metzger ( Quaid ) . Facing the prospect of life imprisonment for her husband and death threats against her only child , Helena decides to hire Flores to assassinate Eduardo Ruiz ; she knows killing Ruiz will effectively end the trial nolle prosequi . Flores plants a car bomb on a DEA car in an assassination attempt against Ruiz . Shortly after planting the bomb , Flores is assassinated by a sniper in retaliation for his co @-@ operation with General Salazar ; the car bomb kills Castro , but Gordon and Ruiz survive . 
 Helena , knowing Ruiz is soon scheduled to testify , makes a deal with Juan Obregón ( Bratt ) , lord of the drug cartel , who forgives the debt of the Ayala family and has Ruiz poisoned . Ayala is released , much to the dissatisfaction of Gordon , who is still angry over the death of his partner . During a phone conversation between Ayala and Metzger , Carl has deduced that the person who originally informed on Ruiz was Metzger himself . Evidently in a bid for power with another drug cartel in Mexico , Metzger took $ 3 Million to inform on Ruiz to the FBI , and facilitate the downfall of the Ayala organization . Ayala said that Metzger was planning on taking over Ayala 's empire completely . As Ayala hangs up the phone , Metzger looks up to see two hit men entering his office . Soon after the release , Gordon bursts into the Ayala home during a celebration for Carl and surreptitiously plants a listening bug under his desk , all while struggling with the bodyguards . 
 = = Relationship to actual events = = 
 Some aspects of the plotline are based on actual people and events . The character General Arturo Salazar is closely modeled after Mexican General Jesús Gutiérrez <unk> , who was secretly on the payroll of Amado Carrillo Fuentes , head of the Juarez Cartel . The character Porfirio Madrigal is modeled after Fuentes . The Obregón brothers are modeled after the Arellano Félix brothers . At one point in the film , an El Paso Intelligence Center agent tells Robert his position , official in charge of drug control , doesn 't exist in Mexico . As noted in the original script , a Director of the Instituto Nacional para el Combate a las <unk> was created by the Attorney General in 1996 . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Development = = 
 Steven Soderbergh had been interested in making a film about the drug wars for some time but did not want to make one about addicts . Producer Laura Bickford obtained the rights to the United Kingdom mini @-@ series Traffik and liked its structure . Soderbergh , who had seen the mini @-@ series in 1990 , started looking for a screenwriter to adapt it into a film . They read a script by Stephen Gaghan called Havoc about upper @-@ class white kids in Palisades High School doing drugs and getting involved with gangs . Soderbergh approached Gaghan to work on his film , but found he was already working for producer / director Edward Zwick . Bickford and Soderbergh approached Zwick , who agreed to merge the two projects and come aboard as a producer . 
 Traffic was originally going to be distributed by 20th Century Fox , but it was put into turnaround unless actor Harrison Ford agreed to star . Soderbergh began shopping the film to other studios , but when Ford suddenly showed interest in Traffic , Fox 's interest in the film was renewed and the studio took it out of turnaround . Fox CEO Bill Mechanic championed the film , but he departed from the studio by the time the first draft was finished . It went back into turnaround . Mechanic had also wanted to make some changes to the script , but Soderbergh disagreed and decided to shop the film to other major studios . They all turned him down because they were not confident in the prospects of a three @-@ hour film about drugs , according to Gaghan . USA Films , however , had wanted to take on the movie from the first time Soderbergh approached them . They provided the filmmakers with a $ 46 million budget , a considerable increase from the $ 25 million which Fox offered . 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 Soderbergh had " conceptual discussions " with Gaghan while he was shooting The Limey in October 1998 , and they finished the outline before he went off to shoot Erin Brockovich . After Soderbergh was finished with that film , Gaghan had written a first draft in six weeks that was 165 pages long . After the film was approved for production , Soderbergh and Gaghan met two separate times for three days to reformat the script . The draft they shot with had 163 pages with 135 speaking parts and featured seven cities . The film shortens the storyline of the original mini @-@ series ; a major character arc , that of a farmer , is taken out , and the Pakistani plotline is replaced with one set in Mexico . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Harrison Ford was initially considered for the role of Robert Wakefield in January 2000 , but would have had to take a significant cut in his usual $ 20 million salary . Ford met with Soderbergh to flesh out the character . Gaghan agreed to rework the role , adding several scenes that ended up in the finished film . On February 20 , Ford turned down the role and the filmmakers brought it back to Michael Douglas , who had turned down an earlier draft . He liked the changes made and agreed to star , which helped greenlight the project . Gaghan believes Ford turned down the role because he wanted to " reconnect with his action fans . " 
 The filmmakers sent out letters to many politicians , both Democrat and Republican , asking them to make cameo appearances in the film . Several of the scenes had already been shot using actors in these roles , but the filmmakers went back and re @-@ shot those scenes when real politicians agreed to be in the film . Those who agreed , including U.S. Senators Harry Reid , Barbara Boxer , Orrin Hatch , Charles Grassley , and Don Nickles , and Massachusetts governor Bill Weld , were filmed in a scene that was entirely improvised . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 The project was obtained from Fox by Initial Entertainment Group , and was sold to USA Films by <unk> for North American rights only . Stephen Soderbergh never approached USA Films , and the film was fully funded by Initial Entertainment Group . 
 After Fox dropped the film in early 2000 and before USA Films expressed interest soon after , Soderbergh paid for pre @-@ production with his own money . USA Films agreed to give him final cut on Traffic and also agreed to his term that all the Mexican characters would speak Spanish while talking to each other . This meant that almost all of Benicio del Toro 's dialogue would be subtitled . Once the studio realized this , they suggested that his scenes be shot in both English and Spanish , but Soderbergh and del Toro rejected the suggestion . Del Toro , a native of Puerto Rico , was worried that another actor would be brought in and re @-@ record his dialogue in English after he had worked hard to master Mexican inflections and improve his Spanish vocabulary . Del Toro remembers , " Can you imagine ? You do the whole movie , bust your butt to get it as realistic as possible , and someone dubs your voice ? I said , ' No way . Over my dead body . ' Steven was like , ' Don 't worry . It 's not gonna happen . ' " The director fought for subtitles for the Mexico scenes , arguing that if the characters did not speak Spanish , the film would have no integrity and would not convincingly portray what he described as the " impenetrability of another culture " . 
 The filmmakers went to the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) and U.S. Customs early on with the script and told them that they were trying to present as detailed and accurate a picture of the current drug war as possible . The DEA and Customs pointed out inaccuracies in the script . In addition , they gave the production team access to the border checkpoint to Mexico , as shown in the film during the scene in which Wakefield and his people talk with border officials . Despite the assistance , the DEA did not try to influence the content of the script . Soderbergh said Traffic had influences from the films of Richard Lester and Jean @-@ Luc Godard . He also spent time analyzing The Battle of Algiers and Z , which , according to the director , had the feeling that the footage was " caught " and not staged . Another inspiration was Alan J. Pakula 's film All the President 's Men because of its ability to tackle serious issues while being entertaining . In the opening credits of his film , Soderbergh tried to replicate the typeface from All the President 's Men and the placement on @-@ screen at the bottom left @-@ hand corner . Analyzing this film helped the director deal with the large cast and working in many different locations for Traffic . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Half of the first day 's footage came out overexposed and unusable . Before the financiers or studio bosses knew about the problem , Soderbergh was already doing reshoots . The insurers made him agree that any further mishaps resulting in additional filming would come out of the director 's own pocket . Soderbergh shot in various cities in California , Ohio and Texas , on a 54 @-@ day schedule and came in $ 2 million under budget . The director operated the camera himself in an effort to " get as close to the movie as I can , " and to eliminate the distance between the actors and himself . Soderbergh drew inspiration from the cinema verite style of Ken Loach 's films , studying the framing of scenes , the distance of the camera to the actors , lens length , and the tightness of eyelines depending on the position of a character . Soderbergh remembers , " I noticed that there 's a space that 's inviolate , that if you get within something , you cross the edge into a more theatrical aesthetic as opposed to a documentary aesthetic " . Most of the day was spent shooting because a lot of the film was shot with available light . 
 For the hand @-@ held camera footage , Soderbergh used Panavision Millennium <unk> that were smaller and lighter than previous cameras and allowed him to move freely . In order to tell the three stories apart , he adopted a distinctive look for each . For Robert Wakefield 's story , Soderbergh used tungsten film with no filter for a cold , monochrome blue feel . For Helena Ayala 's story , Soderbergh used diffusion filters , flashing the film , <unk> it for a warmer feel . For Javier Rodriguez 's story , the director used tobacco filters and a 45 @-@ degree shutter angle whenever possible to produce a strobe @-@ like sharp feel . Then , he took the entire film through an Ektachrome step , which increased the contrast and grain significantly . He wanted to have different looks for each story because the audience had to keep track of many characters and absorb a lot of information and he did not want them to have to figure out which story they were watching . 
 Benicio del Toro had significant input into certain parts of the film ; for example , he suggested a simpler , more concise way of depicting his character kidnapping Francisco Flores that Soderbergh ended up using . The director cut a scene in which Robert Wakefield smokes crack after finding it in his daughter 's bedroom . After rehearsing said scene with the actors , he felt that the character would not do it ; after consulting with Gaghan , the screenwriter agreed and the filmmakers cut the scene shortly before it was scheduled to be shot . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 The first cut of Traffic ran three hours and ten minutes . Soderbergh cut it down to two hours and twenty minutes . Early on , there were concerns that the film might get an NC @-@ 17 rating and he was prepared to release it with that rating , but the MPAA gave it an R. 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 Traffic was given a limited release on December 27 , 2000 in four theaters where it grossed USD $ 184 @,@ 725 on its opening weekend . It was given a wide release on January 5 , 2001 in 1 @,@ 510 theaters where it grossed $ 15 @.@ 5 million on its opening weekend . The film made $ 124 @.@ 1 million in North America and $ 83 @.@ 4 million in foreign markets for a worldwide total of $ 207 @.@ 5 million , well above its estimated $ 48 million budget . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Rotten Tomatoes reported that 92 % of critics gave the film positive write @-@ ups , based on a sample of 154 , with an average score of 8 / 10 , with del Toro receiving widespread acclaim , and the consensus being " Soderbergh successfully pulls off the highly ambitious Traffic , a movie with three different stories and a very large cast . The issues of ethics are gray rather than black @-@ and @-@ white , with no clear @-@ cut good guys . Terrific acting all around . " At Metacritic the film has received an average score of 86 , based on 34 reviews . Film critic Roger Ebert gave the film four out of four stars and wrote , " The movie is powerful precisely because it doesn 't preach . It is so restrained that at one moment — the judge 's final speech — I wanted one more sentence , making a point , but the movie lets us supply that thought for ourselves " . Stephen Holden , in his review for The New York Times , wrote , " Traffic is an utterly gripping , edge @-@ of @-@ your @-@ seat thriller . Or rather it is several interwoven thrillers , each with its own tense rhythm and explosive payoff " . In his review for The New York Observer , Andrew Sarris wrote , " Traffic marks [ Soderbergh ] definitively as an enormous talent , one who never lets us guess what he 's going to do next . The promise of Sex , Lies , and Videotape has been fulfilled " . 
 Entertainment Weekly gave the film an " A " rating and praised Benicio del Toro 's performance , which critic Owen Gleiberman called , " haunting in his understatement , [ it ] becomes the film 's quietly awakening moral center " . Desson Howe , in his review for the Washington Post , wrote , " Soderbergh and screenwriter Stephen Gaghan , who based this on a British television miniseries of the same name , have created an often exhilarating , soup @-@ to @-@ nuts exposé of the world 's most lucrative trade " . In his review for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers wrote , " The hand @-@ held camerawork – Soderbergh himself did the holding — provides a documentary feel that rivets attention " . However , Richard Schickel , in his review for Time , wrote , " there is a possibly predictable downside to this multiplicity of story lines : they keep interrupting one another . Just as you get interested in one , Stephen Gaghan 's script , inspired by a British mini @-@ series , jerks you away to another " . 
 = = = Top ten lists = = = 
 Traffic appeared on several critics ' top ten lists for 2000 . Some of the notable top @-@ ten list appearances are : 
 2nd : A. O. Scott , The New York Times 
 2nd : Jami Bernard , New York Daily News 
 2nd : Bruce Kirkland , The Toronto Sun 
 3rd : Stephen Holden , The New York Times 
 3rd : Owen Gleiberman , Entertainment Weekly 
 3rd : Peter Travers , Rolling Stone 
 4th : Roger Ebert , Chicago Sun @-@ Times 
 4th : Jack Mathews , New York Daily News 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film won Academy Awards in the categories Best Director ( Soderbergh ) , Best Supporting Actor ( Benicio del Toro ) , Best Film Editing ( Mirrione ) , and Best Adapted Screenplay ( Gaghan ) . It was also nominated for Best Picture , alongside another Soderbergh film , Erin Brockovich , but lost to Gladiator . Traffic was nominated for five Golden Globe Awards including Best Motion Picture – Drama , Soderbergh for Best Director , del Toro for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture , Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture , and Stephen Gaghan for Best Screenplay . Both del Toro and Gaghan won in their respective categories . In addition , del Toro won Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role . He went on to win BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role along with Gaghan , who won for Best Adapted Screenplay . 
 New York Film Critics Circle named Traffic as the Best Film , Soderbergh as Best Director , and del Toro as Best Supporting Actor . Los Angeles Film Critics Association awarded Soderbergh Best Director . Members of the Toronto Film Critics Association voted Soderbergh as Best Director and del Toro as Best Actor . National Society of Film Critics also voted Soderbergh and del Toro as Best Director and Best Supporting Actor , respectively . 
 = History of Minneapolis = 
 Minneapolis is the largest city by population in the U.S. state of Minnesota , and the county seat of Hennepin County . The origin and growth of the city was spurred by the proximity of Fort Snelling , the first major United States military presence in the area , and by its location on Saint Anthony Falls , which provided power for sawmills and flour mills . 
 Fort Snelling was established in 1819 , at the confluence of the Mississippi and Minnesota Rivers , and soldiers began using the falls for waterpower . When land became available for settlement , two towns were founded on either side of the falls : Saint Anthony , on the east side , and Minneapolis , on the west side . The two towns later merged into one city in 1872 . Early development focused on sawmills , but flour mills eventually became the dominant industry . This industrial development fueled the development of railroads and banks , as well as the foundation of the Minneapolis Grain Exchange . Through innovations in milling techniques , Minneapolis became a world @-@ leading center of flour production , earning the name " Mill City " . As the city grew , the culture developed through its churches , arts institutions , the University of Minnesota , and a famous park system designed by Theodore Wirth . 
 Although the sawmills and the flour mills are long gone , Minneapolis remains a regional center in banking and industry . The two largest milling companies , General Mills and the Pillsbury Company , now merged under the General Mills name , still remain prominent in the Twin Cities area . The city has rediscovered the riverfront , which now hosts parkland , the Mill City Museum , and the Guthrie Theater . 
 = = Early European exploration = = 
 Minneapolis grew up around Saint Anthony Falls , the only waterfall on the Mississippi River and the end of the commercially navigable section of the river until locks were installed in the 1960s . 
 French explorer Daniel Greysolon , Sieur du Lhut explored the Minnesota area in 1680 on a mission to extend French dominance over the area . While exploring the St. Croix River area , he got word that some other explorers had been held captive . He arranged for their release . The prisoners included Michel Aco , Antoine <unk> , and Father Louis Hennepin , a Catholic priest and missionary . On that expedition , Father Hennepin explored the falls and named them after his patron saint , Anthony of Padua . He published a book in 1683 entitled Description of Louisiana , describing the area to interested Europeans . As time went on , he developed a tendency to exaggerate . A 1691 edition of the book described the falls as having a drop of fifty or sixty feet , when they only had a drop of 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 8 m ) . Hennepin may have been including nearby rapids in his estimate , as the current total drop in river level over the series of dams is 76 ft ( 23 m ) . 
 The city 's land was acquired by the United States in a series of treaties and purchases negotiated with the Mdewakanton band of the Dakota and separately with European nations . England claimed the land east of the Mississippi and France , then Spain , and again France claimed the land west of the river . In 1787 land on the east side of the river became part of the Northwest Territory and in 1803 the west side became part of the Louisiana Purchase , both claimed by the United States . In 1805 , Zebulon Pike purchased two tracts of land from the Dakota Indians . One tract was located at the mouth of the St. Croix River , while a second , larger tract ran from the confluence of the Minnesota and Mississippi Rivers to St. Anthony Falls , with a width of nine miles ( 14 km ) east and west of the river . In return , he distributed about $ 200 in trading goods and sixty gallons of liquor , and promised a further payment from the United States government . The United States Senate eventually approved a payment of $ 2 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Fort Snelling and St. Anthony Falls = = 
 Fort Snelling was established in 1819 to extend United States jurisdiction over the area and to allay concerns about British fur traders in the area . The soldiers initially camped at a site on the south side of the Minnesota River , but conditions were hard there and nearly a fifth of the soldiers died of scurvy in the winter of 1819 – 1820 . They later moved their camp to Camp Coldwater in May 1820 . Much of the military 's activity was conducted there while the fort was built . Camp Coldwater , the site of a cold , clear , flowing spring , was also considered sacred by the native Dakota . 
 The soldiers needed to supply the fort , so they built roads and planted vegetables , wheat , and hay , and raised cattle . They also made the first weather recordings in the area . A lumber mill and a grist mill were built on the falls in 1822 to supply the fort . 
 A settlement on the east bank of the Mississippi near St. Anthony Falls was envisioned in the 1830s by Joseph Plympton , who became commander of Fort Snelling in 1837 . He made a more accurate survey of the reservation lands and transmitted a map to the War Department delimiting about 34 @,@ 000 acres ( 140 km ² ) within the reservation . He cleverly drew the boundary line to exclude certain parts of the east bank that had been part of the 1805 cession to Zebulon Pike . His plan was to stake a pre @-@ emption claim at the falls . However , Franklin Steele also had plans to stake a claim . On July 15 , 1838 , word reached Fort Snelling that a treaty between the United States and the Dakota and Ojibwa had been ratified , ceding land between the St. Croix River and the Mississippi Rivers . Steele rushed off to the falls , built a shanty , and marked off boundary lines . Plympton 's party arrived the next morning , but they were too late to claim the most desirable land . Plympton claimed some less desirable land near Steele 's claim , as did other settlers such as Pierre <unk> , Joseph Rondo , Samuel Findley , and Baptiste Turpin . Steele went on to build a dam at the falls and built a sawmill that cut logs from the Rum River area . 
 The Dakota were hunters and gatherers and soon found themselves in debt to fur traders . Pressed by a whooping cough outbreak , loss of buffalo , deer , and bear , and loss of forests to logging , in 1851 in the Treaty of Traverse des Sioux , the Mdewakanton sold the remaining land west of the river , allowing settlement in 1852 . 
 Franklin Steele also had a clever plan to obtain land on the west side of the falls . He suggested to his associated Colonel John H. Stevens that he should bargain with the War Department to obtain some land . Stevens agreed to operate a ferry service across the Mississippi in exchange for a claim of 160 acres ( 0 @.@ 6 km2 ) just above the government mills . The government approved this bargain , and Stevens built his house in the winter of 1849 – 1850 . The house was the first permanent dwelling on the west bank in the area that became Minneapolis . A few years later , the amount of land controlled by the fort was reduced with an order from U.S. President Millard Fillmore , and rapid settlement followed . The village of Minneapolis soon sprung up on the southwest bank of the river . 
 = = City pioneers = = 
 = = = St. Anthony = = = 
 After Franklin Steele obtained proper title to his land , he turned his energies to building a sawmill at St. Anthony Falls . He obtained financing and built a dam on the east channel of the river between Hennepin Island and Nicollet Island , along with a sawmill equipped with two up @-@ and @-@ down saws . His partner Daniel <unk> , a lumberman who had moved to Minnesota , dispatched crews up the Mississippi River to begin cutting lumber . The sawmill began cutting lumber in September 1848 . In October 1848 , Steele enlisted Ard Godfrey to supervise the mill at a salary of $ 1500 per year . Steele platted a townsite in 1849 and gave it the name " St. Anthony " . The town quickly grew with workers . In addition to the first sawmill and several others that followed , a grist mill was built in 1851 . By 1855 , the town had approximately 3000 people , and it was incorporated as a city . Godfrey 's house , built in 1848 , was purchased by the Hennepin County Territorial Pioneers ' Association and moved to Chute Square . The house was surveyed in 1934 by the Historic American Buildings Survey . 
 = = = Minneapolis = = = 
 On the west side of the river , John H. Stevens platted a townsite in 1854 . He laid out Washington Avenue parallel to the river , with other streets running parallel to and perpendicular to Washington . He later questioned his decision , thinking he should have run the streets directly east @-@ west and north @-@ south , but it ended up aligning nicely with the plat of St. Anthony . The wide , straight streets , with Washington and Hennepin Avenue being 100 feet ( 30 m ) wide and the others being 80 feet ( 24 m ) wide , contrasted with Saint Paul 's streets that were 60 feet ( 18 m ) wide . 
 Early on the community tried several names , rejecting Albion , All Saints , Lowell , Brooklyn , <unk> and Winona . The twenty four small lakes that are now within the city limits led Charles Hoag , Minneapolis 's first schoolmaster , to suggest <unk> , derived from Minnehaha and mni , the Dakota word for water , and polis , the Greek word for city . 
 The Minnesota Territorial Legislature recognized Saint Anthony as a town in 1855 and Minneapolis in 1856 . Boundaries were changed and Minneapolis was incorporated as a city in 1867 . Minneapolis and Saint Anthony joined in 1872 . Minneapolis changed more than 100 road names in 1873 , including deduplication of names between it and the former Saint Anthony . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 The Hennepin Avenue Bridge , a suspension bridge that was the first bridge built over the full width of the Mississippi River , was built in 1854 and dedicated on January 23 , 1855 . The bridge had a span of 620 feet ( 189 m ) , a roadway of 17 feet ( 5 m ) , and was built at a cost of $ 36 @,@ 000 . The toll was five cents for pedestrians and twenty @-@ five cents for <unk> wagons . 
 The early settlers of Minnesota were anxiously seeking railroad transportation , but insufficient capital was available after the Panic of 1857 . Rails were finally built in Minnesota in 1862 , when the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad built its first ten miles ( 16 km ) of track from the Phalen Creek area in St. Paul to a stop just short of St. Anthony Falls . The railroad continued building track from Minneapolis to Elk River in 1864 and to St. Cloud in 1866 , and from Minneapolis west to Howard Lake in 1867 and Willmar in 1869 . Meanwhile , the Minnesota Central , an early predecessor of the Milwaukee Road , built a line from Minneapolis to Fort Snelling in 1865 . The railroad gradually extended to Faribault , Owatonna , and Austin . It crossed the Iowa border and met up with the McGregor & Western line . This connection gave Minneapolis rail service to Milwaukee via Prairie du Chien , Wisconsin , with through service beginning on October 14 , 1867 . 
 A streetcar system in the Minneapolis area took shape in 1875 , when the Minneapolis Street Railway company began service with horse @-@ drawn cars . Under the leadership of Thomas Lowry , the company merged with the St. Paul Railway Company and took the name Twin City Rapid Transit . By 1889 , when electrification began , the system had grown to 115 miles ( 185 km ) . 
 = = Business and industry = = 
 Most of the early industrial development in Minneapolis was tied to St. Anthony Falls and the power it provided . Between 1848 and 1887 , Minneapolis led the nation in sawmilling . In 1856 , the mills produced 12 million board feet ( 28 @,@ 000 m ³ ) of lumber . That total had risen to about 91 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 board feet ( 215 @,@ 000 m ³ ) in 1869 , and 960 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 board feet ( 2 @,@ 270 @,@ 000 m ³ ) in 1899 . During the peak of this activity , at least 13 sawmills were operating on the falls . The sawmills also supported related industries such as mills that planed and smoothed the lumber ; factories that built sashes , doors , and windows ; and manufacturers of shingles and wooden buckets . 
 The flour milling industry , dating back to the Fort Snelling government mill , later eclipsed the lumber industry in the value of its finished product . Flour production stood at 30 @,@ 000 barrels ( 4 @,@ 800 m3 ) in 1860 , rising to 256 @,@ 100 barrels ( 40 @,@ 720 m3 ) in 1869 . Cadwallader C. Washburn 's imposing mill , built in 1866 , was six stories high and promoted as the largest mill west of Buffalo , New York . Other prominent industries at the falls included foundries , machine shops , and textile mills . 
 During this time , St. Anthony , on the east side , was separate from Minneapolis , on the west side . As a result of inferior management of the water power , St. Anthony found its manufacturing district declining . Some people and organizations started to talk about merging the two cities . A citizens ' committee recommended merging the two cities in 1866 , but a vote on this issue was rejected in 1867 . Minneapolis incorporated as a city in 1867 . The two cities found themselves competing with St. Paul , which had a larger population , the head of navigation of the Mississippi River , and more access to railroads . 
 = = = Threatened collapse of St. Anthony Falls = = = 
 The two cities were later pushed toward merger by a disaster that nearly wiped out the falls . The geological formation of the area consisted of a hard , thin layer of limestone overlaying a soft sandstone formation . As the sandstone eroded away , large blocks of limestone would fall off . The expansion of milling and industry at the falls accelerated the process of erosion . If the fragile limestone cap ever eroded away completely , the falls would turn into a rapids that would no longer provide water power . This process came to a head on October 4 , 1869 , when a tunnel under Hennepin Island and Nicollet Island collapsed and filled with water . With the limestone cap breached , the tunnel quickly created a torrent of water that blasted Hennepin Island and threatened to destroy the falls . The falls were shored up quickly , and over the next several years , the falls were repaired by building a wooden apron , sealing the tunnel , and building low dams above the falls to avoid exposing the limestone to the weather . This work was assisted by the federal government , and was eventually completed in 1884 . The federal government spent $ 615 @,@ 000 on this effort , while the two cities spent $ 334 @,@ 500 . Possibly as a result of the bonding needed to rehabilitate the falls , the cities of St. Anthony and Minneapolis merged on April 9 , 1872 . 
 = = = Development of flour milling = = = 
 The St. Anthony Express newspaper predicted in 1855 that , " The time is not distant when Minnesota , with the superiority of her soil and seasons for wheat culture , and her unparalleled water power for manufacturing flour , will export largely of this article . ... our mills will turn out wheat , superior in quality and appearance to any now manufactured in the West . " By 1876 , eighteen flour mills had been built on the west side of the river below the falls . The first mills used traditional technology of millstones that would pulverize the grain and grind as much flour as possible in one pass . This system worked best for winter wheat , which was sown in the fall and resumed its growth in the spring . However , the harsh winter conditions of the upper Midwest did not lend themselves to the production of winter wheat , since the deep frosts and lack of snow cover killed the crop . Spring wheat , which could be sown in the spring and reaped in the summer , was a more dependable crop . However , conventional milling techniques did not produce a desirable product , since the harder husks of spring wheat kernels fractured between the grindstones . The gluten and starch in the flour could not be mixed completely , either , and the flour would turn rancid . Minneapolis milling companies solved this problem by inventing the middlings purifier , which made it possible to separate the husks from the flour earlier in the milling process . They also developed a gradual @-@ reduction process , where grain was pulverized between a series of rollers made of porcelain , iron , or steel . This process resulted in " patent " flour , which commanded almost double the price of " bakers " or " clear " flour , which it replaced . The Washburn mill attempted to monopolize these techniques , but Pillsbury and other companies lured employees away from Washburn and were able to duplicate the process . 
 Although the flour industry grew steadily , one major event caused a disturbance in the production of flour . On May 2 , 1878 , the Washburn " A " Mill exploded when grain dust ignited . The explosion killed eighteen workers and destroyed one @-@ third of the capacity of the milling district , as well as other nearby businesses and residences . By the end of the year , though , seventeen mills were back in operation , including the rebuilt Washburn " A " Mill and others that had been completely rebuilt . The millers also took the opportunity to rebuild with new technology such as dust collection systems . The largest mill on the east side of the river was the Pillsbury " A " Mill , built in 1880 – 1881 and designed by local architect LeRoy S. Buffington . The Pillsbury Company wanted a building that was beautiful as well as functional . The seven @-@ story building had stone walls six feet thick at the base tapering to eighteen inches at the top . With improvements and additions over the years , it became the world 's largest flour mill . The Pillsbury " A " Mill is now a National Historic Landmark , along with the Washburn " A " Mill . 
 In 1891 , Northwestern Consolidated Milling Company was formed , consolidating many of the smaller mills into one corporate entity . Between 1880 and 1930 , Minneapolis led the nation in flour production , earning it the nickname " Mill City " . Minneapolis surpassed Budapest as the world 's leading flour miller in 1884 , and production stood at about 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US dry barrels ( 810 @,@ 000 m3 ) annually in 1890 . In 1900 , Minneapolis mills were grinding 14 @.@ 1 percent of the nation 's grain , and in 1915 – 16 , flour production hit its peak at 20 @,@ 443 @,@ 000 US dry barrels ( 2 @,@ 363 @,@ 800 m3 ) annually . 
 = = = Hydroelectric power = = = 
 In 1882 , the first hydroelectric power plant in the United States was built at the falls on Upton Island . The Brush Electric Company , headed by Charles F. Brush , supplied the equipment , which included five generators . The electricity was transmitted via four circuits to shops on Washington Avenue . The power plant turned on the lights on September 5 , 1882 , just ahead of the Vulcan Street Plant in Appleton , Wisconsin , which started generating electricity on September 30 . The company competed with the Minneapolis Gas Light Company , which later became <unk> and is now part of <unk> Energy . 
 In 1895 , William de la Barre began building a dam at Meeker Island , 2 @,@ 200 feet ( 571 m ) downriver from the falls . His objective was to build a hydroelectric plant that would sell energy to Twin City Rapid Transit , which was then using steam power to generate electricity . The dam was completed on March 20 , 1897 . Later , in 1906 , he began construction of the Hennepin Island Hydroelectric Plant . The plant was leased to Minneapolis General Electric , which sublet the plant to Twin City Rapid Transit . Minneapolis General Electric later became Northern States Power Company , which is now known as Xcel Energy . 
 = = = Railroads = = = 
 The development of sawmills and flour mills at the falls spurred demand for railroad service to Minneapolis . In 1868 , Minneapolis was only served by a spur from St. Paul , from the Chicago , Milwaukee , St. Paul and Pacific Railroad , and by the fledgling St. Paul and Pacific Railroad . Minneapolis millers found that railroads based in Milwaukee and Chicago were favoring their cities by diverting wheat from Minneapolis mills . In response , the owners of several Minneapolis mills chartered the Minneapolis and St. Louis Railway , which would connect the Lake Superior and Mississippi Railroad through Minneapolis to the Iowa border . Meanwhile , Jay Cooke took control of the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad in 1871 with the goal of aggregating it into the Northern Pacific Railway . Bad economic conditions caused the Panic of 1873 , and the Northern Pacific had to relinquish control of the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad and the Lake Superior and Mississippi Railroad . 
 James J. Hill eventually reorganized the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad as the St. Paul , Minneapolis and Manitoba Railroad , which later became the Great Northern Railway . The Manitoba line had two lines leading to the Red River Valley , giving it access to wheat @-@ growing regions , and it served several mills in Minneapolis . The Manitoba 's small passenger station at Minneapolis had become inadequate , so Hill decided to build a new depot that he expected to share with other railroads . Since the Manitoba 's mainline ran on the east side of the Mississippi , a new bridge across the river was needed to reach the station . The result was the Stone Arch Bridge , completed in 1883 . The Minneapolis Union Depot was opened for passenger service on April 25 , 1885 . 
 Meanwhile , the Milwaukee Road expanded their presence in Minneapolis with a " Short Line " connection from St. Paul to Minneapolis in 1880 and through the acquisition of the Hastings and Dakota Railroad , which had a line going west from Minneapolis to Montevideo , Ortonville , and into Aberdeen , South Dakota . They also built a large railyard and shops on Hiawatha Avenue just north of Lake Street , and a large depot on Washington Avenue . 
 The Minneapolis , Sault Ste . Marie & Atlantic Railway got its start in 1883 , with a goal of serving Atlantic ports via Sault Ste . Marie , Michigan and bypassing Chicago altogether . 
 = = = Other businesses = = = 
 The Minneapolis Chamber of Commerce was founded in 1881 as a market to trade grain . It helped farmers by ensuring that they got the best prices possible for their wheat , oats , and corn , since the usual supply and demand curves were skewed by similar harvest times across the region . In 1883 , they introduced its first futures contract for hard red spring wheat . In 1947 , the organization was renamed the Minneapolis Grain Exchange , since the term " chamber of commerce " had become synonymous with organizations that lobbied for business and social issues . 
 The flour milling industry also spurred the growth of banking in the Minneapolis area . Mills required capital for investments in their plants and machinery and for their ongoing operations . By the early 20th century , Minneapolis was known as " the financial center of the Northwest " . 
 = = Cultural institutions = = 
 = = = Education = = = 
 The University of Minnesota was founded in 1851 , seven years before Minnesota became a state , as a preparatory school . The school was forced to close during the American Civil War because of financial difficulties , but with support from John S. Pillsbury , it reopened in 1867 . William Watts Folwell became the first president of the University in 1869 . The university granted its first two Bachelor of Arts degrees in 1873 , and awarded its first Doctor of Philosophy degree in 1888 . From its beginnings in the St. Anthony area , the university eventually grew into a large campus on the east bank of the Mississippi , along with its campus in St. Paul and the addition of a West Bank campus in the 1960s . 
 DeLaSalle High School was founded by Archbishop John Ireland in 1900 as a Catholic secondary school . Its early mission was as a commercial school , but in 1920 , parents were asking for a college preparatory school . The school has been in operation for over 100 years in several buildings on Nicollet Island . 
 = = = Parks = = = 
 The first park in Minneapolis was land donated to the city in 1857 , but it took about 25 years for the community to take a major interest in its parks . The Minneapolis Board of Trade and other civic leaders pressed the Minnesota Legislature for assistance . On February 27 , 1883 , the Legislature authorized the city to form a park district and to levy taxes . The initial vision was to create a number of boulevards , based on the design concepts of Frederick Law Olmsted , that would connect parks . Civic leaders also hoped to stimulate economic development and increase land values . Landscape architect Horace Cleveland was hired to create a system of parks named the " Grand Rounds " . 
 Lake Harriet was donated to the city by William S. King in 1885 and the first bandshell on the lake was built in 1888 . The current bandshell , built in 1985 , is the fifth one in its location . 
 Minnehaha Falls was purchased as a park in 1889 . The park was named after a character in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 's epic poem , The Song of Hiawatha . 
 In 1906 , Theodore Wirth came to Minneapolis as the parks superintendent . During his tenure , the park system increased from 1810 acres ( 7 @.@ 3 km ² ) in 57 properties to <unk> acres ( 21 @.@ 9 km ² ) in 144 properties . The park system , organized around the Minneapolis chain of lakes ( including Cedar Lake , Lake of the Isles , Lake Calhoun , Lake Harriet , Lake Hiawatha , and Lake Nokomis ) became a model for park planners around the world . He also encouraged active recreation in the parks , as opposed to just setting aside parks for passive admiration . 
 = = = Arts = = = 
 The Minneapolis Institute of Arts was established in 1883 by twenty @-@ five citizens who were committed to bringing the fine arts into the Minneapolis community . The present building , a neoclassical structure , was designed by the firm of McKim , Mead and White and opened in 1915 . It later received additions in 1974 by Kenzo Tange and in 2006 by Michael Graves . 
 The Minnesota Orchestra dates back to 1903 when it was founded as the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra . It was renamed the Minnesota Orchestra in 1968 and moved into its own building , Orchestra Hall , in downtown Minneapolis in 1974 . 
 The Walker Art Center was established in 1927 as the first public art gallery in the Upper Midwest . In the 1940s , the museum shifted its focus toward modern art , after a gift from Mrs. Gilbert Walker made it possible to acquire works by Pablo Picasso , Henry Moore , Alberto Giacometti , and others . The museum continued its focus on modern art with traveling shows in the 1960s and is now one of the " big five " modern art museums in the U.S. 
 = = = Churches = = = 
 Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic Church was founded in 1854 . It is the oldest church in Minneapolis in continuous use . The church was originally built by the First Universalist Society , and later became a Catholic church in 1877 when a Catholic French Canadian congregation acquired it . 
 The Basilica of Saint Mary was constructed between 1907 and 1915 on land that was formerly a farm , then a zoological garden . Archbishop John Ireland supervised the planning of the church , originally named the Pro @-@ Cathedral of Minneapolis , along with the Cathedral of St. Paul in Saint Paul . He chose architect Emmanuel <unk> , who was trained at the École des Beaux @-@ Arts in Paris . The first Mass was held on May 31 , 1914 . Church leaders desired to build the finest altar in America , handcrafted of the finest marble they could afford . It was elevated to the rank of basilica and became the first basilica in the United States in 1926 . The building is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as one of the area 's finest examples of Beaux @-@ Arts architecture . 
 = = A changing city = = 
 = = = Fall of the milling empire = = = 
 In the first few decades of the 20th century , Minneapolis began to lose its dominant position in the flour milling industry , after reaching its peak in 1915 – 1916 . The rise of steam power , and later electric power , eroded the advantage that St. Anthony Falls provided in water power . The wheat fields of the Dakotas and Minnesota 's Red River Valley began suffering from soil exhaustion due to consecutive wheat crops , leading to an increase in wheat leaf rust and related crop diseases . The farmers of the southern plains developed a variety of hardy red winter wheat suitable for bread flour , and the Kansas City area gained prominence in milling . Also , due to changes in rail shipping rates , millers in Buffalo , New York were able to ship their flour more competitively . 
 In response , companies such as the Washburn @-@ Crosby Company and Pillsbury began marketing their brands specifically to consumers . Washburn @-@ Crosby branded their flour " Gold Medal " , in recognition of a prize won in 1880 , and advertised with the slogan " Eventually – Why Not Now ? " Pillsbury countered with their slogan , " Because Pillsbury 's Best " , incorporating their brand name " Pillsbury 's Best " . Washburn @-@ Crosby invented the character Betty Crocker to answer product questions . They also purchased a radio station in 1924 and renamed it WCCO , standing for " Washburn Crosby Company " . Washburn @-@ Crosby merged with several other regional milling companies in 1928 and renamed themselves General Mills . Both General Mills and Pillsbury sought to diversify beyond flour milling by sponsoring baking contests and publishing recipes . They also began developing semi @-@ prepared foods , such as <unk> and prepared foods , such as Wheaties . 
 After 1930 , the flour mills gradually began to shut down . The buildings were either vacated or demolished , the railroad trestle that served the mills was demolished , and the former mill canal and mill ruins were filled in with gravel . The last two mills left at the falls were the Washburn " A " Mill and the Pillsbury " A " Mill . In 1965 , General Mills shut down the Washburn " A " Mill , along with several other of their oldest mills . All milling operations throughout the city 's corridors such as Hiawatha Avenue and the Midtown Greenway ceased by the early 20th century . Demand for rail use also fell as a result . 
 To continue economic use of the river , civic leaders pushed for plans to build locks and dams , making the Mississippi River navigable above Saint Anthony Falls for the first time . Congressional approval for the Upper Minneapolis Harbor Development Project came in 1937 but it wasn 't until 1950 through 1963 , that the United States Army Corps of Engineers constructed two sets of locks at the lower dam and at the falls . They also covered the falls with a permanent concrete apron . The project also resulted in the <unk> of the Stone Arch Bridge by replacing two of the arches with a steel truss . The rest of Spirit Island was also obliterated in the process . 
 = = = Politics , corruption , anti @-@ Semitism and social change = = = 
 Minneapolis was known for anti @-@ Semitism beginning in the 1880s and through the 1950s . The city was described as " the capital of anti @-@ Semitism in the United States " in 1946 by Carey McWilliams and in 1959 by Gunther Plaut . At that time the city 's Jews were excluded from membership in many organizations , faced employment discrimination , and were considered unwelcome residents in some neighborhoods . Jews in Minneapolis were also not allowed to buy homes in certain neighborhoods of Minneapolis . In the 1940s a lack of anti @-@ Semitism was noted in the Midwest with the exception of Minneapolis . McWilliams noted in 1946 the lack of anti @-@ Semitism in neighboring Saint Paul . 
 The 1920s and 1930s of Prohibition , gangsters and mobs ruled the underworld of the city . North Minneapolis was ruled by Jewish gangsters led by Isadore <unk> , also known as Kid Cann , who was also linked to murders , prostitution , money laundering , the destruction of the Minneapolis streetcar system and political bribery . Chief O 'Connor of the Saint Paul Police established the O 'Connor System which provided a haven for crooks in the capital city and a headache for Minneapolis Police . Corruption spread to the MPD as an Irishman named Edward G. " Big Ed " Morgan operated gambling dens with bootleggers under police protection . Danny Hogan , the underworld " Godfather " of Saint Paul allied with Morgan and the two competed with the Jewish gangsters until the wane of Prohibition and Hogan 's death . 
 Hubert Humphrey got his start in Minnesota politics in the early 1940s . He was an organizer of the Minnesota Democratic Party at the time , and he realized that the party 's best chance of success would come if the Minnesota Farmer @-@ Labor Party merged with the Democratic party . Other party leaders had been discussing the merger , but Humphrey 's idea was to keep the Farmer @-@ Labor name in the name of the merged party , in order to gain the strength of thousands of loyal voters . Thus , the party got the name Minnesota Democratic @-@ Farmer @-@ Labor Party . 
 Humphrey first ran for mayor of Minneapolis in 1943 , losing by only six thousand votes . He campaigned again in the 1945 election , with the support of the city 's labor leaders , and found support with the city 's African @-@ American community by promising to implement a city civil rights commission . He also appealed to the city 's middle class by giving talks on civic virtue at area churches . He was elected in 1945 by the largest margin to date . When elected , he immediately proposed a city ordinance that would make racial discrimination by employers subject to a fine . After a long period of discussion , the Minneapolis City Council finally approved the ordinance by a 21 to 3 margin on January 31 , 1947 . The ordinance created the nation 's first Fair Employment Practices Ordinance and established Minneapolis as the nation 's leader in imposing fines for employment discrimination , though pressure from the local Urban League would also limit employment opportunities for African Americans during the ordinance 's first few years . 
 In contrast to similar measures passed in Milwaukee and Chicago , the Minneapolis Fair Employment ordinance gave the city 's newly created Fair Employment Practices Commission ( FEPC ) authority to not only impose fines , but also prison sentences for employers who enacted job discrimination . Larger banks and department stores saw the value in civil rights and began to hire more African @-@ Americans . Humphrey also recognized that city police officers operating under racial and ethnic prejudice were causing urban unrest , so he instructed the city 's police chief to have officers in minority neighborhoods keep in contact with clergy , teachers , business owners , and other neighborhood leaders . This helped to redefine the issue of prejudice and got its attention as a problem that could be solved , not just a fact of life that had to be taken for granted . 
 Humphrey 's progress with civil rights in Minneapolis gained national attention , with many cities inquiring about how they could establish their own civil rights commissions . In 1947 , he was reelected with 102 @,@ 000 votes over his opponent 's 52 @,@ 000 votes . As a delegate to the 1948 Democratic National Convention , he led the call for a strong civil rights plank . In his address , he said , " There are those who say to you – we are rushing this issue of civil rights . I say we are 172 years late . There are those who say – this issue of civil rights is an infringement on states rights . The time has arrived for the Democratic Party to get out of the shadow of state 's rights and walk forthrightly into the bright sunshine of human rights . " Humphrey was elected to the United States Senate in the 1948 election and served many years as a prominent Minnesota politician , including Vice President of the U.S. from 1965 – 1969 . 
 W. Harry Davis , who later served 20 years on the Minneapolis School Board , agreed to run for mayor in 1971 , becoming the city 's first black mayoral candidate supported by a major political party . White supremacists were still present in Minneapolis , and threatened his family daily during the campaign . The police department guarded their home and the FBI gave them protection dogs . Davis also received support from white politicians including Humphrey , Donald M. Fraser , and Walter Mondale . Twenty years later , Minneapolis elected its first African American mayor , Sharon Sayles Belton . To date , she has been the city 's only non @-@ white mayor . 
 In 1968 , Dennis Banks and Clyde Bellecourt were among those who founded the American Indian Movement to advance civil rights for Native Americans . 
 = = = A growing city = = = 
 From about 200 @,@ 000 in the 1900 Census , Minneapolis soared to its highest population recorded in 1950 of over 521 @,@ 000 people . The main growth of the city was in part due to an organized private streetcar system . With 140 million passengers by 1920 , the streetcars ran down important roads extending from Downtown Minneapolis . Neighborhood residential development out of the core mostly dates around the turn of the century as a result of this system . This growth also allowed Minneapolis to annex land from neighboring villages and townships which subsequently pushed the incorporation of today 's inner ring suburbs . 
 The streetcar system was built by Twin City Rapid Transit and operated efficiently through 1949 , with a program of <unk> their profits into system improvements . However , in 1949 , New York investor Charles Green gained control of the system , halted the rebuilding program , and announced a goal of completely converting the system to buses by 1958 . These policies alienated the public and he was ousted in 1951 , but his successor , Fred Ossanna , continued to cut service and replace the system with buses . On June 19 , 1954 , the last streetcar took its run . A photo taken in 1954 shows James <unk> handing Fred Ossanna a check while one of the streetcars burned in the background . Later on , it was discovered that Ossanna and associates had plundered the streetcar system for personal gain . A small section of the line between Lake Calhoun and Lake Harriet is now operated by the Minnesota Streetcar Museum . 
 = = = Reshaping downtown = = = 
 Downtown Minneapolis was the hub of business and financial activity . The Minneapolis City Hall ( which also served as the Hennepin County Courthouse at the time ) was the tallest building in Minneapolis from its construction in 1888 until 1929 . A municipal ordinance instituted in 1890 restricted buildings to a height of 100 feet ( 30 m ) , later raised to 125 feet ( 38 m ) . The construction of the First National – Soo Line Building in 1915 , with a height of 252 feet ( 77 m ) , caused concerns among the real estate industry , so the 125 @-@ foot ( twelve story ) limit was reimposed at the request of the Minneapolis Civic and Commerce Association . 
 The twenty @-@ seven story Rand Tower , built in 1929 , was the next major challenger to the height limit . The thirty @-@ two story Foshay Tower , also built in 1929 , was the highest building in Minneapolis until 1971 . Its builder , Wilbur Foshay , wanted a tower built along the lines of the Washington Monument . He staged a lavish dedication ceremony complete with a march composed by John Philip Sousa . About six weeks later , Foshay lost his fortune in the Wall Street Crash of 1929 . Foshay 's $ 20 @,@ 000 check to Sousa bounced , and Sousa forbade anyone else to play the march until the debt was repaid . 
 During the Great Depression , buildings suffered from a lack of maintenance . Writer Sinclair Lewis , returning to Minneapolis after a long absence , said , " Minneapolis is so ugly . Parking lots like scars . Most buildings are narrow , drab , dirty , flimsy , irregular in relationship to one another — a set of bad teeth . " A decade later , downtown and surrounding areas would be reshaped radically by urban renewal and freeway construction . After World War II , businesses and residents started moving to the suburbs , and downtown Minneapolis , along with downtowns across the nation , was perceived as dying . Urban planners , such as Le Corbusier , were advocating radically rebuilding downtowns by complete rebuilding and forcing out manufacturing and warehousing . The Federal Housing Act of 1949 provided funding for clearing blighted areas , and city officials interpreted the definition of " blighted " liberally . The Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 provided funding for an interstate highway system , which would also transform Minneapolis . 
 The Gateway district , centered around the intersection of Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues just west of the Mississippi River , was the major casualty of urban renewal . The neighborhood had become known as a slum with cheap hotels and <unk> . When General Mills announced in 1955 that they were moving their corporate headquarters to Golden Valley , city planners decided to implement a large @-@ scale Gateway district plan that included demolishing a large number of buildings . Between 1957 and 1965 , one @-@ third of downtown Minneapolis had been leveled , including the Metropolitan Building . 
 Freeway construction had its impact on the city , with neighborhoods disrupted and housing stock lost . Between 1963 and 1975 , Interstate 35W from the south border of the city to its northeastern corner , Interstate 94 from the St. Paul border into downtown , and the Crosstown ( County Road 62 , later to become Minnesota State Highway 62 ) on the southern boundary of Minneapolis were built . The remaining portion of Interstate 94 , from U.S. Highway 12 to the northern boundary of the city , was completed in 1982 . Highway 12 was later rebuilt to Interstate standards in 1992 , at which point it was renumbered Interstate 394 . Several proposed projects never were built , though . Minnesota State Highway 55 , running southeast from downtown to the Fort Snelling area and the Minneapolis – Saint Paul International Airport , was slated to become a freeway , but the upgrade was canceled due to neighborhood opposition . Similarly , a proposed Interstate 335 was to run from Interstate 35W in northeast Minneapolis to a connection with Interstate 94 just north of downtown . This project was also canceled due to neighborhood opposition . 
 = = Modern Minneapolis = = 
 = = = Shaping the skyline = = = 
 While the destruction of the Gateway district left a large gap in downtown Minneapolis , other developments would reshape it and transform the skyline . One of these developments was the building of the Nicollet Mall in 1968 . Previously known as Nicollet Avenue , the portion within the central business became a tree @-@ lined mall for pedestrians and transit . The mall forms a kind of linear park , with trees and fountains and a farmers ' market in the summer . It also boosted the city 's retail trade . The most dramatic change to the skyline came in 1974 , when the IDS Center was opened . At a height of 775 feet 6 inches ( 236 @.@ 4 m ) when built , it dwarfed the previous highest building , the Foshay Tower . Other additions to downtown included the <unk> Tower ( 668 feet , <unk> ) in 1983 now known as 33 South Sixth , Norwest Center , built in 1988 and now renamed the Wells Fargo Center , the Campbell Mithun Tower — previously Piper Jaffray built in 1985 , and Capella Tower , built in 1992 as the headquarters of First Bank . The Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome , opened in 1982 and demolished in 2014 , served as the home of the Minnesota Vikings and previously hosted the Minnesota Twins , and the Minnesota Golden Gophers football team . The site is now being reconstructed as the new Vikings Stadium . In the 1990s , the last wave of downtown development filled in parcels around the skyscrapers with towers 40 stories or less from companies such as Target , Ameriprise Financial , and AT & T. 
 Vertical residential housing also followed the corporate development . The 1970s condo boom saw many discreet high @-@ rises blanket the former milling districts and Downtown West . Riverside Plaza , formerly Cedar Square West , was completed in 1973 as a six tower mixed @-@ income self @-@ contained urban village that originally was much larger and contains the tallest buildings outside Downtown . The plain modern and brutalist concrete styles of that period however were contrasted in the late 1990s to 2000s that brought in more prominent residential towers to the skyline with varying colors and architecture themes . The Carlyle residence one block south of the Mississippi River is 41 stories built in art deco style and is the most recent addition to the skyline . Grant Park and <unk> , though not as tall at 27 – 28 stories , have begun extending the skyline south into the Elliot Park neighborhood . The two contrast as one is traditional with red brick proportions while the other is in modern glass . 
 Light rail made its debut in Minneapolis with the opening of the Blue Line on June 26 , 2004 . This line , part of the METRO system , starts in downtown Minneapolis and progresses southeastward along Minnesota State Highway 55 ( also known as Hiawatha Avenue ) , passes Minnehaha Park on the west side , and serves the Minneapolis – Saint Paul International Airport before it terminates at the Mall of America in Bloomington . In 2014 , service began on the Green Line which connects downtown with the University of Minnesota and downtown St. Paul . 
 = = = Rediscovering the riverfront = = = 
 As industry and railroads left the Mississippi riverfront , people gradually became aware that the riverfront could be a destination for living , working , and shopping . The Minneapolis Park and Recreation Board acquired land along the river banks , including much of Nicollet Island , all of Boom Island , and the West River Parkway corridor . These properties were developed with trails and parkways , and this spurred the development of private land adjacent to the riverfront , creating the new Mill District neighborhood . The Stone Arch Bridge was opened to pedestrian traffic in 1994 , creating a link in the trail system and providing spectacular views of Saint Anthony Falls . Some of the old commercial buildings were adapted to new uses . The Whitney Hotel was built in what used to be the Standard Mill , while the North Star Lofts was a new use for the former North Star Woolen Mills building . Other projects , such as Saint Anthony Main and a number of condominium and townhouse projects , provide residents with the opportunity to live within view of Saint Anthony Falls . 
 Urban archeology along the riverfront has uncovered remnants of the flour mills built in the 1860s and 1870s , along with the tailrace canal that once supplied water to the mills and the trestle supports for the Minnesota Eastern Railroad . These ruins , which had once been buried with gravel and fill , are now open to the public as Mill Ruins Park . The park has signs interpreting the history of the area and the buildings that had once been there . The Washburn " A " Mill , severely damaged by a 1991 fire but now stabilized , now hosts the Mill City Museum , opened in 2003 by the Minnesota Historical Society . The museum presents a history of flour milling and industrial development along the river , and an eight @-@ story elevator ride shows the various steps that turned wheat into flour . The Guthrie Theater moved to a new building along the riverfront in 2006 , just southeast of the Mill City Museum . 
 = Pacific angelshark = 
 The Pacific angelshark ( Squatina californica ) is a species of angel shark , family Squatinidae , found in the eastern Pacific Ocean from Alaska to the Gulf of California , and from Ecuador to Chile , although those in the Gulf of California and southeastern Pacific may in fact be separate species . The Pacific angelshark inhabits shallow , coastal waters on sandy flats , usually near rocky reefs , kelp forests , or other underwater features . This species resembles other angel sharks in appearance , with a flattened body and greatly enlarged pectoral and pelvic fins . Characteristic features of this shark include a pair of cone @-@ shaped barbels on its snout , angular pectoral fins , and a brown or gray dorsal coloration with many small dark markings . It attains a maximum length of 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) . 
 An ambush predator , the Pacific angelshark conceals itself on the sea floor and waits for approaching prey , primarily bony fishes and squid . Prey are targeted visually and , with a quick upward thrust of the head , snatched in protrusible jaws . Individual sharks actively choose ideal ambush sites , where they stay for several days before moving on to a new one . This species is more active at night than during the day , when it stays buried in sediment and seldom moves . Reproduction is viviparous , with the embryos hatching inside the mother 's uterus and being sustained by a yolk sac until birth . Females give birth to an average of six young every spring . 
 Pacific angelsharks are not dangerous to humans unless provoked , in which case their bite can cause a painful injury . They are valued for their meat and are captured by commercial and recreational fishers across their range . A targeted gillnet fishery for this species began off Santa Barbara , California in 1976 and ended in 1994 , after overfishing and new regulations led to its near @-@ collapse . This species is now mainly fished in Mexican waters . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Near Threatened , as the Californian population is largely protected and recovering , while the impact of Mexican fisheries is unknown . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The Pacific angelshark was first scientifically described in 1859 by William Orville Ayres , the first Curator of Ichthyology at the California Academy of Sciences . He gave it the specific epithet californica , as the originally @-@ described specimen was caught off San Francisco . Locally , this species may also be referred to as angel shark , California angel shark , or monkfish . 
 The Chilean angelshark ( Squatina armata ) of the southeastern Pacific was synonymized with this species by Kato , Springer and Wagner in 1967 , but was later tentatively recognized as a separate species again by Leonard Compagno . The taxonomic status of angel sharks in the southeastern Pacific – whether they are S. californica , S. armata , or if there is more than one Squatina species in the region – remains unresolved . The angel sharks inhabiting the Gulf of California may also represent a different species , as they mature at a much smaller size than those from the rest of their range . 
 A phylogenetic study based on mitochondrial DNA , published by Björn <unk> and colleagues in 2010 , reported that the sister species of the Pacific angelshark is the sand devil ( S. <unk> ) of the western North Atlantic . The two species are estimated to have diverged approximately 6 @.@ 1 Ma , close to when the Isthmus of Panama first began to form . The authors also found that Pacific angelsharks from the Gulf of California differed genetically from those elsewhere , though they were equivocal as to whether this represented a species @-@ level distinction . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Pacific angelsharks are found in cold to warm @-@ temperate waters from the southeastern corner of Alaska to the Gulf of California , including the entire Baja peninsula , and are most common off central and southern California . It may also occur from Ecuador to the southern tip of Chile ( see taxonomic uncertainty above ) . This bottom @-@ dwelling shark prefers habitats with soft , flat bottoms close to shore , such as estuaries and bays , and are often found near rocky reefs , submarine canyons , and kelp forests . On occasion , they have been seen swimming 15 – 91 m ( 49 – 299 ft ) above the sea floor . Off California , the Pacific angelshark is most common at a depth of 3 – 45 m ( 9 @.@ 8 – 147 @.@ 6 ft ) , but has been reported from as deep as 205 m ( 673 ft ) . 
 A number of genetically discrete subpopulations have been identified across the northern range of the Pacific angelshark . Several subpopulations exist along the coast from Point Conception northward to Alaska . In the Southern California Bight , there are at least three separate subpopulations off the mainland and northern and southern Channel Islands . The subpopulation along the Pacific coast of Baja California are distinct from those in the Gulf of California . These subpopulations have diverged from one another over time because Pacific angelsharks do not undertake long migratory movements outside of their preferred home areas , and deep waters serve as effective geographical barriers to population mixing . <unk> , a measure of genetic diversity , is higher in the Pacific angelshark than in other shark species that have been examined . 
 = = Description = = 
 With its flattened body and wing @-@ like pectoral fins , the Pacific angelshark superficially resembles a ray . Unlike in rays , its five pairs of gill slits are located on the sides of the head rather than underneath , and the expanded anterior lobes of its pectoral fins are separate rather than fused to the head . The eyes are located on top of the head , with the spiracles behind . There are folds of skin without triangular lobes on the sides of head . The mouth is very wide and placed terminally ( at the front of the snout ) ; a pair of cone @-@ shaped barbels with spoon @-@ like tips are located above . There are 9 tooth rows on either side of the upper jaw and 10 tooth rows on either side of the lower jaw , with toothless gaps at the middle of both jaws . Each tooth has a broad base and a single narrow , smooth @-@ edged cusp . 
 The pectoral and pelvic fins are broad and angular with pointed tips . The two dorsal fins are located far back on the body , and there is no anal fin . The lower lobe of the caudal fin is larger than the upper . A row of small thorns runs down the middle of the back and tail ; thorns are also present on the snout and over the eyes . As the shark ages , the thorns decrease in size and may disappear . The dorsal coloration is gray , brown , or reddish brown with scattered dark markings : large blotches surrounded by a ring of tiny spots in adults , and pairs of ocelli in juveniles . The underside is white , extending to the margins of the pectoral and pelvic fins . This species measures up to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 59 in ) long and weighs up to 27 kg ( 60 lb ) . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 During the day , Pacific angelsharks are almost never seen in the open , instead resting motionless on the sea floor buried under a thin layer of sediment that disguises their outlines . At night some individuals remain motionless , waiting for prey , while others may be encountered on the bottom unburied or actively swimming . Large sharks , including the great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ) and the broadnose sevengill shark ( Notorynchus cepedianus ) , and the northern elephant seal ( Mirounga angustirostris ) are known to consume Pacific angelsharks . Known parasites of this species include the copepod Trebius <unk> , which infests the skin , the myxosporidian <unk> <unk> , which infests the gall bladder , and the tapeworm <unk> <unk> , which infests the spiral valve intestine . The leech <unk> lobata may be attached around this shark 's cloaca , inside the intestine , and even inside the uterus and on developing embryos . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 A sedentary ambush predator , the Pacific angelshark feeds mainly on bony fishes , including kelp bass , croakers , flatfishes , damselfishes , mackerels , and sardines . During the winter and early spring , spawning squid are abundant and become the primary source of food . In the southern Gulf of California , the most important prey species are , in descending order , the mackerel <unk> <unk> , the toadfish <unk> analis , the lizardfish <unk> <unk> , the <unk> <unk> <unk> , and the shrimp <unk> penicillata . At Catalina Island , this species feeds mainly on the blacksmith ( <unk> <unk> ) and the <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . Adults and juveniles have similar diets . 
 Individual sharks choose sites giving them the best ambush success . They prefer junctions of sandy and rocky substrates near reefs ( used by many fishes for shelter ) usually orienting themselves either toward or parallel to nearby vertical structures . They tend to face upslope , which may facilitate burying via falling sediment , bring more fish swimming downstream from the reef , or ease targeting by silhouetting prey against the sunlight . 
 Once settled at a successful site , an angelshark may remain there for ten days , re @-@ burying itself on or near the same spot after every strike . As the local prey eventually learn to avoid the stationary predator , the shark periodically shifts at night to a new site several kilometers away . One study off Santa Catalina Island found that over 13 – 25 hours , nine sharks together used only 1 @.@ 5 km2 ( 0 @.@ 6 mi2 ) . A later , longer @-@ term study found that the sharks ' sporadic position changes covered as much as 75 km ( 47 mi ) over three months , almost circling the island . Single individuals swam up to 7 @.@ 3 km ( 4 @.@ 5 mi ) in a night . 
 The Pacific angelshark is primarily a visual hunter ; experiments in nature show that they strike at fish @-@ shaped targets without any electrical , chemical , vibrational , or behavioral cues . At night , they are guided by the bioluminescence of planktonic dinoflagellates and ostracods disturbed by moving prey . This species ' visual system is attuned to the wavelengths of light emitted by these planktonic organisms , showing the importance of night hunting . Pacific angelsharks are more likely to strike at prey approaching from the front . It usually waits until the prey approaches to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) , as its attack is less accurate beyond this distance . The strike is a stereotyped behavior in which the shark presses the forward lobes of its pectoral fins against the bottom and thrusts its head upwards at up to a 90 ° angle . Its mouth forms a tube when opened , creating a suction force , while its jaws <unk> forward to secure the prey between sharp teeth . During the strike , the eyes roll backward into the head for protection . The strike is often completed in under a tenth of a second . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The Pacific angelshark is aplacental viviparous with the unborn young nourished by a yolk sac ; reproduction occurs on an annual cycle . Most females have a single functional ovary ( on the left side ) , though some have two ; the oviducts are often filled with yolk , which has been speculated to be from unfertilized eggs being resorbed . Young embryos 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) long have translucent skin , protruding eyes , and exposed gill filaments . Spots of pigment have developed when the embryo is 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) long , and the first row of teeth have appeared when the embryo is 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) long . By the time the embryo is 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long , the mouth has migrated to a terminal position and the color pattern has fully developed ; the external yolk sac begins to shrink as the yolk is transferred to an internal yolk sac , which holds it until it can be transferred to the intestine for digestion . The internal yolk sac is fully resorbed before birth ; if the pup is released prematurely , it does not feed until this process is complete . 
 Off Santa Barbara , birthing takes place from March to June after a gestation period of ten months , and the females mate again shortly afterward . The average litter size is 6 with a range of 1 – 11 ( rarely 13 ) ; there is no correlation between female size and number of offspring . The young are born in water 55 – 90 m ( 180 – 295 ft ) deep , probably to protect them from predators . Pacific angelshark embryos grow at 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) per month when young , slowing down to 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) per month just before birth , and are born at a length of 25 – 26 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 10 @.@ 2 in ) . Newborn pups in captivity grow at a rate of around 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) per year , while adults in the wild grow at around 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) per year . Both sexes mature at 90 – 100 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long , corresponding to an age of 8 – 13 years . Gulf of California sharks , which may be another species , mature at 78 cm ( 2 @.@ 56 ft ) long for males and 85 cm ( 2 @.@ 79 ft ) long for females . About 20 % of newborns survive to maturity . The maximum lifespan has been estimated at 25 – 35 years . Unlike other sharks , the growth rings on the vertebrae of this species are deposited in proportion to the shark 's size rather than yearly , making age determination difficult . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Although usually sedate and approachable underwater , Pacific angelsharks are quick to bite if touched , captured , or otherwise provoked , and can inflict severe lacerations . Commercial fisheries for this species exist off Baja California and to a lesser extent off California ( see below ) ; the meat is considered excellent and is sold fresh or frozen . This species is captured in limited numbers by recreational fishers using hook @-@ and @-@ line , spears , or even by hand , particularly off southern California . It is also taken as bycatch in shrimp trawls operating in the Gulf of California , and processed into fishmeal . The capacity of this species to withstand a focused fishing effort is limited , due to its low rates of reproduction and movement . 
 In 1976 , the commercial gillnet fishery for the California halibut ( Paralichthys californicus ) , operating off Santa Barbara , expanded to include the Pacific angelshark as well . The sharks had become valuable due to their promotion as a substitute for the seasonally available common thresher shark ( Alopias vulpinus ) , and the development of new processing techniques . Around 50 % of the shark was used , while the skin , cartilage , and offal were discarded . In the 1980s , rising demand led to the introduction of gillnets with a medium @-@ sized mesh , designed specifically for this species . Fishery landings increased from a dressed ( post @-@ processing ) weight of 148 kg ( 326 lb ) in 1977 , to 117 @,@ 000 kg ( 258 @,@ 000 lb ) in 1983 , to 277 @,@ 000 kg ( 611 @,@ 000 lb ) in 1984 . The fishery peaked in 1985 and 1986 , when 550 @,@ 000 kg ( 1 @.@ 2 million lbs ) were taken annually , making this species the number one shark fished off California . This level of exploitation was unsustainable , and despite a minimum size limit imposed in 1986 , catches fell to 112 @,@ 000 kg ( 247 @,@ 000 lb ) in 1990 . 
 In 1991 , the use of gillnets in nearshore Californian waters was banned by a voter initiative ( Proposition 132 ) ; the restricted area included much of the Pacific angelshark 's habitat and reduced fishing pressure on the species . As a result , Pacific angelshark landings dropped further to 10 @,@ 000 kg ( 22 @,@ 000 lb ) dressed in 1994 , when the central Californian halibut / angel shark fishery was closed completely , and have remained low since . The decline of the Californian fishery led to the industry shifting to Mexico , where gillnet <unk> ( artisanal fishing vessels ) targeting this species now meet most of the angel shark demand in California . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Near Threatened ; Pacific angelshark numbers off California appear to be increasing and demographic modeling suggests the stock is healthy . However , the impact of the intense , unregulated Mexican fishery on the global population is yet undetermined . There is continuing interest in California for a resumption of the commercial fishery , though conservation concerns have thus far taken precedence . 
 = Edmund of Woodstock , 1st Earl of Kent = 
 Edmund of Woodstock , 1st Earl of Kent ( 5 August 1301 – 19 March 1330 ) was the sixth son of Edward I of England , and a younger half @-@ brother of Edward II . Edward I had intended to make substantial grants of land to Edmund , but when the king died in 1307 , Edward II failed to follow through on his father 's intentions , much due to his favouritism towards Piers Gaveston . Edmund still remained loyal to his brother , and in 1321 he was created Earl of Kent . He played an important part in Edward 's administration , acting both as diplomat and military commander , and in 1321 – 22 helped suppress a rebellion against the king . 
 Discontent against the king grew , however , and eventually affected also Edmund . The antagonism was largely caused by Edward 's preference for his new favourites , Hugh Despenser the Younger and his father . In 1326 , Edmund joined a rebellion led by Queen Isabella and Roger Mortimer , whereby Edward II was deposed . Edmund failed to get along with the new administration , and in 1330 he was caught planning a new rebellion , and executed . 
 Once the new king , Edward III , came of age and assumed personal control of government , he annulled the charges against his uncle . The title and estates of the Earl of Kent descended on Edmund 's son , also called Edmund . When this Edmund died , in 1331 , his brother John became earl . Though he was officially exonerated , Edmund did not enjoy a great reputation during his life and afterwards , due to his unreliable political dealings . 
 = = Family background and early years = = 
 Edward I of England had a great number of children with his first wife , Eleanor of Castile , but only one son who survived into adulthood – the future Edward II ( b . 1284 ) . After Eleanor died , the king married Margaret of France , with whom he had two children : Thomas ( b . 1300 ) and , when the king was sixty @-@ two , Edmund . Edmund was born at Woodstock in Oxfordshire on 5 August 1301 , and was therefore referred to as Edmund of Woodstock . Son of the English king , he was also , through his mother , grandson of Philip III of France . On 7 July 1307 , before Edmund had turned six , King Edward I died , leaving Edmund 's half @-@ brother Edward to succeed as King Edward II . 
 Though not resident in the two boys ' household , Edward I had taken great interest in the princes ' upbringing and well @-@ being . Before he died , the king had promised to provide Edmund with substantial grants of land . In August 1306 , Edward I signed a charter promising Edmund land worth 7000 marks a year , and in May 1307 , 1000 marks was added to this . He probably intended to give the earldom of Norfolk to Thomas , while Edmund would receive the earldom of Cornwall , which had been left vacant after Edward I 's cousin Edmund died without children in 1300 . When Edward II came to the throne , however , he went against his father 's wishes by granting the earldom of Cornwall to his favourite Piers Gaveston . According to the chronicle Vita Edwardi Secundi , this act was a grave insult to the king 's younger brothers . Edward II nevertheless took steps to provide his half @-@ brother with an income ; grants made in 1315 and 1319 secured Edmund 2000 marks a year . In May 1321 , Edmund received the strategically important Gloucester Castle , and further grants followed his creation as Earl of Kent on 28 July 1321 . 
 Edward II 's close relationship to Gaveston had been a source of conflict at court , and Gaveston 's execution by a group of rebellious barons in 1312 had brought the country to the brink of civil war . As Edmund came of age , he became an important member of the circle around his brother . In 1318 , the Treaty of Leake was drafted as an effort to reconcile the opposing parties , and Edmund – as his first public act – was among the witnesses to sign this treaty . Further official appointments followed . In the spring of 1320 he took part in an embassy to Pope John XXII in Avignon , where the mission was to absolve the king of his oath to uphold the Ordinances , a set of restrictions imposed on royal authority by the baronage . Later that year , he joined his brother the king in Amiens , where Edward was paying homage to the French king . In October 1320 , Edmund attended his first parliament . 
 = = Civil war = = 
 As the political conflict escalated into full @-@ scale rebellion in 1321 – 22 , Edmund played an important role in its suppression . The opposition stemmed from resentment against the king 's new favourites , Hugh Despenser the Younger and Hugh Despenser the Elder . When Bartholomew Badlesmere , steward of the royal household , defected to the opposition , Edward made his youngest brother Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports in place of Badlesmere on 16 June . In the parliament of July 1321 , Edmund briefly sided with the opposition when he agreed to exile the Despensers , but later claimed this had been done under duress , and in November sat on the council that annulled the exile . 
 In October , Edmund was once more employed in a move against Badlesmere , when he took part in a siege on Leeds Castle in Kent , which was held by Badlesmere . After Badlesmere was forced to surrender , hostilities moved to the Welsh Marches , where Roger Mortimer and others were in open revolt . Once confronted with the royal army , Mortimer surrendered without a fight , and attention turned to the leader of the baronial opposition , Thomas of Lancaster . Edmund , who had taken part in the Marcher campaign , was now ordered , with the Earl of Surrey , to take Lancaster 's castle of Pontefract . On 17 March 1322 , Lancaster was captured after his defeat at the Battle of Boroughbridge , and brought to Pontefract . Here , Edmund was on the jury that condemned him to death for treason . 
 Even with Lancaster defeated , the battle against the rebels was not over . Edmund was charged with overtaking Wallingford Castle from Maurice de Berkeley in January 1323 , a task which he fulfilled with great success . For his loyalty , Edmund was rewarded with substantial holdings in Wales , primarily land forfeited by Roger Mortimer . The greater part of the spoils of war , however , went to the Despensers , who both benefited greatly from the forfeiture of the rebels . By 1326 , the Despensers , father and son respectively , enjoyed incomes of £ 3 @,@ 800 and £ 7 @,@ 000 , while Edmund 's annual income was at only 2 @,@ 355 marks ( £ 1 @,@ 570 ) . 
 = = Scotland and France = = 
 With domestic opposition largely neutralised , the king turned his attention to Scotland . A major campaign was organised in August , but the effort ended in total failure when the English were routed by the Scots , led by Robert the Bruce , at the Battle of Old Byland on 14 October 1322 . Edward II himself had to flee the battlefield to avoid capture , and Edmund was with him as the royal army retreated to York . The king 's inability to handle the Scottish situation was becoming apparent . Andrew Harclay , who had defeated Lancaster at Boroughbridge , and for this had been created Earl of Carlisle and appointed Warden of the Marches to Scotland , signed a peace treaty with the Scots without royal sanction in January 1323 . When the king found out , he ordered Harclay 's arrest . Edmund was one of the judges who passed judgement on Harclay , who was hanged , drawn and quartered for treason . With Harclay gone , Edmund was given responsibilities for the defence of the northern border , but the situation remained untenable . On 30 May 1323 , Edmund was on the council that agreed to a thirteen @-@ year truce with Scotland . 
 Meanwhile , the English king 's possessions in France were coming under threat from the French king . Charles IV of France demanded that Edward again pay homage for his Duchy of Aquitaine , while at the same time threatening to confiscate the duchy under the pretext of a local dispute involving the priory at Saint @-@ Sardos . In April 1324 , Edmund and Alexander de Bicknor , Archbishop of Dublin , were sent to France on a diplomatic mission . While some historians have criticised Edmund for his failure to reach a diplomatic settlement , others have pointed to the difficult circumstances he faced , and how others had fared little better . When diplomacy failed , Edmund was appointed Edward 's lieutenant in France on 20 July 1324 . Though there was a desperate need for reinforcements from England , these never arrived . In the short war that followed , the English lands were quickly overrun by the French , and Edmund was besieged at La <unk> . Here he held out until 22 September , at which point he was forced to surrender and agree to a six @-@ month truce . 
 = = Deposition of Edward II = = 
 Edward II 's refusal to pay homage to the French king was based on concern for his royal sovereignty , but also on fear of a potential resurgence of domestic resistance . For this reason , he sent his wife Isabella to negotiate with King Charles , who was her brother . The Queen departed for France on 9 March 1325 , and in September she was joined by her son , the heir to the throne , Prince Edward . Isabella 's negotiations were successful , and it was agreed that the young Prince Edward would perform homage in the king 's place , which he did on 24 September . Not long after this , Edmund joined the queen and prince in Paris . A circle of opposition was emerging around the queen , including the exiled Roger Mortimer . Edmund , who had previously been steadfast in his support for his half @-@ brother , now joined the plot against the king . Though he still distrusted Mortimer , his hatred for the Despensers seems to have been even greater at this point . When Edmund , along with the others , ignored the king 's order to return to England , his lands were confiscated in March 1326 . 
 In August , Isabella and Mortimer invaded England with mercenary soldiers , and Edmund took part in the invasion . The invasion won the support of a great part of the English nobility , including Edmund 's brother Thomas , and Henry , Earl of Lancaster , Thomas of Lancaster 's brother . Edmund took part in the trials of the two Despensers , and in the council transferring power to Prince Edward , who was crowned King Edward III . For his participation in the coup , Edmund received a reward of land belonging to the Despensers , and the Earl of Arundel , who was also executed as a supporter of Edward II . As the Northern situation was still difficult , Edmund was given joint command of the Scottish Border with Lancaster , but the two fell out , and Lancaster was soon after given sole command . It did not take long for Edmund to grow disenchanted with the new regime ; one source of contention was the dominant position at court of Mortimer , who has been described as Isabella 's lover . In the autumn of 1328 , Edmund and his brother Thomas joined Henry of Lancaster in a conspiracy against Isabella and Mortimer . The conspiracy was a product of shared interest , however , rather than strong personal ties . Once it became clear that it would fail , the two brothers abandoned the venture . 
 = = Death and aftermath = = 
 After participating in the planned rebellion , Edmund became less popular at court . He was still allowed to accompany the king 's wife Philippa to her coronation in January 1330 , but his appearances at court became less frequent . At this point he became involved in another plot against the court , when he was convinced by rumours that his brother was still alive . It later emerged that Roger Mortimer himself was responsible for leading Edmund into this belief , in a form of entrapment . The plot was revealed , and in the parliament of March 1330 Edmund was indicted and condemned to death as a traitor . Upon hearing that the verdict was death , the condemned earl pleaded with Edward III for his life , offering to walk from Winchester to London with a rope around his neck as a sign of atonement . Edward III however knew that leniency was not an option for the aforementioned entrapment utilized by Mortimer could extend to him and potentially be subversive to his own kingship if his father , Edward II truly was alive . Thus Edward III sanctioned the killing of his uncle . It was almost impossible to find anyone willing to perform the execution of a man of royal blood , until a convicted murderer eventually beheaded Edmund in exchange for a pardon . Edmund 's body was initially buried in a Franciscan church in Winchester , but it was removed to Westminster Abbey in 1331 . 
 The execution of a royal prince was a great provocation to the seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Edward III , who had not been informed about the decision , and it probably contributed to the king 's decision to rise up against his protector . In 1330 , Edward III carried out a coup installing himself in personal control of government , and Mortimer was executed . Among the charges against Mortimer was that of procuring Edmund 's death , and the charges against the late earl of Kent were annulled . In late 1325 , Edmund had married Margaret Wake , sister of Thomas Wake , Baron Wake of Liddell , and the couple had several children . His lands and titles descended on his oldest son by the same name , but this Edmund himself died in October 1331 . The earldom then passed to the younger son John . 
 Edmund was not particularly popular while he was alive , nor did he enjoy a good reputation after his death . His unreliability in political issues , and repeated shifts in allegiance , might have contributed to this . His household was also said to behave in a way that caused popular resentment , taking provisions as they passed through the countryside while offering little compensation . At the same time , it has been pointed out that Edmund showed a great deal of loyalty to Edward II , in spite of receiving relatively little rewards and recognition from his brother . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = In fiction = = 
 Edmund is a character in Les Rois maudits ( The Accursed Kings ) , a series of French historical novels by Maurice Druon . He was portrayed by Eric Kruger in the 1972 French miniseries adaptation of the series . 
 = 1920 APFA season = 
 The 1920 APFA season was the inaugural season of the American Professional Football Association — renamed the National Football League in 1922 . The league was formed on August 20 , 1920 by independent professional American football teams from Ohio , all of whom had previously played in the Ohio League or New York Pro Football League ( NYPFL ) . At the meeting , they first called their new league the American Professional Football Conference . A second organizational meeting was held in Canton on September 17 , adding more teams to the league . At the meeting , the name of the league became the American Professional Football Association . Four other teams also joined the Association during the year . Meanwhile , Jim Thorpe of the Canton Bulldogs was named the APFA 's first president but continued to play for the team . 
 Scheduling was left up to each team . There were wide variations , both in the overall number of games played and in the number played against other Association members . Thus , no official standings were maintained . In addition , football teams in the APFA also faced independent football teams not associated with the league . For instance , the Rochester Jeffersons played a schedule consisting mostly of local teams from their local sandlot circuit and the NYPFL , not the APFA . 
 The Akron Pros ended the season as the only undefeated team in the Association . Despite this , two one @-@ loss teams — the Decatur Staleys and Buffalo All @-@ Americans — who both tied Akron that year made cases for a co @-@ championship . At the league meetings in Akron on April 30 , 1921 , the Pros were awarded the Brunswick @-@ Balke Collender Cup for the 1920 season , the only year the trophy was used . According to modern NFL tie @-@ breaking rules , the 1920 Buffalo All @-@ Americans would be co @-@ champions . They would be tied with the Akron Pros in win percentage , 9 @.@ 5 wins to 1 @.@ 5 losses ( .864 ) , both teams beating out the Staleys , who would have a season that counted 11 wins to 2 losses ( .846 ) . 
 Of the 14 teams that played in the APFA / NFL 's inaugural season , the Chicago Cardinals , now named the Arizona Cardinals , and the Decatur Staleys , now named the Chicago Bears , are the only teams that remain in the league . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Prior to the APFA , there were several other loose , professional organizations ; most of the APFA teams were from either the Ohio League or the New York Pro Football League . On August 20 , 1920 , a meeting attended by representatives of four Ohio League teams — Ralph Hay and Jim Thorpe for the Canton Bulldogs , Jimmy O 'Donnell and Stan Cofall for the Cleveland Tigers , Carl Storck for the Dayton Triangles , and Frank Nied and Art Ranney for the Akron Pros — was held . At the meeting , the representatives tentatively agreed to call their new league the American Professional Football Conference , introduce a salary cap for the teams , and not to sign college players nor players under contract with another team . According to the Canton Evening Repository , the purpose of the league was to " raise the standard of professional football in every way possible , to eliminate bidding for players between rival clubs and to secure cooperation in the formation of schedules , at least for the bigger teams . " The representatives then contacted other major professional teams and invited them to a meeting for September 17 . 
 At that meeting , held at Bulldogs owner Ralph Hay 's Hupmobile showroom in Canton , Ohio , representatives of the Rock Island Independents , the Muncie Flyers , the Decatur Staleys , the Racine Cardinals , the Massillon Tigers , the Chicago Tigers , and the Hammond Pros agreed to join the league . Representatives of the Buffalo All @-@ Americans and Rochester Jeffersons could not attend the meeting , but sent letters to Hay asking to be included in the league . Team representatives changed the league 's name slightly to the American Professional Football Association and elected officers , installing Thorpe as president , Cofall as vice @-@ president , Ranney as secretary @-@ treasurer . Under the new league structure , teams created their schedules dynamically as the season progressed , so there were no minimum or maximum number of games needed to be played . Also , representatives of each team voted to determine the winner of the APFA trophy . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 The regular @-@ season schedule was not fixed but was created dynamically by each team as the season progressed . The following table was formed by NFL History , which used contemporary newspapers . The first game that counted in the standings occurred on September 26 , when the Rock Island Independents beat the St. Paul Ideals 48 – 0 ; the final game was a 14 – 14 tie between the Racine Cardinals and the Chicago <unk> on December 19 , 1920 . The Decatur Staleys and the Canton Bulldogs played the most games in the season ( 13 ) , while the Muncie Flyers played the fewest ( 1 ) . The Buffalo All @-@ Americans scored the most points all season ( 258 ) , and the Akron Pros allowed the fewest points ( 7 ) . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 Awarded the Brunswick @-@ Balke Collender Cup and named APFA Champions.Note : Tie games were not officially counted in the standings until 1972 . 
 = = Postseason and legacy = = 
 As there was no playoff system in the APFA until 1932 , a meeting was held to determine the 1920 Champions . Each team that showed up had a vote to determine the champions . Since the Akron Pros never lost a game , the Pros were awarded the Brunswick @-@ Balke Collender Cup on April 30 , 1921 . The trophy was a " silver loving cup " , donated by the Brunswick @-@ Balke @-@ Collender Company . This decision , however , would arise with controversy . The Staleys and the All @-@ Americans each stated that they should win the award because they had more wins and were not beaten by the Akron Pros . Each player from the Pros was also awarded with a golden fob ; this was in the shape of a football and inscribed with " 1920 " , " WORLD CHAMPIONS " , and each player 's first initial and last name . The Pros did not officially celebrate their championship season until the following year . In October 1921 , most of the team was invited to the Elks Club of Akron , which was labeled as " a grand homecoming celebration for the world 's champions " . Pollard was congratulated during an Akron Merchants Association of Colored Business Men 's meeting . 
 The Pros were the first team in the history of the APFA to complete a non @-@ modern " perfect season " . Only four other teams have accomplished this feat : the 1922 Canton Bulldogs at 10 – 0 – 2 , the 1923 Canton Bulldogs at 11 – 0 – 1 , the 1929 Green Bay Packers at 12 – 0 – 1 , and the 1972 Miami Dolphins at 17 – 0 – 0 . In 1972 , the NFL changed the rules so ties count as a half @-@ win and a half @-@ loss . If this rule had applied in 1920 , the All @-@ Americans and the Pros would each have had an .864 winning percentage . Even though the Pros were given the trophy in 1920 , the league lost track of the event and for a long time published in its own record books that the 1920 championship was undecided . It was not until the 1970s that the NFL remembered its early vote on awarding the Akron Pros the championship . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = All @-@ Pro = = = 
 Bruce Copeland , sportswriter for the Rock Island Argus , compiled the All @-@ Pro list for 1920 . He used the games played in Rock Island , other newspapers , and his own memory to determine the first- , second- , and third @-@ team All @-@ Pro list . Pro @-@ Football @-@ Reference.com uses this list as the official All @-@ Pro list of 1920 . Twenty of the players were from Illinois and thirteen were from Ohio . The Rock Island Independents had the most players on the list ( 9 ) , and Racine Cardinals had the least ( 1 ) . 
 = = = Hall of Fame = = = 
 As of 2012 , 10 players have been enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame who played in the 1920 APFA season . One non @-@ player , Joseph Carr , the owner of the Columbus Panhandles in the 1920 season and league president from 1921 – 1939 , was also elected to the Hall . 
 = Marquee Moon = 
 Marquee Moon is the 1977 debut studio album by American rock band Television . By 1974 , the group had become a prominent act on the New York music scene and generated interest from a number of record labels . Television rehearsed extensively in preparation for Marquee Moon and , after signing to Elektra Records , recorded the album at A & R Recording in September 1976 . It was produced by the band 's frontman Tom Verlaine and sound engineer Andy Johns . 
 For Marquee Moon , Verlaine and fellow guitarist Richard Lloyd abandoned contemporary punk rock 's power chords in favor of rock and jazz @-@ inspired interplay , melodic lines , and counter @-@ melodies . Verlaine 's lyrics combined urban and pastoral imagery , references to lower Manhattan , themes of adolescence , and influences from French poetry . He also used puns and double @-@ entendres to give his songs an impressionistic quality describing the perception of an experience rather than its specific details . 
 When Marquee Moon was released in February 1977 , it received widespread critical acclaim and unexpected commercial success in the United Kingdom , but sold poorly in the United States . The record has since been viewed by critics as one of the greatest albums of all time and a foundational record of alternative rock . Television 's innovative post @-@ punk instrumentation on Marquee Moon strongly influenced the indie rock and new wave movements of the 1980s , as well as rock guitarists such as John Frusciante , Will Sergeant , and The Edge . 
 = = Background = = 
 By the mid 1970s , Television had become a leading act in the New York music scene . They first developed a following from their residency at the lower Manhattan club CBGB , where they helped persuade club manager Hilly Kristal to feature more unconventional musical groups . The band had received interest from labels by late 1974 , but chose to wait for an appropriate record deal . They turned down a number of major labels , including Island Records , for whom they had recorded demos with producer Brian Eno . Eno had produced demos of the songs " Prove It " , " Friction " , " Venus " , and " Marquee Moon " in December 1974 , but Television frontman Tom Verlaine did not approve of Eno 's sound : " He recorded us very cold and brittle , no resonance . We 're oriented towards really strong guitar music ... sort of expressionistic . " 
 After founding bassist Richard Hell left in 1975 , Television enlisted Fred Smith , whom they found more reliable and rhythmically adept . The band quickly developed a rapport and a musical style that reflected their individual influences : Smith and guitarist Richard Lloyd had a rock and roll background , drummer Billy Ficca was a jazz enthusiast , and Verlaine 's tastes varied from the rock group 13th Floor Elevators to jazz saxophonist Albert Ayler . That same year , Television shared a residency at CBGB with singer and poet Patti Smith , who had recommended the band to Arista Records president Clive Davis . Although he had seen them perform , Davis was hesitant to sign them at first . He was persuaded by Smith 's boyfriend , Allen Lanier , to let them record demos , which Verlaine said resulted in " a much warmer sound than Eno got " . However , Verlaine still wanted to find a label that would allow him to produce Television 's debut album himself , even though he had little recording experience . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 In August 1976 , Television signed a recording deal with Elektra Records , who promised Verlaine he could produce the band 's first album with the condition that he would be assisted by a well @-@ known recording engineer . Verlaine , who did not want to be guided in the studio by a famous producer , enlisted engineer Andy Johns based on his work for the Rolling Stones ' 1973 album Goats Head Soup . Lloyd was also impressed by Johns , whom he said had produced " some of the great guitar sounds in rock " . Johns was credited as the co @-@ producer on Marquee Moon . Elektra did not query Television 's studio budget for the recording . 
 Television recorded Marquee Moon in September 1976 at A & R Recording in New York City . In preparation for the album 's recording , Television had rehearsed for four to six hours a day and six to seven days a week . Lloyd said they were " both really roughshod musicians on one hand and desperadoes on the other , with the will to become good " . During preparations , the band rejected most of the material they had written over the course of three years . Once they were in the studio , they recorded two new songs for the album — " Guiding Light " and " Torn Curtain " — and older songs such as " Friction " , " Venus " , and the title track , which had become a standard at their live shows . Verlaine said that , because he had predetermined the structure of the album , only those eight songs and a few others were attempted during the recording sessions . For most of Marquee Moon , Johns recorded Television as they performed live in the studio . A few songs were recorded in one take , including the title track , which Ficca assumed was a rehearsal . Johns suggested the group record another take of the song , but Verlaine told him to " forget it " . Verlaine and Lloyd 's guitars were recorded and multi @-@ tracked to left and right channels , and the final recordings were left uncompressed and unadorned with studio effects . 
 The front cover for Marquee Moon was shot by photographer Robert Mapplethorpe , who had previously shot the cover for Patti Smith 's 1975 album Horses . His photo situated Verlaine a step in front of the rest of the band , who were captured in a tensed , serious pose . Verlaine held his right hand across his body and extended his slightly clenched left hand forward . When Mapplethorpe gave Television the contact prints , Lloyd took the band 's favorite shot to a print shop in Times Square and asked for color photocopies for the group members to mull over . Although the first few copies were oddly colored , Lloyd asked the copy worker to print more " while turning the knobs with his eyes closed " . He likened the process to Andy Warhol 's screen prints . After he showed it to the group , they chose the altered copy over Mapplethorpe 's original photo , which Fred Smith had framed and kept for himself . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to Rolling Stone , Marquee Moon was a post @-@ punk album , while Jason Heller from The A.V. Club described it as " elegantly jagged " art punk . Robert Christgau deemed it more of a rock record because of Television 's formal and technical abilities as musicians : " It wasn 't punk . Its intensity wasn 't manic ; it didn 't come in spurts . " Both sides of the album began with three shorter , hook @-@ driven songs , which Stylus Magazine 's Evan <unk> said veered between progressive rock and post @-@ punk styles . The title track and " Torn Curtain " were longer and more jam @-@ oriented . " As peculiar as it sounds , I 've always thought that we were a pop band " , Verlaine later told Select . " You know , I always thought Marquee Moon was a bunch of cool singles . And then I 'd realise , Christ , [ the title track ] is ten minutes long . With two guitar solos . " 
 Verlaine and Lloyd <unk> their guitars around the rhythm section 's drum hits and basslines . Their dual playing drew on 1960s rock and avant @-@ garde jazz styles , abandoning the layered power chords of contemporary punk rock in favor of melodic lines and counter @-@ melodies . Verlaine established the song 's rhythmic phrase , against which Lloyd played dissonant melodies . Lloyd had learned to notate his solos by the time they recorded Marquee Moon , allowing him to develop his solo for a song from introduction to variation and resolution . The two traded rhythmic and melodic lines several times on some songs while producing tension . " There weren 't many bands where the two guitars played rhythm and melody back and forth , like a jigsaw puzzle " , Lloyd said . Most of the solos on Marquee Moon followed a pattern wherein Verlaine ran up a major scale but regressed slightly after each step . On " See No Evil " , he soloed through a full octave before playing a blues @-@ influenced riff , and on the title track , he played in a Mixolydian mode and lowered the seventh by half a step . Lloyd opened " Friction " by playing octaves before Verlaine 's ringing harmonics and series of descending scales . 
 Verlaine 's lyrics on Marquee Moon combined urban and pastoral imagery . Although it was not a concept album , many of its songs made geographical references to lower Manhattan . According to Bryan Waterman , author of the 33 ⅓ book on the record , it celebrated stern adolescence in the urban pastoral mode . Its urban nocturne theme was derived from poetic works about Bohemian decadence . According to Spin , the album was about urban mythology ; Verlaine brought " a sentimental romanticism to the Bowery , making legends out of the mundane " . The lyrics also incorporated maritime imagery , including the paradoxical " nice little boat made out of ocean " in " See No Evil " , the waterfront setting in " Elevation " , sea metaphors in " Guiding Light " , and references to docks , caves , and waves in " Prove It " . 
 Although Verlaine was against drug use after Television formed , he once had a short @-@ lived phase using psychedelic drugs , to which he makes reference in similes on songs such as " Venus " . The vignette @-@ like lyrics follow an ostensibly drug @-@ induced , revelatory experience : " You know it 's all like some new kind of drug / my senses are sharp and my hands are like gloves / Broadway looks so medieval , it seems to flap like little pages / I fell sideways laughing , with a friend from many stages . " According to Waterman , although psychedelic trips informed the experiences of many artists in lower Manhattan at the time , " Venus " contributed to the impression of Marquee Moon as a transcendental work in the vein of 19th @-@ century Romanticism : " Verlaine is into perception , and sometimes the perception he represents is as intense as a mind @-@ altering substance . " Christgau said the lyric about Broadway contributed to how writers have associated the album with the East Village , as it " situates this philosophical action in the downtown night " . 
 The songs on Marquee Moon inspired interpretations from a variety of sources , but Verlaine conceded he did not understand the meaning behind much of his lyrics . He drew on influences from French poetry and wanted to narrate the consciousness or confusion of an experience rather than its specific details . He compared the songs to " a little moment of discovery or releasing something or being in a certain time or place and having a certain understanding of something " . Verlaine also used puns and double @-@ entendres in his lyrics , which he said were atmospheric and conveyed the meaning of a song implicitly . " See No Evil " opens with the narrator 's flights of fancy and closes with an imperative about limitless possibilities : " Runnin ' wild with the one I love / Pull down the future with the one you love " . In the refrain to " Venus " , the narrator falls into " the arms of Venus de Milo " . Verlaine explained his reference to the armless statue as " a term for a state of feeling . They 're loving [ ubiquitous ] arms " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Marquee Moon was released in February 1977 in the United States and on March 4 , 1977 , in the United Kingdom , where it was an unexpected success and reached number 28 on the country 's albums chart . The record 's two singles — the title track and " Prove It " — both charted on the UK Top 30 . Marquee Moon also received widespread acclaim from critics , and its sales were partly fueled by Nick Kent 's rave two @-@ page review of the album for NME . Kent wrote that Television had proven to be ambitious and skilled enough to achieve " new dimensions of sonic overdrive " with an " inspired work of pure genius , a record finely in tune and sublimely arranged with a whole new slant on dynamics " . He deemed the album 's music vigorous , sophisticated , and innovative at a time when rock is wholly conservative . In a five @-@ star review for Sounds , Vivien Goldman hailed Marquee Moon as " an obvious , unabashed , instant classic " , while Peter Gammond of Hi @-@ Fi News & Record Review gave it an " A + " and called it one of the most exciting releases in music , highlighted by Verlaine 's steely , Gábor Szabó @-@ like guitar and authentic rock music . In Audio , Jon Tiven wrote that although the vocals and production could have been more amplified , Verlaine 's lyrics and guitar " manage to viscerally and intellectually grab the listener " . Joan Downs from Time felt the band 's sound was distinguished more by the bold playing of Lloyd , who she said had the potential to become a major figure in rock guitar . Christgau gave Marquee Moon an " A + " in The Village Voice and believed Verlaine 's " demotic @-@ philosophical " lyrics could have sustained the album alone , as would the guitar playing , which he said was as penetrating and expressive as Eric Clapton or Jerry Garcia " but totally unlike either " . 
 In a negative review , Noel Coppage from Stereo Review was critical of the singing and songwriting , likening Marquee Moon to a stale version of Bruce Springsteen . Nigel Hunter wrote in Gramophone that Verlaine 's lyrics and guitar playing were vague and that listeners would need a " strong commitment to this type of music to get much out of it " . In Rolling Stone , Ken Tucker said the lyrics generally amounted to non sequiturs , meaningless phrases , and pretentious aphorisms , but were ultimately secondary to the music . Although he found Verlaine 's solos potentially formless and boring , Tucker credited him for structuring his songs around chilling riffs and " a new commercial impulse that gives his music its catchy , if slashing , hook " . High Fidelity felt the music 's " scaring amalgam of rich , brightly colored textures " compensated for Verlaine 's nearly unintelligible lyrics . 
 While holidaying in London after Marquee Moon 's completion , Verlaine saw that Television had been put on NME 's front cover and called Elektra 's press department , who encouraged Television to capitalize on their success there with a tour of the UK . However , the label had already organized for the band to perform on Peter Gabriel 's American tour as a supporting act . Television played small theatres and some larger club venues , and received more mainstream exposure , but were not well received by Gabriel 's middle @-@ American , progressive rock audiences and found the tour unnerving . In May , the band embarked on a highly successful theatre tour in the UK and were enthusiastically received by audiences . Verlaine said that it was refreshing to perform at large theatres after having played clubs for four years . However , he felt that supporting act Blondie did not suit their show because they were too different artistically , even though both groups had emerged from the music scene at CBGB . Blondie 's Chris Stein said that Television were " so competitive " and unaccommodating on the tour and that they did not treat it like a joint effort . He recalled one show where " all our equipment was shoved up at the [ Glasgow ] Apollo and we had like three feet of room so that [ Verlaine ] could stand still in this vast space . " 
 At the end of 1977 , Marquee Moon was voted the third best album of the year in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics nationwide , published in The Village Voice . Christgau , the poll 's creator and supervisor , ranked it number one on his own list . Sounds also named it the year 's best album , while NME ranked it fifth on its year @-@ end list . Verlaine later said of the overwhelmingly positive response from critics , " There was a certain magic happening , an inexplicable certainty of something , like the momentum of a freight train . That 's not egoism but , if you cast a spell , you don 't get flummoxed by the results of your spell . " By the time of Television 's return to the US , however , Elektra had given up on promoting Marquee Moon , which they dismissed as a commercial failure . Marquee Moon sold fewer than 80 @,@ 000 copies in the US and failed to chart on the Billboard 200 . The group was dispirited by their inability to meet commercial expectations , which led to their disbandment in 1978 . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 According to Tony Fletcher , Marquee Moon was difficult to categorize in 1977 and was hailed as " something entirely original , a new dawn in rock music " . Since then , it has been cited by rock critics as one of the greatest records of the American punk rock movement , with Mark Weingarten of Entertainment Weekly calling it the masterpiece of the 1970s New York punk rock scene . According to English writer Clinton Heylin , Marquee Moon marked the end of the New York scene 's peak period , while Spin said it was the CBGB era 's " best and most enduring record " and ranked it as the sixth greatest album of all time in its April 1989 issue . Q included it in the magazine 's 2002 list of the 100 greatest punk records , while writer Colin Larkin ranked it ninth and Mojo ranked it 35th on similar lists . The album has often been voted high in critics polls of the greatest debuts and has also been named one of the greatest records of the 1970s by NME , who ranked it tenth , and Pitchfork , who ranked it third . On September 23 , 2003 , Marquee Moon was reissued by Rhino Entertainment with several bonus tracks , including the first CD appearance of Television 's 1975 debut single " Little Johnny Jewel ( Parts 1 & 2 ) " . That same year , it was named the fourth greatest album of all time by NME , while Rolling Stone placed it at number 128 on its list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . The record was also ranked 33rd by The Guardian and 25th by Melody Maker on similar lists . According to Acclaimed Music , it is the 23rd most ranked album on critics ' all @-@ time lists . It has been viewed as one of the greatest rock albums ever by English radio DJs Marc Riley , who said that " there 's been nothing like it before or since " , and Mark Radcliffe , who called it " the nearest rock record to a string quartet — everybody 's got a part , and it works brilliantly . " 
 Marquee Moon was also one of the most influential records from the 1970s and has been cited by critics as a cornerstone of alternative rock . It heavily influenced the indie rock movement of the 1980s , while post @-@ punk acts appropriated the album 's uncluttered production , introspective tone , and meticulously performed instrumentation . Hunter Felt from PopMatters attributed Marquee Moon 's influence on post @-@ punk and new wave acts to the precisely syncopated rhythm section of Fred Smith and Billy Ficca . He recommended 2003 's " definitive " reissue of the album to listeners of garage rock revival bands , whom he said had modeled themselves after Verlaine 's Romantic poetry @-@ inspired lyrics and the " jaded yet somehow impassioned cynicism " of his vocals . According to Sputnikmusic 's Adam Downer , Television introduced an unprecedented style of rock and roll on Marquee Moon that inaugurated post @-@ punk music , while The Guardian said it scaled " amazing new heights of sophistication and intensity " as a " gorgeous , ringing beacon of post @-@ punk " despite being released several months before the Sex Pistols ' Never Mind the Bollocks ( 1977 ) . AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine believed the record was innovative for abandoning previous New York punk albums ' swing and groove sensibilities in favor of an intellectually stimulating scope that Television achieved instrumentally rather than lyrically . Erlewine claimed " it 's impossible to imagine post @-@ punk soundscapes " without Marquee Moon . Fletcher argued that the songs ' lack of compression , groove , and unnecessary effects provided " a blueprint for a form of chromatic , rather than rhythmic , music that would later come to be called angular " . 
 In Erlewine 's opinion , Marquee Moon was radical and groundbreaking primarily as " a guitar rock album unlike any other " . Verlaine and Lloyd 's dual playing on the record strongly influenced alternative rock groups such as the Pixies , noise rock acts such as Sonic Youth , and big arena bands like U2 . Greg Kot from the Chicago Tribune wrote that Television " created a new template for guitar rock " because of how Verlaine 's improvised playing was weaved together with Lloyd 's precisely notated solos , particularly on the title track . As a member of U2 , Irish guitarist The Edge simulated Television 's guitar sound with an effects pedal . He later said he had wanted to " sound like them " and that Marquee Moon 's title track had changed his " way of thinking about the guitar " . Verlaine 's jagged , expressive sound on the album made a great impression on American guitarist John Frusciante when he started developing as a guitarist in his early 20s , as it reminded him that " none of those things that are happening in the physical dimension mean anything , whether it 's what kind of guitar you play or how your amp 's set up . It 's just ideas , you know , emotion . " In Rolling Stone , Rob Sheffield called Marquee Moon " one of the all @-@ time classic guitar albums " whose tremulous guitar twang was an inspiration behind bands such as R.E.M. and Joy Division . Joy Division 's Stephen Morris cited it as one of his favorite albums , while R.E.M. ' s Michael Stipe said his love of Marquee Moon was " second only to [ Patti Smith 's ] Horses " . English guitarist Will Sergeant said it was also one of his favorite records and that Verlaine and Lloyd 's guitar playing was a major influence on his band Echo & the Bunnymen . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Tom Verlaine , except where noted . 
 " Marquee Moon " , shortened on the original LP , was restored to its complete length of 10 : 40 on the 2003 remastered CD . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Billy Ficca – drums 
 Richard Lloyd – guitar ( solo on tracks 1 , 4 , 5 , and 6 ) , vocals 
 Fred Smith – bass guitar , vocals 
 Tom Verlaine – guitar ( solo on tracks 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 , and 8 ) , keyboards , lead vocals , production 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Jim Boyer – assistant engineering 
 Greg Calbi – mastering 
 Jimmy Douglass – assistant mixing 
 Lee <unk> – mastering 
 Andy Johns – engineering , mixing , production 
 Tony Lane – art direction 
 Billy Lobo – back cover artwork 
 Robert Mapplethorpe – photography 
 Randy Mason – assistant mixing 
 John Telfer – management 
 = = Charts = = 
 = History of hip @-@ hop dance = 
 The History of Hip @-@ Hop dance encompasses the people and events since the late 1960s that have contributed to the development of the early hip @-@ hop dance styles : uprock , breaking , locking , roboting , boogaloo , and popping . Black Americans and Latino Americans created uprock and breaking in New York City . Black Americans in California created locking , roboting , boogaloo , and popping — collectively referred to as the funk styles . All of these dance styles are different stylistically . They share common ground in their street origins and in their improvisational nature . 
 More than 40 years old , hip @-@ hop dance became widely known after the first professional street @-@ based dance crews formed in the 1970s in the United States . The most influential groups were Rock Steady Crew , New York City Breakers , The Lockers , and The Electric Boogaloos who are responsible for the spread of breaking , locking , and popping respectively . The Brooklyn @-@ based dance style uprock influenced breaking early in its development . Boogaloo gained more exposure because it is the namesake of the Electric Boogaloos crew . Uprock , roboting , and boogaloo are respected dance styles but none of them are as mainstream or popular as breaking , locking , and popping . 
 Parallel with the evolution of hip @-@ hop music , hip @-@ hop social dancing emerged from breaking and the funk styles into different forms . Dances from the 1990s such as the Running Man , the Worm , and the Cabbage Patch entered the mainstream and became fad dances . After the millennium , newer social dances such as the Cha Cha Slide and the Dougie also caught on and became very popular . 
 Hip @-@ hop dance is not a studio @-@ derived style . Street dancers developed it in urban neighborhoods without a formal process . All of the early substyles and social dances were brought about through a combination of events including inspiration from James Brown , DJ Kool Herc 's invention of the break beat , the formation of dance crews , and Don Cornelius ' creation of the television show Soul Train . 
 = = Birth of breaking = = 
 According to hip @-@ hop activist Afrika Bambaataa and b @-@ boy Richard " Crazy Legs " Colón , the purest hip @-@ hop dance style , breaking ( commonly called " breakdancing " ) , began in the early 1970s as elaborations on how James Brown danced to his song " Get on the Good Foot " . People mimicked these moves in their living rooms , in hallways , and at parties . It was at these parties that breaking flourished and developed with the help of a young Clive Campbell . Campbell , better known as DJ Kool Herc , was a Jamaican @-@ born DJ who frequently spun records at neighborhood teenage parties in the Bronx . Jeff Chang , in his book Can 't Stop Won 't Stop ( 2005 ) , describes DJ Kool Herc 's eureka moment in this way : 
