 Herc carefully studied the dancers . " I was smoking cigarettes and I was waiting for the records to finish . And I noticed people was waiting for certain parts of the record , " he says . It was an insight as profound as Ruddy Redwood 's dub discovery . The moment when the dancers really got wild was in a song 's short instrumental break , when the band would drop out and the rhythm section would get elemental . Forget melody , chorus , songs — it was all about the groove , building it , keeping it going . Like a string theorist , Herc zeroed in on the fundamental vibrating loop at the heart of the record , the break . 
 In response to this revelation , Herc developed the Merry @-@ Go @-@ Round technique to extend the breaks — the percussion interludes or instrumental solos within a longer work of music . When he played a break on one turntable , he repeated the same break on the second turntable as soon as the first was finished . He then looped these records one after the other in order to extend the break as long as he wanted : " And once they heard that , that was it , wasn 't no turning back , " Herc told Chang . " They always wanted to hear breaks after breaks after breaks after breaks . " It was during these times that the dancers , later known as break @-@ boys or b @-@ boys , would perform what is known as breaking . 
 Breaking started out strictly as toprock , footwork @-@ oriented dance moves performed while standing up . <unk> usually serves as the opening to a breaker 's performance before transitioning into other dance moves performed on the floor . A separate dance style that influenced toprock is uprock , also called rocking or Brooklyn uprock , because it comes from Brooklyn , New York . The uprock dance style has its roots in gangs . Although it looks similar to toprock , uprock is danced with a partner and is more aggressive , involving fancy footwork , shuffles , hitting motions , and movements that mimic fighting . When there was an issue over turf , the two warlords of the feuding gangs would uprock , and whoever won this preliminary dance battle decided where the real fight would be . Because uprock 's purpose was to moderate gang violence , it never crossed over into mainstream breaking as seen today , except for some specific moves adopted by breakers who use it as a variation for their toprock . 
 Aside from James Brown and uprock , hip @-@ hop historian Jorge " Popmaster Fabel " Pabon writes that toprock was also influenced by " tap dance , Lindy hop , salsa , Afro @-@ Cuban , and various African and Native American dances . " From toprock , breaking progressed to being more floor @-@ oriented , involving freezes , downrock , head spins , and windmills . These additions occurred due to influences from 1970s martial arts films , influences from gymnastics , and the formation of dance crews — teams of street dancers who get together to develop new moves , create dance routines , and battle other crews . One b @-@ boy move taken from gymnastics is called the flare , which was made famous by gymnast Kurt Thomas and is called the " Thomas flair " in gymnastics . 
 B @-@ boys Jamie " Jimmy D " White and Santiago " Jo Jo " Torres founded Rock Steady Crew ( RSC ) in 1977 in the Bronx . Along with Dynamic Rockers and Afrika Bambaataa 's Mighty Zulu Kings , they are one of the oldest continually active breaking crews . For others to get into the crew , they had to battle one of the Rock Steady b @-@ boys — that was their audition , so to speak . The crew flourished once it came under the leadership of b @-@ boy Richard " Crazy Legs " Colón . Crazy Legs opened a Manhattan chapter of the crew and made his friends and fellow b @-@ boys Wayne " Frosty Freeze " Frost and Kenneth " Ken Swift " Gabbert co @-@ vice presidents . RSC was instrumental in the spread of breaking 's popularity beyond New York City . They appeared in Wild Style and Beat Street — 1980s films about hip @-@ hop culture — as well as in the movie Flashdance . They also performed at the Ritz , at the Kennedy Center , and on the Jerry Lewis Telethon . In 1981 , the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts hosted a breaking battle between Dynamic Rockers and Rock Steady Crew . The Daily News and National Geographic covered this event . In 1982 , their manager <unk> " Kool Lady " Blue organized the New York City Rap Tour , which featured Rock Steady Crew , Afrika Bambaataa , Cold Crush Brothers , the Double Dutch Girls , and Fab 5 Freddy . This tour traveled to England and France , which spread hip @-@ hop culture to these countries . In 1983 , they performed for Queen Elizabeth II at the Royal Variety Performance . The following year , they recorded a song titled " ( Hey You ) The Rock Steady Crew " , which was commercially released . RSC now has satellite crews based in Japan , the United Kingdom , and Italy . 
 = = = Capoeira debate = = = 
 Capoeira is an Afro @-@ Brazilian martial art , described by Pabon as " a form of self defense disguised as a dance . " Its influence on breaking is disputed and debated ; one side believes that breaking came from capoeira , while the other side denies this . Capoeira is hundreds of years older than breaking , and uprock is similar in purpose to capoeira in that both translate aggressive combat movements into stylized dance . Both breaking and capoeira are performed to music and , since both art forms are acrobatic , some moves look similar to each other . However , capoeira is more rule @-@ oriented . One rule in capoeira is that a capoeirista 's back can never touch the ground . In contrast , a breaker 's back is almost always on the ground , and the only rule in breaking is that you do not touch your opponent during a battle . 
 Jelon Vieira and <unk> Machado brought capoeira to the United States in the 1970s . Throughout this decade Vieira taught capoeira workshops in New York City and started a capoeira performance company called Dance Brazil that toured across the United States . In Gerard Taylor 's Capoeira : The Jogo de Angola from Luanda to Cyberspace ( 2005 ) , master capoeira teacher Mestre <unk> is quoted as saying : " Demonstrations by Maestre Jelon [ Vieira ] and <unk> Machado are considered by many to be responsible for the incorporation of capoeira movements into breakdancing . " Former Village Voice reporter Sally Banes and her colleague , photographer Martha Cooper , witnessed breaking in 1980 while covering Henry Chalfant 's photography exhibit of subway graffiti . She wrote of the dance : " Its spatial level called to mind capoeira , the spectacular Brazilian dance cum martial art form that incorporates <unk> , kicks , and feints low to the ground , but the two were dissimilar enough in shape and timing that capoeira seemed at most only a distant relative , and certainly one the breakdancers weren 't acquainted with — at least on a conscious level . " In his book Hip Hop Had a Dream ( 2008 ) , Damien Morgan states : " Breakdancing can have its origins in capoeira , because it does not focus on injuring the opponent ; it rather emphasizes skill towards your opponent , to express yourself away from violence ... in most cases , it is blatantly obvious to see some of Breakdancing 's foundations in Capoeira . " 
 Several breaking practitioners and pioneers tend to side with the camp that does not believe breaking came from capoeira . B @-@ boy Crazy Legs states : " We didn 't know what the f @-@ ck no capoeira was , man . We were in the ghetto ! " According to Pabon , " Unlike the popularity of the martial arts films , capoeira was not seen in the Bronx jams until the 1990s . Top rockin ' seems to have developed gradually and unintentionally , leaving space for growth and new additions , until it evolved into a codified form . " B @-@ boy crew <unk> Rockers adds : " Despite of [ sic ] many rumours and opinions Breaking didn 't originate from Capoeira but during the last few years many moves , steps and freezes of this Brazilian ( <unk> ) dance have inspired more and more B @-@ Girls and B @-@ Boys who integrated them into their dance . " B @-@ boy Ken Swift was breaking long before he saw <unk> : " In ' 78 I started [ breaking ] and I didn 't see it [ capoeira ] til ' 92 ... I was around , too — I was in Brooklyn , Bronx , Queens , I went around and I didn 't see it . What we saw was Kung Fu — we saw Kung Fu from the 42nd Street theaters . So those were our inspirations ... when we did the Kung Fu sh @-@ t we switched it up and we put this B @-@ boy flavor into it ... " 
 = = Funk styles = = 
 While breaking was developing in New York , other styles of dance were developing in California . Unlike breaking , the funk styles — which originated in the 1970s in California — were not originally hip @-@ hop dance styles : they were danced to funk music rather than hip @-@ hop music , and they were not associated with the other cultural pillars of hip @-@ hop ( DJing , graffiti writing , and MCing ) . The funk styles are actually slightly older than breaking due to fact that boogaloo and locking were developed in the late 1960s . 
 = = = Locking and roboting = = = 
 Like breaking , the different moves within the funk styles occurred due to the formation of crews . Don " Campbellock " Campbell created locking , and in 1973 founded The Lockers ( originally called The <unk> Dancers ) in Los Angeles . Locking is characterized by consistently freezing or " locking " in place while dancing . Campbell developed locking accidentally while pausing in between dance moves when trying to remember how to do the Funky Chicken . He developed routines based on his new style using these pauses or " locks " . Chang lists some of the other dance moves performed in locking , including " ... points , skeeters , scooby doos , stop ' n go , which @-@ away , and the fancies . " 
 The Lockers made several appearances on Soul Train — the song @-@ and @-@ dance television program featuring funk music , soul music , disco , R & B , and social dancing . They also appeared on The Carol Burnett Show , The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson , The Dick Van Dyke Show , and Saturday Night Live . Three original members of The Lockers were Toni Basil , who doubled as the group 's manager ; Charles " Charles Robot " Washington , a pioneer of roboting ; and Fred " Mr. Penguin " Berry , who played the character of Rerun on the television show What 's Happening ! ! . Berry left the group in 1976 to be on the show and was replaced by street dancer Tony " Go @-@ Go " Lewis . After The Lockers disbanded , Tony Go @-@ Go went on to open a locking school in Japan in 1985 . 
 <unk> comes from Richmond , California . Before joining The Lockers , Charles Robot had his own dance crew called The Robot Brothers . He was inspired in 1969 by a mime artist named Robert Shields , who would pantomime in front of the Hollywood Wax Museum where he worked . On October 27 , 1973 , The Jackson 5 performed " Dancing Machine " on Soul Train , which popularized roboting , but this was not the first time the dance had been performed on the show . Charles Robot had performed roboting on Soul Train two years earlier with his dance partner Angela Johnson . 
 = = = Boogaloo and popping = = = 
 The Electric Boogaloos are another funk styles crew founded in Fresno in 1977 by Sam " Boogaloo Sam " Solomon , Nate " Slide " Johnson , and Joe " Robot Joe " Thomas . Their name was originally The Electric Boogaloo Lockers , but they dropped " Lockers " the following year at the urging of their manager Jeff <unk> after the group moved from Fresno to Long Beach . Boogaloo Sam is widely credited with developing popping and boogaloo . However , there is disagreement as to whether he created the dances himself or borrowed moves from other street dancers . What is not contested is how influential he and his crew were in exposing popping and boogaloo to mainstream audiences . 
 Boogaloo is both a style of dance and a style of music . It started out as a fad dance , and several songs were released in the 1960s celebrating it including " Boogaloo Down Broadway " , " My Baby Likes to Boogaloo " , " Hey You ! Boo @-@ Ga @-@ Loo " , " Do the Boogaloo " , " Boogaloo # 3 " , and " Sock Boogaloo " . In response to this song @-@ and @-@ dance craze , Puerto Rican artists in New York City created a style of music called <unk> ( or Latin boogaloo ) that combined mambo , soul , and R & B. Singer Joe Cuba was a pioneer of this style . 
 Although boogaloo was already a fad dance and a music genre in the 1960s , it did not become a dance style until Boogaloo Sam learned it , expanded it , and started performing it in public venues . He was influenced to expand boogaloo by cartoons ; the 1960s social dances the Twist , the Popcorn , and the Jerk ; and the movements of everyday people . As a dance style , it is characterized by rolling hip , knee , and head movements as if the body has no bones . Electric boogaloo is the signature dance style of The Electric Boogaloos . It is a combination of boogaloo and popping . 
 Popping is based on the technique of quickly contracting and relaxing muscles to cause a jerk in the dancer 's body , referred to as a pop or a hit . Popping is also an inadvertent umbrella term that includes several other illusory dance styles such as ticking , liquid , tutting , waving , gliding , twisto @-@ flex , and sliding . Most of these cannot be traced to a specific person or group and may have influences earlier than hip @-@ hop . Earl " Snake Hips " Tucker was a professional dancer in the 1920s who appeared in the film Symphony in Black and performed at the Cotton Club in Harlem . Since hip @-@ hop did not exist in the 1920s his style was considered jazz , but his " slithering , writhing " movement foreshadowed waving and sliding . 
 The most recognizable popping move is the moonwalk . In 1983 , Michael Jackson performed the moonwalk — called the backslide in popping context — on ABC 's Motown 25 television special . This performance popularized the moonwalk all over the world . However , it was not the first time the backslide had been performed on television or on film . Cab Calloway performed the backslide in 1932 , and Bill Bailey performed it in the movies Cabin in the Sky ( 1943 ) and Rhythm and Blues Revue ( 1955 ) . In 1982 , during a performance in London on Top of the Pops , street dancer Jeffrey Daniel performed the backslide during the song " A Night to Remember " . 
 In the 1970s , while Los Angeles was known for locking and Fresno was known for popping , several other cities in Northern California had their own local funk styles . Sacramento was known for a style called sac @-@ ing , San Jose for dime stopping , and Oakland for snake hitting . The San Francisco crew Granny and Robotroid incorporated stepping moves and JROTC rifle drill movements in their dancing to make a unique funk style called Fillmore strutting . This dance was named after the Fillmore district in San Francisco where Granny and Robotroid were from . Granny and Robotroid performed on the Gong Show in 1976 . Although strutting had exposure on national television , it ( and the rest of the localized funk styles ) faded and never became mainstream . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 When the movies Breakin ' and Breakin ' 2 : Electric Boogaloo were released , all the styles of dance performed in those films were put under the " breakdance " label . In addition , Breakin was released outside the United States as Breakdance : The Movie . The media followed suit by calling all represented styles " breakdancing " , which caused a naming confusion among the general public . This was problematic for two reasons . 
 The first reason is that " breakdancing " became an inadvertent umbrella term among the general public for both breaking and the funk styles . The funk styles were created in California independent from breaking , which was created in New York . They are called funk styles because they were originally danced to funk music . This name gives them a separate identity from breaking , which is traditionally danced to break beats . 
 The second reason this was problematic is that " breakdancing " was originally called b @-@ boying or breaking by the street dancers who created it . A break is a musical interlude during a song — the section on a musical recording where the singing stops and the percussive rhythms are the most aggressive . When 1970s hip @-@ hop DJs played break beats , dancers reacted to those breaks with their most impressive dance moves . DJ Kool Herc coined the terms " b @-@ boys " and " b @-@ girls " , which stands for " break @-@ boys " and " break @-@ girls . " To describe the movement , the suffix " ing " was added after the word identifying the dancer ( b @-@ boying ) or the music beat ( breaking ) . According to Timothy " Popin Pete " Solomon , one of the original members of the Electric Boogaloos , and Raquel Rivera , author of the book New York Ricans from the Hip Hop Zone ( 2003 ) , " breakdancing " is a media @-@ coined term and incorrect . 
 = = Dance crews = = 
 A dance crew is a team of street dancers who come together to develop new moves and battle other crews . As hip @-@ hop culture spread throughout New York City , the more often breaking crews got together to battle against each other . It was during this time that the different dance moves within breaking developed organically . All styles of hip @-@ hop are rooted in battling , and being a part of a crew was the only way to learn when these styles began because they were not taught in studios : they all started out as social dances . Forming and participating in a crew is how street dancers practiced , improved , made friends , and built relationships . In breaking in particular , battling is how b @-@ boys / b @-@ girls improved their skill . 
 Aside from Rock Steady Crew , several breaking crews were active in the 1970s such as Mighty Zulu Kings , Dynamic Rockers , New York City Breakers , <unk> , Air Force Crew , Crazy Commanders Crew , Starchild La Rock , and Rockwell Association . In the same way b @-@ boy crews were active on the east coast of the United States spreading breaking throughout New York , funk crews were also active on the west coast spreading the funk styles throughout California . Aside from The Lockers and The Electric Boogaloos , other funk styles crews such as Medea Sirkas / Demons of the Mind , Black Messengers , The Robot Brothers , The Go @-@ Go Brothers , Granny and Robotroid , and Chain Reaction were active during the 1970s performing on stage . 
 Chain Reaction was a four @-@ man dance crew from Reseda , California whose members included Thomas " T @-@ Bopper " Guzman @-@ Sanchez , Paul " Cool Pockets " Guzman @-@ Sanchez , Robert " Bosco " Winters , and Mike " Deuce " Donley . Just like The Electric Boogaloos had their own signature dance style called electric boogaloo , Chain Reaction also had their own signature dance style called crossover locking . They performed on the talk show Thicke of the Night and in the movie Xanadu . Xanadu premiered in 1980 , four years earlier than the hip @-@ hop dance classics Beat Street and Breakin ' . Xanadu was the first time boogaloo , popping , and crossover locking were performed on film . In 1984 , T @-@ Bopper created a new dance crew called United Street Force . By invitation , this crew performed at the White House for President Ronald Reagan . 
 Crews still form based on friendships and neighborhoods . For example , dance crew Diversity — formed in 2007 — consists of brothers and friends from Essex and London . Crews also form for other reasons such as theme ( Jabbawockeez ) , gender ( ReQuest Dance Crew ) , ethnicity ( Kaba Modern ) , dance style ( Massive Monkeys ) , and age ( Hip Op @-@ eration ) . In 2013 , Hip Op @-@ eration performed an exhibition routine at the World Hip Hop Dance Championships in Las Vegas . At the time , their youngest member was 66 . 
 In the 1970s , b @-@ boy crews were neighborhood @-@ based and would engage in battles held at local block parties called " jams " . Today crews can battle in organized competitions with other crews from around the world . New Zealand crew ReQuest won the Australian @-@ based competition World Supremacy Battlegrounds in 2009 and the American @-@ based competition Hip Hop International in 2009 and 2010 . On October 12 , 2010 , the Vietnamese Ministry of Culture , Sport , and Tourism presented the Certificate of Merit to dance crew Big Toe for winning a variety of international dance competitions . Dance crews are more prevalent in hip @-@ hop , but hip @-@ hop dance companies do exist . Examples include Zoo Nation ( UK ) , Culture Shock ( USA ) , Lux Aeterna ( USA ) , Boy Blue Entertainment ( UK ) , Unity UK ( UK ) , Bounce <unk> Company ( Sweden ) , and <unk> Dance Company ( USA ) . 
 = = Social dancing = = 
 Hip @-@ hop social dancing ( party dancing ) began when hip @-@ hop musical artists started to release songs with an accompanying dance . In 1990 , rapper MC Hammer created the Hammer dance and popularized it in his music video " U Can 't Touch This " . The Hammer dance was a social dance that became wildly popular and then faded as the album it was associated with , Please Hammer , Don 't Hurt ' Em , lost popularity . Most social dances are short @-@ lived fad dances , some are line dances , and others spawn new dance styles that stay relevant even after the life of the songs they came from come to an end . The development of hip @-@ hop social dancing extends further back than the 1990s with the Charleston , a jazz dance ; Chubby Checker 's Twist , which was considered rock & roll ; several 1970s fad dances made popular by James Brown ; and the influence of the television show Soul Train . 
 The Charleston was created in the 1920s by African @-@ Americans in Charleston , South Carolina as a rebellion against prohibition . It gained popularity once it was embraced by Caucasians , but it was still considered an immoral dance due to its association with alcohol . This dance relied on partnering and eventually led to the creation of Lindy Hop . Lindy Hop and the Charleston fall under the swing dance genre ; however , there is a dance move used in breaking that is taken from the Charleston called the Charlie rock . Singer @-@ songwriter Chubby Checker released the song " The Twist " with an accompanying dance of the same name in 1960 . He performed the dance on the television show American Bandstand , and the song reached number one in 1960 and 1962 . The Twist was the most popular dance craze of the 1960s because it broke away from the trend of partner dancing enabling people to perform on their own . 
 James Brown was a major contributor to social dance . He popularized several fad dances in the 1970s such as the Mashed Potato , the Boogaloo , and the Good Foot . His accompanying songs to these dances include " ( Do the ) Mashed Potatoes " , " Do the Boogaloo " , and " Get on the Good Foot " . The song " Do the Boogaloo " influenced Boogaloo Sam when he created the boogaloo dance style , and the Good Foot triggered the creation of breaking . In addition , James Brown also popularized the Funky Chicken , which was a major influence to Don Campbell when he created locking . In an interview with NPR , Lockers ' member Adolpho " Shabba Doo " Quiñones stated " We 're all children of James Brown ... And you know , if James Brown was our father then you 'd have to say Don Cornelius was our great uncle . " 
 In 1970 , Don Cornelius created Soul Train . Before officially becoming a crew , members of The Lockers made several appearances on this show . They introduced different dance moves such as the Robot , Which @-@ <unk> , and the Stop @-@ and @-@ Go during the " Dance of the Week " segment of the broadcast . Disco was very popular during the 1970s , so some dance styles at that time such as waacking and hustle stemmed from disco music rather than funk . Hip @-@ hop became more mainstream in the 1980s , and this surge in interest combined with the popularity of Soul Train kick @-@ started the rise of hip @-@ hop social dancing . 
 One of the more popular social dances created during the 1980s was the Cabbage Patch . The rap group Gucci Crew II created the dance and introduced it in their 1987 song of the same name , " The Cabbage Patch " . Another popular social dance was the Roger Rabbit . This dance imitates the floppy movements of the lead cartoon character as seen in the 1988 film Who Framed Roger Rabbit . The rap duo Kid ' n Play created the Kid ' n Play kick @-@ step and performed it in their 1990 movie House Party . It is a variation on the Charleston with elements of the Roger Rabbit and the Running Man . The Running Man is one of the most recognizable hip @-@ hop social dances . According to Essence magazine , Paula Abdul created the Running Man and taught the dance to Janet Jackson when she was working as her choreographer during Jackson 's Control era . Jackson further popularized the dance when she performed it in her 1989 music video " Rhythm Nation " , and rapper MC Hammer kept the fervor going when he started to do the Running Man in his performances . The pop duo LMFAO brought the Running Man back into the mainstream with their song " Party Rock Anthem " , which was named the 2011 song of the summer by <unk> The accompanying dance in the song called The Shuffle combines three social dances : the Running Man , the ( half ) Charleston , and the T @-@ step . 
 DJ Troy " Webstar " Ryan and Bianca " Young B " Dupree released the song " Chicken Noodle Soup " in 2006 . The dance was so popular , at one point YouTube had over 2 @,@ 000 video clips of kids performing it . The song sold 335 @,@ 000 ringtones , but it was not strong enough to sustain momentum for the full length album " Webstar Presents : Caught in the Web " , which was not successful . For this reason , the Chicken Noodle Soup song and dance faded . The Dougie comes from Dallas , Texas . The dance was named after the 1980s rapper Doug E. Fresh and popularized in the 2010 song " Teach Me How to Dougie " by the rap group Cali Swag District . According to the Wall Street Journal , the Dougie has been particularly popular as a celebratory dance among professional athletes . In 2010 , CNN news anchor Wolf Blitzer performed the Dougie at the Soul Train Music Awards . 
 = = = Line dances = = = 
 The Cha Cha Slide , the Cupid Shuffle , and the Soulja Boy are examples of urban line dances that were created from hip @-@ hop songs of the same name . These line dances have the same premise as the more widely know Electric Slide . There are variations to the Electric Slide , but the dance is always performed to the song " Electric Boogie " by Marcia Griffiths . In keeping with this tradition , the Cha Cha Slide , the Cupid Shuffle , and the Soulja Boy are always performed to their respective songs . 
 DJ Willie " Casper " Perry created the song " Cha Cha Slide " in 1996 for a personal trainer in his hometown Chicago . It did not get commercial airplay until 2000 when Chicago radio station <unk> @-@ FM started playing the song as part of its rotation . Soon after , other radio stations across the United States also started playing the song , and this increase in popularity led to a record deal with Universal Music Group . After securing a deal , the label began producing and distributing instructional videos of the dance to nightclubs , which helped spread its popularity . On February 20 , 2011 , dancers in Anaheim , California set a Guinness world record when 2 @,@ 387 people performed the dance at the Anaheim Convention Center . 
 The song " Cupid Shuffle " was released in February 2007 by singer Bryson " Cupid " Bernard from Lafayette , Louisiana . In August 2007 , 17 @,@ 000 people set a world record when they performed the Cupid Shuffle ( dance ) to his song in Atlanta . The Soulja Boy dance became popular through MySpace when rapper DeAndre " Soulja Boy " Way posted his song " Crank That " to his MySpace page and uploaded an accompanying instructional video showing viewers how to perform the dance . After amassing more than 16 million page views , he was signed to Interscope Records . 
 = A Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion = 
 A Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion , alternatively referred to by its pull quote " A Diversity of Opinions Regarding Abortion Exists Among Committed Catholics " or simply " The New York Times ad " , was a full @-@ page advertisement placed on October 7 , 1984 in The New York Times by Catholics for a Free Choice ( CFFC ) . Its publication brought to a head the conflict between the Vatican and those American Catholics who were pro @-@ choice . The publicity and controversy which followed its publication helped to make the CFFC an important element of the pro @-@ choice movement . 
 Before mid @-@ 1984 , a Catholic position paper was signed by about 80 reform @-@ minded theologians and members of religious institutes who were sympathetic to choice in abortion . This position paper was used by CFFC as the basis for the New York Times ad . CFFC 's statement said that the Catholic Church 's doctrine condemning abortion as " morally wrong in all instances " was " not the only legitimate Catholic position . " It said that " a large number " of Catholic theologians considered abortion to be a moral choice in some cases and cited a recent survey which found that only 11 % of Catholics believed that abortion was wrong under all circumstances . It called for value pluralism and discussion within the Church on the subject . More signatures were added , bringing the total to 97 prominent Catholics including theologians , nuns , priests and lay persons . 
 The advertisement was intended to help 1984 vice @-@ presidential candidate Geraldine Ferraro , a pro @-@ choice Catholic , to resist the sharp criticism directed at her by Archbishop of New York John Joseph O 'Connor during the 1984 U.S. presidential election . Following the ad 's publication , the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops denounced it and called it contrary to " the clear and consistent teaching of the church that deliberately chosen abortion is objectively immoral . " Subsequently , the Vatican pursued <unk> by or reprimands of the signers who were directly subject to Church authority , including 24 nuns who became known as the " Vatican 24 " . Some signers recanted their affiliation with CFFC ; most were said by their superiors to be in line with Catholic teaching . Two nuns resisted , publicly embraced a pro @-@ choice position and eventually left their order . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1982 , CFFC invited members of Congress to a briefing titled " The Abortion Issue in the Political Process " describing the problems facing Catholic politicians and to show that there was a range of personal and political responses to the issue of abortion . Geraldine Ferraro , then a member of the United States House of Representatives , wrote the introduction to the briefing . She wrote , " As Catholics we deal each day , both personally and politically , with the wrenching abortion issue ... the Catholic position on abortion is not monolithic and there can be a range of personal and political responses to the issue . " Other endorsers of the briefing included fellow Democratic politicians Leon Panetta and Tom Daschle . 
 Catholic ethicist Daniel C. Maguire co @-@ authored a position paper on abortion and religious pluralism with feminist Frances Kissling , the president of CFFC , and Maguire 's wife Marjorie Reily Maguire , a theologian and CFFC activist . The position paper , titled " A Catholic Statement on Abortion " , was circulated among several groups of theologians including the College Theology Society , of which Marjorie Maguire was a member , and the Catholic Theological Society of America . Those who were sympathetic to moral pluralism and the possibility of nuanced abortion positions in the Catholic Church signed the statement and formed the Catholic Committee on Pluralism and Abortion . 
 When Ferraro was named Walter Mondale 's running mate for the Democratic Party in the 1984 election , Archbishop O 'Connor and Archbishop of Boston Bernard Francis Law issued statements denouncing her position on abortion . It is likely that O 'Connor targeted Ferraro because of her association with CFFC . O 'Connor said that Catholic voters should not vote for pro @-@ choice politicians . O 'Connor said Ferraro " has given the world to understand that Catholic teaching is divided on the subject of abortion " , which he said was wrong . Ferraro said that her personal pro @-@ choice views were not something she would force on the nation ; she said she would follow the law of the land as interpreted by the Supreme Court . After receiving more criticism from O 'Connor , Ferraro acknowledged that the Church 's position on abortion was indeed " monolithic " , but said many Catholics " do not share the view of the Catholic Church . " 
 = = Publication = = 
 CFFC wanted to make clear the church 's hierarchy did not speak for them . The CFFC turned the Maguire / Maguire / Kissling position paper holding about 80 signatures from leading Catholic reformers into a statement suitable for the public , and in August – September 1984 they sought further signatures from such groups as the Women Church Convergence , a group working to increase women 's roles in the Church . A total of 97 signatures was gathered , including 26 nuns , two priests , and two lay brothers . The CFFC paid $ 30 @,@ 000 for an advertisement in The New York Times , to run on a day that was the annual " Respect Life Sunday " celebrated by American bishops . The timing was intended to help Ferraro retain support in her campaign . 
 On October 7 , 1984 , one full page of The New York Times carried the combined statement of the CFFC and the other signers . At the top of the page were the bold @-@ type words : " A Diversity of Opinions Regarding Abortion Exists Among Committed Catholics " . Underneath that was the title " A Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion " . Following this was a citation to a poll showing only 11 % of American Catholics surveyed opposed abortion in all circumstance , and an endorsement of " candid and respectful discussion " within the Church of a " diversity of opinion " held by Catholics on the issue . The bottom of the page included 97 names divided into two groups : 15 members of the Catholic Committee on Pluralism and Abortion , and 82 others in a group marked " Other Signers " . The advertisement concluded by saying the list of signers was only partial — that 75 priests , members of religious institutes , and theologians had written in support " but cannot sign because they fear losing their jobs . " 
 The second paragraph read as follows : 
 " Statements of recent Popes and of the Catholic hierarchy have condemned the direct termination of pre @-@ natal life as morally wrong in all instances . There is the mistaken belief in American society that this is the only legitimate Catholic position . In fact , a diversity of opinions regarding abortion exists among committed Catholics . " 
 = = Reaction = = 
 On November 14 , 1984 , following the election ( which Mondale and Ferraro lost ) , the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops issued a statement saying the text of the advertisement could only represent the personal opinions of the signers because they were in contradiction to " the clear and consistent teaching of the church that deliberately chosen abortion is objectively immoral . " Cardinal Jean Jerome Hamer , author of the 1974 reaffirmation against procured abortion and the prefect of the Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life , requested on November 30 , 1984 , that the signers who were subject to Church authority be required to publicly retract their position or be dismissed . This elicited a good deal of international press coverage . Of the 26 nuns , two were taken off the Vatican 's list , one for unknown reasons and the other because her missionary order was not under Hamer 's supervision . The remaining 24 nuns were labeled the " Vatican 24 " by the press . 
 Some 35 of the signers met at the St. Charles Hotel in Washington , D.C. on December 19 , 1984 , to determine a course of action . The meeting included 18 nuns of the Vatican 24 . They said the Vatican , in its stern reaction , " seeks to stifle freedom of speech and public discussion in the Roman Catholic Church and create the appearance of a consensus where none exists . " The group <unk> a statement describing the current Church stance as not in the spirit of the Vatican II which said , " Let there be unity in what is necessary , freedom in what is unsettled and charity in any case . " Sister Donna Quinn , a past president of the National Coalition of American Nuns , said , " We believe we have a right to speak out when we have a differing opinion , and this is something European men do not understand . " 
 The four male members of institutes who signed — two priests and two lay brothers — recanted in published statements , the last on January 17 , 1985 . The Vatican announced that many of the nuns had also recanted . 
 In seeking to discipline the nuns , the Vatican did not contact any one of them personally , and did not respond to direct individual communication . Rather , the superiors of the nuns were asked to write letters verifying whether or not the nuns were in line with Catholic teaching on abortion , and a variety of responses were received from the superiors . A few nuns disavowed their position on abortion and the cases were quickly closed . Most nuns held to their earlier conviction , although their superiors sent letters saying that they accepted Church teaching . Once a nun 's superior had sent a letter to the Vatican , the case was closed , without any further attempt to prevent the nun from speaking out on the issues . 
 Two Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur , Patricia Hussey and Barbara Ferraro ( no relation to Geraldine Ferraro ) , did not recant from their pro @-@ choice positions . Hussey and Ferraro , directors of the Covenant House in Charleston , West Virginia — a shelter for homeless and abused women and children — were supported by CFFC in their dispute with the Church . By March 1986 , Hussey and Ferraro were no longer calling for " dialogue " but were publicly demanding recognition of " a woman 's right to choose . " In July 1986 when the two nuns were pressured more strongly with expulsion , 11 of the other nuns who signed came forward with a statement in solidarity with them , denying a recent Vatican announcement that all nuns but Hussey and Ferraro were now aligned with the Church 's position on abortion . The eleven complained of the Church 's divisive tactics , which they said were intended to isolate Hussey and Ferraro . <unk> Maureen Fiedler said , " I have never retracted or recanted one syllable of the Catholic Statement on Abortion and Pluralism . I continue to stand behind every word of it without the slightest reservation . " After nearly four years of dispute , Hussey and Ferraro were informed by their order 's leadership in June 1988 that they would not be dismissed from the order . However , the leadership of the School Sisters of Notre Dame distanced the order from Hussey and Ferraro , calling them " intransigent " and stating that they " have in practice placed themselves outside the life and mission of the congregation . " The two nuns subsequently held a press conference and announced that a woman " can be publicly pro @-@ choice and still be a nun . " In July 1988 , the two resigned from the Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur . 
 <unk> Judith Vaughan , a resident of Los Angeles and a nun with the Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet , said , " We didn 't commit a crime . All we did was say , ' Hey , there 's a diversity of opinion among people [ of our faith ] and we need to talk about freedom of conscience . ' I don 't see myself as defiant . " In January 1985 , Monsignor John P. <unk> sent a memo to all Los Angeles social service directors , ordering them to cease referring homeless women to the shelter Vaughan supervised " because of [ her ] pro @-@ abortion position " . Vaughan was reportedly expelled in February 1985 but in April 1986 she spoke to the Los Angeles Times to say that the Church had closed the case without requiring her to retract her statement . With the help of her superior , Sister Miriam Therese Larkin of St. Louis , Missouri , she retained her position in the order , and <unk> 's memo was overturned . 
 Yale Divinity School ethics professor Sister Margaret Farley said that her signing of the 1984 advertisement came up in early 1986 when she was to be honored with an award given by John Carroll University , a Catholic institution in Cleveland , Ohio . The Cleveland archdiocese wrote to the Vatican to determine Farley 's status , and the Vatican responded that Farley " has retracted her signature from the ' Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion . ' " Sister Helen Amos , the president of Farley 's order , the Sisters of Mercy , was quoted by the Vatican : " Sister Margaret 's position is in accord with the teaching of the Church . " This statement had been accepted as a recantation by Cardinal Hamer in December 1985 . After learning of the Vatican response , Farley said Hamer 's assumption was in error , that she had never recanted or asked that her signature be removed . She said , " What I did ... was to clarify my position . And that was accepted as sufficient . " 
 = = Later events = = 
 Several nuns were given a platform to air their views including activist nuns such as Marjorie Tuite , Margaret Traxler , and six nuns of the order Sisters of Loretto , an order known for its work on pacifism and social justice . In some cases , signers of the statement grew more radical in their beliefs after being reprimanded by church authority . In the publicity surrounding the dispute with the nuns and the theologians , the statistics showing that most American Catholics disagreed with church teachings about abortion were repeated many times . Traxler appeared in a television spot with a tube of toothpaste , saying that you cannot put the toothpaste back in the tube . The various responses to the 1984 advertisement and its aftermath remained in the news through 1986 . 
 On March 2 , 1986 , a follow @-@ up advertisement was placed by the Committee of Concerned Catholics , signed by more than 1 @,@ 000 Catholics supportive of the right to speak dissenting views on abortion and other controversial subjects . This advertisement was intended to show solidarity for the 97 signers of the 1984 advertisement who were threatened by the Church . It began , " We affirm our solidarity with all Catholics whose right to free speech is under attack . " Committee member Kissling said that , though seven nuns had " clarified " their positions , " There have been no retractions ; there have been no withdrawals . " She said the Church 's assertion that many nuns had disavowed their 1984 signing was " a lot of wishful thinking " . Nine conservative Catholic lay group leaders responded with a letter to Hamer asking for quick disciplinary action against dissenting nuns . They warned that " the revolt is spreading " against the church 's position on abortion , and chided the Vatican for failing to react decisively against signers of the first ad . 
 Some Catholic theologians who signed the statement reported being threatened with stagnation in their careers , and found that speaking engagements were canceled because of the controversy . Theologians Daniel Maguire , Rosemary Radford Ruether , Giles <unk> , Elizabeth Jane Via , Mary I. Buckley , Kathleen M. O 'Connor and Elisabeth <unk> <unk> all saw their careers limited after October 1984 . Sister Anne Carr felt pressured to quit the women 's advisory committee assigned to assist U.S. bishops write a pastoral on women . One of the 1 @,@ 000 signers of the March 1986 statement , Mary Ann Sorrentino , was told by her local church hierarchy that in signing she had " excommunicated herself " . 
 In August 1992 , filmmakers Sylvia Morales and Jean Victor presented their PBS POV documentary about three nuns , including one of the Vatican 24 . Titled " Faith Even to the Fire " , the program followed statement signer Sister Judith Vaughan , who faced difficulty in Los Angeles then moved to Chicago to lead the National Assembly of Religious Women . Also featured were Sisters Marie de Pores Taylor of Oakland , California , and Rosa Marta Zarate of San Bernardino , California . 
 = = Signers = = 
 Signers of the statement whose names appeared in the advertisement include : 
 = = = Catholic Committee on Pluralism and Abortion = = = 
 Anthony Battaglia , Ph.D. , Associate Professor , Religious Studies , California State University , Long Beach 
 Roddy O 'Neil Cleary , D.Min. , University of Vermont 
 Joseph Fahey , Ph.D. , Professor , Manhattan College 
 Elisabeth <unk> <unk> , Ph.D. , Professor , University of Notre Dame 
 Mary Gordon , M.A. , author of Final Payments and Company of Women 
 Patricia Hennessy , J.D. , New York City 
 Mary E. Hunt , Ph.D. , Women 's Alliance for Theology , Ethics and Ritual 
 Frances Kissling , Executive Director , Catholics for a Free Choice 
 Justus George Lawler , Executive Editor , Academic <unk> , Winston @-@ Seabury Press 
 Daniel C. Maguire , <unk> , theologian , widely published Catholic ethicist . 
 Marjorie Reiley Maguire , Ph.D. , theologian , an early and active member of CFFC . 
 J. Giles <unk> , Ph.D. , Professor , Brown University 
 Rosemary Radford Ruether , Ph.D. Professor , Garrett – Evangelical Theological Seminary 
 Thomas Shannon , Ph.D. , Professor , Worcester Polytechnic Institute 
 James F. <unk> , Ph.D. , Professor at Indiana University 
 = = = Other signers = = = 
 Ronald Burke , Ph.D. , University of Nebraska at Omaha , co @-@ founder of The Journal of Religion & Film . 
 Anne Carr , nun and theologian at the University of Chicago Divinity School . 
 Patty Crowley , long @-@ term co @-@ leader of the Christian Family Movement . 
 Margaret Farley , Ph.D. , Yale Divinity School 
 Barbara Ferraro , nun with Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur 
 Maureen Fiedler , Ph.D. , S.L. , nun , pacifist , and activist for the Equal Rights Amendment 1978 to 1982 . Fiedler attended the first Women 's Ordination Conference in Detroit in 1975 . 
 Christine E. <unk> , Ph.D. , Xavier University 
 Patricia Hussey , nun with Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur 
 Paul F. <unk> , Th.D. , Xavier University 
 Agnes Mary Mansour , former nun , director of the Michigan Department of Social Services , former president of the University of Detroit Mercy . 
 Kathleen E. McVey , Ph.D. , Princeton Theological Seminary 
 Jeanne L. Noble , Ph.D. , New York University 
 Dolly Pomerleau , co @-@ founder of the Quixote Center 
 Donna Quinn , nun , past president of the National Coalition of American Nuns . 
 Jill Raitt , Ph.D. , University of Missouri 
 Jane Schaberg , Ph.D. , University of Detroit 
 Margaret Ellen Traxler , nun with the School Sisters of Notre Dame , co @-@ founder of the National Coalition of American Nuns 
 Marjorie Tuite , Dominican nun , native New Yorker , feminist 
 Judith Vaughan , nun , director of the House of Ruth shelter for women , Los Angeles 
 Elizabeth Jane Via , district attorney , female priest , professor at University of San Diego 
 Mary Jo Weaver , author 
 Arthur E. <unk> , Ph.D. , University of Notre Dame 
 = Scuttling of the German fleet in Scapa Flow = 
 The scuttling of the German fleet took place at the Royal Navy 's base at Scapa Flow , in Scotland , after the end of the First World War . The High Seas Fleet was interned there under the terms of the Armistice whilst negotiations took place over the fate of the ships . Fearing that all of the ships would be seized and divided amongst the allied powers , the German commander , Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , decided to scuttle the fleet . 
 The scuttling was carried out on 21 June 1919 . Intervening British guard ships were able to beach a number of the ships , but 52 of the 74 interned vessels sank . Many of the wrecks were salvaged over the next two decades and were towed away for scrapping . Those that remain are popular diving sites . 
 = = Background = = 
 The signing of the Armistice on 11 November 1918 , at Compiègne , France , effectively ended the First World War . The Allied powers agreed that Germany 's U @-@ boat fleet should be surrendered without the possibility of return , but were unable to agree upon a course of action regarding the German surface fleet . The Americans suggested that the ships be interned in a neutral port until a final decision was reached , but the two countries that were approached – Norway and Spain – both refused . Admiral Rosslyn Wemyss suggested that the fleet be interned at Scapa Flow with a skeleton crew of German sailors , and guarded in the interim by the Grand Fleet . 
 The terms were transmitted to Germany on 12 November 1918 , instructing them to make the High Seas Fleet ready to sail by 18 November , or the Allies would occupy Heligoland . 
 On the night of 15 November , Rear @-@ Admiral Hugo Meurer , the representative of Admiral Franz von Hipper , met Admiral David Beatty aboard Beatty 's flagship , HMS Queen Elizabeth . Beatty presented Meurer with the terms , which were expanded at a second meeting the following day . The U @-@ boats were to surrender to Rear @-@ Admiral Reginald Tyrwhitt at Harwich , under the supervision of the Harwich Force . The surface fleet was to sail to the Firth of Forth and surrender to Beatty . They would then be led to Scapa Flow and interned , pending the outcome of the peace negotiations . Meurer asked for an extension to the deadline , aware that the sailors were still in a mutinous mood ( which earlier led to the Wilhelmshaven mutiny ) , and that the officers might have difficulty in getting them to obey orders . Meurer eventually signed the terms after midnight . 
 = = Surrender of the fleet = = 
 The first craft to be surrendered were the U @-@ boats , which began to arrive at Harwich on 20 November 1918 ; 176 were eventually handed over . Hipper refused to lead his fleet to the surrender , delegating the task to Rear @-@ Admiral Ludwig von Reuter . The German fleet was met by the light cruiser Cardiff on the morning of 21 November , and led to the rendezvous with over 370 ships of the Grand Fleet and other allied navies . There were 70 German ships in total ; the battleship König and the light cruiser Dresden had engine trouble and had to be left behind . The destroyer <unk> struck a mine while crossing , and sank . 
 The German ships were escorted into the Firth of Forth , where they anchored . Beatty signalled them : 
 The German flag will be hauled down at sunset today and will not be hoisted again without permission . 
 This order was broken twice on 31 May as there was anniversary of Battle of Jutland and on the day of scuttling of the German fleet . The fleet was then moved between 25 and 27 November to Scapa Flow ; the destroyers to Gutter Sound and the battleships and cruisers to the north and west of the island of Cava . Eventually a total of 74 ships were interned there , König and Dresden having arrived on 6 December accompanied by the destroyer <unk> , which replaced the sunken <unk> . The last ship to arrive was the battleship Baden on 9 January 1919 . Initially the interned ships were guarded by the Battle Cruiser Force ( later reduced to the Battle Cruiser Squadron ) , commanded in succession by Vice @-@ Admiral Pakenham , Rear @-@ Admiral Oliver and Rear @-@ Admiral Keyes . On 1 May 1919 Vice @-@ Admiral Leveson and the Second Battle Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet took over guard duties , and were succeeded on 18 May by Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Sydney Fremantle and the First Battle Squadron . 
 = = In captivity = = 
 The naval historian Arthur Marder described the state of affairs in the German ships during the internment as " one of complete demoralization " . He identified four reasons that exacerbated the situation : lack of discipline , standard of food , lack of recreation and slow postal service . The cumulative result of these problems created " indescribable filth in some of the ships " . On 29 November the Second @-@ in @-@ Command of the Grand Fleet , Admiral Sir Charles Madden , wrote to his brother @-@ in @-@ law and former superior Lord Jellicoe that , " All proposed orders are considered and counter @-@ signed by the men 's committee before they are executed and then they are carried out as convenient " . When visiting an interned ship the German officers were reported to have been " dumb with shame " . Food was sent from Germany twice a month but was monotonous and not of good quality . Catching fish and seagulls provided a dietary supplement and some recreation . A large amount of brandy was also sent over . Recreation for the men was limited to their ships , as the British refused to allow any of the interned sailors to go ashore or visit any other German ships . British officers and men were only allowed to visit on official business . Outgoing post to Germany was censored from the beginning , and later incoming post also . German seamen were granted 300 cigarettes a month or 75 cigars . There were German doctors in the interned fleet but no dentists , and the British refused to provide dental care . 
 Command of the interned ships was exercised through Rear @-@ Admiral von Reuter , flying his flag in the battleship Friedrich der Grosse . He had a British drifter at his disposal for visiting ships and issuing written orders on urgent business , and his staff was occasionally allowed to visit other ships to arrange repatriation of officers and men . Von Reuter , whose health was poor , requested that his flag be transferred to the light cruiser Emden on 25 March after he was repeatedly prevented from sleeping by the stomping on his cabin roof by a group of revolutionary sailors called the " Red Guard " . Over seven months the number of men in his command was continually reduced from the 20 @,@ 000 men who had sailed the ships over in November . 4 @,@ 000 returned to Germany on 3 December , 6 @,@ 000 on 6 December and 5 @,@ 000 on 12 December , leaving 4 @,@ 815 , of whom approximately 100 were repatriated a month . 
 Negotiations over the fate of the ships were under way at the Paris Peace Conference . The French and Italians each wanted a quarter of the ships . The British wanted them destroyed , since they knew that any redistribution would be detrimental to the proportional advantage in numbers they had compared to other navies . Under Article XXXI of the Armistice the Germans were not permitted to destroy their ships . Both Admirals Beatty and Madden had approved plans to seize the German ships in case scuttling was attempted ; Admirals Keyes and Leveson recommended that the ships be seized anyway and the crews interned ashore at Nigg Island , but their suggestions were not taken up . Their concern was not without justification , for as early as January 1919 , von Reuter mentioned the possibility of scuttling the fleet to his chief of staff . Having learned of the possible terms of the Treaty of Versailles in May 1919 , he began to prepare detailed plans to scuttle his ships . Admiral Erich Raeder later wrote that von Reuter was informed that the fleet was to be scuttled at all costs . A further reduction of crews with the departure of two transports to Germany on 18 June 1919 meant that von Reuter was left with reliable men to carry out preparations . On that day he sent out orders , paragraph 11 of which stated : " It is my intention to sink the ships only if the enemy should attempt to obtain possession of them without the assent of our government . Should our government agree in the peace to terms to the surrender of the ships , then the ships will be handed over , to the lasting disgrace of those who have placed us in this position . " His orders were sent to the interned ships on 18 June . 
 In the meantime the signing of the Treaty of Versailles was scheduled for noon on 21 June 1919 . The First Battle Squadron prepared to board the German ships in force to check for signs that the fleet was preparing to scuttle . On 13 June Admiral Madden requested in person at the Admiralty a daily political appreciation from 17 June onwards so as to be prepared to take action , but as Madden related to Beatty shortly afterwards , " they had no reliable indication of the German attitude towards the peace terms " . Admiral Fremantle submitted to Madden on 16 June a scheme for seizing the German ships at midnight of 21 / 22 June , after the treaty was meant to be signed . Madden approved the plan on 19 June , but only after he was informed that the deadline for signing the treaty was extended to 19 : 00 on 23 June and he neglected to officially inform Fremantle . News of the extension was seen by Fremantle in a newspaper on the same day and he assumed it to be true . He had been under orders from Madden for some time to exercise his battleships against torpedo attacks , which required good weather in order to recover the torpedoes . The weather on the night of 20 June was favourable so Fremantle ordered the First Battle Squadron to sea at 09 : 00 the next morning , 21 June . The operation to seize the German ships was postponed until the night of his squadron 's return to Scapa Flow on 23 June , after the deadline to sign the treaty had expired . Fremantle later claimed that before he left Scapa he had unofficially informed von Reuter that the armistice was still in effect . 
 = = The fleet is scuttled = = 
 Around 10 : 00 a.m. on 21 June 1919 , von Reuter sent a flag signal ordering the fleet to stand by for the signal to scuttle . At about 11 : 20 the flag signal was sent : " To all Commanding Officers and the Leader of the Torpedo Boats . Paragraph Eleven of to @-@ day 's date . <unk> . Chief of the <unk> Squadron . " The signal was repeated by semaphore and searchlights . Scuttling began immediately : seacocks and flood valves were opened and internal water pipes smashed . <unk> had already been loosened , watertight doors and condenser covers left open , and in some ships holes had been bored through bulkheads , all to facilitate the spread of water once scuttling began . One German ship commander recorded that prior to 21 June , seacocks had been set on a hair turning and heavily lubricated , while large hammers had been placed besides valves . 
 There was no noticeable effect until noon , when Friedrich der Grosse began to list heavily to starboard and all the ships hoisted the Imperial German Ensign at their mainmasts . The crews then began to abandon ship . The British naval forces left at Scapa Flow comprised three destroyers , one of which was under repair , seven trawlers and a number of drifters . Fremantle started receiving news of the scuttling at 12 : 20 and cancelled his squadron 's exercise at 12 : 35 , steaming at full speed back to Scapa Flow . He and a division of ships arrived at 14 : 30 in time to see only the large ships still afloat . He had radioed ahead to order all available craft to prevent the German ships sinking or beach them . The last German ship to sink was the battlecruiser Hindenburg at 17 : 00 , by which time fifteen capital ships were sunk , and only Baden survived . Four light cruisers and thirty @-@ two destroyers were sunk . Nine Germans were shot and killed and about sixteen wounded aboard their lifeboats rowing towards land . 
 During the afternoon , 1 @,@ 774 Germans were picked up and transported by battleships of the First Battle Squadron to Invergordon . Fremantle had sent out a general order declaring that the Germans were to be treated as prisoners @-@ of @-@ war for having broken the armistice and they were destined for the prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps at Nigg . Von Reuter and a number of his officers were brought onto the quarterdeck of HMS Revenge , where Fremantle – through an interpreter – denounced their actions as dishonourable while von Reuter and his men looked on " with expressionless faces . " Admiral Fremantle subsequently remarked privately , " I could not resist feeling some sympathy for von Reuter , who had preserved his dignity when placed against his will in a highly unpleasant and invidious position . " 
 = = Reactions = = 
 The French were disappointed that the German fleet was gone , having hoped to acquire at least some of the ships . The British Admiral Wemyss privately remarked : 
 German Admiral Reinhard Scheer declared : 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Of the 74 German ships in Scapa Flow , 15 of the 16 capital ships , 5 of the 8 cruisers , and 32 of the 50 destroyers were sunk . The remainder either remained afloat , or were towed to shallower waters and beached . The beached ships were later dispersed to the allied navies , but most of the sunken ships were initially left at the bottom of Scapa Flow , the cost of salvaging them being deemed to be not worth the potential returns , owing to the glut of scrap metal left after the end of the war , with plenty of obsolete warships having been broken up . After complaints from locals that the wrecks were a hazard to navigation , a salvage company was formed in 1923 , which raised four of the sunken destroyers . 
 At about this time , the entrepreneur Ernest Cox became involved . He bought 26 destroyers from the Admiralty for £ 250 , as well as Seydlitz and Hindenburg . He began operations to refloat the destroyers using an old German dry dock he purchased and subsequently modified . He was able to lift 24 of his 26 destroyers over the next year and a half , after which he began work on the larger vessels . He developed a new salvage technique whereby divers patched the holes in the submerged hulls , and then pumped air into them so they would rise to the surface , where they could then be towed to the breakers . Using this technique , he refloated several of the ships . His methods were costly , however , and the final cost of raising Hindenburg ran to some £ 30 @,@ 000 . Industrial action and a coal strike in 1926 nearly brought operations to a halt , but Cox instead dug out the coal in the submerged Seydlitz , using it to power his machines until the end of the strike . Salvaging Seydlitz also proved difficult , as the ship sank again during the first attempt to raise her , wrecking most of the salvage equipment . Undaunted , Cox tried again , ordering that when she was next raised , news cameras would be there to capture him witnessing the moment . The plan nearly backfired when Seydlitz was accidentally refloated while Cox was holidaying in Switzerland . Cox told the workers to sink her again , then returned to Britain to be present as Seydlitz was duly refloated a second time . Cox 's company eventually raised 26 destroyers , two battlecruisers and five battleships . 
 Cox sold his remaining interests to the Alloa Shipbuilding Company , ( later Metal Industries Group ) and retired as the " man who bought a navy " . The latter company went on to raise a further five cruisers , battlecruisers , and battleships , before the outbreak of the Second World War brought operations to a halt . The remaining wrecks lie in deeper waters , in depths up to 47 metres ( 154 ft ) , and there has been no economic incentive to attempt to raise them since . Minor salvage is still carried out to recover small pieces of steel . This low @-@ background steel is used in the manufacture of radiation @-@ sensitive devices , such as Geiger counters , as it is not contaminated with radioisotopes , having been produced prior to any chance of nuclear contamination . 
 The seven wrecks that remain are scheduled under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979 . Divers are allowed to visit them but need a permit to do so . 
 While the rebuilding of the German Army in the 1930s was based upon the combined myths of " invincibility on the battlefield " and the " stab in the back " , the attitude and actions of the High Seas Fleet at Scapa Flow became a symbol of defiance for the new recruits and officers of the Kriegsmarine . 
 The last living military witness to the scuttling of the fleet was Claude Choules , who died on 5 May 2011 aged 110 . Choules was the last known living combat veteran of the First World War . However a new eyewitness account of the scuttling and the subsequent angry meeting between von Reuter and Fremantle was published by the family of Hugh David in June 2015 . 
 = = List of the German ships and their fate = = 
 = Arise ( Sepultura album ) = 
 Arise is the fourth studio album by Brazilian heavy metal band Sepultura , released in 1991 by Roadrunner Records . Upon its release , the album received top reviews from heavy metal magazines such as Rock Hard , Kerrang ! and Metal Forces . Arise is considered Sepultura 's finest hour among longtime fans . While the music on Arise was mostly in the same death / thrash style as their previous album , Beneath the Remains , it was clear that the Sepultura sound was acquiring an experimental edge . 
 The album presented their first incursions with industrial music , hardcore punk and Latin percussion . The tour ( 1991 – 1992 ) that supported the album was the group 's longest at that time , totalling 220 shows in 39 different countries . During this trek , the album went gold in Indonesia — the band 's first music industry certification . By the tour 's end , Arise had achieved platinum sales worldwide . 
 = = Production = = 
 In August 1990 , the band travelled to Florida to work on the album . Scott Burns reprised his role as producer and audio engineer , and now with a major advantage : Sepultura were at his home studio , <unk> , a studio properly equipped to record their music style . Their label Roadrunner granted a $ 40 @,@ 000 budget , which helped explain the album 's improved production values . That allowed Igor and Burns , for example , to spend a whole week just testing the drum kit 's tunings and experimenting with microphone practice . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Although lead guitarist Andreas Kisser stated that Arise " took a lot of the same direction " as their previous LP , Beneath the Remains , it was clear that their music had somehow changed . Sepultura 's usual breakneck pace became toned down a bit ; drummer Igor Cavalera started using groove @-@ laden rhythms . According to metal specialist Don Kaye , the album " represented the band taking their initial death / thrash sound to its logical conclusion . " 
 Arise also found the band opening up to non @-@ metal influences . Bands such as Einstürzende Neubauten , The Young Gods and Ministry were already part of Sepultura 's listening habits , and slight touches of industrial music can be traced through the use of samples and sound effects . A trademark of a later phase — Latin percussion and " tribal " drumming — made its first appearance on the song " Altered State " . The band 's old love for hardcore punk is evident on " Subtraction " and " Desperate Cry " . 
 = = Touring and promotion = = 
 Just one day after finishing the recording of Arise , the band embarked on a small headlining tour with extreme <unk> Obituary and <unk> . That was the start of the longest promotional tour of Sepultura 's career , a worldwide affair that would span two full years . In January 1991 they were invited to play for at the Brazilian music festival Rock in Rio 2 where their performance was watched by a 70 @,@ 000 @-@ strong crowd . 
 Before heading out of Brazil on a mid @-@ 1991 European tour , Sepultura performed one more concert in São Paulo , the country 's largest city . It took place at Praça Charles Miller ( in front of Estádio do Pacaembu ) , on May 11 . Local military police expected 10 @,@ 000 to attend . 30 @,@ 000 showed up instead , making crowd management nearly impossible . Six people were hurt , 18 were arrested and one was shot dead . A week before , a young man was stabbed to death at a Ramones concert in São Paulo , during a brawl between headbangers and skinheads . These events were followed by a huge mainstream media backlash throughout the country against rock music . 
 Sepultura 's three @-@ month tour with thrash metal groups Sacred Reich and Heathen was a critical success . For the first time they appeared on the cover of best @-@ selling British heavy metal magazine Kerrang ! and major pop weeklies such as Melody Maker and NME published long feature articles on the group . While in Spain Sepultura recorded their Under Siege video , which included their Barcelona concert and interview footage with all four members of the band . After Europe , they toured North America with grindcore pioneers Napalm Death , New York City hardcore punk group Sick of It All and Sacred Reich . Sepultura wrapped up the year doing a brief German tour with NWOBHM legends <unk> and Florida death metal group Morbid Angel in December . 
 Sepultura then managed to secure a slot in two of the most sought after rock tours of 1992 . One was done with ex @-@ Black Sabbath singer Ozzy Osbourne , who was promoting his multi @-@ platinum solo album No More Tears while the second tour was with industrial metal stalwarts Ministry and influential Alternative Metal / noise rock unit Helmet . Both of these American acts had just released the most successful records of their careers - namely Psalm 69 and Meantime . 
 A remastered version of Arise was released by Roadrunner in 1997 , with added notes by music critic Don Kaye and four bonus tracks , previously released on the compilation The Roots Of Sepultura : a cover version of Motörhead 's " <unk> " , a rough mix of " Desperate Cry " and two previously unreleased songs . A previously unavailable photo shoot from the Arise period was also included in the expanded CD booklet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Arise garnered praise from a wide variety of sources . By the time of its release , major Brazilian newspapers were already aware of the band 's existence , and advance copies sent to them were generally met with positive reviews . Artur G. Couto Duarte , writing for O Estado de Minas , described Sepultura 's soundscapes as " stories describing barren worlds where disease , hunger , torture and death reign supreme " . Folha de S.Paulo 's Sérgio Sá Leitão pointed out Sepultura 's increasing compositional skills , drawing attention to how the band 's occasional use of restraint benefited their songs as a whole . 
 The international pop press also took notice of Brazil 's premiere metal group . Top British weeklies such as the Melody Maker and NME wrote lengthy articles on the band , praising them . A Melody Maker journalist wrote : " Sepultura is [ ... ] a Brazilian metal band which seems to be in the verge of getting big - maybe even bigger than Slayer , their only true rival . " Genre @-@ specific magazines also reacted positively to the group . Germany 's Thrash elected Sepultura the best band in the world , defeating major contenders Metallica and Slayer . Sepultura were also prominently featured on the biggest metal publications of the time , such as Kerrang ! , Rock Hard and Metal Forces . Select gave the album a five out of five rating , referring to it as a " a classic example of rock music as pure cathartic release " and that " few metal LPs released this year , if any , will triumph over Arise . " 
 Arise was the first Sepultura record to enter the Billboard charts , at number 119 . It was also the first to gain a music certification — Arise went gold in 1992 for selling 25 @,@ 000 copies in Indonesia . By 1993 , the album had sold 1 million units around the globe . In 2001 , it won a second certification : silver in the United Kingdom , for selling in excess of 60 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Throughout the years , Arise has been continuously praised by the music press , not only as a landmark release of Sepultura 's career , but of extreme metal in general . In November 1996 , Q magazine stated that " Arise remains their thrash high water mark , sounding like an angry man throwing tools at a urinal while reading the Book of Revelations [ sic ] . " AllMusic contributor Eduardo Rivadavia considered Arise as " a classic of the death metal genre . " The album also appeared in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die ( 2006 ) , edited by writer Robert Dimery . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music composed by Sepultura , except where noted . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Album - Billboard ( North America ) 
 = = Credits = = 
 Sepultura 
 Max Cavalera – vocals , rhythm guitar 
 Igor Cavalera – drums , percussion 
 Paulo Jr . – bass guitar 
 Andreas Kisser – lead guitar 
 Production 
 = M @-@ class cruiser = 
 The M @-@ class cruisers were a class of light cruisers planned , but never built , by Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine before World War II . The ships were designed for commerce raiding in the Atlantic Ocean . The design for the first four ships suffered from a number of problems , and so the fifth and sixth ships were substantially redesigned . 
 The name of the class is taken from the letter designating the first projected unit . As long as the ships were not named , they were referred to by letters assigned in the chronological order of their planned construction . The first planned unit would have been the thirteenth German cruiser and was therefore listed as cruiser M in the navy 's documents . Had any of the ships been built , the class would have been named after the first completed unit . 
 = = Development and cancellation = = 
 The M class was intended for use as a scout for the commerce raiding squadrons envisioned under Plan Z. The ships design process started in 1936 ; the ships were intended for long @-@ range commerce raiding . They were an improvement over previous designs , which suffered from insufficient range to be effective commerce raiders . However , the requirements placed on the design — high maximum and cruising speeds , long range , heavy armament , and armor sufficient to withstand 15 cm shells , all on a displacement no more than 8 @,@ 000 metric tons — were deemed impossible by the design staff . In July 1937 , the <unk> der Marine ( commander in chief of the navy ) requested proposals from both the naval design staff as well as private dockyards . None of the designs by the dockyards were practical , and so the official design , which only met some of the requirements , was chosen . 
 During further development of the design , serious flaws became apparent , including the weakness of both the main battery and anti @-@ aircraft armament , as well as the insufficiently thick armor protection . The stepped arrangement of the deck armor wasted space and was therefore impractical . The layout of the propulsion system was also problematic ; both turbines were in the same engine room , and therefore each were vulnerable to disabling if the other was damaged . Their crew spaces were also insufficient for long @-@ range cruises . As a result , the design was heavily modified for the last two ships of the class , Q and R. The initial design borrowed on contemporary British and French ships , the Southampton class and La Galissonnière class , respectively . The distribution of the M @-@ class ships ' side armor was the most obvious influence of the Southampton @-@ class design . 
 The contract for M was assigned to Deutsche Werke in Kiel under the construction number 263 . N followed at the Kriegsmarinewerft in Wilhelmshaven , as number 129 . O — construction number 606 — was assigned to Germaniawerft in Kiel , but on 8 August 1939 , the contract was transferred to the Kriegsmarinewerft . P was also assigned to Germaniawerft , under number 607 . Q was assigned to Schichau in Danzig , and the contract for R was awarded to the Deutsche Werke . Only the keels for M and N were laid — in 1938 — but construction was halted on 19 and 21 September 1939 , respectively . Both hulls were broken up on the stocks shortly thereafter . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The first four M @-@ class ships — M , N , O , and P — were 178 meters long at the waterline , and 183 meters long overall . They had a beam of 17 meters and a draft of 5 @.@ 42 meters standard , 7 @.@ 25 meters forward , and 6 @.@ 03 meters aft . The ships had a designed displacement of 8 @,@ 500 metric tons , but displaced 7 @,@ 800 tons at standard load and 10 @,@ 400 tons fully laden . The ships had a crew of 28 officers and 892 men . They were designed to carry one picket boat , a barge , a launch , and two cutters . 
 The last two ships — Q and R — were enlarged versions : 188 meters long at the waterline and 196 m overall . Their beams were 1 meter wider , at 18 meters . The ships ' draft was lower at 5 @.@ 4 meters . The ships were designed to displace 9 @,@ 300 tons , and displaced 8 @,@ 568 tons standard . All six ships were to have steel @-@ made , and up to 85 % welded construction . The design called for fifteen watertight compartments and a double bottom for 78 % of the length of the hull . 
 All six ships were intended to use two sets of Brown , Boveri , & Co. and Wagner turbines or Marine @-@ type turbines built by Germaniawerft and four MAN double @-@ acting 12 @-@ cylinder two @-@ stroke diesels . Q and R however , was equipped with an additional four diesels , for a total of eight . The turbines were powered by four Wagner ultra @-@ high pressure boilers , designed to put out 58 atmospheres of pressure . The propulsion system drove three screws , although four were considered for Q and R. The ships ' electrical power was supplied by four generators that produced 2 @,@ 400 kW at 220 volts . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 All six ships were armed with the same set of weaponry . The primary armament consisted of eight 15 cm L / 55 quick @-@ firing guns mounted in four twin turrets , in superfiring pairs fore and aft . The guns had a total of 960 shells , for 120 rounds per gun . The 15 cm twin turrets were Drh L. C / 34 mounts — the same type as those fitted to the <unk> and Scharnhorst @-@ class battleships , as well as a number of other designs . The turrets allowed depression to -10 degrees and elevation to 40 degrees , which enabled a maximum range of 22 @,@ 000 m ( 24 @,@ 000 yd ) . The 15 cm guns had a rate of fire of between 6 and 8 45 @.@ 3 kg ( 100 lb ) rounds per minute , at a muzzle velocity of 875 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 871 ft / s ) . The guns used two propellant charges : a 14 @.@ 15 kg ( 31 @.@ 2 lb ) RPC / 38 fore charge and a 23 @.@ 5 kg ( 52 lb ) main charge in a brass cartridge . 
 The ships carried four 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 76 anti @-@ aircraft guns in two twin turrets , aft of the main superstructure . The 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were supplied with 1 @,@ 600 shells , for 400 rounds per gun . These guns fired 19 @.@ 8 kg ( 44 lb ) high explosive shells at a rate of fire of 15 to 20 rounds per minute and a muzzle velocity of 950 m / s ( 3 @,@ 117 ft / s ) . The guns could elevate to 80 degrees , which allowed them to hit targets flying at 12 @,@ 400 m ( 40 @,@ 700 ft ) . The M @-@ class ships were also equipped with eight 3 @.@ 7 cm AA guns in twin mounts centered on the superstructure . They had a total of 9 @,@ 600 shells . The anti @-@ aircraft weaponry was supplemented with four 2 cm guns , each of which had 2 @,@ 000 rounds . The ships were also armed with eight deck @-@ mounted torpedo tubes and approximately 60 mines . 
 The ships were to have been protected with Krupp and Wotan , Hart ( " Wotan " , Hard ) armor plating . The class decks were 20 mm thick , with 35 mm thick sloped deck . The conning tower had a roof that was 50 mm thick and sides 100 mm thick . The inner layer of the armor belt was 50 mm thick in critical areas amidships , and tapered down to zero protection at the stern and bow . The outer layer was 30 mm amidships ; it too tapered down to nothing at both ends of the ships . The gun turrets had the same armor protection as the preceding light cruiser Nürnberg : the sides were 35 mm thick , the faces were 80 mm thick , the roofs ranged in thickness from 20 – 35 mm . The armor protecting the turret barbettes was 60 mm thick . 
 = Argentodites = 
 Argentodites is a possible multituberculate mammal from the Cretaceous of Argentina . The single species , Argentodites coloniensis , is known from a single blade @-@ like fourth lower premolar ( p4 ) from the La Colonia Formation , which is mostly or entirely Maastrichtian ( latest Cretaceous ) in age . The p4 is 4 @.@ 15 mm long and bears eight cusps on its upper margin and long associated ridges on both sides . The enamel consists of prisms that are completely or partly surrounded by a sheath and that are on average 6 @.@ 57 μm apart . Zofia Kielan @-@ Jaworowska , who described and named the fossil in 2007 , regarded it as a multituberculate , perhaps a <unk> — and thus , a member of a mostly Laurasian ( northern ) group and an immigrant to Argentina from North America — on the basis of the shape of the tooth and features of its enamel . In 2009 , however , two teams argued that Argentodites may in fact be close to or identical with Ferugliotherium , a member of the small Gondwanan ( southern ) group Gondwanatheria ; although their relationships are disputed , gondwanatheres may themselves be multituberculates . 
 = = Discovery and context = = 
 Argentodites is known from a single premolar tooth , MPEF 604 , in the collections of the Museo <unk> " Egidio <unk> " in <unk> , Argentina . It is from the middle part of the La Colonia Formation of Chubut Province , Argentina , which is Late Cretaceous ( Maastrichtian and perhaps partly Campanian ) in age . The premolar was described in 2007 by Zofia Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and colleagues as a new genus and species , Argentodites coloniensis . The generic name , Argentodites , combines " Argentina " with the Ancient Greek <unk> " traveler " , in reference to the animal 's presumed migration from North America to Argentina , and the specific name , coloniensis , refers to the La Colonia Formation . 
 = = Description = = 
 The single known example of Argentodites is a blade @-@ like fourth lower premolar ( p4 ) . It has a length of 4 @.@ 15 mm , height of 2 @.@ 10 mm , and width of 1 @.@ 35 mm . The crown is nearly complete , but the roots are largely missing . Kielan @-@ Jaworowska considered two possible orientations of the tooth — one with the back margin nearly vertically , and the other with the margin inclined backwards — but preferred the former , which made for a more natural placement of the roots . Although the left and right sides of the tooth are almost identical , they believed the tooth is most likely a left p4 , as this would make the lingual ( inner ) side the more convex one , as is usual in the p4 of <unk> multituberculates with a large p4 . 
 The front root is larger than the back one . In side view , the upper and back margins are straight , but the front margin is convex . There are eight cusps arranged in a row on the upper margin , the first of which is located about one third of the tooth 's length from the front margin . Only the last is slightly worn , indicating that the tooth is from a young animal . Long ridges extend from the cusps diagonally toward the front on both the lingual and labial ( outer ) sides of the tooth . The first seven ridges on both sides are connected to the respective cusps , but the eighth ridges do not quite reach their cusp . On both sides of the tooth , there is also a small ridge behind the eighth ridge that extends to the back margin ; these ridges are called the <unk> and <unk> ridge . An even smaller ridge is located below the ridge on the lingual side . 
 The tooth enamel is well preserved over most of the tooth . It consists of prisms — bundles of hydroxyapatite <unk> — with an average diameter of 3 @.@ 8 μm . Most are entirely surrounded by a sheath , but in some the sheath is open . The prisms are slightly curved toward the outer surface of the tooth . Between the prisms , and oriented at an angle of about 45 ° to them , are crystals of interprismatic material . On average , the prisms are 6 @.@ 57 μm apart , so that there are about 27 @,@ 247 per mm2 . 
 = = Identity = = 
 Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and colleagues identified Argentodites as a multituberculate , a diverse fossil group from the northern continents ( Laurasia ) that is also known from a few questionable or fragmentary records from the southern continents ( Gondwana ) . They tentatively allocated it to the multituberculate subgroup Cimolodonta on the basis of its enamel microstructure , which particularly recalls <unk> ( one of the subgroups of Cimolodonta ) , and the convex front margin of the tooth . On the other hand , the straight back margin resembles the condition in the other major subgroup of multituberculates , the " <unk> " , and it does not have the highly vaulted upper margin of p4 that is characteristic of <unk> . They regarded Argentodites as distinct from MACN @-@ RN 975 , a fragmentary fossil mandible ( lower jaw ) with p4 from the Late Cretaceous Los Alamitos Formation of Argentina , which they identified as a " <unk> " multituberculate , because the p4 of MACN @-@ RN 975 is rectangular in shape and has fewer cusps . They believed Argentodites to represent an immigrant from North America , but could not determine precisely in which part of the Cretaceous it reached South America . 
 In a 2009 paper on the affinities of Gondwanatheria , Yamila Gurovich and Robin Beck argue that the difference in shape between MACN @-@ RN 975 and Argentodites is due to extensive wear on the former specimen ; they write that the parts of the p4 that are not worn are virtually identical to the equivalents parts of the Argentodites p4 . In addition , MACN @-@ RN 975 is said to have as many ridges as Argentodites and to be of approximately similar size — about 15 % larger . They allocate MACN @-@ RN 975 to the gondwanathere Ferugliotherium and consequently , they argue that Argentodites most likely represents either Ferugliotherium or some related species . In the same year , Guillermo Rougier and colleagues also suggested <unk> affinities of Argentodites in a paper on the mammals of the Allen Formation , another Cretaceous rock unit of Argentina . Ferugliotherium is a gondwanathere from Late Cretaceous Argentinean deposits . Gondwanatheres are a small and enigmatic group from the late Cretaceous and Paleogene of South America , Antarctica , Madagascar , India , and perhaps Tanzania . Although the evolutionary affinities of gondwanatheres are controversial , both teams that identified Argentodites as gondwanathere believe gondwanatheres are likely themselves multituberculates or closely related to them . 
 = Delaware Route 58 = 
 Delaware Route 58 ( DE 58 ) , also known as Churchmans Road , is a state highway in New Castle County , Delaware . The route runs from DE 4 adjacent to the Christiana Hospital in Christiana southeast to DE 273 near Hares Corner . The road passes through suburban areas between Wilmington and Newark , intersecting DE 1 / DE 7 and Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) in Christiana and DE 37 near the Wilmington Airport . Churchmans Road was originally a county road that was paved in the 1930s and realigned twice in the 1950s . DE 58 was designated onto it in the 1980s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 58 begins at an intersection with DE 4 in Christiana , heading east on Churchmans Road , a four @-@ lane divided highway . Past this intersection , the road continues northwest to provide access to Delaware Park Racetrack and the Churchmans Crossing station on SEPTA 's Wilmington / Newark Line . From DE 4 , the route passes to the north of Christiana Hospital and runs through commercial development to an interchange with DE 1 / DE 7 . Just east of that interchange , DE 58 forms the southern border of the Stanton Campus of Delaware Technical Community College . The route crosses over I @-@ 95 , where there is a ramp from I @-@ 95 southbound to DE 58 westbound . This is the only direct ramp between DE 58 and I @-@ 95 , as all other access between the two routes must be made via DE 1 / DE 7 . 
 Past I @-@ 95 , DE 58 becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road and heads to the southeast through residential areas , crossing the Christina River . The route curves south through commercial development , widening back into a four @-@ lane divided highway and intersecting DE 37 . Past the intersection with DE 37 , DE 58 continues southeast as a two @-@ lane undivided road and skirts the southwestern edge of Wilmington Airport . The route passes through light industrial development and continues to its terminus at DE 273 near Hares Corner . 
 DE 58 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 26 @,@ 570 vehicles at the DE 1 / DE 7 interchange to a low of 10 @,@ 257 vehicles at the DE 37 intersection . None of DE 58 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now DE 58 existed as a county road by 1920 . The entire road was paved by 1936 . By 1952 , the current alignment of Churchmans Road was constructed around Wilmington Airport , with a portion of the original road being removed . The current alignment of Churchmans Road west of DE 7 was built two years later . DE 58 was designated onto its current alignment in 1985 . In 1999 , the intersection at DE 1 / DE 7 was converted into an interchange . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Mileposts run from east to west . The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Augustinian theodicy = 
 The Augustinian theodicy , named for the 4th- and 5th @-@ century theologian , philosopher and ( according to some Christian denominations ) Saint Augustine of Hippo , is a type of Christian theodicy designed in response to the evidential problem of evil . As such , it attempts to explain the probability of an omnipotent ( all @-@ powerful ) and omnibenevolent ( perfectly loving ) God amid evidence of evil in the world . A number of variations of this kind of theodicy have been proposed throughout history ; their similarities were first described by the 20th @-@ century philosopher John Hick , who classified them as " Augustinian " . They typically assert that God is perfectly ( ideally ) good ; that he created the world out of nothing ; and that evil is the result of humanity 's original sin . The entry of evil into the world is generally explained as punishment for sin and its continued presence due to humans ' misuse of free will . God 's goodness and benevolence , according to the Augustinian theodicy , remain perfect and without responsibility for evil or suffering . 
 Augustine of Hippo was the first to develop the theodicy . He rejected the idea that evil exists in itself , instead regarding it as a corruption of goodness , caused by humanity 's abuse of free will . Augustine believed in the existence of a physical Hell as a punishment for sin , but argued that those who choose to accept the salvation of Jesus Christ will go to Heaven . In the 13th century , Thomas Aquinas – influenced by Augustine – proposed a similar theodicy based on the view that God is goodness and that there can be no evil in him . He believed that the existence of goodness allows evil to exist , through the fault of humans . Augustine also influenced John Calvin , who supported Augustine 's view that evil is the result of free will and argued that sin corrupts humans , requiring God 's grace to give moral guidance . 
 The theodicy was criticised by Augustine 's contemporary Fortunatus , a Manichaean who contended that God must still be somehow implicated in evil , and 18th @-@ century theologian Francesco Antonio Zaccaria criticised Augustine 's concept of evil for not dealing with individual human suffering . Hick regards evil as necessary for the moral and spiritual development of humans , and process theologians have argued that God is not omnipotent and so cannot be responsible for any evil . The logic of Augustine 's approach has been adapted by Alvin Plantinga , among others . Plantinga 's adapted Augustinian theodicy , the free will defence – which he proposed in the 1980s – attempts to answer only the logical problem of evil . Such a defence ( not a " theodicy " proper ) does not demonstrate the existence of God , or the probable existence of God , but proves that the existence of God and the presence of evil ( or <unk> <unk> ) in the world are not logically contradictory . Some criticisms have also been derived from science , as aspects of the Augustinian theodicy ( specifically , the fall of an originally good creation ) run contrary to scientific consensus regarding the beginning of the world and the development of life . 
 = = General forms = = 
 The Augustinian theodicy was first distinguished as a form of theodicy by John Hick in Evil and the God of Love , written in 1966 , in which he classified Augustine 's theodicy and its subsequent developments as " Augustinian " . Hick distinguished between the Augustinian theodicy , which attempts to clear God of all responsibility for evil , based on human free will , and the Irenaean theodicy , which casts God as responsible for evil but justified because of its benefits for human development . 
 The Augustinian theodicy is a response to the evidential problem of evil , which raises the concern that if God is omnipotent and omnibenevolent , there should be no evil in the world . Evidence of evil can call into question God 's nature or his existence – he is either not omnipotent , not benevolent , or does not exist . Theodicy is an attempt to reconcile the existence and nature of God with evidence of evil in the world by providing valid explanations for its occurrence . The Augustinian theodicy asserts that God created the world ex nihilo ( out of nothing ) , but maintains that God did not create evil and is not responsible for its occurrence . Evil is not attributed existence in its own right , but is described as the privation of good – the corruption of God 's good creation . 
 The Augustinian theodicy supports the notion of original sin . All versions of this theodicy accept the theological implications of the Genesis creation narrative , including the belief that God created human beings without sin or suffering . Evil is believed to be a just punishment for the fall of man : when Adam and Eve first disobeyed God and were exiled from the Garden of Eden . The free will of humans is offered by the Augustinian theodicy as the continued reason for moral evil : people commit immoral acts when their will is evil . The evil nature of human will is attributed to original sin ; Augustinian theologians argue that the sin of Adam and Eve corrupted the will of human beings , maintaining that God is blameless and good , and not himself responsible for evil . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Augustine = = = 
 Augustine of Hippo ( 354 – 430 AD ) was a philosopher and theologian born in Roman Africa ( present @-@ day Algeria ) . He followed the Manichaean religion during his early life , but converted to Christianity in 386 . His two major works , Confessions and City of God , develop key ideas regarding his response to suffering . In Confessions , Augustine wrote that his previous work was dominated by materialism and that reading Plato 's works enabled him to consider the existence of a non @-@ physical substance . This helped him develop a response to the problem of evil from a theological ( and non @-@ Manichean ) perspective , based on his interpretation of the first few chapters of Genesis and the writings of Paul the Apostle . In City of God , Augustine developed his theodicy as part of his attempt to trace human history and describe its conclusion . 
 Augustine proposed that evil could not exist within God , nor be created by God , and is instead a by @-@ product of God 's creativity . He rejected the notion that evil exists in itself , proposing instead that it is a privation of ( or falling away from ) good , and a corruption of nature . He wrote that " evil has no positive nature ; but the loss of good has received the name ' evil . ' " Both moral and natural evil occurs , Augustine argued , owing to an evil use of free will , which could be traced back to Adam and Eve 's original sin . He believed that this evil will , present in the human soul , was a corruption of the will given to humans by God , making suffering a just punishment for the sin of humans . Because Augustine believed that all of humanity was " <unk> present in the loins of Adam " , he argued that all of humanity inherited Adam 's sin and his just punishment . However , in spite of his belief that free will can be turned to evil , Augustine maintained that it is vital for humans to have free will , because they could not live well without it . He argued that evil could come from humans because , although humans contained no evil , they were also not perfectly good and hence could be corrupted . 
 Augustine believed that a physical Hell exists , but that physical punishment is secondary to the punishment of being separated from God . He proposed two reasons for this : Firstly , humans have free will , and only those who choose to follow God will be forgiven and able to avoid Hell . Secondly , he believed that Adam and Eve 's choice to sin affected our free choice , and that humans are left unable to resist sin . Augustine proposed that the grace of Jesus Christ freed humans from original sin , but he maintained that humans can only be saved if they choose to receive grace , and that this choice is formed by the character of individual humans . Accepting that even those who will be saved continue to sin , Augustine proposed that those who choose God 's grace will still go to Hell for a time to purge them of their sin , before going to Heaven . 
 = = = Thomas Aquinas = = = 
 Thomas Aquinas , a thirteenth @-@ century scholastic philosopher and theologian heavily influenced by Augustine , proposed a form of the Augustinian theodicy in his Summa Theologica . Aquinas began by attempting to establish the existence of God , through his Five Ways , and then attested that God is good and must have a morally sufficient reason for allowing evil to exist . Aquinas proposed that all goodness in the world must exist perfectly in God , and that , existing perfectly , God must be perfectly good . He concluded that God is goodness , and that there is no evil in God . 
 Aquinas supported Augustine 's view that evil is a privation of goodness , maintaining that evil has existence as a privation intrinsically found in good . The existence of this evil , Aquinas believed , can be completely explained by free will . Faced with the assertion that humans would have been better off without free will , he argued that the possibility of sin is necessary for a perfect world , and so individuals are responsible for their sin . Good is the cause of evil , but only owing to fault on the part of the agent . In his theodicy , to say something is evil is to say that it lacks goodness which means that it could not be part of God 's creation , because God 's creation lacked nothing . Aquinas noted that , although goodness makes evil possible , it does not necessitate evil . This means that God ( who is good ) is not cast as the cause of evil , because evil arises out of a defect in an agent , and God is seen to be without defect . Philosopher Eleonore Stump , considering Aquinas ' commentary on the Book of Job , argues that Aquinas has a positive view of suffering : it is necessary to contrast Earth with heaven and remind humans that they still have the propensity to commit evil . Aquinas believed that evil is acceptable because of the good that comes from it , and that evil can only be justified when it is required in order for good to occur . Attempting to relieve God of responsibility for the occurrence of evil , Aquinas insisted that God merely permits evil to happen , rather than willing it . He recognised the occurrence of what seems to be evil , but did not attribute to it the same level of existence that he attributed to spirituality . Like Augustine , Aquinas asserted that humans bear responsibility for evil owing to their abuse of free will . 
 = = = John Calvin = = = 
 John Calvin , a sixteenth @-@ century French theologian and principal figure in the development of Calvinism , was influenced by Augustine 's works . Unlike Augustine , Calvin was willing to accept that God is responsible for evil and suffering ; however , he maintained that God cannot be indicted for it . Calvin continued the Augustinian approach that sin is the result of the fall of man , and argued that the human mind , will , and affections are corrupted by sin . He believed that only the grace of God is sufficient to provide humans with ongoing ethical guidance , arguing that reason is blinded by humans ' sinful nature . Calvin proposed that humanity is predestined , divided into the elect and the <unk> : the elect are those who God has chosen to save and are the only ones who will be saved . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Fortunatus = = = 
 Augustine 's Acts or Disputation Against Fortunatus the Manichaean , which partly touches on the problem of evil , records a public debate between Augustine and the Manichaean teacher Fortunatus . Fortunatus criticised Augustine 's theodicy by proposing that if God gave free will to the human soul , then he must be implicated in human sin ( a problem that Augustine had himself considered four years earlier , in Free Will ) . Quoting the New Testament , Fortunatus proposed that evil exists beyond the evil acts people commit , and that people commit such acts because of their own flawed nature . Augustine replied by arguing that the sin of Adam constrained human freedom , in a way similar to the formation of habits . This was not a teaching on original sin ( a view that Augustine was yet to formulate ) , but on the limitations of human freedom caused by sin . Fortunatus proposed that Augustine was reducing the scope of evil only to what is committed by humans , though Augustine writes that Fortunatus finally conceded the debate when he admitted that he could not defend his views on the origin of evil . 
 = = = Buddhism = = = 
 Scholars of religion Paul Ingram and Frederick <unk> argued that the teachings of Buddhism challenge Augustine 's view of good and evil , proposing a dualism in which good and evil have equal value instead of casting good over evil , as Augustine did . This is similar to the <unk> account of good and evil – that the two are equal and in conflict – though Buddhism teaches that the two will come to a final conclusion and transcend the conflict . Ingram and <unk> argued that the Augustinian theodicy fails to account for the existence of evil before Adam 's sin , which Genesis presents in the form of the serpent 's temptation . 
 = = = Francesco Antonio Zaccaria = = = 
 The Italian theologian Francesco Antonio Zaccaria criticised Augustine 's concept of evil in the eighteenth century . He noted a distinction between using the term evil to imply blame ( sin ) and to imply lament ( suffering ) and argued that Augustine posited sin to have occurred before suffering . This was problematic for Zaccaria , who believed that it made Augustine seem offhand and uninterested in human suffering . For Zaccaria , Augustine 's perception of evil as a privation did not satisfactorily answer the questions of modern society as to why suffering exists . 
 = = = John Hick = = = 
 John Hick criticised the Augustinian theodicy when he developed his own theodicy in 1966 . Hick supported the views of the German theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher , which he classified as Irenaean , who argued that the world is perfectly suited for the moral development of humans and that this justifies the existence of evil . He insisted that , while the Augustinian theodicy attempted to justify historical occurrences of evil , the Irenaean theodicy seeks to justify God eternally . Hick saw Augustine 's view that a perfect world went wrong as incoherent and contradictory , and argued that , if humans were made perfectly good , then it should have been impossible for them to have made an immoral choice . He questioned the success of the theodicy with the charge that it does not remove the blame for evil from God : Augustine presented a theology of predestination ; Hick argued that , if God knew the choices that his creation would make , he must be responsible for them . Hick 's theodicy rejected the idea of the inheritance of sinfulness , and he believed that an eternal hell would render " a Christian theodicy impossible " . The Irenaean theodicy does not , as the Augustinian theodicy does , attempt to protect God from being responsible for evil ; rather , it argues that God is responsible but justified for it because of the benefits it has for human development . Both theodicies stress the perfection of God 's creation , but differ in why the world is seen as perfect . Augustine also believed , as Hick did , that bringing good out of evil is preferable to the evil not occurring in the first place . 
 = = = Process theology = = = 
 In God , Power and Evil : A Process Theodicy , published in 1976 , David Ray Griffin criticised Augustine 's reliance on free will and argued that it is incompatible with divine omniscience and omnipotence . Griffin argued in later works that humans cannot have free will if God is omniscient . He contented that , if God is truly omniscient , then he will know infallibly what people will do , meaning that they cannot be free . Griffin argued that the human will could not oppose God 's will , if God is omnipotent . He proposed that original sin as Augustine conceived it must itself be caused by God , rendering any punishment he wills unjust . 
 Process theology argues that God is not omnipotent : rather than coercion , he has the power of divine persuasion , but he cannot force his will . Griffin , a prominent process theologian , argues that God feels the pain of the world ( both physically and emotionally ) and does everything within his power to achieve good , but he can neither force beings to be good nor prevent evil because he does not play a coercive role in the world . Process theology teaches that , rather than creating the world ex nihilo ( as Augustine proposed ) , God created it out of a pre @-@ existent chaos . 
 = = = Alvin Plantinga = = = 
 In the 1980s , Alvin Plantinga presented a version of the free will defence which , he argued , demonstrated that the existence of an omnipotent benevolent God and of evil are not inconsistent . He believed that , unless it could be shown that the two are not inconsistent , they would be necessarily contradictory . To do this , Plantinga believed that a " possible state of affairs " must be proposed which , if actual , would make God 's existence and the existence of evil consistent . He argued that a third proposition – that evil is the result of the actions of free , rational , fallible human beings – allows the existence of God and evil to be consistent . Plantinga supported this argument by claiming that there are some things that an omnipotent God could not do , yet remain omnipotent – for example , if an omnipotent God has necessary existence , he could not create a world in which he does not exist . For this reason , Plantinga argued that an omnipotent God could not create any universe that he chooses , as Leibniz had proposed . He suggested that , even in a world where humans have free will , their actions may be so predictable that God could not create a world where they would do something unpredictable . Finally , he argued that if every moral agent freely makes at least one bad moral decision in any possible universe , God cannot create a universe where there is human freedom and no evil . Plantinga maintained that the existence of an omnipotent , benevolent God and the existence of evil are not inconsistent . 
 Plantinga 's version of the defence embraces Augustine 's view of free will , but not his natural theology . Rather than attempt to show the existence of God as likely in the face of evil , as a theodicy does , Plantinga 's free will defence attempts to show that belief in God is still logically possible , despite the existence of evil . Theologian Alister McGrath has noted that , because Plantinga only argued that the coexistence of God and evil are logically possible , he did not present a theodicy , but a defence . Plantinga did not attempt to demonstrate that his proposition is true or plausible , just that it is logically possible . 
 = = = Critique from a scientific position = = = 
 John Hick criticised Augustine 's theory for being " implausible " in light of Darwin 's theory of evolution , as it would make Augustine 's idea of a fall from perfection inaccurate ; this is reiterated by professors <unk> Murphy and George Francis Rayner Ellis , who also contend that Augustine 's idea of transmitting original sin from Adam to the rest of humanity requires biological explanation . Professor of Comparative Religion Arvind Sharma has argued that natural evil cannot be the result of moral evil in the way Augustine suggested : scientific consensus is that natural disasters and disease existed before humans and hence cannot be the result of human sin . 
 The twentieth @-@ century philosopher Reinhold Niebuhr attempted to reinterpret the Augustinian theodicy in the light of evolutionary science by presenting its underlying argument without mythology . Niebuhr proposed that Augustine rejected the Manichean view that grants evil ontological existence and ties humans ' sin to their created state . Augustine 's argument continued , according to Niebuhr , by proposing that humans have a tendency to sin because of a biologically inherited nature and rejected the <unk> view that human will could overcome sin on its own . Niebuhr believed Augustine 's argument placed sin in the human will , which was corrupted by Adam 's original sin . He argued that the logic behind Augustine 's theodicy described sin as inevitable but unnecessary , which he believed captured the argument without relying on a literal interpretation of the fall , thus avoiding critique from scientific positions . 
 = South Kasai = 
 South Kasai ( French : Sud @-@ Kasaï ) was an unrecognised secessionist state within the Republic of the Congo ( the modern @-@ day Democratic Republic of the Congo ) which was semi @-@ independent between 1960 and 1962 . Initially proposed as only a province , South Kasai sought full autonomy in similar circumstances to the much larger neighbouring state of Katanga , to its south , during the political turmoil arising from the independence of the Belgian Congo known as the Congo Crisis . Unlike Katanga , however , South Kasai did not explicitly declare full independence from the Republic of the Congo or reject Congolese sovereignty . 
 The South Kasaian leader and main advocate , Albert Kalonji , who had represented a faction of the nationalist movement ( the Mouvement National Congolais @-@ Kalonji or MNC @-@ K ) before decolonisation , exploited ethnic tensions between his own ethnic group , the Baluba , and the Bena Lulua to create a Luba @-@ focused state in the group 's traditional heartland in the south @-@ eastern parts of the Kasai region . As sectarian violence broke out across the country , the state declared its secession from the Congo on 9 August 1960 and its government and called for the Baluba living in the rest of the Congo to return to their " homeland " . Kalonji was appointed President . Although the South Kasaian government claimed to form an autonomous part of a federal Congo @-@ wide state , it exercised a degree of regional autonomy and even produced its own constitution and postage stamps . The state , supported by foreign powers , particularly Belgium , and funded by diamond exports , resolved numerous crises , including those caused by the large emigration of Luba refugees , but became increasingly militarist and repressive . 
 Soon after its secession , South Kasaian and Congolese troops clashed after the Congolese central government ordered an offensive against it . The offensive , planned to be the first act of an offensive against Katanga , was accompanied by widespread massacres of Baluba and a refugee crisis termed a genocide by some contemporaries . The state was rapidly overrun by Congolese troops . The violence in the suppression of Kasai provided much legitimacy to Joseph Kasa @-@ Vubu 's deposition of Patrice Lumumba from the office of Prime Minister in late 1960 and Lumumba 's later arrest and assassination . As a result , South Kasai remained on relatively good terms with the new Congolese government from 1961 . Its leaders , including Kalonji himself , served in both the South Kasaian government and the Congolese parliament . South Kasai continued to exercise quasi @-@ independence while Congolese and United Nations troops were able to move through the territory without conflict with the South Kasaian gendarmerie . In April 1961 , Kalonji took the royal title Mulopwe ( " King of the Baluba " ) to tie the state more closely to the pre @-@ colonial Luba Empire . The act divided the South Kasaian authorities and Kalonji was disavowed by the majority of South Kasai 's parliamentary representatives in Léopoldville . In December 1961 , Kalonji was arrested on a legal pretext in Léopoldville and imprisoned . UN and Congolese troops occupied South Kasai . In September 1962 , shortly after his escape from prison and return to South Kasai , Kalonji was ousted by a military coup d 'état which forced him into exile and brought the secession to an end . 
 The end of South Kasai 's secession is usually held to be either December 1961 , the date of Kalonji 's arrest , or October 1962 with the anti @-@ Kalonji coup d 'état and final arrival of government troops . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Colonial rule = = = 
 European colonial rule in the Congo began in the late 19th century . King Leopold II of Belgium , frustrated by his country 's lack of international power and prestige , attempted to persuade the Belgian government to support colonial expansion around the then @-@ largely unexplored Congo Basin . The Belgian government 's ambivalence about the idea led Leopold to eventually create the colony on his own account . With support from a number of Western countries , who viewed Leopold as a useful buffer between rival colonial powers , Leopold achieved international recognition for a personal colony , the Congo Free State , in 1885 . The Luba Empire , the largest regional power in the Kasai region , was annexed into the new state in 1889 . By the turn of the century , the violence of Free State officials against indigenous Congolese and the ruthless system of economic extraction had led to intense diplomatic pressure on Belgium to take official control of the country , which it did in 1908 , creating the Belgian Congo . 
 Belgian rule in the Congo was based around the " colonial trinity " ( trinité coloniale ) of state , missionary and private company interests . The privileging of Belgian commercial interests meant that large amounts of capital flowed into the Congo and that individual regions became specialised . On many occasions , the interests of the government and private enterprise became closely tied and the state helped companies break strikes and remove other barriers imposed by the indigenous population . The country was split into hierarchically @-@ organised administrative subdivisions , and run uniformly according to a set " native policy " ( politique indigène ) – in contrast to the British and the French , who generally favoured the system of indirect rule whereby traditional leaders were retained in positions of authority under colonial oversight . 
 = = = Ethnicity = = = 
 Before the start of the colonial period , the region of South Kasai formed part of the Luba Empire , a federation of local kingdoms with a degree of cultural uniformity . During the 17th and 18th centuries , the Baluba spread across large parts of the Kasai @-@ Katanga savannah along the Kasai river basin and eventually developed into a number of ethnic subgroups , notably the Luba @-@ Kasai and the Luba @-@ Katanga . Although never united into a single centralised state , the groups retained a degree of emotional attachment based around shared origin myths and cultural practices . Other groups , like the <unk> and the Kanyok , also had long histories in the Kasai region . 
 One of the major legacies of colonial rule in Kasai was the arbitrary <unk> of the population into new ethnic groups . Despite the shared language ( <unk> ) and culture of the two groups , colonial administrators believed the inhabitants of the Lulua river area to be ethnically different from the Baluba and dubbed them the Bena Lulua . The colonists believed the Baluba to be more intelligent , hardworking and open to new ideas than the Bena Lulua who were believed to be more reactionary and stupid . As a result , from the 1930s , the state began to treat the two groups differently and applied different policies to each and promoted the Baluba to positions above other ethnicities . 
 During the 1950s when the Belgians began to fear that the rise of a powerful Luba elite would become a threat to colonial rule , the administration began to support Lulua organisations . This further contributed to the growing ethnic polarisation between the two groups . In 1952 , an organisation called the Lulua Frères ( Lulua Brothers ) was established to campaign for socio @-@ economic advancement of the Lulua group and became an unofficial representative of the Bena Lulua . 
 In 1959 , Luba @-@ Lulua animosity was brought to a head by the discovery of a colonial proposal to move Luba farmers out of Lulua land to the less fertile land on Luba territory . As a result , animosity rose and violent clashes broke out . In August 1959 , Luba demonstrations against the plan which were violently repressed by the colonial military and police . 
 = = = Nationalist movement and Congolese politics = = = 
 = = = = Congolese nationalism = = = = 
 An anti @-@ colonial Pan @-@ African and nationalist movement developed in the Belgian Congo during the 1950s , primarily among the évolué class ( the urbanised black bourgeoisie ) . The movement was divided into a number of parties and groups which were broadly divided on ethnic and geographical lines and opposed to one another . The largest , the Mouvement National Congolais ( MNC ) , was a united front organisation dedicated to achieving independence " within a reasonable " time . It was created around a charter which was signed by , among others , Patrice Lumumba , Cyrille Adoula and Joseph Ileo . Lumumba became a leading figure and by the end of 1959 , the party claimed to have 58 @,@ 000 members . However , many found the MNC was too moderate . A number of other parties emerged , distinguished by their radicalism , support for federalism or centralism and affiliation to certain ethnic groupings . The MNC 's main rival was the Alliance des Bakongo ( ABAKO ) led by Joseph Kasa @-@ Vubu , a more radical party supported among the Kongo people in the north , and Moise Tshombe 's Confédération des Associations <unk> du Katanga ( CONAKAT ) , a strongly federalist party in the southern Katanga Province . 
 = = = = Kalonji @-@ Lumumba split and polarisation = = = = 
 Although it was the largest of the African nationalist parties , the MNC had many different factions within it that took differing stances on a number of issues . It was increasingly polarised between moderate évolués and the more radical mass membership . A radical and federalist faction headed by Ileo and Albert Kalonji split away in July 1959 , but failed to induce mass defections by other MNC members . The dissident faction became known as the MNC @-@ Kalonji ( MNC @-@ K ) , while the majority group became the MNC @-@ Lumumba ( MNC @-@ L ) . The split divided the party 's support base into those who endured with Lumumba , chiefly in the Stanleyville region in the north @-@ east , and those who backed the MNC @-@ K , popular in the south and among Kalonji 's own ethnic group , the Baluba . The MNC @-@ K later formed a cartel with ABAKO and the Parti Solidaire Africain ( PSA ) to call for a united , but <unk> , Congo . 
 The 1959 elections degenerated into an " anti @-@ Baluba plebiscite " in Kasai as the Luba MNC @-@ K succeeded in obtaining a plurality but failed to take control of the provincial government . Instead , Lumumba promoted a Lulua candidate , Barthélemy <unk> , as provincial governor while Kalonji was refused an important ministerial portfolio in Lumumba 's government . Kalonji refused Lumumba 's offer of the Agriculture portfolio . 
 The Kalonjists , who felt rejected and marginalised by the central government , began supporting alternative parties . Among them , the Kalonjists supported Tshombe 's CONAKAT party in nearby Katanga which , because of its strongly federalist stance , opposed to Lumumba 's conception of a strong central government based in the capital Léopoldville . As part of this , the Kalonjists supported CONAKAT against their main local rivals , the centralist Association Générale des Baluba de Katanga ( <unk> ) party led by Jason <unk> , which , although it represented the Baluba of Katanga Province , was in favour of centralism . The Kalonjists , who believed themselves to be acting on behalf of all the Luba @-@ Kasai , created an animosity between the Luba @-@ Kasai and the Luba @-@ Katanga but also failed to gain the full support of CONAKAT , much of which had racial prejudice against the Baluba and supported only the " authentic Katangese " . 
 = = Secession = = 
 = = = Persecution of the Baluba = = = 
 The Republic of the Congo received independence on 30 June 1960 under a joint government of Kasa @-@ Vubu and Lumumba . Four days previously , MNC @-@ K officials had petitioned the Léopoldville parliament to peacefully divide the Province of Kasai along the lines suggested by Kalonji . The motion , which would have required the modification of the Congo 's new constitution ( Loi fondamentale ) , was received by a parliament divided between Lumumba and Kasa @-@ Vubu factions and no agreement could be reached . 
 In the aftermath of independence , ethnic tensions flared up across the country , much of it directed against the Baluba , and a number of violent clashes occurred . Despite rejecting earlier proposals for Luba repatriations to Kasai in January 1960 , the Kalonjists made an official call to the Baluba across the Congo to return to their Kasaian " homeland " on 16 July . Initially , the Kalonjists envisaged the division of Kasai Province in two in order to allow for the creation of a quasi @-@ autonomous MNC @-@ K and Luba @-@ dominated provincial government . The proposed province was termed the Federative State of South Kasai ( État <unk> du Sud @-@ Kasaï ) . Rapidly , however , Kalonji realised that the chaos in the rest of the Congo could be used to secede unilaterally and declare full local independence . This decision was further re @-@ enforced by the full secession of the State of Katanga ( État du Katanga ) , led by Tshombe , on 11 July 1960 . Kalonji visited Katanga at the start of August 1960 , shortly after its secession , where , on the 8 August , he declared that Kasai " must be divided at all costs . " 
 = = = Secession = = = 
 On 9 August 1960 , Kalonji , still in Katanga , declared the region of south @-@ eastern Kasai to be the new Mining State of South Kasai ( État <unk> du Sud @-@ Kasaï ) or Autonomous State of South Kasai ( État <unk> du Sud @-@ Kasaï ) . 
 Unlike Katanga , however , South Kasai 's secession did not explicitly mean the rejection of its position within the Republic of the Congo . Rather , it resembled the self @-@ declared local governments in <unk> Province . The " Autonomous State " title was chosen in order to re @-@ enforce the impression that the secession was not a rejection of Congolese sovereignty , but the creation of a federally @-@ governed region of the Congo . The secession had some support among journalists , intellectuals and politicians in Léopoldville , with one newspaper calling it " a model by which the many new states now <unk> in the Congo might form a new federation " . In practice South Kasai had considerably more independence than a regular province and , by mandating its own federated powers unilaterally , was effectively seceding from the Congo . Despite this , Kalonji and members of his party continued to sit as deputies in the Congolese parliament in Léopoldville . 
 Kalonji was declared President and Joseph Ngalula Prime Minister . Although the Luba @-@ Kasai had never lived in a single state before , Kalonji was able to gain the broad support of the Luba chiefs for the secession . Kalonji was able to portray the secession internationally as the result of the persecution and the failure of the Congolese government to sufficiently protect the Baluba in the rest of the Congo . At its height , South Kasai numbered around a million inhabitants and 30 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 12 @,@ 000 sq mi ) of territory . The state 's capital was Bakwanga ( currently known as <unk> @-@ Mayi ) . 
 = = = Governance = = = 
 Once established in power , Kalonji positioned himself personally as " big man " and patron from whom state power originated . Tribal leaders from Luba and other ethnic groups enjoyed a close , client @-@ like relationship with Kalonji himself and received preferential treatment in exchange for services . In particular , Kalonji was reliant on tribal leaders to mobilise paramilitaries to support the South Kasaian army . 
 The immediate internal problems faced by South Kasai were large number of unsettled Luba refugees and internal dissent from non @-@ Luba minorities . The state was able to direct money from diamond exporting and foreign support to fund public services which allowed Luba refugees to be settled in employment . Social services were " relatively well @-@ run " . On the 12 July 1961 , the state adopted a constitution turning itself into the Federated State of South Kasai ( État <unk> du Sud @-@ Kasaï ) , declaring the state itself both " sovereign and democratic " but also part of a hypothetical " Federal Republic of the Congo " . The state had its own flag , published its own official journal , the Moniteur de l 'État <unk> du Sud @-@ Kasaï , and even produced its own postage stamps . 
 The South Kasaian army or gendarmerie grew from just 250 members at its inception to nearly 3 @,@ 000 by 1961 . In 1961 , the military led a campaign to expand the size of the state 's territory at the expense of neighbouring ethnic groups . Despite receiving some support from Belgium , the gendarmerie was poorly equipped and constantly low on supplies and ammunition . 
 As government authority in South Kasai was consolidated , the government became increasingly militaristic and authoritarian . Non @-@ Luba groups were increasingly marginalised . Political opponents were killed or driven into exile , including Ngalula . Non @-@ Luba groups in the region , especially the Kanyok , fought a constant but low @-@ level insurgency against the South Kasaian government . 
 = = = International support = = = 
 Kalonji went to great lengths to secure international recognition and support for the state of South Kasai . The former colonial power , Belgium , distrusted the Congolese central government and supported both the governments of South Kasai and Katanga . Like Katanga , South Kasai had important mineral deposits , including diamond fields , and Belgian companies had large sums of money tied up in mines in the area . A Belgian company , Forminière , was the state 's principal supporter and received concessions from South Kasai in exchange for financial support . The comparatively large income from these companies meant that South Kasai was able to support significant public services and cope with large numbers of internally @-@ displaced Luba refugees . In the context of the Cold War , Kalonji was supported by Western powers and moderates in the Congolese government who viewed him as both a moderate pro @-@ Westerner and anticommunist . Although both Katanga and South Kasai were supported by South Africa , France and the Central African Federation , neither state ever received any form of official diplomatic recognition . 
 After the coup d 'état which removed Lumumba from power , Kalonji tried to cultivate good relations with the Congolese government . Joseph @-@ Désiré Mobutu , in particular , was able to use South Kasai for the execution of his political opponents and dissident Lumumbists including Pierre <unk> . 
 = = = Kalonji as Mulopwe = = = 
 Because of the importance of the Luba ethnicity to South Kasai , Kalonji used his support from the traditional Luba tribal authorities to have himself declared Mulopwe . The title , Mulopwe ( usually translated as " King " or " Emperor " ) , was extremely symbolic because it was the title employed by the rulers of the pre @-@ colonial Luba Empire and had been disused since the 1880s . By taking it , along with the extra name <unk> ( " homeland " ) , Kalonji was able to closely tie himself and the South Kasaian state to the Luba Empire to increase its legitimacy in the eyes of the Baluba . In order to avoid accusations of impropriety , the title was bestowed on Kalonji 's father on 12 April 1961 , who then immediately abdicated in favour of his son . With the accession of Kalonji to the title of Mulopwe on 16 July , the state 's title changed to the Federated Kingdom of South Kasai ( Royaume <unk> du Sud @-@ Kasaï ) . 
 Kalonji 's accession to the position of Mulopwe was heavily criticised even by many Luba in South Kasai . Kalonji remained popular among some groups , but lost the support of the South Kasaian évolués who saw his elevation as flagrant opportunism . Soon after his elevation , Kalonji was publicly condemned and disavowed by ten of South Kasai 's 13 representatives in the Léopoldville parliament beginning the disintegration of the secessionist state . 
 = = Collapse and reintegration = = 
 = = = Campaign of August – September 1960 = = = 
 When South Kasai seceded , government troops from the Armée Nationale Congolaise ( ANC ) were already fighting Katangese troops in the Kasai region . South Kasai held important railway junctions needed by the Congolese army for its campaign in Katanga , and therefore soon became an important objective . South Kasai also had important mineral wealth which the central government was anxious to return to the Congo . The central government also misunderstood the South Kasaian position , believing that , like Katanga , the region had declared full independence from the Congo and rejected Congolese sovereignty . 
 Initially , Lumumba hoped that the United Nations ( UN ) , which sent a multi @-@ national peacekeeping force to the Congo in July 1960 , would help the central government to suppress both Katangese and South Kasaian secessions . The UN was reluctant to do so , however , considering the secessions to be internal political matters and its own mission to be maintaining basic law and order . Rejected by both the UN and United States , Lumumba sought military support from the communist Soviet Union . Within days of the secession and with Soviet logistical support , 2 @,@ 000 ANC troops launched a major offensive against South Kasai . The attack was extremely successful . On 27 August , ANC soldiers arrived in Bakwanga . 
 During the course of the offensive , the ANC became involved in ethnic violence between the Baluba and Bena Lulua . As a result , the ANC perpetrated a number of large massacres of Luba civilians . In September , Dag Hammarskjöld , the UN Secretary @-@ General who had recently deployed a large peacekeeping force to the Congo , referred to the massacres as " a case of incipient genocide " . The Baluba were also attacked by the Katangese from the south . In the ensuring massacres , in which ANC or Katangese troops often participated , around 3 @,@ 000 Baluba were killed . The violence of the advance caused an exodus of many thousands of Luba civilians who fled their homes to flee the fighting with more than 35 @,@ 000 left in refugee camps in Élisabethville ( the capital of Katanga ) alone . As many as 100 @,@ 000 sought refuge in Bakwanga . Diseases , notably <unk> but also malaria , smallpox and anemia , were widespread and reached " epidemic proportions " among Luba refugees between October and December 1960 . 
 Allegations of genocide and brutality by the ANC were used to provide legitimacy to Kasa @-@ Vubu 's dismissal of Lumumba , with the support of Mobutu , in September 1960 . In the aftermath of the campaign , the South Kasaian state was able to provide substantial aid to its refugees , many of whom were resettled in homes and jobs . 
 = = = Coexistence and attempted reconciliation = = = 
 Despite the occupation of South Kasai , the South Kasaian state was not dismantled and co @-@ existed with the rest of the Congo . Congolese delegates , as well as ANC and UN troops were generally able to move around the territory without conflict with the South Kasaian authorities while their sporadic campaign against Katangese forces continued . Nevertheless , throughout much of the period , the South Kasaian gendarmerie fought with Kanyok and Lulua militias across the region while local ethnic violence continued . 
 In mid @-@ 1961 , conferences were held at <unk> ( modern @-@ day Mbandaka ) and later in Antananarivo , Madagascar to attempt to broker a peaceful reconciliation between the secessionist factions and the central government in the face of a rebel government in the Eastern Congo led by Antoine Gizenga . It was believed that , with Lumumba dead , it might be possible to create a federal constitution that could reconcile the three parties . The agreements instead led to more uncertainty . 
 = = = Kalonji 's arrest = = = 
 On 2 December 1961 , Kalonji was accused by another deputy , the communist Christophe Gbenye , of having ordered corporal punishment against a political prisoner in South Kasai . Parliament voted to remove Kalonji 's political immunity and he was taken into custody by the ANC in Léopoldville . A delegation of around 400 Luba tribal elders sent to Léopoldville to protest were also briefly arrested . Mobutu and Victor Lundula visited Bakwanga soon afterwards . 
 On 9 March 1962 , the recently re @-@ convened Léopoldville Parliament , under Cyrille Adoula , agreed to modify the Constitution and gave South Kasai official provincial status . In April 1962 , UN troops were ordered to occupy South Kasai as part of U Thant 's new aggressive stance against secession following Hammarskjöld 's death . In Léopoldville , Kalonji was sentenced to five years ' imprisonment . On 7 September , however , Kalonji escaped from prison and returned to South Kasai where he hoped to regain an official position in local elections and , at the head of a government , regain his immunity . 
 = = = Coup d 'état of 1962 = = = 
 As dissatisfaction with the secession grew , Ngalula and other South Kasaian émigrés in Léopoldville plotted to overthrow the regime in Bakwanga . In September 1962 , the Léopoldville government appointed Albert Kankolongo as Special Commissioner ( <unk> extraordinaire ) , giving him full military and civil power , to dismantle the local state . Ngalula approached Kankolongo to lead a mutiny and coup d 'état against Kalonji . 
 On the night of 29 / 30 September 1962 , military commanders in South Kasai , led by Kankolongo , led a coup d 'état in Bakwanga against the <unk> regime . The coup d 'état was followed by calls for South Kasai to be fully re @-@ integrated into the Congo . On 5 October 1962 , central government troops again arrived in Bakwanga to support the mutineers and help suppress the last <unk> loyalists , marking the end of the secession . Kalonji himself escaped capture during the coup and fled into exile in Barcelona in Francisco Franco 's Spain . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = In Kasai = = = 
 In October 1962 , South Kasai returned to the Republic of the Congo . The State of Katanga continued to hold out against the central government until it too collapsed in January 1963 after UN forces began to take a more aggressive stance under Thant . As a compromise , South Kasai was one of the 21 provinces formally established by the federalist constitution of 1962 . As the Mobutu regime launched a centralist restructuring of the Congolese state from 1965 , South Kasai was one of the few provinces which was retained . In order to discourage further secessionist sentiment , the province was later restructured to include new territory in <unk> and <unk> Districts and renamed Eastern Kasai ( Kasaï @-@ Oriental ) . 
 The majority of the South Kasaian soldiers were integrated into the ANC after the dissolution of the state but nearly 2 @,@ 000 loyalists went into hiding to await Kalonji 's possible restoration . The rebels were led by General <unk> and fought a guerrilla war against the new provincial government until 1963 when they also accepted integration into the ANC . Soon after the end of the secession , the city of Bakwanga was renamed <unk> @-@ Mayi . 
 = = = End of the Congo Crisis = = = 
 In 1965 , Mobutu launched a second coup d 'état against the central government and took personal emergency powers . Once established as the sole source of political power , Mobutu gradually consolidated his control in the Congo . The number of provinces was reduced , and their autonomy curtailed , resulting in a highly centralised state . Mobutu increasingly placed his supporters in the remaining positions of importance . In 1967 , to illustrate his legitimacy , he created a party , the Popular Movement of the Revolution ( MPR ) , which until 1990 was the nation 's only legal political party under Mobutu 's revised constitution . In 1971 , the state was renamed Zaire and efforts were made to remove all colonial influences . He also nationalised the remaining foreign @-@ owned economic assets in the country . By the time of its disestablishment , Zaire was characterised by widespread <unk> , corruption and economic mismanagement . 
 The issues of federalism , ethnicity in politics and state centralisation were not resolved by the crisis and partly contributed to a decline in support for the concept of the state among Congolese people . Mobutu was strongly in favour of centralisation and one of his first acts , in 1965 , were to reunify provinces and abolish much of their independent legislative capacity . Subsequent loss of faith in central government is one of the reasons that the Congo has been labeled as a failed state , and has contributed violence by factions advocating ethnic and localised federalism . 
 = Characters of StarCraft = 
 Major and recurring characters from the military science fiction series StarCraft are listed below , organised by respective species and most commonly affiliated faction within the fictional universe . The story of the StarCraft series revolves around interstellar affairs in a distant sector of the galaxy , where three species are vying for supremacy : the Terrans , a highly <unk> future version of humanity , the Protoss , a theocratic race of vast psionic ability ; and the Zerg , an insectoid species commanded by a hive mind persona . The latter two of these species were genetically engineered by the Xel 'Naga , a fourth species believed extinct . The series was begun with Blizzard Entertainment 's 1998 video game StarCraft , and has been expanded with sequels Insurrection , Retribution , Brood War , Ghost , Wings of Liberty , Heart of the Swarm , and Legacy of the Void . The franchise has been further extended with a series of novels , graphic novels and other works . 
 = = Casting and design = = 
 The characters and story of the StarCraft series were created by Chris Metzen and James Phinney . However , as Phinney was not involved in StarCraft : Brood War , Chris Metzen alone is credited for the development of the plot in the expansion . Despite the series success globally , particularly in South Korea , Blizzard Entertainment has not made any major comments regarding the development of the characters and the storyline of the StarCraft series . 
 However , interviews with the two of the voice actors have given a glimpse into small parts of the development process . An interview with Robert Clotworthy , the voice of Jim Raynor in all released StarCraft games to date , has revealed that for the most part the voicing for the characters was done over only a few days in sessions of up to four hours , a fact mirrored in a similar interview with Sarah Kerrigan 's actress , Glynnis Talken Campbell . Clotworthy also stated how the concept art for the game usually used for the visual development of characters and locales in games was used by him in order to develop the personality of his character . 
 Visually , most of the characters and units in the games were developed from artwork by Metzen and Samwise Didier , although at least two other artists — Glenn Rane and Peter Lee — have developed concept art for StarCraft II . It is also implied by some of the authors of the novels that the development of the characters in their books was influenced by Metzen as well as Andy Chambers and Evelyn Fredericksen . This is particularly notable for characters later appearing in the games , such as Valerian Mengsk . 
 = = Main characters = = 
 = = = Jim Raynor = = = 
 Voiced by Robert Clotworthy 
 Jim Raynor is the primary Terran protagonist and player character in the StarCraft franchise . Raynor is the ubiquitous character of the series , having participated in all critical plot points and military conflicts in the sector , except one . He is also the only character to have established inter @-@ species alliance . 
 A former colonial marshal on the backwater planet of Mar Sara , Raynor joins Arcturus Mengsk 's revolutionaries in their fight against the tyrannical and corrupt Confederacy of Man , where he develops a relationship with Sarah Kerrigan , Mengsk 's second in command . However , he quickly comes to realise that Mengsk is far from the force for good when he abandons Kerrigan and the entire population of a planet to die by the hand of the Zerg to satisfy his own thirst for power . Disillusioned and embittered , Raynor deserts Mengsk and becomes a persona non grata in the new Terran Dominion . The situation gets no better when Kerrigan , who was captured by the Zerg , is assimilated into the swarm and becomes one of their most powerful assets . After desertion , Raynor and his forces take part in major combat operations across the sector : He fights alongside the Protoss templar Tassadar in the battle that leads to the fall of the Zerg ruler , the Overmind , and splinters the Zerg into several factions . When the expeditionary forces of United Earth Directorate ( UED ) arrive in the sector to subjugate it , Raynor , Mengsk and Kerrigan ( now calling herself the Queen of Blades ) combine their Terran , Zerg and Protoss allies to repel the invasion . No sooner than they fall , the alliance shatters . 
 Four years later , Raynor 's rebel movement is contracted by a group called the Moebius Foundation to recover pieces of a Xel 'Naga artifact which is ultimately used on Char by a combined force of Raynor 's Raiders and Terran Dominion expeditionary fleet to <unk> the Queen of Blades , restoring Sara Kerrigan 's humanity . After her deinfestation , Kerrigan is relentlessly pursued by Arcturus Mengsk ; during one such raid Arcturus 's Dominion forces capture and allegedly summarily execute the rebel commander . It is later revealed that Raynor was not in fact executed , but held prisoner as a hostage to keep Kerrigan in line . After being freed from his prison Raynor assists Kerrigan as she storms the Dominion capital of Augustgrad on the planet Korhal After a showdown with Arcturus Mengsk inside his Palace , Kerrigan manages to gain the upper hand with help from James Raynor , and kills Arcturus by overloading his body with psychic energy , causing him to explode spectacularly . In Legacy of the Void , Raynor and his Raiders are now part of the Dominion military under the new Emperor Valerian , and ( with the aid of Artanis and his protoss forces ) defend Korhal from an attack by Amon . Joining with Artanis and Kerrigan later on , Raynor watches as Kerrigan ascends to become a Xel 'naga and destroys Amon once and for all ; two years later , Kerrigan - in human form - visits Raynor at the bar on Mar Sara where he began in Wings of Liberty , and he leaves with her . He is not seen or heard from again . 
 StarCraft creator Chris Metzen designed Raynor as rough @-@ living and dangerous man ; Clotworthy describes Raynor as a man that other characters " wouldn 't mess with " . Nevertheless , his depiction is meant to be that of an ordinary man . Critics connected sympathetically with Raynor 's plights , and GameSpot named him one of the best heroes in video gaming . 
 = = = Sarah Kerrigan = = = 
 Voiced by Glynnis Talken Campbell in StarCraft ; by Tricia Helfer in Starcraft 2 
 Sarah Kerrigan is the primary Zerg protagonist and player character in the StarCraft franchise . Kerrigan serves as the primary antagonist of all but the first and last two games . As " The Primal Queen of Blades " , Kerrigan is the de facto leader of the Zerg Swarm and mentor to broodmother Zagara . 
 Originally a Terran ghost agent for Arcturus Mengsk , she is betrayed and abandoned to the Zerg , who transform her into a Terran / Zerg hybrid with vast psionic powers under the control of the then unknown Amon . Following the death of the Overmind , Kerrigan asserts her independence , striking out at those who betrayed her and who seek to contain her , eventually taking control of the entire Zerg Swarm . Four years later , Kerrigan invades the Dominion in search of a number of Xel 'Naga artifacts ; these artifacts are instead retrieved by Raynor at the behest of the <unk> Foundation , who assembles them into a device that reverts Kerrigan to a human and releases Amon 's grip on her . After her deinfestation , Kerrigan is mercilessly pursued by Arcturus Mengsk , however she successfully escapes Arcturus 's Dominion forces . After willingly allowing herself to be reinfested on Zerus , Kerrigan is reborn as the Primal Queen of Blades , after which she successfully reunites the Zerg Swarm and storms the Dominion capital of Augustgrad on the planet Korhal with help from Raynor 's Raiders . After a showdown with Arcturus Mengsk inside his Palace , Kerrigan manages to gain the upper hand with help from James Raynor , and kills Acturus by overloading his body with psychic energy , causing him to explode spectacularly . In the aftermath of her victory , Kerrigan gathers the Swarm and departs in search of Amon . 
 According to Zeratul , Kerrigan factors prominently into a Xel <unk> prophecy concerning the Zerg , the Protoss , and the Hybrids . Heart of the Swarm reveals that Kerrigan is the only being powerful enough to stop the fallen Xel 'naga Amon , though exactly how is not revealed . Though originally intended as a throwaway character , Kerrigan grew on the developers , who gave her a greater role in the series . Talken Campbell described Kerrigan 's transformation as " going from good girl to bad girl " ; many of the aspects of Kerrigan 's infested character design are inspired by the Greek gorgon Medusa . IGN rated Kerrigan as the fifth most memorable video game villain , while readers of GameSpot put Kerrigan as the most evil video game villain . 
 During the events of Legacy of the Void , Kerrigan enters into an alliance with Artanis while investigating the Xel 'Naga homeworld Ulnar . Some time after Artanis 's reclamation of the Protoss homeworld of Aiur , Kerrigan sends a psionic call to Raynor and Artanis for assistance in permanently killing Amon in the Void . During the joint Terran Dominion / Zerg / Protoss assault of the Void , the full context of Zeratul 's prophecy about Kerrigan is made clear : Only a fellow Xel 'Naga is capable of killing Amon , and only Kerrigan is capable of ascension . With the remainder of the joint armada , Kerrigan is successful in killing Amon during her psychic backlash in the void . During the aftermath , Kerrigan returns to Raynor in human form and disappears . 
 = = = Artanis = = = 
 Voiced by Paul Ainsley in Brood War ; by Patrick Seitz in StarCraft II 
 Artanis is the primary Protoss protagonist and player character in the StarCraft franchise . Artanis is a high templar and a military commander introduced in Brood War . The character also appears in the novels Queen of Blades and Twilight . Later retcons have made Artanis the identity of the nameless ' Executor ' for the Protoss campaign in StarCraft . 
 An ambitious leader , Artanis is the youngest templar to achieve the rank of praetor and executor . Artanis holds Tassadar in high esteem and despite being a strong believer in Khalai system , he also holds to the idea of reunification with the Nerazim and Tal 'Darim . Artanis is responsible for the initial defense of Aiur alongside Fenix before being dispatched to arrest Tassadar by Aldaris ; Artanis , however , sides with Tassadar and helps him defeat the Overmind . Artanis later organizes the evacuation of his now devastated Nerazim home world of Shakuras , and with Zeratul undertakes measures to cleanse the Zerg presence on Shakuras through the use of a Xel 'Naga temple . When Sarah Kerrigan 's actions result in the deaths of Aldaris , Fenix and Raszagal , Artanis commands a fleet to bring Kerrigan to justice on Char , and despite allying with both the Dominion and the UED remnants , his forces are defeated by her Zerg . Artanis returns to Shakuras to rebuild the Protoss civilization ; with Zeratul having disappeared , Artanis becomes the hierarch of the unified Protoss Protectorate , the Daelaam , but struggles with reintegrating the two estranged branches of his people , with many of the Aiur survivors desiring to retake their home world . He makes a brief appearance in Wings of Liberty in the vision of the Protoss 's last stand against the hybrids and their Zerg swarm . 
 Artanis is the central character of Legacy of the Void , the third and final part of StarCraft II . He leads the Protoss to invade Aiur but as the invasion went on , many Protoss fell under Amon 's control . Amon has seized the Khala and is controlling the Protoss via their nerve cords . Artanis initially fell under their control but Zeratul severed his nerve cord , dying in the process . Shortly afterwards , Artanis leaves Aiur behind in the ship Spear of Adun and begins his quest to destroy Amon . 
 = = Terran characters = = 
 The terrans are a young species with psionic potential . The terrans of the Koprulu sector descend from the survivors of a disastrous 23rd century colonization mission from Earth . Compared to the protoss and zerg , the terrans are technologically inferior , lacking in genetic @-@ diversity , and highly factionalized . The four dominant government factions are the Kel @-@ Morian Combine , the Terran Dominion , the Umojan Protectorate , and the United Earth Directorate . Terrans are in a constant state of conflict : whenever they are not caught in the two @-@ front pitched battle crossfire with their alien neighbors ' interstellar conflicts , they endure frequent assassinations , civil wars and revolutions amongst themselves . Nevertheless , terran ingenuity and unyielding stubbornness has kept them from extinction ; they stand as one of the three dominant species of the galaxy . 
 = = = Raynor 's Raiders = = = 
 = = = = Matt Horner = = = = 
 Matt Horner is the captain of the Raiders ' flagship Hyperion and Raynor 's second @-@ in @-@ command . Brian Bloom provides Horner 's voice . Described as " young and idealistic " and guided by strong moral principles , Horner is originally a supporter of Mengsk , but becomes disgusted by Mengsk 's deliberate attacks on civilian Confederate targets . Having come to admire Raynor 's bravery and loyalty , Horner follows Raynor when he abandons Mengsk 's cause , and is keen to strike at the morally bankrupt Terran Dominion . Horner is only an average combatant in personal combat , but is otherwise an excellent pilot and tactician . First introduced in the novel Queen of Blades , Horner commands the Hyperion as it comes under attack from Zerg in orbit of the planet Char and is forced to withdraw from the system , leaving Raynor and a small group of Raiders stranded on the surface ; Horner is only able to return several months later to evacuate the survivors . Horner continues in a similar role in Wings of Liberty , acting as Raynor 's conscience and trying to keep his commander focused . After the capture of James Raynor by Arcturus 's Dominion forces in Heart of the Swarm , Matt Horner assumes temporary command of Raynor 's Raiders , leading the rebel movement for much of the game until Raynor 's return to the Hyperion after the raid aboard the prison ship Moros . During the events of Legacy of the Void , Horner is now an admiral commanding the Dominion fleet , joining the joint Dominion / protoss defense against Amon and his Moebius Corps forces . After Amon falls , Horner is the Dominion 's chief military leader , as he and Emperor Valerian pledge to maintain peace and prosperity for the Dominion . 
 = = = = Rory Swann = = = = 
 Rory Swann is the chief engineer of the Hyperion . Swann came from a family of tech @-@ savvy miners who opened a successful private mining operation on Meinhoff : however , their operation was crushed by ever @-@ rising taxes . Swann lodged a complaint to the Kel @-@ Morian Combine officials and discovered that Tavish Kerr , who 's mining operations weren 't burden with taxes , bribed officials to put rival claims out of business through excessive taxation . Swann started a miner 's revolt , claiming independence from the Kel @-@ Morian Combine . However , Combine forces arrived and mercilessly crushed the revolt . Swann himself lost an arm , along with many friends , and was only saved because Raynor 's Raiders responded to their distress signal . Swann had nothing left , so he joined the Raiders . 
 = = = = Egon <unk> = = = = 
 Egon <unk> is a former scientist in Terran Dominion 's science project in <unk> III that involves a cyborg program using New Folsom Prison inmates as experimental lab rats . He tried to reason out , but his former colleagues are silencing him . He invents a virus to escape the facility . Then he hides at Deadman 's Port , he was going to be killed by the criminals when Raynor rescued him . He is now the Hyperion 's engineer / scientist and researcher . 
 = = = = Tychus Findlay = = = = 
 Tychus J. Findlay is a marine and past associate of Raynor 's who becomes affiliated with the Raiders . He appears in the novel Heaven 's Devil and in Wings of Liberty as one of the main characters . Findlay is known for his charisma and toughness , and by his friendship with James Raynor . He is voiced by Neil Kaplan . Findlay is introduced in the cinematic trailer for StarCraft II , in which he is shown being encased into powered combat armour . According to Blizzard 's Nick Carpenter , the marine in the trailer lacked any identity but eventually evolved into Findlay , allowing the cinematic team to flesh out the trailer with the character 's personality . Findlay is surrounded by rumours regarding his reputation ; on the one hand , he is held as a loyal soldier who risks his life to save his comrades , while on the other , he is regarded as an amoral scoundrel . Findlay and Raynor fought together for the Confederacy several years prior to the events of StarCraft before becoming outlaws ; Findlay was eventually captured and incarcerated . By Wings of Liberty , Findlay escapes from prison , tracks down Raynor , and recruits him to work for the secretive Moebius Foundation , where , according to Metzen , Findlay acts as the metaphorical devil on Raynor 's shoulder . 
 = = = = Gabriel Tosh = = = = 
 Gabriel Tosh is a mysterious arms dealer and a " spectre " — an elite ghost agent enhanced through the use of <unk> , a potent psionic reagent . Though originally created for Ghost , Tosh is introduced in the novel Spectres and Wings of Liberty , where he is voiced by Dave Fennoy . Metzen describes Tosh as a " Boba Fett @-@ type character " while Andy Chambers feels Tosh is " quasi @-@ Rastafarian " . Tosh possesses a nihilistic personality and believes that he must always look out for himself in order to survive . As such , he acts as a foil for the idealistic and honorable character of Matt Horner . Tosh represents an amoral influence on Raynor , and the temptation to cut corners and act like a pirate , although he is not inherently evil . 
 You can either choose to help him break out his former friends imprisoned in New Folsom Prison or end his project by using a Dominion agent to end the project . 
 = = = = Ariel Hanson = = = = 
 Dr. Ariel Hanson is a scientist who becomes associated with Raynor 's Raiders after her home colony on the planet Agria is invaded by Zerg in Wings of Liberty , where she is voiced by Ali Hillis . A selfless and altruistic individual , she mainly wishes for life to return to normal . She is considered to be the moral opposite of Tychus Findlay , acting as a metaphorical angel on Raynor 's shoulder , and represents a positive moral influence on Raynor . Originally designed as a male character , Hanson was changed in development to female to act as a love interest for Raynor , albeit limited by Raynor 's status as a mercenary and fugitive , and moreover the fact that Raynor is still trying to sort himself out in relation to Sarah Kerrigan . 
 Either you can help her colony by eliminating the Protoss Mothership , or end the colony 's suffering by killing the colony 's denizens , which leads to her death . 
 = = = Terran Dominion / Terran Confederacy = = = 
 = = = = Arcturus Mengsk = = = = 
 Arcturus Mengsk was the emperor of the Terran Dominion , which presided over the majority of the Terrans in the Koprulu Sector . The main antagonist of the series , he is voiced by James Harper and is the primary subject of the novel I , Mengsk . Mengsk is extremely intelligent and is capable as both a strategist and tactician . While Mengsk does not empathize with people well , he is highly skilled at oratory and propaganda and possesses a remarkable ability for manipulating other people . 
 Born on Korhal IV , the scion of a powerful founding family of the Terran Confederacy , Mengsk was a colonel in the Confederate Marine Corps and a veteran of the Guild Wars , who became a successful prospector after war 's end . Though trying to distance himself from the actions of his father , a prominent Korhal senator and vocal dissident against the Confederacy , Mengsk became a revolutionary himself when his father , mother , and younger sister were murdered by Confederate assassins . His activities soon spurred the Confederacy to launch a nuclear attack against Korhal , wiping out its population ; Mengsk swore vengeance , and formed a revolutionary group he called the Sons of Korhal . Years of open conflict successfully weakened Confederate control over the fringe worlds , during which he recruited followers such as Sarah Kerrigan , Jim Raynor and Edmund Duke . Raynor and Kerrigan grew uneasy with Mengsk 's increasingly extreme methods , namely luring Zerg to attack Confederate targets , leading to Mengsk abandoning Kerrigan to the Zerg on the Confederate capital of Tarsonis ( another reason for the latter was Kerrigan had been the assassin that murdered his father ) . With the destruction of Tarsonis by the Zerg , Mengsk crowned himself emperor and styled himself as a benevolent dictator . 
 In Brood War , the Dominion is invaded by the United Earth Directorate and Mengsk narrowly escapes capture with the reluctant help of Raynor . Faced with execution and the destruction of the Dominion as alternatives , Mengsk allies with Kerrigan and Raynor to defeat the UED , but Kerrigan eventually betrays their alliance and delivers a crippling blow to Mengsk 's forces . Nevertheless , Mengsk rebuilds and the Dominion remains the dominant Terran power . In Frontline , many of the stories in the anthology paint Mengsk and the Dominion overall as tyrannical and corrupt , no different from the Confederacy . 
 In Wings of Liberty , Mengsk and his son Valerian find the Dominion opposed by several rebel and paramilitary groups , including those loyal to Raynor . Arcturus suffers compound setbacks during the game , initially due to the mass invasion of Dominion space by Zerg forces which catches the Dominion military and Mengsk unprepared , and later from Raynor 's Raiders who capture and broadcast proof of Mengsk 's war crimes during the events of StarCraft . Despite these setbacks Arcturus manages to overcome these hardships , maintaining his position as Emperor of the Dominion for the remainder of the game . During the events of Heart of the Swarm , Mengsk tries to have Kerrigan killed on several occasions , including issuing an obituary about Raynor . Kerrigan however , successfully reunites the Zerg Swarm and storms the Dominion capital of Augustgrad on the planet Korhal with help from Raynor 's Raiders . After a showdown with Acturus Mengsk inside his Palace , Kerrigan manages to gain the upper hand with help from James Raynor , and kills Acturus by overloading his body with psychic energy , causing him to explode spectacularly . In the wake of his death , Valerian ascends to the throne vacated by Arcturus . 
 GameSpy cites Mengsk as a classic example of The Who 's " Won 't Get Fooled Again " lyrics " meet the new boss , same as the old boss " . Mengsk was responsible for the release from prison of Tychus Findlay , with the specific purpose of tailing Jim Raynor and killing Kerrigan ; Raynor foils this plan by killing Tychus . 
 = = = = Edmund Duke = = = = 
 Edmund Duke is ranking officer in first the Confederacy and later the Dominion . Voiced in the games by Jack Ritschel , Duke also appears in several novels , including Liberty 's Crusade , Shadow of the Xel 'Naga and Queen of Blades . A scion of one of the influential Old Families of Confederacy with a long career in the military , Duke is a methodical and experienced tactician but also as an egotistical and xenophobic man . As a colonel , Duke commands the Alpha Squadron of the Confederate Security Forces , and is the face of the Confederacy for the player in the early parts of StarCraft . Duke initially leads the defense of Confederate colonies Chau Sara and Mar Sara from the Zerg and the Protoss fleet commanded by Tassadar , for which he is promoted to general . 
 Duke is later charged with quelling rebellion on the Confederate world of Antiga Prime , but is defeated by Mengsk 's forces . When Duke 's flagship <unk> II is shot down by the Zerg during the battle , Duke is rescued by Raynor on Mengsk 's orders in return for the defection of the general and his squadron , and Duke 's knowledge is vital to Mengsk 's assault on Tarsonis . Mengsk , still skeptical of Duke 's loyalty , later dispatches Duke on expeditions to investigate the Zerg on Char and a Xel 'Naga artifact on Bhekar Ro in Shadow of the Xel 'Naga , engagements which decimate Alpha Squadron . In Brood War , Duke organises the Dominion 's fleet defences against the United Earth Directorate , and later follows Mengsk into alliance with Kerrigan and her Zerg . However , as part of a surgical strike against the Dominion 's military capabilities , Kerrigan has Duke 's flagship destroyed , killing the general . 
 = = = = Valerian Mengsk = = = = 
 Valerian Mengsk is the son of Arcturus Mengsk and his successor as Emperor of the Terran Dominion . Valerian is first introduced in The Dark Templar Saga series of novels , while his backstory is further developed in I , Mengsk . Valerian was created as Metzen felt that Arcturus ' story had been effectively told in StarCraft and Brood War . While Blizzard stipulated Valerian 's physical description , The Dark Templar Saga author Christie Golden was given the freedom to develop the character as she wished . A disciple of Japanese martial arts and a keen archaeologist , he is described as " brilliant ... and probably a bit arrogant for knowing it " . Valerian is particularly interested in Xel 'Naga artifacts , which he employs mercenaries and leading archaeologists to retrieve and study . Valerian was raised in secrecy on a number of worlds across the Koprulu Sector during his father 's campaign against the Confederacy . While Valerian shares Arcturus ' passion for liquors and ancient weapons , his relationship with his father is adversarial due to Arcturus ' disdain for both him and his mother in his childhood . 
 Valerian made his game debut in Wings of Liberty , voiced by Josh Keaton . He is confronted by Jim Raynor , mistaking him for his father Arcturus , aboard the Dominion battlecruiser <unk> . Valerian reveals that he is the owner of the Moebius Foundation , the think tank that Raynor had been collecting the pieces of a Xel 'Naga artifact for , and claimed that his mission was the same as Raynor 's - to rescue Kerrigan . Taking more than half the Dominion fleet , Valerian joins forces with Raynor 's Raiders and lays siege to the Zerg stronghold of Char , as part of an effort to prove to the Dominion ( and to his father ) that he will be worthy to take the emperor 's crown after Arcturus . Ultimately , the mission succeeds in de @-@ infesting Kerrigan , but in the aftermath of the battle a disagreement between Arcturus and Valerian over Sara Kerrigan 's fate sparks an armed civil war between the Emperor and Prince , leading Valerian and a faction of the Dominion 's armed forces loyal to him to seek shelter with Raynor 's Raiders . 
 In Heart of the Swarm , Valerian helps Raynor and his Raiders escape into the Umojan Protectorate , where Kerrigan undergoes extensive testing in a research lab . The lab is discovered and attacked by a Dominion task force , and Valerian and Kerrigan escape on board the Hyperion , the Raiders ' flagship . Valerian is nearly <unk> strangled by Kerrigan for leaving Raynor behind on the base . Valerian knew that his father would be willing to sacrifice him to destroy Kerrigan , even in spite of Hyperion captain Matt Horner warning the Dominion fleet that he was on board , and so he aided Kerrigan and the Raiders in searching for him . During the final assault against Korhal , Valerian recognized that Arcturus was beyond redemption , and asked only that Kerrigan minimize civilian casualties ; Kerrigan thus elected to attend his request , recognizing him as a different man from his father . Kerrigan killed Arcturus shortly thereafter . Following the death of his father and the departure of the Zerg , Valerian assumed the throne and became the new Emperor of the Dominion . He immediately went to work rebuilding the Dominion , and enacted new laws to eliminate the corruption and abuse of power that had occurred during his father 's reign . These reforms included abolishing forced military conscription and slave labor . He also reorganized a number of his father 's secret projects , such as Project Blackstone . 
 = = = = November Annabella " Nova " Terra = = = = 
 November Annabella Terra , call sign " Nova " , a.k.a. " Agent <unk> " , is a ghost agent and the protagonist of the StarCraft : Ghost sub @-@ series . Grey DeLisle provides the voice for Nova . Despite the indefinite postponement of the Ghost video game , she appears in Wings of Liberty and Heart of the Swarm as well as a series of novels , including StarCraft Ghost : Nova and StarCraft Ghost : Spectres . She is featured as a playable hero in Heroes of the Storm . Blizzard announced that Nova will also be the subject of her own RTS follow on titled Nova Covert Ops , which was released on March 29 , 2016 . 
 Nova is the daughter of one of the highly influential Confederate Old Families ; despite having unusually high psionic potential her father prevents her from being taken into the Confederate Ghost Program . However , after her family is murdered by an anti @-@ Confederate resistance movement , Nova flees to the undercity of Tarsonis , where she is forced to work as an organized crime enforcer . Nova is rescued during the Zerg invasion of Tarsonis , and ends up in the possession of the newly formed Terran Dominion , who train her as a ghost . At her request , her past memories are erased . 
 = = = = Horace Warfield = = = = 
 General Horace Warfield is put in command of the Dominion forces to fight the second Zerg invasion , in Wings of Liberty . He served in the Confederate military under Arcturus Mengsk , and held a higher place among Mengsk 's advisors than Edmund Duke , who also abandoned the confederacy . His entire family was killed during the Zerg assault on Tarsonis due to the use of the psi @-@ emitters , about which Warfield is rumoured to have provided extremely valuable intelligence . In Heart of the Swarm , Warfield is defeated by Kerrigan and tells her to let the transports full of wounded troops leave the planet alive , calling her a traitor to humanity and stating that Raynor would be ashamed of her . Kerrigan , furious at the general 's comments , executes him but allows the transports to escape . 
 = = = United Earth Directorate = = = 
 = = = = Gerard DuGalle = = = = 
 Gerard DuGalle is the commanding admiral of the United Earth Directorate 's expeditionary force to the Koprulu Sector . DuGalle only appears in Brood War and is voiced by Jack Ritschel . Considered the UED 's most capable military leader , DuGalle , a Frenchman , is a staunch believer in the UED 's mission to pacify the sector and carries out his orders with precision . In Brood War , DuGalle leads the UED as it conquers the Terran Dominion ; however , despite his experience , DuGalle believes misinformation planted by former Confederate soldier Samir Duran regarding a psi disruptor , a device that disrupts Zerg communications , on Tarsonis . When DuGalle 's lifelong friend Alexei Stukov abandons the fleet , DuGalle allows Duran to assassinate Stukov as a traitor , only realizing his mistake too late . Nevertheless , DuGalle acts to prevent Duran destroying the psi disruptor and uses it to capture the Zerg Overmind on Char . However , as a result of demoralization , limited manpower and an alliance of enemies led by Kerrigan , the fleet is eventually pushed back and when a final attempt to recapture Char fails , DuGalle orders the retreat . Shortly before the UED fleet is overtaken by Zerg and destroyed , DuGalle composes a letter to his wife in which he admits responsibility for his closest friend 's death and commits suicide by a gunshot to the head . 
 = = = = Alexei Stukov = = = = 
 Alexei Stukov was the vice admiral and second @-@ in @-@ command of the United Earth Directorate 's expeditionary force . He first appears in Brood War , voiced by <unk> Guerra ; he later reappears as one of Kerrigan 's lieutenants in the Zerg Swarm in Heart of the Swarm and Legacy of the Void , voiced by Victor Brandt . A man of Russian descent , his military career primarily revolves around secret research , though he is also noted as an excellent tactician . A close friend of DuGalle , Stukov will debate situations with the admiral but will subordinate himself to his friend 's higher rank . Stukov becomes suspicious of the motives of Samir Duran after the latter convinces DuGalle to destroy the psi disruptor . Believing the device to be the UED 's best hope to conquer the Zerg , Stukov instead takes the psi disruptor to Braxis but is tracked down and shot dead by Duran . With his dying breaths , Stukov convinces DuGalle that Duran is a traitor and to keep the psi disruptor running for the UED 's assault on the Zerg homeworld of Char . Stukov 's body is given a full funeral and UED propaganda portrays Stukov as a hero , claiming he died in combat on Char . 
 Stukov is later mysteriously revived by a Zerg cerebrate to make use of him for its own deeds . He is first observed , apparently infested , by pirates raiding a secret science facility in the bonus mission " Deception " , a facility that Stukov subsequently destroys . Stukov later appears in another bonus map , " Mercenaries II " , in which he hires several mercenary groups to destroy some of his adversaries . In the StarCraft 64 secret mission " Resurrection " , Artanis sends a task force headed by Raynor to inject Stukov with an experimental serum ; the serum reverses the infestation effects and leaves Stukov healthy , albeit embittered . However , the Protoss cure would prove only temporary , and once Stukov was turned over to the <unk> Foundation for research purposes , the scientists re @-@ infested him in an attempt to replicate the cure , without success . Creative director Andy Chambers regards the resurrection as an experiment by the Zerg , while Metzen notes that Stukov 's resurrection had " really interesting hooks " . Blizzard 's former producer Bill Roper hoped that Stukov 's storyline will be developed further , noting that the character would only be reintroduced if Blizzard can " figure out the right way to do it " . 
 Stukov joins in the battle against a resurrected Duran , revealed to be a Xel 'Naga , in the Epilogue of Legacy of the Void . In an act of just vengeance , Stukov delivers the killing blow to Duran . 
 = = = Umojan Protectorate = = = 
 = = = = Michael Daniel Liberty = = = = 
 Michael Daniel Liberty is a terran news reporter whose affiliations have varied over time . He hates it when people such as his former editor @-@ in @-@ chief Handy Anderson calls him " Mickey " . Liberty is described as being " of normal height and proportions , if a little lanky . " He has dirty blond hair that is spattered with lighter striations of gray which is swept back in a ponytail to cover a bald spot . He has a liking for cigarettes , but keeps trying to quit . A few years after going freelance , Liberty remained the same in physical appearance , apart from an abundance of facial hair 
 = = Protoss characters = = 
 The Daelaam are the unified protoss protectorate organization representing all known protoss kindred , races , castes , and factions . Before the Brood Wars , Protoss society was divided — the Khalai of the Protoss Empire , the exiled Nerazim , the heretic Tal 'Darim , and the hibernating Purifiers . Because of the Great War and subsequent Brood War , the former body collapsed and all branches of protoss were forced to band together in sharing knowledge , integrating technology , and for mutual survival . 
 = = = Khalai = = = 
 The Khala , or " The Path of Ascension " , was the religious law of the protoss , established after an era known as the " Aeon of Strife " that followed the departure of the Xel 'Naga . There are four distinct castes : The Khalai , or " The Enlightened Ones " , consisted a caste of artists , engineers , and scientists which constituted the majority of protoss society ; the Templar , consisted a caste of militarism , industrialism , and law enforcement charged with exploration and the defense of protoss interests ; the <unk> , consisted a caste of historians , educators , and archivists charged with maintaining the telepathic network that unified protoss society into the Khalai ; and the <unk> , consisted a caste of theologians , politicians , and <unk> which formed the Conclave ruling class over protoss society . 
 = = = = Tassadar = = = = 
 Tassadar is a high templar who holds the rank of executor in the Khalai military . He appears in StarCraft and in several novels , most notably Queen of Blades . Tassadar is voiced by Michael Gough in StarCraft , with Michael Dorn playing the part in later appearances . Described as being fascinated with , if somewhat wary of , the dark templar , Tassadar is the commander of the fleet that made first contact with the Terrans by destroying their colony of Chau Sara to contain Zerg infestation . However , Tassadar eventually disregards his orders to continue destroying worlds with no concern for the Terrans , and instead engages the Zerg by conventional means . After tracking the Zerg to their homeworld of Char , he encounters the dark templar Zeratul and Jim Raynor , forging a friendship with the two and learning how to use his psionic powers in conjunction with the powers of the dark templar . 
 The Khalai government sees Tassadar 's <unk> with the dark templar as heretical and as a bigger threat to their society than the Zerg invasion of the Protoss homeworld Aiur , sending Aldaris and Artanis to arrest him . Artanis however , along with Fenix , sides with Tassadar , sparking a civil war between Tassadar 's followers and the government . The conflict is only ended when Tassadar demonstrates the effectiveness of the dark templar against the Zerg . With Raynor , Zeratul and Fenix , Tassadar breaks through the Zerg defences on Aiur to the Zerg Overmind ; Tassadar channels both his own psionic energies and those of the dark templar through the hull of his flagship and crashes it into the Overmind . The resulting discharge of energy destroys the Overmind and transcends Tassadar to a new level of spiritual existence ; Metzen refers to this transformation as becoming a " twilight messiah " . 
 By the events of StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty , Tassadar is believed dead by the Protoss , though he has become a legendary figure among them . However , when Zeratul visits the remains of the Overmind in his investigations into the Koprulu Sector 's future , Tassadar appears in spirit form and shows him a vision that the Overmind had originally shown him when he destroyed it . This vision foretold the fall of the galaxy to the Zerg Swarm led by the Xel 'naga Amon and his Protoss @-@ Zerg hybrids . This Tassadar turns out to be a projection of the Xel 'Naga Ouros and not the real Tassadar . 
 = = = = Fenix = = = = 
 Fenix is a praetor within the military of the Khalai . Bill Roper voices Fenix in both StarCraft and Brood War . A templar and an old friend of Tassadar 's , Fenix is a powerful and cunning leader , but remains distrustful towards the motives of the ruling judicator caste . Under the command of Aldaris , Fenix helps defend Aiur from the Zerg invasion , but eventually falls in the battle of Antioch when his position is overwhelmed by Zerg and his psi @-@ blades lose power . Nevertheless , Fenix is retrieved and integrated into a dragoon , a mechanical fire support unit designed to allow incapacitated warriors to continue military service . Fenix allies his templar forces with Tassadar 's upon the schism between Tassadar and the Protoss government , later leading a task force against the Overmind 's outer defenses , facilitating Zeratul 's assassination of a number of cerebrates and ultimately the death of the Overmind itself . Over this time , Fenix develops a strong friendship with Tassadar 's Terran companion Jim Raynor . 
 In Brood War , Fenix and Raynor remain behind as a rear guard when the Protoss evacuate the now Zerg @-@ overrun Aiur through a warp gate . They hold it until attacked by United Earth Directorate forces pursuing Arcturus Mengsk , upon which they escape through the gate , disabling it as they depart . With Raynor and Mengsk , Fenix enters into an alliance with Sarah Kerrigan against the UED , even leading the Zerg forces on a raiding mission for resources on Moria . However , after the UED is routed from their position on the Dominion capital world of Korhal , Kerrigan turns on her allies . Though unfazed by Kerrigan 's betrayal , Fenix is slain when Kerrigan 's Zerg launch a surprise attack against his base camp on Korhal . In StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm , Raynor shows that he still harbors a grudge against Kerrigan for Fenix 's death after seeing her willingly become infested again after all his hard work in returning her to human form . 
 = = = = Rohana = = = = 
 Rohana was one of three grand preservers who helped create the <unk> . When the Spear of Adun was reactivated , she served as a councilor to Hierarch Artanis . 
 Before her stasis aboard the Spear of Adun , Rohana was a driven protoss who was not afraid to seek out tasks others thought impossible . She displayed strict adherence to tradition , yet was creative when faced with the issues . After she was awakened , Rohana held on to the old ways of the Protoss Empire , openly speaking out against her Nerazim crew , Artanis ' Terran allies , and the reawakening of the Purifiers . She served as a reminder of the past , clinging to old traditions and ways , and refusing to cut her connection from the Khala even as Amon continued to possess her , stating knowledge and history was the only thing that brought unity to the protoss . Though Artanis valued her memories and her ability to see into Amon 's thoughts , he began to grow weary of her adherence to the old ways and her objections to his choices , becoming more of a critic than a councilor . Eventually , she came to terms with the Daelaam , and cut herself from the Khala , stating that perhaps history did not need to be recorded with perfect clarity 
 = = = = Selendis = = = = 
 Selendis is the executor of the Protoss military following the reunification of the race . The character is introduced in the novel Twilight and in the Wings of Liberty campaign , where she is played by Cree Summer . Selendis is fiercely loyal to her race 's ideals and completely dedicated to her responsibilities . A protégée of Artanis , she considers the dark templar to be a threat to her heritage but is willing to work beside them . Selendis is particularly eager to reclaim Aiur from the Zerg . Shortly after Artanis cleanses Shakuras of Zerg , Selendis takes part in an expedition to rescue three stranded heroes from Aiur ; however , the mission was sabotaged by Ulrezaj , who kills two of the trapped warriors . During this time , Selendis became aware of other Protoss survivors stranded on Aiur , but as it was not believed possible to save them , their existence is kept secret . Later , Selendis commands the defenses of the dark templar archives on Ehlna against attack by Zerg and Ulrezaj , resulting in Ulrezaj 's defeat . 
 In Wings of Liberty Selendis leads a force to the planet Haven , where refugees of Meinhoff and Agria have settled after the fall of their old <unk> , to purge it with fire in order to eradicate a zerg virus which has infested several refugees . Raynor 's Raiders appear and are formally greeted by Selendis as past allies , Selendis explains her actions and intentions which leaves the player with one out of two options . 
 Either the player purges Haven in the Protoss ' place while trying to save as many <unk> refugees as possible , this option will have Selendis praise Raynor and calling him a " true friend of the Protoss " , but she will not appear afterwards . 
 In the other option Raynor sides with Ariel Hanson of Agria , who is the unofficial leader of the refugees , and her ideals of being able to create a cure for the Zerg Infestation . Selendis will lead her forces and attempt to burn the settlements with a Mothership while Raynor will attempt to destroy said ship and Protoss outposts which reinforces the Mothership 's shields . When successful Selendis and her remaining forces will retreat and comment on Raynor 's leading abilities as well as hope that his trust in the refugees is not unfounded . 
 In the last mission of the Protoss mini @-@ campaign Selendis appears as one of the heroes which makes their last stand against the Zerg and Hybrids and eventually perishes , her last words are an apology to Tassadar for not being strong enough . Her unit is a Carrier . 
 In Legacy of the Void , she serves as the Executor in the invasion of Aiur but falls under Amon 's control , like many other Protoss . She leads the golden armada against Artanis 's forces , who holds them out long enough for the Keystone to break them free from Amon 's control . Under Artanis 's urging , Selendis severs her nerve cord and urges her fellow templar to sever their cords as well , permanently freeing them from Amon 's grasp . 
 = = = = Aldaris = = = = 
 Aldaris is a member of the ruling judicator caste of Protoss society ; in StarCraft he acts as liaison between the player character and the Protoss government . He is voiced by Paul Eiding in both StarCraft and Brood War . Aldaris is a fanatical believer in the Khala and does not hesitate to judge others through a strict interpretation of its tenets . As a result , he is outraged by Tassadar 's association with the dark templar , and following the outbreak of war between the judicator caste and the templar caste , commands the government forces against Tassadar . Aldaris captures Tassadar and puts him on trial for crimes of blasphemy and treason , though Tassadar is freed by Zeratul . Aldaris later witnesses the rebels successfully penetrate the Zerg 's core defenses , and wishes them luck in their final battle against the Overmind . In Brood War , Aldaris reluctantly allies with the dark templar when the Protoss flee Aiur for Shakuras . However , when Sarah Kerrigan is accepted as an ally by dark templar matriarch Raszagal , Aldaris is furious . While Artanis and Zeratul are absent , he discovers Raszagal is being mentally controlled by Kerrigan and instigates a rebellion amongst the Khalai refugees . When his insurrection is thwarted , the judicator tries to explain his actions to Artanis and Zeratul , but is murdered by Kerrigan before he can reveal her involvement . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Ancient Protoss , a protoss dragoon , holding the rank of praetor . He was introduced in the StarCraft 64 map , Resurrection IV . Along with Jim Raynor took part in the mission on Braxis to de @-@ infest Alexei Stukov . To date , it is his only appearance . 
 = = = = Karax = = = = 
 Karax is a Khalai <unk> . An expert in weapons , armor and ships . Karax is one of the most precise of protoss engineers . Over the course of the war against Amon , he was able to rise above his worker origins , serving as an important part of the war effort . Karax is shorter and stockier than most protoss . The armor he wears also differs in that it is more functional than ceremonial . Karax was among the Golden Armada when it assaulted Aiur . [ 1 ] [ 3 ] After Amon forced the protoss into retreat , he guided Hierarch Artanis through the Spear of Adun , explaining its systems , and how he had given orders for the Templar in stasis to have their nerve cords removed , as per Amon 's corruption of the Khala . He had already been forced to sever his own nerve cords , but had attached cybernetic tentacles to the tips , effectively giving him extra means of physical manipulation 
 = = = = Urun = = = = 
 Urun is the leader of the Auriga Tribe and a member of the Hierarchy . He wished to retake Aiur for the glory of the protoss . 
 Urun appears in " Wings of Liberty " leading the remnants of the Protoss air force in battle during the end of the Protoss mini @-@ campaign , fighting against the hybrids and the enslaved Zerg Swarm . 
 = = = = Adun = = = = 
 Adun was a protoss warrior and strategist who led the Templar shortly before the exile of the Nerazim . All protoss revered him as a hero . Adun 's legacy achieved exalted status was woven into protoss lore , language and culture . En Taro Adun ! ( " In honor of Adun ! " ) became both a salutation and a battle cry used by the <unk> ; Adun <unk> ( " May Adun give you sanctuary " ) became a standard Nerazim expression . Both the Citadel of Adun and the Spear of Adun was named for him . The zerg , having gained knowledge of <unk> ' significance to the protoss , referred to their enemies as " The Children of Adun . " 
 = = = = Lasarra = = = = 
 Lasarra was a female protoss scientist stationed on Kaldir when it was attacked by zerg led by Sarah Kerrigan . The protoss were defeated ; Lasarra was captured during the attack on Kaldir at the request of Abathur , who wanted to experiment on her even though it was known that the protoss could not be infested . Kerrigan agreed to spare Lasarra 's life until she found a use for her . During her time onboard Kerrigan 's leviathan , Lasarra interacted with Kerrigan a number of times . Kerrigan tried to justify her actions on Kaldir , saying that if the protoss could contact Shakuras , Kerrigan would not have been able to survive . However , Lasarra is unconvinced , saying that self @-@ preservation is no justification for killing so many innocents . Eventually , Kerrigan admitted she could not and would not justify her actions , stating that both the zerg and protoss were killers . Eventually , as one of the protoss ships was able to break through the zerg blockade , Lasarra was implanted with a special larva and allowed to warp in to that ship . The larva devoured her and then other lifeforms being stored on the ship , evading detection . It eventually transformed into a broodmother , Niadra , which bred a new brood that infested the ship , killing every protoss on board . Kerrigan later showed some regret over Lasarra 's death , as she told Izsha that she did not enjoy having to kill her . 
 = = = = Kaldalis = = = = 
 Kaldalis is a protoss zealot and a close friend of Hierarch Artanis . Kaldalis takes pride in the history of the protoss and the Khala , though does not express prejudice towards the Nerazim , and believes that driving them away was a sin . A scar runs down his left eye . Kaldalis survived the zerg conquest of Aiur during the Great War . Afterwards , he joined the Protoss Protectorate led by Hierarch Artanis . Kaldalis was impressed by Artanis ' vision of a unified protoss society , the Daelaam : incorporating the cultures of Khalai , Nerazim , Tal 'Darim and Purifiers . 
 After the Second Great War , the Protectorate launched its campaign to reclaim Aiur . As a zealot , Kaldalis volunteered to be part of the Akhundelar , the " Tip of the Spear " ; the Akhundelar are the pre @-@ invasion vanguard spec @-@ ops troops expected to suffer heavy casualties . On the eve of battle , Kaldalis met privately with Artanis on <unk> . Artanis doubted that the reclamation was worth the casualties and was surprised to learn Kaldalis had volunteered to join the Akhundelar . Kaldalis declared the hierarch 's vision of protoss unity gave him hope , and that it was a future he was willing to die for . Kaldalis deployed to the surface of Aiur with two other zealots , and two high templar . Their task was to defend a probe warping in a pylon , thereby establish a foothold . The group was attacked by zerg from atop a hill , and from burrows around them . Eventually , only Kaldalis remained to face the enemy . However , enough time had been bought for the pylon to materialize , and Kaldalis was reinforced by zealots warping in . 
 = = = = Karass = = = = 
 Praetor Karass was a protoss high templar . His mastery of psionic powers was considered legendary . On the eve of the Second Great War , Karass and his troops journeyed to <unk> in pursuit of Infested Kerrigan . There he met the Prelate Zeratul ; the dark templar was seeking information on the hybrids . The praetor put himself at Zeratul 's disposal and the pair broke through zerg patrols and found the prophecy Zeratul and Kerrigan sought . Kerrigan attacked the outnumbered protoss shortly afterward . Karass instructed Zeratul to escape with the information ; the praetor and his troops proceeded to buy Zeratul time with their lives . The dark templar reluctantly withdrew aboard Void Seeker , and swore Karass ' sacrifice would not be in vain . 
 = = = = Talis = = = = 
 Talis was a protoss Praetor . She was seen in the prologue of the Legacy of the Void , when Zeratul helped her defeat Amon 's forces . She defends the Xel 'Naga temple from both Hybrid and Tal 'Darim attacks , allowing Zeratul to escape , before dying from countless void shades and Hybrid attacking her . 
 = = = Nerazim = = = 
 The Nerazim , or " The Dark Ones " , were exiled from Aiur for refusing to submit to the communal will of the Khala . They are warriors who strike from the shadows , and remain dedicated defenders of their people despite their banishment . After the devastation of Aiur in StarCraft , the Nerazim took in their Khalai brethren on their shadowy homeworld of Shakuras , where both sides work to rebuild Protoss society . 
 = = = = Zeratul = = = = 
 Zeratul is a Nerazim prelate and one of the main Protoss protagonists . The character is voiced by Jack Ritschel in StarCraft and Brood War , and by Fred Tatasciore in all three parts of StarCraft II . A renowned psionic warrior and assassin , Zeratul is somewhat secretive and calculating , but is nevertheless honorable and loyal to his species . He teaches Tassadar how to use dark templar energies and facilitates the final attack on the Overmind by slaying several cerebrates . Following the death of the Overmind , Zeratul tries to put in motion the reunification of the Khalai survivors with the wayward dark templar and unmask the secrets of Samir Duran 's experiments . After Duran revealed he had been breeding Protoss @-@ Zerg hybrids for a greater master , Zeratul set out to find Duran 's master and his plan , which encompasses all of his activities in the three installments of StarCraft II . In Wings of Liberty , he gives Jim Raynor a crystal with his memories to emphasize the importance of the latter 's mission to de @-@ infest Kerrigan . In Heart of the Swarm , he guides Kerrigan to Zerus , the original home of the Zerg , and encourages her to re @-@ infest herself so she can stop Amon , a fallen Xel 'naga who is revealed to be the master of Duran and seeks to destroy all life in the <unk> Sector and remold it in his image . Zeratul will also feature in the events of Legacy of the Void ( originally believed to be the central character , the actual protagonist of the story is Artanis ) . He appears early on but is killed as he severs Artanis 's nerve cords to cut him off from Amon 's control . He is described by GameSpot as a " dark warrior who champions the light " and a " willing scapegoat " for his people and ranked in their top ten heroes chart . 
 The character of Zeratul was created by Blizzard Entertainment 's Chris Metzen , with concept art produced by other Blizzard artists such as Samwise Didier . Chris Metzen mentioned that Ritschel died some time during the development of the game , and thus Fred Tatasciore has taken over as the new voice actor . Tatasciore described Zeratul as an incredible character , a " Darth Vader " who invests so much in the survival of things , and one of the best characters he has ever played . GameSpot described all the characters in StarCraft as " three @-@ dimensional , full of personality and complexity " , and then continued to comment : " Yet even among this star @-@ studded cast , it is Zeratul who stands out as the most noble of heroes , although he is shrouded in a cloak of mystery and aloofness " . 
 = = = = Vorazun = = = = 
 Vorazun is a Nerazim matriarch , daughter to Raszagal , second @-@ in @-@ command to Artanis , and the leader of the surviving Nerazim on Shakuras . She is a skilled warrior , and dedicated to her people . Vorazun is deeply committed to the individuality and culture of her people . While she originally feared the cultural change the Daelaam was bringing to her people , she nonetheless remained committed to its ideals in a unified protoss nation . 
 Vorazun had a complicated relationship with Artanis , even before her ascension to Matriarch . Artanis originally believed she was against his vision on unification . Despite Vorazun 's many objections , she nominated Artanis for the role of Hierarch of the Daelaam . By the End War , Vorazun gained a greater deal of respect for Artanis . After the destruction of Shakuras and witnessing him survive against countless foes alone , she claimed Artanis had partaken and completed the " Shadow Walk " , becoming Dark Templar . She also comforted Artanis after he killed Zeratul while under Amon 's control . 
 Vorazun had accused Zeratul of <unk> against the Nerazim for his role in the death of her mother . Despite Artanis ' protests regarding Raszagal 's corruption by Kerrigan , she stated she would always hold Zeratul in contempt . It wasn 't until following Zeratul 's prophecy 's that lead to Ulnar , she admitted that he was closer to the truth than anyone and after finally realizing that Zeratul 's dedication to the Xel 'naga prophecy 's gave the protoss hope , she vowed to honor him with Artanis . 
 = = = = Raszagal = = = = 
 Raszagal was the matriarch of the Nerazim on Shakuras , and mother to Vorazun . The character appears in Brood War , where she is voiced by Debra <unk> , and in the novel Shadow Hunters . Described as one of the oldest living Protoss and imbued with tremendous psychic powers , she is one of the few to clearly remember the Protoss homeworld from before the exile of the Nerazim . During her youth , Raszagal was important in ensuring the dark templar were only exiled , rather than exterminated . In Brood War , Raszagal directs Zeratul and Artanis to cleanse the Zerg from Shakuras and welcomes Sarah Kerrigan as an ally in their mission . This spurs Aldaris to rebellion ; Raszagal consequently orders his death . Kerrigan and Samir Duran later kidnap Raszagal from Shakuras , using her to blackmail Zeratul into killing the second Overmind . It quickly becomes apparent that Kerrigan has mentally subverted Raszagal and has been using her to manipulate events from the beginning . Zeratul captures Raszagal , but is unable to hold off the Zerg forces long enough to escape . Realizing that the matriarch is beyond redemption from Kerrigan 's influence , Zeratul kills Raszagal . Raszagal 's mind is freed by the lethal blow , and she dies thanking Zeratul for releasing her , naming him as her successor as leader of the dark templar . 
 = = = = Mohandar = = = = 
 Mohandar is a prelate within the Nerazim , the elderly leader of the Nerazim and member of the Hierarchy . He believes that Zeratul should return to Shakuras . 
 In <unk> , [ 3 ] Mohandar attended a meeting of the Hierarchy to discuss Zamara , a missing preserver . There were none on Shakuras . A terran female , Rosemary Dahl , attended the meeting , along with <unk> ( a survivor from Aiur ) and Executor Selendis ; she was subject to protoss anti @-@ female bias ( due to their experiences with Sarah Kerrigan ) . Among the topics of conversation covered were Ulrezaj , a powerful dark archon and old enemy of the Khalai . During the meeting , Mohandar deferred to the judgment of Hierarch Artanis . Artanis decided to launch an expedition to rescue the preserver , but didn 't know where to start . Mohandar , however , believed he knew where Zamara was going — Ehlna , a Nerazim sanctuary moon . There , the Nerazim , who had no preservers , used modified khaydarin crystals to store memories . 
 Mohandar tried to insist on only sending Nerazim to the sanctuary , but Selendis talked him into allowing a small number of templar warriors to accompany the expedition . He agreed , but only if there was no disrespect . <unk> went along with them , and ( much to Mohandar 's annoyance ) so did Dahl . Mohandar pointed out the protoss were still evaluating her , a terran female . 
 He took part in the mission to Ehlna . Once at the <unk> <unk> ( the center where Nerazim memories were preserved ) he met Jake Ramsey ( the terran carrying Zamara 's essence ) and Zeratul . The latter made ready to leave . Mohandar told him his place was on Shakuras within the Hierarchy . Zeratul promised to return to Shakuras soon . 
 Mohandar appears once in Zeratul 's apocalyptic vision at the end of the Protoss mini @-@ campaign in Wings of Liberty . By this time , it is implied that he is the most senior member of the Dark Templar remaining aside from Zeratul . 
 Mohandar appears in the StarCraft II short story Children of the Void , set before Legacy of the Void . He was killed while quelling a Nerazim uprising in the capital city of <unk> with Matriarch Vorazun . 
 = = = = Ulrezaj = = = = 
 Ulrezaj is a Nerazim rebel who believes that the Khalai Protoss should either be removed from Shakuras or exterminated . He is introduced in the downloadable Brood War campaign " <unk> : Dark Vengeance " , and later appears as the antagonist of the novels Shadow Hunters and Twilight . Brought up as a scholar on the moon of Ehlna , Ulrezaj begins to abuse his position by learning from prohibited sources of information . Resenting the exile of the dark templar from Aiur , he abandons his career and takes up arms against the Khalai Protoss as they establish themselves on Shakuras . He later uses the knowledge learned from his early days to become a dark archon ; an immensely powerful psionic being created by several Protoss merging . Allying with a Terran smuggler , Alan Schezar , Ulrezaj moves an orbital base over Shakuras ; Ulrezaj uses Schezar 's resources to mutate Zerg to attack the Khalai Protoss , while an EMP device disables Shakuras ' power grid . Though defeated by Zeratul 's forces , Ulrezaj escapes . 
 Ulrezaj reappears several years later , residing on Aiur where he is manipulating a faction of Protoss survivors who were not evacuated . Ulrezaj uses these Protoss to attempt to capture a Terran archaeologist , Jacob Ramsey , who has the powerful mind of a Protoss archivist , Zamara , residing in his own mind ; their failure to do so leads to Ulrezaj personally trying to take Ramsey , but the archaeologist escapes through a warp gate while both Zerg and Valerian Mengsk 's forces also attempt to capture him . Ulrezaj traces Ramsey to Ehlna , breaking through the defenses of both the Protoss and the Dominion . However , Zamara uses her last energy to lock Ulrezaj 's mind into a storage crystal , sacrificing herself to keep Ulrezaj trapped . 
 = = = Tal 'Darim = = = 
 The Tal 'Darim , or " The Forged Ones " are a fanatical sect of Protoss cut off from the Khala , who actively worship the Xel 'Naga as gods . They are one of the antagonists in every game , and serve Amon , to rebuild the universe in his name . However , they become allies with Artanis after Alarak defeats Ma 'Lash in the rite of Rak 'Shir and becomes leader , vowing to bring down Amon . 
 = = = = Alarak = = = = 
 Alarak ( voiced by John de Lancie ) is a central figure of the Tal 'Darim in the service of Amon . He was first described in the short story Ascension , one of the lead @-@ up short stories before the release of Legacy of the Void . In the story , he holds the title of Fourth Ascendant , a minor leader in the Tal 'Darim hierarchy , known as the " Chain of Ascension " ; one can only advance in rank through Rak 'Shir , a ritual trial by combat of their immediate superior . When the First Ascendant , Nuroka , challenges Highlord Ma 'lash for leadership of the Tal 'Darim , Alarak remains neutral , until Ma 'lash seemed on the brink of defeat ; he then declared for him , offering his psionic strength , allowing Ma 'lash to defeat Nuroka . With the First , Second , and Third <unk> claimed in the battle , Alarak is named First Ascendant ; however , Ma 'lash is wary , and threatens a slow and painful death if Alarak betrays him . 
 Throughout the ritual , Alarak is filled with doubts as to Amon 's goals , which becomes a betrayal as Amon begins to phase out the Tal 'Darim and other " mortal " forces , relying more and more on his hybrid . Alarak thus forms an alliance with Artanis , who pledges to aid in bringing down Ma 'lash and removing the Tal 'Darim from Amon 's service . With the aid of Artanis ' forces , Alarak challenges Ma 'lash to Rak 'Shir and defeats him , becoming the new Highlord of the Tal 'Darim . Declaring that Amon had lied to them , Alarak promises revenge against Amon , and joins force with Artanis . After Amon is destroyed , Alarak decides to find a new homeworld for the Tal 'Darim rather than join the remaining protoss on Aiur , though he allows any of his people who wish it one chance to remain with Artanis . 
 Alarak , in Legacy of the Void , possess immense psionic powers and is always rude and arrogant , exhibiting a sadistic and totalitarian personality . He renounces the concept of freedom and holds zero respect for anything other than the ability to slaughter . 
 = = = = Ma 'Lash = = = = 
 Ma 'Lash was the Highlord of the Tal 'Darim . He is featured in Legacy of the Void and in the short story Ascension . Ma 'Lash used brute force to become the Highlord . He enjoys killing his challengers slowly , barely keeping them alive while at the verge of being extinguished . In Legacy of the Void , Alarak invokes the rite of Rak 'Shir ; Ma 'Lash loses and dies . 
 = = = = Nuroka = = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 = = = = Ji <unk> = = = = 
 Ji <unk> was the First Ascendant , ater Second Ascendant of the Tal 'darim . 
 = = = = Nyon = = = = 
 Nyon is a Tal 'Darim executor who Raynor 's Raiders fight in Wings of Liberty for pieces of Xel 'Naga artifacts . He is killed later in the game , when the Raiders destroy his mothership . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 He was the leader of the Tal 'darim who knew the truth behind the organization . 
 = = = Purifiers = = = 
 The purifiers are a synthetic race conceived as an " ultimate fighting force " at a time when protoss scientists and engineers were making technological advancements in intelligent and sentient robotics . 
 = = = = Talandar = = = = 
 In Legacy of the Void , Artanis ' forces uncover a Purifier robot whose personality and memories was cloned from Fenix . This Purifier thinks he is Fenix in a dragoon shell . Artanis is overjoyed to meet this manifestation of his old comrade and is in no rush to tell him the truth , allowing him to discover it at a pace he is comfortable with , by studying the combat logs . Eventually , upon learning more about Fenix , he decides to have his name changed to ' Talandar ' . He becomes the ambassador between the Daelaam and the Purifiers , convincing them to join force . He follows Artanis in battle to reclaim their homeworld . 
 = = = = Clolarion = = = = 
 Clolarion was a legendary protoss executor , whose deeds were taught to Templar warriors long after his death . Because of his status , Clolarion was chosen to take part in the purifier program . His mind was scanned into a robotic shell , in an attempt to recreate and preserve the greatest warriors of the Templar . The Clolarion purifier was sealed in Cybros along with the rest of the purifiers after their rebellion against the Conclave . 
 In 2506 , during the End War , the Daelaam under the command of Hierarch Artanis came to Cybros to reactivate the purifiers . Clolarion acted as their spokesman and leader during the mission , and ordered the Purifiers to engage the zerg on the station , and then purified the surface of <unk> , the forest moon Cybros orbited . With the battle over , Artanis asked the purifiers to join the Daelaam in the war against Amon . Clolarion questioned his sincerity and only accepted an alliance on the condition of Talandar being their ambassador . 
 = = Zerg characters = = 
 The Zerg Swarm is an evolving hivemind : a ruthless amalgamation of biologically advanced , parasitoid @-@ <unk> species , directed by an instinctive " adapt or die " <unk> . The volcanic world of Char serves as The Swarm 's " primary hive cluster " in the Koprulu sector . Dedicated to the pursuit of " genetic perfection " , the zerg assimilate advanced species across the galaxy , incorporating useful genetic code . They are a virus , they rapidly consume , mutate , adapt , and propagate in minutes . They thrive in the most inhospitable environments that creates superior strains in the process . They are named " The Swarm " per their seemingly endless force deployments and relentless assaults they employ to overwhelm their foes : for The Swarm , sacrificing thousands to destroy or assimilate each one of their enemy 's soldiers is a trivial matter . 
 = = = Queen of Blade 's Zerg Swarm = = = 
 The Swarm was reunited under Kerrigan at the end of the Brood War . The cerebrates were eliminated from the Swarm but broods such as the Char Brood remained . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Between the end of the Brood War and Kerrigan 's defeat on Char , Kerrigan created numerous broodmothers , powerful queens , each of which would lead a brood . The queens were ordered to evolve and only submit to the will of the strongest leader , which became a problem upon Kerrigan 's defeat . The brood mothers scattered their broods . Kerrigan was forced to follow and attempt to subdue them . Following the eradication of the last cerebrates in Brood War , Kerrigan creates powerful and intelligent broodmothers to fulfill their role in the Swarm . Kerrigan commanded the broodmothers " to fight , to conquer , to be strong and to lead by force of will " . Through decentralizing command hierarchy , Kerrigan ensured the Zerg Swarm could function without leadership . The strongest of these zerg broods , The Zagara Brood , was led by Zagara . Following Kerrigan 's defeat and de @-@ infestation on Char , the Zagara brood remained there , seeking large egg piles in an acid marsh . Despite General Horace Warfield 's extermination campaign against the zerg remaining on the planet , the brood thrived while all others perished . Its prosperity was interrupted however , when Kerrigan returned to Char and subjugated Zagara , thereby putting the brood under Kerrigan 's control . 
 = = = = = Zagara = = = = = 
 Zagara is a zerg broodmother , Kerrigan 's second @-@ in @-@ command , and the leader of the Zagara Brood . In the absence of the Queen of Blades , Zagara sought to reunite the Swarm under her own leadership . She rallied the feral zerg of Char to her side , and managed to hold out against the genocidal forces of General Horace Warfield . However , her brute tactics prevented her from achieving victory . When Kerrigan returned to Char , Zagara challenged her authority due to her regained humanity , thus deeming her unworthy to lead the Swarm . Once defeated by Kerrigan , the broodmother was forgiven and rejoined Kerrigan 's Zerg Swarm forces . Her renewed loyalty is not left unrewarded though , as once Kerrigan ascends to become a Xel 'naga , she relinquishes all command over the Zerg Swarm to Zagara , making her the new " Queen of Blades " , but after being evolved by Abathur and subjected to Kerrigan 's teaching her some lessons . She is seen in the Epilogue , establishing a foothold over dozens of systems to grant a safe haven for the Zerg Swarm as it rebuilds from the long conflict against the Terrans , the Protoss and Amon 's Hybrids forces . 
 = = = = = Niadra = = = = = 
 Niadra is a zerg broodmother and leader of the Niadra Brood . She was created by Sarah Kerrigan when she battled the protoss on Kaldir . Although she succeeded in preventing them from contacting the Golden Armada , one of the protoss ships attempted to flee from the planet and travel to Shakuras . To prevent them from surviving , Kerrigan placed a parasitic larva within the captured protoss colonist Lasarra and dropped the psionic veil that prevented her from being warped back to her people . After being teleported to the ship , the protoss attempted to warn the Templar but died as the parasitic larva spawned from her body . Shortly afterwards , it began infesting the local animals kept onboard by the protoss and hid within the ventilation shafts where it found a safe location to mature into a queen . Kerrigan gave her the name Niadra and tasked her with eliminating all the protoss on board the ship , a task she accomplished with assistance from her zerg offspring . After damaging the vessel 's warp drive , Niadra and her brood became the only occupants of the craft , but they had traveled beyond the reach of Kerrigan 's ability to communicate . With few other options , Niadra decided to continue the Queen of Blades ' last directives : to survive , grow her brood , and destroy the protoss . 
 = = = = = Rokarr = = = = = 
 Rokarr is a zerg broodmother and leader of the Rokarr Brood . Her brood attacked Terran Dominion fortification at the Sigma <unk> platform , but the assault stalemated . Rokarr ordered the destruction of local feral brood lords , whose essence was then used to create more of them . The brood lords easily destroyed the Dominion fortification . 
 = = = = = Naktul = = = = = 
 Naktul is a zerg broodmother , and leader of the Naktul Brood . Naktul and her brood were based on Phaeton following the fragmentation of the Swarm during the Second Great War . The Terran Dominion deployed a Drakken pulse cannon on the surface to interdict the orbital rendezvous location for ships of Raynor 's Raiders and their allies fleeing a Dominion attack on <unk> . When Sarah Kerrigan — deinfested <unk> the Battle of Char — arrived to destroy the cannon , Naktul still regarded Kerrigan as " The Queen of Blades " and zerg leader and offered her immediate support . Kerrigan was uncomfortable with this acclamation , but nonetheless accepted the brood 's assistance to destroy the cannon . In spite of her early support , Naktul was amongst the last broodmother to rejoin the Swarm when Kerrigan 's attack on Korhal drew close . Naktul contacted the Swarm as a representative of the remaining renegade broodmothers , and conveyed their wishes to rejoin the Swarm . Kerrigan sent them to destroy enemy strongholds across the Sector to test them . 
 = = = = = Kilysa = = = = = 
 Kilysa is a zerg broodmother , and leader of the Kilysa Brood . When Kilysa asked to rejoin the Swarm , Sarah Kerrigan ordered her to destroy <unk> IV to as a test . During the invasion of Korhal , Kilysa had her leviathans formed a blockade and suppressed Dominion fleets reinforcement into the Korhal system . 
 = = = = = Nafash = = = = = 
 Nafash was a zerg broodmother , and leader of the Nafash Brood . Hoping to make the Swarm stronger by evolving a way to deal with extreme cold , Sarah Kerrigan sent Nafash and her brood to infest Kaldir . After Kerrigan 's deinfestation , Nafash sought to create her own Swarm . Shortly after setting up a hive , Nafash moved off into the ice valleys . When the protoss struck , Nafash fell back to prepared positions . The protoss hunted her down and killed her . 
 = = = = = Ryloth = = = = = 
 Ryloth is a zerg broodmother , and leader of the Ryloth Brood . During the Second Great War she kept her large brood out of harm 's way until Sarah Kerrigan returned from Zerus . When she asked to rejoin the Swarm , Kerrigan ordered her to destroy <unk> II , a Dominion shipbuilding world . Her brood on Marek V was almost exterminated by Prometheus Company , but was saved by Kerrigan 's brood . 
 = = = = Izsha = = = = 
 Izsha is a zerg advisor in service to Sarah Kerrigan . She is a unique type of zerg ; one of a kind . Izsha exemplifies a midpoint for Kerrigan , standing between Kerrigan 's cold rationality and the feral nature of the Swarm . She harkens back to the ideology of the Overmind , but is still a rational individual . In earlier times , Kerrigan used her to store her thoughts and plans . On at least one occasion she entrusted Izsha with a plan to infest a planet using the hyper @-@ evolutionary virus through its water supply . Izsha reunited with Kerrigan following the latter 's de @-@ infestation and subsequent return to the Swarm . She served as an advisor , recalling memories from Kerrigan 's time as the Queen of Blades , and helping her to reclaim the Swarm while remaining attached to her queen 's leviathan . 
 While Abathur was designed to be " evil , " the concept of Izsha was to strike a balance between human and monster . Unlike Abathur , Izsha was to have a face that the player could talk and relate to , one that Kerrigan could have more of an emotional connection with . 
 = = = = Abathur = = = = 
 Abathur is a unique super intelligent zerg @-@ biologist creature , created from numerous zerg species . He is the swarm zerg 's evolutionary master craftsman and archivist of the entire Swarm 's DNA library . Arrogant and impatient , Abathur loves biodiversity , despises extinction , and instinctively wants to " eat " anything strange or different so that he can absorb , catalogue and understand it . Abathur is well mannered and is constantly connecting DNA , experimenting on strains and studying the Swarm 's enemies . He does this by " consuming " creatures and gaining access to their genetic code . Abathur perceives other beings in terms of their raw genetic material , not as sentient beings . 
 The quest for ' purity ' was retained in the zerg psyche , becoming a pseudo @-@ religious concept to them . Through the quest for ' perfection ' the zerg were set on a steady state of evolution and conflict . The core idea of this ' religion ' was that there was a state that the zerg could reach where they no longer needed to evolve , that their evolutionary form would never have to change again because they could already adapt to any situation . Abathur accepts that the Overmind 's instinctive desire for " true perfection " is impossible for the zerg swarm to achieve , yet reasoned that " ... chasing perfection was tactically sound regardless . " Instead , Abathur believed it is " purpose " which makes the zerg strong . Abathur states that without an overriding will , " feral zerg " are lesser than beasts , much like he was after the death of the Overmind . Abathur is personally responsible for the continuation of the zerg @-@ species . He undertakes each experiment as though the survival of the species depends on it alone , and tolerates no genetic regression or evolutionary backstep . 
 = = = = Infested Stukov = = = = 
 The infested incarnation of Alexei Stukov makes an appearance in StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm , voiced by Victor Brandt . Following Sarah Kerrigan 's transformation on Zerus , Stukov contacted her and told her about the experiments being performed on Skygeirr Platform . After defeating the shapeshifter , " Emil Narud " , and his hybrids , Stukov joined the Swarm . Alexei Stukov was granted control of the Stukov Brood ; a brood consisting strains of <unk> , infested terrans and aberrations . During the Battle of Korhal , Stukov 's brood attacked Dominion entrenchments . 
 According to Stukov , he escaped his Moebius captors after being re @-@ infested and learned that the foundation is secretly breeding Protoss @-@ Zerg hybrids at the request of Arcturus Mengsk . Although not a hybrid himself , Stukov oddly seems to possess an amalgamation of Protoss and Zerg abilities and characteristics , though this likely resulted from his exposure to the Protoss anti @-@ infestation cure . Once the lab breeding the hybrid is destroyed , he realizes that he has no purpose and cannot return to Earth or any Terran faction as an infested human . Kerrigan offers him a position in the Swarm as a brood leader until he makes up his mind , and Stukov ultimately decides to stay with the Swarm until the end . 
 Stukov returns in StarCraft II : Legacy of the Void during the invasion of the Void . During the invasion , Stukov helps kill the Shapeshifter , reversing the position of how Stukov met his demise during Brood War ( where he was killed by the Shapeshifter , disguised as a former Confederate ally . ) 
 = = = = = Dehaka = = = = = 
 Dehaka is a primal zerg pack leader from Zerus who is fixated on adaptation and collecting raw genetic material , which he refers to as " essence " ; for <unk> , " essence " is survival against extinction . Dehaka lost his large right arm prior to the Swarm 's return to Zerus ; it was later to be found in the same area where Sarah Kerrigan defeated the other primal pack leaders . When the Zerg Swarm returned to Zerus , Dehaka initially opted to simply observe the Swarm and Kerrigan . He witnessed the newcomers awaken Zurvan and the primal @-@ infestation of Kerrigan . Dehaka perceived Kerrigan as the strongest of the zerg pack leaders . He and his pack welcomed the new power by allying with the Swarm , believing Kerrigan would lead them to new " essence " . Dehaka correctly predicted that the other zerg pack leaders would refuse to submit and " adapt " ; the other pack leaders were destroyed by Kerrigan , including Zurvan . Kerrigan confronted Dehaka afterwards , confirming that Dehaka had known that Zurvan would turn on her . Dehaka did not deny this , responding with " one zerg would grow strong , the other would fall " . Dehaka remained with the Zerg Swarm . 
 = = = Overmind 's Zerg Swarm = = = 
 The first broods were formed by the Overmind , with the direction of each brood being delegated to a cerebrate . A brood was engineered for a specific function , which impacted its numerical strength and the diversity of its strains . The Terrans gave the Great War broods reporting names based on beasts found in Earth mythology . The Command Wing broods were responsible for defending the Overmind and searching for new species for assimilation . These broods did not engage in front @-@ line combat unless necessary . The Command Wing included the Tiamat Brood , <unk> Brood , and Fenris Brood . The Attack Wing broods were the Swarm 's front @-@ line forces , meant to conquer and occupy worlds . The wing 's primary broods were amongst the largest in the Swarm . The Attack Wing included the Garm Brood , <unk> Brood , and Surtur Brood . 
 = = = = The Overmind = = = = 
 The Overmind is the center of the Zerg Swarm 's hive mind society , created by the Xel 'Naga as a single consciousness for their experiments on the Zerg . It is the antagonist of StarCraft , where it is voiced by Jack Ritschel ; Paul Eiding voices the character in Wings of Liberty . At some point during its creation , it was secretly enslaved by the fallen Xel 'Naga Amon , who implanted it with a directive to destroy the Protoss and bound the Zerg to a hive mind . The Overmind becomes aware of Xel 'Naga , attacking and assimilating its masters . Through this , the Overmind learns of the existence of the Protoss and is determined to assimilate the fellow Xel 'Naga @-@ empowered species , believing this will result in perfection . To provide the necessary force to overcome the Protoss , the Overmind targets the psionic potential of the Terrans for assimilation . He also assimilated Sarah Kerrigan so as to create a weapon to free the Zerg from the control of his Dark Master . The Zerg and Protoss clash on various Terran worlds , eventually leading to Zeratul assassinating the cerebrate Zasz . Zasz 's death momentarily links the minds of the Overmind and Zeratul , allowing Overmind to learn the location of the Protoss homeworld Aiur . The Overmind quickly launches an invasion of Aiur and manifests itself on the planet 's surface . Following a lengthy and costly campaign on Aiur , Tassadar harnesses the energies of the dark templar to strike at the Overmind directly , disintegrating it . 
 Although no longer a major character in the story , the remains of the original Overmind appear again in StarCraft II . Following the interpretation of the prophetic fragments recovered by Zeratul on <unk> by the <unk> of Zhakul , Zeratul deduces that the " Great <unk> " referenced by the prophecy refers to the Zerg Overmind , and travels to Aiur to recover whatever memories lingered within the remains of the Overmind 's husk . In the course of his investigation Zeratul encounters the spirit of Tassadar , who passes on vital information he obtained from the Overmind concerning the Queen of Blades , the Hybrid , and the Overmind 's vision of one possible future brought about due to the death of Kerrigan . Alongside Kerrigan , the Overmind was rated the eighth most diabolical video game villain by GamePro . 
 = = = = Cerebrates = = = = 
 Cerebrates are secondary agents in the Zerg Swarm , each of which commands an individual brood of Zerg that possesses a distinct tactical role within the hierarchy . Alongside the Overmind , the cerebrates are the only Zerg with full sapience , each with its own personality and methods , although they are genetically incapable of disobeying the Overmind . Cerebrates can be reincarnated by the Overmind upon death , though dark templar energies are capable of preventing this . The death of a cerebrate causes the Overmind to lose control of its respective brood , which will then run amok . 
 = = = = = Daggoth = = = = = 
 Daggoth was the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the entire zerg swarm war @-@ machine . As the highest ranking cerebrate , Daggoth was a tactical genius in command of the Tiamat Brood , the largest and most powerful brood in the Zerg Swarm . Voiced by Micky Neilson , Daggoth is the most strong @-@ willed and ferocious of the cerebrates . It trains the player character in the Zerg campaign of StarCraft and dispenses forces to protect Kerrigan following her transformation . Daggoth was charged with protecting the Overmind itself . In the wake of the Overmind 's death , Daggoth immediately takes command of the fractured Zerg broods , annihilated several renegade zerg broods , and ordered several cerebrates to merge to form a new Overmind . 
 = = = = = Zasz = = = = = 
 The second most prominent cerebrate is Zasz , who commands the first strike Garm Brood . A clever but somewhat questioning leader , Zasz is voiced by Bill Roper in StarCraft . Kerrigan often argues with Zasz over her impulsive and seemingly rebellious actions ; despite the Overmind 's assurance that Kerrigan is loyal , Zasz remains untrusting . However , while Tassadar distracts the attention of Kerrigan 's forces , Zasz is assassinated by Zeratul . Its death gives the Overmind and Zeratul a temporary mental link , allowing the Overmind to find Aiur and Zeratul to learn the origins of the Zerg . Zasz 's final words to Kerrigan proclaim her to be " the doom of us all " ; following Kerrigan 's rise to power at the culmination of Brood War , Zasz is seemingly proven correct . Ironically , Zeratul 's connection with the Overmind following Zasz 's death reveals Kerrigan to be the only hope of resisting the eradication of all life by the Xel 'naga Amon . 
 = = = = = Other cerebrates = = = = = 
 Insurrection features two further cerebrates , <unk> and Auza . Commander of the Fenris Brood and with the directive of search and destroy , <unk> itself is capable of intercepting enemy transmissions and provides tactical support for the player in Insurrection 's Zerg campaign . Auza , who commands the Incubus Brood and is responsible for reconnaissance , attempts to personally assimilate a rebel Terran psychic , but is overwhelmed as the psychic 's mind overcomes its own . As a result , the Overmind is forced to kill Auza . Retribution introduces <unk> of the <unk> Brood , who relays the Overmind 's directives to the player . Various other cerebrates are also featured throughout the series , though following the death of the second Overmind , Metzen explained that all remaining extant cerebrates died , as they were not designed to live without their creator or killed by Kerrigan herself and absorbing their warriors to her side . 
 = = = Enslaved , Feral , and Renegade Zerg = = = 
 A brood depended on a nexus creature to direct it . In the pre @-@ conflict Swarm , this position was filled by cerebrates . However , supplanting the cerebrate with another entity could allow broods , or other large groups of zerg , to be controlled by non @-@ Swarm agents . 
 During the Brood War , the United Earth Directorate Expeditionary Fleet took control of the zerg unaligned with Sarah Kerrigan by controlling the second Overmind . The enslaved broods played a critical role in ensuring the UED 's temporary dominance of the sector . 
 Alan Schezar used a khaydarin crystal to control a cerebrate and its brood . Ulrezaj also used khaydarin crystals to achieve similar results . 
 " Independent " broods appeared after the turmoil resulting from the Overmind 's death . Some were employed as mercenaries . 
 = = = = Second Overmind = = = = 
 A second Overmind is created in Brood War , formed from the merging of several cerebrates . This second Overmind never reaches full maturity , and thus lacks the power and intelligence of the original and is much weaker ; attacks that were superficial to the first Overmind send the second into remission , although dark templar energies are still needed to kill it . The second Overmind is captured and drugged by the United Earth Directorate , who use its control of the Swarm to bolster its own forces in the Koprulu Sector , but it is ultimately slain by Zeratul . 
 = = = Primal Zerg = = = 
 The primal zerg are a zerg subspecies from the zerg homeworld , Zerus . They retain the physical and psychological traits of the original " primal zerg " <unk> . Their unique genetic @-@ adaptations made assimilation difficult , as they were shown as able to absorb " swarm @-@ essence " to mutate counter @-@ measures . Their highly individualistic nature avoided incorporation into the Zerg Swarm 's hivemind . 
 = = = = Zurvan = = = = 
 Zurvan , the Ancient One , was a primal zerg of Zerus who had lived for millions of years . Zurvan embodied the " survival of the fittest " ideals the primal zerg pack leaders operated on . Zurvan was wary of the Overmind and the hive @-@ minded zerg swarm , believing that losing ones individuality to a single indomitable will is a terrible evolutionary fate for a strong zerg . He was spawned before the Overmind , and lived to see the return of the Zerg Swarm to Zerus during the Second Great War . It shepherded a deinfested Sarah Kerrigan 's rebirth into the Swarm , before challenging her and subsequently being killed and having its essence absorbed by her . Zurvan was younger than the power found in the first spawning pool but older than the first Overmind . It escaped being incorporated into the Swarm hive mind by Amon and remained on Zerus when the Swarm left the planet . In time , it became a pack leader and became immense both in power and physique . By the time the Swarm and a deinfested Sarah Kerrigan returned to Zerus , it had been millennia since Zurvan 's last evolution 
 = = = = Brakk = = = = 
 Brakk was a primal zerg pack leader on Zerus . When Sarah Kerrigan arrived on Zerus , Brakk declared that her zerg intruded on his territory . Wishing to stop her from waking Zurvan , he sent his pack to destroy the <unk> meat that her drones were harvesting . When this was unsuccessful , he personally led an attack on her hive cluster and was killed . The remnants of Brakk 's pack were destroyed shortly afterwards by Yagdra 's pack . 
 = = = = Kraith = = = = 
 Kraith was a primal zerg pack leader on Zerus and leader of Kraith 's Pack . According to Zurvan , Kraith was " immense and consumed by hatred " . Kraith was defeated by the new , primal reinfested Sarah Kerrigan , who consumed his essence . He was shown charging at a herd of Primal <unk> , eliminating them . 
 = = = = Slivan = = = = 
 Slivan , the Eternal Mother was one of the primal zerg pack leaders of Zerus . She was described as " hollow and destructive " by Zurvan . Slivan was defeated by the new , primal Queen of Blades , and her essence absorbed . She can spawn countless locusts . 
 = = = = Yagdra = = = = 
 Yagdra was one of the primal zerg pack leaders of Zerus . Yagdra closely resembled an ash worm in appearance , and it was considerably larger in stature than most other primal zerg . It could spit <unk> of destructive acid that burnt like fire . 
 When Yagdra learned that Sarah Kerrigan was transforming in a chrysalis , it attempted to halt the process permanently by sending its pack at Kerrigan 's brood . In the process , Yagdra also eradicated the last remnants of Brakk 's now @-@ leaderless pack , however , it was not successful in killing the Queen of Blades before she hatched from her chrysalis . The opportunity came soon enough , however , when Kerrigan , now the Primal Queen of Blades , set out to challenge the pack leaders for control of Zerus . She came for Yagdra first . Aided by Dehaka 's Pack , Kerrigan fought her way through Yagdra 's minions and confronted the pack leader himself . Yagdra told her that her transformation meant nothing . The two fought , and Kerrigan emerged victorious . After slaying Yagdra , she absorbed his essence . 
 = = Xel 'Naga characters = = 
 = = = Amon 's Dark Forces = = = 
 Amon is the primary antagonist of the StarCraft II : Legacy of the Void expansion . He is described as a malevolent Xel 'naga and is the mastermind behind the Protoss @-@ Zerg hybrids . His ultimate goal is to remake creation in his image ( the hybrids ) . 
 = = = = Amon = = = = 
 Amon is first alluded to in a discussion between Duran and Zeratul in the Brood War mission Dark Origin , in which he is described as " ... a far greater power , a power that has slept for countless ages and is reflected in the creature within that cell . " In Wings of Liberty Zeratul 's investigation into the Hybrids reveals that Amon 's coming has been foretold ; initially , he is described as " one who shall break the cycle of the gods . " On Zhakul , Amon 's role in the Ulan prophecy is further elaborated on , and it is here that he is first referred to as the " fallen one . " After arriving on Aiur to retrieve the surviving memories from the remains of the Overmind , Zeratul encounters the spirit of Tassadar ; from both beings Zeratul gains a glimpse into one possible future in which the Overmind foresaw Amon successfully employ his hybrids and the Zerg to annihilate the Protoss before turning on and wiping out the Zerg . In this future , Amon taunted the Protoss by revealing Kerrigan to be the only one in a position to oppose him . 
 During Heart of the Swarm events 
 In Heart of the Swarm Amon 's identity and initial background are revealed . Amon came to Zerus after the other Xel 'naga molded the Zerg . Desiring the Zerg 's power to absorb the essence of their prey for his own goals , he connected many Zerg to a hivemind and later forced an overriding directive on the Overmind : the destruction of the Protoss . Millennia before the start of the series , Amon died after a war with the other Xel 'Naga who had discovered his work with the Zerg , but work on the hybrids continued under the direction of the shape shifter Emil Narud . Sarah Kerrigan learned about Amon when she traveled to Zerus , and came to realize his lingering influence over the Zerg swarm was a major reason behind her crimes as the Queen of Blades . Kerrigan later learned about Narud 's attempts to restore Amon to life , and attacked the shape @-@ shifter 's lab in order to stop him . Although Kerrigan defeated Narud , the shape @-@ shifter used his dying words to reveal that he had already accomplished his goal : Amon had returned . Reflecting on her fight with Narud , Stukov speculated that the Xel 'naga device used to de @-@ infest Kerrigan may have actually had a hand in somehow reviving Amon . He noted that the original Queen of Blades had tremendous power , and that the device couldn 't just simply erase it , surmising that it had to " go somewhere . " After exacting her revenge on Arcturus Mengsk , Kerrigan took the Zerg swarm to hunt down Amon to try to keep him from enslaving the Zerg again . 
 During Whispers of Oblivion events 
 In the Whispers of Oblivion campaign released by Blizzard ahead of the upcoming Legacy of the Void , Amon is revealed to have been resurrected in the Sigma Quadrant 's <unk> System . Since his resurrection he has been under the protection of the Tal 'Darim , a fanatical Protoss branch devoted to Amon . 
 In addition to the above @-@ mentioned names , Amon is also referenced as " a malevolent presence within the void " by Zeratul in Wings of Liberty , the " Dark Voice " in the game captions , and " the dark god " in the prequel Whispers of Oblivion campaign . During his auditory taunts in the Wings of Liberty mission In Utter Darkness , a pair of glowing red eyes can be seen , but there is little else visually distinguishable about the character in the mission despite the fact that raw data exists for Amon in the map editor . 
 During Legacy of the Void events 
 Amon was the main villain in Legacy of the Void , though he did not appear in his true form until the epilogue campaign " Into the Void " . He seizes control of the Khala , controlling most of the Protoss as they attempted to retake Aiur . Zeratul and other protoss who had their nerve cords cut were immune to that control . In his last act before being killed by the possessed Artanis , Zeratul severed the Hierarch 's nerve cords , cutting him off from the Khala . Artanis rallies what few managed to avoid corruption and flees Aiur on the Spear of Adun , rallying an army to fight Amon 's forces and destroy his power base , before returning to Aiur with the Keystone ( the Xel 'Naga artifact used to purge Kerrigan of her own corruption ) . Convincing the possessed Khalai to sever their cords and break away from the Khala , their action sends Amon 's essence into the artifact , which then implodes , banishing his essence into the Void . 
 As the protoss celebrate their victory , however , Artanis and Jim Raynor are summoned by Kerrigan to Ulnar , the former Xel 'Naga homeworld , which contains a gateway into the Void ; Kerrigan seeks their help in going through and ending Amon once and for all . Fighting through Amon 's minions , led by a reincarnated Duran / Narud , the trio release an imprisoned Xel 'Naga named Ouros , who had appeared to both Zeratul and Artanis in the form of their deceased friend Tassadar to guide them towards his intended aim : For Kerrigan to ascend to become Xel 'Naga herself , and use her powers to kill Amon , as only a Xel 'Naga could defeat him for good . With the aid of Artanis and Raynor 's armies , Kerrigan undergoes the ascension , and destroys Amon forever . 
 = = = = Hybrids = = = = 
 The xel 'naga regularly conducted experiments on other species as part of their " natural life cycle " . Two species , one with the " purity of form " and another with the " purity of essence " , would merge naturally to create a new iteration of Xel 'naga . This process had occurred numerous times . To this purpose , the last incarnation of the xel 'naga uplifted the protoss and zerg , intending for them to lead to the culmination of another iteration of the cycle . Contrary to the xel 'naga 's intent , the hybrids were the result of a perversion of the process . Amon 's servants created hybrids to aid his plan to dominate creation . Overt knowledge of the hybrids began spreading among the terrans , protoss , and zerg , after the Brood War , and most who knew understood the dire threat the hybrids posed to the status quo . 
 Maar 
 Maar was the first hybrid to be awakened . Maar took over the forbidden protoss archive world of Zhakul . It subverted some of the Zhakul Guardians and imprisoned the three preservers , draining them to survive . Maar was defeated and killed only after Zeratul freed the preservers . 
 = = = = Shapeshifter = = = = 
 The shapeshifter was an enigmatic and mysterious character in the StarCraft Universe . Very little is known about this creature , beyond the fact that the shapeshifter was in fact a Xel 'Naga , and was by its own admission several thousand years old . In each case that the shapeshifter has appeared in a meaningful role the creature has assumed the form of a Terran Male . The Shapeshifter 's allegiance was to the fallen Xel 'Naga Amon , and accordingly its actions were to further Amon 's own goals . 
 After Blizzard confirmed Duran 's return in Heart of the Swarm , and tacitly implied that he may have appeared in Wings of Liberty , many assumed that the character was reincarnated as Emil Narud . To support this position fans point to the fact that Narud was revealed in Heart of the Swarm to be an ancient shapeshifter serving Amon ( fitting his description of himself in Brood War as " a servant of a far greater power " ) , and moreover , " Narud " is " Duran " spelled backwards . Although this was observed and commented / discussed by fans in the series , Blizzard made no definitive effort to merge the two characters until the release of Whispers of Oblivion , a three part prequel campaign to Legacy of the Void . In Whispers of Oblivion , Zeratul confirmed that Samir Duran and Emil Narud were indeed the same individual . 
 Alias as Samir Duran 
 The shapeshifter makes its initial appearance as Samir Duran , an enigmatic ex @-@ Confederate Ghost operative introduced in Brood War , where he was voiced by Paul Ainsley . Duran was highly intelligent and manipulative , as well as knowledgeable about both the Protoss and Zerg . A former lieutenant in Alpha Squadron , Duran formed a small commando unit after the fall of the Confederacy to fight Mengsk 's Dominion . 
 Duran quickly allied with the United Earth Directorate 's expeditionary force , and used UED resources to mount an assassination attempt on Mengsk and provided vital intelligence and strategic advice on the Dominion to DuGalle . Duran convinced DuGalle to destroy the psi disruptor , to Stukov 's chagrin , and as the UED closed in on Mengsk and his allies , Duran sabotaged a key operation , allowing the emperor to escape . When Stukov reconstructed the psi disruptor , Duran killed him and revealed his allegiance was actually to Sarah Kerrigan . 
 With Duran as her advisor , Kerrigan successfully established command over the entirety of the Zerg Swarm . However , Duran vanished shortly afterwards . In a secret mission , he was discovered by Zeratul engineering a Protoss / Zerg hybrid . Duran ominously explained he " had many names throughout the millennia " , that his work has little to do with Kerrigan and that he served " a far greater power " . 
 Alias of Dr. Emil Narud 
 Four years after the events of Brood War , the shapeshifter reemerged in the <unk> Sector , now going by the persona Dr. Emil Narud - an enigmatic scientist first introduced in Wings of Liberty and later appearing in Heart of the Swarm , voiced by Armin Shimerman . Narud was the head of the Moebius Foundation and was viewed as a genius on Zerg biology and an expert on Protoss and Xel 'Naga technology . 
 In Wings of Liberty , Narud and the Moebius Foundation backed Tychus Findlay 's contact with James Raynor as a way to get around an imperial decree from Arcturus Mengsk which made it illegal to traffic in alien goods . Narud would later appear by proxy as the Moebius Foundation 's representative during a mission briefing on <unk> , wherein Narud lent James Raynor his medical transport ships to help Raynor destroy the foundation 's data cores in order to prevent the Queen of Blades from gaining access to them . On the eve of the invasion of Char , Raynor learned from Valerian that Narud had been working with the Dominion 's Crown Prince for the entire duration of the game . In the aftermath of the successful de @-@ infestation of the Queen of Blades , a civil war erupts between Arcturus and Valerian ; in an attempt to find a safe haven , Valerian and Raynor seek shelter with the Moebius Foundation . Initially , Narud greeted and temporarily sheltered the group , but after examining the Xel 'Naga artifact and thoroughly questioning Raynor about Kerrigan , Narud revealed his allegiance to Arcturus and sold out the group to an incoming Dominion fleet , but the fleet 's attempt to kill Kerrigan fails . 
 Narud later reappeared in Heart of the Swarm after former UED Vice Admiral Alexei Stukov contacted Kerrigan with a message to seek out the Skygeirr Station research facility orbiting Ketill IV . Upon her arrival at the facility , Stukov explained to Kerrigan that Skygeirr housed the Dominion 's primary Hybrid research and development laboratory , and that " Emil Narud " was actually an ancient shapeshifter in the employment of a fallen Xel 'Naga named Amon . After the Zerg swarm breached the interior of the facility and began attacking the Hybrids within , Narud made his initial appearance , broadcasting a message throughout the facility to inform Kerrigan that she was not welcome in the station . After the Swarm breached the lowest level , Narud personally moved to kill Kerrigan by driving a null zone towards the Queen of Blades . When the null zone attack failed , Narud retreated inside a Xel 'Naga temple dedicated to Amon . In a showdown with Kerrigan , Narud taunted the Queen of Blades by using his shapeshifting abilities - first morphing into Jim Raynor , and then into Kerrigan 's own human form , in which he wounded Kerrigan with a psi blade similar to that wielded by the Protoss . Kerrigan gained the upper hand in the end , impaling Narud with her wing @-@ spikes . With his dying breath , Narud proclaimed that Amon had been resurrected and that she would see him soon . 
 During the epilogue campaign , the combined forces of Kerrigan , Raynor and Artanis ventured into the void in order to rescue " Tassadar " ( really Ouros ) and encountered Narud , who was Ouros 's jailer . After a difficult battle Narud 's forces were overpowered and Narud was cornered by not only Artanis Kerrigan and Raynor , but Alexei Stukov , who called him " Duran . " He asked Duran if he remembered what he had done to him , and Narud assumed Stukov was simply there to gloat . Stukov said " No , I 'm here to say good night you son of a bitch . " ( an echo of the words Duran had said right before shooting him ) . He then shot Narud with a psychic blast , finishing him for good . 
 = = = Ouros = = = 
 Ouros was one of the xel 'naga who helped construct the material universe and seed it with life to perpetuate the Infinite Cycle . At some point , he was captured by Amon while the rest of his race was extinguished . He was chained in the Void , which was twisted to the will of Amon . However , he could still subtly influence the material universe , leaving clues to help guide his creations to rescue him by using Tassadar 's form ( Zeratul and Artanis ) and voices ( Kerrigan ) 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 The characters of StarCraft have been popular enough to inspire the creation of several collectable statues and toys . The first series of statues was released by ToyCom in 2003 , consisting of a firebat with markings similar to some original StarCraft concept art for the firebat , a hydralisk and one of Tassadar with a ceremonial sword , which is also seen in concept art for the original game . A series of toys were also made available in 1998 , featuring two variations of the marine , another hydralisk and a Protoss zealot . In addition , 1 / 30 scale model kits for the marine and hydralisk were released in 1999 by Academy Hobby Model Kits . 
 A second series of collectable statues , which included infested Kerrigan , Zeratul and a Terran ghost , was in development but appears to have been cancelled . However , upon announcement of StarCraft II in 2007 , Blizzard released a new collectable statue depicting Wings of <unk> mascot character Tychus Findlay . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The characters and story of the StarCraft series have been received with praise and only minute criticism by many game reviewers . The GameSpot review of StarCraft described the voice acting as " great " , stating that it brings the characters to life . GameSpot goes further in the review for Brood War , commenting that the story and dialogue is with only a few exceptions " brilliantly written " and " one of the year 's best stories in any gaming genre " . The reviewer of StarCraft for IGN praises the melding of the story into the gameplay and implies that the development of the characters during the course of the story , particularly that of Kerrigan , is unforgettable . In addition , the review of Brood War puts the storyline as " solid " . 
 Gaming Revolution echoed this praise , saying the plot is " fantastic " , but the reviewer added that he felt it was " over too quickly " . At <unk> , the reviewer cited that he felt " the characters were talking to me " and even expressed a development of an emotional attachment to the character of Raynor . Electric Playground put the story as the best part of the game , if a little derivative , but described the voice acting as " really quite excellent " . 
 = Star Wars = 
 Star Wars is an American epic space opera franchise , centered on a film series created by George Lucas . It depicts the adventures of various characters " a long time ago in a galaxy far , far away " . 
 The franchise began in 1977 with the release of the film Star Wars , ( subtitled Episode IV : A New Hope in 1981 ) by 20th Century Fox , which became a worldwide pop culture phenomenon . It was followed by the similarly successful sequels The Empire Strikes Back ( 1980 ) and Return of the Jedi ( 1983 ) ; these three films constitute the original Star Wars trilogy . A prequel trilogy was later released between 1999 and 2005 , which received a more mixed reaction from critics and fans in comparison to the original trilogy . A sequel trilogy is also currently being produced with the first installment as The Force Awakens ( 2015 ) . All seven films were nominated for or won Academy Awards , as well as being commercial successes , with a combined box office revenue of $ 6 @.@ 46 billion , making Star Wars the fourth highest @-@ grossing film series . 
 The series has spawned an extensive media franchise — the Star Wars expanded universe — including books , television series , computer and video games , and comic books , resulting in significant development of the series 's fictional universe . Star Wars also holds a Guinness World Records title for the " Most successful film merchandising franchise . " In 2012 , the total value of the Star Wars franchise was estimated at USD $ 30 @.@ 7 billion , including box @-@ office receipts as well as profits from their video games and DVD sales . 
 In 2012 , The Walt Disney Company acquired Lucasfilm for $ 4 @.@ 06 billion and announced three new Star Wars films ; the first film of that trilogy , Star Wars : The Force Awakens , was released in 2015 . 20th Century Fox retains the physical distribution rights to the first two Star Wars trilogies , owning permanent rights for the original 1977 film and holding the rights to Episodes I – III , V and VI until May 2020 . Walt Disney Studios owns digital distribution rights to all the Star Wars films , excluding A New Hope . 
 = = Setting = = 
 The events depicted in the Star Wars franchise take place in a fictional galaxy . Many species of alien creatures ( often humanoid ) are depicted . Robotic droids are also commonplace and are generally built to serve their owners . Space travel is common , and many planets in the galaxy are members of a single galactic government . In the prequel trilogy , this is depicted in the form of the Galactic Republic ; at the end of the prequel trilogy and throughout the original trilogy , this government is the Galactic Empire . Preceding and during the sequel trilogy , this government is the New Republic . 
 One of the prominent elements of Star Wars is " the Force " , an omnipresent energy that can be harnessed by those with that ability , known as Force @-@ <unk> . It is described in the first produced film as " an energy field created by all living things [ that ] surrounds us , penetrates us , [ and ] binds the galaxy together . " The Force allows users to perform various supernatural feats ( such as telekinesis , clairvoyance , precognition , and mind control ) and can amplify certain physical traits , such as speed and reflexes ; these abilities vary between characters and can be improved through training . While the Force can be used for good , known as the light side , it also has a dark side that , when pursued , imbues users with hatred , aggression , and malevolence . 
 The seven films feature the Jedi , who adhere to the light side of the Force to serve as peacekeepers and guardians , and the Sith , who use the dark side of the Force for evil in an attempt to destroy the Jedi Order and the Republic and rule the galaxy for themselves . 
 = = Theatrical films = = 
 The first film in the series , Star Wars , was released on May 25 , 1977 . This was followed by two sequels : The Empire Strikes Back , released on May 21 , 1980 , and Return of the Jedi , released on May 25 , 1983 . The opening crawl of the sequels disclosed that they were numbered as " Episode V " and " Episode VI " respectively , though the films were generally advertised solely under their subtitles . Though the first film in the series was simply titled Star Wars , with its 1981 re @-@ release it had the subtitle Episode IV : A New Hope added to remain consistent with its sequel , and to establish it as the middle chapter of a continuing saga . 
 In 1997 , to correspond with the 20th anniversary of the original film , Lucas released a " Special Edition " of the Star Wars trilogy to theaters . The re @-@ release featured alterations to the three films , primarily motivated by the improvement of CGI and other special effects technologies , which allowed visuals that were not possible to achieve at the time of the original filmmaking . Lucas continued to make changes to the films for subsequent releases , such as the first ever DVD release of the original trilogy on September 21 , 2004 , and the first ever Blu @-@ ray release of all six films on September 16 , 2011 . Reception of the Special Edition was mixed , prompting petitions and fan edits to produce restored copies of the original trilogy . 
 More than two decades after the release of the original film , the series continued with a prequel trilogy ; consisting of Episode I : The Phantom Menace , released on May 19 , 1999 ; Episode II : Attack of the Clones , released on May 16 , 2002 ; and Episode III : Revenge of the Sith , released on May 19 , 2005 . On August 15 , 2008 , Star Wars : The Clone Wars was released theatrically as a lead @-@ in to the animated TV series of the same name . Star Wars : The Force Awakens was released on December 18 , 2015 . 
 On January 26 , 2016 , Variety reported that Disney executives were meeting with cable outlets Turner , FX Networks , Viacom , NBCUniversal , A & E Networks and AMC Networks to have a discussion on purchasing the free @-@ TV rights to the first six Star Wars movies . 
 = = = Saga films = = = 
 = = = Other films = = = 
 = = = Plot overview = = = 
 = = = = Original trilogy = = = = 
 The original trilogy begins with the Galactic Empire nearing completion of the Death Star space station , which will allow the Empire to crush the Rebel Alliance , an organized resistance formed to combat Emperor Palpatine 's tyranny . Palpatine 's Sith apprentice Darth Vader captures Princess Leia , a member of the rebellion who has stolen the plans to the Death Star and hidden them in the astromech droid R2 @-@ D2 . R2 , along with his protocol droid counterpart C @-@ 3PO , escapes to the desert planet Tatooine . There , the droids are purchased by farm boy Luke Skywalker and his step @-@ uncle and aunt . While Luke is cleaning R2 , he accidentally triggers a message put into the droid by Leia , who asks for assistance from the legendary Jedi Knight Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi . Luke later assists the droids in finding the exiled Jedi , who is now passing as an old hermit under the alias Ben Kenobi . When Luke asks about his father , whom he has never met , Obi @-@ Wan tells him that Anakin Skywalker was a great Jedi who was betrayed and murdered by Vader . Obi @-@ Wan and Luke hire the smuggler Han Solo and his Wookiee co @-@ pilot Chewbacca to take them to Alderaan , Leia 's home world , which they eventually find has been destroyed by the Death Star . Once on board the space station , Luke and Han rescue Leia while Obi @-@ Wan allows himself to be killed during a lightsaber duel with Vader ; his sacrifice allows the group to escape with the plans that help the Rebels destroy the Death Star . Luke himself ( guided by the power of the Force ) fires the shot that destroys the deadly space station during the Battle of Yavin . 
 Three years later , Luke travels to find the Jedi Master Yoda , now living in exile on the swamp @-@ infested world of Dagobah , to begin his Jedi training . However , Luke 's training is interrupted when Vader lures him into a trap by capturing Han and his friends at Cloud City . During a fierce lightsaber duel , Vader reveals that he is Luke 's father and attempts to turn him to the dark side of the Force . Luke escapes and , after rescuing Han from the gangster Jabba the Hutt , returns to Yoda to complete his training ; only to find the 900 @-@ year @-@ old Jedi Master on his deathbed . Before he dies , Yoda confirms that Vader is Luke 's father . Moments later , the Force ghost of Obi @-@ Wan tells Luke that he must confront his father once again before he can become a Jedi , and that Leia is his twin sister . 
 As the Rebels attack the second Death Star , Luke engages Vader in another lightsaber duel as the Emperor watches ; both Sith Lords intend to turn Luke to the dark side and take him as their apprentice . During the duel , Luke succumbs to his anger and brutally overpowers Vader , but controls himself at the last minute ; realizing that he is about to suffer his father 's fate , he spares Vader 's life and proudly declares his allegiance to the Jedi . An enraged Palpatine then attempts to kill Luke with Force lightning , a sight that moves Vader to turn and kill the Emperor , suffering mortal wounds in the process . Redeemed , Anakin Skywalker dies in his son 's arms . Luke becomes a full @-@ fledged Jedi , and the Rebels destroy the second Death Star . 
 = = = = Prequel trilogy = = = = 
 The prequel trilogy begins 32 years before the original film , with the corrupt Trade Federation setting up a blockade of battleships around the planet Naboo . The Sith Lord Darth Sidious had secretly planned the blockade to give his alter ego , Senator Palpatine , a pretense to overthrow and replace the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic . At the Chancellor 's request , the Jedi Knight Qui @-@ Gon Jinn and his apprentice , a younger Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi , are sent to Naboo to negotiate with the Federation . However , the two Jedi are forced to instead help the Queen of Naboo , Padmé Amidala , escape from the blockade and plead her planet 's crisis before the Republic Senate on Coruscant . When their starship is damaged during the escape , they land on Tatooine for repairs , where Qui @-@ Gon discovers a nine @-@ year @-@ old Anakin Skywalker . Qui @-@ Gon comes to believe that Anakin is the " Chosen One " foretold by Jedi prophecy to bring balance to the Force , and he helps liberate the boy from slavery . The Jedi Council , led by Yoda , reluctantly allows Obi @-@ Wan to train Anakin after Qui @-@ Gon is killed by Palpatine 's first apprentice , Darth Maul , during the Battle of Naboo . 
 The remainder of the prequel trilogy , set a decade later , chronicles Anakin 's gradual descent to the dark side as he fights in the Clone Wars , which Palpatine secretly engineers to destroy the Jedi Order and lure Anakin into his service . Anakin and Padmé fall in love and secretly wed , and eventually Padmé becomes pregnant . Anakin has a prophetic vision of Padmé dying in childbirth , and Palpatine convinces him that the dark side of the Force holds the power to save her life . Desperate , Anakin submits to Palpatine 's Sith teachings and is renamed Darth Vader . 
 While Palpatine re @-@ organizes the Republic into the tyrannical Empire , Vader participates in the extermination of the Jedi Order , culminating in a lightsaber duel between himself and Obi @-@ Wan on the volcanic planet Mustafar . Obi @-@ Wan defeats his former apprentice and friend , severing his limbs and leaving him to burn to death on the shores of a lava flow . Palpatine arrives shortly afterward and saves Vader by placing him into a mechanical black mask and suit of armor that serves as a permanent life support system . At the same time , Padmé dies while giving birth to twins Luke and Leia . Obi @-@ Wan and Yoda , now the only remaining Jedi alive , agree to separate the twins and keep them hidden from both Vader and the Emperor ; until the time comes when Anakin 's children can be used to help overthrow the Empire . 
 = = = = Sequel trilogy = = = = 
 Approximately 30 years after the destruction of the second Death Star , Luke Skywalker , the last Jedi , has vanished . The First Order has risen from the fallen Empire and seeks to destroy Luke and the New Republic , while the Resistance , a small force backed by the Republic and led by the former princess of Alderaan , General Leia Organa , opposes them . On the planet Jakku , Resistance pilot Poe Dameron obtains a map that leads to Luke 's location . Stormtroopers under the command of <unk> Ren , the son of Han Solo and Leia , capture Poe . His droid BB @-@ 8 escapes with the map and encounters a scavenger , Rey . Ren tortures Poe and learns of BB @-@ 8 . Stormtrooper FN @-@ <unk> finds himself unable to kill for the First Order , and he frees Poe . The two escape in a TIE fighter ; Poe dubs FN @-@ <unk> " Finn " . They crash on Jakku , and Poe appears to die in the process . Finn encounters Rey and BB @-@ 8 , but the First Order locates them , so they escape the planet in a stolen ship : the Millennium Falcon . After leaving Jakku , the Falcon is recaptured by Han Solo and Chewbacca , who have stepped away from the Resistance and resumed their lives as smugglers . The five companions travel to <unk> to meet with Maz Kanata . While there , Rey finds the lightsaber that previously belonged Anakin and Luke Skywalker , and upon touching it , brushes with the Force . Maz 's castle is attacked by the First Order . Finn , Han , and Chewbacca are saved by a group of Resistance pilots led by Poe , who survived the crash on Jakku , but Rey is captured by Ren and taken to Starkiller Base . After reuniting with Leia and the Resistance on D <unk> , Han , Finn , and Chewbacca travel to Starkiller Base to free Rey and disable the planet 's shields , which will allow Resistance pilots to destroy it . Rey is tortured by Ren , but her Force sensitivity allows her to resist him . She escapes by using a Jedi mind trick on her guard and reunites with Han , Finn , and Chewbacca , but the group encounters Ren . Han confronts his son , calling him by his birth name , Ben Solo , and asking him to come home . Ren momentarily appears to be swayed towards the light side , but then ignites his lightsaber and kills Han . Resistance pilots begin to bombard the base . Finn and Rey escape the base and encounter Ren . Finn takes up Anakin 's lightsaber , only to be badly wounded by Ren . Rey Force pulls the lightsaber to her , and fights and wounds Ren , but the two are separated by a rift . Rey , Finn , and Chewbacca escape the imploding planet on the Falcon and return to the Resistance . A wounded Finn stays on D <unk> , while Rey , Chewbacca , and R2 @-@ D2 use the map to find Luke Skywalker on the planet <unk> @-@ To , where Rey presents a silent Luke with his old lightsaber . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 The stormtroopers from the movies share a name with the Nazi stormtroopers ( see also Sturmabteilung ) . Imperial officers ' uniforms also resemble some historical German Army uniforms ( see Wehrmacht ) and the political and security officers of the Empire resemble the black clad SS down to the imitation silver death 's head insignia on their officer 's caps . World War II terms were used for names in Star Wars ; examples include the planets Kessel ( a term that refers to a group of encircled forces ) , Hoth ( Hermann Hoth was a German general who served on the snow laden Eastern Front ) , and Tatooine ( <unk> - a province south of Tunis in Tunisia , roughly where Lucas filmed for the planet ; Libya was a WWII arena of war ) . Palpatine being Chancellor before becoming Emperor mirrors Adolf Hitler 's role as Chancellor before appointing himself Dictator . The Great Jedi Purge alludes to the events of The Holocaust , the Great Purge , the Cultural Revolution , and the Night of the Long Knives . In addition , Lucas himself has drawn parallels between Palpatine and his rise to power to historical dictators such as Julius Caesar , Napoleon Bonaparte , and Adolf Hitler . The final medal awarding scene in A New Hope , however , references Leni Riefenstahl 's Triumph of the Will . The space battles in A New Hope were based on filmed World War I and World War II dogfights . 
 Continuing the use of Nazi inspiration for the Empire , J. J. Abrams , the director of Star Wars : The Force Awakens , has said that the First Order , an Imperial offshoot which will possibly serve as the main antagonist of the sequel trilogy , is also inspired by another aspect of the Nazi regime . Abrams spoke of how several Nazis fled to Argentina after the war and he claims that the concept for the First Order came from conversations between the scriptwriters about what would have happened if they had started working together again . 
 Aside from its well known science fictional technology , Star Wars features elements such as knighthood , chivalry , and princesses that are related to archetypes of the fantasy genre . The Star Wars world , unlike fantasy and science @-@ fiction films that featured sleek and futuristic settings , was portrayed as dirty and grimy . Lucas ' vision of a " used future " was further popularized in the science fiction @-@ horror films Alien , which was set on a dirty space freighter ; Mad Max 2 , which is set in a post @-@ apocalyptic desert ; and Blade Runner , which is set in a crumbling , dirty city of the future . Lucas made a conscious effort to parallel scenes and dialogue between films , and especially to parallel the journeys of Luke Skywalker with that of his father Anakin when making the prequels . 
 Star Wars contains many themes of political science that mainly favor democracy over dictatorship . Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise first launched in 1977 . The plot climax of Star Wars is modeled after the fall of the democratic Roman Republic and the formation of an empire . 
 = = = Technical information = = = 
 All seven films of the Star Wars series were shot in an aspect ratio of 2 @.@ 39 : 1 . The original and sequel trilogies were shot with anamorphic lenses . Episodes IV , V , and VII were shot in Panavision , while Episode VI was shot in Joe Dunton Camera ( <unk> ) scope . Episode I was shot with Hawk anamorphic lenses on Arriflex cameras , and Episodes II and III were shot with Sony 's CineAlta high @-@ definition digital cameras . 
 Lucas hired Ben Burtt to oversee the sound effects on the original 1977 film . Burtt 's accomplishment was such that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences presented him with a Special Achievement Award because it had no award at the time for the work he had done . Lucasfilm developed the THX sound reproduction standard for Return of the Jedi . John Williams composed the scores for all seven films . Lucas ' design for Star Wars involved a grand musical sound , with leitmotifs for different characters and important concepts . Williams ' Star Wars title theme has become one of the most famous and well @-@ known musical compositions in modern music history . 
 Lucas hired ' the Dean of Special Effects ' John Stears , who created R2 @-@ D2 , Luke Skywalker 's <unk> , the Jedi Knights ' lightsabers , and the Death Star . The technical lightsaber choreography for the original trilogy was developed by leading filmmaking sword @-@ master Bob Anderson . Anderson trained actor Mark Hamill ( Luke Skywalker ) and performed all the sword stunts as Darth Vader during the lightsaber duels in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi , wearing Vader 's costume . Anderson 's role in the original Star Wars trilogy was highlighted in the film Reclaiming the Blade , where he shares his experiences as the fight choreographer developing the lightsaber techniques for the movies . 
 = = = Production history = = = 
 = = = = Original trilogy = = = = 
 In 1971 , Universal Studios agreed to make American Graffiti and Star Wars in a two @-@ picture contract , although Star Wars was later rejected in its early concept stages . American Graffiti was completed in 1973 and , a few months later , Lucas wrote a short summary called " The Journal of the <unk> " , which told the tale of the training of apprentice CJ Thorpe as a " Jedi @-@ <unk> " space commando by the legendary Mace Windy . Frustrated that his story was too difficult to understand , Lucas then began writing a 13 @-@ page treatment called The Star Wars on April 17 , 1973 , which had thematic parallels with Akira Kurosawa 's The Hidden Fortress . By 1974 , he had expanded the treatment into a rough draft screenplay , adding elements such as the Sith , the Death Star , and a protagonist named Annikin Starkiller . 
 For the second draft , Lucas made heavy simplifications , and introduced the young hero on a farm as Luke Starkiller . Annikin became Luke 's father , a wise Jedi knight . " The Force " was also introduced as a mystical energy field . The next draft removed the father character and replaced him with a substitute named Ben Kenobi , and in 1976 a fourth draft had been prepared for principal photography . The film was titled Adventures of Luke Starkiller , as taken from the Journal of the <unk> , Saga I : The Star Wars . During production , Lucas changed Luke 's name to Skywalker and altered the title to simply The Star Wars and finally Star Wars . 
 At that point , Lucas was not expecting the film to become part of a series . The fourth draft of the script underwent subtle changes that made it more satisfying as a self @-@ contained film , ending with the destruction of the Galactic Empire itself by way of destroying the Death Star . However , Lucas had previously conceived of the film as the first in a series of adventures . Later , he realized the film would not in fact be the first in the sequence , but a film in the second trilogy in the saga . This is stated explicitly in George Lucas ' preface to the 1994 reissue of Splinter of the Mind 's Eye : 
 It wasn 't long after I began writing Star Wars that I realized the story was more than a single film could hold . As the saga of the <unk> and Jedi Knights unfolded , I began to see it as a tale that could take at least nine films to tell — three trilogies — and I realized , in making my way through the back story and after story , that I was really setting out to write the middle story . 
 The second draft contained a teaser for a never @-@ made sequel about " The Princess of <unk> " , and by the time of the third draft some months later Lucas had negotiated a contract that gave him rights to make two sequels . Not long after , Lucas met with author Alan Dean Foster , and hired him to write these two sequels as novels . The intention was that if Star Wars was successful , Lucas could adapt the novels into screenplays . He had also by that point developed an elaborate backstory to aid his writing process . 
 When Star Wars proved successful , Lucas decided to use the film as the basis for an elaborate serial , although at one point he considered walking away from the series altogether . However , Lucas wanted to create an independent filmmaking center — what would become Skywalker Ranch — and saw an opportunity to use the series as a financing agent . Alan Dean Foster had already begun writing the first sequel novel , but Lucas decided to abandon his plan to adapt Foster 's work ; the book was released as Splinter of the Mind 's Eye the following year . At first , Lucas envisioned a series of films with no set number of entries , like the James Bond series . In an interview with Rolling Stone in August 1977 , he said that he wanted his friends to each take a turn at directing the films and giving unique interpretations on the series . He also said that the backstory in which Darth Vader turns to the dark side , kills Luke 's father and fights Ben Kenobi on a volcano as the Galactic Republic falls would make an excellent sequel . 
 Later that year , Lucas hired science fiction author Leigh Brackett to write Star Wars II with him . They held story conferences and , by late November 1977 , Lucas had produced a handwritten treatment called The Empire Strikes Back . The treatment is similar to the final film , except that Darth Vader does not reveal he is Luke 's father . In the first draft that Brackett would write from this , Luke 's father appears as a ghost to instruct Luke . 
 Brackett finished her first draft in early 1978 ; Lucas has said he was disappointed with it , but before he could discuss it with her , she died of cancer . With no writer available , Lucas had to write his next draft himself . It was this draft in which Lucas first made use of the " Episode " numbering for the films ; Empire Strikes Back was listed as Episode II . As Michael Kaminski argues in The Secret History of Star Wars , the disappointment with the first draft probably made Lucas consider different directions in which to take the story . He made use of a new plot twist : Darth Vader claims to be Luke 's father . According to Lucas , he found this draft enjoyable to write , as opposed to the yearlong struggles writing the first film , and quickly wrote two more drafts , both in April 1978 . He also took the script to a darker extreme by having Han Solo imprisoned in carbonite and left in limbo . 
 This new story point of Darth Vader being Luke 's father had drastic effects on the series . Michael Kaminski argues in his book that it is unlikely that the plot point had ever seriously been considered or even conceived of before 1978 , and that the first film was clearly operating under an alternate storyline where Vader was separate from Luke 's father ; there is not a single reference to this plot point before 1978 . After writing the second and third drafts of Empire Strikes Back in which the point was introduced , Lucas reviewed the new backstory he had created : Anakin Skywalker was Ben Kenobi 's brilliant student and had a child named Luke , but was swayed to the dark side by Emperor Palpatine ( who became a Sith and not simply a politician ) . Anakin battled Ben Kenobi on the site of a volcano and was wounded , but then resurrected as Darth Vader . Meanwhile , Kenobi hid Luke on Tatooine while the Republic became the Empire and Vader systematically hunted down and killed the Jedi . 
 With this new backstory in place , Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy , changing Empire Strikes Back from Episode II to Episode V in the next draft . Lawrence Kasdan , who had just completed writing Raiders of the Lost Ark , was then hired to write the next drafts , and was given additional input from director Irvin Kershner . Kasdan , Kershner , and producer Gary Kurtz saw the film as a more serious and adult film , which was helped by the new , darker storyline , and developed the series from the light adventure roots of the first film . 
 By the time he began writing Episode VI in 1981 ( then titled Revenge of the Jedi ) , much had changed . Making Empire Strikes Back was stressful and costly , and Lucas ' personal life was disintegrating . Burned out and not wanting to make any more Star Wars films , he vowed that he was done with the series in a May 1983 interview with Time magazine . Lucas ' 1981 rough drafts had Darth Vader competing with the Emperor for possession of Luke — and in the second script , the " revised rough draft " , Vader became a sympathetic character . Lawrence Kasdan was hired to take over once again and , in these final drafts , Vader was explicitly redeemed and finally unmasked . This change in character would provide a springboard to the " Tragedy of Darth Vader " storyline that underlies the prequels . 
 = = = = Prequel trilogy = = = = 
