 Financial accounting research 
 Examines financial accounting and the financial markets , and focuses on the relationship between accounting information and the decision @-@ making of external users of the accounting information in the capital markets . 
 Managerial accounting research 
 Focuses on the relationship between accounting information and internal users of the accounting information , for example examining the allocation of resources and decision @-@ making within an enterprise . 
 Auditing research 
 Studies related to the audit function , including auditor decision @-@ making and the effects of auditing on financial reporting . 
 Taxation research 
 Examines taxation @-@ related issues such as market reactions to tax disclosures and taxpayer decision @-@ making , and the relationship between accounting information and tax authorities . 
 Governance research 
 Examines the overall corporate management of organizations . 
 AIS research 
 Examines issues related to accounting information systems , such as system security and design science . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Academic accounting research can be classified by methodology into archival , experimental , and analytical studies : 
 Archival research 
 Research that examines " objective data collected from repositories " , including data collected by the researchers ; 
 Experimental research 
 Research that examines data " the researcher gathered by administering treatments to subjects " ; and 
 Analytical research 
 Research " based on the act of formally modeling theories or substantiating ideas in mathematical terms " . 
 This classification is not exhaustive — other possible methodologies include the use of case studies , computer simulations and field research . 
 = Action of 1 November 1944 = 
 The Action of 1 November 1944 also known as the Ambush off Pag Island was a naval engagement in the Kvarner Gulf of the Adriatic Sea , between the islands of Pag and <unk> ( present @-@ day Lošinj ) on 1 November 1944 . It was fought between a British Royal Navy destroyer flotilla and a Kriegsmarine force of two corvettes and a destroyer . The German flotilla was deployed to escort a convoy retreating from Šibenik to Fiume ( present @-@ day Rijeka ) . The British managed to destroy all three German ships in return for no loss . 
 The action caused the death of more than 200 German crewmen . The attacking force rescued 90 , and an additional 20 sailors were rescued two days later by German vessels sent to search for survivors . The convoy of 19 landing craft , which was expected to be escorted by the three vessels sunk by the Royal Navy , was not intercepted and it reached its destination by 2 November . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the Italian capitulation of 8 September 1943 , following the Allied invasion of Italy , the Yugoslav Partisans captured most of the eastern Adriatic coast in the region of Dalmatia . The Germans however rushed to occupy these areas particularly the northern Adriatic ports of Trieste , Fiume ( present @-@ day Rijeka ) and Pula and established the Operational Zone of the Adriatic Littoral ( German : Operationszone <unk> Küstenland – <unk> ) , with its headquarters in Trieste on 10 September . Since an Allied landing in the area was anticipated , <unk> also hosted a substantial German military contingent including newly formed German naval units which consisted of many captured Italian warships . As result an engagement with the Royal Navy seemed to be inevitable . 
 In the second half of 1944 the Royal Navy sent a flotilla into the Adriatic , both to secure the area and to attack German coastal shipping . The coastal shipping became increasingly significant for the German forces deployed in the Independent State of Croatia , and especially Dalmatia — as road and rail routes became unsafe for use because of activity of the Yugoslav Partisans . To deny that option , the Royal Navy initiated Operation Exterminate , primarily aimed at destruction of German corvettes . On 26 October , the Yugoslav Partisans informed Lieutenant Commander Morgan Morgan @-@ Giles , commander of the coastal forces in the north Adriatic , that there were two German destroyers in a cove on the south coast of the Rab Island . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The German withdrawal from the Dalmatian cities of Zadar and Šibenik to Fiume , codenamed Operation Viking ( Operation Wikinger ) involved transporting troops and materiel on board two ship convoys , protected by the Kriegsmarine . The withdrawal was a consequence of imminent capture of Zadar and Šibenik by Yugoslav Partisans . The Wikinger II convoy set sail from Šibenik at 17 : 00 on 1 November . The convoy consisted of <unk> landing craft MFP 522 , MFP 554 , MFP 484 and MFP 354 , representing group " A " of the convoy , and 13 Combat engineer Landing Craft ( Pionier @-@ <unk> ) and two large <unk> assault landing craft , arranged into the group " B " . 
 In the first part of the route , the convoy was protected by the 2nd Group of the 3rd E @-@ boat Flotilla , before the escort duty was turned over to the 2nd Escort Flotilla ( <unk> ) based in Fiume . The 3rd E @-@ boat Flotilla originally consisted of S 154 , S 156 and S 158 E @-@ boats , but during the 25 October Royal Air Force attack on Šibenik , de Havilland Mosquitos sunk S 158 and damaged S 156 , leaving only one operational E @-@ boat for the convoy duty . At the time , the only operational vessels of the 2nd Escort Flotilla were Torpedoboot Ausland destroyer TA @-@ 20 ( ex @-@ Italian Urakaze @-@ class destroyer Audace ) , with a crew of 113 , and U @-@ Boot Jäger corvettes UJ 202 and UJ 208 These were ex @-@ Italian <unk> @-@ class corvettes <unk> and <unk> , with crews of about 110 each , and fast minesweeper R 187 . The TA 20 was commanded by Oberleutnant zur See der Reserve ( Sub @-@ Lieutenant ) Heinz <unk> , the UJ 202 by Oberleutnant zur See der Reserve Heinz <unk> and UJ 208 by Oberleutnant zur See der Reserve Klaus <unk> . 
 The TA 21 ( ex @-@ Italian destroyer <unk> ) remained in port due to problems with fuel quality . The fuel problems also caused the force to depart the port at different times . The corvettes left at 16 : 00 , R 187 sailed a half an hour later , while the TA 20 left port at 19 : 00 , with the flotilla commander Korvettenkapitän der Reserve ( Lieutenant Commander ) Friedrich @-@ Wilhelm <unk> on board . 
 = = Action = = 
 Acting upon the information provided by the Yugoslav Partisans , the Royal Navy sortied two Type II Hunt @-@ class destroyers , HMS Avon Vale and HMS Wheatland , from their base at the Ist Island at 17 : 00 on 1 November . Wheatland was under command of Lieutenant Hugh Askew Corbett , while Avon Vale was under Lieutenant Ivan Hall . The destroyers were accompanied by motor torpedo boats MTB 295 , MTB 287 and MTB 274 , motor gun boats MGB 642 , MGB 638 and MGB 633 and motor launch <unk> . The destroyers were tasked with landing a team of South African coast watchers on the north tip of Rab , the MTBs with patrolling the Kvarner Gulf between Rab and Krk islands , while the rest of the force loitered southwest , near Premuda . Morgan @-@ Giles commanded the force . 
 The coast watchers landed at 19 : 50 , the same time the MTBs reported sighting of two enemy " destroyers " sailing south — in fact the two corvettes . Using radar , the corvettes detected the destroyers on their port side at 20 : 15 and ordered general quarters , while UJ 202 fired two star shells . The crew of R 187 saw this as she followed the corvettes from afar . The destroyers engaged the German corvettes at 20 : 20 , at a position due west of Lun on the island of Pag , assigning a corvette each as a target . The first British salvos scored hits on the corvettes , using their 100 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) guns , from a distance of 3 @,@ 700 metres ( 4 @,@ 000 yards ) . UJ 202 was hit directly by several shots , knocking out its 100 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) gun , a bow @-@ mounted quadruple 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) gun , and a stern @-@ mounted 37 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) gun . Her bridge and radio room were also hit . She continued to return fire while attempting to sail to Rab . UJ 208 was also quickly hit , and its 100 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) and bow @-@ mounted 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) guns were knocked out of action . Her crew managed to put out fire on her stern , but another blaze amidships blocked all communications between the forward and aft sections of the vessel . By 20 : 30 , she rolled to the port and began sinking . UJ 202 sank at 21 : 00 . 
 The Royal Navy force took only ten minutes to disable the corvettes . They then began to pull survivors out of the sea , but the rescue was suspended at about 22 : 30 , when the TA 20 was picked up by radar and fired upon . The first salvo hit her bridge killing all officers , and knocking out her fire @-@ control system . She sank close to Pag Island . Neither TA 20 , nor the corvettes managed to radio news of the attack . 
 R 187 had maintained radio silence and sailed east to evade detection . It linked up with the convoy sailing from Šibenik at approximately 23 : 45 , and proceeded to escort it north . The combat engineer landing craft reached Kraljevica , except for two which made port in Senj due to poor weather conditions . The rest of the convoy reached Fiume on 2 November . The Royal Navy destroyers sailed back to Ist with empty magazines . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 As weather conditions worsened , Royal Navy destroyers were only able to rescue 90 survivors from the three German ships . Before the rescue operation was suspended to engage TA 20 , Wheatland pulled out of the sea three officers and 68 seamen — most of them crew of UJ 202 . The Kriegsmarine sortied TA 40 and TA 45 corvettes as well as S 33 and S 154 E @-@ boats to look for survivors , finding seventeen TA 20 crew members on the islet of <unk> on 3 November . The group included seven wounded , tended by a local lighthouse crew . Besides them , the ships rescued one UJ 202 and three UJ 208 crew members from the sea . The deteriorating weather also prevented retrieval of the coast watchers for four days . More than two hundred Germans perished in this action , including the flotilla commander and all three ship commanding officers . 
 Corbett was awarded the Distinguished Service Order and Hall the Distinguished Service Cross for their " bravery , resolution and skill " in the battle . All four Kriegsmarine commanders involved in the action were posthumously awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross , and <unk> was promoted to the rank of <unk> ( Commander ) . 
 Yugoslav Partisans captured Šibenik and Zadar by 3 November 1944 , but the war in the Adriatic continued until April 1945 . Allied destroyers never engaged large Kriegsmarine vessels in the Adriatic after November 1944 . Dwindling German naval assets in the area resulted in limited action , while the last recorded loss was TA 45 torpedoed by Royal Navy MTBs in April . Only four Kriegsmarine ships survived to be captured or scuttled when German forces in Italy surrendered at the end of April to advancing forces of the British 8th Army . 
 The shipwreck of TA 20 was found by Italian wreck divers in 1999 , she lies on a part of sea floor near a commercial trawling zone , and is regularly obscured by large quantities of silt . The two corvettes were located in 2000 . Since divers who found them could not identify them as UJ 202 or UJ 208 specifically , they became known as the " northern " and the " southern " corvette . The northern corvette rests on her keel , with her bow pointing to Rab and her stern partially destroyed , either from hostile fire or secondary explosions from her own depth charges . The divers ' description of the wreck indicates that she is UJ 202 . The southern corvette lies on her starboard side covered in silt . Several depth charges are still found on her stern in Gatteschi @-@ type racks indicating that the southern corvette is the wreck of UJ 208 . The three shipwrecks are a part of " the Ghost Fleet of Pag " ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) together with the wrecks of HMS Aldenham , and Austro @-@ Hungarian steamships SS <unk> and SS Euterpe . 
 = <unk> stingray = 
 The bluespotted stingray ( Neotrygon kuhlii ) or Kuhl 's stingray , is a species of stingray of the Dasyatidae family . It was recently changed from Dasyatis kuhlii in 2008 after morphological and molecular analyses show that it is part of a distinct genus , Neotrygon . The body is rhomboidal and colored green with blue spots . Maximum disk width is estimated 46 @.@ 5 centimeters ( 18 @.@ 3 in ) . It is popular in aquaria but usually not distinguished from the bluespotted ribbontail ray . The ribbontail has a rounded body , is a brighter green with brighter blue and more vivid spots , but the bluespotted stingray is larger . The stingray 's lifespan is estimated thirteen years of age for females and ten years for males . The bluespotted stingray preys on many fish and small mollusks . The bluespotted stingray is also generally found from Indonesia to Japan , and most of Australia . The bluespotted stingray is also targeted by many parasites such as tapeworms , flatworms , and flukes . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The bluespotted stingray was discovered by Heinrich Kuhl in Java , Indonesia . The population of this species is greatly debatable due to the five different species of rays in Indonesia . Also , there are two different subgroups : the Java and Bali form . The distinct difference between the two strains is their size , with the Bali being much larger than the Java . On the familial level , the family Dasyatidae is made up of 9 genera and 70 species . The genus of Neotrygon are called maskrays , because of the color pattern around their eyes . 
 = = Description and behavior = = 
 The bluespotted stingray has a flat disc @-@ like rhomboid body up to 47 centimeters ( 19 in ) in diameter and 70 centimeters ( 28 in ) in total length . Their coloring is a dark green with blue spots with a light white underbelly also known as countershading . Its snout is very short and broadly angular along with its angular disc . The rays ' bright coloration serves as a warning for its venomous spines . The ray has a very long tail accommodating two venomous spines on the base of the tail . The tail is about twice as long as the body of the ray , and the barbs or spines are two different sizes , one being very large and the other a medium @-@ sized barb . The bluespotted stingray has bright yellow eyes that are positioned to allow them a wide angle of view . Since the gills are located ventrally , the spiracles allow water to reach the gills while resting or feeding on the benthos . The spiracles are located directly behind the eyes . The mouth is located on the ventral side of the body , which promotes the unique foraging technique of stingrays . Rays are normally solitary individuals but can occur in groups . One unique characteristic of the bluespotted stingray is that they rarely bury themselves in the sand , only to hide from predators , unlike the majority of stingrays who bury themselves regularly to hunt . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The bluespotted stingray feeds on shrimp , small bony fish , mollusks , crabs and other worms . Due to the fact that this ray is a shallow bottom feeder , it has a small variety of marine life to prey on . The bluespotted stingray overpowers its prey by pinning them to the bottom of the seafloor with its fins . The bluespotted stingray has numerous tiny teeth , with the lower jaw being slightly convex . They also , like most stingrays , have plate @-@ like teeth to crush prey . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The bluespotted stingray is ovoviviparous . The embryos are retained in eggs within the mother 's body until they are ready to hatch . The embryos receive nourishment from the mothers ' uterine fluid . Mothers give birth to up to seven pups per litter ; these pups range from 6 inches ( 150 mm ) to 13 inches ( 330 mm ) long at birth . The bluespotted stingray passes its offspring 32 sets of chromosomes . The mother also has an annual reproductive cycle . Studies show that the mating season is in October and November and the ovulating season is in the Australian summer ( December 1- February 28 / 29 ) , which coincides with the embryonic development . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 The bluespotted stingray is commonly found in waters of depths about 0 – 90 meters ( 0 – 295 feet ) , being commonly found in sand and mudflats , but have also been encountered near rocky coral reefs , and sea grass beds . This stingray is found in a tropical climate at 29 ° N- 31 ° S , and 20 ° E- 171 ° W. At high tide the bluespotted stingray moves into the shallow lagoons and reef flats . It is found in northern Australia , Kenya , Madagascar , The island of Mauritius , Somalia , the east coast of South Africa , India . The bluespotted stingray is in almost the entire continental waters of Asia , including the Sea of Japan , Yellow Sea , East China Sea , Philippine Sea , Sulu Sea , Java Sea , Banda Sea , Celebes Sea , Andaman Sea , the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea . 
 = = Threats and protected areas = = 
 In Queensland , Australia there are many areas for high protection of the bluespotted stingray , three being the Shoalwater , Corio Bay 's Area Ramsar Site , and the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park . A major threat to the bluespotted stingray is the destruction of coral reefs mainly in the north Western Pacific . The rays dwell in these reefs and the destruction and pollution from fertilizers and pesticides hurt them . The ray is commonly caught in the Java Sea by fishermen trawling and by Danish seine boats in large quantities . The bluespotted stingray is the second most significant species out of the sharks , rays , and skate family to be fished , contributing to about 700 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 500 lb ) per boat in 2006 @-@ 2007 . 
 = = Predators = = 
 Larger elasmobranchs , such as hammerhead sharks , prey on the bluespotted stingray . The rays coloration is a warning for the highly venomous barbs , thus few animals attempt to overpower this ray . The hammerhead shark uses its head to pin down the bluespotted stingray , while it is in shock and much weaker . 
 = = Human interaction = = 
 Due to the unique characteristics of this ray it is very common to be found in pet trade , many people ignore the fact that in total maturity the size of the ray exceeds the capacity of many household aquariums . The bluespotted stingray is generally fished for its meat , being either smoked and salted or dried for local markets , but inexpensive due to its small size . It is caught in mass in bottom trawl , trammel , and fish traps . The bluespotted stingray is very venomous and it has a barb approximately 12 inches ( 300 mm ) long . The venom contains serotonin , 5 ' <unk> , and phosphodiesterase . 
 The skin of the bluespotted stingray is often used for drums such as on the Arab and Turkish darbuka goblet drum and riq ( def ) tambourine . 
 = = Parasites = = 
 There are many parasites that inhibit the bluespotted stingray , this is a table of the common groups of the parasite , and the specific name of the parasite . 
 = John Churchill , 1st Duke of Marlborough = 
 General John Churchill , 1st Duke of Marlborough , Prince of Mindelheim , KG , PC ( / <unk> / , often / <unk> / ; 26 May 1650 – 16 June 1722 O.S. ) , was an English soldier and statesman whose career spanned the reigns of five monarchs . Rising from a lowly page at the court of the House of Stuart , he served James , Duke of York , through the 1670s and early 1680s , earning military and political advancement through his courage and diplomatic skill . 
 Churchill 's role in defeating the Monmouth Rebellion in 1685 helped secure James on the throne , yet just three years later he abandoned his Catholic patron for the Protestant Dutchman , William of Orange . Honoured for his services at William 's coronation with the earldom of Marlborough , he served with further distinction in the early years of the Nine Years ' War , but persistent charges of Jacobitism brought about his fall from office and temporary imprisonment in the Tower . It was not until the accession of Queen Anne in 1702 that Marlborough reached the zenith of his powers and secured his fame and fortune . 
 His marriage to the hot @-@ tempered Sarah Jennings – Anne 's intimate friend – ensured Marlborough 's rise , first to the Captain @-@ <unk> of British forces , then to a dukedom . Becoming de facto leader of Allied forces during the War of the Spanish Succession , his victories on the fields of Blenheim ( 1704 ) , Ramillies ( 1706 ) , Oudenarde ( 1708 ) , and Malplaquet ( 1709 ) , ensured his place in history as one of Europe 's great generals . But his wife 's stormy relationship with the Queen , and her subsequent dismissal from court , was central to his own fall . <unk> Anne 's disfavour , and caught between Tory and Whig factions , Marlborough , who had brought glory and success to Anne 's reign , was forced from office and went into self @-@ imposed exile . He returned to England and to influence under the House of Hanover with the accession of George I to the British throne in 1714 . 
 Marlborough 's insatiable ambition made him the richest of all Anne 's subjects . His family connections wove him into the fabric of European politics ( his sister Arabella became James II 's mistress , and their son , the Duke of Berwick , emerged as one of Louis XIV 's greatest Marshals ) . His leadership of the allied armies consolidated Britain 's emergence as a front @-@ rank power . He successfully maintained unity among the allies , thereby demonstrating his diplomatic skills . Throughout ten consecutive campaigns during the Spanish Succession war , Marlborough held together a discordant coalition through his sheer force of personality and raised the standing of British arms to a level not known since the Middle Ages . Although in the end he could not compel total capitulation from his enemies , his victories allowed Britain to rise from a minor to a major power , ensuring the country 's growing prosperity throughout the 18th century . 
 = = Early life ( 1650 – 78 ) = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Churchill was the son of Sir Winston Churchill ( 1620 – 1688 ) of <unk> Wootton in Dorset , by his wife Elizabeth Drake , fourth daughter of Sir John Drake ( died 1636 ) of Ash in the parish of <unk> in Devon . The Churchill family are stated by the Devon historian William George Hoskins ( 1954 ) to have originated at the estate of Churchill , in the parish of <unk> in Devon , during the reign of King Henry II ( 1154 – 1189 ) . 
 = = = Ashe House = = = 
 At the end of the English Civil War Lady Drake was joined at her Devon home , Ash House in the parish of <unk> , by her fourth daughter Elizabeth Drake and her husband Winston Churchill ( 1620 – 1688 ) , a Royalist cavalry captain . Unlike his mother @-@ in @-@ law who had supported the Parliamentary cause , Winston had the misfortune of fighting on the losing side of the war – for which he , like so many other Cavaliers , was forced to compound ; in his case £ 446 18s . Although Winston had paid off the fine by 1651 , it had impoverished him . From this episode may derive the Churchill family motto : <unk> Pero <unk> ( " Faithful but Unfortunate " ) . 
 = = = Siblings = = = 
 Winston Churchill and his wife Elizabeth Drake had at least nine children , only five of whom survived infancy . The eldest daughter , Arabella Churchill , was born on 28 February 1649 ; John Churchill , the eldest son , was born on 26 May 1650 ( O.S. ) . The two younger sons were George Churchill ( 1654 – 1710 ) , an admiral in the Royal Navy , and Charles Churchill ( 1656 – 1714 ) , a general who served on campaign in Europe with his eldest brother John . 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Little is known of John Churchill 's childhood about which he left no written description , but growing up in these impoverished conditions at Ashe , with family tensions soured by conflicting allegiances , may have made a lasting impression on the young Churchill . His descendant and biographer the Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill , asserted that the conditions at Ashe " might well have aroused in his mind two prevailing impressions : first a hatred of poverty ... and secondly the need of hiding thoughts and feelings from those to whom their expression would be repugnant . " 
 = = Youth and education = = 
 After the Restoration of King Charles II in 1660 his father 's fortunes took a turn for the better , although he remained far from prosperous . In 1661 , Winston became Member of Parliament for Weymouth , and as a mark of royal favour he received rewards for losses incurred fighting against the Parliamentarians during the civil war , including the appointment as a Commissioner for Irish Land Claims in Dublin in 1661 . When Winston departed for Ireland the following year , John enrolled at the Dublin Free School ; but by 1664 , following his father 's recall to the position of Junior Clerk Comptroller of the King 's Household at Whitehall , John had transferred his studies to St Paul 's School in London . The King 's own penury meant the old Cavaliers received scant financial reward , but the prodigal monarch could offer something which would cost him nothing – positions at court for their progeny . Thus in 1665 Arabella became Maid of Honour to Anne Hyde , the Duchess of York . Some months later Arabella 's brother John joined her at court , serving as page to Anne 's husband , James , Duke of York , the brother of the King . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early military experience = = = 
 The Duke of York 's passion for all things naval and military rubbed off on young Churchill . Often accompanying the Duke inspecting the troops in the royal parks , it was not long before the boy had set his heart on becoming a soldier himself . On 14 September 1667 ( O.S. ) , he obtained a commission as Ensign in the King 's Own Company in the 1st Guards , later to become the Grenadier Guards . Many of Marlborough 's hagiographers , following <unk> 's panegyric , credit him with service in the North African outpost of Tangier , recently acquired as part of the dowry of Charles II 's Portuguese wife , Catherine of Braganza . That is unlikely , and even Sir Winston S Churchill says " There is , indeed , no contemporary evidence of his ever having been there . " ( But Churchill then assumes he had been there , on the strange basis that Marlborough said he had at some time been to Spain and he supposedly would have considered the somewhat notorious and decidedly new Stuart possession of Tangier to be " Spain " ) . The known facts are that he was commissioned Ensign in September 1667 ( as above ) . On 21 February 1670 , the 1st Guards ( in which he had been commissioned ) and the Coldstream Guards were ordered each to provide fifty musketeers , a corporal , a sergeant and a commissioned officer for service with Sir Thomas Allen 's Mediterranean fleet . In March 1670 , there is an order of the King to provide money owed to Churchill 's father , Sir Winston , to cover John Churchill 's " <unk> and other expenses in ye employment he is now forthwith by our command to undertake on board ye fleet in ye Mediterranean seas " . Sir Edward <unk> sailed early in 1670 to the Mediterranean , where he joined ( in fact , effectively relieved ) Sir Thomas Allen . By February 1671 , John Churchill was back in London and duelling with Sir John Fenwick . 
 Back in London by February 1671 , Churchill 's handsome features and manner – described by Lord Chesterfield as " irresistible to either man or woman " – had soon attracted the ravenous attentions of one of the King 's most noteworthy mistresses , Barbara Villiers , Duchess of Cleveland . But his liaisons with the insatiable temptress were indeed dangerous . One account has it that upon the King 's appearance Churchill leapt out of his lover 's bed and hid in the cupboard , but the King , himself wily in such matters , soon discovered young Churchill who promptly fell to his knees – " You are a rascal , " said Charles , " but I forgive you because you do it to get your bread . " The story may be apocryphal ( another version has Churchill jumping out of the window ) , yet it is widely accepted that he was the father of Cleveland 's daughter , Barbara , born on 16 July 1672 ( O.S. ) . 
 In 1672 Churchill was posted to sea again , and fought against the Dutch navy at the Battle of Solebay ( Southwold Bay , on the Suffolk coast ) on 28 May , possibly aboard the Duke of York 's flagship , the Prince which was crippled in the action . Shortly thereafter , Churchill was promoted ( above the resentful head of his lieutenant ) to a captaincy in the Duke of York 's Admiralty Regiment . The following year Churchill gained a commendation at the Siege of Maastricht when the young captain distinguished himself as part of the 30 @-@ man forlorn hope , successfully capturing and defending part of the fortress . During this incident Churchill is credited with saving the Duke of Monmouth 's life , receiving a slight wound in the process but gaining further praise from a grateful House of Stuart , as well as recognition from the House of Bourbon . King Louis XIV in person commended the deed , from which time forward bore Churchill an enviable reputation for physical courage , as well as earning the high regard of the common soldier . 
 Although Charles II 's anti @-@ French Parliament had forced England to withdraw from the Franco @-@ Dutch War in 1674 , some English regiments remained in French service . In April Churchill was appointed the colonelcy of one such regiment , thereafter serving with , and learning from , the great Marshal Turenne . Churchill was present at the hard @-@ fought battles of Sinsheim in June 1674 , and <unk> in October ; he may also have been present at <unk> in July 1675 , where Turenne was killed . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 On his return to St. James 's Palace , Churchill 's attention was drawn towards other matters , and to a fresh face at court . " I beg you will let me see you as often as you can , " pleaded Churchill in a letter to Sarah Jennings , " which I am sure you ought to do if you care for my love ... " Sarah Jennings ' social origins were in many ways similar to Churchill 's – minor gentry blighted by debt @-@ induced poverty . After her father 's death when she was eight , Sarah , together with her mother and sisters , moved to London . As Royalist supporters ( despite the fact that Sarah 's great uncle , James Temple , was convicted of regicide ) , the Jennings ' loyalty to the crown , like the Churchill 's , was repaid with court employment , and in 1673 Sarah followed her sister Frances into the household of the Duchess of York , Mary of Modena , second wife to James , Duke of York . 
 Sarah was about fifteen when Churchill returned from the Continent in 1675 , and he appears to have been almost immediately captivated by her charms and considerable good looks . Churchill 's amorous , almost abject , missives of devotion were , it seems , received with suspicion – his first lover , Barbara Villiers , was just moving her household to Paris , feeding doubts that he may well have been looking at Sarah as a replacement mistress rather than a fiancée . However , his persistent courtship over the coming months eventually won over the beautiful , if relatively poor , Maid of Honour . Although Winston wished his son to marry the wealthy Catherine Sedley ( if only to ease his own burden of debt ) , Colonel Churchill married Sarah sometime in the winter of 1677 – 78 , possibly in the apartments of the Duchess of York . 
 John and Sarah had the following children : 
 Lady Harriet Churchill ( Oct 1679 @-@ <unk> ) 
 Henrietta Churchill , 2nd Duchess of Marlborough ( 19 Jul 1681 – 24 Oct 1733 ) 
 Lady Anne Churchill ( 27 Feb 1683 – 15 Apr 1716 ) 
 John Churchill , Marquess of Blandford ( 13 Feb 1686 – 20 Feb 1703 ) 
 Lady Elizabeth Churchill ( 15 Mar 1687 – 22 Mar 1751 ) 
 Lady Mary Churchill ( 15 Jul 1689 – 14 May 1719 ) , became Duchess of Montagu by marriage to the 2nd Duke 
 Lord Charles Churchill ( 19 Aug 1690 – 22 May 1692 ) 
 = = Years of crises ( 1678 – 1700 ) = = 
 = = = Diplomatic service = = = 
 Under the Earl of Danby the government now undertook a political realignment , and prepared to enter the war against France . The new alliance with the Dutch , together with the expansion of the English army , opened important prospects for Churchill in military and diplomatic spheres . In April 1678 , Churchill ( accompanied by his friend and rising politician , Sidney Godolphin ) , departed for The Hague to negotiate a convention on the deployment of the English army in Flanders . The young diplomat 's essay in international statecraft proved personally successful , bringing him into contact with William , Prince of Orange , who was highly impressed by the shrewdness and courtesy of Churchill 's negotiating skills . The assignment had helped Churchill develop a breadth of experience that other mere soldiers were never to achieve , yet because of the duplicitous dealings of Charles II 's secret negotiations with Louis XIV ( Charles had no intention of waging war against France ) , the mission ultimately proved abortive . In May , Churchill was appointed temporary rank of Brigadier @-@ General of Foot , but hopes of promised action on the Continent proved illusory as the warring factions sued for peace and signed the Treaty of Nijmegen . 
 When Churchill returned to England at the end of 1678 he found grievous changes in English society . The iniquities of the Popish Plot ( Titus Oates ' fabricated conspiracy aimed at excluding the Catholic Duke of York from the English accession ) , meant temporary banishment for James – an exile that would last nearly three years . James obliged Churchill to attend him , first to The Hague then to Brussels , before gaining permission to move to Edinburgh . Yet it was not until 1682 , after Charles II 's complete victory over the exclusionists , that the Duke of York was allowed to return to London . For his services during the crisis Churchill was made Lord Churchill of Eyemouth in the peerage of Scotland on 21 December 1682 ( O.S. ) , and the following year , on 19 November ( O.S. ) , appointed colonel of the King 's Own Royal Regiment of Dragoons . 
 The Churchills ' combined income now ensured a life of some style and comfort ; as well as maintaining their residence in London ( staffed with seven servants ) , they were also able to purchase Holywell House in St Albans ( Sarah Jennings ' family home ) where their own family could enjoy the benefits of country life . While in Edinburgh Sarah had given birth to Henrietta on 19 July 1681 ( O.S. ) . Another daughter , Anne , arrived in 1684 , followed by John in 1686 , Elizabeth in 1687 , Mary in 1689 , and Charles in 1690 who lived for only two years . 
 Churchill resumed court life with enthusiasm . In July 1683 he was sent to the Continent to conduct Prince George of Denmark to England for his arranged marriage to the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Princess Anne , the Duke of York 's younger daughter . Anne lost no time in appointing Sarah – of whom she had been passionately fond since childhood – one of her Ladies of the Bedchamber . Their relationship continued to blossom , so much so that years later Sarah wrote – " To see [ me ] was a constant joy ; and to part with [ me ] for never so short a time , a constant uneasiness ... This worked even to the jealousy of a lover . " For his part , Churchill treated the princess with respectful affection and grew genuinely attached to her , assuming – in his reverence to royalty – the chivalrous role of a knightly champion . From this time forward the Churchills were increasingly detached from James 's Catholic inner circle and more noticeably associated with the Princess . 
 = = = Rebellion = = = 
 With the death of Charles II in 1685 his brother , the Catholic Duke of York , became King James II . On James 's succession Churchill was appointed governor of the Hudson 's Bay Company . He had also been affirmed Gentleman of the Bedchamber in April , and admitted to the English peerage as Baron Churchill of Sandridge in the county of Hertfordshire in May , thus giving him a seat in the House of Lords . However , the new Parliament was overshadowed by rebellion , led in Scotland by the Earl of Argyll , and in England by Charles II 's illegitimate son , the Duke of Monmouth , who , encouraged by malcontents and various Whig conspirators ( exiled for their part in the failed Rye House plot ) , prepared to take what he considered rightfully his – the crown of England . 
 To face Monmouth 's rebels Churchill was given command of the regular foot in the King 's army , but the honour of leading the campaign passed to the limited , yet highly loyal , Earl of Feversham . Monmouth had landed at Lyme Regis on 11 June ( O.S. ) , but his ill @-@ timed , ill @-@ equipped , and ill @-@ advised peasant rebellion eventually floundered on the Somerset field of Sedgemoor on 6 July 1685 ( O.S. ) . Although Churchill was subordinate to Feversham , his administrative capacity , tactical skill , and courage in battle were pivotal in the victory . " Sedgemoor may not have been John Churchill 's most spectacular victory , " writes historian John <unk> , " but it must rightly be considered to be his first " . 
 Churchill had been promoted to Major General on 3 July ( O.S. ) , but it was Feversham who received the lion 's share of the reward . Churchill was not entirely forgotten , and in August he was awarded the lucrative colonelcy of the Third Troop of Life Guards . Yet according to Historian David Chandler it is possible that the Sedgemoor campaign , and its subsequent persecutions driven by the bloodthirsty zeal of Judge Jeffreys , set in train a process of disillusion that culminated in his abandonment of his king , and long @-@ time patron and friend , just three years later . His master , however , had already given him cause for anxiety . " If the King should attempt to change our religion , " he is reputed to have remarked to Lord Galway shortly after James II 's succession , " I will instantly quit his service . " 
 = = = Revolution = = = 
 Churchill emerged from the Sedgemoor campaign with great credit , but he was anxious not to be seen as sympathetic towards the King 's growing religious ardour against the Protestant establishment . James II 's promotion of Catholics in royal institutions – including the army – engendered first suspicion , and ultimately sedition in his mainly Protestant subjects ; even members of his own family expressed alarm at the King 's fanatic zeal for the Roman Catholic religion . When the queen gave birth to a son , James Francis Edward Stuart , it opened up the prospect of a line of successive Catholic monarchs . Some in the King 's service , such as the Earl of Salisbury and the Earl of Melfort , betrayed their Protestant upbringing in order to gain favour at court , but although Churchill remained true to his conscience , telling the King , " I have been bred a Protestant , and intend to live and die in that communion " , he was also motivated by self @-@ interest . Believing that the monarch 's policy would either wreck his own career or generate a wider insurrection , he did not intend , like his unfortunate father before him , to be on the losing side . 
 Seven men met to draft the invitation to the Protestant Dutch Stadtholder , William , Prince of Orange , to invade England and assume the throne . The signatories to the letter included Whigs , Tories , and the Bishop of London , Henry Compton , who assured the Prince that , " Nineteen parts of twenty of the people ... are desirous of change . " William needed no further encouragement . Although the invitation was not signed by Churchill ( he was not , as yet , of sufficient political rank to be a signatory ) , he declared his intention through William 's principal English contact in The Hague – " If you think there is anything else that I ought to doe , you have but to command me . " Churchill , like many others , was looking for an opportune time to desert James . 
 William landed at Torbay on 5 November 1688 ( O.S. ) ; from there , he moved his army to Exeter . James 's forces – once again commanded by Lord Feversham – moved to Salisbury , but few of its senior officers were eager to fight – even Princess Anne wrote to William to wish him " good success in this so just an undertaking . " Promoted to Lieutenant @-@ General on 7 November ( O.S. ) Churchill was still at the King 's side , but his displaying " the greatest transports of joy imaginable " at the desertion of Lord Cornbury led Feversham to call for his arrest . Churchill himself had openly encouraged defection to the Orangist cause , but James continued to hesitate . Soon it was too late to act . After the meeting of the council of war on the morning of 24 November ( O.S. ) , Churchill , accompanied by some 400 officers and men , slipped from the royal camp and rode towards William in Axminster , leaving behind him a letter of apology and self @-@ justification : 
 ... I hope the great advantage I enjoy under Your Majesty , which I own I would never expect in any other change of government , may reasonably convince Your Majesty and the world that I am actuated by a higher principle .. 
 When the King saw he could not keep even Churchill – for so long his loyal and intimate servant – he despaired . James II , who in the words of the Archbishop of Rheims , had " given up three kingdoms for a Mass " , fled to France , taking with him his son and heir . With barely a shot fired , William had secured the throne , reigning as joint sovereign with his wife Mary , James II 's eldest daughter . 
 = = = William 's general = = = 
 As part of William and Mary 's coronation honours , Churchill was created Earl of Marlborough on 9 April 1689 ( O.S. ) ; he was also sworn as a member of the Privy Council and made a Gentleman of the King 's Bedchamber . His elevation , however , led to accusatory rumours from King James 's supporters that Marlborough had disgracefully betrayed his erstwhile king for personal gain ; William himself entertained reservations about the man who had deserted James . Marlborough 's apologists though , including his most notable descendant and biographer Winston Churchill , have been at pains to attribute patriotic , religious , and moral motives to his action ; but in the words of Chandler , it is difficult to absolve Marlborough of ruthlessness , ingratitude , intrigue and treachery against a man to whom he owed virtually everything in his life and career to date . 
 Marlborough 's first official act was to assist in the remodelling of the army – the power of confirming or purging officers and men gave the Earl the opportunity to build a new patronage network which would prove beneficial over the next two decades . His task was urgent , for less than six months after James II 's departure , England joined the war against France as part of a powerful coalition aimed at curtailing the ambitions of Louis XIV . With his experience it was logical that Marlborough took charge of the 8 @,@ 000 British troops sent to the Low Countries in the spring of 1689 ; yet throughout the Nine Years ' War ( 1688 – 97 ) he saw only three years service in the field , and then mostly in subordinate commands . However , at the Battle of <unk> on 25 August 1689 Marlborough won praise from the Allied commander , Prince Waldeck – " ... despite his youth he displayed greater military capacity than do most generals after a long series of wars ... He is assuredly one of the most gallant men I know . " In recognition of his skill and valour William awarded him the lucrative colonelcy of the 7th Foot ( later the Royal Fusiliers ) . 
 Since <unk> , though , Marlborough 's popularity at court had waned . William and Mary distrusted both Lord and Lady Marlborough 's influence as confidants and supporters of Princess Anne ( whose claim to the throne was stronger than William 's ) . Sarah had supported Anne in a series of court disputes with the joint monarchs , infuriating Mary who included the Earl in her disfavour of his scheming wife . Yet for the moment the clash of tempers were over @-@ shadowed by more pressing events in Ireland where James had landed in March 1689 in an attempt to regain his thrones . When William left for Ireland in June 1690 Marlborough became commander of all troops and militia in England , and was appointed a member of the Council of Nine to advise Mary on military matters in the King 's absence ; but she made scant effort to disguise her distaste at his appointment – " I can neither trust or esteem him , " she wrote to William . 
 William III 's victory at the Battle of the Boyne on 1 July 1690 ( O.S. ) forced James II to abandon his army and flee back to France . In August Marlborough himself left for Ireland engaged upon his first independent command – a land / sea operation upon the southern ports of Cork and Kinsale . It was a bold , imaginative project aimed at disrupting Jacobite supply routes , and one which the Earl conceived and executed with outstanding success . Cork fell on 27 September ( O.S. ) , and Kinsale followed in mid @-@ October . Although the campaign did not end the war in Ireland as Marlborough hoped , it taught him the significance of the minutiae of logistics , and the importance of cooperation and tact when working alongside other senior Allied commanders . It would , however , be more than ten years before he once again took charge in the field . 
 = = = Dismissal and disgrace = = = 
 William III recognised Marlborough 's qualities as a soldier and strategist , but the refusal of the Order of the Garter and failure to appoint him Master @-@ General of the Ordnance , rankled with the ambitious Earl ; nor did Marlborough conceal his bitter disappointment behind his usual bland discretion . Using his influence in Parliament and the army , Marlborough aroused dissatisfaction concerning William 's preferences for foreign commanders , an exercise designed to force the King 's hand . Aware of this , William in turn began to speak openly of his distrust of Marlborough ; the Elector of Brandenburg 's envoy to London overheard the King remark that he had been treated – " so infamously by Marlborough that , had he not been King , he would have felt it necessary to challenge him to a duel . " 
 Since January 1691 Marlborough had been in contact with the exiled James II in Saint @-@ Germain , anxious to obtain the erstwhile King 's pardon for deserting him in 1688 – a pardon essential for the success of his future career in the not altogether unlikely event of a Jacobite restoration . James himself maintained contact with his supporters in England whose principal object was to re @-@ establish him upon his throne . William was well aware of these contacts ( as well as others such as Godolphin and the Duke of Shrewsbury ) , but their double @-@ dealing was seen more in the nature of an insurance policy , rather than as an explicit commitment . Marlborough did not wish for a Jacobite restoration , but William was conscious of his military and political qualities , and the danger the Earl posed : " William was not prone to fear , " wrote Thomas Macaulay , " but if there was anyone on earth that he feared , it was Marlborough . " 
 By the time William and Marlborough had returned from an uneventful campaign in the Spanish Netherlands in October 1691 , their relationship had further deteriorated . In January 1692 , the Queen , angered by Marlborough 's intrigues in Parliament , the army , and even with Saint @-@ Germain , ordered Anne to dismiss Sarah from her household – Anne refused . This personal dispute precipitated Marlborough 's dismissal . On 20 January ( O.S. ) , the Earl of Nottingham , Secretary of State , ordered Marlborough to dispose of all his posts and offices , both civil and military , and consider himself dismissed from all appointments and forbidden the court . No reasons were given but Marlborough 's chief associates were outraged : Shrewsbury voiced his disapproval and Godolphin threatened to retire from government . Admiral Russell , now commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Navy , personally accused the King of ingratitude to the man who had " set the crown upon his head . " 
 = = = High treason = = = 
 The nadir of Marlborough 's fortunes had not yet been reached . The spring of 1692 brought renewed threats of a French invasion and new accusations of Jacobite treachery . Acting on the testimony of one Robert Young , the Queen had arrested all the signatories to a letter purporting the restoration of James II and the seizure of William III . Marlborough , as one of these signatories , was sent to the Tower of London on 4 May ( O.S. ) where he languished for five weeks ; his anguish compounded by the news of the death of his younger son Charles on 22 May ( O.S. ) . Young 's letters were eventually discredited as forgeries and Marlborough was released on 15 June ( O.S. ) , but he continued his correspondence with James , leading to the celebrated incident of the " Camaret Bay letter " of 1694 . 
 For several months the Allies had been planning an attack upon Brest , the French port in the Bay of Biscay . The French had received intelligence alerting them to the imminent assault , enabling Marshal Vauban to strengthen its defences and reinforce the garrison . Inevitably the attack on 18 June led by Thomas Tollemache ended in disaster ; most of his men were killed or captured , and Tollemache himself died of his wounds shortly afterwards . Despite lacking evidence , Marlborough 's detractors claimed that it was he who had alerted the enemy . Macaulay states that in a letter on 3 May 1694 Marlborough betrayed the Allied plans to James , thus ensuring that the landing failed and that Tollemache , a talented rival , was killed or discredited as a direct result . Historians such as John Paget and C. T. Atkinson conclude that he probably did write the letter , but did so only when he knew that it would be received too late for its information to be of any practical use ( the plan of the attack on Brest was widely known , and the French had already begun to strengthen their defences in April ) . To Richard Holmes the evidence linking Marlborough with the Camaret Bay letter ( which no longer exists ) , is slender , concluding , " It is very hard to imagine a man as careful as Marlborough , only recently freed from suspicion of treason , writing a letter which would kill him if it fell into the wrong hands . " However , David Chandler surmises that , " the whole episode is so obscure and inconclusive that it is still not possible to make a definite ruling . In sum , perhaps we should award Marlborough the benefit of the doubt . " 
 = = = Reconciliation = = = 
 Mary 's death on 28 December 1694 ( O.S. ) eventually led to a formal but cool reconciliation between William III and Anne , now heir to the throne . Marlborough hoped that the rapprochement would lead to his own return to office , but although he and Lady Marlborough were allowed to return to court , the Earl received no offer of employment . 
 In 1696 Marlborough , together with Godolphin , Russell and Shrewsbury , was yet again implicated in a treasonous plot with James II , this time instigated by the Jacobite militant John Fenwick . The accusations were eventually dismissed as a fabrication and Fenwick executed – the King himself had remained incredulous – but it was not until 1698 , a year after the Treaty of Ryswick brought an end to the Nine Years ' War , that the corner was finally turned in William 's and Marlborough 's relationship . On the recommendation of Lord Sunderland ( whose wife was a close friend of Lady Marlborough ) , William eventually offered Marlborough the post of governor to the Duke of Gloucester , Anne 's eldest son ; he was also restored to the Privy Council , together with his military rank . When William left for Holland in July Marlborough was one of the Lords Justices left running the country in his absence ; but striving to reconcile his close Tory connections with that of the dutiful royal servant was difficult , leading Marlborough to complain – " The King 's coldness to me still continues . " 
 = = Later life ( 1700 – 22 ) = = 
 = = = War of the Spanish Succession = = = 
 With the death of the infirm and childless King Charles II of Spain on 1 November 1700 , the succession of the Spanish throne , and subsequent control over her empire , once again embroiled Europe in war – the War of the Spanish Succession . On his deathbed Charles II had bequeathed his domains to Louis XIV 's grandson , Philip , Duc d 'Anjou . This threatened to unite the Spanish and French kingdoms under the House of Bourbon – something unacceptable to England , the Dutch Republic and the Holy Roman Emperor , Leopold I , who had himself a claim to the Spanish throne . With William 's health deteriorating ( himself estimating he had but a short time to live ) , and with the Earl 's undoubted influence over his successor Princess Anne , the King decided that Marlborough should take centre stage in European affairs . Representing William III in The Hague as Ambassador @-@ Extraordinary and as commander of English forces , Marlborough was tasked to negotiate a new coalition to oppose France and Spain . 
 On 7 September 1701 , the Treaty of the Second Grand Alliance was duly signed by England , the Emperor , and the Dutch Republic to thwart the ambitions of Louis XIV and stem Bourbon power . However , William was not to see England 's declaration of war . On 8 March 1702 ( O.S. ) the King , already in a poor state of health , died from injuries sustained in a riding accident , leaving his sister @-@ in @-@ law , Anne , to be immediately proclaimed as his successor . Although the King 's death occasioned instant disarray amongst the coalition , Count Wratislaw was able to report that – " The greatest consolation in this confusion is that Marlborough is fully informed of the whole position and by reason of his credit with the Queen can do everything . " This ' credit with the Queen ' also proved personally profitable to her long @-@ standing friends . Anxious to reward Marlborough for his diplomatic and martial skills in Ireland and on the Continent , Anne made him the Master @-@ General of the Ordnance – an office he had long desired – a Knight of the Garter and Captain @-@ General of her armies at home and abroad . With Lady Marlborough 's advancements as Groom of the Stole , Mistress of the Robes , and Keeper of the Privy Purse , the Marlboroughs , now at the height of their powers with the Queen , enjoyed a joint annual income of over £ 60 @,@ 000 , and unrivalled influence at court . 
 = = = = Early campaigns = = = = 
 On 4 May 1702 ( O.S. ) England formally declared war on France . Marlborough was given command of the English , Dutch , and hired German forces , but he had not as yet commanded a large army in the field , and had far less experience than a dozen Dutch and German generals who must now work under him . His command had its limitations , however . As commander of Anglo @-@ Dutch forces he had the power to give orders to Dutch generals only when their troops were in action with his own ; at all other times he had to rely on his powers of tact and persuasion , and gain the consent of accompanying Dutch field deputies or political representatives of the States General . Nevertheless , despite his Allies ' initial lassitude the campaign in the Low Countries ( the war 's principal theatre ) began well for Marlborough . After outmanoeuvring Marshal Boufflers , he captured Venlo , Roermond , <unk> and Liège , for which in December a grateful Queen publicly proclaimed Marlborough a duke . 
 On 9 February 1703 ( O.S. ) , soon after the Marlboroughs ' elevation , their daughter Elizabeth married Scroop Egerton , Earl of Bridgewater . This was followed in the summer by an engagement between Mary and John Montagu , heir to the Earl of , and later Duke of , Montagu , ( they later married on 20 March 1705 ( O.S. ) ) . Their two older daughters were already married : Henrietta to Godolphin 's son Francis in April 1698 , and Anne to the hot @-@ headed and intemperate Charles Spencer , Earl of Sunderland in 1700 . However , Marlborough 's hopes of founding a great dynasty of his own reposed in his eldest and only surviving son , John , who , since his father 's elevation , had borne the courtesy title of Marquess of Blandford . But while studying at Cambridge in early 1703 , the 17 @-@ year @-@ old was stricken with a severe strain of smallpox . His parents rushed to be by his side , but on Saturday morning , 20 February ( O.S. ) , the boy died , plunging the duke into ' the greatest sorrow in the world ' . 
 Bearing his grief , and leaving Sarah to hers , the Duke returned to The Hague at the beginning of March . By now Marshal Villeroi had replaced Boufflers as commander in the Spanish Netherlands , but although Marlborough was able to take Bonn , Huy , and Limbourg in 1703 , the ' Great Design ' – the Anglo @-@ Dutch plan to secure Antwerp and thereby open the river lines into Flanders and Brabant – was left in ruins by Villeroi 's initiative , poor Allied co @-@ ordination , and by General <unk> 's defeat at the Battle of <unk> on 30 June . Domestically the Duke also encountered problems . The moderate Tory ministry of Marlborough , the Lord Treasurer Godolphin , and the Speaker of the House of Commons Robert Harley , were hampered by , and often at variance with , their High Tory colleagues whose strategic policy favoured the full employment of the Royal Navy in pursuit of trade advantages and colonial expansion overseas . To the Tories an action at sea was preferable to one ashore : rather than attack the enemy where they were strongest the Tories proposed to attack Louis XIV and Philip V where they were weakest – in their colonial empires and on the high seas . In contrast the Whigs , led by their ' Junto ' , enthusiastically supported the Ministry 's Continental strategy of thrusting the army into the heart of France . This support wilted somewhat following the Allies ' recent campaign , but the Duke , whose diplomatic tact had held together a very discordant Grand Alliance , was now a general of international repute , and the limited success of 1703 was soon eclipsed by the Blenheim campaign . 
 = = = = Blenheim and Ramillies = = = = 
 Pressed by the French and Bavarians to the west and Hungarian rebels to the east , Austria faced the real possibility of being forced out of the war . Concerns over Vienna and the situation in southern Germany convinced Marlborough of the necessity of sending aid to the Danube ; but the scheme of seizing the initiative from the enemy was extremely bold . From the start the Duke resolved to mislead the Dutch , who would never willingly permit any major weakening of Allied forces in the Spanish Netherlands . To this end , Marlborough moved his English troops to the Moselle ( a plan approved of by The Hague ) , but once there he planned to slip the Dutch leash and march south to link up with Austrian forces in southern Germany . 
 A combination of strategic deception and brilliant administration enabled Marlborough to achieve his purpose . After marching 250 miles ( 400 km ) from the Low Countries , the Allies fought a series of engagements against the Franco @-@ Bavarian forces ranged against them on the Danube . The first major encounter occurred on 2 July 1704 when Marlborough and Prince Louis of Baden stormed the Schellenberg heights at Donauwörth . However , the main event followed on 13 August when Marlborough – assisted by the Imperial commander , the able Prince Eugene of Savoy – delivered a crushing defeat on Marshal Tallard 's and the Elector of Bavaria 's army at the Battle of Blenheim . The whole campaign , which historian John Lynn describes as one of the greatest examples of marching and fighting before Napoleon , had been a model of planning , logistics , tactical and operational skill , the successful outcome of which had altered the course of the conflict – Bavaria was knocked out of the war , and Louis XIV 's hopes of an early victory were destroyed . With the subsequent fall of Landau on the Rhine , and Trier and Trarbach on the Moselle , Marlborough now stood as the foremost soldier of the age . Even the Tories , who had declared that should he fail they would " break him up like hounds on a hare " , could not entirely restrain their patriotic admiration . 
 The Queen lavished upon her favourite the royal manor of Woodstock and the promise of a fine palace commemorative of his great victory at Blenheim ; but since her accession her relationship with Sarah had become progressively distant . The Duke and Duchess had risen to greatness not least because of their intimacy with Anne , but the Duchess 's relentless campaign against the Tories ( Sarah was a firm Whig ) , isolated her from the Queen whose natural inclinations lay with the Tories , the staunch supporters of the Church of England . For her part , Anne , now Queen and no longer the timid adolescent so easily dominated by her more beautiful friend , had grown tired of Sarah 's tactless political hectoring and increasingly haughty manner which , in the coming years , were to destroy their friendship and undermine the position of her husband . 
 During the Duke 's march to the Danube Emperor Leopold I offered to make Marlborough a prince of the Holy Roman Empire in the small principality of Mindelheim . The Queen enthusiastically agreed to this elevation , but after the successes of 1704 , the campaign of 1705 brought little reason for satisfaction on the Continent . The planned invasion of France via the Moselle valley was frustrated by friend and foe alike , forcing the Duke to withdraw back towards the Low Countries . Although Marlborough penetrated the Lines of Brabant at Elixheim in July , Allied indecision and considerable Dutch hesitancy ( concerned as they were for the security of their homeland ) , prevented the Duke from pressing his advantage . The French and the Tories in England dismissed arguments that only Dutch obstructionism had robbed Marlborough of a great victory in 1705 , confirmed in their belief that Blenheim had been a lucky strike and that Marlborough was a general not to be feared . 
 The early months of 1706 also proved frustrating for the Duke as Louis XIV 's generals gained early successes in Italy and Alsace . These setbacks thwarted Marlborough 's original plans for the coming campaign , but he soon adjusted his schemes and marched into enemy territory . Louis XIV , equally determined to fight and avenge Blenheim , goaded his commander , Marshal Villeroi , to seek out Monsieur <unk> . The subsequent Battle of Ramillies , fought in the Spanish Netherlands on 23 May , was perhaps Marlborough 's most successful action , and one in which he had himself characteristically drawn his sword at the pivotal moment . For the loss of fewer than 3 @,@ 000 dead and wounded ( far fewer than Blenheim ) , his victory had cost the enemy some 20 @,@ 000 casualties , inflicting in the words of Marshal Villars , " the most shameful , humiliating and disastrous of routs " . The campaign was an unsurpassed operational triumph for the English general . Town after town subsequently fell to the Allies . ' It really looks more like a dream than truth ' , wrote Marlborough to Sarah . With Prince Eugene 's rout of the French army at Turin in September , 1706 proved a miraculous year for Allied arms . 
 = = = = Falling out of favour = = = = 
 While Marlborough fought in the Low Countries a series of personal and party rivalries instigated a general reversal of fortune . The Whigs , who were the main prop of the war , had been laying siege to Godolphin . As a price for supporting the government in the next parliamentary session , the Whigs demanded a share of public office with the appointment of a leading member of their Junto , the Earl of Sunderland ( Marlborough 's son @-@ in @-@ law ) , to the post of Secretary of State . The Queen , who loathed Sunderland and the Junto , and who refused to be dominated by any single party , bitterly opposed the move ; but Godolphin , increasingly dependent on Whig support , had little room for manoeuvre . With Sarah 's tactless , unsubtle backing , Godolphin relentlessly pressed the Queen to submit to Whig demands . In despair , Anne finally relented and Sunderland received the seals of office ; but the special relationship between Godolphin , Sarah , and the Queen had taken a severe blow and she began to turn increasingly to a new favourite – Sarah 's cousin , Abigail Masham . Anne also became ever more reliant on the advice of Harley , who , convinced that the duumvirate 's policy of appeasing the Whig Junto was unnecessary , had set himself up as alternative source of advice to a sympathetic Queen . 
 Following his victory at Ramillies Marlborough returned to England and the acclamation of Parliament ; his titles and estates were made perpetual upon his heirs , male or female , in order that ' the memory of these deeds should never lack one of his name to bear it ' . However , the Allied successes were followed in 1707 with a resurgence in French arms in all fronts of the war , and a return to political squabbling and indecision within the Grand Alliance . The Great Northern War also threatened dire consequences . The French had hoped to entice Charles XII , King of Sweden , to attack the Empire regarding grievances over the Polish Succession , but in a pre @-@ campaign visit to the King 's headquarters at Altranstädt , Marlborough 's diplomacy helped placate Charles and prevent his interference regarding the Spanish Succession . 
 In Altranstädt , Marlborough reportedly approached Carl Piper , the most favored of the King 's advisers of the time . Allegedly , he offered Piper a pension in exchange for advising Charles XII to invade Russia , as this would distract Charles from interfering in the War of the Spanish Succession . Carl Piper was openly accused of having accepted Marlborough 's bribe , persuaded Charles to the Swedish invasion of Russia , which consequently lead to the disastrous Battle of Poltava . Carl Piper denied having accepted Marlborough 's offer , but he did admit that he had accepted that Marlborough provided his wife Christina Piper with a pair of valuable earrings , which she admitted , and as it was the habit of Carl Piper to personally refuse bribes but allow his wife to accept them and then follow her recommendation , the accusation of Marlborough 's bribe is not unlikely . 
 Nevertheless , major setbacks in Spain at Almanza and along the Rhine in Southern Germany , had caused Marlborough great anxiety . Prince Eugene 's retreat from Toulon ( Marlborough 's major goal for 1707 ) ended any lingering hopes of a war @-@ winning blow that year . 
 Marlborough returned from these tribulations to a political storm as the Ministry 's critics turned to attack the overall conduct of the war . The Duke and Godolphin had initially agreed to explore a ' moderate scheme ' with Harley and reconstruct the government , but they were incensed when Harley privately criticised the management of the war in Spain to the Queen , and his associate Henry St John , the Secretary at War , raised the issue in Parliament . Convinced of Harley 's <unk> , the <unk> threatened the Queen with resignation unless she dismissed him . Anne fought stubbornly to keep her favourite minister , but when the Duke of Somerset and the Earl of Pembroke refused to act without ' the General nor the Treasurer ' , Harley resigned : Henry Boyle replaced him as Secretary of State , and his fellow Whig , Robert Walpole , replaced St John as Secretary at War . The struggle had given Marlborough a final lease of power but it was a Whig victory , and he had to a large extent lost his hold on the Queen . 
 = = = = Oudenaarde and Malplaquet = = = = 
 The military setbacks of 1707 continued through the opening months of 1708 with the defection of Brugge and Gent to the French . Marlborough remained despondent about the general situation , but his optimism received a major boost with the arrival in theatre of Prince Eugene , his co @-@ commander at Blenheim . Heartened by the Prince 's robust confidence , Marlborough set about to regain the strategic initiative . After a forced march , the Allies crossed the river <unk> at Oudenaarde just as the French army , under Marshal Vendôme and the duc de Burgundy , was crossing farther north with the intent of besieging the place . Marlborough – with renewed self @-@ assurance – moved decisively to engage them . His subsequent victory at the Battle of Oudenaarde on 11 July 1708 demoralised the French army in Flanders ; his eye for ground , his sense of timing and his keen knowledge of the enemy were again amply demonstrated . The success , aided by the dissension of the two French commanders , restored the strategic initiative to the Allies , who now opted to besiege Lille , the strongest fortress in Europe . While the Duke commanded the covering force , Eugene oversaw the siege of the town , which surrendered on 22 October ; however , it was not until 10 December that the resolute Boufflers yielded the citadel . Yet for all the difficulties of the winter siege , the campaign of 1708 had been a remarkable success , requiring superior logistical skill and organisation . The Allies re @-@ took Brugge and Gent , and the French were driven out of almost all the Spanish Netherlands : " He who has not seen this , " wrote Eugene , " has seen nothing . " 
 While Marlborough achieved honours on the battlefield , the Whigs , now in the ascendancy , drove the remaining Tories from the Cabinet . Marlborough and Godolphin , now distanced from Anne , would henceforth have to conform to the decisions of a Whig ministry , while the Tories , sullen and vengeful , looked forward to their former leaders ' downfall . To compound his troubles , the Duchess , spurred on by her hatred of Harley and Abigail , had finally driven the Queen to distraction and wrecked what was left of their friendship . Sarah was retained in her court position out of necessity as the price to be paid to keep her victorious husband at the head of the army . 
 After the recent defeats and one of the worst winters in modern history , France was on the brink of collapse . However , Allied demands at the peace talks in The Hague in April 1709 ( principally concerning Article 37 that bound Louis XIV to hand over Spain within two months or face the renewal of the war ) , were rejected by the French in June . The Whigs , the Dutch , Marlborough and Eugene failed for personal and political reasons to secure a favourable peace , adhering to the uncompromising slogan ' No peace without Spain ' without any clear knowledge of how to accomplish it . All the while Harley , maintained up the backstairs by Abigail , rallied the moderates to his side , ready to play an ambitious and powerful middle part . 
 Marlborough returned to campaigning in the Low Countries in June 1709 . After outwitting Marshal Villars to take the town of Tournai on 3 September ( a major and bloody operation ) , the Allies turned their attention upon Mons , determined to maintain the ceaseless pressure on the French . With direct orders from the increasingly desperate Louis XIV to save the city , Villars advanced on the tiny village of Malplaquet on 9 September 1709 and entrenched his position . Two days later the opposing forces clashed in battle . On the Allied left flank the Prince of Orange led his Dutch infantry in desperate charges only to have it cut to pieces . On the other flank , Eugene attacked and suffered almost as severely . Nevertheless , sustained pressure on his extremities forced Villars to weaken his centre , enabling Marlborough to break through and claim victory . Yet the cost was high : the allied casualty figures were approximately double that of the enemy ( sources vary ) , leading Marlborough to admit – " The French have defended themselves better in this action than in any battle I 've seen . " The Duke proceeded to take Mons on 20 October , but on his return to England his enemies used the Malplaquet casualty figures to sully his reputation . Harley , now master of the Tory party , did all he could to persuade his colleagues that the pro @-@ war Whigs – and by their apparent concord with Whig policy , Marlborough and Godolphin – were bent on leading the country to ruin . 
 = = = = Endgame = = = = 
 The Allies had confidently expected that victory in a major set @-@ piece battle would compel Louis XIV to accept peace on Allied terms , but after Malplaquet ( the bloodiest battle of the war ) , that strategy had lost its validity : Villars had only to avoid defeat for a compromise peace settlement to become inevitable . In March 1710 , fresh peace talks re @-@ opened at Geertruidenberg , but again Louis XIV would not concede Whig demands to force his grandson , Philip V , from Spain . Publicly Marlborough toed the government line , but privately he had real doubts about pressing the French into accepting such a dishonourable course . 
 Although the Duke was only an observer at Geertruidenberg , the failed negotiations gave credence to his detractors that he was deliberately prolonging the war for his own profit . Yet it was with reluctance that he returned to campaigning in the spring , capturing Douai in June , before taking Béthune , and Saint @-@ <unk> , followed in November by Aire @-@ sur @-@ la @-@ Lys . Nevertheless , support for the pro @-@ war policy of the Whigs had , by this time , ebbed away . The Cabinet had long lacked cohesion and mutual trust ( particularly following the Sacheverell affair ) when in the summer the plan to break it up , prepared by Harley , was brought into action by the Queen . Sunderland was dismissed in June , followed by Godolphin ( who had refused to sever his ties with Sarah ) in August . Others followed . The result of the general election in October was a Tory landslide and a victory for the peace policy . Marlborough remained at the head of the army , however . The defeated Junto , the Dutch , Eugene and the Emperor , implored him to stand by the common cause , while the new ministers , knowing they had to fight another campaign , required him to maintain the pressure on the enemy until they had made their own arrangements for the peace . 
 The Duke , ' much thinner and greatly altered ' , returned to England in November . His relationship with Anne had suffered further setbacks in recent months ( she had refused to grant him his requested appointment of Captain @-@ General for life , and had interfered in military appointments ) . The damage done to Marlborough 's general standing was substantial because it was so visible . For now , though , the central issue was the Duchess whose growing resentment of Harley and Abigail had finally persuaded the Queen to be rid of her . Marlborough visited Anne on 17 January 1711 ( O.S. ) in a last attempt to save his wife , but she was not to be swayed , and demanded Sarah give up her Gold Key ( the symbol of her office ) within two days , warning , " I will talk of no other business till I have the key . " 
 Notwithstanding all this turmoil – and his declining health – Marlborough returned to The Hague in late February to prepare for what was to be his last campaign , and one of his greatest . Once again Marlborough and Villars formed against each other in line of battle , this time along the Avesnes @-@ le @-@ Comte – Arras sector of the lines of Non Plus Ultra ( see map ) . By an exercise of brilliant psychological deception , and a secretive night march covering nearly 40 miles in 18 hours , the Allies penetrated the allegedly impregnable lines without losing a single man ; Marlborough was now in position to besiege the fortress of <unk> . Villars , deceived and outmanoeuvred , was helpless to intervene , compelling the fortress 's unconditional surrender on 12 September . Chandler writes – " The pure military artistry with which he repeatedly deceived Villars during the first part of the campaign has few equals in the annals of military history ... the subsequent siege of <unk> with all its technical complexities , was an equally fine demonstration of martial superiority . " 
 For Marlborough , though , time had run out . His strategic gains in 1711 made it virtually certain that the Allies would march on Paris the following year , but Harley had no intention of letting the war progress that far and risk jeopardising the favourable terms secured from the secret Anglo @-@ French talks ( based on the idea that Philip V would remain on the Spanish throne ) that had proceeded throughout the year . Marlborough had long had doubts about the Whig policy of ' No Peace without Spain ' , but he was reluctant to abandon his allies ( including the Elector of Hanover , Anne 's heir presumptive ) , and sided with the Whigs in opposing the peace preliminaries . Personal entreaties from the Queen ( who had long tired of the war ) , failed to persuade the Duke . The Elector made it clear that he too was against the proposals , and publicly sided with the Whigs . Nevertheless , Anne remained resolute , and on 7 December 1711 ( O.S. ) she was able to announce that – " notwithstanding those who delight in the arts of war " – a sneer towards Marlborough – " both time and place are appointed for opening the treaty of a general peace . " 
 = = = = Dismissal = = = = 
 To prevent the serious renewal of warfare in the spring , it was considered essential to replace Marlborough with a general more in touch with the Queen 's ministers and less in touch with their allies . To do this , Harley ( newly created Earl of Oxford ) and St John first needed to bring charges of corruption against the Duke , completing the anti @-@ Whig , anti @-@ war picture that Jonathan Swift was already presenting to a credulous public through his pamphleteering , notably in his Conduct of the Allies ( 1711 ) . The means to achieve Marlborough 's fall had already been put in train when the Ministry had set up a Parliamentary ' Commission for the taking , examining and stating the public accounts of the Kingdom ' , to report on alleged irregularities during the war . 
 Two main charges were brought to the House of Commons against Marlborough : first , an assertion that over nine years he had illegally received more than £ 63 @,@ 000 from the bread and transport contractors in the Netherlands ; second , that he had taken 2 @.@ 5 % from the pay of the foreign troops in English pay , amounting to £ 280 @,@ 000 . Despite Marlborough 's refutations ( claiming ancient precedent for the first allegation , and , for the second , producing a warrant signed by the Queen in 1702 authorising him to make the deductions in lieu of secret @-@ service money for the war ) , the findings were enough for Harley to persuade the Queen to release her Captain @-@ General . On 29 December 1711 ( O.S. ) , before the charges had been examined , Anne , who owed to him the success and glory of her reign , sent her letter of dismissal : " I am sorry for your own sake the reasons are become so public which makes it necessary for me to let you know you have render 'd it impracticable for you to continue yet longer in my service " . The Tory dominated Parliament concluded by a substantial majority that , ' the taking of several sums of money annually by the Duke of Marlborough from the contractor for foraging the bread and wagons ... was unwarrantable and illegal ' , and that the 2 @.@ 5 % deducted from the pay of foreign troops ' is public money and ought to be accounted for . ' When his successor , the Duke of Ormonde , left London for The Hague to take command of British forces he went , noted Bishop Burnet , with ' the same allowances that had been lately voted criminal in the Duke of Marlborough ' . 
 The Allies were stunned by Marlborough 's dismissal . The French , however , rejoiced at the removal of the main obstacle to the Anglo @-@ French talks . Oxford ( Harley ) and St John had no intention of letting Britain 's new Captain @-@ General undertake any action , and issued Ormonde his ' restraining orders ' in May , forbidding him to use British troops in action against the French – an infamous step that ultimately ruined Eugene 's campaign in Flanders . Marlborough continued to make his views known , but he was in trouble : attacked by his enemies and the government press ; with his fortune in peril and Blenheim Palace still unfinished and running out of money ; and with England split between Hanoverian and Jacobite factions , Marlborough thought it wise to leave the country . After attending Godolphin 's funeral on 7 October ( O.S. ) , he went into voluntary exile to the Continent on 1 December 1712 ( O.S. ) . 
 = = = Return to favour = = = 
 Marlborough was welcomed and fêted by the people and courts of Europe , where he was not only respected as a great general but also as a prince of the Holy Roman Empire . Sarah joined him in February 1713 , and was delighted when on reaching Frankfurt in the middle of May to see that the troops under Eugene 's command paid her lord ' all the respects as if he had been at his old post ' . The Duke also journeyed to his principality of Mindelheim which was destined , as he suspected , to revert to Bavaria at the conclusion of the peace negotiations . 
 Throughout his travels Marlborough remained in close contact with the Electoral court of Hanover , determined to ensure a bloodless Hanoverian succession on Anne 's death . He also maintained correspondence with the Jacobites . The spirit of the age saw little wrong in Marlborough 's continuing friendship with his nephew , the Duke of Berwick , James II 's illegitimate son with Arabella . But these assurances against a Jacobite restoration ( which he had been taking out since the early years of William III , no matter how insincere ) , stirred Hanoverian suspicions , and perhaps prevented him from holding the first place in the counsels of the future George I. 
 The representatives of France , Great Britain , and the Dutch Republic signed the Treaty of Utrecht on 11 April 1713 ( N.S. ) – the Emperor and his German allies , including the Elector of Hanover , continued with the war before finally accepting the general settlement the following year . The Treaty marked Britain 's emergence as a great power . Domestically , however , the country remained divided between Whig and Tory , Jacobite and Hanoverian factions . By now Oxford and St John ( Viscount Bolingbroke since 1712 ) – absorbed entirely by their mutual enmity and political squabbling – had effectively wrecked the Tory administration . Marlborough had been kept well informed of events while in exile and had remained a powerful figure on the political scene , not least because of the personal attachment the Queen still retained for him . After the death of his daughter Elizabeth from smallpox in March 1714 , Marlborough contacted the Queen . Although the contents of the letter are unknown it is possible that Anne may have summoned him home . Either way , it seems that an agreement was reached to reinstate the Duke in his former offices . 
 Oxford 's period of predominance was now at an end , and Anne turned to Bolingbroke and Marlborough to assume the reins of government and ensure a smooth succession . But beneath the weight of hostility the Queen 's health , already fragile , rapidly deteriorated , and on 1 August 1714 ( O.S. ) – the day the Marlboroughs returned to England – she died . The Privy Council immediately proclaimed the Elector of Hanover King George I of England . The Jacobites had proved incapable of action ; what Daniel Defoe called the ' solidity of the constitution ' had triumphed , and the regents chosen by George prepared for his arrival . The accession boded ill for the ' men of Utrecht ' – Bolingbroke and Oxford . Bolingbroke ( a staunch Jacobite ) fled to France , while vengeful Whigs pursued Oxford to the Tower . In contrast , Marlborough was received with the greatest cordiality . The new King had not entirely forgiven him his flirtations with Saint @-@ Germain , and he had no intention of employing him in any but military capacities . However , reappointed as Captain @-@ General , Master @-@ General of Ordnance , and Colonel of the 1st Foot Guards , Marlborough once more became a person of influence and respect at court . 
 The Duke 's return to favour under the House of Hanover enabled him to preside over the defeat of the 1715 Jacobite rising from London ( although it was his former assistant , Cadogan , who directed the operations ) . But his health was fading , and on 28 May 1716 ( O.S. ) , shortly after the death of his daughter Anne , Countess of Sunderland , he suffered a paralytic stroke at Holywell House . This was followed by another , more severe stroke in November , this time at a house on the Blenheim estate . The Duke recovered somewhat , but while his speech had become impaired his mind remained clear , recovering enough to ride out to watch the builders at work on Blenheim Palace and attend the Lords to vote for Oxford 's impeachment . 
 In 1719 the Duke and Duchess were able to move into the east wing of the unfinished palace , but Marlborough had only three years to enjoy it . While living at Windsor Lodge he suffered another stroke in June 1722 , not long after his 72nd birthday . Finally , at 4 a.m on 16 June ( O.S. ) , in the presence of his wife and two surviving daughters Henrietta Godolphin and Mary Montagu , the 1st Duke of Marlborough died . He was initially buried in the vault at the east end of Henry VII 's chapel in Westminster Abbey , but following instructions left by Sarah , who died in 1744 , Marlborough was moved to be by her side lying in the vault beneath the chapel at Blenheim . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Marlborough was equally adept at both battle and siege : 
 ... in the ten campaigns he made against [ the French ] ; during all which time it cannot be said that he ever slipped an opportunity of fighting , when there was any probability of coming at his enemy : and upon all occasions he concerted matters with so much judgement and forecast , that he never fought a battle which he did not gain , nor laid siege to a town which he did not take . 
 To military historians David Chandler and Richard Holmes , Marlborough is the greatest British commander in history , an assessment that is shared by others , including the Duke of Wellington who could " conceive nothing greater than Marlborough at the head of an English army " . However , the Whig historian , Thomas Macaulay , denigrates Marlborough throughout the pages of his History of England who , in the words of historian John Wilson Croker , pursues the Duke with " more than the ferocity , and much less than the sagacity , of a bloodhound " . According to historian George Trevelyan , Macaulay " instinctively desired to make Marlborough 's genius stand out bright against the background of his villainy " . It was in response to Macaulay 's History that a descendant — Winston Churchill — wrote his laudatory biography , Marlborough : His Life and Times ( 4 vol . 1933 – 1938 ) . 
 Marlborough was ruthlessly ambitious , relentless in the pursuit of wealth , power and social advancement , earning him a reputation for avarice and miserliness . These traits may have been exaggerated for the purposes of party faction but , notes Trevelyan , nearly all other statesmen of the day were engaged in founding families and amassing estates at the public expense ; Marlborough only differed in that he gave the public much more value for their money . In his quest for fame and personal interests he could be unscrupulous , as his desertion of James II testifies . To Macaulay this is regarded as a piece of selfish treachery against his patron ; an analysis shared by the historian G. K. Chesterton : " Churchill , as if to add something ideal to his imitation of Iscariot , went to James with wanton professions of love and loyalty ... and then calmly handed over the army to the invader " . To Trevelyan , Marlborough 's behaviour during the 1688 revolution was a sign of his " devotion to the liberties of England and the Protestant religion " . However , his continuing correspondence with Saint @-@ Germain was not noble . Although Marlborough did not wish for a Jacobite restoration his double @-@ dealing ensured that William III and George I would never be fully disposed to trust him . 
 Marlborough 's weakness during Anne 's reign lay in the English political scene . His determination to preserve the independence of the Queen 's administration from control of party faction initially enjoyed full support , but once royal favour turned elsewhere , the Duke , like his key ally Godolphin , found himself isolated ; first becoming little more than a servant of the Whigs , then a victim of the Tories . 
 = = = Captain @-@ General = = = 
 On the grand strategic level Marlborough had a rare grasp of the broad issues involved , and was able from the start of the Spanish Succession war to see the conflict in its entirety . He was one of the few influences working towards genuine unity within the Grand Alliance , but the extension of the war aims to include the replacement of Philip V as King of Spain was a fatal mistake . Marlborough stands accused – possibly for political and diplomatic reasons – of not pressing his private doubts about reinforcing failure . Spain proved a continuous drain of men and resources , and ultimately hampered his chances of complete success in Flanders , the war 's main theatre . The Allies did come close to a complete victory on several occasions , but the increasingly severe conditions imposed upon Louis XIV forestalled an early end to hostilities . Although the Duke lost his political influence in the latter stages of the war he still possessed vast prestige abroad , yet his failure to communicate his innermost convictions to his allies or political masters means he must bear some responsibility for the continuance of the war beyond its logical conclusion . 
 As a commander Marlborough preferred battle over slow moving siege warfare . Aided by an expert staff ( particularly his carefully selected aides @-@ de @-@ camp such as Cadogan ) , as well as enjoying a close personal relationship with the talented Imperial commander , Prince Eugene , Marlborough proved far @-@ sighted , often far ahead of his contemporaries in his conceptions , and was a master at assessing his enemy 's characteristics in battle . Marlborough was more likely to manoeuvre than his opponents , and was better at maintaining operational tempo at critical times , yet the Duke qualifies more as a great practitioner within the constraints of early 18th century warfare , rather than as a great innovator who radically redefined military theory . Nevertheless , his predilection for fire , movement , and co @-@ ordinated all @-@ arms attacks , lay at the root of his great battlefield successes . 
 As an administrator Marlborough was also without peer ; his attention to detail meant his troops rarely went short of supply – when his army arrived at its destination it was intact and in a fit state to fight . This concern for the welfare of the common soldier together with his ability to inspire trust and confidence , and his willingness to share the dangers of battle , often earned him adulation from his men – " The known world could not produce a man of more humanity " , observed Corporal Matthew Bishop . It was this range of abilities that makes Marlborough outstanding . Even his old adversaries recognised the Duke 's qualities . In his Letters on the Study of History ( 1752 ) , Bolingbroke declared – " I take with pleasure this opportunity of doing justice to that great man ... [ whose memory ] as the greatest general , and as the greatest minister that our country , or perhaps any other has produced , I honour " . His success was made possible because of his enormous reserves of stamina , willpower and self @-@ discipline ; his ability to hold together the Alliance against France , made possible by his victories , can hardly be overestimated . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 26 May 1650 – 21 December 1682 : John Churchill , Esq . 
 21 December 1682 – 14 May 1685 : The Right Honourable The Lord Churchill of Eyemouth 
 14 May 1685 – 9 April 1689 : The Right Honourable The Lord Churchill of Sandridge and Eyemouth 
 9 April 1689 – December 1702 : The Right Honourable The Earl of Marlborough 
 December 1702 – 16 June 1722 : His Grace The Duke of Marlborough 
 in the Holy Roman Empire : 18 November 1705 – ? ? ? 1714 : His Serene Highness The Prince of Mindelheim 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 = Mark Kerry = 
 Mark Anthony Kerry ( born 4 August 1959 ) is an Australian former backstroke and freestyle swimmer of the 1970s and 1980s , who won three Olympic medals , including a gold in the 4 × 100 m medley relay at the 1980 Summer Olympics as the backstroker for the Quietly Confident Quartet . During his career , he won twelve Australian Championships . 
 Initially trained by his mother , Kerry enjoyed success in swimming and surf lifesaving as a teenager . His swimming career progressed to senior Australian standards after he switched to the tutelage of John Rigby and moved to Queensland . He made his debut at the 1976 Australian Championships and promptly won the 200 m freestyle and backstroke events to win selection for the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal at the age of 16 . At the Olympics , Kerry reached the final in two events , coming seventh and fifth in the 100 m and 200 m backstroke respectively . Kerry was disappointed with his performances , but they attracted the attention of American coach Doc Counsilman , who invited Kerry to swim under him at the Indiana University . Kerry set Australian records while in the United States , but his international career hit trouble when he was expelled from the 1978 Commonwealth Games team for breaking a curfew . 
 Kerry returned to Australia in 1980 for the national championships and gained selection for the Moscow Olympics by winning the backstroke double . Kerry declined financial inducements and resisted political pressure from the government of Australia to boycott the Olympics in protest at the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . He went on to win bronze in the 200 m backstroke after missing the final in the 100 m . The peak of his career came in the 4 × 100 m medley relay , where he led off the winning team . The race remains the only time that the United States did not win the event at the Olympics . After the games , Kerry took an extended break from the sport , before returning for the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles . He claimed a bronze in the medley relay and came fifth in the 100 m backstroke . He then retired and took up a television and modelling career in the United States . After returning to Australia , he ran and owned Dunhill Management , one of the largest recruiting firms in the nation , with his brother . In 2001 , the Kerry brothers sold Dunhill for A $ 22 @.@ 7 million , with up to A $ 13 @.@ 8 million in additional payments depending on the success of the company . They later founded a new recruitment firm , K2 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in Temora , New South Wales , near the regional centre of Wagga Wagga , Kerry was one of two sons born to a car salesman . Kerry 's mother was a swimming teacher who ran her own aquatic school . Kerry was taught to swim by his mother , whom he regarded as a perfectionist who emphasised technique and turned him to backstroke . Kerry grew up participating in a wide range of sports , representing Wollongong High School in tennis , athletics and swimming . He also competed four times in the state cross @-@ country championships . Once his family had moved to the seaside city of Wollongong , Kerry developed a love of the surf . He found the ocean water much more exciting due to its unpredictability . Kerry steadily rose through the surf lifesaving ranks , competing at the state and national championships . In 1974 , Kerry won the Cadet Malibu event in the Australian Championships , and in 1975 he came second in the surf race at the Australian Open Surfing Championships . In the pool , Kerry had his first competitive race at the age of 12 in 1971 . At the time , Brad Cooper — who went on to win the 400 m freestyle at the 1972 Summer Olympics — was living in Wollongong and he and Kerry trained together on a regular basis . In 1974 , Kerry competed in the Australian Age Championships in freestyle , before moving north to train with John Rigby in Brisbane , Queensland in the following year . At the time of his move , Kerry was ranked around 200th in the world in backstroke . 
 = = International debut : 1976 Olympics = = 
 Kerry had improved to such an extent that by November 1975 , his times in the 200 m backstroke had dropped from around 2 m 10 s to around 2 m 3 @.@ 0 s , ranking him third in the world . As a result of his strong performances in the pool , Kerry retired from surf racing . Kerry made his debut at the 1976 Australian Championships , winning the 200 m freestyle and backstroke events in 1 m 54 @.@ 33 s and 2 m 3 @.@ 58 s respectively , as well as the 4 × 200 m freestyle and the 4 × 100 m medley relays for New South Wales , leading off both relays . Aged 16 , Kerry won selection for the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal in the 100 m and 200 m backstroke , the 200 m freestyle , the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay and the 4 × 100 m medley relay . 
 Kerry was second in his heat of the 200 m freestyle heat in a time of 1 m 54 @.@ 86 s , but was four seconds off the pace and did not qualify for the final . His time was 2 @.@ 08 s behind the slowest qualifier , placing him 16th . Kerry did not get to swim in the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay . The fastest Australian in the corresponding individual event , he was rested in the qualifying round ; Australia came third in their heat and ninth overall to miss the final by 1 @.@ 88 s after Peter Dawson swam his split in a time four seconds slower than Kerry 's effort in the individual event . Had Kerry repeated his individual time in the relay in place of Dawson , Australia would have qualified fifth . 
 Kerry found more success in the 100 m backstroke , winning his heat in 57 @.@ 99 s to qualify third fastest for the semifinals . He then scraped into the final as the second slowest qualifier , after coming fourth in his semifinal in a time of 58 @.@ 04 s . His time of 57 @.@ 94 s placed him seventh in the final , ahead of fellow Australian Mark Tonelli , but more than two seconds behind the victorious John Naber of the United States . In the 200 m event , Kerry put in a personal best time of 2 m 3 @.@ 58 s in the first heat to qualify fourth fastest for the final , but swam slower in the decider to finish fifth in a time of 2 m 4 @.@ 07 s , one place behind Tonelli and 2 @.@ 72 s away from bronze . Kerry combined with Paul <unk> , Neil Rogers and Peter Coughlan in the 4 × 100 m medley relay , placing sixth . The quartet qualified in sixth place , and Kerry had them in fourth place after posting a time of 57 @.@ 94 s in the first leg , but his teammates were unable to keep up with the leaders and finished more than four seconds out of medal contention . 
 Kerry was disappointed with his performances , feeling that he had failed to perform to his potential amid the pressure and excitement of an Olympics . However , he felt that his experience of racing against the likes of Naber and Roland Matthes would hold him in good stead . On a brighter note , Kerry 's performances impressed the leading American coach Doc Counsilman , who invited him to come and swim at Indiana University after Kerry finished his secondary schooling in Australia . Kerry successfully defended his 200 m backstroke national title in 1977 , but the time was more than four seconds slower than his effort in the previous year . He combined with his New South Wales teammates to win all three relays , again in times substantially slower than in the preceding Olympic year . The performances earned him selection for the Australian team for the Coca Cola Meet in London , but Kerry felt that he lacked motivation after the Olympics . Upon returning , he decided to absent himself from such events . 
 = = US college stint and expulsion for disciplinary issues = = 
 In January 1978 , Kerry arrived at Indiana University , studying theatre , drama and telecommunications . Based on the times that he recorded for Indiana , Kerry was named in the Australian squad for the 1978 Commonwealth Games in Edmonton , Canada . However , his international career appeared to be in disarray when along with two teammates , Tonelli and Joe Dixon , he was expelled from the Australian team for breaking a curfew on American Independence Day during a training camp in Honolulu , Hawaii . According to Tonelli , Kerry was late because he was courting a female he had met , while Tonelli and Dixon had been drinking . Tonelli also admitted to the officials that he had smoked marijuana — not illegal under Hawaii law — on the night . In the aftermath of the incident , Tonelli appeared on Australian television , strongly denying rumours that he had been involved in a drug @-@ fuelled orgy with teammates . He admitted to smoking marijuana , but defended his actions , saying that it was not illegal . Supporters in Australia , including future Prime Minister Bob Hawke , launched a petition for the reinstatement of the trio , which garnered thousands of signatures , but to no avail . 
 Kerry returned to Indiana and continued his training . He competed at the 1979 U.S. National Championships at Fort Lauderdale , setting Australian records in the 100 m and 200 m backstroke in times of 56 @.@ 50 s and 2 m 2 @.@ 61 s respectively . Over time , Kerry became increasingly discontented with Counsilman , whom he felt was losing focus and becoming preoccupied with various business commitments and an attempt to swim across the English Channel . Kerry transferred to the University of Southern California , which was coached by Naber 's mentor Peter <unk> . 
 = = 1980 Olympics = = 
 Kerry returned home to compete in the 1980 Australian Championships , winning both backstroke events , albeit in a slower time than his Australian records . Kerry added two titles as a member of the 4 × 100 m medley and freestyle relay teams for New South Wales . This earned Kerry his second trip to the Olympics , this time in Moscow . However , another obstacle arose with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , which resulted in a boycott of the Games by a large part of the Western world , led by the United States . The Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser was also the patron of the Australian Olympic Committee , and significant political pressure came to bear on the athletes to boycott the Games . Kerry 's team @-@ mate Tonelli , however , realised that only the sportspeople would suffer from a boycott and that trade relations would continue unabated . He took a leadership role among the athletes to fight for their right to compete . Kerry was equally adamant that he was going to compete , unlike some other swimmers who made personal boycotts . He received offers from Australian government officials to boycott the Games in return for financial payments . He said : 
 I felt the biggest statement we could make was to go to Moscow and show the world . If there was a total boycott , fine , but trade was still going on . It was disgusting . Why should the athletes be made to suffer ? 
 Upon leaving the US for the Olympics , Kerry was threatened with the cancellation of his US visa . Kerry arrived in Moscow facing a four event schedule : he was nominated in both backstroke events and the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay and the 4 × 100 m medley relay . With the Americans and many other western swimmers absent , Australian officials were confident that their three entrants in the 100 m backstroke , Kerry , Tonelli and Glenn Patching , would all make the final and win medals . Kerry came third in both his heat and semi @-@ final , clocking 58 @.@ 08 s and 58 @.@ 07 s respectively , missing out on the final by just 0 @.@ 02 s . He was the ninth fastest in the closely run semifinals , with the third fastest qualifier being only 0 @.@ 18 s faster . Patching missed the final after slipping on the starting wall in his race , while Tonelli went on to finish seventh . Had Kerry matched his personal best of 65 @.@ 50 s , he would have won the gold medal ahead of Sweden 's Bengt Baron . 
 Kerry bounced back in the 200 m backstroke and won his heat to qualify third @-@ fastest , before claiming bronze in a time of 2 m 3 @.@ 14 s behind the Hungarian duo of Sándor <unk> and Zoltán <unk> . He edged out the Soviet Union 's Vladimir <unk> by 0 @.@ 34 s , becoming the first Australian to win a medal in an individual backstroke event since David Theile in 1960 . In the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay , he combined with Tonelli , Graeme Brewer and Ron McKeon as Australia came seventh after qualifying fourth . The Australians were sixth at the halfway point when Kerry jumped in for the third leg . Kerry moved Australia into fifth by the end of his leg , just 0 @.@ 78 s from the bronze medal position , after posting a split time of 1 m 52 @.@ 64 s , the 18th fastest split in the race . However , McKeon could not keep pace with the opposition anchor swimmers , and Australia finished seventh , 1 @.@ 52 s outside the medals . 
 = = = Relay victory = = = 
 The 4 × 100 m medley relay was the focal point of Kerry 's Moscow campaign . The event had always been won by the United States since its inception at Olympic level in 1960 , and their boycott had opened up the field in the event . In the five times the event had been contested , Australia 's best result was a silver in the inaugural race . A bronze in 1964 was the only other medal success and the 1976 edition of the medley relay had seen Australia eliminated in the heats . This time , Australia was regarded as a medal chance , but was not seen as the main threats — Sweden , Great Britain and the Soviet Union were seen as the most likely winners . The hosts 's team included the silver medallists in the 100 m backstroke and breaststroke , and their butterflyer had come fifth ; their freestyler would later place fourth . The British had Duncan Goodhew , the breaststroke gold medallist , while Sweden 's butterflyer and backstroker had won their respective events and their freestyle swimmer would come second in the 100 m . Australia 's team paled in comparison on paper . Neil Brooks , the freestyler , later came 14th overall after having an asthma attack , and Peter Evans was the only individual medallist in the corresponding individual event . Kerry had been eliminated in the backstroke semifinals , while Tonelli was swimming as a makeshift butterflyer , despite having performed better than Kerry in the 100 m backstroke . Adding to the pressure was the fact that Australia won no gold medals at the 1976 Olympics in any sport , and were yet to win in Moscow , so the public were still awaiting their first victory since Munich in 1972 . Coming into the Olympics , Australia were ranked seventh out of the thirteen competing countries . 
 Australia 's prospects improved after the morning heats in which Sweden was disqualified . Tonelli , the eldest swimmer in the quartet at the age of 23 , convened the team as its de facto leader . He asked his team @-@ mates to commit to swimming their legs in a certain time ; Kerry vowed to swim the backstroke in 57 s , Evans the breaststroke in 63 s flat , Tonelli the butterfly in 54 s and Brooks promised to anchor the team in 49 @.@ 8 s , even though he had never gone faster than 51 s . Tonelli named the foursome as the Quietly Confident Quartet , and they exhibited a quiet confidence as they lined up for the race . 
 As Patching had slipped earlier in the meet , Kerry decided to rub a sticky red substance onto the soles of his feet . The Soviet hosts had installed a carpet following the incidents , resulting in Kerry leaving red footprints in the stadium . Kerry led off in a time faster than his effort in the individual event , but it was still two seconds slower than his personal best time of 57 @.@ 87 s , leaving Australia in fourth place at the end of the first leg . Evans then swam a personal best of 63 @.@ 01 s , drawing Australia almost level with the host nation at the halfway mark . Tonelli swam his leg in 54 @.@ 94 s , almost two seconds faster than he had done over the distance . Tonelli did so with an uneven arm technique due to the uneven strength in his arms . He began to lose ground in the last 50 m and was a bodylength behind until a late surge brought him to within a metre by the end of his leg . Brooks then executed a powerful , well @-@ timed dive and surfaced almost even with his Soviet counterpart . He had drawn level by the halfway mark and made a superior turn to take the lead . The Soviet freestyler pulled level at the 25 m mark before Brooks again sprinted away to seal an Australian victory by 0 @.@ 22 s . Brooks had finished his leg in 49 @.@ 86 s as he had vowed to his teammates . The time of 3 m 45 @.@ 70 s sealed Australia 's first ever win in a medley relay at the Olympics , for men or women . The team then made a celebratory dive into the pool and were interviewed poolside . In 2000 , Kerry and the other members of the quartet were each awarded the Australian Sports Medal for their victory in Moscow . 
 = = Break and comeback = = 
 After the Olympics , Kerry took an extended break from competitive swimming . He was asked to return for the 1982 Commonwealth Games in Brisbane , so he made a comeback , but only did two weeks of solid training and missed selection , failing to win either of the backstroke events . In 1983 , he began preparing for the Olympics , but did not start serious work until October . Kerry was confident in his ability to perform at international standards with sporadic preparation after long sabbaticals . He attributed this to his technique and ability to keep his 190 cm , 80 kg body in shape while not training . 
 He returned to Australia in 1984 and after training in Brisbane , he was selected for the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles despite winning neither backstroke event at the Australian Championships . Arriving in the United States , Kerry was scheduled to compete in the 100 m backstroke and 4 × 100 m medley relay . Kerry swam quickly to win his heat in the 100 m in a time of 57 @.@ 15 s , qualifying third fastest for the final . However , he was unable to improve his pace in the final , finishing fifth in a time of 57 @.@ 18 s , 0 @.@ 69 s from the bronze medal . In the medley relay , Kerry and Evans joined Glenn Buchanan and Mark Stockwell , who swam the butterfly and freestyle respectively . They were no match for the Americans , who had three of the four gold medallists in the corresponding individual events and finished almost four seconds ahead . Kerry had Australia in third place at the first change , finishing his leg in a time of 57 @.@ 12 s , but by this point the Americans were already 1 @.@ 71 s ahead . Australia remained third at every change and were beaten by the second @-@ placed Canadians by just 0 @.@ 02 s . 
 = = After swimming = = 
 After the Games , Kerry retired from competitive swimming . He then worked in Los Angeles as a model and hosted a fashion show on cable television . According to Tonelli , Kerry 's mother told her son to " look after that face , [ because ] that 's all you 've got " . Tonelli disagreed , opining that " he was always much more than that " . Tonelli reported that Kerry was busy preening himself just before the start of their Olympic @-@ winning relay performance , claiming that although Australia was unlikely to win the race , he needed to look good because a prospective employer might be watching . Kerry went on to model on the catwalks of Milan and Paris . 
 Kerry married his American wife Lynda , and they split their time between Australia and the United States . They have two children , a son Tanner who is a semi @-@ professional basketball player , and a daughter Madison , who is an actress appearing on Home and Away . Along with his brother Phil , Kerry founded Dunhill Management , one of Australia 's largest recruiting firms . In 2001 , the brothers sold Dunhill to the British firm Robert Walters for A $ 22 @.@ 7 million , with up to A $ 13 @.@ 8 million in extra payments depending on the future success of the company . After this , Kerry worked as the managing director of another firm , before starting a new recruitment business with his brother , K2 Recruitment & Consulting . 
 = Turboliner = 
 The Turboliners were a family of gas turbine trainsets built for Amtrak in the 1970s . They were among the first new equipment purchased by Amtrak and represented an attempt by Amtrak to update its fleet with faster , more modern trains . The first batch , known as RTG , were built by the French firm ANF and entered service on multiple routes in the Midwestern United States in 1973 . The new trains led to ridership increases wherever they were used ; the fixed consist proved a detriment as demand outstripped supply . The high cost of operating the trains led to their withdrawal from the Midwest in 1981 . 
 The second batch , known as RTL , were of a similar design but manufactured by Rohr Industries , an American company . These entered service on the Empire Corridor in the state of New York in 1976 . The RTLs remained in service there through the 1990s , supplemented by several rebuilt RTGs . In the late 1990s and early 2000s New York and Amtrak partnered to rebuild the RTLs for high @-@ speed service ; this project failed and the last RTL trainsets left revenue service in 2003 . After the settlement of legal issues New York sold the remaining trainsets for scrap in 2012 . 
 = = RTG = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The RTG ( abbreviated from the French Rame à Turbine à Gaz , or gas turbine train ) model was an Americanized version of the French ANF T 2000 RTG <unk> ( related to the prototype precursor to the very first TGV trainset , the TGV 001 ) . The RTGs used European @-@ style couplers ( buffers and turnbuckles ) between their cars , due to having been built in France by ANF for use on French railways . Another change was the installation of top @-@ mounted Nathan <unk> horns , a variation of the standard Nathan P5 horns . Each trainset consisted of two power cars ( which included seating ) , two coaches and a bar / grill . The trains were powered by a pair of 1 @,@ 140 horsepower ( 850 kW ) Turbomeca turbines . 
 = = = Service = = = 
 Amtrak acquired the Turboliners with multiple goals in mind . The Turboliners were expected to cost less to operate than a comparable diesel locomotive while having a higher operating speed , though this would be constrained by track conditions . Amtrak also hoped that introducing new equipment would generate favorable publicity . Two years into its existence , Amtrak was fighting the perception that it was making " cosmetic changes to hand @-@ me @-@ down equipment . " New gas turbine trainsets could change that perception and generate favorable publicity . 
 The first two RTG trainsets arrived in September 1973 . These were based out of Chicago , and initially served the Chicago – St. Louis corridor . Impressed with their reliability , Amtrak ordered an additional four trainsets which entered service in 1975 . Amtrak assigned these sets to its other two Midwestern corridors : Chicago – Milwaukee and Chicago – Detroit . Between 1975 and 1976 Amtrak experimented with formally renaming these services " Turboliner " after the equipment before returning to traditional names ( e.g. Wolverine ) . 
 Amtrak established a separate maintenance facility for all six trainsets in the Brighton Park neighborhood of Chicago , on the site of an ex @-@ Gulf , Mobile and Ohio Railroad coach yard . This facility closed in 1981 after the withdrawal of the RTGs from service ; according to Amtrak the trainsets were too expensive to operate compared to conventional equipment . The trainsets were mothballed at Amtrak 's main maintenance facility in Beech Grove , Indiana . A contributing factor to the withdrawal of the RTGs was the spike in fuel prices after the Yom Kippur War . 
 In 1985 , three RTG trainsets ( numbered 64 to 69 ) were retrofitted with RTL style noses , and third rail capability to enable operation into New York . Renamed RTG @-@ IIs , they were retired from service after one caught fire in Pennsylvania Station in New York on September 11 , 1994 . 
 = = = = St. Louis = = = = 
 The St. Louis corridor was the first to receive the new Turboliner equipment , with the initial run occurring September 28 , 1973 , amid great fanfare . The two daily frequencies were branded Turboliner , replacing the individual names Abraham Lincoln and Prairie State . Amtrak would repeat this experiment with the Detroit and Milwaukee corridors . Track conditions limited the new trainsets to 79 mph ( 127 km / h ) , but they were clean , comfortable , quiet and reliable . In the first year the Chicago – St. Louis running time dropped from 5 @.@ 5 to 5 hours . The Federal Railroad Administration refused a request from Amtrak to raise the speed limit to 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) , citing inadequate signalling along the route . The new equipment had fallen out of favor by the end of 1974 : food service was inadequate , and the five @-@ car fixed consist could not handle demand . Amfleet coaches and new conventional diesels replaced both of the Turboliner trainsets in 1975 . 
 = = = = Detroit = = = = 
 Turboliners arrived on the Detroit run on April 10 , 1975 . Additional equipment allowed Amtrak to add a frequency in late April ; the arrival of a third trainset in May made Chicago – Detroit the " first all @-@ turbine @-@ powered route . " One year into operation ridership on the corridor increased by 72 percent . The fixed capacity of 292 passengers on an RTL trainset proved an impediment ; Amtrak could not add capacity when demand outstripped supply . Amtrak replaced one of the trainsets with a conventional locomotive hauling then @-@ new Amfleet coaches in 1976 ; Turboliner service ended altogether by 1981 as more Amfleet equipment became available . 
 = = = = Milwaukee = = = = 
 Turboliners debuted on the Hiawatha corridor began on June 1 , 1975 , with additional trainsets operating in 1976 . As with the St. Louis and Detroit corridors , Amtrak dropped individual names in favor of the Turboliner in branding in 1976 , but resumed these names in 1980 . Turboliner equipment was withdrawn altogether in 1981 . Their withdrawal was the end of Turboliner service in the Midwest . 
 = = RTL = = 
 Amtrak ordered an additional seven Turboliner trainsets which were delivered between 1976 and 1977 . These were manufactured by Rohr Industries and were known as RTL Turboliners . They were based on the earlier RTG series trains but had American @-@ style Janney couplers throughout and a different design power car cab . The standard configuration of each set was five cars : power cars at either end , a food service car , and two coaches . At times Amtrak operated Turboliners with an additional coach cut into the consist . The sets operated in revenue service throughout upstate New York from the 70s into the 90s . One of these original sets were rebuilt into an RTL @-@ II set . 
 The RTL Turboliners were capable of third rail operation , allowing them to enter Grand Central Terminal and , later Pennsylvania Station in New York City . As it had with the earlier RTGs in the Midwest , Amtrak set up a separate maintenance facility in Rensselaer , New York . This facility opened on November 30 , 1977 , and cost $ 15 million . As built the RTLs carried 2 @,@ 560 US gallons ( 9 @,@ 700 l ; 2 @,@ 130 imp gal ) of fuel , permitting a cruising range of 950 miles ( 1 @,@ 530 km ) . The seven trainsets cost $ 32 million . 
 The official inaugural run of the RTLs took place on September 18 – 19 , 1976 . Regular service on the Empire Corridor began on Monday , September 20 . Initially the two trainsets were mostly confined to the New York – Albany shuttle , with a single round @-@ trip each on Saturday and Sunday to Buffalo . The New York – Montreal Adirondack received Turboliners on March 1 , 1977 , replacing conventional equipment . By April 1977 Turboliners had displaced conventional equipment on most routes in upstate New York . Exceptions included some New York – Albany trains as well as the long @-@ distance Lake Shore Limited and Niagara Rainbow . 
 = = = RTL @-@ II = = = 
 In 1995 Amtrak and the state of New York collaborated to rebuild a single RTL trainset at a cost of $ 2 million . This rebuild included a pair of new Turbomeca <unk> T1 turbines , each capable of developing 1 @,@ 600 horsepower ( 1 @,@ 200 kW ) . The interiors were also to be renovated and the exterior paint scheme changed . Morrison @-@ Knudsen rebuilt the power cars while Amtrak overhauled the coach interiors at Beech Grove . The rebuilt trainset was designated RTL @-@ II . In test runs on the Empire Corridor and Northeast Corridor it reached a top speed of 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) all the while consuming less fuel than previously . 
 = = = RTL @-@ III = = = 
 In 1998 Amtrak and the state of New York began the High Speed Rail Improvement Program , a $ 185 million effort to improve service over the Empire Corridor . A key component of this program would be the reconstruction of all seven RTL Turboliner trainsets to the RTL @-@ III specification . New York selected Super Steel Schenectady to perform the work , and the first two trainsets were to enter service in 1999 . Numerous delays pushed the start of service to April 2003 . Of the five additional trainsets , originally scheduled to enter service in 2002 , only one was completed and it never entered revenue service . All seven trainsets were renumbered in 2001 to prevent duplicate numbers with the new GE <unk> and were painted in new Acela @-@ style livery . One of the rebuilt RTL @-@ IIIs was tested on the night of February 15 , 2001 , reaching 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) . 
 The agreement between Amtrak and New York provided that New York would take ownership of the rebuilt trainsets once Amtrak had " fully accepted " them for regular revenue service . Amtrak withdrew all the trainsets from service in June 2003 after problems developed with the air @-@ conditioning systems and refused to operate them . In 2004 New York sued Amtrak in federal court for $ 477 million , both for not operating the trainsets and for failing to complete track work in the Empire Corridor to permit regular 125 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 201 km / h ) operation . Amtrak mothballed the equipment at its maintenance facility in Bear , Delaware . Joseph H. Boardman , then Commissioner of the New York State Department of Transportation ( and a future president of Amtrak ) , accused Amtrak of " stealing " the trains and threatened to find a new vendor for the state 's intercity rail service . Conventional Amfleet equipment replaced the trainsets in revenue service . 
 In April 2005 , New York reached a settlement with Super Steel to completely close the rehabilitation project for $ 5 @.@ 5 million , to stop work on the project , cover any remaining costs , and move four unfinished trains into storage at a nearby industrial park . This settlement , when added to the $ 64 @.@ 8 million previously spent , brought the total amount spent on the project — the results of which were three rehabilitated trainsets and four others in various states of repair — to $ 70 @.@ 3 million . In 2007 Amtrak and New York settled their own lawsuit , with Amtrak paying New York $ 20 million . Amtrak and New York further agreed to commit $ 10 million each to implement track improvements in the Empire Corridor . New York auctioned off its surplus Turboliners in 2012 for $ 420 @,@ 000 , including spare parts . 
 = Resident Evil : Revelations = 
 Resident Evil : Revelations , known as Biohazard Revelations ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Baiohazādo <unk> ) in Japan , is a survival horror video game developed by Capcom and originally released for the Nintendo 3DS handheld game console in early 2012 . It is part of the Resident Evil video game series and takes place between the events of Resident Evil 4 and Resident Evil 5 . The story of the game follows series protagonists Jill Valentine and Chris Redfield as they try to stop a bioterrorist organization from infecting the Earth 's oceans with a virus . 
 Resident Evil : Revelations emphasizes survival , evasion , and exploration over fast @-@ paced combat by providing the player with limited ammunition , health , and movement speed . It was designed to bring back the content and horror of the series ' roots , while at the same time trying to modernize the gameplay . Resident Evil : Revelations was also the first game to support the Nintendo 3DS Circle Pad Pro outside Japan . The game was a moderate commercial success and received generally positive reviews from video game critics , who praised its graphics , sound effects , and horror setting . A high definition version of the game was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , Wii U and Xbox 360 in 2013 . A follow @-@ up to the game , Resident Evil : Revelations 2 , was released in 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Resident Evil : Revelations is a survival horror game where the player controls the on @-@ screen character from a third @-@ person perspective to interact with the environment and enemies . In the game 's single @-@ player campaign , the player must complete a series of scenarios collected together into episodes . Most of the scenarios involve the player controlling Jill Valentine aboard a ghost ship in the Mediterranean Sea , but some require the player to play as other characters in different settings . To finish a scenario and proceed to the next one , the player must complete certain objectives such as solving puzzles , defeating a boss , collecting keys that open doors to new areas , and reaching a specific point in the game , among others . 
 As a survival horror game , Resident Evil : Revelations emphasizes survival , evasion , and exploration over fast @-@ paced combat by providing the player with limited ammunition , health , and movement speed . The player has the ability to run , climb ladders , swim and dive underwater for a limited period of time . Up to three firearms can be carried at one time , in addition to grenades and the standard combat knife . Firearms range from handguns to shotguns , submachine guns and rifles . When aiming a firearm to shoot enemies , the gameplay switches into a first @-@ person perspective . Playing as Jill , the player can upgrade firearms by finding special items throughout the game . The player may also perform melee attacks when an enemy has been stunned after being shot at the right time . Ammunition and health suppliers are dispersed among the game to help players increase their resources . A device called Genesis can be used to scan and find items hidden throughout the game 's environments . The game also features an automap to help players navigate the game . 
 In addition to the single @-@ player campaign , Resident Evil : Revelations offers a more action @-@ oriented mode , called Raid Mode , where one or two players may fight their way through a selection of altered scenarios from the single @-@ player campaign . These usually feature enemies of varying power for the player to defeat . Once a scenario has been completed , the player is rewarded with experience and battle points that can be exchanged for various weapons and items at a store . Gaining experience and acquiring new equipment allow players to progress to higher and more challenging scenarios . As the player progresses throughout the game , the player may also unlock numerous characters for use in both the single @-@ player campaign and Raid Mode , with each character having a different set of abilities and melee attack . The game supports a StreetPass functionality that allows different players to exchange items for use in the game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Resident Evil : Revelations is set between Resident Evil 4 and Resident Evil 5 and depicts the events shortly after the establishment of the counter @-@ terrorism group Bioterrorism Security Assessment Alliance ( BSAA ) . One year prior to the game 's events , the Federal Bioterrorism Commission ( FBC ) sent agents Parker <unk> and Jessica Sherawat to keep the " floating city " of Terragrigia under control after the bioterrorist organization Il Veltro launched an attack on the city using genetically modified living creatures known as Bio Organic Weapons ( BOW ) in opposition to Terragrigia 's solar energy development . In the present , BSAA head Clive R. O 'Brian sends out BSAA agent Jill Valentine and Parker to search for BSAA agent Chris Redfield and Jessica at their last known location , the cruise ship Queen Zenobia in the Mediterranean Sea . They have reportedly gone missing during their mission to investigate Veltro 's possible reappearance . Aboard the ship , Jill and Parker encounter several <unk> infected with the T @-@ Abyss virus and enter a room where they believe Chris is being held , realizing too late that it was a trap apparently set by a Veltro operative . Meanwhile , Chris and Jessica find a base of operations for Veltro ; the <unk> <unk> airstrip in the mountains . Being informed by O 'Brian that Jill and Parker are missing in the Mediterranean , they are redeployed to investigate their whereabouts . O 'Brian also sends BSAA agents Quint <unk> and Keith Lumley to <unk> <unk> to gather information . 
 Awakening in separate locked rooms , Jill and Parker manage to regroup and witness a video transmission of a Veltro member threatening to infect one fifth of the Earth 's oceans with the T @-@ Abyss , which was created in retaliation to the FBC for their involvement in the destruction of Veltro 's forces on Terragrigia . Jill and Parker reach the ship 's antenna to request evacuation , but learn that a satellite attack on the Queen Zenobia has been activated by FBC director Morgan Lansdale . Despite their attempts to confuse the satellite 's system and cause a misfire on the ship , the attack floods the ship with water . Chris and Jessica arrive to the Queen Zenobia and eventually meet with Jill and Parker . The team is then confronted by the Veltro operative , who poses various questions hinting at a larger conspiracy . However , Jessica shoots him before he can reveal anymore . Parker unmasks him to discover that he was his FBC partner Raymond Vester . He seemingly dies after whispering something to him . Afterwards , Chris and Jill make their way to the ship 's laboratory to stop the virus from contaminating the sea , while Parker and Jessica search for a way to stop the ship from sinking . During the search , Parker turns his gun on Jessica , suspecting her of being an FBC mole , as told by Vester . At the same time , Raymond reveals himself to be alive , having worn a kevlar vest , and working with O 'Brian . Jessica wounds Parker and initiates a self @-@ destruct sequence before escaping . 
 Having found the laboratory , Chris and Jill are confronted by Lansdale via a video uplink , revealing that he worked with Veltro in the Terragrigia Panic in an effort to increase the FBC 's funding and international influence . The pair neutralize the virus and proceed to an extraction point . Along the way , they meet with an injured Parker . Despite the pair 's attempt at saving him , Parker falls into the fire below a broken catwalk . O 'Brian informs Chris and Jill that he had orchestrated the events in an effort to gather evidence of Lansdale 's involvement in Terragrigia . He also informs them of the results from Keith and Quint 's data analysis : the existence of a sister ship below the ruins of Terragrigia , which was destroyed by Lansdale to eliminate incriminating evidence of his involvement . However , Lansdale then proceeds to arrest O 'Brian , cutting off communications . Jill and Chris search for Veltro leader Jack Norman , knowing that he holds evidence against Lansdale . However , he has gone delusional and survived a year by injecting himself with T @-@ Abyss . He then injects himself with an overdose of the virus , which transforms him into a new type of Tyrant . After a long battle , Chris and Jill defeat him and broadcast the video , exposing Lansdale . As a result , O 'Brian is released and the FBC is dissolved . In the end , it is revealed that Parker was saved by Raymond from the explosion . In a post @-@ credits scene , Raymond approaches Jessica at a cafe and gives her a sample of the T @-@ Abyss . She asks him why he saved Parker , with him replying that he " had his reasons " . 
 = = Development = = 
 Resident Evil : Revelations was developed by Capcom and directed by Koshi Nakanishi , who previously worked as a game designer for Resident Evil 5 . The development team chose to develop the game for the Nintendo 3DS as they felt that its 3D capabilities could produce a " tense , scary experience with a realistic atmosphere that could make players feel like there could be something lurking around every corner . " The developers main goal was to bring back the content and horror of the series ' roots , while at the same time trying to modernize the gameplay . A cruise ship was chosen as the main setting of the game because it could provide claustrophobic corridors and make the player helpless in the middle of the ocean . The developers also decided to give the game an episodic structure with short and varied chapters to make it suitable for playing on a portable game console . The Raid mode was designed so that players could " bring the game to their friends house and enjoy it with friends face to face , as they talk . " 
 The game was developed simultaneously with Resident Evil : The Mercenaries 3D and uses a ported and downsized version of the internally developed MT Framework graphics engine , which was initially designed for high definition ( HD ) games such as Devil May Cry 4 and Lost Planet 2 . Capcom 's previous experience with The Mercenaries 3D helped the development team improve the technical and graphical aspects of Resident Evil : Revelations to a greater extent . According to Nakanishi , " It was thanks to the tremendous efforts of our technical team that we were able to get console @-@ quality graphics from portable hardware . " Some techniques were used to reduce performance costs ; for example , the Genesis scanner reduces the on @-@ screen display complexity and some types of enemies were designed to have simplistic skeletal physics . To increase the horror aspect of the game , the enemies were designed to moan and emit terrifying sounds even before being spotted by the player . Nakanishi remarked that this mechanic allows players to determine which enemies are coming for them from their sound alone . 
 Unlike in previous Resident Evil games , the developers designed the game so that the player could move and shoot at the same time . Producer Masachika Kawata explained that the reason why the mechanic was not adopted earlier was because it would make the game too fast for a survival horror game . Despite this , the developers balanced the gameplay of Resident Evil : Revelations by slowing down the speed of the player movement and by making enemies move in a complex and spooky manner , " as if they 're trying to avoid your attack . " The developers decided to support the Circle Pad Pro accessory as soon as it was conceived since improving the game controls was a major priority . Numerous features were not included in the final product due to time and budget constraints . The developers originally planned to add a special weapon designed to be used underwater and acquired from Chris at the end of the eight episode , but the plot of the game changed during development and the team had to discard it . Additionally , the land in the distance that can be seen from the ship in the first episode was originally going to be the setting of the last episode , where Jill would have found something from her past . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 Resident Evil : Revelations was announced at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2010 trade show in Los Angeles . A playable demo referred to as a " pilot version " by Capcom was released with Resident Evil : The Mercenaries 3D in 2011 . Another playable demo of the game was made available for download from the Nintendo eShop service in January 2012 in North America and Europe . IGN editors nominated the game for Best 3DS Game at their Best of E3 2011 Awards and later listed it as one of the 30 most anticipated games of 2012 . Prior to its release , Capcom sent North American copies of Resident Evil : Revelations to reviewers with the game 's title , as printed on the cover 's spine , misspelled as " <unk> " . To make up for the error , Capcom offered to replace the cover with a corrected version to users in North America . 
 Resident Evil : Revelations was released on January 26 , 2012 in Japan , January 27 , 2012 in Europe , and February 7 , 2012 in North America . It was the first game to support the Circle Pad Pro outside Japan . A bundle containing the accessory and the game was exclusively released in Europe . According to Media Create , the game sold 296 @,@ 040 copies in Japan in 2012 . In the United States , the game was among the 25 best @-@ selling video games of February 2012 and sold 122 @,@ 000 units in March 2012 . Although sales of Resident Evil : Revelations were considered successful for a Nintendo 3DS game , Capcom wanted it to sell " a little more " given the game 's large development costs . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Resident Evil : Revelations received generally positive reviews from video game critics . Jane Douglas of GameSpot felt that the game is " a thoroughly successful crossbreeding of old @-@ school chills and new @-@ school action " , highlighting its brooding atmosphere and slow @-@ paced combat . Josh <unk> of Game Revolution went so far as to say that the game is sometimes even superior to the old @-@ school Resident Evil games . Writing for IGN , Richard George described Resident Evil : Revelations as " a great handheld game , one that not only pushes the boundaries and standards of the Nintendo 3DS but one that recaptures a long @-@ forgotten spirit of a classic franchise . " However , he also criticized the scenarios not involving the cruise ship setting and remarked that the constant alterations of characters and gameplay between scenarios hold the game " back from true greatness " , stating that the game " doesn 't understand its strengths " . 
 Several critics declared the game 's graphics to be some of the best on the Nintendo 3DS . Eurogamer reviewer Rich Stanton praised the environments for their lighting and particle effects , while GameSpot credited the highly detailed character models , especially those of Jill and some enemies . IGN also highlighted the sound design , saying that " Capcom has mastered the ability to play up a soundtrack when appropriate , sometimes completely cutting to isolated noises in order to focus a player on something truly haunting . " Game Revolution stated similar pros , noting that the game is best experienced when played in the dark with headphones on . Tim Turi of Game Informer praised the story for its episodic structure and pacing , but also admitted that BSAA agents Quint and Keith are the worst characters in the series ' history . The fact that the game supports the Circle Pad Pro was seen as a valuable feature , as it gives players the ability to move , shoot and control the camera at the same time . 
 In a mixed review , Edge felt that the gameplay " takes the best and worst of Resident Evil 's past and present , and spot welds them together unevenly . If the designers had committed wholeheartedly to either polarity of action or horror , Revelations may have been a headshot , but what we 're left with is more like a glancing blow . " GameSpot praised the gameplay for its stop @-@ and @-@ shoot action and use of the Genesis scanner , saying that it " nicely complements the resource scavenging that underpins your survival . " Game Informer felt that the weapon customization allows for different playstyles , but also criticized the game 's lack of enemy variety in comparison to other games in the series . Jonathan <unk> of G4 praised the exploration of the cruise ship setting , comparing it favorably to Super Metroid . However , he criticized the controls for being frustrating and the AI @-@ controlled companions for being useless . Similarly , IGN remarked that the fact that the player is accompanied by a partner makes the game less scary . The Raid Mode was seen as a valuable addition to the game . Eurogamer stated that the mode " is a great concept for 3DS " and the game " executes it with conviction " due to its unlockable features , challenge , and replayability . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = HD version = = 
 An HD version of the game was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , Wii U , and Xbox 360 on May 21 , 2013 in North America , May 23 , 2013 in Japan , and May 24 , 2013 in Europe . The HD version features upgraded graphics , additional Raid Mode content such as new weapons and characters , and a new difficulty mode which remixes enemy and item placement in the single @-@ player campaign . The HD version does not support the 3D capabilities of the Nintendo 3DS , but the Wii U version of the game offers additional features using the Wii U GamePad , including dual screen gameplay , Off @-@ TV Play and Miiverse functionality . Critical reception towards the HD version was mixed to positive . Taylor Cocke of IGN gave the HD version a rating of 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 and criticized it for its dated graphics and uneven controls , saying that the game is " simply out of its element " . Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer , awarding the HD version a rating of 7 out of 10 , criticized the character movement for being sluggish , but also admitted that the game still stands out compared to the previous main installments in the series , which he described as a " directionless , desperate mess " . As of February 2014 , all the HD versions combined have sold 1 @.@ 1 million copies worldwide . A follow @-@ up to the game , Resident Evil : Revelations 2 , was released as an episodic video game in 2015 . 
 = Ezri Dax = 
 Ezri Dax / <unk> <unk> / is a fictional character who appears in the seventh season of the American science fiction TV series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . Portrayed by Nicole de Boer , she is a counselor aboard the Federation space station Deep Space Nine . The character is a member of the Trill species , and is formed of both a host and a symbiont – referred to as Dax . Ezri was introduced to the series following the death of the previous Dax host , Jadzia ( Terry Farrell ) at the end of season six . It had been the producers ' intention to introduce a new female character bearing the symbiont in order to ensure that Nana Visitor as Kira Nerys was not the only female member of the main cast . There were difficulties in casting initially , and the character changed from one who was intended to be " spooky " to one that had found itself in a position where it had to take on the Dax symbiont resulting in schizophrenic @-@ like symptoms as it comes to adjust to the new mental relationship . De Boer was not considered for the part until co @-@ producer Hans Beimler suggested that she should submit an audition tape , which resulted in her invitation to meet with the producers in Los Angeles and in her gaining the role . 
 The character made her first appearance in the first episode of the seventh season , " Image in the Sand " . The character continued to appear throughout the final season of the series , with her final appearance in the series finale " What You Leave Behind " . Her character stepped into the void left by Jadzia amongst the crew , but found that she had to redevelop those previous relationships and learn to get along with Jadzia 's widower , Worf ( Michael Dorn ) . During the course of the season , Ezri becomes less nervous of her role over time and learns from the Dax symbiont and becomes involved romantically with Dr. Julian Bashir ( Alexander Siddig ) . In the non @-@ canon Star Trek novels following the end of the Deep Space Nine series , Ezri changes to the command track of Starfleet and becomes executive officer of the USS Defiant , and ends her romantic involvement with Bashir . After a transfer to the USS Aventine in the Star Trek : Destiny trilogy of novels , she receives a battlefield commission and becomes the Captain of the Aventine . 
 The fan reaction to the character was reported as positive , but several of the Ezri @-@ centric episodes came in for criticism , with producer Ira Steven Behr apologising to de Boer for " Prodigal Daughter " – an episode described as " just a mess " by writer Ronald D. Moore . The relationship between Ezri and both Worf and Bashir was described as one of five " great geek TV love triangles " . The inclusion of the character was criticised on the internet , with Ezri being referred to as both an " ill @-@ conceived idea " and a " replacement Dax " . 
 = = Concept and development = = 
 Terry Farrell had portrayed the character of Jadzia Dax from the pilot episode " Emissary " through to " Tears of the Prophets " , the final episode of season six . The actress had decided not to renew her contract for the seventh season , and so the character was killed off in her final appearance . However , due the character 's symbiotic nature , only the host died ; the symbiont known as Dax survived – which would allow the producers to reintroduce it in a new host later . 
 Prior to the start of the seventh season , the producers sought to re @-@ introduce Dax but with a new host . They decided immediately that it had to be a female character , as otherwise Kira Nerys , played by Nana Visitor , would be the only female main character . There were some difficulties in finding an actress who met the requirements of the part ; Ira Steven Behr said " So we started the casting process , and all I saw was a lot of people who couldn 't play the part . There was absolutely no one in the running . " The initial casting call required an actress with a " spooky " quality , but following the failure to find someone adequate , co @-@ supervising producer René Echevarria suggested that the character instead should be someone who was unprepared to be joined with Dax and only did so because of an unexpected occurrence . 
 Echevarria suggested this to Behr over lunch , but he initially was not sure . By the time they had returned separately to the studio , Behr had an entire plan worked out based on the new premise for the character . Behr suggested that the character should be basically acting as if she 's schizophrenic , saying " We 'd never played up the idea in the past , but it made sense . What must it be like to hear all those voices and opinions ? " The producers also decided that they wanted a younger actress who felt vulnerable in order to offset the strength that Jadzia had grown into over the years . Casting remained difficult , until Hans Beimler suggested an actress from Canada whom he had once worked with – Nicole de Boer . She had worked with Beimler on the television series Beyond Reality and TekWar . She was asked to submit an audition tape where she played out a scene between Ezri and Quark , which she recorded herself in the hotel room she was staying at , and later admitted that she did not know what a Trill was at the time . 
 At the time , de Boer was busy working in Canada but was unknown as an actress in the United States . She was called down to Los Angeles to audition in person based on the strength of the tape , where she performed a four and a half minute scene written specifically for the audition . It was later converted into a scene used in the episode " Afterimage " . She thought she had ruined her audition when she nearly choked on a glass of water as executive producer Rick Berman entered the room and had to run to the bathroom , by which time she had already soaked her clothes and caused her mascara to run . But Behr praised her , saying " We got a good vibe off her , she knew her part . She got it . And that was it . " 
 As part of her preparation for each day 's filming , she had the Trill spots applied by makeup artist Mary Kay Morse , with Michael Westmore working on her detailing instead . This was a change from when Farrell had portrayed Jadzia , as in that case , Westmore had applied the spots himself each day . She made her first appearance in the season seven opener , " Image in the Sand " , for which she was required for only half a day , as she was in only one scene . " I came in and I had one line — that 's it , I hadn 't even moved to L.A. yet and I hadn 't found a place to live . " She began to understand what was required of her from her second episode onwards . She later explained that " I never really got too freaked in the beginning . I thought more of this as the biggest job I 've ever had , than going into the whole Star Trek phenomenon . I just wanted to do a good job . " 
 De Boer felt that the producers did a good job with involving Ezri over the course of the seventh season , but not to the extent that it detracted from the more established members of the main cast . However , there was one part of the season where she was concerned that the fans would suffer from " Ezri overload " . But she felt that the character had a real story arc and character evolution as the season went by . She said that she did not want Ezri to remain the same " young and confused " person that she was in her first appearances , which was something that the writers and producers agreed with . She said that " As time went on , you saw that Ezri was intelligent , that she was endearing and a good person . She became a more complicated character than you might have thought in her first few episodes . " She praised specific episodes which evolved the character , such as " The Siege of AR @-@ 558 " which required Ezri to draw upon Dax 's past experiences , as otherwise she would have been completely out of her element . De Boer also enjoyed " Prodigal Daughter " as the episode showed the change in Ezri from before she was joined with the Dax symbiont , and she thought that the events portrayed in " Field of Fire " were " fascinating " . As she approached the end of Deep Space Nine , de Boer addressed the rumors of her joining Star Trek : Voyager , saying that " My first instinct would be to say no . I would need to feel there was a reason for Ezri to be on Voyager " . She was interviewed at the series wrap party after completing filming on the final episode , " What You Leave Behind " , and said , " The last episode was very emotional , especially on the last day ... I couldn 't believe that a season had gone by already . I realized all the people I 'd grown close to must be feeling it much more because they 'd been doing it 7 years . I cried . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Ezri Tigan was born in 2354 on her homeworld ; she is a member of the indigenous species of the planet Trill . She grew up in the <unk> system with her family , who were shown on the series in the episode " Prodigal Daughter " . She enrolled in Starfleet Academy in 2372 in the medical program , with a specialism in psychology . Two years later , she was assigned as assistant ship 's counsellor to the USS Destiny for field training . During this journey , the ship was assigned to transport the Dax symbiont from Deep Space Nine to Trill , after its host Jadzia ( Terry Farrell ) was killed by Dukat ( Marc Alaimo ) , but it became necessary for it to be joined to a host en route . 
 As Ezri Tigan was the only unjoined Trill available on board , she agreed to be joined to the symbiont even though she was unprepared and did not previously seek to be joined to one . Following the procedure , Ezri — now known as Ezri Dax — spent time at the Symbiosis Institute on Trill to learn to adapt to her new state . Because of her new state , Ezri 's romantic relationship with her former boyfriend ended , as she later explained to her family that he reminded her of a past host 's son . 
 = = = Star Trek : Deep Space Nine = = = 
 Ezri Dax made her first appearance on the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine series in the premiere episode of season seven , " Image in the Sand " . She had travelled to Earth to find Captain Benjamin Sisko ( Avery Brooks ) , an old friend of both Jadzia and Curzon Dax — two former hosts of the symbiont . She leaves with him , Jake Sisko ( <unk> Lofton ) and Joseph Sisko ( Brock Peters ) , to travel to the planet Tyree to search for the Orb of the Emissary . They find the device ; the Captain is hesitant to open it but does , with Ezri 's encouragement — resulting in the restoration of the Bajoran wormhole . Together they return to Deep Space Nine , where Ezri meets the rest of the station 's crew for the first time . 
 In the following episode " Afterimage " , Ezri must cope with the reactions of Jadzia 's former friends to the return of Dax . Worf ( Michael Dorn ) , Jadzia 's widower , reacts poorly , and Garak ( Andrew Robinson ) begins to suffer from the symptoms of acute claustrophobia . Together , Ezri and Garak work through his issues , resulting in her realising that she can remain on the station and Starfleet agreeing to her skipping her final periods of training and receiving a promotion from Ensign to Lieutenant ( junior grade ) based on the past experiences of the Dax symbiont . In " The Siege of AR @-@ 558 " , Ezri is forced to rely on her symbiont 's past experiences after she and the other members of the Defiant crew end up fighting against the Jem 'Hadar on the front lines . 
 In " Prodigal Daughter " , Ezri returns to her family home on the planet New Sydney , in the <unk> system , after Sisko asks her to investigate the disappearance of Chief Miles O 'Brien ( Colm Meaney ) . There she finds that her family are involved with the Orion Syndicate , and discovers that her brother <unk> ( Kevin Rahm ) murdered the person that O 'Brien was searching for . The Mirror Universe episode " The Emperor 's New Cloak " showed an unjoined Ezri Tigan , who is in a relationship with both the alternative Kira Nerys ( Nana Visitor ) and Leeta ( Chase Masterson ) . During the course of the episode , Tigan kills the mirror @-@ Garak , in revenge for the death of Brunt ( Jeffrey Combs ) . The remaining episodes of the season are set in the main universe , with the following episode " Field of Fire " exploring Ezri 's use of the memories of Joran Dax ( Leigh McCloskey ) — who had previously been revealed as a murderer in the third season episode " Equilibrium " . She uses those memories to track down a Vulcan serial killer on the station . 
 Ezri takes a Runabout to the Badlands against Sisko 's orders in the episode " Penumbra " in order to search for Worf , who has been lost on board a Klingon vessel . She manages to find his escape pod and brings him on board , but the two argue as he resents her presenting herself with the same opinions as Jadzia Dax . However , the two are soon attacked by the Jem 'Hadar and are forced to transport themselves to a nearby planet . The two continue to argue , which results in them having sex . They are captured by the Breen shortly afterwards . The two are subsequently interrogated in " ' Til Death Do Us Part " , and she reveals to Worf that she is actually in love with Julian Bashir ( Alexander Siddig ) . They are subsequently handed over the Dominion as the Breen / Dominion alliance is announced . 
 After Worf kills Weyoun ( Jeffrey Combs ) , the pair are scheduled for execution . However , Damar ( Casey Biggs ) , the leader of the Cardassian Union is concerned at what the new alliance might bring and wants to side with the Federation ; he releases Ezri and Worf and sets them free to take a message back to Deep Space Nine to seek aid . Worf discusses the actions of the Klingon Chancellor , Gowron ( Robert O 'Reilly ) , with Ezri in " Tacking into the Wind " . This results in Worf confronting the Chancellor and slaying him , ushering in General Martok ( J. G. Hertzler ) as the new leader of the Klingons . In the series finale , " What You Leave Behind " , Ezri and Bashir reveal their feelings for one another , and later after the fall of Cardassia Prime and the surrender of the Dominion , they discuss their future together . 
 = = = Depiction after the series = = = 
 In Pocket Books ' non @-@ canon DS9 <unk> novels , Ezri remains on Deep Space Nine but moves from counselling to command , and received a promotion to Lieutenant to become executive officer of the USS Defiant . Following a mission on the Trill homeworld , she and Bashir end their romance but decide to remain close friends . In the Star Trek : Destiny trilogy , Dax , who had transferred to second officer of the new Vesta @-@ class <unk> explorer starship USS Aventine , received a battlefield promotion to Captain and commanding officer . She played a critical role in bringing about the final defeat of the Borg . During the Star Trek : Typhon Pact and Star Trek : The Fall series , Dax continues to serve as Captain of the Aventine . In the Star Trek : The Next Generation novel Takedown , the newly promoted Admiral William Riker is stationed aboard the Aventine alongside Captain Dax , and the ship is pursued by the Enterprise as he is leading a number of renegade starships in attacking Federation targets . 
 = = Reception and commentary = = 
 The general fan reaction to the character was positive , and the fans appreciated de Boer 's performances . One negative issue which was raised was the number of Ezri @-@ centric episodes reduced the number of those available to close up the story arcs involving other characters . The actress had been concerned that the fans did not like her while the production was underway as she was not receiving any fan mail , except for that which she received on her first day of filming . De Boer was not aware that the production team had been holding sacks of mail from the public for her , and she was only able to access it about three quarters of the way through the season . Ezri was referred to as " Ally <unk> " by TV Guide magazine — a reference to the title character on the television series Ally McBeal — which de Boer took as a compliment . 
 The differences between Ezri and Jadzia were often considered by viewers and critics . In Where No Woman Has Gone Before : Feminist Perspectives On Star Trek , an essay by Susan A. Lentz within the book Star Trek Visions of Law and Justice , Ezri was described as " less assured , insecure , and uncertain who she is . Of course , Jadzia may have herself once been such a host . The growth and evolution of Ezri unfold as she acknowledges her ' past lives ' . " Ezri 's relationship with Bashir and Worf were also regarded as an extension of Jadzia 's previous relationships , leading to it being listed as one of the 5 " great geek TV love triangles " by the website Den of Geek . However , this romantic plot featuring Ezri and Worf / Bashir was criticised by website DVD Talk in their review of the season seven DVD release saying that it was similar to a " soap opera " . 
 Criticism was directed at some of the character 's aspects , and toward the introduction of the character . Jim Johnson @-@ Smith , in American Science Fiction TV , uses an example of Ezri and Worf 's concentration on their romantic relationship in the episode " ' Til Death Do Us Part " instead of being more concerned with their capture by the Breen . Ezri was described as " an ill @-@ conceived idea that never really took off and has left many DS9 fans angry that a show favourite ( Jadzia Dax ) isn 't around any more " by the website Flickering Myth . The review on DVD Talk also stated " With its large ensemble cast , DS9 could have gone on perfectly well without a replacement for Jadzia . Instead , we get a " replacement Dax " who turns out to be , hands down , the least interesting and most annoying character DS9 has been stuck with . " 
 In addition , as de Boer feared , the Ezri @-@ centric episodes came in for criticism . DVD Talk described " Prodigal Daughter " as " clearly an attempt to cram some back @-@ story into Ezri to make up for the fact that she 's a new character " , and " Field of Fire " as " utterly generic " . The former was also considered to be the weakest of the season by the crew on the series , with Behr apologising to de Boer for it afterwards . Writer Ronald D. Moore simply stated , " It was just a mess . " The crew nicknamed it " Audra Goes Home " , a reference to the 1960s western television show The Big Valley . 
 = = = Mirror version = = = 
 The mirror version of Ezri , known as Ezri Tigan , as seen in the episode " The Emperor 's New Cloak " , was both a mercenary and a lesbian . Previously when Star Trek had dealt with issues relating to homosexuality , it had received complaints from the fanbase . This had occurred during the fifth season of Star Trek : The Next Generation in the episode " The Outcast " where Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) has a romantic liaison with a member of an alien race that is neither male nor female . 
 Criticism was received once again when Jadzia Dax had a same @-@ sex kiss in the episode " Rejoined " of Deep Space Nine . Because of real world changes , such as further acceptance of same @-@ sex couples and an increased number of homosexual characters on television , the negative response to the lesbian version of Ezri was not as heavy as those earlier story @-@ lines . 
 = Karl @-@ Gottfried Nordmann = 
 Karl @-@ Gottfried " <unk> " Nordmann ( 22 November 1915 – 22 July 1982 ) was a German Luftwaffe pilot during World War II and , after the war , a president of Mercedes @-@ Benz in North America . As a fighter ace he was credited with 78 enemy aircraft shot down in over 800 combat missions . He claimed the majority of his victories over the Eastern Front , with one during the Invasion of Poland and eight during the Battle of France and Britain . 
 Born in Giessen , Nordmann volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe of the Third Reich in 1936 . Following flight training , he was posted to Jagdgeschwader 132 ( JG 132 — 132nd Fighter Wing ) in October 1938 . After a series of redesignations his unit was subordinated to Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 — 51st Fighter Wing ) . He fought in the aerial battles over Poland , France and Britain , claiming nine victories . Following the German invasion of the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa , he was appointed Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) of the IV . Gruppe ( 4th Group ) of JG 51 . He was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 1 August 1941 following his 31st aerial victory and received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves on 16 September 1941 after 59 victories . The Oak Leaves grades to the Knight 's Cross was Germany 's highest military decoration at the time of its presentation to Nordmann . 
 Nordmann was appointed Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) of JG 51 , which he led for two years , on 10 April 1942 . Injuries sustained in a midair collision on 17 January 1943 grounded him from further combat flying . He surrendered command of JG 51 on 1 April 1944 and was appointed Jagdfliegerführer <unk> ( fighter leader Eastern Prussia ) . Nordmann then served further fighter command positions with Jagdabschnittsführer 6 ( leader of the 6th fighter sector ) and the 1st Fighter Division , a position he held until the end of World War II . Following World War II , Nordmann joined Mercedes @-@ Benz in sales . He worked as the president of Mercedes @-@ Benz in North America and Canada from 1971 until shortly before his death in 1982 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Nordmann was born on 22 November 1915 in Giessen , at the time in the Grand Duchy of Hesse of the German Empire . He was the son of a doctor and joined the military service of the Luftwaffe on 6 April 1936 as a Fahnenjunker ( officer cadet ) . Nordmann was promoted to Leutnant ( Second Lieutenant ) on 1 January 1938 and served with 1 . Staffel of Kampfgeschwader 253 from 1 March to 30 April 1938 . He was then posted to the Jagdfliegerschule ( Fighter Pilot School ) at Werneuchen , under the command of Oberst ( Colonel ) Theodor Osterkamp . Since July 1938 , he served as a <unk> ( squadron officer ) with the Stab of I. Gruppe ( 1st group ) of Jagdgeschwader 77 ( JG 77 — 77th Fighter Wing ) , which later became IV . / Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 — 51st Fighter Wing ) . 
 This unit underwent as a series of <unk> which started with VI . / Jagdgeschwader 132 ( JG 132 — 132nd Fighter Wing ) , was renamed on 2 November 1938 to I. / Jagdgeschwader 331 ( JG 331 — <unk> Fighter Wing ) . While based at Breslau @-@ <unk> ( currently called Copernicus Airport Wrocław ) , it was redesignated again , this time to I. / JG 77 on 1 May 1939 , which was later re @-@ designated to IV . / JG 51 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 World War II in Europe began on Friday 1 September 1939 when German forces invaded Poland . Nordmann claimed his first aerial victory when he shot down a Polish <unk> on 3 September 1939 . Nordmann achieved his next victory during the Battle of France and seven more in the Battle of Britain . He was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of the 12 . Staffel ( 12th squadron ) of Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 — 51st Fighter Wing ) on 1 March 1940 , replacing Oberleutnant ( First Lieutenant ) Erwin <unk> who became Staffelkapitän of 7 . Staffel of Jagdgeschwader 3 ( JG 3 — 3rd Fighter Wing ) . In this function , he was promoted to Oberleutnant on 1 April 1940 . Nordmann was victorious over two Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Supermarine Spitfires on 17 October 1940 and achieved his ninth aerial victory on 6 May 1941 . 
 In June 1941 , JG 51 and the majority of the Luftwaffe were transferred to the Eastern Front in preparation for Operation Barbarossa , the invasion of the Soviet Union . On 20 July 1941 Nordmann was appointed to command IV . / JG 51 , succeeding Major Friedrich Beckh who was selected to command JG 51 as Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) . Command of the 12 . Staffel was passed on to Oberleutnant Heinrich Bär . Less than two weeks later , on 1 August 1941 Nordmann was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) after a total of 31 victories which was presented to him by General der Flieger Bruno Loerzer . Unteroffizier ( Sergeant ) Franz @-@ Josef <unk> flew as Nordmann 's <unk> ( wing man ) around this time . Nordmann achieved his 40th victory in total on 16 August and his 50th on 28 August . Only three weeks later he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 16 September 1941 after 59 victories which was presented by Adolf Hitler . Three days later , on 19 September , he was promoted to Hauptmann ( captain ) . On 10 April 1942 , Nordmann took over command of JG 51 as Geschwaderkommodore from Beckh who was transferred to the Reich Air Ministry . 
 Nordmann was promoted to Major ( major ) on 18 June 1942 . On 26 June 1942 Nordmann crashed his Messerschmitt Bf 109 F @-@ 2 ( Werknummer <unk> — factory number ) . The aircraft flipped during the landing and Nordmann suffered a basilar fractured skull , an injury typical of high @-@ speed crashes . Although he flew again shortly after the crash his injury required hospitalization in August . Nordmann , who had been assisted by Hauptmann Joachim Müncheberg as a Geschwaderkommodore in training , temporarily replaced him during his absence . On 17 January 1943 Nordmann 's Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 was involved in a midair collision with Hauptmann Rudolf Busch , Gruppenkommandeur of I. / JG 51 . Busch was killed and Nordmann , severely injured , did not fly operationally again . In total , Nordmann claimed 78 aerial victories , 69 of which on the Eastern Front , flying over 800 combat missions . Under his leadership JG 51 reported the 4,000th aerial victory on 16 December 1942 , the 5,000th victory on 2 June 1943 , the <unk> victory on 27 July 1943 and the <unk> victory on 15 September 1943 . 
 Nordmann , who had been promoted to Oberstleutnant ( lieutenant colonel ) on 1 August 1943 , was appointed Jagdfliegerführer <unk> on 1 April 1944 . This command was also later referred to as Jagdabschnittsführer 6 ( leader of the 6th fighter sector ) , while subordinated to the Luftflotte 6 ( 6th Air Fleet ) . For his leadership service and the <unk> aerial of JG 51 he was honorably mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht , an information bulletin issued by the headquarters of the Wehrmacht , on 4 May 1944 . He was appointed Inspekteur der <unk> Ost ( Inspector of Fighter Operations East ) on 4 January 1945 and on 30 January 1945 promoted to Oberst ( Colonel ) . Just prior to the end of the war , on 4 April 1945 , he took over command of the 1st Fighter Division until the end of the war . 
 = = Later life and business career = = 
 After World War II , Nordmann joined Mercedes @-@ Benz in 1950 , initially working in sales . He later became head of the sales department and , in 1968 , head of worldwide services . In January 1971 he was appointed president of Mercedes @-@ Benz in North America and Canada , retiring in January 1981 . Despite his retirement , he continued to hold a position as company director . During his tenure with Mercedes , Nordmann was an early mentor of Jürgen Schrempp , who later became the chief executive officer of Daimler AG . Under Nordmann 's leadership , Mercedes sales in the United States increased from 30 @,@ 000 cars in 1970 to 43 @,@ 600 cars in 1972 , a 0 @.@ 4 % U.S. market share . To further expand the market presence in North America , Mercedes in 1976 opened a facility in Jacksonville , Florida . In 1977 Daimler bought the Euclid Company of Ohio and Freightliner Trucks in 1981 . 
 In 1981 Nordmann attended an aviation symposium of the International Order of Characters ( IOC ) held in Stamford , Connecticut . The symposium panel was made up of four former World War II fighter pilots . In addition to Nordmann , the panel included the former RAF pilots , Sir Douglas Bader and Robert Stanford Tuck , and the former United States Army Air Forces pilot Robert S. Johnson . 
 He died at his home on 22 July 1982 in Greenwich , Connecticut , USA . Nordmann 's wife was named Tina . They had a son , Peter , and a daughter , Corinne . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 8 October 1939 ) 
 1st Class ( 5 January 1940 ) 
 Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe ( 28 July 1941 ) 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for fighter pilots in gold with pennant 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves 
 Knight 's Cross on 1 August 1941 as Oberleutnant and Staffelkapitän of the 12 . / Jagdgeschwader 51 
 35th Oak Leaves on 16 September 1941 as Oberleutnant and Staffelkapitän of the 12 . / Jagdgeschwader 51 
 Mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht on 4 May 1944 
 = = = Dates of rank = = = 
 = Taksony of Hungary = 
 Taksony ( Hungarian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ; before or around 931 – early 970s ) was the Grand Prince of the Hungarians after their catastrophic defeat in the 955 Battle of Lechfeld . In his youth he had participated in plundering raids in Western Europe , but during his reign the Hungarians only targeted the Byzantine Empire . The Gesta Hungarorum recounts that significant Muslim and Pecheneg groups settled in Hungary under Taksony . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Taksony was the son of Zoltán ( the third grand prince of the Hungarians ) , according to the Gesta Hungarorum ( written around 1200 ) . The same source adds that Taksony 's mother was an unnamed daughter of Menumorut , a local ruler defeated by the conquering Hungarians shortly before 907 . Its unknown author also says that Taksony was born " in the year of Our Lord 's incarnation 931 " . The Gesta Hungarorum reports that Zoltán abdicated in favor of Taksony in 947 , three years before his own death . 
 However , modern historians have challenged existing information on Taksony 's early life . A nearly @-@ contemporaneous source – <unk> of Cremona 's Retribution – narrates that Taksony led a plundering raid against Italy in 947 , which suggests that he was born considerably earlier than 931 . His father 's reign was preserved only in the Gesta Hungarorum ; its anonymous author lists Zoltán among the grand princes , and all later Hungarian monarchs were descended from him . The Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus wrote around 950 that Fajsz , Taksony 's cousin , was grand prince of the Hungarians at that time . 
 In that time Taxis , king of the Hungarians came to Italy with a large army . Berengar gave him ten measures of coins not from his own money , but from an exaction on the churches and paupers . 
 = = Reign = = 
 A later source , Johannes Aventinus , writes that Taksony fought in the Battle of Lechfeld on August 10 , 955 . There , future Holy Roman Emperor Otto I routed an 8 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Hungarian army . If this report is reliable , Taksony was one of the few Hungarian leaders to survive the battlefield . Modern historians , including Zoltán <unk> and Gyula Kristó , suggest that Fajsz abdicated in favor of Taksony around that time . After that battle the Hungarians ' plundering raids in Western Europe stopped , and they were forced to retreat from the lands between the Enns and <unk> rivers . However , the Hungarians continued their incursions into the Byzantine Empire until the 970s . 
 According to the Gesta Hungarorum , " a great host of Muslims " arrived in Hungary " from the land of <unk> " under Taksony . The contemporaneous Abraham ben Jacob also recorded the presence of Muslim merchants from Hungary in Prague in 965 . Anonymous also writes of the arrival of Pechenegs during Taksony 's reign ; he granted them " a land to dwell in the region of Kemej as far as the Tisza " . The only sign of a Hungarian connection with Western Europe under Taksony is a report by <unk> of Cremona . He writes about <unk> , whom Pope John XII consecrated bishop and " sent to the Hungarians in order to preach that they should attack " the Germans in 963 . However , there is no evidence that <unk> ever arrived in Hungary . Taksony arranged the marriage of his elder son Géza to Sarolt , daughter of Gyula of Transylvania , before his death during the early 970s . 
 = = Family = = 
 Taksony 's marriage to a woman " from the land of the Cumans " was arranged by his father , according to the Gesta Hungarorum . Although this reference to the Cumans is anachronistic , Gyula Kristó and other historians argue that the Gesta seems to have preserved the memory of the Turkic – Khazar , Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarian – origin of Taksony 's wife . The names of two of their sons ( Géza and Michael ) have been preserved . The following family tree presents Taksony 's ancestry and his offspring . 
 * Whether Menumorut is an actual or an invented person is debated by modern scholars . 
 * * A Khazar , Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarian woman 
 * * * Kristó writes that she may have been a member of the Rurik dynasty from Kievan <unk> 
 = Daybreaker ( Architects album ) = 
 Daybreaker is the fifth studio album by British metalcore band Architects . It was released on 28 May 2012 in the United Kingdom and most of Europe and on 5 June 2012 in the United States . It was the last album to feature guitarist Tim Hillier @-@ Brook , who left the band on 16 April 2012 . Daybreaker was co @-@ produced by the band and Ben Humphreys at Outhouse Studios in Reading , Berkshire , and used the same team and studio that were used for recording the band 's third studio album , Hollow Crown . Daybreaker was praised by music writers for its variety and marks Architects ' return to the technical sound of their earlier albums — especially Hollow Crown — while incorporating several melodic elements from their fourth album , The Here and Now . 
 The album debuted on charts in five countries but failed to appear on any mainstream top 40 . To promote it , Architects released five music videos , toured five continents ( 2012 's Almost World Tour was filmed for the documentary One Hundred Days ) and issued a re @-@ release of the album to commemorate their departure from Century Media Records . Daybreaker received a mixed to positive response from critics ; some praised its use of atmospheric elements and the return to a heavier style , while others criticised it as uninspired . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In the band 's fourth album , 2011 's The Here and Now , the band set out to mix their typical sounds with the music they were listening to at the time . The response was polarised : critics applauded the style while many fans criticised the album and accused the band of selling out . During the publicity for The Here and Now , the band praised it as a progression for them ; they did not want to reject an album they had just released . But their own lack of belief in the record and their growing concern that they were irrelevant started to severely affect the band 's confidence in themselves and their style . 
 Songs recorded during early demo sessions after The Here and Now became b @-@ sides for re @-@ releases . During this time , the band became certain they wished to make another " heavy " record . Tom Searle said , " some people might say we 've regressed , but I think we 've found our enthusiasm for playing heavy music again . I 'm excited again by what I 've come up with on guitar and lyrically it 's much more political and less personal . " The band started to write socially aware lyrics during the writing phase of Daybreaker ; vocalist Sam Carter said this was a result of the band touring the world and seeing things he felt were downplayed by the media . 
 The band recorded Daybreaker at Outhouse Studios in Reading , Berkshire , where they had previously recorded Ruin ( 2007 ) and Hollow Crown ( 2009 ) . Daybreaker had the same production and engineering team as did Hollow Crown ; John Mitchell acted as Daybreaker 's mixing engineer , and Mitchell described Daybreaker as " the album they should have made after Hollow Crown " . Tom Searle said that during the recording , he and Hillier @-@ Brook were constantly practising to perfect the highly technical guitar riffs . 
 Architects invited Jon Green from Deez Nuts , Oliver Sykes from Bring Me the Horizon , and Drew York from Stray from the Path to sing on the album . They invited Green because they believed his screaming vocals had a " Satanic " quality , while a collaboration with Sykes was something the band considered " long overdue " , since Carter had sung on Bring Me the Horizon 's 2008 album Suicide Season . On 16 April 2013 , shortly before Daybreaker 's release , Hillier @-@ Brook announced he would leave the band to pursue other projects . The band had thought Hiller @-@ Brook seemed unhappy while he was a member of Architects . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Daybreaker was first announced with a tentative release date of " summer " . The album was released in the United Kingdom on 28 May 2012 . In June 2013 , Century Media Records re @-@ released it in North America exclusively for the band 's performance at Warped Tour 2013 . This version includes their single " Black Blood " and covers of Bon Iver 's " Blood Bank " and Thrice 's " Of Dust and Nations " . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 In early November 2011 , Architects announced a plan to release " Devil 's Island " , the first song from the then @-@ unnamed follow @-@ up to their fourth studio album The Here and Now . They released it on 4 December 2011 , with a b @-@ side song called " Untitled " . Both the song and the accompanying music video reference rioting in England in 2011 , and the music video features clips of the riots . " Devil 's Island " was well received by critics for its return to the mathcore style of their third album , Hollow Crown . Thrash Hits said , " more @-@ melodic aspects of Architects are still very much on show " , that the song used " increased harsh vocals " and that the guitar tones were reminiscent of those on " Early Grave " , the opening track of Hollow Crown . J.J. <unk> of Bring The Noise said , " the track is sweeping and melodic in parts , whilst bursting with high tempo and visceral raw energy in others . " Tim <unk> , writing for Mind Equals Blown , praised the song 's lyrics , saying , " Architects has taken on an important issue in Britain today and made a song that questions humanity ; it may have a lasting effect on listeners that bands like Rise Against have been able to do , though they sound nothing alike " . The band supported the single 's release with a five @-@ day UK headline tour in December 2011 ; supporting acts were Deaf Havana , Tek @-@ One and Heights . 
 On 26 March 2012 Architects released a typography @-@ styled music video for " These Colours Don 't Run " . The music video was designed to " capture the madness that is America , be it good or bad " . Tom Searle wanted the video " [ to get ] people thinking and talking . And in the land of the free — you know nothing comes for free ! " The band 's third single " Alpha Omega " was released on 7 May 2012 after a radio debut on Daniel P. Carter 's BBC Radio 1 Rock Show podcast on 24 April 2012 . The music video for the song was posted on 10 May 2012 . On 12 December , Architects released another typography @-@ styled video for " Even If You Win , You 're Still a Rat " . 
 " Black Blood " was released on 3 June 2013 to promote the re @-@ released version of Daybreaker ; the single also had a typography @-@ style video . The song was released in conjunction with Architects ' performances at Warped Tour 2013 ; it was featured on the Warped Tour sampler that was released for free download on Amazon.com. The band initially wanted to record a music video for the song but they cancelled shooting because Tom Searle was afflicted with skin cancer . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Throughout March 2012 , Architects and Touché <unk> supported Rise Against on their European tour . Hillier @-@ Brook 's last tour with Architects was the April 2012 British tour with Rolo Tomassi and Stray from the Path . Between March and June that year — the last few months before the large tours in support of Daybreaker — Architects performed at several festivals ; the Swedish Konzerthaus <unk> in Lucerne , the La Boule Noire near Paris , <unk> Festival in Belgium , British touring festival Slam Dunk Festival in Leeds and Hatfield , and German festivals <unk> Festival , Traffic Jam Festival and <unk> Festival . Because Hillier @-@ Brook had announced he would leave Architects on 16 April 2012 after his final performance with the band at <unk> Festival , Josh Middleton of <unk> joined the band as touring guitarist . In late April , Architects supported The Devil Wears Prada and Whitechapel on a six @-@ day tour of South America . 
 Architects began promoting Daybreaker by playing several large European festivals throughout June and July 2013 , before embarking on tour legs in south @-@ east Asia , Australasia , North America and Europe , which were dubbed the The Daybreaker Almost World Tour . Most of the tour dates were published in July , the first leg of the tour began in August with 16 dates in Canada with support from <unk> / <unk> and <unk> . In September , the band headed to Asia to play dates in Hong Kong , Malaysia , Thailand , Singapore , Indonesia and China . In late September and early October , the band played 12 gigs in New Zealand and Australia supporting The Amity Affliction — it was Architects ' first tour of Australia since December 2010 . The final leg of the tour took place in Europe , with supporting bands While She Sleeps and Heights in mainland Europe , and Deez Nuts , Bury Tomorrow and The Acacia Strain in the UK . The tour 's British leg included a gig at UK Warped Tour , a one @-@ day festival headlined by Lostprophets and Bring Me the Horizon at Alexandra Palace in London on 10 November . A documentary about Architects ' touring experiences was titled " One Hundred Days : The Story Of Architects Almost World Tour " . 
 In 2013 , Architects expanded their promotional reach to the United States , a country they were not confident in . They were " tired of losing money " with their tours in the US and " [ the band ] were about ready to give up on America " . Starting in March , with opening act <unk> they supported Enter Shikari and then joined the American Warped Tour 2013 in June . The band also made single appearances in Europe at several summer festivals , including Download Festival 2013 in the UK . The band announced they would tour the US for the third time in 2013 in November and December with co @-@ headliners Protest The Hero and support from The Kindred and <unk> . They also announced plans to tour Australia before the end of 2013 . Architects ' final performance in support of Daybreaker and their first in India occurred at the <unk> culture festival on 11 January 2014 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 According to Andrew Kelham , Daybreaker is an " urgent and resurgent " record ; it has been identified by critics as metalcore , progressive metal , mathcore and post @-@ hardcore . Architects have been credited for fusing the intense technicality and metallic style of Hollow Crown with the " soaring vocals " and the much improved production of The Here and Now . The album is defined by a number of features , including a contrast of singing and extreme metal screaming , and melodic choruses complemented by " soaring " vocals , technical guitar work with palm muted breakdowns and the use of string instruments and piano to generate atmosphere . Daybreaker is noted for fusing influences from Architects ' previous two albums The Here And Now and Hollow Crown ; many reviewers have cited the album as a return to the band 's heavier , more technical roots . When he interviewed the band , Kelham wrote , " some will see Daybreaker as an apology , but it 's not . Others will view it as a hasty attempt to claw back the glories of third album Hollow Crown , but it 's not that either . It 's a collection of songs about moving on , growing up and making sense of what has come before " . 
 The record 's opening track is " The Bitter End " , an introduction built on skittish electronics , dark piano chords , xylophone notes , orchestral harmonies , haunting vocals and lyrics . The album then breaks into intense and heavy songs such as " high @-@ octane " tracks " Alpha Omega " and " These Colours Don 't Run " , which are full of " interesting rhythms and powerful melodies " . 
 The piano @-@ led track " Truth Be Told " gives the record a break from the chaos ; it explores post @-@ hardcore territory by following a " loop @-@ like rhythmic structure " . " Outsider Heart " has been compared to the math rock guitar playing of Meshuggah . " Devil 's Island " has been described as " a full @-@ body seizure set to electric guitar " . Architects began to experiment with elements such as the addition of string instruments and piano that would help generate atmosphere . This is evident in the melodic songs " Truth Be Told " , " Behind The Throne " and " Unbeliever " . " Behind the Throne " is an intense , atmospheric , ambient @-@ rock song with a grandiose , electro @-@ drummed backdrop . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Lyrically , the album discusses negative aspects of religion and society , and is seen as a " companion piece " to Enter Shikari ’ s A Flash Flood of Colour . Daybreaker 's lyrics were written by Carter and Tom Searle , who focused on political and " bigger picture " themes . Carter described " Devil 's Island " as " one of the hardest songs to write " because of the prominence of its theme of rioting . Searle , who focused on its lyrics , said , " With money firmly ingrained into our global society we really need to look to alternative solutions when problems like the riots occur because violence is never the solution " . Carter said " Black Blood " , which was included on the re @-@ release , is about the oil industry , society 's strong dependence on oil and the way " short term profit is the only thing these people think about , instead of the longevity of what we really could do and how we could stabilize what 's really going on in the world right now " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Daybreaker debuted at number one on the UK Rock & Metal Albums Chart and at number 42 on the UK Album Charts for selling 3 @,@ 208 copies . It became the highest @-@ charting release by Architects in their five @-@ album career ; The Here And Now had reached number 57 . The next week , the album fell to number 12 on the Rock & Metal , then to number 33 , and it left the chart the following week . The album debuted on the US Top Heatseekers chart at number 28 , selling 1 @,@ 200 copies in its first week . In Belgium , the album charted at number 182 , and in Germany at number 93 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Daybreaker received mixed to positive reviews from music critics . Some reviewers praised the band for texturing and progressing their sound , and for writing socio @-@ political lyrics . The album was criticised for sounding forced or formulaic . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , Daybreaker received an average score of 73 , based on 8 reviews , which indicates generally favourable reviews . 
 About.com writer Ryan Cooper praised the album , awarded it four stars out of five and said it " laughs in the face of those who think passionate realism , artistic integrity and mass commercial appeal are all mutually exclusive . Daybreaker balances all three with pretty much perfect dexterity . " Raziq Rauf writing for the BBC praised the band for the album 's musical diversity with its use of electronic songs like album @-@ opener " The Bitter End " and the band 's use of technicality and melody in songs . He summarised the album by saying , " Daybreaker is a great album . It ’ ll go down as one of Architects ’ finest works — it ’ s certainly their most well @-@ rounded release to date . " Big Cheese writer Paul Hagen praised the album 's lyrical content , saying , " Socially turbulent times seems to produce the best music and if bands can keep channelling genuine anger into their art , there are going to be some more really great albums released over the next few years " . 
 Canadian music magazine Exclaim ! published two reviews of Daybreaker . Bradley <unk> gave an unfavourable review of the album 's sound . He said although the tracks are " catchy and occasionally compelling , they 're essentially identical and formulaic , as the atmospheric build @-@ ups and soaring riffs make way for boring breakdowns . The metal @-@ influenced parts sound forced to appease fans disappointed with their last release , which results in Daybreaker sounding more like a business move than a work of art . " Scott Harms ' review was more favourable , praising the band 's return to a much more aggressive style . He credits it for incorporating influences from previous albums , saying " they have found a balance in which to return to the Searle brothers ' heavy sounds while carefully incorporating Sam Carter 's soaring clean vocals " . Harms summarised his review by saying , " as a whole , [ Daybreaker ] sounds epic " . Adam Rees of Metal Hammer rated the album 7 out of 10 , acknowledging the " abundant " inclusion of string instruments and piano and the way these instruments create atmosphere . <unk> ended his review by calling Daybreaker , " A brave and brilliant British metal album " . Canoe.ca author Darryl Sterdan awarded the album 2 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 , saying it " <unk> [ es ] their newfound sensitivity and maturity with plenty of good old @-@ fashioned techno @-@ metal frenzy and primal @-@ scream aggro . Pity they didn ’ t write memorable songs while they were at it . " 
 Alt Sounds writer Candice <unk> gave the album a rating of 94 % out of 100 % and praised the album 's lyrical content . She said the political nature of the album also uses emotional dramatisation to capture the listener , particularly in songs like " Devil 's Island " . <unk> states the song " drives remorse into the cold hearts of those involved . It ’ s a severe and poignant song that will stand the test of time . " Ryan Bird , in an otherwise positive review of Daybreaker , criticised it upon first hearing it ; he said it struggled to settle into any distinctive rhythm or groove . However , Bird concluded his review by saying , " but despite its relative ( and relatively few ) faults . ' Daybreaker ' represents a victory for a band who some had once been so eager to write off , suggesting that maybe — just maybe — they 've got what it takes to bring both sides [ of their fanbase ] together " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Daybreaker featured on several lists of best albums of 2012 , including Rock Sounds top 50 at number 48 , Kerrang ! ' s 101 at number 36 and <unk> 's at number 23 out of 25 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music composed by Architects . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Luis Walter Alvarez = 
 Luis Walter Alvarez ( June 13 , 1911 – September 1 , 1988 ) was an American experimental physicist , inventor , and professor who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1968 . The American Journal of Physics commented , " Luis Alvarez was one of the most brilliant and productive experimental physicists of the twentieth century . " 
 After receiving his PhD from the University of Chicago in 1936 , Alvarez went to work for Ernest Lawrence at the Radiation Laboratory at the University of California in Berkeley . Alvarez devised a set of experiments to observe K @-@ electron capture in radioactive nuclei , predicted by the beta decay theory but never observed . He produced tritium using the cyclotron and measured its lifetime . In collaboration with Felix Bloch , he measured the magnetic moment of the neutron . 
 In 1940 Alvarez joined the MIT Radiation Laboratory , where he contributed to a number of World War II radar projects , from early improvements to Identification Friend or Foe ( IFF ) radar beacons , now called transponders , to a system known as VIXEN for preventing enemy submarines from realizing that they had been found by the new airborne microwave radars . Enemy submarines would wait until the radar signal was getting strong and then submerge , escaping attack . But VIXEN transmitted a radar signal whose strength was the cube of the distance to the submarine so that as they approached the sub , the signal — as measured by the sub — got progressively weaker , and the sub assumed the plane was getting farther away and didn 't submerge . The radar system for which Alvarez is best known and which has played a major role in aviation , most particularly in the post war Berlin airlift , was Ground Controlled Approach ( GCA ) . Alvarez spent a few months at the University of Chicago working on nuclear reactors for Enrico Fermi before coming to Los Alamos to work for Robert Oppenheimer on the Manhattan project . Alvarez worked on the design of explosive lenses , and the development of exploding @-@ bridgewire detonators . As a member of Project Alberta , he observed the Trinity nuclear test from a B @-@ 29 Superfortress , and later the bombing of Hiroshima from the B @-@ 29 The Great Artiste . 
 After the war Alvarez was involved in the design of a liquid hydrogen bubble chamber that allowed his team to take millions of photographs of particle interactions , develop complex computer systems to measure and analyze these interactions , and discover entire families of new particles and resonance states . This work resulted in his being awarded the Nobel Prize in 1968 . He was involved in a project to x @-@ ray the Egyptian pyramids to search for unknown chambers . With his son , geologist Walter Alvarez , he developed the Alvarez hypothesis which proposes that the extinction event that wiped out the dinosaurs was the result of an asteroid impact . 
 Alvarez was a member of the JASON Defense Advisory Group , the Bohemian Club , and the Republican Party . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Luis Walter Alvarez was born in San Francisco on June 13 , 1911 , the second child and oldest son of Walter C. Alvarez , a physician , and his wife Harriet née Smyth , and a grandson of Luis F. Alvarez , a physician who lived for a time in Spain , then Cuba , and finally the United States , who found a better method for diagnosing macular leprosy . He had an older sister , Gladys , a younger brother , Bob , and a younger sister , Bernice . His aunt , Mabel Alvarez , was a California artist specializing in oil painting . 
 He attended Madison School in San Francisco from 1918 to 1924 , and then San Francisco Polytechnic High School . In 1926 , his father became a researcher at the Mayo Clinic , and the family moved to Rochester , Minnesota , where Alvarez attended Rochester High School . He had always expected to attend the University of California , but at the urging of his teachers at Rochester , he instead went to the University of Chicago , where he received his bachelor 's degree in 1932 , his master 's degree in 1934 , and his PhD in 1936 . As an undergraduate , he belonged to the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity . As a postgraduate he moved to Gamma Alpha . 
 In 1932 , as a graduate student at Chicago , he discovered physics there and had the rare opportunity to use the equipment of legendary physicist Albert A. Michelson . Alvarez also constructed an apparatus of Geiger counter tubes arranged as a cosmic ray telescope , and under the aegis of his faculty advisor Arthur Compton , conducted an experiment in Mexico City to measure the so @-@ called East – West effect of cosmic rays . Observing more incoming radiation from the west , Alvarez concluded that primary cosmic rays were positively charged . Compton submitted the resulting paper to the Physical Review , with Alvarez 's name at the top . 
 He was an agnostic . 
 = = Early work = = 
 Alvarez 's sister , Gladys , worked for Ernest Lawrence as a part @-@ time secretary , and mentioned Alvarez to Lawrence . Lawrence then invited Alvarez to tour the Century of Progress exhibition in Chicago with him . After he completed his oral exams in 1936 , Alvarez , now engaged to be married to Geraldine Smithwick , asked his sister to see if Lawrence had any jobs available at the Radiation Laboratory . A telegram soon arrived from Gladys with a job offer from Lawrence . This started a long association with the University of California , Berkeley . Alvarez and Smithwick were married in one of the chapels at the University of Chicago and then headed for California . They had two children , Walter and Jean . They were divorced in 1957 . On December 28 , 1958 , he married Janet L. Landis , and had two more children , Donald and Helen . 
 At the Radiation Laboratory he worked with Lawrence 's experimental team , which was supported by a group of theoretical physicists headed by Robert Oppenheimer . Alvarez devised a set of experiments to observe K @-@ electron capture in radioactive nuclei , predicted by the beta decay theory but never observed . Using magnets to sweep aside the positrons and electrons emanating from his radioactive sources , he designed a special purpose Geiger counter to detect only the " soft " X @-@ rays coming from K capture . He published his results in the Physical Review in 1937 . 
 When deuterium ( hydrogen @-@ 2 ) is bombarded with deuterium , the fusion reaction yields either tritium ( hydrogen @-@ 3 ) plus a proton or helium @-@ 3 plus a neutron ( 2H + 2H → 3H + p or 3He + n ) . This is one of the most basic fusion reactions , and the foundation of the hydrogen bomb and the current research on controlled nuclear fusion . At that time the stability of these two reaction products was unknown , but based on existing theories Hans Bethe thought that tritium would be stable and helium @-@ 3 unstable . Alvarez proved the reverse by using his knowledge of the details of the 60 @-@ inch cyclotron operation . He tuned the machine to accelerate doubly ionized helium @-@ 3 nuclei and was able to get a beam of accelerated ions , thus using the cyclotron as a kind of super mass spectrometer . As the accelerated helium came from deep gas wells where it had been for millions of years , the helium @-@ 3 component had to be stable . Afterwards Alvarez produced the radioactive tritium using the cyclotron and the 2H + 2H reaction and measured its lifetime . 
 In 1938 , again using his knowledge of the cyclotron and inventing what are now known as time @-@ of @-@ flight techniques , Alvarez created a mono @-@ energetic beam of thermal neutrons . With this he began a long series of experiments , collaborating with Felix Bloch , to measure the magnetic moment of the neutron . Their result of μ0 = 1 @.@ 93 ± 0 @.@ 02 <unk> , published in 1940 , was a major advance over earlier work . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Radiation Laboratory = = = 
 The British Tizard Mission to the United States in 1940 demonstrated to leading American scientists the successful application of the cavity magnetron to produce short wavelength pulsed radar . The National Defense Research Committee , established only months earlier by President Franklin Roosevelt , created a central national laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) for the purpose of developing military applications of microwave radar . Lawrence immediately recruited his best " <unk> " , among them Alvarez , who joined this new laboratory , known as the Radiation Laboratory , on November 11 , 1940 . Alvarez contributed to a number of radar projects , from early improvements to Identification Friend or Foe ( IFF ) radar beacons , now called transponders , to a system known as VIXEN for preventing enemy submarines from realizing that they had been found by the new airborne microwave radars . 
 One of the first projects was to build equipment to transition from the British long @-@ wave radar to the new microwave centimeter @-@ band radar made possible by the cavity magnetron . In working on the Microwave Early Warning system ( <unk> ) , Alvarez invented a linear dipole array antenna that not only suppressed the unwanted side lobes of the radiation field , but also could be electronically scanned without the need for mechanical scanning . This was the first microwave phased @-@ array antenna , and Alvarez used it not only in <unk> but in two additional radar systems . The antenna enabled the Eagle precision bombing radar to support precision bombing in bad weather or through clouds . It was completed rather late in the war ; although a number of B @-@ 29s were equipped with Eagle and it worked well , it came too late to make much difference . 
 The radar system for which Alvarez is best known and which has played a major role in aviation , most particularly in the post war Berlin airlift , was Ground Controlled Approach ( GCA ) . Using Alvarez 's dipole antenna to achieve a very high angular resolution , GCA allows ground @-@ based radar operators watching special precision displays to guide a landing airplane to the runway by transmitting verbal commands to the pilot . The system was simple , direct , and worked well , even with previously untrained pilots . It was so successful that the military continued to use it for many years after the war , and it was still in use in some countries in the 1980s . Alvarez was awarded the National Aeronautic Association 's Collier Trophy in 1945 " for his conspicuous and outstanding initiative in the concept and development of the Ground Control Approach system for safe landing of aircraft under all weather and traffic conditions " . 
 Alvarez spent the summer of 1943 in England testing GCA , landing planes returning from battle in bad weather , and also training the British in the use of the system . While there he encountered the young Arthur C. Clarke , who was an RAF radar technician . Clarke subsequently used his experiences at the radar research station as the basis for his novel Glide Path , which contains a thinly disguised version of Alvarez . Clarke and Alvarez developed a long @-@ term friendship . 
 = = = Manhattan Project = = = 
 In the fall of 1943 , Alvarez returned to the United States with an offer from Robert Oppenheimer to work at Los Alamos on the Manhattan project . But Oppenheimer suggested that he first spend a few months at the University of Chicago working with Enrico Fermi before coming to Los Alamos . During these months , General Leslie Groves asked Alvarez to think of a way that the US could find out if the Germans were operating any nuclear reactors , and , if so , where they were . Alvarez suggested that an airplane could carry a system to detect the radioactive gases that a reactor produces , particularly xenon 133 . The equipment did fly over Germany , but detected no radioactive xenon because the Germans had not built a reactor capable of a chain reaction . This was the first idea of monitoring fission products for intelligence gathering . It would become extremely important after the war . 
 As a result of his radar work and the few months spent with Fermi , Alvarez arrived at Los Alamos in the spring of 1944 , later than many of his contemporaries . The work on the " Little Boy " ( a uranium bomb ) was far along so Alvarez became involved in the design of the " Fat Man " ( a plutonium bomb ) . The technique used for uranium , that of forcing the two sub @-@ critical masses together using a type of gun , would not work with plutonium because the high level of background spontaneous neutrons would cause fissions as soon as the two parts approached each other , so heat and expansion would force the system apart before much energy has been released . It was decided to use a nearly critical sphere of plutonium and compress it quickly by explosives into a much smaller and denser core , a technical challenge at the time . 
 To create the symmetrical implosion required to compress the plutonium core to the required density , thirty two explosive charges were to be simultaneously detonated around the spherical core . Using conventional explosive techniques with blasting caps , progress towards achieving simultaneity to within a small fraction of a microsecond was discouraging . Alvarez directed his graduate student , Lawrence H. Johnston , to use a large capacitor to deliver a high voltage charge directly to each explosive lens , replacing blasting caps with exploding @-@ bridgewire detonators . The exploding wire detonated the thirty two charges to within a few tenths of a microsecond . The invention was critical to the success of the implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon . He also supervised the RaLa Experiments . Alvarez later wrote that : 
 With modern weapons @-@ grade uranium , the background neutron rate is so low that terrorists , if they had such material , would have a good chance of setting off a high @-@ yield explosion simply by dropping one half of the material onto the other half . Most people seem unaware that if separated U @-@ 235 is at hand , it 's a trivial job to set off a nuclear explosion , whereas if only plutonium is available , making it explode is the most difficult technical job I know . 
 Again working with Johnston , Alvarez 's last task for the Manhattan Project was to develop a set of calibrated microphone / transmitters to be parachuted from an aircraft to measure the strength of the blast wave from the atomic explosion , so as to allow the scientists to calculate the bomb 's energy . He observed the Trinity nuclear test from a B @-@ 29 Superfortress that also carried fellow Project Alberta members Harold Agnew and Deak Parsons . 
 Flying in the B @-@ 29 Superfortress The Great Artiste in formation with the Enola Gay , Alvarez and Johnston measured the blast effect of the Little Boy bomb which was dropped on Hiroshima . A few days later , again flying in The Great Artiste , Johnston used the same equipment to measure the strength of the Nagasaki explosion . 
 = = Bubble chamber = = 
 Returning to the University of California as a full professor , Alvarez had many ideas about how to use his wartime radar knowledge to improve particle accelerators . Though some of these were to bear fruit , the " big idea " of this time would come from Edwin McMillan with his concept of phase stability which led to the <unk> . Refining and extending this concept , the Lawrence team would build the world 's then @-@ largest proton accelerator , the Bevatron , which began operating in 1954 . Though the Bevatron could produce copious amounts of interesting particles , particularly in secondary collisions , these complex interactions were hard to detect and analyze at the time . 
 Seizing upon a new development to visualize particle tracks , created by Donald Glaser and known as a bubble chamber , Alvarez realized the device was just what was needed , if only it could be made to function with liquid hydrogen . Hydrogen nuclei , which are protons , made the simplest and most desirable target for interactions with the particles produced by the Bevatron . He began a development program to build a series of small chambers , and championed the device to Ernest Lawrence . 
 The Glaser device was a small glass cylinder ( 1 cm × 2 cm ) filled with ether . By suddenly reducing the pressure in the device , the liquid could be placed into a temporary superheated state , which would boil along the disturbed track of a particle passing through . Glaser was able to maintain the superheated state for a few seconds before spontaneous boiling took place . The Alvarez team built chambers of 1 @.@ 5 in , 2 @.@ 5 in , 4 in , 10 in , and 15 in using liquid hydrogen , and constructed of metal with glass windows , so that the tracks could be photographed . The chamber could be cycled in synchronization with the accelerator beam , a picture could be taken , and the chamber <unk> in time for the next beam cycle . 
 This program built a liquid hydrogen bubble chamber almost 7 feet ( 2 meters ) long , employed dozens of physicists and graduate students together with hundreds of engineers and technicians , took millions of photographs of particle interactions , developed computer systems to measure and analyze the interactions , and discovered families of new particles and resonance states . This work resulted in the Nobel Prize in Physics for Alvarez in 1968 , " For his decisive contributions to elementary particle physics , in particular the discovery of a large number of resonant states , made possible through his development of the technique of using hydrogen bubble chambers and data analysis . " 
 = = Scientific detective = = 
 In 1964 Alvarez proposed what became known as the High Altitude Particle Physics Experiment ( <unk> ) , originally conceived as a large superconducting magnet carried to high altitude by a balloon in order to study extremely high @-@ energy particle interactions . In time the focus of the experiment changed toward the study of cosmology and the role of both particles and radiation in the early universe . This work was a large effort , carrying detectors aloft with high @-@ altitude balloon flights and high @-@ flying U @-@ 2 aircraft , and an early precursor of the COBE satellite @-@ born experiments on the cosmic background radiation ( which resulted in the award of the 2006 Nobel Prize , shared by George Smoot and John Mather . ) 
 Alvarez proposed in 1965 to search the Egyptian pyramids for unknown chambers . Using naturally occurring cosmic rays , his scheme was to place spark chambers , standard equipment in the high @-@ energy particle physics of this time , beneath the second pyramid of <unk> in a known chamber . By measuring the counting rate of the cosmic rays in different directions the detector would reveal the existence of any void in the overlaying rock structure . 
 Alvarez assembled a team of physicists and archeologists from the United States and Egypt , the recording equipment was constructed and the experiment carried out , though it was interrupted by the 1967 Six @-@ Day War . <unk> after the war , the effort continued , recording and analyzing the penetrating cosmic rays until 1969 when Alvarez reported to the American Physical Society that no chambers had been found in the 19 % of the pyramid surveyed . 
 In November 1966 Life published a series of photographs from the film that Abraham Zapruder took of the Kennedy assassination . Alvarez , an expert in optics and <unk> , became intrigued by the pictures and began to study what could be learned from the film . Alvarez demonstrated both in theory and experiment that the backward snap of the President 's head was fully consistent with his being shot from behind . He also investigated the timing of the gunshots and the shockwave which disturbed the camera , and the speed of the camera , pointing out a number of things which the FBI <unk> either overlooked or got wrong . He produced a paper intended as a tutorial , with informal advice for the physicist intent on arriving at the truth . 
 = = Dinosaur extinction = = 
 In 1980 Alvarez and his son , geologist Walter Alvarez , along with nuclear chemists Frank Asaro and Helen Michel , " uncovered a calamity that literally shook the Earth and is one of the great discoveries about Earth 's history " . 
 Walter Alvarez was doing geologic research in central Italy during the 1970s on the walls of a gorge whose limestone layers included strata both above and below the Cretaceous – Paleogene boundary , also called the K @-@ T boundary , the boundary between those two geologic periods . Exactly at the boundary is a layer of clay . Walter told his father that the layer marked where the dinosaurs and much else became extinct and that nobody knew why , or what the clay was about — it was a big mystery and he intended to solve it . 
 Alvarez had access to the nuclear chemists at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and was able to work with Frank Asaro and Helen Michel , who used the technique of neutron activation analysis . In 1980 , Alvarez , Alvarez , Asaro , and Michel published a seminal paper proposing an extraterrestrial cause for the Cretaceous @-@ Paleogene extinction ( then called the Cretaceous @-@ Tertiary extinction ) . In the years following the publication of their article , the clay was also found to contain soot , glassy spherules , shocked quartz crystals , microscopic diamonds , and rare minerals formed only under conditions of great temperature and pressure . 
 Publication of the 1980 paper brought criticism from the geologic community , and an often acrimonious scientific debate ensued . Ten years later , and after Alvarez 's death , evidence of a large impact crater called Chicxulub was found off the coast of Mexico , providing support for the theory . Other researchers later found that the end @-@ Cretaceous extinction of the dinosaurs may have occurred rapidly in geologic terms , over thousands of years , rather than millions of years as had previously been supposed . Others continue to study alternative extinction causes such as increased volcanism , particularly the massive Deccan Traps eruptions that occurred around the same time , and climate change , checking against the fossil record . However , on March 4 , 2010 , a panel of 41 scientists agreed that the Chicxulub asteroid impact triggered the mass extinction . 
 = = Aviation = = 
 In his autobiography , Alvarez said , " I think of myself as having had two separate careers , one in science and one in aviation . I 've found the two almost equally rewarding . " An important contributor to this was his enjoyment of flying . He learned to fly in 1933 , later earning instrument and multi @-@ engine ratings . Over the next 50 years he accumulated over 1000 hours of flight time , most of it as pilot in command . He said , " I found few activities as satisfying as being pilot in command with responsibility for my passengers ' lives . " 
 Alvarez made numerous professional contributions to aviation . During World War II he led the development of multiple aviation @-@ related technologies . Several of his projects are described above , including Ground Controlled Approach ( GCA ) for which he was awarded the Collier Trophy in 1945 . He also held the basic patent for the radar transponder , for which he assigned rights to the U.S. government for $ 1 . 
 Later in his career Alvarez served on multiple high level advisory committees related to civilian and military aviation . These included a Federal Aviation Administration task group on future air navigation and air traffic control systems , the President 's Science Advisory Committee Military Aircraft Panel , and a committee studying how the scientific community could help improve the United States ' capabilities for fighting a nonnuclear war . 
 Alvarez 's aviation responsibilities led to many adventures . For example , while working on GCA he became the first civilian to fly a low approach with his view outside the cockpit obstructed . He also flew many military aircraft from the co @-@ pilot 's seat , including a B @-@ 29 Superfortress and a Lockheed F @-@ 104 Starfighter . In addition , he survived a crash during World War II as a passenger in a Miles Master . 
 = = Death = = 
 Alvarez died of cancer on September 1 , 1988 . Alvarez died of complications from a succession of recent operations for cancer of the esophagus . He was cremated , and his ashes were scattered over Monterey Bay . His papers are in The Bancroft Library at the University of California , Berkeley . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Fellow of the American Physical Society ( 1939 ) and President ( 1969 ) 
 Collier Trophy of the National Aeronautics Association ( 1946 ) 
 Member of the National Academy of Science ( 1947 ) 
 Medal for Merit ( 1947 ) 
 Fellow of the American Philosophical Society ( 1953 ) 
 Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences ( 1958 ) 
 California Scientist of the Year ( 1960 ) 
 Albert Einstein Award ( 1961 ) 
 National Medal of Science ( 1963 ) 
 Michelson Award ( 1965 ) 
 Nobel Prize in Physics ( 1968 ) 
 Member of the National Academy of Engineering ( 1969 ) 
 University of Chicago Alumni Medal ( 1978 ) 
 National Inventors Hall of Fame ( 1978 ) 
 Enrico Fermi award of the US Department of Energy ( 1987 ) 
 IEEE Honorary Membership ( 1988 ) 
 The Boy Scouts of America named their Cub Scout <unk> award for Alvarez ( 2012 ) 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 " Berkeley Proton Linear Accelerator , " Radiation Laboratory , University of California , Berkeley ( October 13 , 1953 ) . 
 " High @-@ energy Physics with Hydrogen Bubble Chambers , " Radiation Laboratory , University of California , Berkeley ( March 7 , 1958 ) . 
 " LRL 25 @-@ inch Bubble Chamber , " Lawrence Radiation Laboratory , University of California , Berkeley ( July 8 , 1964 ) . 
 " Two @-@ element variable @-@ power spherical lens , " Patent <unk> ( December 1964 ) 
 " Early Days of Accelerator Mass Spectrometry , " Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory ( May 1981 ) . 
 " The Hydrogen Bubble Chamber and the Strange Resonances , " Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory ( June 1985 ) . 
 " History of Proton Linear Accelerators , " Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory ( Jan. 1987 ) . 
 = = Patents = = 
 Golf training device 
 <unk> Reactor 
 Optical range finder with variable angle exponential prism 
 Two @-@ element variable @-@ power spherical lens 
 Variable @-@ power lens and system 
 Subatomic particle detector with liquid electron multiplication medium 
 Method of making <unk> optical element matrix 
 Optical element of reduced thickness 
 Method of forming an optical element of reduced thickness 
 = Long Ya Men = 
 Long Ya Men ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) or Dragon 's Teeth Gate , is the name given to a craggy granite outcrop that formerly stood at the gateway to Keppel Harbour in Singapore . The rocky outcrop served as navigational aids to ancient mariners sailing through the swift waters of the narrow channel between them , but was subsequently destroyed by the British in 1848 to widen the channel for larger vessels to sail through . In 2005 , a symbolic replica was erected by the Singapore government near its original site to mark the role it played in Singapore 's maritime history . 
 Long Ya Men was documented in Wang Dayuan 's travelogue <unk> <unk> , and in the Mao Kun navigational map historical maritime annal Wubei Zhi said to date from the voyages of Ming dynasty 's Admiral Zheng He . Long Ya Men in the map was also used to refer to the strait between Sentosa island and Labrador Point , and named after a pinnacle of stone that was called Batu Berlayar , which means “ Sail Rock ” in Malay . Another suggestion is that it refers to the Singapore Main Strait south of Pulau <unk> . The Long Ya Men 's unique features was said to have assisted Zheng He in navigating the waters around Singapore during his seven maritime voyages to the west between 1405 and 1433 AD . 
 = = History = = 
 Historically the rocky outcrop was known locally by the Malays in earlier times as " Batu Berlayar " ( " Sailing Rock " ) near the present site of Labrador Park , off Pasir Panjang Road . Another rock outcrop used to stand on the opposite shore of Tanjong <unk> on Sentosa Island . These two rock outcrops once formed a gateway at the western entrance to Keppel Harbour . British sailors named the more prominent Batu Berlayar , " Lot 's Wife " in reference to the biblical story of the wife of Abraham 's nephew . She was transformed into a pillar of salt when she disobeyed divine orders not to look back at the destruction of Sodom while fleeing from the city . 
 In the 14th century , the ancient mariner and trader Wang Dayuan , is said to have sailed through this passageway . In his travelogue , he recorded that the Fujian mariners knew about these two rock outcrops as Long Ya Men , because they reminded them of the two pegs at the bow of their ships . These two pegs were known to the mariners as " Dragon 's Teeth " . 
 The Keppel passageway was used by Asian and early European sailors and traders for hundreds of years to sail past Singapore . Between 1405 and 1433 , Zheng He made seven voyages to more than 30 countries , travelling in fleets of up to 300 ships to the South Pacific , Indian Ocean , Persian Gulf and Africa . The admiral travelled on the order of the Chinese Emperor to establish trade relations with countries west of China . He is believed to have sailed through the waters off Labrador Park in Pasir Panjang , though whether he landed in Singapore is uncertain . In the 17th century , the passageway was abandoned in favour of the wider and more open Main Straits , that lies south of Pulau <unk> , where Raffles Lighthouse stands today . 
 Sir Stamford Raffles of the British East India Company did not know of the " Lot 's Wife " , or the deep water harbour it led to when he landed in Singapore in January , 1819 . William Farquhar , the first British Resident and Commandant of Singapore , wrote to Raffles on 2 September 1819 that he had founded a new harbour west of the settlement . The two rock outcrops were subsequently blown up by the Straits Settlements Surveyor , John Thomson , in August 1848 in order to widen the entrance to the new harbour . 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 In July 2005 , a 6m high stone replica of Long Ya Men was put up near its original site by a joint collaboration involving the Singapore Tourism Board , the Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore and the National Parks Board . This was part of a three @-@ month @-@ long celebration of the 600th anniversary of Zheng He 's maiden voyage , which began in Nanjing , China . A storyboard telling Long Ya Men 's significance to Singapore and Zheng He 's story , was also put up next to the replica . 
 The authorities had initially planned for the replica to replace the red <unk> Beacon , but the Singapore Heritage Society was against the decision , saying the beacon was itself a heritage site and should not be destroyed because the beacon has been at Labrador Park since the end of World War II . The replica was finally built just meters away from the beacon . The authorities hope the symbolic replica can serve to preserve the memory of Long Ya Men , which is an important part of Singapore ’ s maritime history , for future generations and visitors familiar with the historical voyages of Zheng He . 
 = 2011 Astana season = 
 The 2011 season for the Astana cycling team began in January at the Tour Down Under and ended in October at the Tour of Hainan . As a UCI ProTeam , they were automatically invited and obligated to send a squad to every event in the UCI World Tour . In a change from the 2010 season , the team 's manager was Giuseppe Martinelli , replacing Yvon <unk> . There was also a major change in ridership , as three @-@ time Tour de France champion Alberto Contador departed for Saxo Bank – SunGard , while his doping case remains unresolved . Three Spanish domestiques followed Contador to Saxo Bank – SunGard , while two climbing talents who spent the previous season with Liquigas – Doimo , Roman Kreuziger and Robert Kišerlovski , were notable additions to the team for 2011 . 
 Alexander Vinokourov was the team 's leader alongside Kreuziger . Vinokourov stated before the season that 2011 would likely be his last year as a professional rider . He sustained a serious crash at the Tour de France . He broke his right femur and retired from the sport for a time , but he eventually went back on this decision and his decision from before the season , opting instead to return for the 2012 season . 
 True to their longtime identity as a stage racing team , all of Astana 's 2011 victories came in stage races . They had a much lesser presence at the Grand Tours than they did when Contador rode for them , achieving just one stage win and sixth overall as their best placing , both from the Giro d 'Italia . They also took stage wins at seven other races . 
 = = 2011 roster = = 
 Ages as of January 1 , 2011 . 
 = = One @-@ day races = = 
 = = = Spring classics = = = 
 The squad was not competitive at the first three monument races in the spring season , coming just 66th in Milan – San Remo , 35th at the Tour of Flanders , and 18th at Paris – Roubaix . Kišerlovski and Clarke took seventh places at two early @-@ season classics , respectively the Classica Sarda and the Giro del Friuli , the latter a race run in such difficult conditions that only 25 riders finished . 
 The team 's two leaders Vinokourov and Kreuziger rode strongly at the Ardennes classics . Vinokourov took fourth in La Flèche Wallonne , six seconds back of winner Philippe Gilbert . Kreuziger was also fourth , at the fourth monument Liège – Bastogne – Liège , and also back of Gilbert as race winner . The team also sent squads to the E3 Prijs Vlaanderen – Harelbeke , Gent @-@ Wevelgem , and the Amstel Gold Race , but finished distantly in each , 16th , 66th , and 17th respectively . 
 = = = Fall races = = = 
 Gasparotto turned in a fourth place ride at Tre Valli <unk> , which matched the team 's best single @-@ day result of the season , along with the performances of Kreuziger and Vinokourov from earlier in the season . Clarke provided two of the team 's highest finishes in the later @-@ season single day races , coming fifth at the Coppa Ugo Agostoni and seventh at Vattenfall Cyclassics . Clarke also turned in a good ride at the Grand Prix Cycliste de Québec , finishing tenth . 
 The team also sent squads to the Clásica de San Sebastián , the GP Ouest @-@ France , the Grand Prix Cycliste de Montréal , the Coppa Sabatini , the Giro dell 'Emilia , the GP Bruno Beghelli , the Giro di Lombardia , the Chrono des Nations , and the Japan Cup , but finished no higher than 17th in any of these races . 
 = = Stage races = = 
 Di Gregorio took the team 's first win of the season , at Paris – Nice , winning a windy , rainy stage 7 into Sophia Antipolis . Vinokourov had targeted this stage , since it fell on the anniversary of the death of his friend Andrei <unk> in the 2003 race . It was also during this stage that Kiserlovski slid and crashed on a slippery downhill , and skidded underneath a parked truck . It took several minutes to safely extricate him , and after needing eight stitches to sew up his wounds , he did not start the final stage . Vinokourov won stage 3 of the Tour of the Basque Country with a 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) long solo attack . Kreuziger took his first win of the season at the Giro del Trentino , winning the fourth and final stage . He also was first over the day 's last two climbs , which gave him enough points to win the mountains classification . The squad also won the teams classification . 
 Later in April , the team took two wins at two concurrent events . In stage 2 at the Presidential Cycling Tour of Turkey , Valentin took his first win of the season in a field sprint , besting Alessandro Petacchi at the finish . The victory made the younger Iglinsky the race leader for a day before he ceded it to Colnago – CSF Inox 's Manuel Belletti , winner of stage 3 . Later in the race , Zeits made a fortunate breakaway which took nearly 12 minutes over the rest of the peloton . The result put him fourth in the overall standings , 20 seconds clear of the man in fifth , but 10 minutes ahead of the man in sixth . The next day , the Astana squad worked hard to get another breakaway containing Zeits to the finish line first , which resulted him in moving up to second overall . He retained this position to the conclusion of the race . At the Tour de Romandie , Vinokourov won stage 3 . He , Mickaël Cherel , and Tony Martin had slipped off the front of the field when the day 's principal breakaway was caught , and stayed away to allow a three @-@ up sprint decide the winner , though they had no appreciable time gap over the fast @-@ charging peloton at the finish . Cherel protested the results , feeling that Vinokourov 's sprint had illegally impeded him , but race officials upheld the order of finish on the road . Vinokourov felt after this result that he was a strong contender for the overall crown , sitting 32 seconds back with an individual time trial , where pending race leader Pavel Brutt struggles , still to race . He finished the race third , losing time to race champion Cadel Evans in that time trial . He later said he was satisfied with this performance . However , at this race , Kiserlovski was revealed to have worse injuries from his Paris – Nice crash than first thought . An MRI taken after the Romandie prologue , due to the Croatian suffering from severe shoulder pain , revealed that he had a cracked vertebra . He abandoned the race with hopes of recovering in time for the Giro d 'Italia . Vinokourov had a successful Critérium du Dauphiné . He finished second in the prologue time trial and assumed the race lead the next day on the first road race stage . He held the jersey for a second day before losing it in the stage 3 time trial , a considerably longer course than the prologue . He finished a distant 14th , having difficulty on the technical descents on the course , and slipped to fourth overall . When Janez Brajkovič faltered in stage 6 , Vinokourov re @-@ assumed a podium position , third , and kept it to the race 's conclusion the next day . 
 The team had a very successful Tour of Austria , a race concurrent to the Tour de France . Kessiakoff rode to a strong stage 2 win on a summit finish at <unk> Horn . On a day where the composition of the leading group changed several times over rolling terrain , Kessiakoff was the first rider to attack out of the main peloton and surpassed all riders ahead of him to finish alone atop the 1 @,@ 670 m ( 5 @,@ 480 ft ) summit . A former mountain bike veteran , this solo ride was Kessiakoff 's first career road win in his third year in the discipline . The result gave him a lead of a minute and 18 seconds in the overall standings . After most of the riders finished together on the next four stages , Kessiakoff built his lead even higher in the stage 7 time trial . He was fifth , ceding time only to riders well behind him in the overall standings , extending his lead to two and a half minutes . He easily won the race overall the next day , finishing safely in the peloton in an uncomplicated sprinters ' stage . After <unk> won the youth award at the inaugural Giro di Padania , Valentin Iglinsky provided for the team 's final wins of 2011 at the Tour of Hainan . In a race that actually counted toward the 2012 Asia tour standings , Iglinsky , the race 's defending champion , won stage 8 and subsequently the overall crown the next day . 
 The team also sent squads to the Tour Down Under , the Tour of Qatar , the Tour of Oman , the Volta ao Algarve , the Giro di Sardegna , Tirreno – Adriatico , the Volta a Catalunya , the Tour of Belgium , the Tour de Suisse , the Eneco Tour , and the Tour de l 'Ain , but did not have a stage win , classification win , or podium finish in any of them . 
 = = Grand Tours = = 
 = = = Giro d 'Italia = = = 
 Astana 's leader for the Giro was Kreuziger . Though he had ridden six previous Grand Tours and finished in the top ten at the Tour de France twice , this was his first time riding the Giro , as his former team Liquigas – Doimo always inevitably had someone else in mind for leadership at the Italian tour . It was also the first time Kreuziger had ridden as the unquestioned leader in a Grand Tour . Both leadership and access to the Giro were central to Kreuziger 's signing with Astana in the offseason . A team of experienced domestiques , along with Kiserlovski , the tenth place finisher at the 2010 Giro d 'Italia , were named to ride in support . Kreuziger 's goal was to finish on the podium . 
 The team began the Giro with a poor team time trial , finishing 17th of 23 teams , immediately putting Kreuziger 50 seconds off the race lead . Kreuziger made each of the day 's selections in stage 5 , a hilly stage with numerous sectors of unpaved or ' white ' roads , and finished with the race 's top riders eight seconds back of the day 's winner and new race leader Pieter Weening . This result moved Kreuziger up 42 places , from 70th to 18th , even though his time gap to the race leader remained close to the same . Kreuziger took one of the time bonuses two days later on Montevergine di Mercogliano , as the race 's top riders narrowly missed taking back the last breakaway rider Bart De Clercq on the Giro 's first summit finish . While the Belgian won the stage , Kreuziger 's third @-@ place ride moved him further up the classification , to 14th . Kreuziger , like the rest of the field , was greatly outclassed by Alberto Contador on Mount Etna in stage 9 , but despite finishing 50 seconds back he vaulted even higher in the standings , entering the top ten overall for the first time , at seventh . He also gained the white jersey for best young rider after this stage . He held that position in stage 11 , which unexpectedly became a stage for the overall classification riders despite Contador 's hints that he may cede his pink jersey on this day . With Michele Scarponi 's Lampre – ISD leading a strong chase , Kreuziger finished sixth on the day , amongst the race 's top riders , to remain seventh overall . 
 Kreuziger , along with most of the race 's best riders , was again out @-@ distanced by Contador on the Grossglockner , the next summit finish . He finished sixth on the day , losing over a minute and a half . Attrition to other riders meant he actually moved up to fifth overall , though he was three and a half minutes down on Contador , a time gap unlikely to be recouped . Kreuziger faltered badly the next day on the stage ending at Monte Zoncolan . He was a distant 16th on the day , losing three and a half minutes to stage winner Igor Antón , but more importantly losing between two and three minutes to the race 's other top riders . He fell down to ninth overall as a result . He regained one position the next day with ninth place on Gardeccia , but again lost time to the race 's other leading riders . This was because Ag2r – La Mondiale rider Hubert Dupont fell from his position above Kreuziger in the standings . Kreuziger finished sixth in the climbing time trial to the <unk> , but since the climb was relatively short , time gaps among the top riders were small , and he remained eighth overall as a result . 
 The team took their one stage win in stage 19 . Tiralongo , perhaps Kreuziger 's top support rider , attacked out of the leading group 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) , all uphill , from the finish in <unk> . After other riders tried to bridge up to him but never made it all the way , Contador easily made his way to the front of the race and rode beside Tiralongo for several moments . They shared a few words , and Contador patted the veteran Italian on the back as he encouraged him to take the stage win himself . Tiralongo did so , the first race win of his 12 @-@ year career . Contador , who had ridden the last three seasons with Astana , remembered Tiralongo as a friend and a valued support rider , and wanted to do something to thank him for all his hard work done on the Spaniard 's behalf . The day was also a good one for Kreuziger , as his eighth place on the day moved him up to seventh overall . Kreuziger was just 16th in the stage 21 time trial in Milan , a poor showing for him . But since José Rujano , the man who had been directly ahead of him in the overall standings , is a vastly inferior time trialist ( 46th on the day ) , Kreuziger moved past him to finish the Giro in sixth place overall . While he did fall short of his goal to finish on the podium , Kreuziger nonetheless added another Grand Tour top ten and the best young rider jersey to his <unk> . The squad also finished as winners of the Trofeo Fast Team , the traditional team classification where the times for the team 's top three riders are added each day . They finished an even ten minutes the better of Movistar Team . 
 = = = Tour de France = = = 
 Vinokourov led the Astana squad at the Tour de France . Entering 2011 , he had thought it to be his final season as an active competitor , and his main goal for the year was to wear the yellow jersey at some time during the Tour . His pursuit of yellow was strengthened by the addition of Kreuziger to the squad , riding solely in support of the veteran Kazakh . Paris – Nice stage winner Di Gregorio and Tiralongo were also named to the squad . 
 The squad turned in a decent ride in the stage 2 team time trial , finishing ninth of 22 teams . The result installed Vinokourov into 27th place , 32 seconds off the race lead . Vinokourov took third in stage 4 on the Mûr @-@ de @-@ Bretagne , one of only ten riders to finish together at the front of the race . He moved up six places to 18th with this result . In stage 8 on Super Besse , Vinokourov and Team Sky 's Juan Antonio Flecha put in an attack that constituted a clear bid to take the yellow jersey . Starting the day 32 seconds back of race leader Thor Hushovd , Vinokourov surged past Flecha and all remaining members of the morning breakaway other than eventual stage winner Rui Costa . He occupied second position on the road , holding a sufficient time gap that he could take the race leadership , until he was reabsorbed by the depleted front peloton and finished at the back of that group . The result did , however , move Vinokourov up to 11th . 
 The team 's fortunes took a dramatic turn the next day . On the same day that breakaway riders Flecha and Johnny Hoogerland were sideswiped by a car at the front of the race , Vinokourov crashed along with Jurgen Van den Broeck , Andreas Klöden , and David Zabriskie , all of whom eventually left the race due to their injuries . Vinokourov 's injuries were quite clearly serious immediately – he could not walk back to the road from which he fell , needing to be held up by Di Gregorio and <unk> . He was revealed to have sustained a broken right femur . Fofonov also crashed , witnessing what took place from his position directly behind Vinokourov . He described that the race had been extremely fast , and the road wet , with Hushovd and a rider from Omega Pharma – Lotto taking a line around a left @-@ hand curve that resulted in those behind taking it much too widely and falling off the road . Vinokourov was quoted as saying " I never expected such a dramatic end on the Tour de France " and said that he expected the team to fight on for a stage win . He had surgery in <unk> the next day , with the scheduled recovery time for the injury ruling him out for the remainder of the season , also meaning that it would likely end his professional career . A week later , Vinokourov indeed announced his retirement from the sport , for a second time . After his first four weeks of rehabilitation went better than anticipated , Vinokourov announced that he would ride the Giro di Lombardia before retiring . Later this plan changed , to have him ride the Chrono des Nations instead , due to the lesser risk of crashing in an individual time trial than in a hilly classic . In September , Vinokourov came out of retirement altogether and announced that he would return as an active rider in 2012 . 
 Despite Vinokourov 's hopes upon crashing out of the race that the squad would continue to be combative , they did not attain any noteworthy results over the remainder of the Tour . <unk> and Fofonov took top @-@ ten stage placings from breakaways in stages 16 and 17 , but did not come close to winning either day , finishing tenth and sixth respectively and over a minute off the winner 's time both days . Vaitkus finished eighth on the Champs @-@ Élysées stage to close out the Tour . The squad 's best @-@ placed rider in the final overall standings was Di Gregorio in 39th place , an hour and 22 minutes off Tour winner Cadel Evans ' time . 
 = = = Vuelta a España = = = 
 Kashechkin , who previously rode for Astana before being suspended following a positive doping test at the 2007 Tour de France , transferred to the team from Lampre – ISD effective at the beginning of August . His first race back with the team was the Vuelta a España , where he was to ride as squad leader . He hoped to finish in the top five . 
 Astana turned in their strongest team time trial performance in the Vuelta , finishing fourth of the 22 teams . Kiserlovski commented after the ride that the team was well pleased with fourth place and the small time gap to the stage winners Leopard Trek . Gasparotto had high placings in stages 2 and 3 , but did not come especially close to winning either , taking seventh in a field sprint and then ninth over a minute down on the back @-@ to @-@ back days . In the Vuelta 's first summit finish the next day in the Sierra Nevada , Kessiakoff finished in the 29 @-@ rider leading peloton 11 seconds back of the stage winner , which moved him up to seventh overall . Kashechkin , on the other hand , finished in the second @-@ to @-@ last large group , losing 18 minutes and any chance at serious overall contention . Kessiakoff moved up to sixth the next day by finishing tenth on the <unk> de Jaén climb . After two more tenth places on difficult stages , Kessiakoff 's position improved to fourth overall , gaining that position on stage 9 . He occupied fifth after stage 11 , having slipped a bit in the stage 10 individual time trial , still leaving him to be described as the " big surprise of the Vuelta a España . " After 11 stages , Kashechkin lay 107th , nearly an hour and a half behind the race leader . Team manager Martinelli stated that no pressure for a particular final placing would be put on Kessiakoff . Sporting director <unk> <unk> expressed the team 's dissatisfaction with Kashechkin publicly suggesting the expectation of a high placing when he obviously did not have the form to attain it . 
 Kessiakoff moved into his highest overall position after stage 12 , occupying third overall just nine seconds behind the race leader . Kessiakoff at last cracked on stage 14 , finishing 21st two minutes off the pace on La Farrapona . He had such time in hand over the bulk of the field , however , that he slipped only to sixth overall . Kessiakoff badly cracked in the next stage , losing almost 22 minutes and falling to 26th overall . Kiserlovski then became the team 's top overall rider . He took ninth on stage 18 into <unk> , part of a breakaway that took over seven minutes against the race 's top riders . The result installed him into 16th place overall . He ended the Vuelta in 18th , as Astana 's best @-@ placed rider . Kessiakoff 's final position was 34th , and Kashechkin was 89th . 
 = = Season victories = = 
 = Ultima Underworld II : Labyrinth of Worlds = 
 Ultima Underworld II : Labyrinth of Worlds is a 1993 first @-@ person role @-@ playing video game developed by Looking Glass Technologies and published by Origin Systems . As the sequel to Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss , the game is set in the Ultima fantasy universe . Players assume the role of the Avatar — the protagonist of the Ultima series — and adventure through multiple dimensions while seeking to prevent the evil Guardian from achieving world domination . Progression is largely nonlinear and the game allows for emergent gameplay . 
 Ultima Underworld II began production in April 1992 , shortly after the completion of Ultima Underworld ; and it was developed in nine months . The team sought to improve upon the foundation laid by the game 's predecessor , particularly by increasing the size and interactivity of the game world . The team reused and improved the first game 's engine . Development was impeded by insufficient staffing and extensive playtesting , and the rapid production cycle led to burnout on the team . 
 Most critics gave Ultima Underworld II positive reviews and lauded its graphics , design and nonlinearity . Complaints focused on its high system requirements and unrefined pacing . It has been placed on numerous hall of fame lists since its release . In reaction to the game 's difficult development , Looking Glass altered its design approach : they streamlined ideas from the Ultima Underworld series to create System Shock . The team pitched a sequel to Ultima Underworld II multiple times , but Origin Systems rejected the idea . Arkane Studios ' Arx Fatalis ( 2002 ) is a spiritual successor to the franchise originally pitched as a sequel . OtherSide Entertainment 's upcoming Underworld Ascendant will be the first officially licensed entry in the series in over 23 years . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Ultima Underworld II is a role @-@ playing video game that takes place from a character 's eye view in a three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) graphical environment . The player 's goal is to adventure through dungeon @-@ like indoor environments across eight parallel dimensions , while completing quests to help the inhabitants of each world . The player uses a freely movable mouse cursor to interact with the game 's world and to manipulate the heads @-@ up display ( HUD ) interface . Icons on the HUD allow the player to examine objects closely , to converse with non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) and to ready the player character 's weapon , among other things . During the game , the player collects items and stores them in an inventory on the HUD . Because it uses the same engine as its predecessor , Ultima Underworld II shares many of that game 's features . For example , it allows the player character to jump and swim , and it contains an automap . 
 The player begins by creating a character , for whom traits such as gender , character class and skills may be selected . Skills range from diplomacy and lockpicking to blacksmithing . The game starts in the castle of Lord British , through which the player accesses other dimensions . The player character gains experience points by fighting , completing quests and exploring . During combat , the player attacks by clicking the screen : more damage is dealt when the player presses and holds the attack button . Depending on where the player clicks , different types of attacks — such as thrusts and slashes — occur . The player may cast spells by using an appropriate combination of " runestones " , which are collected throughout the game . When enough experience points have been accumulated , the player character levels up and gains hit points . Experience points also grant " skill points " , which allow the character to increase skill proficiency . Unlike in Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss , skills are not improved at shrines ; rather , they are increased by training with NPCs at the castle or in other dimensions . 
 As with its predecessor , Ultima Underworld II was designed to generate emergent gameplay through the interplay of simulated systems . The developers attempted to combine role @-@ playing elements with " a sophisticated three @-@ dimensional simulation of a sensible and believable world " . For example , torches burn out , items wear over time and the player character must eat . Many items in the game are useless but were included for the sake of realism . The game is nonlinear , in that players must " visit and revisit " areas as the character gains abilities and becomes stronger , instead of " clearing each square foot as they go " . Many situations and puzzles in the game have multiple solutions . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Ultima Underworld II is set in the fantasy world of the Ultima franchise . It takes place across multiple parallel dimensions , the first being Britannia , the traditional setting of Ultima games . The protagonist is the Avatar , the main character of the series . Chronologically , the events of the game occur directly after those of Ultima VII : The Black Gate , rather than those of the original Ultima Underworld . As with Ultima VII , the villain of Ultima Underworld II is the Guardian , an evil being who seeks to conquer Britannia . The game features recurring characters from previous Ultima games , such as Lord British , Nystul , Dupre , Iolo and Mayor Patterson . Also present are Lady Tory and Miranda , the latter of whom appeared in Ultima VII . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 One year after the events of Ultima VII : The Black Gate , the Avatar and many other recurring characters from the Ultima series attend a celebration at the castle of Lord British . However , they are trapped when a large dome of impenetrable " blackrock " covers the castle . The Guardian plans to attack Britannia while the characters are trapped , and he explains that those who do not surrender will be left to die in the dome . Searching the sewers beneath the castle , the Avatar locates a smaller blackrock crystal that leads to alternate dimensions . The magic used by the Guardian to seal the castle caused interdimensional portals to open between eight parallel worlds , each of which is a " center " for the Guardian 's power across dimensions . The denizens of these dimensions are ruled by the Guardian , and the player must free each world to weaken the Guardian 's power over Lord British 's castle and elsewhere . The Guardian mocks the efforts of the Avatar in their dreams throughout the game . As the Avatar explores other worlds , a contemporaneous plotline , which PC Zone 's David McCandless called a " soap opera " , unfolds at the castle . One of those trapped in the castle is a traitor , and the Avatar must discover their identity . 
 The first dimension visited by the Avatar is a prison tower in " <unk> " , which has been conquered by goblins led by the Guardian . There , the player rescues a human resistance leader named Bishop , who then returns to lead a rebellion against the Guardian . Back at the castle , the player gives a small blackrock gem obtained in the prison tower to Nystul , who enchants it to disrupt the portal in the sewers . Next , the player visits <unk> Keep , a floating fortress in a different dimension . <unk> , a sorceress in <unk> Keep who is allied with Bishop , warns the Avatar that the Guardian has hidden a magical spy beneath the castle in Britannia . She provides a special dagger with which to kill it . After removing the spy , the Avatar visits a dimension of ice caves : the remnants of a civilization destroyed by the Guardian , now ruled by a ghost named Beatrice . The Avatar returns to the castle and finds that Lady Tory has been murdered by the traitor . The next dimension is <unk> , a world inhabited by energy beings called " <unk> " that each serve a single purpose , such as knowing only the past or producing runestones . <unk> are created to serve the Guardian , but the Avatar destroys and replaces the sole reproductive <unk> to free the race . 
 The Avatar completes a series of tests at <unk> Academy , a mage school whose staff was killed by the Guardian . Afterwards , the player travels to the Pits of Carnage , a subterranean prison on a world where the Guardian trains soldiers to attack other dimensions ; and to the Tomb of Praecor Loth , where a king killed in a war with the Guardian is buried . Finally , the Avatar visits the Ethereal Void , a strange world with floating , glowing pathways and no map . Eventually , the Avatar discovers that Mayor Patterson is the traitor and destroys the blackrock dome . 
 = = Development = = 
 Looking Glass Technologies began to develop Ultima Underworld II in April 1992 . The team 's goal was to build upon the foundation laid by the game 's predecessor , Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss . They attempted to write a better , more complex plot and to include superior simulation elements and " play value " . According to project leader Doug Church , the team 's " biggest advantage " was the presence of four dedicated designers ; by contrast , each member of the original game 's team had assumed multiple roles . The Tomb of Praecor Loth was largely created by lead writer Austin Grossman , who took inspiration from the Dungeons & Dragons module Tomb of Horrors . The additional designers allowed Looking Glass to more carefully revise levels in Ultima Underworld II , so that players would have " interesting stuff " to see and do each time they explored an area . The team attempted to fine @-@ tune the role @-@ playing mechanics of Ultima Underworld , such as by making certain skills more powerful in the sequel . More puzzles and interactivity were added , and the game world was made several times larger than that of Ultima Underworld , according to Church . He later believed that the team was overambitious , and that the game was insufficiently focused and polished as a result . 
 Like its predecessor , Ultima Underworld II was produced by Warren Spector , who was Looking Glass ' main link to publisher Origin Systems . Church later praised Spector 's handling of the project : his weekly phone conversations and monthly meetings with Looking Glass helped Church and the team to refocus creatively during development . When the team failed to produce enough art for the game , Spector supplemented the art team with contractors from Origin , which Church believed was " critical " to the game 's being released on schedule . As a result of the art team 's distance from Looking Glass , Church had to phone " nine different area codes every couple days to check up on things " . He recalled the challenge of describing the enemy designs by phone . Dan Schmidt and the recently hired Seamus Blackley composed the game 's score in Blackley 's apartment over one week . They attempted to give each world a unique sound , while hiding variations of the main theme in each track . The music system from the original Ultima Underworld was retained with only minor alterations , but the team included digitized sound effects instead of the synthesized audio used in the first game . 
 Ultima Underworld II was developed in nine months . It was originally slated for a February 1993 release , but the date was later moved up to December 1992 . The game underwent two and a half months of playtesting by Origin and Looking Glass employees , and by remote testing firms . According to Church , the testing phase took more time than expected because of complaints from playtesters and the presence of numerous bugs . Church went to Origin 's headquarters in Texas during the final stages of development . The team " tried desperately to make Christmas " , and the game was completed around December 18 . Church compiled the final version on his laptop in Spector 's office . However , the game was held back for further playtesting even though it could have shipped on schedule . Church later commented , " [ T ] here was one bug we couldn 't reproduce , and everyone really wanted to go home for Christmas . We ended up taking a few days off , checking it a few more days and using that version anyway . " The delay caused the game to miss the holiday season . It was shipped in January 1993 . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 Ultima Underworld II was built with an improved version of the game engine used for its predecessor . The team enhanced its visual capabilities : they broadened the first @-@ person view by 30 % , expanded the color palette , added more 3D objects , increased the size and animation of character sprites and wrote a new texture mapping algorithm . Director Paul Neurath commented that Ultima Underworld 's texture mapping had failed to " look quite as good as we had hoped " , and that the new system realized their vision . The game 's code is roughly 30 % larger than that of Ultima Underworld — bloat that Church attributed to " second project syndrome " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Paul Neurath , Ultima Underworld II and its predecessor together sold half a million units . Paul Presley of PC Review called the game " huge " and praised its atmosphere , increased variety and higher graphical detail . However , he found that the game , unlike its predecessor , does not feature " anything that takes it to a higher plateau to wait for the others to catch up " . He summarized Ultima Underworld II as " magnificent " , and he wrote , " If someone were to hand me £ 40 and say buy either Underworld I or II , I 'd take the sequel any time . " PC Zone 's David McCandless wrote , " Nothing can completely prepare you for the freedom the game gives you ... It 's about as close to Virtual Reality as you are ever likely to get from your mouse driver . " He praised the game 's atmospheric sound and called its graphics " stunning " : on a high @-@ end computer , he found that " dungeons can move like a film " . Partly because of the game 's large size , he felt that Ultima Underworld II was looser and less involving than its predecessor , but he concluded that players would still " sit there , dribble slightly , and say ' blimey ' every eight to ten minutes . " 
 The Toronto Star 's William Burrill called it " the best fantasy ... role @-@ playing game in this ( or any parallel ) world . " He praised its automap and noted its increased graphical fidelity . However , he found that the control system took time to learn , and he stated , " This is not a game you can master quickly or play in a night . It has its frustrations and its flaws , despite its brilliance of design " . He summarized that " those who are patient will be richly rewarded with a game like no other . " Computer Gaming World 's Doug <unk> enjoyed the game 's graphics and praised the plot , conversations and 3D world for giving a sense of " being there " . However , he noted that the game 's movement controls were " a pain " and that navigating the environment was initially " frustrating " . <unk> was unfavorable toward the linearity of the plot and dialogue trees , and toward NPCs ' inability to take actions independent of the player . He described the game as " a long and grueling quest " that often " seems more frustrating than enjoyable " . Although he called it " a relatively high @-@ quality game " , he finished , " By the time I finally saw daylight again , emerging from the Labyrinth , I must admit that it wasn 't exultation I felt , but sheer relief . " The magazine 's Scorpia was more positive , calling the game " a good follow @-@ up to the previous entry " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In a 2004 retrospective review , PC Gamer UK 's John Walker stated that Ultima Underworld II " was new and exciting in half a dozen areas at once , not just one . Somehow , no game has quite achieved that since " . PC Gamer has included Ultima Underworld II in several lists of the 100 best computer games : the game placed 54th in 2001 , 39th in 2007 , and 98th in 2011 . One writer for the magazine wrote , " Like Ultima Underworld but again and better . No , that won 't do . Ultima Underworld [ II ] needs to be hailed from the roof @-@ tops for being one of the best dungeon @-@ based adventure RPGs of all illustrious gaming history . " Another wrote that " [ n ] o other game since has raised the bar half as high " . In 2011 , a writer for PC Gamer called Ultima Underworld II " a game from the future " that was " [ w ] <unk> , richly , impossibly interactive " . 
 According to Church , Looking Glass found Ultima Underworld II 's long playtesting phase extremely stressful . Neurath commented that the game 's rushed production led to burnout on the team . Near the end of development , the company decided that it " had done too many dungeon games " , and it began to consider a project with a similar design philosophy but without a fantasy setting . After brainstorming sessions by Church , Spector , Grossman and Neurath , Looking Glass began development of System Shock . Grossman later stated that his work on the Tomb of Praecor Loth was in some ways a " mini @-@ prototype " for ideas he fleshed out in System Shock . Looking Glass pitched a sequel to Ultima Underworld II several times , but Origin Systems rejected the idea . Years later , Arkane Studios pitched Ultima Underworld III to Electronic Arts and received a similar response , which inspired the studio to create the spiritual successor Arx Fatalis . In 2014 , Neurath and his company OtherSide Entertainment announced Underworld Ascendant , another spiritual successor to the Ultima Underworld series . In 2015 the game was renamed to Underworld Ascendant and a Kickstarter campaign was launched and successfully funded . 
 = Georgios Samaras = 
 Georgios Samaras ( Greek : Γεώργιος <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] , born 21 February 1985 ) is a Greek professional footballer who plays as a winger or striker for Rayo OKC of the North American Soccer League and the Greece national team . 
 Samaras started his career at OFI Crete , before moving on to Eredivisie side Heerenveen in 2001 . He made his first team debut two years later and after a further three seasons with the club he moved to Premier League club Manchester City for a fee of £ 6 million in 2006 . After Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson took over as manager Samaras fell out of favour with the first team . In January 2008 he was loaned out to Scottish Premier League team Celtic , moving on a permanent basis in the summer . 
 Samaras helped Celtic win Scottish league championships in 2008 , 2012 , 2013 and 2014 , totalling 74 goals in 249 competitive games . He left the club at the end of his contract in 2014 and returned to the Premier League with West Bromwich Albion , where he featured rarely and had an unsuccessful loan to Al @-@ Hilal in Saudi Arabia . In March 2016 , he joined North American Soccer League expansion team Rayo OKC . 
 Although eligible to play for Australia , because his father Ioannis Samaras was born in Melbourne , Samaras chose to represent his country of birth , Greece . He made his debut in 2006 , and became a regular over the next eight years , earning 81 caps and scoring 9 goals . He represented his country at Euro 2008 , the 2010 World Cup , Euro 2012 and the 2014 World Cup . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Samaras was born on 21 February 1985 in Heraklion , the capital city of the Greek island of Crete . His favourite footballer growing up was Marco van Basten . Samaras was also a keen basketball fan and his father , Ioannis Samaras , often let him stay up until the early hours of the morning so he could watch his hero Michael Jordan . 
 In 1994 , when he was 10 years old , Samaras joined his boyhood heroes , OFI Crete . His father was playing for them at the time and then retired in 1996 . Six months later , he became Academy chief manager , a position he retained until 2000 , when he became manager . Samaras credits his father highly with helping start his football career . His influence meant that Samaras trained every day of his childhood and he also got to spend a lot of time behind the scenes at OFI . Samaras left for Eredivisie club Heerenveen in 2001 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Heerenveen = = = 
 Samaras broke into the Heerenveen team during the 2002 – 03 season , still aged only 18 . He scored three goals in his first four appearances , all of which were from the bench . This form prompted Heerenveen activate a three @-@ year extension clause in his contract . 
 Samaras ' first goal of the 2003 – 04 season came , on 25 October , in a shock 2 – 1 loss for Heerenveen against NEC Nijmegen . On 3 December , Samaras scored as Heerenveen beat ADO Den Haag 2 – 0 . His next goal came 10 days later as he scored an equaliser to secure a draw 1 – 1 for Heerenveen against RBC Roosendaal . He then scored on 20 December , as Heerenveen beat Roda JC 2 – 1 . 
 Samaras ' first goal of the 2004 – 05 season came on 11 September , in a 2 – 0 win over De <unk> . He then scored a last @-@ minute winner on 3 October , as Heerenveen secure all three points against ADO Den Haag . On 28 November , Samaras scored one of Heerenveen 's goals as they staged a late comeback against title @-@ chasing Feyenoord , and secured a 2 – 2 draw . He then scored on 22 January , as Heerenveen , who were performing very well in the Eredivisie , beat Den Bosch 2 – 1 . On 12 March , Samaras scored an equaliser against RKC Waalwijk , but Heerenveen then conceded a late goal and fell to a 2 – 1 defeat . On 2 April , Samaras scored to help Heerenveen secure a shock 2 – 1 victory over Ajax . A fortnight later , Samaras scored the equaliser as Heerenveen came from behind to beat Vitesse Arnhem 3 – 1 . This win moved Heerenveen up to fifth in the table . In the next match Samaras , along with Klaas @-@ Jan Huntelaar , scored a hat @-@ trick as relegation candidates RBC Roosendaal were defeated 7 – 1 and Heerenveen pushed to finish the league in a European spot . 
 At the start of the 2005 – 06 season , Sevilla were reported to be interested in Samaras as a replacement for Júlio Baptista . While Arsenal were also looking at him after they had missed out on signing Baptista , some news organisations had reported that Arsenal had already signed Samaras and that he would join at the end of the season . However , the player 's father , Ioannis Samaras said that this was untrue and that his son wanted to stay at the club for another year . Samaras scored on the opening day of the season , on 20 August , when he helped Heerenveen to a 5 – 4 victory over Roda JC . He picked up a minor leg injury in September , which ruled him out of Heerenveen 's UEFA Cup tie against Baník Ostrava . But he returned to action on 23 September , and scored as Heerenveen beat NEC Nijmegen 2 – 1 . On 14 December , Samaras scored as Heerenveen came back from behind to beat Levski Sofia 2 – 1 in the UEFA Cup . On 30 December , Samaras scored twice as Heerenveen beat Ajax 4 – 2 . In January 2006 , Arsenal and Manchester City showed interest in signing the striker . Samaras tried to get released from his contract after Heerenveen had rejected a bid from Manchester City . However , the Dutch arbitration commission ruled that he had no grounds to end his contract . Samaras scored 25 goals in 88 appearances for Heerenveen . 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 Samaras moved to Manchester City on 30 January 2006 for a fee of £ 6 million , a record for a Greek player . He was given the number 20 shirt . Samaras stated that he was excited about moving to Manchester City , because he saw them as being the next stage in his development . He also said that he would relish being in a team with the likes of David James , Andy Cole , and Trevor Sinclair . He made his debut for City on 1 February , as a 65th @-@ minute replacement for Cole in a 3 – 0 home win against Newcastle United . His first goal for the club came in the following home match , against Charlton Athletic . The following month Samaras scored in a 2 – 1 home win against Aston Villa , to put City through to the quarter @-@ finals of the League Cup . This was his fourth goal in six appearances . Samaras scored one further goal that season , in a 2 – 1 defeat to Tottenham Hotspur . 
 = = = = 2006 – 07 = = = = 
 Samaras ' first goal of the 2006 – 07 season came on 20 September , despite this , City lost 2 – 1 in the League Cup to League One side Chesterfield . Four days later , Samaras scored twice , as Manchester City beat West Ham United 2 – 0 . City had won just three of their previous 16 games , and the club , as well as Samaras , had been receiving a lot of criticism from fans . In December , City manager Stuart Pearce publicly stated that Samaras would have to ' toughen up ' , if he wanted to be a success in the Premier League . He said that Samaras ' all round game wasn 't good enough , and that he would need to learn to pass the ball better and compete more effectively . Some fans had criticised Pearce for signing Samaras , along with other foreign players , who had not settled in well enough to the English game . On 2 January , Samaras came on as a half @-@ time substitute , and scored twice , as they beat Everton 2 – 1 . 
 In March , the Daily Mirror reported that the reason Manchester City were struggling so badly was that they didn 't have any quality strikers . They went on say that the £ 6 million spent on Samaras looked like " very bad business " especially compared to the £ 2 @.@ 5 million Blackburn Rovers had spent on Benni McCarthy . They also described Samaras as looking like a " fish out of water " as he struggled to adapt to the different style of play in England . On 10 March , defender Richard Dunne said that he felt the reason that City were performing so badly was that their foreign players , including Samaras , were letting the side down by not working hard enough . Samaras responded to his criticisms , by saying that he felt it was Pearce 's fault that he wasn 't playing well because the manager wasn 't giving him a regular run of games . He also said that he felt a lot of criticism stemmed from his high transfer fee , saying that it is normal for expensive players to be criticised more than most when they don 't play well . Samaras also said that he had come through tougher periods than this and his self @-@ belief would not be shaken , he said that his desire was to become a Champions League player . The Daily Mail pointed out that , despite the criticism , Samaras had scored more goals than any other City player and that he was also responsible for the few highlights of their season . 
 = = = = 2007 – 08 = = = = 
 Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson took over from Pearce for the 2007 – 08 season and , following a spending spree , Samaras was reportedly deemed surplus to requirements by the new manager . Samaras ' agent Paul <unk> said that , despite interest from across Europe , his client wanted to stay in the Premier League and prove his ability . Samaras was linked with a £ 2 @.@ 5 million move to Middlesbrough towards the end of the transfer window but ended up staying at City . Eriksson stated that although he was unimpressed with Samaras when he first joined , he felt the player had improved and adapted his style of play a lot during pre @-@ season and that he now felt comfortable keeping him at the club . Samaras had been widely criticised , and even booed , by City fans at times during the previous season and Eriksson said that he hoped it would not happen again and that he appreciated why Samaras could have found it hard to play under those circumstances . Samaras was behind the likes of Valeri <unk> and Rolando Bianchi in the pecking order and was included in the squad for the first time only on 25 September , when he was selected for a League Cup match against Norwich City . He started the match and scored a last @-@ minute winner to put Manchester City into the quarter @-@ final . 
 By the time the January transfer window came , Eriksson had decided to sell Samaras , amongst others , to try and raise funds for the club . Birmingham City had chased him for several weeks and had a £ 2 @.@ 5 million offer accepted , meeting Manchester City 's valuation of the player , but they pulled out of the deal with a week of the transfer window remaining . Several teams including Rangers , Middlesbrough , Espanyol , Bolton Wanderers and Charlton Athletic had expressed an interest in signing him , but it was Celtic to whom he eventually moved . 
 Samaras failed to get a regular place in the first team over the two years he was at Manchester City . Mainly used as a substitute , he scored 12 goals in 63 appearances for the Eastlands club . 
 = = = Celtic = = = 
 On 29 January 2008 , Samaras signed for Scottish Premier League club Celtic on a six @-@ month loan deal , with the club having an option to buy him at the end of his loan spell . He said that he wanted the move because he needed to be playing first team football to get into the Greece squad for Euro 2008 . He also said that he was attracted to the fact that he would regularly be able to play in European competition with Celtic . 
 Samaras was given the number 9 shirt and made his debut on 4 February , in a 5 – 1 win in the Scottish Cup over Kilmarnock . He scored the final goal of the game after coming on as a substitute . On 20 February , he came on as a substitute in Celtic 's 3 – 2 defeat to Barcelona , this was his first ever Champions League match . A week later he scored the winner in a 2 – 1 win over Inverness Caledonian Thistle to help Celtic keep up the pressure on league leaders Rangers . He then scored in Celtic 's next match , a 2 – 0 win over Hibernian , after coming on as a substitute . Samaras ' next goal came on 23 March , he again came on as a substitute and rounded off the scoring in a 3 – 0 win over Gretna . On 19 April , he scored the only goal of the game as Celtic beat Aberdeen 1 – 0 , and moved to the top of the league for the first time in 2008 . The next month , on 3 May , Samaras again came on as a substitute and scored the winner . His goal gave Celtic a 2 – 1 victory over Motherwell and kept up Celtic 's late challenge for the league title . Celtic won the title on the last day of the season , 22 May , by beating Dundee United 1 – 0 . Samaras came on as a late substitute and collected his first winners ' medal after the match . 
 Samaras ' contribution in the second half of the season proved vital to Celtic winning the title , he scored several important goals which kept alive Celtic 's faltering title hopes . His signing was also credited with reviving the previously underperforming Jan <unk> of <unk> . 
 = = = = 2008 – 09 = = = = 
 After his successful loan spell , Samaras left Manchester City on 15 July 2008 and signed a three @-@ year contract with Celtic . Although the fee was not disclosed , it was reported to be between £ 1 million and £ 3 million . Samaras ' first goals of the 2008 – 09 season came on 23 August . He scored twice as Celtic beat Falkirk 3 – 0 . On 13 September , he scored another two goals as Celtic beat Motherwell 4 – 2 . He scored twice again in Celtic 's next match as they beat Kilmarnock 3 – 1 . He then scored another two goals as Celtic beat Livingston 4 – 0 and advanced to the League Cup quarter @-@ final . He was named SPL Player of the Month for September , at this point he was also the top scorer with seven goals . 
 Samaras suffered a knee cartilage injury in mid @-@ October , after a successful operation he was expected to be out for a month . This meant he would be likely to miss crucial Champions League ties against Manchester United and Aalborg . He returned earlier than expected and was back in training on 9 November , having missed seven games . Samaras returned to action on 12 November , coming on as a substitute in a 3 – 0 win over Kilmarnock . On 25 November he started against Aalborg but did not play well and missed several chances as Celtic lost 2 – 1 . This loss consigned Celtic to a bottom place finish in their group . 
 His first goals of the new year came on , on 4 January , as he scored twice against Dundee United . However , this was not enough for a victory and the match finished 2 – 2 . Although he did not start in the League Cup Final due to poor form , he did come on as a substitute as Celtic beat Rangers 2 – 0 and won the trophy . Samaras scored twice on 4 April , as Celtic beat Hamilton Academical 4 – 0 . Celtic lost the title on the last day of the season . Samaras scored 17 goals , with 15 of them coming in the SPL . This made him the third top scorer behind Kris Boyd and team mate Scott McDonald . 
 = = = = 2009 – 10 = = = = 
 Celtic manager Gordon Strachan left at the end of the season and was replaced by Tony Mowbray . On 5 August , Samaras scored in injury time of Celtic 's Champions League third qualifying round tie against Dynamo Moscow . This goal won Celtic the tie , 2 – 1 on aggregate , and helped them to their first European away win in six years . Celtic then drew English Premier League club Arsenal , but lost 5 – 1 on aggregate and subsequently dropped into the Europa League . On 13 December , Samaras scored in Celtic 's 3 – 2 win over Motherwell , this was his fifth goal in the club 's previous four matches . He scored in Celtic 's 2 – 1 defeat against Hearts on 19 December . This left Celtic four points behind rivals Rangers going into Christmas . From February onwards , Samaras was mainly played out of position on the left of midfield . 
 Celtic endured a dismal season , culminating in a humiliating 2 – 0 loss to lower league Ross County in the semi @-@ final of the Scottish Cup . Samaras missed a chance to equalise in that match when the score was only 1 – 0 to County , and he was amongst several players publicly criticised by caretaker manager Neil Lennon . Samaras finished the season with 10 league goals and 12 in all competitions . 
 = = = = 2010 – 11 = = = = 
 Samaras began the 2010 – 11 season in good form , scoring his first goal in a Europa League tie against FC Utrecht with a chest down and finish to make it 2 – 0 , sending Celtic into the second leg with a lead . On 22 September 2010 , he scored a hat @-@ trick in a 6 – 0 win over Inverness Caledonian Thistle in the League Cup . However , the goals then dried up with Samaras failing to score again in 2010 . 
 He then produced a match @-@ winning performance against Rangers at Ibrox on 2 January 2011 . He was selected as a lone striker and scored both Celtic goals in a 2 – 0 victory . His first goal came from latching onto a Joe <unk> pass before rounding Rangers goalkeeper Allan McGregor and slotting home from a wide angle . His second came after he won a penalty which he converted to secure the victory . His efforts in this game won him Goal.com 's World Player of the Week Award . In the following game , a Scottish Cup tie against Berwick Rangers , Samaras again started but failed to last the 90 minutes after sustaining a hamstring injury . Samaras had an influential performance in a 3 – 0 home victory against Rangers in the SPL on 20 February , helping to set up the second goal for Gary Hooper and causing problems for the opposition throughout the game . 
 On 16 March , Samaras captained Celtic for the first time in a 2 – 1 Scottish Cup win over Inverness Caledonian Thistle at the Caledonian Stadium . Two days later , he signed a new deal to keep him at Parkhead until the summer of 2014 . Celtic drew 0 – 0 with Rangers on 24 April 2011 in the final Old Firm league fixture of the season , with Samaras missing a penalty kick late in the second half . The draw kept Rangers one point ahead of Celtic in the league , and the Ibrox club went on to win the league by one point despite Celtic 's emphatic 4 – 0 win over Motherwell in the final league game of the season ( Samaras scoring Celtic 's second goal in that game ) . Samaras did end the season with silverware though , playing a week later in Celtic 's 3 – 0 win over Motherwell in the Scottish Cup Final . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 = = = = 
 On 3 November 2011 , Samaras started against Rennes in a Europa League match at Celtic Park . Celtic won the match 3 – 1 with Samaras getting two assists . He drew plaudits for his much noticed work @-@ rate and determination during the match . Samaras then started the next match against Motherwell in the SPL and set up another goal for Anthony Stokes , Celtic went on to win the match 2 – 1 after being 1 – 0 down . Samaras went on to score his first goal of the 2011 – 12 season in a 5 – 0 win over St Mirren . Manager Neil Lennon said that ; " He got his goal , which we 've been waiting on a long time . His play was fantastic . He is a talent and all we are asking for is consistency . He has shown everyone today what he is capable of when he is in full flow . The rest took a leaf from his book . " After an impressive performance in Celtic 's 1 – 1 draw against Italian league leaders Udinese , fellow Serie A side Palermo expressed an interest in Samaras . He had been playing as a left midfielder in the previous few weeks , and the Daily Record said that his good form since returning to the team had helped re @-@ ignite Celtic 's season . On 24 December , Samaras started as a striker and scored twice as Celtic beat Kilmarnock 2 – 1 . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 = = = = 
 On 8 August , Samaras scored his 50th Celtic goal in the 2 – 0 away victory over HJK Helsinki in the second leg of the Champions League third qualifying round . On 21 August , Samaras assisted Kris Commons ' opening goal in the Champions League play @-@ off round first leg away at Helsingborgs and then scored himself later in the match . He scored a dramatic late winner in a 2 – 3 win against Spartak Moscow in the Champions League group stage . Samaras became the first player in Celtic history to score in five consecutive away matches in Europe , with headed goals in 2 – 1 defeats to Barcelona and Benfica adding to his goals against Spartak Moscow , Helsingborgs and HJK Helsinki . Samaras is also credited for helping Celtic qualify from the group stage , providing the assist for Hooper 's opening goal in the final game against Spartak at Parkhead and then winning the foul for the penalty that Commons converted to clinch the win required that night . 
 Samaras scored an overhead kick in a 2 – 0 win at Dundee on Boxing Day 2012 . In March 2013 , Samaras was substituted on as Aberdeen led Celtic 3 – 1 at Celtic Park , and his overhead kick completed the comeback as he made it 4 – 3 in the 94th minute of the match . 
 Over the course of the season , Samaras captained Celtic on several occasions , including the opening league match against Aberdeen and also in the away leg of Celtic 's last @-@ 16 Champions League tie against Juventus . Samaras finished the season with more silverware as Celtic clinched their second successive league title and then defeated Hibs 3 – 0 in the Scottish Cup Final , albeit Samaras was an unused substitute in that match . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 = = = = 
 Samaras started the 2013 – 14 season with a goal against NIFL Premiership club Cliftonville in the Champions League second qualifying round , and made it two goals in two matches as he scored in the return leg with a header in a 2 – 0 victory . Celtic won the tie 5 – 0 on aggregate . Celtic knocked out Elfsborg in the next round , before playing <unk> <unk> in the final qualifying round . Trailing 2 – 0 from the first leg away in Kazakhstan , they rallied in the return match at Parkhead . Samaras scored early in the second half , adding to Commons ' goal just before half time , to level the tie on aggregate . A last minute goal from James Forrest clinched the aggregate win and saw the club once again progress to the group stages . Samaras played in all six group games , but only scored once , away against Barcelona in a 6 – 1 defeat . He continued to feature regularly in domestic games for Celtic , but was often used as a substitute . He scored a hat @-@ trick on 28 September away against Kilmarnock in a 5 – 2 win . Samaras only scored another three league goals after that , including a goal from a penalty kick in his final appearance for the club on 11 May 2014 , a 3 – 1 win at home against Dundee United . 
 The same day , Samaras confirmed that Celtic would not offer him a new deal when his current contract expired at the end of the season , leaving him as a free agent . 
 = = = West Bromwich Albion = = = 
 On 22 August 2014 , Samaras completed a free transfer move to English Premier League side West Bromwich Albion on a two @-@ year contract . He failed to secure a regular place in the team and by January 2015 had made only eight substitute appearances , all without scoring . 
 On 5 February 2015 , Samaras joined Saudi side Al @-@ Hilal on loan for the rest of the season , with an option to sign him permanently at the end of his loan spell . He played against Al @-@ Ahli in the Saudi Crown Prince Cup Final eight days later , but despite scoring his first goal for his new team , they lost 2 – 1 . His next goal came in the first round of the Kings Cup on 10 March 2015 , netting his side 's fourth goal in a 4 – 1 win over Al @-@ <unk> . 
 In April 2015 , Greek newspaper <unk> reported that Samaras was unhappy with life in the Middle East and did not wish to continue his career at the Saudi club when his contract expired at the end of the season . It was also reported that Portuguese club Sporting Lisbon were keen to sign him . 
 Samaras had his contract with West Bromwich Albion terminated by mutual consent on 17 July 2015 . 
 = = = Rayo OKC = = = 
 In August 2015 , Samaras was reported to have agreed terms with Serie A club Sampdoria , but the move fell through as the club were unhappy with the results of his medical . Afterwards , he spent time in New York to rehabilitate from a back injury , and in November 2015 was linked with a move to the New York Cosmos , although once again no move actually materialised . 
 Samaras did eventually sign for a North American Soccer League team , joining expansion side Rayo OKC on 10 March 2016 . On 2 April , he made his debut in their first match , replacing Robbie Findley for the final 12 minutes of a goalless home draw against FC Edmonton . He was the last of three of the team 's players sent off on 28 May in a 1 – 0 loss at Soccer Bowl holders the Cosmos . Samaras ' first goal for the franchise came on 16 July in his 9th match , coming on as a late substitute to wrap up a 3 – 0 win over the same opponent at the Miller Stadium . 
 = = International career = = 
 Samaras was eligible to play for the Australian national team . His father , Ioannis , was born in Melbourne , but moved to Greece at the age of 13 , and had a successful football career , playing for OFI Crete , Panathinaikos , and the Greek national team . Additionally , his grandfather ( also Georgios ) was one of the founding members of South Melbourne FC . Although Samaras considered playing for Australia , he was never approached by Football Federation Australia and chose to play for the country of his birth . 
 He made his debut for Greece just a week after his 21st birthday , on 28 February 2006 , in a friendly game against Belarus , in which he scored the only goal of the game . He featured in Greece 's Euro 2008 qualifiers and was a member of the unsuccessful Greek squad at the finals , making just one appearance as a second @-@ half substitute in their first UEFA Euro 2008 Group D game against Sweden . 
 Samaras ' fourth international goal was a crucial one , when he scored the winning goal in a 2010 World Cup qualifier against Israel in front of his hometown crowd in Heraklion . He scored his fifth international goal with an overhead kick in a World Cup qualifier on 10 October 2009 , against Latvia in a 5 – 2 victory . Samaras also played against Ukraine in a World Cup Qualifying play @-@ off , setting up the only goal of the tie , passing to Dimitris <unk> who slotted home to give Greece a 1 – 0 win and a place in the 2010 World Cup Finals . 
 On 1 June 2010 , Georgios Samaras was selected in the 23 @-@ man Greece squad for the World Cup . ESPN.com rated him as Greece 's second best player , only behind talisman Giorgos <unk> . He played in all three group matches . Despite Greece 's 2 – 1 win over Nigeria , they failed to proceed to the knockout stage , due to 2 – 0 losses to both South Korea and Argentina . On 17 November 2010 , Samaras scored his sixth international goal in a friendly against Austria in Vienna with Greece winning the match 2 – 1 . Samaras also set up Greece 's second goal . 
 Samaras then went on to score a vital goal for Greece against Croatia on 7 October 2011 , a volley from the edge of the box with his left foot . The match finished 2 – 0 and the result meant that Greece qualified for the Euro 2012 . Samaras played in all three of Greece 's group games at Euro 2012 , helping them to finish second in Group A and progress to the quarter @-@ finals . He then played in the quarter @-@ final tie against Germany , scoring early in the second half to level the match at 1 – 1 , although Germany went on to win 4 – 2 and knock Greece out . 
 Samaras was selected in Greece 's squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup . In the team 's final group stage fixture , Samaras assisted Greece 's first goal and scored the winning goal from a penalty kick in the 90th minute to give the team a 2 – 1 win over the Ivory Coast and qualify Greece for the last 16 of the World Cup for the first time in the nation 's history . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Samaras has been described as having all the skills necessary for forward play . His height , 6 ft 4 in ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) , makes him difficult to handle in the air – and he is also a good header of the ball . This means he can be used as an effective target man and his team can hit long balls up to him . He can also score from corners and crosses . Samaras is also strong which further adds to his physical presence and makes him harder for defenders to play against . 
 Samaras is also a good dribbler . This is due to his skill , quick feet and agility . He uses this to his advantage as often goes on runs where he beats several opposition players . However , he can sometimes hold onto the ball for too long and get tackled . As well as his dribbling ability , he is quick which means he can beat players with his pace . He can also use his strength to beat players as well and is also able to use his creativity to set up goals for other players . While he was at Manchester City , Eriksson said that he would only retain him in the side if he stopped dribbling and running out wide . Eriksson said that he believed Samaras to be a good header of the ball and he had to stop believing he was like Ronaldinho if he was to become a good player . 
 Although predominantly a striker , Samaras can also play as a left midfielder . During his time at Manchester City , Samaras expressed his disappointment at being used on the left of midfield too often , he publicly said to manager Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson ; " I am not a left @-@ midfielder , I am a striker and I like to play there , " However , after his move to Celtic , Samaras was more open to playing as a left midfielder . The Daily Mail said that this was because he was happier at Celtic and more willing to be a team player . In addition to being able to play as a target man , Samaras can also be used in several different roles when playing up front . His natural style of play is to drift off the front line and provide a link between the attack and midfield . In doing this he can use his pace and skill to run at the defence , while also creating chances or opening up space for his teammates . He can also run beyond the centre @-@ backs and his pace means he can run on to through balls hit over the defence . 
 Despite his ability , Samaras has performed inconsistently throughout his career . His mazy runs often go nowhere and he frequently gets caught in possession when a pass to a team @-@ mate is available . His languid manner exacerbates supporters ' frustrations and has often led to accusations of him being " lazy " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club statistics = = = 
 As of 17 July 2016 
 1 . ^ Includes league play @-@ offs for spots in UEFA competitions and relegation / promotion play @-@ offs 
 2 . ^ Includes FA Community Shield 
 3 . ^ There is currently no other competition for Scottish professional football clubs 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 17 October 2014 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list Greece 's goal tally first 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Celtic 
 Scottish Premier League ( 4 ) : 2007 – 08 , 2011 – 12 , 2012 – 13 , 2013 – 14 
 Scottish Cup ( 2 ) : 2010 – 11 , 2012 – 13 
 Scottish League Cup ( 1 ) : 2008 – 09 
 Al @-@ Hilal 
 Saudi Crown Prince Cup : ( Runner @-@ up ) 2014 – 15 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 SPL Player of the Month : September 2008 
 Celtic Supporters ' Player of the Year : 2012 / 13 
 2014 FIFA World Cup awards : Man of the match Greece vs Ivory Coast 
 = What Makes You Beautiful = 
 " What Makes You Beautiful " is a song by English @-@ Irish boy band One Direction . It served as their debut single and lead single from their debut studio album , Up All Night ( 2011 ) . Written by Savan Kotecha and producer Rami Yacoub , the song was released by Syco Records on 11 August 2011 . The uptempo power pop track features a prominent guitar @-@ based chorus and riff . The middle eight consists of a " na na na " hook while the opening guitar riff is similar to that of the song " Summer Nights " from the Broadway musical and motion picture Grease as well as interpolations of The McCoys 's 1965 single " Hang on <unk> " . 
 " What Makes You Beautiful " was a commercial success , reaching number one in several countries . It has been certified quadruple platinum in the US with sales of 4 @.@ 8 million copies as of June 2016 . The single peaked at number four on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the UK Singles Chart . The song won the 2012 Brit Award for Best British Single and was generally complimented by contemporary music critics , who highlighted the appeal to the teenage audience and the pop sensibility . It debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart after setting a Sony Music Entertainment pre @-@ order record and selling 153 @,@ 965 copies in its first week . The single also topped the Irish and Scottish Singles Charts , and reached the top ten on the Australian and New Zealand Singles Charts , Flemish Ultratop 50 , Canadian Hot 100 , and the Japan Hot 100 . It has been certified quadruple platinum in the US with sales of 4 @.@ 8 million copies as of June 2016 . 
 The accompanying music video , directed by John Urbano , depicts One Direction spending time on a beach in Malibu , California . The music video was uploaded to YouTube on August 19 , 2011 and has accumulated more than 780 million views since it premiered . The clip garnered the group three MTV Video Music Awards at the 2012 ceremony . One Direction performed the song live on televised shows , at awards ceremonies , and on four of their major concert tours : Up All Night Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) , Take Me Home Tour ( 2013 ) , Where We Are Tour ( 2014 ) and On the Road Again Tour ( 2015 ) . Artists including the Piano Guys have covered " What Makes You Beautiful " . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 After being formed and finishing third in the seventh series of The X Factor in 2010 , they first formed as solo singers but soon got placed as a band on 23 July 2010 One Direction were signed to Syco Music , a subsidiary of Sony Music Entertainment . " What Makes You Beautiful " was written by Savan Kotecha and Carl Falk , and was produced by Yacoub and Falk . Instrumentation was completed by Falk and Yacoub . Serban Ghenea handled the audio mixing , Tom Coyne the audio mastering , and John Hanes the mix engineering , for which Phil Seaford served as the assistant . Discussing the song 's conception , Kotecha said : 
 After recording the song at Cosmos Studios and Kinglet Studios in Stockholm , Sweden , the band felt relieved to have a song that they were happy to release as their debut single . Band member Liam Payne called the song " perfect " , and Harry Styles said , " When we were recording in the studio we knew instantly that we wanted this track to be our first single . " Styles spoke to MTV News , " I think for us we wanted to release something that wasn 't cheesy but it was fun . It kind of represented us , I think it took us a while to find it but I think we found the right song . " Payne added , " We always wanted [ the single ] to be something that people didn 't expect and then when we heard it , it wasn 't what we expected either so it kind of fitted perfectly . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 " What Makes You Beautiful " premiered on BBC Radio 1 on 10 August 2011 , and was released by Syco Music in Europe , Australia and New Zealand via digital download on 11 September 2011 . A CD single was released in the United Kingdom on 12 September 2011 , and followed in Australia and Germany on 25 November 2011 and 2 December 2011 , respectively . In North America , the single was released in Canada via digital download on 31 January 2012 . It was issued 14 February 2012 in the United States and was sent by Columbia Records to US contemporary hit radio ( CHR ) playlists on 28 February 2012 . 
 For the North American release of Up All Night on 13 March 2012 , Columbia Records executives used social media to shape its marketing campaign . Columbia Records co @-@ chairman Steve Barnett and his team decided to reverse the usual pattern of releasing a single on radio . Instead the label mounted a four @-@ month marketing campaign aimed at building a fan base through social media before a single was ever released or played on the radio . The social media campaign asked fans to sign petitions and to enter video competitions to win a concert in their town . The campaign was a success as One Direction 's Facebook followers in the United States rose from 40 @,@ 000 to 400 @,@ 000 . As a result , " What Makes You Beautiful " sold more than 131 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , even though it had yet to be played on the radio . Radio programmers were flooded with calls from fans . Johnny Wright , who managed New Kids on the Block , Backstreet Boys and ' N Sync , said : " Now they are calling the radio station , and the radio station is scratching its head , saying , " We don 't even have that record yet " . It 's almost like the return of the Beatles . I call it hype , but it 's positive hype because it 's all real . It 's not manufactured . No one paid these kids . " 
