 = = Composition = = 
 " What Makes You Beautiful " is a power pop song , with electropop influences . Running for three minutes and 18 seconds , the song is set in common time with a tempo of 125 beats per minute . Written in the key of E major , it follows the chord progression E – A – B ; vocal elements range from the note of B3 to G ♯ 5 . James C. McKinley Jr. of The New York Times compared its chord progression to " La Bamba " . The opening guitar riff has been noted as similar to that of Grease single " Summer Nights " . " What Makes You Beautiful " has a guitar @-@ based chorus ; Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey likened it to a cross between Pink 's " Raise Your Glass " and McFly 's " All About You " . It also contains cowbell instrumentation , and the middle eight consists of an " oh na na na " hook . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave " What Makes You Beautiful " four out of five stars , praising its catchy melody and summarising it as " adorable , completely innocent and bound to cause a stir amongst your mates " . Zachary Houle of PopMatters called the song a " nice get @-@ up @-@ and @-@ go dance number . " Ailbhe Malone of NME commended the song 's appeal to the teenage audience and its chord progression for being " simple enough to be played on an acoustic guitar at a house party . " Newsround called it " fun , upbeat and incredibly catchy . " AllMusic 's Matthew Chisling called it an " effervescent and fresh tween love song " , and chose it as one of the best tracks on Up All Night . Sophie Goddard from Cosmopolitan called the single " ridiculously catchy " . Student 's Jack Murray rated " What Makes You Beautiful " five out of five stars and called it " not only the best pop single of the year so far , but potentially of any X Factor contestant ever " . Murray lauded the songwriting and light production . Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly awarded " What Makes You Beautiful " a B + grade , calling the song " shallow but <unk> " and writing that the song shows that boy bands are not dying out . 
 Jason Lipshutz of Billboard characterised it as " the real deal " , regarding the song as " endlessly playable " as ' N Sync 's " Bye Bye Bye " . Lipshutz noted its " cheeky electro @-@ pop twist " . Stephanie Abrahams of TIME assessed , " The group takes cues from the boy bands of yesteryear with bubblegum lyrics about young love — “ The way you flip your hair gets me overwhelmed ” they croon in their breakout single – which any parent can get behind . That ’ s a far cry from a typical Nicki Minaj verse . " The Observer editor Kitty Empire wrote in an assessment , " With the exception of their persuasive No 1 single , " What Makes You Beautiful " , their songs aren 't wildly distinctive . " " What Makes You Beautiful " won the BRIT Award for Best British Single at the 2012 Brit Awards , which was held on 21 February 2012 . The song also won the Teen Choice Award for Choice Music : Love Song at the 2012 Teen Choice Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " What Makes You Beautiful " performed considerably well worldwide , but especially so in the British Isles , debuting at number 1 on the Irish Singles Chart on 15 September 2011 ; its B @-@ side , " Na Na Na " also entered at number 27 . The single topped the chart for four consecutive weeks . " What Makes You Beautiful " became the fourteenth best @-@ selling single of 2011 on the Irish Singles Chart . In the UK , " What Makes You Beautiful " received the highest ever number of pre @-@ orders for a Sony Music Entertainment single . It sold 82 @,@ 000 copies in its first two days , a figure which rose to 100 @,@ 000 by the third day . It entered the UK Singles Chart at number 1 on 18 September 2011 , shifting 153 @,@ 965 copies that week — the highest first @-@ week UK sales for any song in 2011 at the time . " What Makes You Beautiful " also debuted at number 1 on the Scottish Singles Chart . " What Makes You Beautiful " was the 20th best @-@ selling single of 2011 , moving 540 @,@ 000 copies . The single was the 92nd best @-@ selling single of the 21st century in the UK by May 2012 . As of August 2015 , " What Makes You Beautiful " had sold 978 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . 
 In Belgium , the song debuted at number 44 on both the Flemish Ultratop 50 and the Wallonian Ultratip ; it peaked at numbers 8 and 19 , respectively . Accumulating twenty @-@ two weeks on the French Singles Chart , it debuted at number 83 and peaked at number 38 . In Finland , the single debuted and peaked at number 20 . On the top sixty Swedish Sverigetopplistan , the single debuted at number 49 , peaked at number 29 , and spent twenty @-@ four weeks on that chart . It was certified quadruple platinum by the Swedish Recording Industry Association ( GLF ) , denoting sales of 80 @,@ 000 copies . " What Makes You Beautiful " debuted at number 15 and peaked at number 7 on the Australian Singles Chart . The single spent twenty @-@ five weeks in the Australian Singles Chart top twenty . " What Makes You Beautiful " has been certified six times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting sales of 420 @,@ 000 units . " Na Na Na " also appeared on the Australian Singles Chart of 28 November 2011 at number 84 . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , the single entered at number 16 , and peaked at number 2 in its fourth and fifth weeks . The song spent eleven consecutive weeks in the chart 's top ten . It was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting sales of 30 @,@ 000 units . 
 The single debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 at number 9 , while bowing at number 2 on the Canadian Hot Digital Songs Chart with 19 @,@ 000 downloads sold , the biggest debut for a first time charted artist since the <unk> 's " Summer Girl " entered at number two in June 2009 . The single peaked at number 7 on the Canadian Hot 100 and has been certified quadruple platinum by Music Canada , denoting sales of 320 @,@ 000 copies . In the United States , " What Makes You Beautiful " became the highest Billboard Hot 100 debut for a British act since 1998 . On 1 March 2012 , the single debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 28 , whilst bowing at number 12 on the Hot Digital Songs chart , selling 132 @,@ 000 digital downloads in its first week . On the week ending 21 April 2012 , " What Makes You Beautiful " peaked at number 4 . As of 30 June 2012 , the single had spent thirteen consecutive weeks in the Billboard Hot 100 top ten . The song also became a chart success on other Billboard charts , reaching the top five on the Pop Songs , Adult Pop Songs , and Hot 100 Airplay charts , whilst topping the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . The track sold 3 @,@ 881 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in 2012 , becoming the best @-@ selling song by a boy band in digital history . The song was certified quadruple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on 21 February 2013 , and it has sold 4 @.@ 8 million copies in the US as of June 2016 . " What Makes You Beautiful " has sold over 7 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " What Makes You Beautiful " was directed by John Urbano . Filmed for two days in July 2011 , it premiered on 19 August 2011 . On each of the five days preceding the video 's premiere , One Direction posted a teaser trailer of the video online . Each teaser showed footage from the video and behind the scenes , and one member of the band announcing how many days were left until the video premiere . The video opens with One Direction spending time on a Malibu , California beach inter cut with scenes of them driving an orange campervan . During the second verse , a group of three girls joins the band at the beach ; in Styles ' bridge solo , he intimately sings to one girl , Madison <unk> , individually . During the final choruses the band and girls are shown sitting around a fire , lighting sparklers and taking photographs . On video sharing website MUZU TV , the video was the fourth most @-@ watched music video of 2011 in the UK . The video won two MTV Video Music Awards for Best Pop Video and Most Share @-@ Worthy Video , and earned the group the award for Best New Artist on 6 September 2012 . As of July 2016 , the music video has received more than 780 million Vevo and YouTube views . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 One Direction performed " What Makes You Beautiful " for the first time on Red or Black ? on 10 September 2011 . The performance started with hosts Ant & Dec announcing that the band was supposedly running late for their appearance , and cut to a video of One Direction boarding a London Tube carriage full of fans , as the studio version of the song began playing . Each fan on the tube was given a numbered ticket . The band and fans disembarked the tube and made their way to the television studio , where the remainder of the song was sung live . After the song , Styles caught a numbered ticket raining onstage . The number corresponded to a ticket held by a fan from the tube ; the colour of the fan 's shirt was the correct answer for the Red or Black ? challenge . The band performed " What Makes You Beautiful " after its B @-@ side , " Na Na Na " , at the BBC Radio 1 Teen Awards on 9 October 2011 . The band also performed the song to open telethon Children in Need 2011 on 19 November 2011 . After " Gotta Be You " and " One Thing " , One Direction performed " What Makes You Beautiful " at Capital FM 's Jingle Bell Ball on 4 December 2011 , at The O2 Arena . They performed a medley of " She Makes Me Wanna " and " What Makes You Beautiful " with JLS on the The X Factor 's eighth series final on 10 December 2011 . The group performed " One Thing " and " What Makes You Beautiful " on Dancing on Ice on 5 February 2012 . 
 In Italy , the band performed the song at the 2012 Sanremo Music Festival on 14 February 2012 . In France , they performed " What Makes You Beautiful " and " One Thing " on Le Grand Journal on 22 February 2012 . In the United States , One Direction performed the song along with " More than This " and " One Thing " for the first time on The Today Show at the Rockefeller Center on 12 March 2012 . An estimated 15 @,@ 000 fans descended on the plaza . Melissa <unk> , senior entertainment producer for The Today Show , said : " One Direction is relatively unknown with no hits yet . They basically exploded , and all the adults are saying , ' Who are these people , and how do they know about it ? ' " . They also performed the song at the 2012 Kids ' Choice Awards on 31 March 2012 . One Direction performed " What Makes You Beautiful " and " One Thing " on the NBC comedy television show Saturday Night Live on 7 April 2012 , and also appeared in a comedy sketch with Sofía Vergara . In Australia , they performed " One Thing " and " What Makes You Beautiful " at the 54th Logie Awards , where they also presented an award for " Most Popular New Female Talent " on 15 April 2012 . On 12 August 2012 , One Direction performed " What Makes You Beautiful " at the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony in London , which represented the handover to Rio de Janeiro as the host of the 2016 Summer Olympics . It was included on the set list of the group 's headlining sold @-@ out show at Madison Square Garden on 3 December 2012 . One Direction performed the song on two of their major concert tours : Up All Night Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) and Take Me Home Tour ( 2013 ) . Also this song added in Where We Are Tour ( 2014 ) & On the Road Again Tour ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 The song was covered for American television series Glee by Kevin McHale , Chord Overstreet , Harry Shum , Jr . , Samuel Larsen , and Damian McGinty in the episode titled " Prom @-@ asaurus " . It was first aired on 8 May 2012 , and is the 19th episode of the third season . Their characters Artie Abrams ( McHale ) , Sam Evans ( Overstreet ) , Mike Chang ( Shum ) , Joe Hart ( Larsen ) , and Rory Flanagan ( McGinty ) , covered the song in the episode , performing a choreographed dance routine to it . Sarah Maloy of Billboard acknowledged , " Screaming girls and choreographed boy band moves are , of course , in no short supply . " Maloy described Glee 's version as " barely changing the sound or style of the original version . " Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone wrote , " While One Direction 's original manages to pack a pop punch , Glee 's take kind of hits the mark . ( Literally . The Glee boys prance across the stage in the same path as the U.K. heartthrobs . ) " Futterman concluded that it was the fourth best performance of that episode . Glee 's cover was released for digital download through the iTunes Store on 8 May 2012 . It charted at numbers 93 and 163 on the Canadian Hot 100 and UK Singles Chart , respectively . 
 In July 2012 , the Piano Guys uploaded on YouTube an instrumental piano version of the song , which went viral . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download and CD single 
 " What Makes You Beautiful " – 3 : 24 
 " Na Na Na " – 3 : 10 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Uses in popular culture = = 
 During One Direction 's appearance on Sesame Street in its 45th season , they parodied " What Makes You Beautiful " with the song " What Makes " U " Useful " . 
 Benjamin Stockham ( playing for the 11 @-@ year @-@ old character Marcus Bowa ) performed that tune in his school talent show on the pilot episode of NBC television series About a Boy broadcast on 22 February 2014 . On 13 May 2014 , in the first season finale of the same show , the lead character David Walton in the role of Will Freeman sang the same song with his " band " that includes Marcus ' mother Fiona Bowa played by Minnie Driver . 
 The song is featured on Just Dance 4 and Just Dance Wii U. 
 The song plays in the 2012 film Tad , The Lost Explorer . 
 = The Man in the Moone = 
 The Man in the Moone is a book by the English divine and Church of England bishop Francis Godwin ( 1562 – 1633 ) , describing a " voyage of utopian discovery " . Long considered to be one of his early works , it is now generally thought to have been written in the late 1620s . It was first published posthumously in 1638 under the pseudonym of Domingo Gonsales . The work is notable for its role in what was called the " new astronomy " , the branch of astronomy influenced especially by Nicolaus Copernicus . Although Copernicus is the only astronomer mentioned by name , the book also draws on the theories of Johannes Kepler and William Gilbert . Godwin 's astronomical theories were greatly influenced by Galileo Galilei 's Sidereus Nuncius ( 1610 ) , but unlike Galileo , Godwin proposes that the dark spots on the Moon are seas , one of many parallels with Kepler 's Somnium sive opus <unk> de <unk> <unk> of 1634 . 
 Gonsales is a Spaniard forced to flee the country after killing a man in a duel . Having made his fortune in the East Indies , he decides to return to Spain , but falls ill on the voyage home and is set off on the island of St Helena to recover . There he discovers a species of wild swan able to carry substantial loads , the gansa , and contrives a device that allows him to harness many of them together and fly around the island . Once fully recovered , Gonsales resumes his journey home , but his ship is attacked by an English fleet off the coast of Tenerife . He uses his flying machine to escape to the shore , but once safely landed he is approached by hostile natives and is forced to take off again . This time his birds fly higher and higher , towards the Moon , which they reach after a journey of twelve days . There Gonsales encounters the Lunars , a tall Christian people inhabiting what appears to be a utopian paradise . After six months of living among them , Gonsales becomes homesick and concerned for the condition of his birds , and sets off to return to Earth . He lands in China , where he is immediately arrested as a magician , but after learning the language manages to win the trust of the local mandarin . The story ends with Gonsales meeting a group of Jesuit missionaries , who arrange to have a written account of his adventures sent back to Spain . 
 Some critics consider The Man in the Moone , along with Kepler 's Somnium , to be one of the first works of science fiction . Although the book was well known in the 17th century , and even inspired parodies by Cyrano de Bergerac and Aphra Behn , modern literary critics do not consider it to be very important . Recent studies have focused on Godwin 's theories of language , the mechanics of lunar travel , and his religious position and sympathies as evidenced in the book . 
 = = Background and contexts = = 
 Godwin , the son of Thomas Godwin , Bishop of Bath and Wells , was elected a student of Christ Church , Oxford , in 1578 , from where he received his Bachelor of Arts ( 1581 ) and Master of Arts degrees ( 1584 ) ; after entering the church he gained his Bachelor ( 1594 ) and Doctor of Divinity ( 1596 ) degrees . He gained prominence ( even internationally ) in 1601 by publishing his Catalogue of the Bishops of England since the first planting of the Christian Religion in this Island , which enabled his rapid rise in the church hierarchy . During his life , he was known as a historian . 
 = = = Scientific advances and lunar speculation = = = 
 Godwin 's book appeared in a time of great interest in the Moon and astronomical phenomena , and of important developments in celestial observation , mathematics and mechanics . The influence particularly of Nicolaus Copernicus led to what was called the " new astronomy " ; Copernicus is the only astronomer Godwin mentions by name , but the theories of Johannes Kepler and William Gilbert are also discernible . Galileo Galilei 's 1610 publication Sidereus Nuncius ( usually translated as " The <unk> Messenger " ) had a great influence on Godwin 's astronomical theories , although Godwin proposes ( unlike Galileo ) that the dark spots on the Moon are seas , one of many similarities between The Man in the Moone and Kepler 's Somnium sive opus <unk> de <unk> <unk> of 1634 ( " The Dream , or Posthumous Work on Lunar Astronomy " ) . 
 Speculation on lunar habitation was nothing new in Western thought , but it intensified in England during the early 17th century : Philemon Holland 's 1603 translation of Plutarch 's Moralia introduced Greco @-@ Roman speculation to the English vernacular , and poets including Edmund Spenser proposed that other worlds , including the Moon , could be inhabited . Such speculation was prompted also by the expanding geographical view of the world . The 1630s saw the publication of a translation of Lucian 's True History ( 1634 ) , containing two accounts of trips to the Moon , and a new edition of Ariosto 's Orlando Furioso , likewise featuring an ascent to the Moon . In both books the Moon is inhabited , and this theme was given an explicit religious importance by writers such as John Donne , who in Ignatius His Conclave ( 1611 , with new editions in 1634 and 1635 ) satirised a " lunatic church " on the Moon founded by Lucifer and the Jesuits . Lunar speculation reached an acme at the end of the decade , with the publication of Godwin 's The Man in the Moone ( 1638 ) and John Wilkins 's The Discovery of a World in the Moone ( also 1638 , and revised in 1640 ) . 
 = = = Dating evidence = = = 
 Until Grant McColley , a historian of early Modern English literature , published his " The Date of Godwin 's Domingo Gonsales " in 1937 , it was thought that Godwin wrote The Man in the Moone relatively early in his life — perhaps during his time at Christ Church from 1578 to 1584 , or maybe even as late as 1603 . But McColley proposed a much later date of 1627 or 1628 , based on internal and biographical evidence . A number of ideas about the physical properties of the Earth and the Moon , including claims about " a secret property that operates in a manner similar to that of a <unk> attracting iron " , did not appear until after 1620 . And Godwin seems to borrow the concept of using a flock of strong , trained birds to fly Gonsales to the Moon from Francis Bacon 's Sylva sylvarum ( " Natural History " ) , published in July 1626 . All this evidence supports McColley 's dating of " 1626 – 29 , with the probable years of composition 1627 – 28 " , which is now generally accepted . 
 William Poole , in his 2009 edition of The Man in the Moone , provides additional evidence for a later dating . Godwin , he argues , most likely got his knowledge of the Jesuit mission in China ( founded in 1601 ) from a 1625 edition of Samuel Purchas 's Purchas his Pilgrimage . This book contains a redaction from Nicolas Trigault 's De Christiana expeditione apud Sinas <unk> ab <unk> Jesu ( 1615 ) ( " Concerning the Christian expedition to China undertaken by the Society of Jesus " ) , itself the redaction of a manuscript by the Jesuit priest Matteo Ricci . Poole also sees the influence of Robert Burton , who in the second volume of The Anatomy of Melancholy had speculated on gaining astronomical knowledge through telescopic observation ( citing Galileo ) or from space travel ( Lucian ) . Appearing for the first time in the 1628 edition of the Anatomy is a section on planetary periods , which gives a period for Mars of three years – had Godwin used William Gilbert 's De Magnete ( 1600 ) for this detail he would have found a Martian period of two years . Finally , Poole points to what he calls a " genetic debt " : while details on for instance the Martian period could have come from a few other sources , Burton and Godwin are the only two writers of the time to combine an interest in alien life with the green children of Woolpit , from a 12th @-@ century account of two mysterious green children found in Suffolk . 
 One of Godwin 's " major intellectual debts " is to Gilbert 's De Magnete , in which Gilbert argued that the Earth was magnetic , though he may have used a derivative account by Mark Ridley or a geographical textbook by Nathanael Carpenter . It is unlikely that Godwin could have gathered first @-@ hand evidence used in narrating the events in his book ( such as the details of Gonsales 's journey back from the East , especially a description of Saint Helena and its importance as a resting place for sick mariners ) , and more likely that he relied on travel adventures and other books . He used Trigault 's De Christiana expeditione apud Sinas ( 1615 ) , based on a manuscript by Matteo Ricci , the founder of the Jesuit mission in Beijing in 1601 , for information about that mission . Details pertaining to the sea voyage and Saint Helena likely came from Thomas Cavendish 's account of his first circumnavigation of the world , available in Richard Hakluyt 's Principal Navigations ( 1599 – 1600 ) and in Purchas His Pilgrimage , first published in 1613 . Information on the Dutch Revolt , the historical setting for the early part of Gonsales ' career , likely came from the annals of Emanuel van <unk> , a Dutch historian working in London . 
 = = = English editions and translations = = = 
 McColley knew of only one surviving copy of the first edition , held at the British Museum ( now British Library <unk> ) , which was the basis for his 1937 edition of The Man in the Moone and Nuncius Inanimatus , an edition criticised by literary critic Kathleen Tillotson as lacking in textual care and consistency . H. W. Lawton 's review published six years earlier mentions a second copy in the Bibliothèque nationale de France , <unk> ( now RES <unk> <unk> 752 ( 6 ) ) , an omission also noted by Tillotson . 
 For the text of his 2009 edition , William Poole collated a copy in the Bodleian Library Oxford ( <unk> . 940 ( 1 ) ) with that in the British Library . The printer of the first edition of The Man in the Moone is identified on the title page as John Norton , and the book was sold by Joshua Kirton and Thomas Warren . It also includes an epistle introducing the work and attributed to " E. M. " , perhaps the fictitious Edward Mahon identified in the Stationers ' Register as the translator from the original Spanish . Poole speculates that this Edward Mahon might be Thomas or Morgan Godwin , two of the bishop 's sons who had worked with their father on telegraphy , but adds that Godwin 's third son , Paul , might be involved as well . The partial revision of the manuscript ( the first half has dates according to the Gregorian calendar , the second half still follows the superseded Julian calendar ) indicates an unfinished manuscript , which Paul might have acquired after his father 's death and passed on to his former colleague Joshua Kirton : Paul Godwin and Kirton were apprenticed to the same printer , John Bill , and worked there together for seven years . Paul may have simply continued the " E. M. " hoax unknowingly , and / or may have been responsible for partial revision of the manuscript . To the second edition , published in 1657 , was added Godwin 's Nuncius Inanimatus ( in English and Latin ; first published in 1629 ) . The third edition was published in 1768 ; its text was abridged , and a description of St Helena ( by printer Nathaniel Crouch ) functioned as an introduction . 
 A French translation by Jean Baudoin , L 'Homme dans la Lune , was published in 1648 , and republished four more times . This French version excised the narrative 's sections on Lunar Christianity , as so do the many translations based on it , including the German translation incorrectly ascribed to Hans Jakob Christoffel von <unk> , Der fliegende Wandersmann nach dem Mond , 1659 . Johan van <unk> ( c . 1594 – 1650 ) translated the book into Dutch , and a Dutch translation – possibly <unk> 's , although the attribution is uncertain – went through seven printings in the Netherlands between 1645 and 1718 . The second edition of 1651 and subsequent editions include a continuation of unknown authorship relating Gonsales ' further adventures . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The story is written as a first @-@ person narrative from the perspective of Domingo Gonsales , the book 's fictional author . In his opening address to the reader the equally fictional translator " E. M. " promises " an essay of Fancy , where Invention is shewed with Judgment " . Gonsales is a citizen of Spain , forced to flee to the East Indies after killing a man in a duel . There he prospers by trading in jewels , and having made his fortune decides to return to Spain . On his voyage home he becomes seriously ill , and he and a negro servant Diego are put ashore on St Helena , a remote island with a reputation for " temperate and healthful " air . A scarcity of food forces Gonsales and Diego to live some miles apart , but Gonsales devises a variety of systems to allow them to communicate . Eventually he comes to rely on a species of bird he describes as some kind of wild swan , a gansa , to carry messages and provisions between himself and Diego . Gonsales gradually comes to realise that these birds are able to carry substantial burdens , and resolves to construct a device by which a number of them harnessed together might be able to support the weight of a man , allowing him to move around the island more conveniently . Following a successful test flight he determines to resume his voyage home , hoping that he might " fill the world with the Fame of [ his ] Glory and Renown " . But on his way back to Spain , accompanied by his birds and the device he calls his Engine , his ship is attacked by an English fleet off the coast of Tenerife and he is forced to escape by taking to the air . 
 After setting down briefly on Tenerife , Gonsales is forced to take off again by the imminent approach of hostile natives . But rather than flying to a place of safety among the Spanish inhabitants of the island the gansas fly higher and higher . On the first day of his flight Gonsales encounters " illusions of ' Devils and Wicked Spirits ' " in the shape of men and women , some of whom he is able to converse with . They provide him with food and drink for his journey and promise to set him down safely in Spain if only he will join their " Fraternity " , and " enter into such Covenants as they had made to their Captain and Master , whom they would not name " . Gonsales declines their offer , and after a journey of 12 days reaches the Moon . Suddenly feeling very hungry he opens the provisions he was given en route , only to find nothing but dry leaves , goat 's hair and animal dung , and that his wine " stunk like Horse @-@ piss " . He is soon discovered by the inhabitants of the Moon , the Lunars , whom he finds to be tall Christian people enjoying a happy and carefree life in a kind of pastoral paradise . Gonsales discovers that order is maintained in this apparently utopian state by swapping delinquent children with terrestrial children . 
 The Lunars speak a language consisting " not so much of words and letters as tunes and strange sounds " , which Gonsales succeeds in gaining some fluency in after a couple of months . Six months or so after his arrival Gonsales becomes concerned about the condition of his gansas , three of whom have died . Fearing that he may never be able to return to Earth and see his children again if he delays further , he decides to take leave of his hosts , carrying with him a gift of precious stones from the supreme monarch of the Moon , <unk> . The stones are of three different sorts : <unk> , which can store and generate great quantities of heat ; <unk> , which generates great quantities of light ; and <unk> , which when one side of the stone is clasped to the skin renders a man weightless , or half as heavy again if the other side is touched . 
 Gonsales harnesses his gansas to his Engine and leaves the Moon on 29 March 1601 . He lands in China about nine days later , without re @-@ encountering the illusions of men and women he had seen on his outward journey and with the help of his <unk> , which helps the birds to avoid plummeting to Earth as the weight of Gonsales and his Engine threatens to become too much for them . He is quickly arrested and taken before the local mandarin , accused of being a magician , and as a result is confined in the mandarin 's palace . He learns to speak the local dialect of Chinese , and after some months of confinement is summoned before the mandarin to give an account of himself and his arrival in China , which gains him the mandarin 's trust and favour . Gonsales hears of a group of Jesuits , and is granted permission to visit them . He writes an account of his adventures , which the Jesuits arrange to have sent back to Spain . The story ends with Gonsales 's fervent wish that he may one day be allowed to return to Spain , and " that by enriching my country with the knowledge of these hidden mysteries , I may at least reap the glory of my fortunate misfortunes " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The story is set during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I , a period of religious conflict in England . Not only was there the threat of a Catholic resurgence but there were also disputes within the Protestant Church . When Gonsales first encounters the Lunars he exclaims " Jesu Maria " , at which the Lunars fall to their knees , but although they revere the name of Jesus they are unfamiliar with the name Maria , suggesting that they are Protestants rather than Catholics ; Poole is of the same opinion : " their lack of reaction to the name of Mary suggests that they have not fallen into the errors of the Catholic Church , despite some otherwise rather Catholic @-@ looking institutions on the moon " . Beginning in the 1580s , when Godwin was a student at Oxford University , many publications criticising the governance of the established Church of England circulated widely , until in 1586 censorship was introduced , resulting in the Martin Marprelate controversy . Martin Marprelate was the name used by the anonymous author or authors of the illegal tracts attacking the Church published between 1588 and 1589 . A number of commentators , including Grant McColley , have suggested that Godwin strongly objected to the imposition of censorship , expressed in Gonsales 's hope that the publication of his account may not prove " prejudicial to the Catholic faith " . John Clark has suggested that the Martin Marprelate controversy may have inspired Godwin to give the name Martin to the Lunar 's god , but as a bishop of the Church of England it is perhaps unlikely that he was generally sympathetic to the Martin Marprelate position . Critics do not agree on the precise denomination of Godwin 's Lunars . In contrast with Clark and Poole , David Cressy argues that the Lunars falling to their knees after Gonsales 's exclamation ( a similar ritual takes place at the court of <unk> ) is evidence of " a fairly mechanical form of religion ( as most of Godwin 's Protestant contemporaries judged Roman Catholicism ) " . 
 By the time The Man in the Moone was published , discussion on the plurality of worlds had begun to favour the possibility of extraterrestrial life . For Christian thinkers such a plurality is intimately connected to Christ and his redemption of man : if there are other worlds , do they share a similar history , and does Christ also redeem them in his sacrifice ? According to Philipp Melanchthon , a 16th @-@ century theologian who worked closely with Martin Luther , " It must not be imagined that there are many worlds , because it must not be imagined that Christ died or was resurrected more often , nor must it be thought that in any other world without the knowledge of the son of God , that men would be restored to eternal life " . Similar comments were made by Calvinist theologian Lambert <unk> . Midway through the 17th century the matter appears to have been settled in favour of a possible plurality , which was accepted by Henry More and Aphra Behn among others ; " by 1650 , the Elizabethan Oxford examination question an <unk> <unk> mundi ? ( ' can these be many worlds ? ' – to which the correct Aristotelian answer was ' no ' ) had been replaced by the disputation thesis quod Luna sit <unk> ( ' that the moon could be habitable ' – which might be answered ' probably ' if not ' yes ' ) " . 
 = = = Lunar language = = = 
 Godwin had a lifelong interest in language and communication ( as is evident in Gonsales 's various means of communicating with his servant Diego on St Helena ) , and this was the topic of his Nuncius <unk> ( 1629 ) . The language Gonsales encounters on the Moon bears no relation to any he is familiar with , and it takes him months to acquire sufficient fluency to communicate properly with the inhabitants . While its vocabulary appears limited , its possibilities for meaning are multiplied since the meaning of words and phrases also depends on tone . Invented languages were an important element of earlier fantastical accounts such as Thomas More 's Utopia , François Rabelais 's Gargantua and Pantagruel and Joseph Hall 's Mundus Alter et Idem , all books that Godwin was familiar with . P. Cornelius , in a study of invented languages in imaginary travel accounts from the 17th and 18th centuries , proposes that a perfect , rationally organised language is indicative of the Enlightenment 's rationalism . As H. Neville Davies argues , Godwin 's imaginary language is more perfect than for instance More 's in one aspect : it is spoken on the entire Moon and has not suffered from the Earthly dispersion of languages caused by the fall of the Tower of Babel . 
 One of Godwin 's sources for his Lunar language was Trigault 's De Christiana expeditione apud Sinas . Gonsales provides two examples of spoken phrases , written down in a cipher later explained by John Wilkins in Mercury , or The Secret and Swift Messenger ( 1641 ) . Trigault 's account of the Chinese language gave Godwin the idea of assigning tonality to the Lunar language , and of appreciating it in the language spoken by the Chinese mandarins Gonsales encounters after his return to Earth . Gonsales claims that in contrast to the multitude of languages in China ( making their speakers mutually unintelligible ) , the mandarins ' language is universal by virtue of tonality ( he suppresses it in the other varieties of Chinese ) . Thus the mandarins are able to maintain a cultural and spiritual superiority resembling that of the Lunar upper class , which is to be placed in contrast with the variety of languages spoken in a fractured and morally degenerate Europe and elsewhere . <unk> argues that using the term " language " is overstating the case , and that cipher is the proper term : " In spite of Godwin 's claims , this musical ' language ' is not in fact a language at all , but simply a cipher in which the letters of an existing language may be transcribed " . He suggests Godwin 's source may have been a book by Joan Baptista Porta , whose De <unk> <unk> notis ( 1606 ) contains " an exact description of the method he was to adopt " . 
 = = Genre = = 
 The book 's genre has been variously categorised . When it was first published the literary genre of utopian fantasy was in its infancy , and critics have recognised how Godwin used a utopian setting to criticise the institutions of his time : the Moon was " the ideal perspective from which to view the earth " and its " moral attitudes and social institutions , " according to Maurice Bennett . Other critics have referred to the book as " utopia " , " Renaissance utopia " or " picaresque adventure " . While some critics claim it as one of the first works of science fiction , there is no general agreement that it is even " proto @-@ science @-@ fiction " . 
 Early commentators recognised that the book is a kind of picaresque novel , and comparisons with Don Quixote were being made as early as 1638 . In structure as well as content The Man in the Moone somewhat resembles the anonymous Spanish novella <unk> de <unk> ( 1554 ) ; both books begin with a genealogy and start out in Salamanca , featuring a man who travels from master to master seeking his fortune . But most critics agree that the picaresque mode is not sustained throughout , and that Godwin intentionally achieves a " generic transformation " . 
 Godwin 's book follows a venerable tradition of travel literature that blends the excitement of journeys to foreign places with utopian reflection ; More 's Utopia is cited as a forerunner , as is the account of Amerigo Vespucci . Godwin could fall back on an extensive body of work describing the voyages undertaken by his protagonist , including books by Hakluyt and Jan <unk> van <unk> , and the narratives deriving from the Jesuit mission in Beijing . 
 = = Criticism and influence = = 
 The Man in the Moone was published five months after The Discovery of a World in the Moone by John Wilkins , later bishop of Chester . Wilkins refers to Godwin once , in a discussion of spots in the Moon , but not to Godwin 's book . In the third edition of The Discovery ( 1640 ) , however , Wilkins provides a summary of Godwin 's book , and later in Mercury ( 1641 ) he comments on The Man in the Moone and Nuncius Inanimatus , saying that " the former text could be used to unlock the secrets of the latter " . The Man in the Moone quickly became an international " source of humour and parody " : Cyrano de Bergerac , using Baudoin 's 1648 translation , parodied it in L <unk> Monde : <unk> les États et Empires de la Lune ( 1657 ) ; Cyrano 's traveller actually meets Gonsales , who is still on the Moon , " degraded to the status of pet monkey " . It was one of the inspirations for what has been called the first science fiction text in the Americas , <unk> and Lunar <unk> Aligned to the Meridian of Mérida of the Yucatán by an <unk> or Inhabitant of the Moon ... by Manuel Antonio de Rivas ( 1775 ) . The <unk> language of Jonathan Swift , who was a distant relation of Godwin 's , may have been influenced by The Man in the Moone , either directly or through Cyrano de Bergerac . 
 The Man in the Moone became a popular source for " often extravagantly staged comic drama and opera " , including Aphra Behn 's The Emperor of the Moon , a 1687 play " inspired by ... the third edition of [ The Man in the Moone ] , and the English translation of Cyrano 's work " , and Elkanah Settle 's The World in the Moon ( 1697 ) . Thomas D 'Urfey 's Wonders in the Sun , or the Kingdom of the Birds ( 1706 ) was " really a sequel , starring Domingo and Diego " . Its popularity was not limited to English ; a Dutch farce , Don Domingo Gonzales of de Man in de <unk> , formerly considered to have been written by Maria de Wilde , was published in 1755 . 
 The book 's influence continued into the 19th century . Edgar Allan Poe in an appendix to " The <unk> Adventure of One Hans <unk> " called it " a singular and somewhat ingenious little book " . Poe assumed the author to be French , an assumption also made by Jules Verne in his From the Earth to the Moon ( 1865 ) , suggesting that they may have been using Baudoin 's translation . H. G. Wells 's The First Men in the Moon ( 1901 ) has several parallels with Godwin 's fantasy , including the use of a stone to induce weightlessness . But The Man in the Moone has nevertheless been given only " lukewarm consideration in different histories of English literature " , and its importance is downplayed in studies of Utopian literature . Frank E. Manuel and <unk> P. Manuel 's Utopian Thought in the Western World ( winner of the 1979 National Book Award for Nonfiction ) mentions it only in passing , saying that Godwin " treats primarily of the mechanics of flight with the aid of a crew of birds " , and that The Man in the Moone , like Bergerac 's and Wilkins 's books , lacks " high seriousness and unified moral purpose " . 
 Gonsales 's load @-@ carrying birds have also left their mark . The Oxford English Dictionary 's entry for gansa reads " One of the birds ( called elsewhere ' wild swans ' ) which drew Domingo Gonsales to the Moon in the romance by Bp . F. Godwin " . For the etymology it suggests <unk> , found in Philemon Holland 's 1601 translation of Pliny the Elder 's Natural History . Michael van Langren ( " Langrenus " ) , the 17th @-@ century Dutch astronomer and cartographer , named one of the lunar craters for them , <unk> , later renamed Halley . 
 = = Modern editions = = 
 The Man in the Moone : or a Discourse of a Voyage thither by Domingo Gonsales , 1638 . Facsimile reprint , <unk> Press , 1971 . 
 The Man in the Moone and Nuncius Inanimatus , ed . Grant McColley . Smith College Studies in Modern Languages 19 . 1937 . Repr . <unk> Press , 1996 . 
 The Man in the Moone . A Story of Space Travel in the Early 17th Century , 1959 . 
 The Man in the Moone , in Charles C. Mish , Short Fiction of the Seventeenth Century , 1963 . Based on the second edition , with modernised text ( an " eccentric choice " ) . 
 The Man in the Moone , in Faith K. <unk> and T. Allan Comp , eds . , The Man in the Moone and Other Lunar Fantasies . Praeger , 1971 . 
 The Man in the Moone , ed . William Poole . Broadview , 2009 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 55111 @-@ 896 @-@ 3 . 
 = = = Monographs on The Man in the Moone = = = 
 Anke Janssen , Francis Godwins " The Man in the Moone " : Die Entdeckung des Romans als Medium der <unk> mit <unk> . Peter Lang , 1981 . 
 = White Horse ( Taylor Swift song ) = 
 " White Horse " is a song performed by American singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift . The song was written by Swift and Liz Rose and produced by Nathan Chapman , with Swift 's aid . The song was released on December 7 , 2008 by Big Machine Records , as the second single from Swift 's second studio album Fearless ( 2008 ) . Swift and Rose composed the song about one of Swift 's ex @-@ boyfriends , when Swift discovered he was not what she had perceived of him . It focused on the moment where Swift accepted that the relationship was over . " White Horse " is , musically , a country song and uses sparse production to emphasize vocals . Lyrically , the track speaks of disillusionment and pain in a relationship , drawing references to fairytales . 
 Critically , " White Horse " garnered generally positive reception . At the 2010 Grammy Awards , " White Horse " won the Grammy Awards for Best Country Song and Best Female Country Vocal Performance . The song also performed well commercially , although it did not duplicate the success of its predecessor , " Love Story " . In the United States , it peaked at number thirteen in the Billboard Hot 100 and number two on Hot Country Songs . It was later certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Trey Fanjoy , who directed the majority of Swift 's prior videos . The video features Swift as she decides to end a relationship via phone call . In the video , Swift recalls multiple memories with her love interest , both positive and negative . Swift promoted " White Horse " via live performances , including numerous during the Fearless Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Swift commenced composing " White Horse " almost a year before the release of Fearless , weeks after composing Fearless 's lead single " Love Story " , songs which are quite disparate lyrically . Swift first solely wrote the first verse . She then made a phone call to Liz Rose , co @-@ writer of most tracks on Swift 's eponymous debut studio album , Taylor Swift ( 2006 ) , asking for her aid in finishing the song ; the two completed writing the song in approximately forty @-@ five minutes . The song was inspired by a boyfriend of Swift 's who she perceived to be a Prince Charming and , in the downfall of the relationship , then realized he was not . She said he was the person who triggered the song , but , once in the midst of writing it , drifted in direction . It focused on the initial moment where she recognized the relationship was over . She said everything after that particular moment centered on recuperation and , because of that , considered it the most solemn aspect of a breakup : " To me , ' White Horse ' is about what , in my opinion , is the most heart @-@ breaking part of a break @-@ up – that moment when you realize that all the dreams you had , all those visions you had of being with this person , all that disappears . " About the difference in themes between " White Horse " and " Love Story " , Swift explained that in divergent scenarios , she regarded fairytales in different manners . She attributed the fact that because she did not expect to go through the event , then she became more inclined to come in terms with reality . 
 " When we 're little girls , our parents read us storybooks . And we think that Prince Charming 's gonna come along , is gonna have a white cape on , is going to put us on a pedestal . And the bad guy wears black and we always know who that guy is . But what we don 't realize is that , in reality , the bad guy is wearing jeans . And he 's cute . And he 's charming , makes you laugh , and you believe him . You think he 's the good guy . Then , you realize he 's not . " 
 The song was not originally intended to be included on Fearless , due to Swift believing <unk> was already represented accurately on the album ; therefore , Swift was planning on including the track on her third studio album , what would become Speak Now in 2010 . However , when Swift 's Los Angeles managing agency set up an appointment with the executive producers of her favorite television series , Grey 's Anatomy , Betsy Beers and Shonda Rhimes , they discussed including Swift 's music on the series . Swift chose to play them " White Horse " live with an acoustic guitar . Beers and Rhimes were very impressed and told Swift they would respond her via telephone as soon as they could . Swift decided to not include the track on Fearless , until the producers responded , which they did not for some time . When Grey 's Anatomy 's representatives called , Swift and Nathan Chapman recorded the song immediately , sent a CD to them , and they decided to use it on the television series . " White Horse " debuted on the fifth season premiere of Grey 's Anatomy , " Dream a Little Dream of Me " , on September 25 , 2008 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " White Horse " is a country song with a length of three minutes and 55 seconds . It is set in common time and has a tempo of 92 beats per minute . Therefore , it is categorized as ballad . It is written in the key of C major and Swift 's vocals span one octave , from G3 to A4 . " White Horse " follows the chord progression C5 – F ( add ) 2 – Am7 – F ( add ) 2 . The song is based upon a pop hook , and has an instrumentation mainly based on acoustic guitar and soft piano , with accents of cello . The production , however , is sparse , leaving an emphasis on Swift 's soft and breathy vocals . 
 The lyrics of " White Horse " are written in first person , with Swift reflecting on an occasion when a relationship , which seemed like a fairytale in the commence , fell apart : " I 'm not a princess , this ain 't a fairytale / I 'm not the one you 'll sweep off her feet / Lead her up the stairwell . " The track spoke about pain and disillusionment , in the clear perspective of a reborn realist . Due to the heartbreak , the protagonist escapes from the small town that she resided in . Several music critics , like Kate Kiefer of Paste , noted the lyrical disparity between " White Horse " and Swift 's previous single , " Love Story " , where Swift viewed fairytales in a positive light , with a happy ending . Kiefer assumed that " White Horse " withdrew everything she said in " Love Story " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " White Horse " garnered generally positive reception from critics . August Brown of The Los Angeles Times compared the song with Dolly Parton 's " Jolene " ( 1973 ) , saying Parton would have recognized her own predicament in " White Horse " and may have congratulated Swift for attempting to move on . Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine called " White Horse " a " lovely ballad " with a prominent hook and deemed it " easily the best song " on Fearless . However , Keefer stated , " Even ' White Horse ' [ ... ] makes use of a well @-@ worn , clichéd image that Swift doesn 't use in any novel way . " Josh Love of The Village Voice thought " preternatural wisdom and inclusiveness " shined through the lyrics and theme of " White Horse " ; Love also mentioned that it was one of Fearless ' " great songs " . Lucy Davies of the BBC said it demonstrated how repetitive the lyrical themes on Fearless were . She noted Swift recycled the phrase " face of an angel " from the album 's previous track , " Hey Stephen " . An uncredited review from Billboard stated , " The second single from Taylor Swift 's top @-@ selling CD is a beautiful , understated ballad that showcases her skill with a lyric and shines a spotlight on her signature tender , heart @-@ on @-@ her @-@ sleeve vocals . " The review stated that the latter was accomplished by the song 's production , which made Swift 's vocal performance more palpable and emotive . The review also complimented the song , as something everyone could relate to . Kate Kiefer of Paste recognized it to be one of Swift 's best songs . Sean Dooley of About.com attributed the track 's effectiveness to be in how Swift captured the heartbreaking moment . While reviewing Fearless , Dooley selected " White Horse " as one of the best tracks on the album . At the 52nd Grammy Awards , " White Horse " won the Grammy Awards for Best Country Song and Best Female Country Vocal Performance . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the week ending November 29 , 2008 , " White Horse " debuted and peaked at number thirteen on the Billboard Hot 100 . Its appearance , along with six other songs , on the chart tied Swift with Hannah Montana ( Miley Cyrus ) for the female act to have the most songs charting on the Billboard Hot 100 in the same week , a record later surpassed by Swift herself when she charted eleven songs at once in 2010 . The following week , the song dropped to number fifty @-@ six , and , on the week ending April 25 , 2009 , it spent its last week on the Billboard Hot 100 at number forty @-@ four , after a total of twenty @-@ two weeks on the chart . The song is one of thirteen songs from Fearless charted within the top forty of the Billboard Hot 100 , breaking the record for the most top forty entries from a single album . The single was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipments exceeding one million copies . As of November 2014 , " White Horse " has sold 1 @.@ 9 million copies in the United States . 
 The single debuted at number thirty @-@ seven on Billboard Hot Country Songs on the week @-@ ending December 12 , 2008 . It jumped at number twenty @-@ six on the following week , the biggest jump of the week . On the week ending February 14 , 2009 , it entered the top ten at number ten , scoring Swift 's seventh consecutive top ten hit on the chart . It peaked at number two on the week @-@ ending April 4 , 2009 and held there on the following week before dropping at number seven . It charted for a total of twenty weeks on Billboard Hot Country Songs . 
 " White Horse " debuted at number twenty @-@ seven in Canada on the week ending November 29 , 2008 . On the week ending January 24 , 2009 , " White Horse " peaked at number forty @-@ three in Canada . It was certified gold by Music Canada for sales of 40 @,@ 000 digital downloads . In Australia , the track entered at its peak at number forty @-@ one on the week ending February 22 , 2009 . In United Kingdom , " White Horse " debuted and peaked at number sixty on the week ending March 21 , 2009 . It stayed on United Kingdom for two weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " White Horse " was directed by Trey Fanjoy , who directed the majority of Swift 's prior videos . Swift commented that Fanjoy was her first choice to film the video because she understood the direction Swift wanted to take and how to make the video different than the prior ones they filmed . The video 's plot centered on infidelity . However , because the theme had appeared on the video for " Picture to Burn " , the scenario was reversed , rather than removed entirely , for Swift thought it was inevitable to include it . It was conceptualized so that Swift was not the person who someone was unfaithful to , but rather the one who someone was unfaithful with : " This girl falls in love with this guy and he 's perfect . He 's adorable . He 's charming . He 's endearing . She falls in love with him . Then , she comes to realize that he 's been leading a double life . He was already in a relationship years before he ever met her [ ... ] You find out that I 'm the one that was ruining a relationship without even knowing it . " Swift chose actor Stephen Colletti to portray the role of her love interest . She had previously seen him on the reality television series Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County , where she acknowledged him to be " cute " , and later on One Tree Hill , where she was impressed by his acting skills ; thus , Colletti was contacted to portray the character . Swift chose Colletti primarily because of his sweet and endearing demeanor . As a result , the character would seem very loyal , as though he would never betray his partner . Therefore , others did not expect for him to betray Swift either . " That 's always the hardest thing , when someone has you fooled so much that you think they 're never gonna hurt you . And then they do . That 's when you get the worst heartbreak " , Swift said . 
 The video was shot in one day in January 2009 in Nashville , Tennessee . <unk> scenes between Swift and Colletti were filmed first ; the lunch , outdoor , and indoor scenes followed . Coincidentally , on the day of filming , it rained heavily , something which Swift was enlightened by , since it corresponded to the video 's gloomy and dark feel . Swift said it aided in making the video less colorful lighting @-@ wise , and more fixated on muted tones . The last scenes were more difficult for Swift because they involved crying . She attributed the difficulty to the number of people surrounding her and watching , something she was not accustomed to . However , Fanjoy , who was once an actress , guided her into thinking about what made her most solemn , and completing the scene effectively . Fanjoy said the scenes demonstrated what an exceptional actress Swift was , adding she took direction very well . The scene took approximately three hours to film . 
 The video premiered on February 7 , 2009 on CMT . The video commences with a close @-@ ups of Swift 's and Colletti 's mouths as they speak via telephone . He begins , " All I want is you . Do you love me ? " She affirms , and he asks for another chance . The video transitions to Swift sitting on the living room floor , next to a fireplace . She performs as she flashbacks to memories with Colletti . The two frolic on a brown couch and play with a deck of cards . The video then transitions to Swift and her friend having lunch a restaurant , where Swift 's friend informs her of Colletti 's betrayal . The two converse and , then , Swift is seen walking on the streets during nighttime . She sees Colletti arriving at a house with groceries and , after staring at each other , a redheaded woman walks out of the house . In a panic , Swift runs away and the video transcends to the phone call , which commenced in the beginning of the video , with Colletti repeating , " Will you give me another chance ? " A rapid flashback of cut @-@ scenes is played and , after its conclusion , Swift denies his request , hangs up , and cries . Cut @-@ scenes feature Swift and Colletti frolicking , Swift walking in the streets , and her sitting beside the fireplace . To date , the video has over 109 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On her first televised performance of " White Horse " , on November 23 , 2008 , at the 2008 American Music Awards , Swift donned a white evening gown as she sat on floral @-@ patterned couch . While promoting the song , she later performed it at the Nomination Concert for the 51st Grammy Awards , where she coupled it in a medley with a cover of Brenda Lee 's " I 'm Sorry " , and the AOL Sessions . Since , Swift has performed the track at the Studio 330 Sessions , the 2009 CMA Music Festival , the 2009 V Festival , the Australian charity concert Sydney Sound Relief , and on Dancing with the Stars . Swift performed " White Horse " on all venues in 2009 and 2010 of her first headlining concert tour , the Fearless Tour . During the performances , Swift wore a pastel sundress as performed solely playing an acoustic guitar , standing at the edge of the stage 's runway . In the concert on May 22 , 2009 , at Staples Center in Los Angeles , California , Swift sang " White Horse " in duet with American singer John Mayer . Reviewing the June 2 , 2010 concert at Verizon Center in Washington , D.C. , Dave McKenna of The Washington Post reported , " On ' White Horse , ' the chorus of believers also joined in , and threw their young fists in the air to yell Swift 's esteem @-@ free but cathartic climax , ' I 'm gonna find someone someday who might actually treat me well ! ' " Swift said in a 2012 interview with Cosmopolitan that White Horse is in fact her favorite song to sing live , " a song that I 've always been proud of because it 's about that really horrible feeling of a one @-@ sided relationship that isn 't balanced ; it 's one @-@ sided . You clearly love him more than he loves you , and you know it . And it 's a sinking feeling , but it 's also a really intoxicating feeling . And a lot of times girls will end up in these relationships where he 's not giving you anything so you 'll take the crumbs . In my mind what hurts the most is what they didn 't say . It 's when they knew I needed to hear something and they wouldn 't just say it . They knew I needed commitment or loyalty or reassurance , and they wouldn 't give it . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 CD Single 
 " White Horse " ( Album Version ) – 3 : 55 
 " White Horse " ( Radio Edit ) – 3 : 22 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 2013 RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = Repentless = 
 Repentless is the twelfth studio album by American thrash metal band Slayer . It was released on September 11 , 2015 , and is the first Slayer album to feature guitarist Gary Holt of Exodus and the first to feature drummer Paul Bostaph since 2001 's God Hates Us All . Repentless is also Slayer 's first album following the death of founding member Jeff Hanneman in 2013 , and the band 's first album to be released on Nuclear Blast . 
 Five singles were released from the album , " Implode " , " When the Stillness Comes " , " Repentless " , " Cast The First Stone " and " You Against You " . The album debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 , the highest charting debut from the band in their native country . It also topped the chart in Germany and featured in the top ten of almost twenty charts around the world . It received mixed to positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Background = = 
 When asked in May 2011 if Slayer was going to make a follow @-@ up to World Painted Blood , then @-@ Slayer drummer Dave Lombardo replied that although nothing had been written yet , there were " definitely plans " . In early 2011 , guitarist Jeff Hanneman contracted necrotizing fasciitis . Reports linked this illness with a spider bite he claimed to have received while in a friend 's hot tub . When asked about a new record , bassist Tom Araya stated that any work would have to wait until Hanneman had recovered . 
 On February 20 , 2013 , it was announced that Lombardo would not take part in Slayer 's Australia tour due to contractual disputes , and his place would be taken by former drummer Jon Dette . Being interviewed in late February by Soundwave TV , guitarist Kerry King elaborated more on the personnel status for the album . He expressed doubt as to who might produce the album , saying that Metallica had producer Greg Fidelman " monopolized " . Additionally , the continued absence of Hanneman further contributed to the uncertainty . Lombardo 's permanent replacement was later announced to be Paul Bostaph , who was previously the band 's drummer from 1992 – 2001 , appearing on several albums . 
 On May 2 , 2013 , Jeff Hanneman died of liver failure in a Los Angeles hospital . A week later , the official cause of death was announced as alcohol @-@ related cirrhosis . Hanneman and his family had apparently been unaware of the extent of condition until shortly before his death . King has announced his desire for the band to continue , but Araya was more uncertain , stating , " After 30 years , it would literally be like starting over , " and expressing doubts that Slayer 's fanbase would approve of such a change . In March 2015 , Araya revealed that the band had recorded one song prior to Hanneman 's passing , and that the song will appear on the album . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 The album 's writing process started in November 2011 , announced by Lombardo through Twitter . King later said that he and Lombardo had been working on music prior to the holidays and that they had completed three songs , in addition to three outtakes from the previous record . It was initially hoped that the album would be ready for release by summer of 2012 , but this did not come to fruition . Frontman Tom Araya later said that the album would be pushed back to a 2013 release , but this idea fell through . 
 In addition , King had noted that two of the new songs had been fully recorded and that there was a possibility that they might be released as an EP , but the idea was later dismissed . King announced the songs ' titles as " Chasing Death " and " Implode . " Araya announced that the band would start writing the new album upon completion of the 2012 Mayhem Festival , which ended in August of that year . Since their recorded songs still needed to be mixed , King announced in a late August 2012 interview that there had been a twelve @-@ day window where the band had been able to " hijack Greg Fidelman from Metallica " for further production on the album . By then , the band had two songs that were missing lead guitar parts and vocals and had recorded six demos . In addition , King said that the band had yet to record three more demos . 
 In February 2013 during an interview with Eddie Trunk , King declared that , while Hanneman still had not been involved with the album , the band was waiting for label issues to be resolved before recording . King stated that he and Lombardo had eight songs that they were working on , as well . When asked about whether or not Exodus guitarist Gary Holt , who had been filling in for Hanneman during live shows , would play on the record , King denied it , saying that he would handle all guitars except for Hanneman 's lead parts . King also said that Hanneman had yet to offer up any material for the album . Araya later contradicted King 's statement about Hanneman and stated that Hanneman had been working on material for the album . Shortly after Hanneman 's death , Araya revealed that Hanneman had gone so far as to send Araya music that he had been working on , and Araya later said that some of this material — including an outtake from World Painted Blood — may make it onto the album . 
 Even prior to Hanneman 's death , King had expressed doubt as to who would even play on the album . He stated that if work on the album could be done in June 2013 , then it was hoped that the album could be out by the following September or October . After Hanneman 's passing , Holt was asked if he will be featured on the album , to which he replied that he would probably be playing some solos on the album , but that the rest of the guitar work would all be King . King later confirmed this sentiment , but explained that Holt would not be participating in any of the writing , noting : " fans aren 't ready for it . " 
 According to Holt , recording for the album was expected to commence at the end of 2013 . King later stated that there were plans to begin recording in January 2014 . King further revealed that he and drummer Paul Bostaph have recorded 11 songs on a demo , while also working on some additional tracks , seven of which had complete lyrics . On April 24 , 2014 , Slayer offered a free download of " Implode " , their first song in five years as well as their first recording to feature Holt on guitar . Additionally , it is the first recording to feature Bostaph on drums since 2001 's God Hates Us All . On the same day , it was announced that Slayer had signed to Nuclear Blast , and would release their eleventh studio album in early 2015 . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 In an interview , King described " Chasing Death " as being about alcoholism : " it 's like people who drink too much . They don 't help themselves out so they 're chasing death . " He explained " Implode " as being about the end of the world . The album could feature material written by Hanneman prior to his passing . Araya has explained that Hanneman had two songs that he submitted to the rest of the band . One song was an outtake from World Painted Blood , which Araya said that he and Hanneman had been working on melody and lyrics for . Additionally , Araya has said that he plans to go through Hanneman 's personal audio files , and that some of that material could also find its way onto the new album in one form or another . One song , mentioned by King in an interview , is " Piano Wire " , an unfinished track that Hanneman had been working on for the previous album . King also mentioned that there were two other songs that Hanneman had been holding onto for the last 15 to 20 years that will be released . 
 In October 2014 , the band revealed plans to release a new song , entitled " When the Stillness Comes " , via Scion AV , an " in @-@ house record label and lifestyle marketing division " of Toyota 's Scion brand . The song was released for Record Store Day on April 18 , 2015 . On June 19 , 2015 , Slayer made the title track available for streaming on YouTube . On August 31 , 2015 , Slayer released " Cast the First Stone " , another track on the album , via the Adult Swim singles program . On September 3 , 2015 , a behind the scenes look at the making of the music video for the album 's title track was released . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In April 2014 , the band released " Implode " for free . Rolling Stone said the song " plays out like classic Slayer " , although the lyrics were described as " expect [ ed ] " subject matter . Alex Young of Consequences of Sound called the song a " pummeling assault of metal music " . In January 2015 , the album , yet to be titled at the time , was mentioned by Loudwire as one of the " 30 Most Anticipated Rock + Metal Albums of 2015 " , alongside expected albums by bands like Black Sabbath , Iron Maiden , Anthrax , Megadeth , Testament , Metallica and Tool . Repentless sold 49 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and debuted number four on the US Billboard 200 , the band 's highest position in its native country . The album fell to number 34 on the Billboard 200 in its second week , selling 11 @,@ 000 copies . Seven weeks after being released , Repentless sold over 80 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 Repentless has received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Writing for Exclaim ! , Greg Pratt said that Repentless " isn 't going to be one of the classic Slayer albums , but there 's still plenty of good thrash to be found . " Journalist J.C. Maçek III of Spectrum Culture wrote " The truth is that it might be easy to dismiss Slayer after almost 35 years as a nostalgic metal act . This would be a travesty and a mistake . Slayer not only has something new to say on Repentless , but a new way to say it . " AllMusic writer Thom Jurek gave the album three out of five stars , calling Repentless " a retro , workmanlike effort from a band determined to soldier on , and that 's fine . There are hardcore devotees who never want their favorite bands to change ; this is for them . But again , given all that 's transpired since 2009 , Slayer get points for even pulling this off . " The Guardian stated that " Slayer have always been a model of consistency and a band that fans of vicious , vein @-@ bursting heavy metal can rely on . " Kim Kelly , writing in Spin was less enthusiastic , calling the album " middling " and stating that it " mostly falls flat . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Kerry King , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Slayer = = = 
 Tom Araya – bass , vocals 
 Kerry King – guitars 
 Gary Holt – guitars 
 Paul Bostaph – drums 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Terry Date – production , engineering , mixing 
 Peter Mack – additional engineering 
 Derrick Stockwell – assistant engineering 
 Howie Weinberg – mastering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Swede Hanson ( wrestler ) = 
 Robert Fort Hanson ( March 27 , 1933 – February 19 , 2002 ) was an American professional wrestler best known by his ring name Swede Hanson . He spent much of his career wrestling as part of a tag team with Rip Hawk . Together , they held championships in four different promotions . 
 Hanson and Hawk were heel ( villain ) wrestlers and competed against some of the most popular teams of their time . They later feuded with each other when Hawk found a new partner after Hanson suffered a legitimate heart attack . Hanson retired in 1986 and lived in South Carolina until his death in 2002 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hanson was born in East Orange , New Jersey . He attended high school until his senior year ; although he was offered a football scholarship to Wake Forest University , he declined the offer and stopped attending school . His mother was struggling financially , so Hanson became an aircraft mechanic to help his family . He also competed as an amateur boxer , and he compiled a 61 – 3 record in New Jersey Golden Gloves competitions . 
 = = Career = = 
 Boxing and professional wrestling promoter Willie <unk> discovered Hanson and convinced him to compete in wrestling . He trained with George Tragos and debuted in WWWF ( now World Wrestling Entertainment ) in Paterson , New Jersey against Miguel Torres in 1957 . Hanson was sent to Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania to compete while he continued to develop his skills . While there , he wrestled against Bruno Sammartino in Sammartino 's debut match . 
 He was later hired by Jim Crockett and moved to the Carolinas to compete . While there , he began teaming with Rip Hawk to form a tag team known as the " Blond Bombers " . They competed as heels ( villains ) and were hated by the crowds . During appearances , fans would throw acid or threaten them with knives and guns . In one attack , Hanson was stabbed in the leg and required 72 stitches . Hawk taught Hanson a move called the reverse neckbreaker , which saw Hanson stand back @-@ to @-@ back with his opponent , clasp his hands under the opponent 's chin , and fall to the ring floor while pulling the opponent with him . This became Hanson 's signature manoeuvre that he used in most matches . 
 Hanson remained silent during the team 's interviews while Hawk did most of the talking . The team won its first title on August 3 , 1965 , when they defeated Hiro Matsuda and Duke <unk> to win the Florida version of the NWA World Tag Team Championship . They also competed in Mid @-@ Atlantic Championship Wrestling , where they became the inaugural NWA Atlantic Coast Tag Team Champions . They held the title belts four times between 1968 and 1971 while feuding with George Becker and Johnny Weaver . During that time , they also won the IWA World Tag Team Championship while competing in Tasmania . While in the Carolinas , Hanson and Hawk spent a lot of time with Ric Flair when Flair entered the wrestling business . Hawk stated that Flair used to cause trouble for the group , including one incident in which Flair flirted with the girlfriend of a Mafia member . Hanson and Hawk used their friendship with the Mafia member to help Flair escape from being killed in revenge . 
 In 1971 , Hanson suffered a heart attack and had to take time away from wrestling . After returning , he formed a tag team with Super Destroyer . The partnership was short lived , as Super Destroyer later turned on Hanson . As a result , Hanson become a face ( fan favorite ) and the two feuded for several months . In 1974 , Hanson and his new partner , Tiger Conway , Jr . , began a feud with Hawk and Ric Flair . The series of matches later evolved into singles matches that pitted former partners Hanson and Hawk against each other . Hanson later became a less high @-@ profile wrestler and was given the role of putting over new wrestlers in the promotion . Hanson left the territory for a while but later returned with a new gimmick . He had frizzy hair and wore psychedelic clothes while teaming with Gene Anderson and Sgt. Jacques Goulet . 
 Hanson returned to the WWWF in 1979 as a vicious heel under the management of Fred Blassie . To build up his heat , many of his opponents were stretchered @-@ out of the ring following their matches with Swede . He unsuccessfully challenged World champion Bob Backlund at Madison Square Garden in October of that year . 
 Hanson and Hawk later reformed their team and competed together in the Amarillo , Texas @-@ based NWA Western States Sports . While there , they won the NWA Western States Tag Team Championship three times . Hanson 's final title reign was the only one that did not involve Hawk , as he teamed with The Hangman in Montreal , Quebec to win the Canadian International Tag Team Championship in 1981 . Hanson then returned to McMahon 's New England @-@ based Capitol Wrestling , which had since become the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . Using the gimmick of a redneck , complete with long hair and a Confederate flag , he competed for the WWF as a face until his retirement in 1986 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Hanson is regarded as an intimidating but honest wrestler . The character he portrayed was hated by many fans , but Hanson was different from many heel wrestlers because he did not cheat to win matches . Even while competing as a heel , however , Hanson and Hawk were admired by many spectators and had a fan club devoted to them . In contrast to Hawk , who remained a heel during his entire run in Mid @-@ Atlantic Championship Wrestling , Hanson gained popularity with even more fans when he feuded with Hawk and became the promotion 's top face wrestler . Writers who have looked back on his career have noted that he wrestled with " heart " and always worked his hardest in the ring . Hanson has had a lasting impact on the business , as he was willing to put over other wrestlers , including Blackjack Mulligan and Angelo <unk> to help boost their careers . He and Hawk also helped popularize the quick tag , which saw them trading places in the ring every few seconds to remain energized while their opponents became worn down . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 During the course of his wrestling career , he was married twice . While both marriages ended in divorce , he and his second wife remained close until the day he died . Swede 's marriages brought him seven children and twelve grandchildren . Swede 's first marriage to a woman named Vicky , brought him a daughter and son , named Linda and Lance . Then he married a woman named Doris , which brought him another daughter and son , Luana and Bobby . He also gained a stepson , Billy Roy and two adopted children , Mary and Carol , through his second marriage . Hanson lived in Charlotte , NC for over 20 + years . In the late 80 's , Hanson and his second wife moved to Fort Mill , SC . After divorcing his second wife , he remained living in a double @-@ wide mobile home on five acres of land in Fort Mill , South Carolina . He was later engaged to a woman named Patsy Hughes . 
 During his wrestling career , Hanson also worked in construction and had a position as a bouncer . After retiring from wrestling , Hanson worked a series of jobs . He was a trainer at a fitness center and later returned to construction work . His final position was as manager of a nightclub . Hanson also participated in several golf tournaments to raise money for charities . 
 In his later life , Hanson suffered from diabetes and Alzheimer 's disease . He also had high blood pressure and heart problems . He was hospitalized in Columbia , South Carolina in October 2001 due to dementia and died from Sepsis , on February 19 , 2002 . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Reverse neckbreaker 
 Nicknames 
 " Big " 
 Managers 
 Gary Hart 
 Homer O 'Dell 
 Freddie Blassie 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Championship Wrestling from Florida 
 NWA World Tag Team Championship ( Florida version ) ( 1 time ) - with Rip Hawk 
 International Wrestling Association 
 Canadian International Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with The Hangman 
 Mid @-@ Atlantic Championship Wrestling 
 NWA Atlantic Coast Tag Team Championship ( 4 times ) - with Rip Hawk 
 NWA Southern Tag Team Championship ( Mid @-@ Atlantic version ) ( 1 time ) - with Rip Hawk 
 NWA Western States Sports 
 NWA Western States Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) - with Rip Hawk 
 World Championship Wrestling ( Australia ) 
 IWA World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Rip Hawk 
 = 1920 Cleveland Tigers ( NFL ) season = 
 The 1920 Cleveland Tigers season was the franchise 's inaugural season in the American Professional Football Association ( APFA ) and fifth total as an American football team . The Tigers entered the season coming off a 5 @-@ win , 2 @-@ loss , 2 @-@ tie ( 5 – 2 – 2 ) record in 1919 . After the 1919 season , several representatives from the Ohio League , a loose organization of profession football teams , wanted to form a new professional league ; thus , the APFA was created . 
 The Tigers opened the season with a 0 – 0 tie against the Dayton Triangles , en route to a 2 – 4 – 2 record , which placed the team 10th in the final standings . In week 8 , the Tigers scored 7 points against the Akron Pros , which was the only points Akron allowed all season . The sportswriter Bruce Copeland compiled the 1920 All @-@ Pro list , but no players from the <unk> were on it . As of 2012 , no player from the 1920 Tigers roster has been enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame . 
 = = Offseason = = 
 The Cleveland Tigers finished 5 – 2 – 2 in their 1919 season in the Ohio League . After the 1919 season , representatives of four Ohio League teams — the Canton Bulldogs , the Tigers , the Dayton Triangles , and the Akron Pros — called a meeting on August 20 , 1920 to discuss the formation of a new league . At the meeting , they tentatively agreed on a salary cap and pledged not to sign college players or players already under contract with other teams . They also agreed on a name for the circuit : the American Professional Football Conference . They then invited other professional teams to a second meeting on September 17 . 
 At the second meeting , held at Bulldogs owner Ralph Hay 's Hupmobile showroom in Canton , representatives of the Rock Island Independents , the Muncie Flyers , the Decatur Staleys , the Racine Cardinals , the Massillon Tigers , the Chicago Cardinals , and the Hammond Pros agreed to join the league . Representatives of the Buffalo All @-@ Americans and Rochester Jeffersons could not attend the meeting , but sent letters to Hay asking to be included in the league . Team representatives changed the league 's name slightly to the American Professional Football Association and elected officers , installing Jim Thorpe as president . Under the new league structure , teams created their schedules dynamically as the season progressed , so there were no minimum or maximum number of games needed to be played . Also , representatives of each team voted to determine the winner of the APFA trophy . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Game summaries = = 
 = = = Week 3 : at Dayton Triangles = = = 
 October 10 , 1920 at Triangle Park 
 In their opening game of the 1920 season , the Tigers played the Dayton Triangles . The Triangles were coming off a historic game ; it was the first match between two APFA teams . No team scored in this game , and it ended in a 0 – 0 tie . 
 = = = Week 4 : at Canton Bulldogs = = = 
 October 17 , 1920 at Lakeside Park 
 The Tigers next faced the Canton Bulldogs , which would be the Bulldogs ' first APFA opponent . The Tigers lost 7 – 0 before a crowd of 7 @,@ 000 people . The Bulldogs ' offense had 15 first downs , and the only score of the game came when the Bulldogs ' Ike Martin had a 7 @-@ yard touchdown run in the first quarter . Jim Thorpe of the Bulldogs , who would later be enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame , made his season debut in the game , coming in as a substitute in the fourth quarter . 
 = = = Week 5 : at Akron Pros = = = 
 October 24 , 1920 at League Park 
 The Akron Pros were the Tigers ' next opponent . Playing in front of 6 @,@ 000 fans , the game was called a " punting duel " by the Youngstown Vindicator . The only score came from a punt block by Akron 's Bob Nash in the first quarter . Nash grabbed the ball from the Tigers ' punter , Stan Cofall , on the 8 @-@ yard line and ran in for the score . With an extra point from Charlie Copley , the Pros defeated the Tigers 7 – 0 to keep their undefeated season alive . During the game , injuries for both teams occurred . Pollard of the Pros dislocated his right shoulder , and <unk> Conn for the Tigers injured his right leg in the fourth quarter . 
 = = = Week 6 : vs. Columbus Panhandles = = = 
 October 31 , 1920 at League Park 
 In week 6 , the Tigers played against the Columbus Panhandles . In front of 5 @,@ 000 fans , the Tigers won 7 – 0 . The lone score came from a rushing touchdown in the second quarter from Charlie Brickley . This was the eighth straight loss for the Panhandles , dating back to 1919 , and the seventh straight without scoring . According to football historian Chris Willis , this loss for the Panhandles crushed the city of Columbus and made the Panhandles challenge lesser teams for the rest of the season . 
 = = = Week 7 : vs. Canton Bulldogs = = = 
 November 7 , 1920 at Dunn Field 
 Tigers ' next game was played against the Canton Bulldogs , who were coming off their first loss of the season . Neither team scored in the first quarter , but the Bulldogs ran for two touchdowns in the second . Calac and Grigg had 6- and 15 @-@ yard rushing touchdowns . The Bulldogs ' defense forced two safeties — one in the third and one in the fourth quarter — to win the game 18 – 0 . 
 = = = Week 8 : vs. Akron Pros = = = 
 November 14 , 1920 at Dunn Park , Cleveland , Ohio 
 In week eight , the Tigers had a rematch with the Pros . Playing in front of 8 @,@ 000 fans , the Pros allowed their first and only points of the year from a 50 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Mark Devlin to Tuffy Conn and an extra point by Al Pierotti in the third quarter . Pollard had a 20 @-@ yard rushing touchdown in the second quarter and Copley made an extra point to tie the game at 7 – 7 , making it the second tie of the season for the Tigers . The final score of the game was a 14 – 0 victory for the Tigers . 
 = = = Week 9 : vs. Toledo Maroons = = = 
 November 21 , 1920 at Dunn Field , Cleveland , Ohio 
 The Toledo Maroons were the Tigers ' next opponent . The Maroons were an independent team but joined the APFA in 1922 . Prior to this game , the Maroons did not score a point against an APFA tem all season , and that streak continued into this game . In the first quarter , Baston blocked a kick and ran it for a touchdown . He would later score the game 's final points in the fourth as he caught a receiving touchdown from Pierotti . 
 = = = Week 10 : at Buffalo All @-@ Americans = = = 
 November 28 , 1920 at Buffalo Baseball Park 
 In their final game of the 1920 season , the Tigers played against the Buffalo All @-@ Americans , who were coming off their first loss of the season . The Public Ledger called the game " scrappy " ; most forward passes were blocked , and neither team 's offense was productive . A total of 5 @,@ 000 fans showed up to the game . The All @-@ Americans had possession on the 5 @-@ yard line and the 1 @-@ foot line , but the Tigers ' defense stopped them . The only score of the game came in the third quarter . Anderson scored an 8 @-@ yard rushing touchdown . 
 = = Post @-@ season = = 
 Due to several losses , the Triangles did not contend for the APFA trophy in 1920 . The Tigers ' performance of 2 – 4 – 2 would be the team 's best before folding in 1921 . Sportswriter Bruce Copeland compiled the 1920 All Pro team , but no players made the list . As of 2012 , no players from the 1920 Dayton Triangles were enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame . 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = Standings = = 
 Awarded the Brunswick @-@ Balke Collender Cup and named APFA Champions.Note : Tie games were not officially counted in the standings until 1972 . 
 = Year Zero ( album ) = 
 Year Zero is the fifth studio album by American industrial rock band Nine Inch Nails , released on April 17 , 2007 , by Interscope Records . Frontman Trent Reznor wrote the album 's music and lyrics while touring in support of the group 's previous release , With Teeth ( 2005 ) . In contrast to the introspective style of songwriting Reznor used on previous records , Year Zero is a concept album that criticizes contemporary policies of the United States government by presenting a dystopian vision of the year 2022 . The album is part of a larger Year Zero project which includes a remix album , an alternate reality game , and a potential television or film project . The Year Zero alternate reality game expanded upon the album 's fictional storyline by using media such as websites , pre @-@ recorded phone messages , and murals . 
 Upon its release in April 2007 , Year Zero sold over 187 @,@ 000 units in its first week , and it reached number two on the Billboard 200 chart . The album also received generally positive reviews , many of which were favorable toward the accompanying alternate reality game . Year Zero produced two singles , " Survivalism " and " Capital G " , the latter released as a promotional single . Disputes arose between Reznor and Universal Music Group , parent company of Interscope Records , over the overseas pricing of the album . Year Zero was the last Nine Inch Nails studio album released on Interscope . In October 2007 , Reznor announced that Nine Inch Nails had fulfilled its contractual commitments to Interscope , effectively ending the band 's relationship with the label . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In a 2005 interview with Kerrang ! , Trent Reznor expressed his intentions to write material for a new release while on tour promoting With Teeth . He reportedly began work on the new album by September 2006 . Reznor devised much of the album 's musical direction on his laptop . Reznor told Kerrang ! in a later interview , " When I was on the Live : With Teeth tour , to keep myself busy I just really hunkered down and was working on music the whole time , so this kept me in a creative mode and when I finished the tour I felt like I wasn 't tired and wanted to keep at it . " 
 The limitations of devising the album 's musical direction on a tour bus forced Reznor to work differently from usual . Reznor said , " I didn 't have guitars around because it was too much hassle ... It was another creative limitation ... If I were in my studio , I would have done things the way I normally do them . But not having the ability to do that forced me into trying some things that were fun to do . " 
 By the end of the tour , Reznor began work on the album 's lyrical concepts , attempting to break away from his typically introspective approach . Reznor drew inspiration from his concern at the state of affairs in the United States and at what he envisioned as the country 's political , spiritual , and social direction . Year Zero was mixed in January 2007 , and Reznor stated on his blog that the album was finished as of February 5 . The album 's budget was a reported US $ 2 million , but since Reznor composed most of the album himself on his laptop and in his home @-@ studio , much of the budget instead went toward the extensive accompanying promotional campaign . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 While work continued on the album , Reznor hinted in an interview that it was " part of a bigger picture of a number of things I 'm working on " . In February 2007 fans discovered that a new Nine Inch Nails tour t @-@ shirt contained highlighted letters that spelled out the words " I am trying to believe " . This phrase was registered as a website URL , and soon several related websites were also discovered in the IP range , all describing a dystopian vision of the fictional " Year 0 " . It was later reported that 42 Entertainment had created these websites to promote Year Zero as part of an alternate reality game . 
 The Year Zero story takes place in the United States in the year 2022 ; or " Year 0 " according to the American government , being the year that America was reborn . The United States has suffered several major terrorist attacks , and in response the government has seized absolute control on the country and reverted to a Christian fundamentalist theocracy . The government maintains control of the populace through institutions such as the Bureau of Morality and the First Evangelical Church of Plano , as well as increased surveillance and the secret drugging of tap water with a mild sedative . In response to the increasing oppression of the government , several corporate , government , and subversive websites were transported back in time to the present by a group of scientists working clandestinely against the authoritarian government . The websites @-@ from @-@ the @-@ future were sent to the year 2007 to warn the American people of the impending dystopian future and to prevent it from ever forming in the first place . 
 The Year Zero game consisted of an expansive series of websites , phone numbers , e @-@ mails , videos , MP3s , murals , and other media that expanded upon the fictional storyline of the album . Each new piece of media contained various hints and clues to discover the next , relying on fan participation to discover each new facet of the expanding game . Rolling Stone described the fan involvement in this promotion as the " marketing team 's dream " . Reznor , however , argued that " marketing " was an inaccurate description of the game , and that it was " not some kind of gimmick to get you to buy a record – it IS the art form " . 
 Part of this promotional campaign involved USB drives that were left in concert venues for fans to find during Nine Inch Nails ' 2007 European tour . During a concert in Lisbon , Portugal , a USB flash drive was found in a bathroom stall containing a high @-@ quality MP3 of the track " My Violent Heart " , a song from the then @-@ unreleased album . Another USB drive was found at a concert in Barcelona , Spain , containing the track " Me , I 'm Not " . Messages found on the drives and tour clothing led to additional websites and images from the game , and the early release of several unheard songs from the album . Following the discovery of the USB drives , the high @-@ quality audio files quickly circulated the internet . Owners of websites hosting the files soon received cease and desist orders from the Recording Industry Association of America , despite Interscope having sanctioned the viral campaign and the early release of the tracks . Reznor told The Guardian : 
 On February 22 , 2007 a teaser trailer was released through the official Year Zero website . It featured a quick glimpse of a blue road sign that said " I AM <unk> TO <unk> " , as well as a distorted glimpse of " The Presence " from the album cover . One frame in the teaser led fans to a URL containing the complete album cover . In March , the multitrack audio files of Year Zero 's first single , " Survivalism " , were released in GarageBand format for fan remixing . The multitrack files for " Capital G " , " My Violent Heart " and " Me , I 'm Not " were released the following month , and files for " The Beginning of the End " , " Vessel " and " God Given " were released on the month after that . In response to an early leak of the album , the entire album became available for streaming on Nine Inch Nails ' MySpace page a week before the album 's official release . 
 = = = Performance 2007 tour = = = 
 After taking a break from touring to complete work on Year Zero , the Nine Inch Nails live band embarked on a world @-@ tour in 2007 dubbed Performance 2007 . The tour included the band 's first performance in China . Reznor continued to tour with the same band he concluded the previous tour with : Aaron North , Jeordie White , Josh Freese , and Alessandro Cortini . The tour spanned 91 dates across Europe , Asia , Australia , and Hawaii . 
 Between tour legs Nine Inch Nails gave a performance as part of the Year Zero game . A small group of fans received fictional in @-@ game telephone @-@ calls that invited them to a " resistance meeting " in a Los Angeles parking lot . Those who arrived were given " resistance kits " , some of which contained cellphones that would later inform the participants of further details . After receiving instructions from the cellphones , fans who attended a fictional Art is Resistance meeting in Los Angeles were rewarded with an unannounced performance by Nine Inch Nails . The concert was cut short as the meeting was raided by a fictional SWAT team and the audience was rushed out of the building . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Nine Inch Nails ' 2006 tour merchandise designs featured overt references to the United States military , which Reznor said " reflect [ ed ] future directions " . Reznor later described Year Zero as " the soundtrack to a movie that doesn 't exist " . The album criticizes the American government 's policies , and " could be about the end of the world " . Reznor specifically cited what he labeled as the " erosion of freedoms " and " the way that we treat the rest of the world and our own citizens " . Reznor had previously called the results of the 2004 US election " one step closer to the end of the world . " 
 Even though the fictional story begins in January 2007 , the timeline of the album and alternate reality game mentions historical events , such as the September 11 attacks and the Iraq War . From there , fictional events lead to worldwide chaos , including bioterrorism attacks , the United States engaging in nuclear war with Iran , and the elimination of American civil liberties at the hands of the fictional government agency The Bureau of Morality . Regardless of being fictional , a columnist of The Hartford Courant commented , " What 's scary is that this doesn 't seem as far @-@ fetched as it should , given recent revelations about the FBI 's abuse of the Patriot Act and the dissent @-@ equals @-@ disloyalty double @-@ speak coming out of Washington in recent years . " 
 = = Music = = 
 Reznor called Year Zero a " shift in direction " in that it " doesn 't sound like With Teeth " . He also said that when he finishes a new album , he has to " go into battle with the people whose job it is to figure out how to sell the record . The only time that didn 't happen was [ for ] With Teeth . This time , however , [ he was ] expecting an epic struggle . [ Year Zero ] is not a particularly friendly record and it certainly doesn 't sound like anything else out there right now . " 
 Fifteen original tracks were considered for inclusion on the album , which Reznor described as " Highly conceptual . Quite noisy . Fucking cool . " Reznor also described the album as a " collage of sound type of thing " , citing musical inspiration from early Public Enemy records , specifically the production techniques of The Bomb Squad . Most of Year Zero 's musical elements were created by Reznor solely on his laptop , as opposed to the instrument @-@ heavy With Teeth . Allmusic 's review described the album 's laptop @-@ mixed sound : " guitars squall against glitches , beeps , pops , and blotches of blurry sonic attacks . Percussion looms large , distorted , organic , looped , screwed , <unk> and broken . " Many reviews of the album compared the album 's electronic sound to earlier Nine Inch Nails releases such as The Downward Spiral and The Fragile , while contrasting its heavily modified sounds to the more " organic " approach of With Teeth . Many critics also commented on the album 's overall tone , including descriptions such as " lots of silver and grey ambience [ sic ] " and reference to the album 's " oblique tone " . The New York Times review described the album 's sound by saying " Hard beats are softened with distortion , static cushions the tantrums , sneaky bass lines float beneath the surface . " The article went on to describe individual tracks : " And as usual the music is packed with details : " Meet Your Master " goes through at least three cycles of decay and rebirth ; part of the fun of " The Warning " is tracking the ever @-@ mutating timbres . " 
 Many of the songs on the album feature an extended instrumental ending , which encompasses the entire second half of the three @-@ minute long " The Great Destroyer " . The album was co @-@ produced by Reznor and Atticus Ross , mixed by long @-@ time collaborator Alan Moulder , and mastered by Brian Gardner . The album features instrumental contributions by live band member Josh Freese and vocals by Saul Williams . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 All of the artwork for Year Zero was created by Rob Sheridan , art director for Nine Inch Nails , who is also credited for artwork on With Teeth , among other Nine Inch Nails releases since 2000 . The album features a thermo @-@ chrome heat @-@ sensitive CD face which appears black when first opened , but reveals a black binary code on a white background when heat is generated from the album being played . The binary sequence translates to " <unk> " , the address of a website involved in the alternate reality game . Reznor displayed displeasure at the extra $ 10 added to the CD 's price in Australia for the thermo @-@ coating , saying it only cost an extra 83 ¢ per CD and that the extra cost came from his pocket . 
 Included with the album is a small insert that is a warning from the fictional United States Bureau of Morality ( <unk> ) , with a phone number to report people who have " engaged in subversive acts " . When the number is called , a recording from the <unk> is played , claiming " By calling this number , you and your family are implicitly pleading guilty to the consumption of anti @-@ American media and have been flagged as potential militants . " 
 It was named one of the best album covers of 2007 by Rolling Stone Magazine . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Upon its release in April 2007 , Year Zero sold over 187 @,@ 000 in its first week . The album reached number two on the Billboard 200 and peaked in the top 10 in six other countries , including Australia , Canada and the United Kingdom . The album 's first single , " Survivalism " peaked at number 68 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and topped the Modern Rock and Canadian singles charts . The " Capital G " promotional single reached number six on the Modern Rock chart . 
 In a post on the official Nine Inch Nails website , Reznor condemned Universal Music Group — the parent company of Interscope Records — for its pricing and distribution plans for Year Zero . He wrote that he hated Interscope for setting the price of the album higher than usual , humorously labeling the company 's retail pricing of Year Zero in Australia as " <unk> " , [ sic ] and concluding that " as a reward for being a ' true fan ' you get ripped off . " Reznor went on to say in later years the " climate " of record labels may have an increasingly ambivalent impact on consumers who buy music . Reznor 's post , specifically his criticism of the recording industry at large , elicited considerable media attention . Reznor continued his attack on Universal Music Group during a September 2007 concert in Australia , where he urged fans to " steal " his music online instead of purchasing it legally . Reznor went on to encourage the crowd to " steal and steal and steal some more and give it to all your friends and keep on <unk> ' . " Although Universal never replied publicly to the criticism , a spokesperson for the Australian Music Retailers Association said " It is the same price in Australia as it is in the US because of the extra packaging . " Due to the pricing dispute , plans to release a " Capital G " maxi @-@ single in Europe were scrapped . The track was instead released as a promotional single , without a " Halo number " , unlike most official Nine Inch Nails releases . 
 Year Zero was the last Nine Inch Nails studio album released on Interscope . Reznor announced in October 2007 that Nine Inch Nails had fulfilled its contractual commitments to Interscope and could proceed " free of any recording contract with any label " , effectively ending the band 's relationship with its record label . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Year Zero received generally favourable reviews from music critics , with an average rating of 76 % based on 28 reviews on review aggregator Metacritic . Robert Christgau described Year Zero as Reznor 's " most songful album " , while Thomas Inskeep of Stylus magazine praised it as " one of the most forward @-@ thinking ' rock ' albums to come down the pike in some time " . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone called the album Reznor 's " strongest , weirdest and most complex record since The Downward Spiral " , and concluded that " he 's got his bravado back . " Rolling Stone ranked it at number 21 on its " Top 50 Albums of 2007 " list . 
 Several reviewers also commented on the accompanying alternate reality game . Ann Powers of The Los Angeles Times , praised the album and game concept as " a total marriage of the pop and gamer aesthetics that unlocks the rusty cages of the music industry and solves some key problems facing rock music as its cultural dominance dissolves into dust . " In relation to the declining music industry , Joseph Jaffe of Brandweek commented that such " mysterious marketing measures [ ... ] are what 's desperately needed to gain attention in this uncertain era of distribution dilemmas and sagging sales " , also commending acts such as Nine Inch Nails and Radiohead for being " more innovative than marketers " . Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B + , comparing it to The X @-@ Files and calling it " A sci @-@ fi concept album whose end @-@ of @-@ days , paranoia @-@ drenched story line has been disseminated via the Internet " . It also stated : " Amid its carefully calibrated sonic assaults , Year Zero has a number of tracks that will stop you in yours . Sometimes , it 's a matter of dropping the volume [ ... ] Even his use of electronics has shifted to a new level [ ... ] Is the truth in here ? <unk> , but Reznor 's claim that ' I got my violence in high def ultra @-@ realism ' sounds like gospel to us . " 
 On the fictional world depicted in the album and promotional campaign , The Cleveland Free Times commented that the album 's fictionalized world and characters " often seemed heavy @-@ handed and forced " , but also conceded that " its clotted claustrophobia suited its subject matter " . Ann Powers added , " The songs on ' Year Zero , ' each from the perspective of a character or characters already existent in the ARG , draw a connection between the music fan 's passionate identification with songs and the gamer 's experience of becoming someone else online . " In 2008 , 42 Entertainment won two Webby Awards for its work on the Year Zero game , in the categories of " Integrated Campaigns " and " Other Advertising : Branded Content " . 
 = = Related projects = = 
 A remix album , titled Year Zero Remixed , was released in November 2007 . Due to the expiration of his contract with Interscope Records , the album 's release , marketing , and promotion were completely in Reznor 's control . The album features remixes from artists including The Faint , Ladytron , Bill Laswell , Saul Williams , Olof Dreijer of The Knife , and Sam <unk> of Interpol . Reznor himself strongly supports fan @-@ made remixes of songs from the album , as evidenced by his decision to upload every song in multi @-@ track form to the then @-@ newly launched Nine Inch Nails remix website . Instrumental versions of the songs on Year Zero are available at the site for download in multiple formats , including MP3 , WAV , GarageBand , and Ableton Live formats . 
 A planned film adaption of Year Zero became a television project . Reznor met with various writers and pitched the idea to television networks . The 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike affected the pre @-@ production stage . Despite this , Reznor has commented the project is " still churning along " , and that he has begun working with American film producer Lawrence Bender . In 2010 , Reznor started developing the Year Zero miniseries with HBO and BBC Worldwide Productions . Reznor and Bender collaborated with Carnivàle writer Daniel Knauf to create the science fiction epic . Although , in August 2013 , it was stated in an article by the NME that HBO had rejected the series . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Trent Reznor . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Trent Reznor – vocals , guitar , bass , drums , keyboards , programming , production 
 William <unk> – trumpet ( 7 ) 
 Matt <unk> – tenor sax ( 7 ) 
 Josh Freese – drums ( 1 , 7 ) 
 Jeff / Geoff Gallegos – brass / winds musical arrangement , baritone sax ( 7 ) 
 Brian Gardner – mastering 
 Elizabeth Lea – trombone ( 7 ) 
 Alan Moulder – mix engineering 
 Atticus Ross – production , sound design 
 Doug <unk> – recording engineering 
 Saul Williams – backing vocals ( 3 , 6 ) 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = This Kiss ( Carly Rae Jepsen song ) = 
 " This Kiss " is a song by Canadian singer Carly Rae Jepsen from her second studio album , Kiss ( 2012 ) . The song was written by Jepsen , Matthew Koma , Kelly Covell and Redfoo of electropop duo LMFAO through e @-@ mails , text messaging and telephone calls , with production handled by Koma and Redfoo . " This Kiss " was released as the third single from the album on September 10 , 2012 . The mid @-@ tempo dance @-@ pop track lyrically speaks about a kiss being something Jepsen can 't resist and the lips of her beloved . 
 " This Kiss " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who compared it to " Call Me Maybe " and " Good Time " . However , it failed to match the success of her previous singles , only reaching the top three in on the Ultratip chart of Belgium ( Flanders ) and in South Korea , while missing the top ten in countries such as Canada and United Kingdom . In the United States , the song peaked at 86 on the Billboard Hot 100 prior to its single release , and at number 37 on Pop Songs . An accompanying music video was first released on October 26 , 2012 , at the Fun Size film premiere , portrays Jepsen flirting with a guy in the club . To promote its release as a single , Jepsen performed " This Kiss " on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , the Late Show with David Letterman , and at the 2012 American Music Awards . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " This Kiss " was written by Jepsen , Kelly Covell , Matthew Koma , and Stefan Kendal Gordy , also known as Redfoo from electropop duo LMFAO , through e @-@ mails , text messaging and telephone calls . Jepsen explained that she had " never written a song that way before so I 'd definitely say it was new , " adding that " there was something really exciting about being on the phone and singing ideas to each other and then calling each other back and re @-@ writing lyrics in your BlackBerry and iPhone and seeing it all being exchanged . " The singer also revealed that she was pleased with the creative process of the song , commenting that " despite all this craziness , [ it ] remains the same . And that same exciting feeling that I had before anybody knew me , when I was just beginning to work on ' Call Me Maybe ' , is the same feeling I had today with Redfoo from LMFAO . You can sense the people who really have it are about writing that right word or that right melody to make it lift and make you feel that perfect emotion . " " This Kiss " was recorded at Party Rock Studio with Redfoo in 2012 after Redfoo recorded ideas at Sonic Vista Studios Ibiza , Spain , and was released as the second single from Kiss on September 10 , 2012 . " This Kiss " is a mid @-@ tempo dance @-@ pop track which lyrically speaks about a kiss being something Jepsen can 't resist and the lips of her beloved , featuring lyrics such as " This kiss is something I can 't resist / Your lips are undeniable / This kiss is something I can 't risk / Your heart is unreliable " during the chorus . Carl Williot of Idolator compared the lyrics to the ones of Hall & Oates ' " Kiss on My List " ( 1981 ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " This Kiss " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Amy Sciarretto of Pop Crush rated the song four out of five stars , describing it " as sweet and as cavity @-@ causing " as Jepsen 's debut international single " Call Me Maybe " ( 2011 ) . Sciaretto added that it was possible that " This Kiss " could be one of the biggest songs of the fall of 2012 . Billboard critic Jason Lipshutz deemed the song " as undeniable as the lips of the lyrical object of affection who ( gasp ! ) isn 't the boy she has back home . " Heather Phares of Allmusic wrote that " This Kiss " is musically similar to " typical pop " songs , but added that the lyrics are " better written than the work of most of her competition . " Carl Williot of Idolator was sure that the song would " monopolize " radio stations like " Good Time " ( 2012 ) , and added that " with the dance beat and vocal effects , " the singer was " going for dance floor domination as well . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Following its release as a single , " This Kiss " failed to match the success of Jepsen 's previous singles , debuting at number 86 on the US Billboard Hot 100 on the week ending September 29 , 2012 , before falling off the chart the following week . The song managed to stay for one week on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 39 , and on the French Singles Chart at number 173 . In Japan , it reached number 65 on the country 's Hot 100 chart , while peaking at number 23 on the Canadian Hot 100 . As of November 30 , 2012 , the song has sold over 115 @,@ 000 downloads in United States according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Filming for the music video began on September 20 , 2012 , with shots of Jepsen on set of the music video surfacing online the same day . She was pictured wearing a pair of leather pants along with a red @-@ black corset and a silver chain hanging from her waist . The singer said she is aiming to show a more mature side with the music video . On October 8 , 2012 , a 24 @-@ second teaser was uploaded to YouTube featuring Jepsen performing the track at a party , falling for a guy in a grey beanie and then jumping into a swimming pool with him for a kiss . Two weeks later , the singer tweeted , " the music video for This Kiss is coming <unk> soon ! Until then here is a little preview . Hope you enjoy it ! <unk> x , " followed by the link of the teaser . A lyric video , which " channels the familiar opening credits of the classic show Saved By The Bell " as noted by Carl Williot of Idolator , was released on October 18 , 2012 . The music video premiered first on October 26 , 2012 , at the Fun Size film premiere , and then released online on October 28 , 2012 . Directed by Justin Francis , the video starts with Jepsen and her fellow friends driving a Fiat 500 . After they come out of the car , they follow to a ' 80s inspired warehouse , where Jepsen starts flirting with a guy ( actor Kurt Collins ) . The guy is immediately attracted to her , and , as the video comes to a close , they both take a dive in a pool and kiss . Fun Size 's star Thomas McDonell make cameo appearance . 
 = = Live performances and usage in media = = 
 Jepsen 's first performance of " This Kiss " was on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on September 18 , 2012 , and later the same day on So You Think You Can Dance season 9 finale . On October 25 , 2012 , the singer performed the song on the Late Show with David Letterman . For the performance , Jepsen sported a shimmery dress and slick jacket . Jepsen also performed the song at the halftime show of the 100th Grey Cup , in a medley with " Call Me Maybe " at the 2012 American Music Awards , and at Walmart Soundcheck . Despite Jepsen not appearing in the film , " This Kiss " was featured in the comedy Fun Size . As a promotion for both the song and the film , people who bought a ticket to watch Fun Size before November 4 , 2012 would get a free download of " This Kiss " . The singer performed the song on the television show 90210 on episode " Till Death Do Us Part " that she guest featured . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 Digital download 
 " This Kiss " — 3 : 49 
 Digital EP — remixes 
 " This Kiss " ( Jason Nevins Remix ) — 4 : 11 
 " This Kiss " ( Digital Dog Radio Edit ) — 4 : 13 
 " This Kiss " ( Brass Knuckles Remix ) — 4 : 05 
 " This Kiss " ( Mathieu <unk> Remix ) — 6 : 45 
 UK digital download 
 " This Kiss " — 3 : 49 
 " This Kiss " ( Digital Dog Radio Edit ) — 4 : 13 
 " This Kiss " ( Brass Knuckles Remix ) — 4 : 05 
 " This Kiss " ( Mathieu <unk> Remix ) — 6 : 45 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Party Rock Studio in 2012 . 
 Personnel 
 Carly Rae Jepsen — lead vocals , songwriter 
 Matthew Koma — songwriter , producer 
 Stefan Kendal Gordy — songwriter , producer 
 Kelly Covell — songwriter 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Kiss . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Genes , Brain and Behavior = 
 Genes , Brain and Behavior ( also known as <unk> ) is a peer @-@ reviewed online @-@ only scientific journal covering research in the fields of behavioral , neural , and psychiatric genetics . It is published by Wiley @-@ Blackwell on behalf of the International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society . The journal was established in 2002 as a quarterly and is currently published monthly . <unk> is a hybrid open access journal , but all content is available online for free two years after publication . 
 = = Overview and history = = 
 Genes , Brain and Behavior is published by Wiley @-@ Blackwell on behalf of the International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society . Volume 1 appeared in 2002 and issues appeared quarterly . As submissions increased , the journal switched in 2003 to a bimonthly schedule , in 2006 to 8 @-@ times @-@ a @-@ year , and in 2014 to a monthly frequency . Content is available online from the Wiley Online Library or , after a 12 @-@ month embargo , from <unk> . Authors can elect to have accepted articles published as open access . All content is available online for free 24 months after publication . The journal was originally published in both print and electronic versions , but since 2014 the journal is online @-@ only . 
 The founding editor @-@ in @-@ chief was Wim <unk> ( French National Centre for Scientific Research ) , who was succeeded in 2012 by Andrew Holmes ( National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its third year , Genes , Brain and Behavior was available in 1400 academic libraries . According to the Journal Citation Reports , its 2014 impact factor is 3 @.@ 661 , ranking the journal 80th out of 252 journals in the category " <unk> " and 7th out of 51 journals in the category " Behavioral Sciences " . 
 The five journals that as of 2015 have cited Genes , Brain and Behavior most often , are ( in order of descending citation frequency ) PLoS ONE , Behavioural Brain Research , Genes , Brain and Behavior , Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience , and <unk> . As of 2015 , the five journals that have been cited most frequently by articles published in Genes , Brain and Behavior are The Journal of Neuroscience , Nature , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , Genes , Brain and Behavior , and the American Journal of Human Genetics . 
 The journal has developed standards for the publication of mouse mutant studies . Many mouse mutant studies have serious methodological problems leading to fatally flawed scientific conclusions , causing a waste of time , effort , and research resources , and leading to ethical problems because of the unnecessary use of live animals for flawed studies . These standards are gradually being accepted more widely in the field . 
 = = <unk> and indexing = = 
 Genes , Brain and Behavior is abstracted and indexed in : 
 = = Most cited articles = = 
 According to the Web of Science , the following three articles have been cited most often ( > 250 times ) : 
 Rubenstein JL , Merzenich MM ( 2003 ) . " Model of autism : increased ratio of excitation / inhibition in key neural systems " . Genes , Brain and Behavior 2 ( 5 ) : 255 – 67 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1034 / j.1601 @-@ <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 Moy , SS ; Nadler , JJ ; Perez , A ; Barbaro , RP ; Johns , JM ; Magnuson , TR ; Piven , J ; Crawley , JN ( 2004 ) . " Sociability and preference for social novelty in five inbred strains : An approach to assess autistic @-@ like behavior in mice " . Genes , Brain and Behavior 3 ( 5 ) : 287 – 302 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1601 @-@ <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 Nadler , JJ ; Moy , SS ; Dold , G ; Trang , D ; Simmons , N ; Perez , A ; Young , NB ; Barbaro , RP ; Piven , J ; Magnuson , TR ; Crawley , JN ( 2004 ) . " Automated apparatus for quantitation of social approach behaviors in mice " . Genes , Brain , and Behavior 3 ( 5 ) : 303 – 14 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1601 @-@ <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 = Brown v. Board of Education = 
 Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka , 347 U.S. 483 ( 1954 ) , was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court declared state laws establishing separate public schools for black and white students to be unconstitutional . The decision overturned the Plessy v. Ferguson decision of 1896 , which allowed state @-@ sponsored segregation , insofar as it applied to public education . Handed down on May 17 , 1954 , the Warren Court 's unanimous ( 9 – 0 ) decision stated that " separate educational facilities are inherently unequal . " As a result , de jure racial segregation was ruled a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution . This ruling paved the way for integration and was a major victory of the Civil Rights Movement . However , the decision 's fourteen pages did not spell out any sort of method for ending racial segregation in schools , and the Court 's second decision in Brown II only ordered states to desegregate " with all deliberate speed " . 
 = = Background = = 
 For much of the sixty years preceding the Brown case , race relations in the United States had been dominated by racial segregation . This policy had been endorsed in 1896 by the United States Supreme Court case of Plessy v. Ferguson , which held that as long as the separate facilities for the separate races were equal , segregation did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment ( " no State shall ... deny to any person ... the equal protection of the laws . " ) . 
 The plaintiffs in Brown asserted that this system of racial separation , while masquerading as providing separate but equal treatment of both white and black Americans , instead perpetuated inferior accommodations , services , and treatment for black Americans . Racial segregation in education varied widely from the 17 states that required racial segregation to the 16 in which it was prohibited . Brown was influenced by UNESCO 's 1950 Statement , signed by a wide variety of internationally renowned scholars , titled The Race Question . This declaration denounced previous attempts at scientifically justifying racism as well as morally condemning racism . Another work that the Supreme Court cited was Gunnar Myrdal 's An American Dilemma : The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy ( 1944 ) . Myrdal had been a signatory of the UNESCO declaration . The research performed by the educational psychologists Kenneth B. Clark and Mamie Phipps Clark also influenced the Court 's decision . The Clarks ' " doll test " studies presented substantial arguments to the Supreme Court about how segregation had an impact on black schoolchildren 's mental status . 
 The United States and the Soviet Union were both at the height of the Cold War during this time , and U.S. officials , including Supreme Court Justices , were highly aware of the negative impacts that segregation and racism played on America 's international image . When Justice William O. Douglas traveled to India in 1950 , the first question he was asked was , " Why does America tolerate the lynching of Negroes ? "  Douglas later wrote that he had learned from his travels that " the attitude of the United States toward its colored minorities is a powerful factor in our relations with India . "  Chief Justice Earl Warren echoed Douglas 's concerns in a 1954 speech to the American Bar Association , proclaiming that " Our American system like all others is on trial both at home and abroad , ... the extent to which we maintain the spirit of our constitution with its Bill of Rights , will in the long run do more to make it both secure and the object of adulation than the number of hydrogen bombs we stockpile . "  
 = = Case = = 
 = = = Filing and arguments = = = 
 In 1951 , a class action suit was filed against the Board of Education of the City of Topeka , Kansas in the United States District Court for the District of Kansas . The plaintiffs were thirteen Topeka parents on behalf of their 20 children . 
 The suit called for the school district to reverse its policy of racial segregation . The Topeka Board of Education operated separate elementary schools under an 1879 Kansas law , which permitted ( but did not require ) districts to maintain separate elementary school facilities for black and white students in 12 communities with populations over 15 @,@ 000 . The plaintiffs had been recruited by the leadership of the Topeka NAACP . Notable among the Topeka NAACP leaders were the chairman McKinley Burnett ; Charles Scott , one of three serving as legal counsel for the chapter ; and Lucinda Todd . 
 The named plaintiff , Oliver L. Brown , was a parent , a welder in the shops of the Santa Fe Railroad , an assistant pastor at his local church , and an African American . He was convinced to join the lawsuit by Scott , a childhood friend . Brown 's daughter Linda , a third grader , had to walk six blocks to her school bus stop to ride to Monroe Elementary , her segregated black school one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) away , while Sumner Elementary , a white school , was seven blocks from her house . 
 As directed by the NAACP leadership , the parents each attempted to enroll their children in the closest neighborhood school in the fall of 1951 . They were each refused enrollment and directed to the segregated schools . Linda Brown Thompson later recalled the experience in a 2004 PBS documentary : 
 . . . <unk> like I say , we lived in an integrated neighborhood and I had all of these playmates of different nationalities . And so when I found out that day that I might be able to go to their school , I was just thrilled , you know . And I remember walking over to Sumner school with my dad that day and going up the steps of the school and the school looked so big to a smaller child . And I remember going inside and my dad spoke with someone and then he went into the inner office with the principal and they left me out . . . to sit outside with the secretary . And while he was in the inner office , I could hear voices and hear his voice raised , you know , as the conversation went on . And then he immediately came out of the office , took me by the hand and we walked home from the school . I just couldn 't understand what was happening because I was so sure that I was going to go to school with Mona and Guinevere , Wanda , and all of my playmates . 
 The case " Oliver Brown et al. v. The Board of Education of Topeka , Kansas " was named after Oliver Brown as a legal strategy to have a man at the head of the roster . The lawyers , and the National Chapter of the NAACP , also felt that having Mr. Brown at the head of the roster would be better received by the U.S. Supreme Court Justices . The 13 plaintiffs were : Oliver Brown , Darlene Brown , Lena Carper , Sadie Emmanuel , Marguerite Emerson , Shirley Fleming , Zelma Henderson , Shirley <unk> , Maude Lawton , Alma Lewis , Iona Richardson , and Lucinda Todd . The last surviving plaintiff , Zelma Henderson , died in Topeka , on May 20 , 2008 , at age 88 . 
 The District Court ruled in favor of the Board of Education , citing the U.S. Supreme Court precedent set in Plessy v. Ferguson , 163 U.S. 537 ( 1896 ) , which had upheld a state law requiring " separate but equal " segregated facilities for blacks and whites in railway cars . The three @-@ judge District Court panel found that segregation in public education has a detrimental effect on negro children , but denied relief on the ground that the negro and white schools in Topeka were substantially equal with respect to buildings , transportation , curricula , and educational qualifications of teachers . 
 = = = Supreme Court review = = = 
 The case of Brown v. Board of Education as heard before the Supreme Court combined five cases : Brown itself , Briggs v. Elliott ( filed in South Carolina ) , Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County ( filed in Virginia ) , Gebhart v. Belton ( filed in Delaware ) , and Bolling v. Sharpe ( filed in Washington D.C. ) . 
 All were NAACP @-@ sponsored cases . The Davis case , the only case of the five originating from a student protest , began when 16 @-@ year @-@ old Barbara Rose Johns organized and led a 450 @-@ student walkout of Moton High School . The Gebhart case was the only one where a trial court , affirmed by the Delaware Supreme Court , found that discrimination was unlawful ; in all the other cases the plaintiffs had lost as the original courts had found discrimination to be lawful . 
 The Kansas case was unique among the group in that there was no contention of gross inferiority of the segregated schools ' physical plant , curriculum , or staff . The district court found substantial equality as to all such factors . The lower court , in its opinion , noted that , in Topeka , " the physical facilities , the curricula , courses of study , qualification and quality of teachers , as well as other educational facilities in the two sets of schools [ were ] comparable . " The lower court also observed that " colored children in many instances are required to travel much greater distances than they would be required to travel could they attend a white school " but also noted that the school district " transports colored children to and from school free of charge " and that " [ n ] o such service [ was ] provided to white children . " 
 In the Delaware case the district court judge in Gebhart ordered that the black students be admitted to the white high school due to the substantial harm of segregation and the differences that made the separate schools unequal . 
 The NAACP 's chief counsel , Thurgood Marshall — who was later appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1967 — argued the case before the Supreme Court for the plaintiffs . Assistant attorney general Paul Wilson — later distinguished emeritus professor of law at the University of Kansas — conducted the state 's ambivalent defense in his first appellate argument . 
 In December 1952 , the Justice Department filed a friend of the court brief in the case . The brief was unusual in its heavy emphasis on foreign @-@ policy considerations of the Truman administration in a case ostensibly about domestic issues . Of the seven pages covering " the interest of the United States , " five focused on the way school segregation hurt the United States in the Cold War competition for the friendship and allegiance of non @-@ white peoples in countries then gaining independence from colonial rule . Attorney General James P. McGranery noted that , 
 The existence of discrimination against minority groups in the United States has an adverse effect upon our relations with other countries . Racial discrimination furnishes grist for the Communist propaganda mills . 
 The brief also quoted a letter by Secretary of State Dean Acheson lamenting that : 
 The United States is under constant attack in the foreign press , over the foreign radio , and in such international bodies as the United Nations because of various practices of discrimination in this country . 
 British barrister and parliamentarian Anthony Lester has written that " Although the Court 's opinion in Brown made no reference to these considerations of foreign policy , there is no doubt that they significantly influenced the decision . " 
 = = = Unanimous opinion and consensus building = = = 
 In spring 1953 , the Court heard the case but was unable to decide the issue and asked to rehear the case in fall 1953 , with special attention to whether the Fourteenth Amendment 's Equal Protection Clause prohibited the operation of separate public schools for whites and blacks . 
 The Court <unk> the case at the behest of Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter , who used <unk> as a stalling tactic , to allow the Court to gather a consensus around a Brown opinion that would outlaw segregation . The justices in support of desegregation spent much effort convincing those who initially intended to dissent to join a unanimous opinion . Although the legal effect would be same for a majority rather than unanimous decision , it was felt that dissent could be used by segregation supporters as a legitimizing counter @-@ argument . 
 Conference notes and draft decisions illustrate the division of opinions before the decision was issued . Justices Douglas , Black , Burton , and Minton were predisposed to overturn Plessy . Fred M. Vinson noted that Congress had not issued desegregation legislation ; Stanley F. Reed discussed incomplete cultural assimilation and states ' rights and was inclined to the view that segregation worked to the benefit of the African @-@ American community ; Tom C. Clark wrote that " we had led the states on to think segregation is OK and we should let them work it out . " Felix Frankfurter and Robert H. Jackson disapproved of segregation , but were also opposed to judicial activism and expressed concerns about the proposed decision 's <unk> . Chief Justice Vinson had been a key stumbling block . After Vinson died in September 1953 , President Dwight D. Eisenhower appointed Earl Warren as Chief Justice . Warren had supported the integration of Mexican @-@ American students in California school systems following Mendez v. Westminster . However , Eisenhower invited Earl Warren to a White House dinner , where the president told him : " These [ southern whites ] are not bad people . All they are concerned about is to see that their sweet little girls are not required to sit in school alongside some big overgrown Negroes . " Nevertheless , the Justice Department sided with the African American plaintiffs . 
 In his reading of the unanimous decision , Justice Warren noted the adverse psychological effects that segregated schools had on African American children . 
 While all but one justice personally rejected segregation , the judicial restraint faction questioned whether the Constitution gave the Court the power to order its end . The activist faction believed the Fourteenth Amendment did give the necessary authority and were pushing to go ahead . Warren , who held only a recess appointment , held his tongue until the Senate confirmed his appointment . 
 Warren convened a meeting of the justices , and presented to them the simple argument that the only reason to sustain segregation was an honest belief in the inferiority of Negroes . Warren further submitted that the Court must overrule Plessy to maintain its legitimacy as an institution of liberty , and it must do so unanimously to avoid massive Southern resistance . He began to build a unanimous opinion . 
 Although most justices were immediately convinced , Warren spent some time after this famous speech convincing everyone to sign onto the opinion . Justices Jackson and Reed finally decided to drop their dissent . The final decision was unanimous . Warren drafted the basic opinion and kept circulating and revising it until he had an opinion endorsed by all the members of the Court . 
 = = = Holding = = = 
 Reporters who observed the court holding were surprised by two facts . First , the court made a unanimous decision . Prior to the ruling , there were reports that the court members were sharply divided and might not be able to agree . Second , the attendance of Justice Robert H. Jackson who had suffered a mild heart attack and was not expected to return to the bench until early June 1954 . " Perhaps to emphasize the unanimity of the court , perhaps from a desire to be present when the history @-@ making verdict was announced , Justice Jackson was in his accustomed seat when the court convened . " Reporters also noted that Dean Acheson , former secretary of state , who had related the case to foreign policy considerations , and Herbert Brownell , the current attorney general , were in the courtroom . 
 The key holding of the Court was that , even if segregated black and white schools were of equal quality in facilities and teachers , segregation by itself was harmful to black students and unconstitutional . They found that a significant psychological and social disadvantage was given to black children from the nature of segregation itself , drawing on research conducted by Kenneth Clark assisted by June <unk> . This aspect was vital because the question was not whether the schools were " equal " , which under Plessy they nominally should have been , but whether the doctrine of separate was constitutional . The justices answered with a strong " no " : 
 [ D ] <unk> segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race , even though the physical facilities and other " tangible " factors may be equal , deprive the children of the minority group of equal educational opportunities ? We believe that it does . ... 
 " Segregation of white and colored children in public schools has a detrimental effect upon the colored children . The impact is greater when it has the sanction of the law , for the policy of separating the races is usually interpreted as denoting the inferiority of the negro group . A sense of inferiority affects the motivation of a child to learn . Segregation with the sanction of law , therefore , has a tendency to [ retard ] the educational and mental development of negro children and to deprive them of some of the benefits they would receive in a racial [ ly ] integrated school system . " ... 
 We conclude that , in the field of public education , the doctrine of " separate but equal " has no place . Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal . Therefore , we hold that the plaintiffs and others similarly situated for whom the actions have been brought are , by reason of the segregation complained of , deprived of the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment . 
 = = = Local outcomes = = = 
 The Topeka junior high schools had been integrated since 1941 . Topeka High School was integrated from its inception in 1871 and its sports teams from 1949 on . The Kansas law permitting segregated schools allowed them only " below the high school level . " 
 Soon after the district court decision , election outcomes and the political climate in Topeka changed . The Board of Education of Topeka began to end segregation in the Topeka elementary schools in August 1953 , integrating two attendance districts . All the Topeka elementary schools were changed to neighborhood attendance centers in January 1956 , although existing students were allowed to continue attending their prior assigned schools at their option . Plaintiff Zelma Henderson , in a 2004 interview , recalled that no demonstrations or tumult accompanied desegregation in Topeka 's schools : 
 " They accepted it , " she said . " It wasn 't too long until they integrated the teachers and principals . " 
 The Topeka Public Schools administration building is named in honor of McKinley Burnett , NAACP chapter president who organized the case . 
 Monroe Elementary was designated a U.S. National Historic Site unit of the National Park Service on October 26 , 1992 . 
 = = Social implications = = 
 Not everyone accepted the Brown v. Board of Education decision . In Virginia , Senator Harry F. Byrd , Sr. organized the Massive Resistance movement that included the closing of schools rather than desegregating them . See , for example , The Southern Manifesto . For more implications of the Brown decision , see Desegregation . 
 = = = Deep South = = = 
 Texas Attorney General John Ben Shepperd organized a campaign to generate legal obstacles to implementation of desegregation . 
 In 1957 , Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus called out his state 's National Guard to block black students ' entry to Little Rock Central High School . President Dwight Eisenhower responded by deploying elements of the 101st Airborne Division from Fort Campbell , Kentucky , to Arkansas and by federalizing Arkansas 's National Guard . 
 Also in 1957 , Florida 's response was mixed . Its legislature passed an <unk> Resolution denouncing the decision and declaring it null and void . But Florida Governor LeRoy Collins , though joining in the protest against the court decision , refused to sign it , arguing that the attempt to overturn the ruling must be done by legal methods . 
 In Mississippi fear of violence prevented any plaintiff from bringing a school desegregation suit for the next nine years . When Medgar Evers sued to desegregate Jackson , Mississippi schools in 1963 White Citizens Council member Byron De La Beckwith murdered him . Two subsequent trials resulted in hung juries . Beckwith was not convicted of the murder until 1994 . 
 In 1963 , Alabama Gov. George Wallace personally blocked the door to Foster Auditorium at the University of Alabama to prevent the enrollment of two black students . This became the infamous Stand in the Schoolhouse Door where Wallace personally backed his " segregation now , segregation tomorrow , segregation forever " policy that he had stated in his 1963 inaugural address . He moved aside only when confronted by General Henry Graham of the Alabama National Guard , who was ordered by President John F. Kennedy to intervene . 
 = = = Upland South = = = 
 In North Carolina , there was often a strategy of nominally accepting Brown , but tacitly resisting it . On May 18 , 1954 the Greensboro , North Carolina school board declared that it would abide by the Brown ruling . This was the result of the initiative of D.E. Hudgins Jr , a former Rhodes Scholar and prominent attorney , who chaired the school board . This made Greensboro the first , and for years the only , city in the South , to announce its intent to comply . However , others in the city resisted integration , putting up legal obstacles to the actual implementation of school desegregation for years afterward , and in 1969 , the federal government found the city was not in compliance with the 1964 Civil Rights Act . Transition to a fully integrated school system did not begin until 1971 , after numerous local lawsuits and both nonviolent and violent demonstrations . Historians have noted the irony that Greensboro , which had heralded itself as such a progressive city , was one of the last holdouts for school desegregation . 
 = = = The North = = = 
 Many Northern cities also had de facto segregation policies , which resulted in a vast gulf in educational resources between black and white communities . In Harlem , New York , for example , not a single new school had been built since the turn of the century , nor did a single nursery school exist , even as the Second Great Migration caused overcrowding of existing schools . Existing schools tended to be dilapidated and staffed with inexperienced teachers . Northern officials were in denial of the segregation , but Brown helped stimulate activism among African @-@ American parents like Mae Mallory who , with support of the NAACP , initiated a successful lawsuit against the city and State of New York on Brown 's principles . Mallory and thousands of other parents bolstered the pressure of the lawsuit with a school boycott in 1959 . During the boycott , some of the first freedom schools of the period were established . The city responded to the campaign by permitting more open transfers to high @-@ quality , historically @-@ white schools . ( New York 's African @-@ American community , and Northern desegregation activists generally , now found themselves contending with the problem of white flight , however . ) 
 The intellectual roots of Plessy v. Ferguson , the landmark United States Supreme Court decision upholding the constitutionality of racial segregation in 1896 under the doctrine of " separate but equal " were , in part , tied to the scientific racism of the era . However , the popular support for the decision was more likely a result of the racist beliefs held by many whites at the time . In deciding Brown v. Board of Education , the Supreme Court rejected the ideas of scientific racists about the need for segregation , especially in schools . The Court buttressed its holding by citing ( in footnote 11 ) social science research about the harms to black children caused by segregated schools . 
 Both scholarly and popular ideas of <unk> played an important role in the attack and backlash that followed the Brown decision . The Mankind Quarterly was founded in 1960 , in part in response to the Brown decision . 
 = = Legal criticism and praise = = 
 William Rehnquist wrote a memo titled " A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases " when he was a law clerk for Justice Robert H. Jackson in 1952 , during early deliberations that led to the Brown v. Board of Education decision . In his memo , Rehnquist argued : " I realize that it is an unpopular and <unk> position , for which I have been excoriated by ' liberal ' colleagues but I think Plessy v. Ferguson was right and should be reaffirmed . " Rehnquist continued , " To the argument . . . that a majority may not deprive a minority of its constitutional right , the answer must be made that while this is sound in theory , in the long run it is the majority who will determine what the constitutional rights of the minorities are . " Rehnquist also argued for Plessy with other law clerks . 
 However , during his 1971 confirmation hearings , Rehnquist said , " I believe that the memorandum was prepared by me as a statement of Justice Jackson 's tentative views for his own use . " Justice Jackson had initially planned to join a dissent in Brown . Later , at his 1986 hearings for the slot of Chief Justice , Rehnquist put further distance between himself and the 1952 memo : " The bald statement that Plessy was right and should be reaffirmed , was not an accurate reflection of my own views at the time . " In any event , while serving on the Supreme Court , Rehnquist made no effort to reverse or undermine the Brown decision , and frequently relied upon it as precedent . 
 Chief Justice Warren 's reasoning was broadly criticized by contemporary legal academics with Judge Learned Hand decrying that the Supreme Court had " assumed the role of a third legislative chamber " and Herbert Wechsler finding Brown impossible to justify based on neutral principles . 
 Some aspects of the Brown decision are still debated . Notably , Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas , himself an African American , wrote in Missouri v. Jenkins ( 1995 ) that at the very least , Brown I has been misunderstood by the courts . 
 Brown I did not say that " racially isolated " schools were inherently inferior ; the harm that it identified was tied purely to de jure segregation , not de facto segregation . Indeed , Brown I itself did not need to rely upon any psychological or social @-@ science research in order to announce the simple , yet fundamental truth that the Government cannot discriminate among its citizens on the basis of race . … 
 Segregation was not unconstitutional because it might have caused psychological feelings of inferiority . Public school systems that separated blacks and provided them with superior educational resources making blacks " feel " superior to whites sent to lesser schools — would violate the Fourteenth Amendment , whether or not the white students felt stigmatized , just as do school systems in which the positions of the races are reversed . Psychological injury or benefit is irrelevant … 
 Given that desegregation has not produced the predicted leaps forward in black educational achievement , there is no reason to think that black students cannot learn as well when surrounded by members of their own race as when they are in an integrated environment . ( … ) Because of their " distinctive histories and traditions , " black schools can function as the center and symbol of black communities , and provide examples of independent black leadership , success , and achievement . 
 Some Constitutional originalists , notably Raoul Berger in his influential 1977 book " Government by Judiciary , " make the case that Brown cannot be defended by reference to the original understanding of the 14th Amendment . They support this reading of the 14th amendment by noting that the Civil Rights Act of 1875 did not ban segregated schools and that the same Congress that passed the 14th Amendment also voted to segregate schools in the District of Columbia . Other originalists , including Michael W. McConnell , a federal judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit , in his article " <unk> and the Desegregation Decisions , " argue that the Radical Reconstructionists who spearheaded the 14th Amendment were in favor of desegregated southern schools . Evidence supporting this interpretation of the 14th amendment has come from archived Congressional records showing that proposals for federal legislation which would enforce school integration were debated in Congress a few years following the amendment 's ratification . 
 The case also has attracted some criticism from more liberal authors , including some who say that Chief Justice Warren 's reliance on psychological criteria to find a harm against segregated blacks was unnecessary . For example , Drew S. Days has written : " we have developed criteria for evaluating the constitutionality of racial classifications that do not depend upon findings of psychic harm or social science evidence . They are based rather on the principle that ' distinctions between citizens solely because of their ancestry are by their very nature odious to a free people whose institutions are founded upon the doctrine of equality , ' Hirabayashi v. United States , 320 U.S. 81 ( 1943 ) . . . . " 
 In his book " The Tempting of America " ( page 82 ) , Robert Bork endorsed the Brown decision as follows : 
 By 1954 , when Brown came up for decision , it had been apparent for some time that segregation rarely if ever produced equality . Quite aside from any question of psychology , the physical facilities provided for blacks were not as good as those provided for whites . That had been demonstrated in a long series of cases … The Court 's realistic choice , therefore , was either to abandon the quest for equality by allowing segregation or to forbid segregation in order to achieve equality . There was no third choice . Either choice would violate one aspect of the original understanding , but there was no possibility of avoiding that . Since equality and segregation were mutually inconsistent , though the <unk> did not understand that , both could not be honored . When that is seen , it is obvious the Court must choose equality and prohibit state @-@ imposed segregation . The purpose that brought the fourteenth amendment into being was equality before the law , and equality , not separation , was written into the law . 
 In June 1987 , Philip Elman , a civil rights attorney who served as an associate in the Solicitor General 's office during Harry Truman 's term , claimed he and Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter were mostly responsible for the Supreme Court 's decision , and stated that the NAACP 's arguments did not present strong evidence . Elman has been criticized for offering a self @-@ aggrandizing history of the case , omitting important facts , and denigrating the work of civil rights attorneys who had laid the groundwork for the decision over many decades . However , Frankfurter was also known for being one of court 's most outspoken advocates of the judicial restraint philosophy of basing court rulings on existing law rather than personal or political considerations . Public officials in the United States today are nearly unanimous in lauding the ruling . In May 2004 , the fiftieth anniversary of the ruling , President George W. Bush spoke at the opening of the " Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site " , calling Brown " a decision that changed America for the better , and forever . " Most Senators and Representatives issued press releases hailing the ruling . 
 = = Brown II = = 
 In 1955 , the Supreme Court considered arguments by the schools requesting relief concerning the task of desegregation . In their decision , which became known as " Brown II " the court delegated the task of carrying out school desegregation to district courts with orders that desegregation occur " with all deliberate speed , " a phrase traceable to Francis Thompson 's poem , The Hound of Heaven . 
 Supporters of the earlier decision were displeased with this decision . The language " all deliberate speed " was seen by critics as too ambiguous to ensure reasonable haste for compliance with the court 's instruction . Many Southern states and school districts interpreted " Brown II " as legal justification for resisting , delaying , and avoiding significant integration for years — and in some cases for a decade or more — using such tactics as closing down school systems , using state money to finance segregated " private " schools , and " token " integration where a few carefully selected black children were admitted to former white @-@ only schools but the vast majority remained in underfunded , unequal black schools . 
 For example , based on " Brown II , " the U.S. District Court ruled that Prince Edward County , Virginia did not have to desegregate immediately . When faced with a court order to finally begin desegregation in 1959 the county board of supervisors stopped appropriating money for public schools , which remained closed for five years , from 1959 to 1964 . 
 White students in the county were given assistance to attend white @-@ only " private academies " that were taught by teachers formerly employed by the public school system , while black students had no education at all unless they moved out of the county . 
 = = Brown III = = 
 In 1978 , Topeka attorneys Richard Jones , Joseph Johnson and Charles Scott , Jr . ( son of the original Brown team member ) , with assistance from the American Civil Liberties Union , persuaded Linda Brown Smith — who now had her own children in Topeka schools — to be a plaintiff in reopening Brown . They were concerned that the Topeka Public Schools ' policy of " open enrollment " had led to and would lead to further segregation . They also believed that with a choice of open enrollment , white parents would shift their children to " preferred " schools that would create both predominantly African American and predominantly European American schools within the district . The district court reopened the Brown case after a 25 @-@ year hiatus , but denied the plaintiffs ' request finding the schools " unitary " . In 1989 , a three @-@ judge panel of the Tenth Circuit on 2 – 1 vote found that the vestiges of segregation remained with respect to student and staff assignment . In 1993 , the Supreme Court denied the appellant School District 's request for certiorari and returned the case to District Court Judge Richard Rodgers for implementation of the Tenth Circuit 's mandate . 
 After a 1994 plan was approved and a bond issue passed , additional elementary magnet schools were opened and district attendance plans redrawn , which resulted in the Topeka schools meeting court standards of racial balance by 1998 . Unified status was eventually granted to Topeka Unified School District No. 501 on July 27 , 1999 . One of the new magnet schools is named after the Scott family attorneys for their role in the Brown case and civil rights . 
 = = Related cases = = 
 Plessy v. Ferguson , 163 U.S. 537 ( 1896 ) — separate but equal for public facilities 
 Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education 175 U.S. 528 ( 1899 ) — sanctioned de jure segregation of races 
 Lum v. Rice , 275 U.S. 78 ( 1927 ) — separate schools for Chinese pupils from white schoolchildren 
 Powell v. Alabama , 287 U.S. 45 ( 1932 ) — access to counsel 
 Missouri ex rel . Gaines v. Canada , 305 U.S. 337 ( 1938 ) <unk> that provide a school to white students must provide in @-@ state education to blacks 
 Smith v. <unk> , 321 U.S. 649 ( 1944 ) — non @-@ white voters in primary schools 
 Hedgepeth and Williams v. Board of Education ( 1944 ) <unk> racial segregation in New Jersey schools . 
 Mendez v. Westminster , 64 F. Supp . 544 ( 1946 ) — prohibits segregating Mexican American children in California 
 <unk> v. Board of Regents of Univ. of Okla . , 332 U.S. 631 ( 1948 ) — access to taxpayer state funded law schools 
 Shelley v. Kraemer , 334 U.S. 1 ( 1948 ) — restrictive covenants 
 Sweatt v. Painter , 339 U.S. 629 ( 1950 ) — segregated law schools in Texas 
 McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents , 339 U.S. 637 ( 1950 ) — prohibits segregation in a public institution of higher learning 
 Hernandez v. Texas , 347 U.S. 475 ( 1954 ) — the Fourteenth Amendment protects those beyond the racial classes of white or Negro . 
 Briggs v. Elliott , 347 U.S. 483 ( 1952 ) Brown Case # 1 — Summerton , South Carolina . 
 Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County , 103 F. Supp . 337 ( 1952 ) Brown Case # 2 — Prince Edward County , Virginia . 
 Gebhart v. Belton , 33 Del . Ch . 144 ( 1952 ) Brown Case # 3 — Claymont , Delaware 
 Bolling v. Sharpe , 347 U.S. 497 ( 1954 ) Brown companion case — dealt with the constitutionality of segregation in the District of Columbia , which — as a federal district , not a state — is not subject to the Fourteenth Amendment . 
 NAACP v. Alabama , 357 U.S. 449 ( 1958 ) — privacy of NAACP membership lists , and free association of members 
 Cooper v. Aaron , 358 U.S. 1 ( 1958 ) – Federal court enforcement of desegregation 
 Boynton v. Virginia , 364 U.S. 454 ( 1960 ) — outlawed racial segregation in public transportation 
 Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States , 379 U.S. 241 ( 1964 ) — held constitutional the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which banned racial discrimination in public places , particularly in public accommodations even in private property . 
 Loving v. Virginia , 388 U.S. 1 ( 1967 ) — banned anti @-@ miscegenation laws ( race @-@ based restrictions on marriage ) . 
 Alexander v. Holmes County Board of Education , 396 U.S. 1218 ( 1969 ) – changed Brown 's requirement of desegregation " with all deliberate speed " to one of " desegregation now " 
 Swann v. Charlotte @-@ Mecklenburg Board of Education , 402 U.S. 1 ( 1971 ) — established <unk> as a solution 
 <unk> Heung Lee v. Johnson , 404 U.S 1215 ( 1971 ) – " Brown v. Board of Education was not written for blacks alone " , desegregation of Asian schools in opposition to parents of Asian students 
 Milliken v. Bradley , 418 U.S. 717 ( 1974 ) — rejected <unk> across school district lines . 
 Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1 , 551 U.S. 701 , 127 S. Ct . <unk> ( 2007 ) — rejected using race as the sole determining factor for assigning students to schools . 
 List of United States Supreme Court Cases 
 * See Case citation for an explanation of these numbers . 
 = Emma Hollis = 
 FBI Special Agent Emma Hollis is a fictional character from the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . Hollis , introduced in the series ' third and final season , is a young special agent within the Federal Bureau of Investigation . During the show 's final year , she was partnered with offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) . The character of Hollis was portrayed by Canadian actor Klea Scott . 
 Special agent Hollis made her first appearance in the third season 's opening episode " The Innocents " . She is the daughter of James Hollis , who suffered from <unk> 's disease . The character has been met with mixed reactions from critics ; however , Scott 's performance has been generally well received . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 Hollis is a young Federal Bureau of Investigation special agent who becomes a protégée to offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) when he begins working in Virginia . She struggles to understand the criminal mind , as her sister was murdered by a man with no motive . She has an estranged half @-@ sister , Tamra , who has become a heroin addict . Hollis also has to deal with her father 's bout with an Alzheimer 's @-@ like illness , which has possibly been induced by the Millennium Group — a secretive organisation to which Black had previously belonged , and which he now believes to be responsible for bioterrorism . Group member Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) uses Hollis ' father 's illness as leverage to coerce her into cooperating with the Millennium Group . 
 Hollis is very much aware of Black 's reputation and eager to prove her worth as an investigator . Intrigued by Frank 's abilities as an investigator , she strives to learn as much from him as she can , while Frank also learns to recognize her strengths as an FBI agent . The respected , independent , ambitious young Bureau Agent formed a close relationship with Frank Black — and then turned her back on him to join the Millennium Group , which had agreed to cure her father of Alzheimer 's . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 When ending the second season , the producers and crew thought it would be the last . However , to their surprise Millennium was renewed for a third season . Many of the cliffhanger plot threads from the season finale were written off as the hallucinations of Frank Black . When creating the third season , they wanted to go back to the stand alone storytelling format used in the first season ; to do so they had Frank join the FBI and receive a new " skeptical " partner with whom he could work . Regarding Hollis , producer Michael Duggan said " she 's not a rookie ... but she 's young enough to be in awe of Frank Black 's rep as a legendary crime solver " . 
 Originally , the producers were looking for a white actress to play the part . Klea Scott 's agent thought she was " really right " for the part . He then went down to the producers for the show and campaigned for her and guaranteed them if she did not fit for the role , he would never send another actor to the casting director of the show . Scott auditioned with four other actresses to get the part . Scott won the role , but producer Chip Johannessen recalled that " she wasn 't what the network were looking , they wanted Heather Locklear or something to come . That was kind of how that went down " . Fox backed down , and Scott got the role . Scott had been living in Los Angeles , but relocated to the series ' filming location in Vancouver when she joined the cast . Scott had little input in her character 's development , and admitted feeling " a little hurt " to find that Hollis had joined the Millennium Group by the end of the series ; however , Scott felt this development was " believable and real " . Scott 's first day on set was during the filming of the final scene of " The Innocents " , the third season 's opening episode . The actress found it difficult to adjust to the series ' heavy workload , but found it enjoyable to work with co @-@ star Lance Henriksen . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although the character of Emma Hollis has been met with mixed reception , Scott 's acting has generally been seen in a positive light . Entertainment Weekly writer Ken Tucker said Scott 's presence as Hollis was " bracing " , finding that she " captures perfectly the way young adepts try to soak up everything about their heroes " ; while Raymond Edel of The Record described the character as a " quick @-@ witted extrovert " . Allan Johnson of the Chicago Tribune felt that the character made the third season of Millennium " a much more watchable series than in its previous two seasons " , offering a " different perspective " on the series ' dark subject matter . Rob Owen , of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , has noted that Hollis ' involvement in the " a tug of war between Frank and [ the ] Millennium Group " gave Millennium 's third season " a more personal take " on its central conflicts . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , have been critical of the character of Emma Hollis , finding that she has been written in a manner that " pass [ es ] emotional baggage off as character development " . However , Shearman and Pearson were less critical of Scott 's performance , noting that the character was " played well " and that Scott " works hard to mine some sort of truth " out of Hollis ' character . Randy Miller , writing for DVD Talk , noted that Hollis ' introduction left Millennium feeling " more of a curious sister to The X @-@ Files rather than its own entity " , likening Hollis and Black to the latter series ' Fox Mulder and Dana Scully . 
 = Morea expedition = 
 The Morea expedition ( French : Expédition de Morée ) is the name given in France to the land intervention of the French Army in the Peloponnese ( at the time often still known by its medieval name , Morea ) between 1828 and 1833 , at the time of the Greek War of Independence . 
 After the fall of Messolonghi , Western Europe decided to intervene in favour of revolutionary Greece . Their attitude toward the Ottoman Empire 's Egyptian ally , Ibrahim Pasha , was especially critical ; their primary objective was to elicit the evacuation of the occupied regions , the Peloponnese in particular . The intervention began when a Franco @-@ Russo @-@ British fleet was sent to the region , winning the Battle of Navarino in October 1827 . In August 1828 , a French expeditionary corps disembarked at Koroni in the southern Peloponnese . The soldiers were stationed on the peninsula until the evacuation of Egyptian troops in October , then taking control of the principal strongholds still held by Turkish troops . Although the bulk of the troops returned to France from the end of 1828 , there was a French presence in the area until 1833 . 
 As during Napoleon 's Egyptian Campaign , when a Commission of Sciences and Arts had accompanied the military campaign , a Morea scientific expedition ( Expédition scientifique de Morée . ) accompanied the troops . Seventeen learned men represented different specialties ( natural history and antiquities – archaeology , architecture and sculpture ) made the voyage . Their work was of major importance in increasing knowledge about the country . As an example , the topographic maps they produced were excellent . More significantly , the measurements , drawings , profiles , plans and proposals for the theoretical restoration of Peloponnesian monuments , of Attica and of the Cyclades were , following James Stuart and Nicholas Revett 's Antiquities of Athens , a new attempt to systematically and exhaustively catalogue ancient Greek ruins . The Morea expedition and its publications offered a near @-@ complete description of the regions visited . They formed a scientific , aesthetic and human inventory that remained one of the best means , short of visiting them in person , to get to know the regions . 
 = = Context = = 
 = = = Military and diplomatic context = = = 
 In 1821 , the Greeks revolted against centuries @-@ long Ottoman rule . They won numerous victories early on and declared independence . However , the declaration contradicted the principles of the Congress of Vienna and of the Holy Alliance , which imposed a European equilibrium of the status quo , outlawing any change . In contrast to what happened elsewhere in Europe , the Holy Alliance did not intervene to stop the liberal Greek insurgents . 
 The liberal and national uprising displeased the Austria of Metternich , the principal political architect of the Holy Alliance . However , Russia , another reactionary gendarme of Europe , looked favorably on the insurrection due to its Orthodox religious solidarity and its geostrategic interest ( control of the Dardanelles and the Bosphorus ) . France , another active member of the Holy Alliance , had just intervened in Spain against liberals at Trocadero ( 1823 ) but held an ambiguous position : Paris saw the liberal Greeks first and foremost as Christians , and their uprising against the Muslim Ottomans had undertones of a new crusade . Great Britain , a liberal country , was interested in the regional situation primarily because it lay on the route to India and London wished to exercise a form of control there . For all of Europe , Greece represented the cradle of Western civilisation and of art since antiquity . 
 The Greek victories had been short @-@ lived . The Sultan had called to his aid his Egyptian vassal Muhammad Ali , who had dispatched his son Ibrahim Pasha to Greece with a fleet and 8 @,@ 000 men , later adding a further 25 @,@ 000 troops . Ibrahim ’ s intervention proved decisive : the Peloponnese had been reconquered in 1825 ; the gateway town of Messolonghi had fallen in 1826 ; Athens had been taken in 1827 . All that Greek nationalists still held was Nafplion , Hydra , Mani and Aegina . 
 A strong current of <unk> developed in Western Europe . Thus it was decided to intervene in favour of Greece , the cradle of civilisation and a Christian vanguard in the Orient whose strategic location was clear . By the Treaty of London of July 1827 , France , Russia and the United Kingdom recognised the autonomy of Greece , which remained a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire . The three powers agreed to a limited intervention in order to convince the Porte to accept the terms of the convention . A plan to send a naval expedition as a show of force was proposed and adopted . A joint Russian , French and British fleet was sent to exercise diplomatic pressure against Constantinople . The Battle of Navarino ( October 1827 ) , fought after a chance encounter , resulted in the destruction of the Turkish @-@ Egyptian fleet . 
 In 1828 , Ibrahim Pasha thus found himself in a difficult situation : he had just suffered a defeat at Navarino ; the joint fleet exercised a blockade which prevented him from receiving reinforcements and supplies ; his Albanian troops , whom he could no longer pay , had returned to their country under the protection of Theodoros Kolokotronis ’ Greek troops . On August 6 , 1828 , a convention had been signed at Alexandria between the viceroy of Egypt , Muhammad Ali , and the British admiral Edward Codrington . Ibrahim Pasha had to evacuate his Egyptian troops and leave the Peloponnese to the few Turkish troops ( estimated at 1200 men ) remaining there . However , Ibrahim Pasha refused to honor the agreement that had been reached , continuing to control various Greek regions : Messenia , Navarino , Patras and several other strongholds . He had also ordered the systematic destruction of Tripoli . 
 In addition , the French government of Charles X was beginning to have doubts about its Greek policy . Ibrahim Pasha himself noted this ambiguity when he met General Maison in September : “ Why was France , after enslaving men in Spain in 1823 , now coming to Greece to make men free ? ” Eventually a liberal agitation , pro @-@ Greek and inspired by what was then happening in that country , began to develop in France . The longer France waited , the more delicate her position vis @-@ à @-@ vis Metternich became . The ultra @-@ royalist government thus decided to accelerate events . A land expedition was proposed to Great Britain , which refused to intervene directly . Meanwhile , Russia had declared war against the Ottoman Empire and its military victories were unsettling for London , which did not wish to see the Tsarist empire extend too far south . Thus Great Britain did not oppose an intervention by France alone . 
 = = = Intellectual context = = = 
 Enlightenment philosophy had developed Western Europeans ’ interest in Greece , or rather in an idealised Ancient Greece , the linchpin of Antiquity , as it was perceived and taught . The Enlightenment philosophers , for whom the notions of Nature and Reason were so important , believed that these had been the fundamental values of Classical Athens . The Ancient Greek democracies , and above all Athens , became models to emulate . There they searched for answers to the political and philosophical problems of their time . Works such as those of Abbé Barthélemy , Voyage du Jeune <unk> ( 1788 ) , served to fix definitively the image that Europe had of the Aegean . 
 The theories and system of interpreting ancient art devised by Johann Joachim Winckelmann influenced European tastes for decades . His major work , History of Ancient Art , was published in 1764 and translated into French in 1766 ( the English translation came later , in 1881 ) . In this major work Winckelmann initiated the tradition of dividing ancient art into periods , classifying the works chronologically and stylistically . 
 The views of Winckelmann on art encompassed the entirety of civilisation . He drew a parallel between a civilisation 's general level of development and the evolution of its art . He interpreted this artistic evolution the same way that his contemporaries saw the life cycle of a civilisation , in terms of progress , apogee and then decline . For him , Greek art had been the pinnacle of artistic achievement , culminating with Phidias . Further , Winckelmann believed that the most beautiful works of Greek art had been produced under ideal geographic , political and religious circumstances . This frame of thought long dominated intellectual life in Europe . He classified Greek art into four periods : Ancient ( archaic period ) , Sublime ( Phidias ) , Beautiful ( <unk> ) and Decadent ( Roman period ) . 
 Winckelmann ’ s theories on the evolution of art culminated in the Sublime period of Greek art , which had been conceived during a period of complete political and religious liberty . The theories idealised Ancient Greece and increased people ’ s desire to travel to contemporary Greece . It was seductive to believe , as he did , that ' good taste ' was born beneath the Greek sky . He convinced 18th @-@ century Europe that life in Ancient Greece was pure , simple and moral , and that classical Hellas was the source from which artists should draw ideas of “ noble simplicity and calm grandeur ” . Greece became the “ motherland of the arts ” and “ the teacher of taste ” . 
 The French government had planned the Morea expedition in the same spirit as those of James Stuart and Nicholas Revett , whose work it wished to complete . The semi @-@ scientific expeditions commissioned and financed by the Society of <unk> remained a benchmark : these represented the first attempts to rediscover Ancient Greece . The first , that of Stuart and Revett to Athens and the islands , took place in 1751 – 1753 , and resulted in The Antiquities of Athens , mined by architects and designers for a refined " Grecian " neoclassicism . The expedition of Revett , Richard Chandler and William Pars to Asia Minor took place between 1764 and 1766 . Finally , the “ work ” of Lord Elgin on the Parthenon at the beginning of the 19th century had sparked further longing for Greece : it now seemed possible to build vast collections of ancient art in Western Europe . 
 = = Military expedition = = 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 The Chamber of Deputies authorised a loan of 80 million gold francs to allow the government to meet its obligations . An expeditionary corps of 13 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 men commanded by Lieutenant @-@ General Nicolas Joseph Maison was formed . It was composed of three brigades commanded by the <unk> de camp <unk> Sébastiani ( brother of the Corsican soldier @-@ diplomat Horace François Bastien Sébastiani de La Porta ) , Philippe Higonet , and <unk> Schneider . The Chief of the General Staff was General Antoine Simon Durrieu . 
 The expeditionary corps was made up of nine infantry regiments : 
 1st brigade : 8th Line Infantry Regiment , 16th Line Infantry Regiment , 27th Light Infantry Regiment 
 2nd brigade : 35th Line Infantry Regiment , 46th Line Infantry Regiment , 58th Line Infantry Regiment 
 3rd brigade : 29th Line Infantry Regiment , 42nd Line Infantry Regiment , 54th Line Infantry Regiment 
 Also departing were the 3rd Chasseur Regiment ( commanded by Colonel Paul @-@ Eugène de <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , four companies of artillery ( with equipment for campaigns , sieges , and mountains ) of the 3rd and 8th Artillery Regiments , and two companies of military engineers ( sappers and miners ) . 
 A transport fleet protected by warships was organised ; sixty ships sailed in all . Equipment , victuals , munitions and 1 @,@ 300 horses had to be brought over , as well as arms , munitions and money for the Greek provisional government of John <unk> . France wished to support free Greece as it came into being by helping it activate its army , with the aim of gaining influence in the region . 
 The first brigade left Toulon on August 17 ; the second , two days later ; and the third on September 1 . The general in command , Nicolas Joseph Maison , was with the first brigade , aboard the ship of the line Ville de Marseille . The first convoy was composed of merchant ships and apart from the Ville de Marseille , it included the frigates Amphitrite , Bellone and Cybèle . The second convoy was escorted by ship of the line Duquesne and the frigates Iphigénie and Armide . 
 = = = Operations in the Peloponnese = = = 
 = = = = Landing = = = = 
 On August 29 , the fleet transporting the two first brigades arrived in Navarino bay , where the joint Franco @-@ Russo @-@ British squadron was berthed . The Egyptian army was concentrated between Navarino and Methoni . Thus , the landing was risky . The fleet sailed toward the Gulf of Koroni protected by a fortress held by the Ottomans . The expeditionary corps began to disembark without meeting any opposition on the evening of August 29 , finishing on the morning of August 30 . A proclamation by governor <unk> had informed the Greek population of the imminent arrival of a French expedition . The locals rushed up before the troops as soon as they set foot on Greek soil and offered them food . 
 The French pitched camp in the plain of Koroni , near <unk> , on the site of the ancient Coronea . The third brigade , which had borne up against a storm and lost three ships , managed to land at Koroni on September 16 . 
 = = = = Departure of the Egyptian Army = = = = 
 Ibrahim Pasha used a number of pretexts to delay the evacuation : problems with food supply or transport , or unforeseen difficulties in the strongholds ’ handover . The French officers had difficulties in maintaining the fighting zeal of their soldiers , who for example had become excited at the ( false ) news that an imminent march on Athens would take place . This impatience on the part of the French troops was perhaps decisive in convincing the Egyptian commander to respect his obligations . Moreover , French soldiers were beginning to suffer from autumn rains which drenched their tent camp , increasing the likelihood of fever and especially of dysentery . On September 24 , Louis @-@ Eugène Cavaignac wrote that thirty men of 400 in his company of military engineers were affected by fever . General Maison wished to be able to set up his men in the fortresses ’ barracks . On September 7 , Ibrahim Pasha accepted to evacuate his troops as of September 9 . The agreement reached with General Maison provided that the Egyptians would leave with their arms , baggage and horses , but without any Greek slave or prisoner . As the Egyptian fleet could not evacuate the entire army in one go , supplies were authorised for the troops who remained on land ; these men had just undergone a lengthy blockade . A first Egyptian division , 5 @,@ 500 men and 27 ships , set sail on September 16 , escorted by three ships from the joint fleet ( two English ones and the French frigate <unk> ) . 
 The last Egyptian transport sailed away on October 5 , taking Ibrahim Pasha . Of the 40 @,@ 000 men he had brought from Egypt , he was taking back barely 20 @,@ 000 . A few Ottoman soldiers remained in order to hold the different strongholds of the Peloponnese . The next mission of the French troops was to “ give security ” to these and hand them back to independent Greece . 
 = = = = <unk> taken = = = = 
 On October 6 , General Maison ordered General Higonet to march on Navarino . He left with the 16th Infantry Regiment , which included artillery and military engineers . Thus , Navarino ’ s seacoast was put under siege by Admiral Henri de <unk> ’ s fleet and the land siege was undertaken by General Higonet ’ s soldiers . The Turkish commander of the fort refused to surrender : 
 “ The Porte is at war with neither the French nor the English ; we will commit no hostile act , but we will not surrender the fort . ” 
 Hence , the sappers received an order to open a breach in the walls . General Higonet entered the fortress , held by 250 men who surrendered with sixty cannons and 800 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . The French troops moved in intending to remain for some time , building up Navarino ’ s fortifications , rebuilding its houses and setting up a hospital and various features of local administration . 
 On October 7 , the 35th Line Infantry Regiment , commanded by General Durrieu , accompanied by artillery and by military engineers , appeared before Methoni , defended by 1 @,@ 078 men and a hundred cannons , and which had food supplies for six months . Two ships of the line , the <unk> ( Captain Maillard ) and HMS Wellesley ( Captain Frederick Lewis Maitland ) blocked the port and threatened the fortress with their cannons . The fort ’ s commanders , the Turk Hassan Pasha and the Egyptian Ahmed Bey , made the same reply as had the commander of Navarino . Methoni ’ s fortifications were in a better state than those of Navarino . Thus the sappers focused on opening the city gate . The city ’ s garrison did not defend it . The commanders of the fort explained that they could not surrender it without disobeying the Sultan ’ s orders , but also recognised that it was impossible for them to resist . Thus the fort had to be taken , at least symbolically , by force . 
 It was more difficult to take Koroni . General Sébastiani showed up there on October 7 with a party from his brigade . The fort commander ’ s response was similar to those given at Navarino and Methoni . Sébastiani sent his sappers , who were pushed back by rocks thrown from atop the walls . A dozen men were wounded , among them Cavaignac and , more seriously , a captain , a sergeant and three sappers . The other French soldiers felt insulted and their general had great difficulty in preventing them from opening fire and taking the stronghold by force . The Amphitrite , the <unk> and the Wellesley came to the assistance of the ground troops . The threat they posed led the Ottoman commander to surrender . On October 9 , the French entered Koroni and seized 80 cannons and guns , along with numerous victuals and munitions . 
 Patras had been controlled by Ibrahim Pasha since the evacuation of the Peloponnese . The third brigade had been sent by sea to take the city , located in the north @-@ western part of the peninsula . It landed on October 4 . General Schneider gave Hadji Abdullah , Pasha of Patras and of the “ Castle of the Morea ” , twenty @-@ four hours to hand over the fort . On October 5 , when the ultimatum expired , three columns marched on the city and the artillery was deployed . The Pasha immediately signed the capitulation of Patras and of the “ Castle of the Morea ” . However , the aghas who commanded the latter refused to obey their pasha , whom they considered a traitor , and announced that they would rather die in the ruins of their fortress than surrender . 
 = = = = Siege of the " Morea Castle " = = = = 
 The " Castle of the Morea " guarded the entry to the Gulf of Corinth , near <unk> . Bayezid II had built it in 1499 . 
 General Schneider negotiated with the aghas , who persisted in their refusal to surrender . A siege was begun from in front of the fortress and fourteen marine and field guns , placed a little over 400 meters away , reduced the artillery of those under siege to silence . Admiral de <unk> had General Maison put all his artillery and sappers on board . By land Maison sent two infantry regiments and the 3rd Light Cavalry Regiment . Reinforcements arrived on October 23 . New batteries nicknamed “ for breaching ” ( de brèche ) were installed . These received the names of Charles X , George IV , the Duke of Angoulême , the Duke of Bordeaux and “ Marine ” . A party from the British fleet and HMS Blonde under Captain Edmund Lyons came to add their cannons . 
 On October 30 , the batteries opened fire . In four hours , a breach was largely opened in the ramparts . Then , an emissary came out with a white flag to negotiate the terms of the fort ’ s surrender . General Maison replied that the terms had been negotiated at the beginning of the month at Patras . He added that he did not trust a group of besieged men who had not respected a first agreement to respect a second one . He gave the garrison half an hour to evacuate the fort , without arms or baggage . The aghas submitted . However , the fortress ’ resistance had cost 25 men , killed or wounded in the French expedition . 
 = = = The French in the Peloponnese = = = 
 On November 5 , 1828 , the last “ non @-@ Greeks ” ( Turks , Egyptians or Muslims generally ) left the Morea . 2 @,@ 500 Turks and their families were placed aboard French vessels headed for Smyrna . 
 The French and British ambassadors had set themselves up at Poros and invited Constantinople to send a diplomat there so as to pursue negotiations over the status of Greece . The Porte persisted in refusing to participate in conferences . Hence , the French suggested continuing military operations and extending them into Attica and Euboea . The British opposed this plan . Thus it was left to the Greeks to drive out the Ottomans from these territories , with the understanding that the French army would only intervene if the Greeks found themselves in trouble . 
 Gradually , the Morea was evacuated of troops . The Schneider brigade , of which Cavaignac was a member , boarded ship in the first days of April 1829 . General Maison left on May 22 , 1829 . Only one brigade remained in the Peloponnese . Fresh troops came from France to relieve the soldiers present in Greece : thus the 57th Line Infantry Regiment landed at Navarino on July 25 , 1830 . France did not withdraw its troops for good until after King Otto arrived in Greece in January 1833 . 
 The French troops , commanded by General Charles Louis Joseph Olivier <unk> , did not remain idle during these nearly five years . Fortifications were raised , like those at Navarino . Bridges were constructed , such as those over the <unk> River between Kalamata and Methoni . The Methoni – Navarino road was built , and improvements were made to Peloponnesian towns ( barracks , bridges , gardens , etc . ) . 
 = = = Military results of the expedition = = = 
 The Ottoman Empire could no longer depend on Egyptian troops to hold Greece . The strategic situation now resembled that existing before 1825 and the landing of Ibrahim Pasha . Then , the Greek insurgents had triumphed on all fronts . 
 After the Morea military expedition , the Greeks only had to face the Turkish troops in Central Greece . <unk> , gateway to Boeotia , was conquered at the beginning of November 1828 . A counterattack by Mahmud Pasha from Euboea was repulsed in January 1829 . In April , Naupaktos was restored to the Greeks ; in May , <unk> Kapodistrias recaptured the symbolic town of Messolonghi . However , it took the military victory of Russia in the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1828 – 29 and the Treaty of Adrianople before the independence of Greece was recognised . 
 The Greek territories that had been liberated by September 1829 , a year after the Morea military expedition — the Peloponnese and central Greece — were those which would form independent Greece after 1832 . 
 = = Scientific expedition = = 
 The Morea expedition was the second of the great military @-@ scientific expeditions led by France in the first half of the 19th century . The first , used as a benchmark , had been the Egyptian one , starting in 1798 ; the last took place in Algeria from 1839 . All three took place at the initiative of the French government and were placed under the guidance of a particular ministry ( Foreign relations for Egypt , Interior for the Morea and War for Algeria ) . The great scientific institutions recruited learned men ( both civilians and from the military ) and specified their missions , but in situ work took place in close co @-@ operation with the army . 
 The Commission of Sciences and Arts from Napoleon ’ s Egyptian expedition , and especially the publications that followed , had become a model . As Greece was the other important “ ancient ” region considered as lying at the origin of Western civilisation ( one of the philhellenes ’ principal arguments ) , it was decided to “ take advantage of the presence of our soldiers who were occupying the Morea to send a learned commission . It did not have to equal that attached to the glory of Napoleon [ … ] It did however need to render eminent services to the arts and sciences . ” 
 In Egypt and Algeria , scientific work took place under the army ’ s protection . In the Morea , most troops were departing when exploration had barely begun . The army was content to provide logistical support : “ tents , stakes , tools , liquid containers , large pots and sacks ; in a word , everything that could be found for us to use in the army ’ s storehouses . ” 
 The members of the scientific expedition landed at Navarino on March 3 , 1829 , after 21 days at sea . 
 = = = Physical sciences section = = = 
 This section included several sciences : botany ( Jean Baptiste Bory de Saint @-@ Vincent , Louis <unk> Saint @-@ Sauveur and Antoine Vincent <unk> ) , geography , geology ( Pierre Théodore <unk> d ’ <unk> and Émile Puillon Boblaye ) and zoology . The government insisted that a landscape artist also be sent , as Minister of the Interior <unk> had asked for one so as not to restrict the observations “ to flies and herbs , but to extend them to places and people . ” 
 = = = = Geography = = = = 
 One of the first objectives fixed by the French government had been to draw precise maps of the Peloponnese , with a scientific purpose , but also for economic and military reasons . The Minister of War , the Vicomte de Caux , had written to General Maison on January 6 , 1829 : 
 “ All the maps of Greece are very imperfect and were drawn up based on more or less inaccurate templates ; it is thus essential to fix them . Not only will geography be enriched by this research , but we will in the process support France ’ s commercial interests by making her relations easier , and it will above all be useful for our ground and naval forces , who may find themselves involved in this part of Europe . ” 
 In two years , a very precise map , drawn on six sheets at a 1 / 200 @,@ 000 scale , was produced . In March 1829 , a base of 3 @,@ 500 meters had been traced in the Argolis , from one angle at the ruins of Tiryns to an angle of a house in ruins in the village of Aria . This was intended to serve as a point of departure in all the triangulation operations for topographic and geodesic readings in the Peloponnese . Pierre <unk> and Puillon @-@ Boblaye proceeded to perform numerous verifications on the base and on the rulers used . The margin of error was thus reduced to 1 meter for every 15 kilometers . The longitude and latitude of the base point at Tiryns were read and checked , so that again the margin of error was reduced as far as possible to an estimated 0 @.@ 2 seconds . 134 geodesic stations were set up on the peninsula ’ s mountains , as well as on Aegina , Hydra and Nafplion . Thus , equilateral triangles whose sides measured about 20 km were drawn . The angles were measured with <unk> by <unk> . 
 The geographers suffered from fever — Bory de Saint @-@ Vincent ’ s team as much as that of Puillon @-@ Boblaye : 
 “ The horrible heat that beset us in July placed , for the rest , the entire topographic brigade in disarray . These gentlemen , having worked in the sun , have nearly all taken ill and eight days ago , we grieved to see M. <unk> die at Napoli eight days ago . ” ( Bory de Saint @-@ Vincent ) 
 “ Of twelve officers employed in the geodesic service , two are dead and all have been sick . Besides them , we have lost two sappers and a household servant . ” ( Puillon @-@ Boblaye ) 
 = = = = Botany and zoology = = = = 
 Jean Baptiste Bory de Saint @-@ Vincent led the scientific expedition . Additionally , he made detailed botanical studies . He gathered a multitude of specimens : Flore de Morée ( 1832 ) lists 1 @,@ 550 plants , of which 33 were orchids and 91 were grasses ( just 42 species had not yet been described ) ; Nouvelle Flore du Péloponnèse et des Cyclades ( 1838 ) described 1 @,@ 821 species . In Morea , Bory de Saint @-@ Vincent was content to collect plants . He proceeded to classify , identify and describe them upon his return to France . Then he was aided , not by his collaborators from Greece , but by Louis <unk> <unk> , Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> and Adolphe @-@ Théodore Brongniart . Similarly , the naturalists Étienne and Isidore Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire helped edit the expedition ’ s scientific works . 
 As the gathering process went along , they sent the plants , as well as birds and fish , to France . 
 The Morea expedition confirmed that the golden jackal existed in Greece . Although earlier travel narratives had mentioned its presence , these were not considered trustworthy . Moreover , the subspecies seen and described by the French ( named Canis aureus <unk> ) was endemic to the region . Bory de Saint @-@ Vincent brought back pelts and a skull . 
 = = = Fine arts section = = = 
 This section was formed by the Institut de France , which designated the architect Guillaume @-@ Abel Blouet as its head . The Institut sent Amable <unk> , Pierre Achille Poirot , Frédéric de Gournay and Pierre Félix <unk> as his assistants . 
 The architect Jean @-@ Nicolas Huyot gave very precise instructions to this section . Of wide @-@ ranging experience formed in Asia Minor and Egypt and under the influence of engineers , he asked them to keep an authentic diary of their excavations where precision measurements read off watches and compasses should be written down , to draw a map of the region they travelled , and to describe the layout of the terrain . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The publication of works on archaeology and art followed the same pattern as with works on physical and natural sciences : that of an itinerary with descriptions of the roads travelled , noteworthy monuments along these routes and descriptions of their destinations . Hence , volume I of Expédition de Morée . Section des Beaux Arts describes Navarino ( pp. 1 – 7 ) with six pages of plates ( fountains , churches , the fortress of Navarino and the palace of Nestor at Pylos ) ; then on pages 9 – 10 , the Navarino @-@ Methoni road is detailed with four pages of plates ( a church in ruins and its frescoes , but also bucolic landscapes reminding the reader that the scene is not so far from Arcadia ) ; and finally three pages on Methoni and four pages of plates . The bucolic landscapes were rather close to the “ norm ” that Hubert Robert had proposed for depictions of Greece . 
 The presence of troops from the expeditionary corps was important , alternating with that of Greek shepherds : 
 “ ( … ) their generous hospitality and simple and innocent mores reminded us of the beautiful period of pastoral life which fiction calls the Golden age , and seemed to present to us as real people the characters of Theocritus ’ and Virgil ’ s <unk> . ” 
 The archaeological expedition travelled through Navarino ( Pylos ) , Methoni , Koroni , Messene and Olympia ( described in the publication ’ s first volume ) ; <unk> , Megalopolis , Sparta , Mantineia , Argos , Mycenae , Tiryns and Nafplion ( subjects of the second volume ) ; the Cyclades ( Syros , Kea , Mykonos , Delos , Naxos and Milos ) , Sounion , Aegina , Epidaurus , Troezen , Nemea , Corinth , Sicyon , Patras , Elis , Kalamata , the Mani Peninsula , Cape Matapan , Monemvasia , Athens , Salamis Island and Eleusina ( covered in volume III ) . 
 Edgar Quinet had left with the rest of the expedition . However , from the time he arrived in Greece , he kept apart from his companions , as did another member of his section , the Lyon sculptor Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> . The two travelled through the Peloponnese separately and Quinet visited Piraeus on April 21 , 1829 , thence reaching Athens . He saw the Cyclades in May , starting with Syros . Having taken ill , he returned to France on June 5 , and his <unk> moderne et ses rapports avec l ’ <unk> appeared in September 1831 . <unk> pursued his research in Greece until August 1831 , long after the expedition had returned to France at the end of 1829 . 
 = = = = Ways of exploration = = = = 
 The artistic and archaeological exploration of the Peloponnese unfolded in the manner in which archaeological research was then conducted in Greece . The first step always involved an attempt to make an on @-@ site check ( a form of autopsy in the manner of Herodotus ) against the texts of ancient authors like Homer , Pausanias or Strabo . Thus , at Navarino , the location of Nestor ’ s palace was determined from Homer and the adjectives “ inaccessible ” and “ sandy ” . At Methoni , “ the ancient remains of the port of which the description matches perfectly with that of Pausanias are enough to determine with certainty the location of the ancient town . ” 
 Having explored Navarino , Methoni and Koroni , the members of the expedition returned to Messene , where they spent a month starting on April 10 . 
 = = = = Olympia = = = = 
 The expedition spent six weeks , starting on May 10 , 1829 , in Olympia . Abel Blouet and Dubois undertook the first excavations there . They were accompanied by the painters Poirot , <unk> and Duval . The archaeological advice of Huyot was followed : 
 “ Following the instructions which had been given to him by the commission of the Institute , this antiquarian ( Dubois ) had begun the excavations of which the result had been the discovery of the first bases of the two columns of the pronaos and several fragments of sculpture . ” 
 The site was divided into squares and excavations were undertaken in straight lines : archaeology was becoming rationalised , and it was in this way that the location of the temple of Zeus was determined . The simple chase after treasure was beginning to be abandoned . 
 The fundamental contribution of the Morea scientific expedition was in effect its quasi @-@ disinterest in pillage and treasure hunting . Blouet refused to perform excavations that risked damaging the monuments , and banned the mutilation of statues with the intent of taking a piece separated from the rest of the statue without regard . It is perhaps for this reason that the three metopes of the temple of Zeus discovered at Olympia were brought back in their entirety . In any case , this willingness to protect the integrity of monuments undoubtedly represented an epistemological progress . 
 = = = = Byzantine Greece = = = = 
 The French did not limit their interest to Antiquity ; they also described and drew Byzantine monuments . Quite often , and until then for the travellers as well , only Ancient Greece mattered ; medieval and modern Greece were ignored . Blouet , in his Expédition de Morée , gave very precise descriptions of the churches he saw . For instance , plate 9 ( I , II and III ) of volume I deals with : 
 “ Layout , section and perspective view of one of the two small churches of the village of <unk> , situated on the slope of the mountain to the left of the Navarino @-@ Methoni road ; ( … ) ; its interior , decorated with paintings and frescoes , is divided into two parts by a wall that forms a small closed sanctuary in the back in which the priest stands to officiate . ” 
 = = = = Foundation of the French School at Athens = = = = 
 The results obtained by the Morea scientific expedition underscored the need to create a permanent , stable structure that would allow its work to continue . From 1846 , it was possible to “ systematically and permanently continue the work so gloriously and so happily begun by the Morea scientific expedition ” due to the creation on rue Didot , at the foot of Mount <unk> , of a French scientific institution , in the form of the French School at Athens . 
 = = = Publications = = = 
 Abel Blouet and Amable <unk> , Expédition scientifique de Morée , <unk> par le Gouvernement Francais . Architecture , Sculptures , Inscriptions et <unk> du <unk> , des Cyclades et de l ’ <unk> . , Firmin Didot , 1831 . ( 3 volumes ) 
 J. B. Bory de Saint @-@ Vincent , Relation du voyage de la Commission scientifique de Morée dans le Péloponnèse , les Cyclades et l ’ <unk> . , Levrault , 1836 – 1838 . 2 volumes and an atlas . 
 J. B. Bory de Saint @-@ Vincent ( and collaborators ) , Expédition scientifique de Morée . Section des sciences physiques . , volume II Géographie et <unk> . , 1834 . 
 J. B. Bory de Saint @-@ Vincent ( and collaborators ) , Expédition scientifique de Morée . Section des sciences physiques . , volume III Botanique , also called Flore de Morée . , 1832 . 
 J. B. Bory de Saint @-@ Vincent ( and Louis <unk> <unk> ) , Nouvelle Flore du Péloponnèse et des Cyclades . , 1838 ( revised and expanded edition of 1832 ’ s Flore de Morée . ) . 
 E. Puillon @-@ Boblaye , Recherches <unk> sur les <unk> de Morée . , Levrault , 1836 . 
 = Natalie Clifford Barney = 
 Natalie Clifford Barney ( October 31 , 1876 – February 2 , 1972 ) was an American playwright , poet and novelist who lived as an expatriate in Paris . 
 Barney 's salon was held at her home at 20 rue Jacob in Paris ' Left Bank for more than 60 years and brought together writers and artists from around the world , including many leading figures in French literature along with American and British Modernists of the Lost Generation . She worked to promote writing by women and formed a " Women 's Academy " ( L 'Académie des Femmes ) in response to the all @-@ male French Academy while also giving support and inspiration to male writers from Remy de Gourmont to Truman Capote . 
 She was openly lesbian and began publishing love poems to women under her own name as early as 1900 , considering scandal as " the best way of getting rid of nuisances " ( meaning heterosexual attention from young males ) . In her writings she supported feminism and pacifism . She opposed monogamy and had many overlapping long and short @-@ term relationships , including on @-@ and @-@ off romances with poet Renée Vivien and dancer Armen Ohanian and a 50 @-@ year relationship with painter Romaine Brooks . Her life and love affairs served as inspiration for many novels , ranging from the salacious French bestseller Sapphic Idyll to The Well of Loneliness , the most famous lesbian novel of the twentieth century . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Barney was born in 1876 in Dayton , Ohio , to Albert Clifford Barney and Alice Pike Barney . Her father was the son of a wealthy manufacturer of railway cars and of English descent , and her mother was of French , Dutch and German ancestry . Her maternal grandfather 's father was Jewish . When Barney was five years old her family spent the summer at New York 's Long Beach Hotel where Oscar Wilde happened to be speaking on his American lecture tour . Wilde scooped her up as she ran past him fleeing a group of small boys , held her out of their reach then sat her down on his knee and told her a story . The next day he joined Barney and her mother on the beach , where their conversation changed the course of Alice 's life , inspiring her to pursue art seriously , despite , years later , her husband 's disapproval . She later studied under Carolus @-@ Duran and James McNeill Whistler . Many of Alice Pike Barney 's paintings are now in the Smithsonian American Art Museum . 
 Like many girls of her time , Barney had a haphazard education . Her interest in the French language began with a governess who read Jules Verne stories aloud to her so she would have to learn quickly to understand them . Later she and her younger sister Laura Clifford Barney attended Les <unk> , a French boarding school founded by feminist Marie Souvestre and attended by such notables as Eleanor Roosevelt . As an adult she spoke French fluently without an accent and made her home in Paris . Nearly all her published works were written in French . 
 When she was ten her family moved from Ohio to Washington , D.C. , spending summers in Bar Harbor , Maine . As the rebellious and unconventional daughter of one of the wealthiest families in town , she was often mentioned in Washington newspapers . In her early twenties she made headlines by galloping through Bar Harbor while driving a second horse on a lead ahead of her and by riding astride instead of sidesaddle . 
 Barney later said she knew by age 12 she was lesbian and was determined to " live openly , without hiding anything . " In 1899 after seeing the courtesan Liane de Pougy at a dance hall in Paris , Barney presented herself at de Pougy 's residence in a page costume and announced she was a " page of love " sent by Sappho . Although de Pougy was one of the most famous women in France , constantly sought after by wealthy and titled men , Barney 's audacity charmed her . Their brief affair became the subject of de Pougy 's tell @-@ all roman à clef , Idylle Saphique ( Sapphic Idyll ) . Published in 1901 , this book became the talk of Paris , reprinted at least 69 times in its first year . Barney was soon well known as the model for one of the characters . By this time , however , the two had already broken up after quarreling repeatedly over Barney 's desire to " rescue " de Pougy from her life as a courtesan . 
 Barney herself contributed a chapter to Idylle Saphique in which she described reclining at de Pougy 's feet in a screened box at the theater , watching Sarah Bernhardt 's play Hamlet . During intermission , Barney ( as " Flossie " ) compares Hamlet 's plight with that of women : " What is there for women who feel the passion for action when pitiless Destiny holds them in chains ? Destiny made us women at a time when the law of men is the only law that is recognized . " She also wrote Lettres à une <unk> ( Letters to a Woman I Have Known ) , her own epistolary novel about the affair . Although Barney failed to find a publisher for the book and later called it naïve and clumsy , it is notable for its discussion of homosexuality , which Barney regarded as natural and compared to albinism . " My queerness , " she said , " is not a vice , is not deliberate , and harms no one . " 
 = = Eva Palmer @-@ Sikelianos = = 
 Barney 's earliest intimate relationship was with Eva Palmer @-@ Sikelianos . In 1893 they became acquainted during summer vacations in Bar Harbor , Maine . Barney likened Palmer to a medieval virgin , an ode to her ankle length red hair , sea @-@ green eyes and pale complexion . The two remained close for a number of years . As young adults in Paris they shared an apartment at 4 , rue <unk> . Later they each had their own place in Neuilly . Barney frequently solicited Palmer 's help in her romantic pursuits of other women , namely Pauline Tarn . Palmer ultimately left Barney 's side for Greece and eventually married Angelos Sikelianos . Their relationship did not survive this turn of events , Barney took a dim view of Angelos and heated letters were exchanged . Later in their lives the friendship was repaired and both took a mature view on the roles they had played in each other 's lives . 
 = = Renée Vivien = = 
 In November 1899 Barney met the poet Pauline Tarn , better known by her pen name Renée Vivien . For Vivien it was love at first sight , while Barney became fascinated with Vivien after hearing her recite one of her poems , which she described as " haunted by the desire for death . " Their romantic relationship was also a creative exchange that inspired both of them to write . Barney provided a feminist theoretical framework which Vivien explored in her poetry . They adapted the imagery of the Symbolist poets along with the conventions of courtly love to describe love between women , also finding examples of heroic women in history and myth . Sappho was an especially important influence and they studied Greek so as to read the surviving fragments of her poetry in the original . Both wrote plays about her life . 
 Vivien saw Barney as a muse and as Barney put it , " she had found new inspiration through me , almost without knowing me . " Barney felt Vivien had cast her as a femme fatale and that she wanted " to lose herself ... entirely in suffering " for the sake of her art . Vivien also believed in fidelity , which Barney was unwilling to agree to . While Barney was visiting her family in Washington , D.C. in 1901 , Vivien stopped answering her letters . Barney tried to get her back for years , at one point persuading a friend , operatic mezzo @-@ soprano Emma Calvé , to sing under Vivien 's window so she could throw a poem ( wrapped around a bouquet of flowers ) up to Vivien on her balcony . Both flowers and poem were intercepted and returned by a governess . 
 In 1904 she wrote Je Me <unk> ( I Remember ) , an intensely personal prose poem about their relationship which was presented as a single handwritten copy to Vivien in an attempt to win her back . They reconciled and traveled together to Lesbos , where they lived happily together for a short time and talked about starting a school of poetry for women like the one which Sappho , according to tradition , had founded on Lesbos some 2 @,@ 500 years before . However , Vivien soon got a letter from her lover Baroness Hélène van Zuylen and went to Constantinople thinking she would break up with her in person . Vivien planned to meet Barney in Paris afterward but instead stayed with the Baroness and this time , the breakup was permanent . 
 Vivien 's health declined rapidly after this . According to Vivien 's friend and neighbor Colette , she ate almost nothing and drank heavily , even rinsing her mouth with perfumed water to hide the smell . Colette 's account has led some to call Vivien an anorexic but this diagnosis did not yet exist at the time . Vivien was also addicted to the sedative chloral hydrate . In 1908 she attempted suicide by overdosing on laudanum and died the following year . In a memoir written fifty years later Barney said " She could not be saved . Her life was a long suicide . Everything turned to dust and ashes in her hands . " 
 In 1949 , two years after the death of Hélène van Zuylen , Barney restored the Renée Vivien Prize with a financial grant under the authority of the Société des gens de lettres and took on the chairmanship of the jury in 1950 . 
 = = Poetry and plays = = 
 In 1900 , Barney published her first book , a collection of poems called <unk> Portraits @-@ Sonnets de Femmes ( Some Portrait @-@ Sonnets of Women ) . The poems were written in traditional French verse and a formal , old @-@ fashioned style since Barney did not care for free verse . These poems have been described as " apprentice work " but by publishing them , Barney became the first woman poet to openly write about the love of women since Sappho . Her mother contributed pastel illustrations of the poems ' subjects , wholly unaware three of the four women who modeled for her were her daughter 's lovers . 
 Reviews were generally positive and glossed over the lesbian theme of the poems , some even misrepresenting it . The Washington Mirror said Barney " writes odes to men 's lips and eyes ; not like a novice , either . " However , a headline in a society gossip paper cried out " Sappho Sings in Washington " and this alerted her father , who bought and destroyed the publisher 's remaining stock and printing plates . 
 To escape her father 's sway Barney published her next book , Cinq Petits Dialogues Grecs ( Five Short Greek Dialogues , 1901 ) , under the pseudonym <unk> . The name came from the works of Pierre <unk> , who helped to edit and revise the manuscript . Barney also dedicated the book to him . The first of the dialogues is set in ancient Greece and contains a long description of Sappho , who is " more faithful in her inconstancy than others in their fidelity . " Another argues for paganism over Christianity . Barney 's father 's death in 1902 left her with a substantial fortune , freeing her from any need to conceal the authorship of her books ; she never used a pseudonym again . 
 Je Me <unk> was published in 1910 , after Vivien 's death . That same year , Barney published Actes et Entr 'actes ( Acts and Interludes ) , a collection of short plays and poems . One of the plays was <unk> ( Ambiguity ) , a revisionist version on the legend of Sappho 's death : Instead of throwing herself off a cliff for the love of <unk> the sailor , she does so out of grief that <unk> is marrying the woman she loves . The play incorporates quotations from Sappho 's fragments , with Barney 's own footnotes in Greek . 
 Barney did not take her poetry as seriously as Vivien did , saying , " if I had one ambition it was to make my life itself into a poem . " Her plays were only performed through amateur productions in her garden . According to Karla Jay , most of them lacked coherent plots and " would probably baffle even the most sympathetic audience . " After 1910 she mostly wrote the epigrams and memoirs for which she is better known . Her last book of poetry was called Poems & <unk> : Autres Alliances and came out in 1920 , bringing together romantic poetry in both French and English . Barney asked Ezra Pound to edit the poems but then ignored the detailed recommendations he made . 
 = = Salon = = 
 For over 60 years , Barney hosted a literary salon , a weekly gathering at which people met to socialize and discuss literature , art , music and any other topic of interest . Barney strove to feature women 's writing while also hosting some of the most prominent male writers of her time . She brought together expatriate Modernists with members of the French Academy . Joan <unk> described Barney 's salon as " a place where lesbian assignations and appointments with academics could coexist in a kind of cheerful , cross @-@ pollinating , cognitive dissonance . " 
 In the 1900s Barney held early gatherings of the salon at her house in Neuilly . The entertainment included poetry readings and theatricals ( in which Colette sometimes performed ) . Mata Hari performed a dance once , riding into the garden as Lady Godiva on a white horse harnessed with turquoise cloisonné . 
 The play <unk> may have led Barney to leave Neuilly in 1909 . According to a contemporary newspaper article , her landlord objected to her holding an outdoor performance of a play about Sappho , which he felt " followed nature too closely " . She canceled her lease and rented the pavilion at 20 , Rue Jacob in Paris ' Latin Quarter and her salon was held there until the late 1960s . This was a small two @-@ story house , separated on three sides from the main building on the street . Next to the <unk> was a large , overgrown garden with a Doric " Temple of Friendship " tucked into one corner . In this new location , the salon grew a more prim outward face , with poetry readings and conversation , perhaps because Barney had been told the <unk> 's floors would not hold up to large dancing parties . Frequent guests during this period included Pierre <unk> , Paul Claudel , Philippe Berthelot and translator J. C. Mardrus . 
 During World War I the salon became a haven for those opposed to the war . Henri <unk> once gave a reading from his anti @-@ war novel Under Fire and Barney hosted a Women 's Congress for Peace at the Rue Jacob . Other visitors to the salon during the war included Oscar <unk> , Auguste Rodin and poet Alan Seeger , who came while on leave from the French Foreign Legion . 
 In the early 1920s , Ezra Pound was a close friend of Barney 's and often visited . The two schemed together to subsidize Paul Valéry and T. S. Eliot so they could quit their jobs and focus on writing , but Valéry found other patrons and Eliot refused the grant . Pound introduced Barney to avant @-@ garde composer George Antheil and while her own taste in music leaned towards the traditional , she hosted premieres of Antheil 's Symphony for Five Instruments and First String Quartet at the Rue Jacob . It was also at Barney 's salon that Pound met his longtime mistress , the violinist Olga Rudge . 
 In 1927 Barney started an Académie des Femmes ( Women 's Academy ) to honor women writers . This was a response to the influential French Academy which had been founded in the 17th century by Louis XIII and whose 40 " immortals " included no women at the time . Unlike the French Academy , her Women 's Academy was not a formal organization , but rather a series of readings held as part of the regular Friday salons . <unk> included Colette , Gertrude Stein , Anna Wickham , <unk> , Lucie Delarue @-@ Mardrus , Mina Loy , Djuna Barnes and posthumously , Renée Vivien . 
 Other visitors to the salon during the 1920s included French writers Jeanne <unk> , André Gide , Anatole France , Max Jacob , Louis Aragon and Jean Cocteau along with English @-@ language writers Ford Madox Ford , W. Somerset Maugham , F. Scott Fitzgerald , Sinclair Lewis , Sherwood Anderson , Thornton Wilder , T. S. Eliot and William Carlos Williams and moreover , German poet Rainer Maria Rilke , Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore ( the first Nobel laureate from Asia ) , Romanian aesthetician and diplomat <unk> <unk> , journalist Janet Flanner ( who set the New Yorker style ) , journalist , activist and publisher Nancy Cunard , publishers Caresse and Harry Crosby , art collector and patron Peggy Guggenheim , Sylvia Beach ( the bookstore owner who published James Joyce 's Ulysses ) , painters Tamara de Lempicka and Marie <unk> and dancer Isadora Duncan . 
 For her 1929 book Aventures de l 'Esprit ( Adventures of the Mind ) Barney drew a social diagram which crowded the names of over a hundred people who had attended the salon into a rough map of the house , garden and Temple of Friendship . The first half of the book had reminiscences of 13 male writers she had known or met over the years and the second half had a chapter for each member of her Académie des Femmes . This gender @-@ balanced structure was not carried through on the book 's packaging , which listed eight of the male writers then added " ... and some women . " 
 In the late 1920s Radclyffe Hall drew a crowd after her novel The Well of Loneliness had been banned in the UK . A reading by poet Edna St. Vincent Millay packed the salon in 1932 . At another Friday salon in the 1930s Virgil Thomson sang from Four Saints in Three Acts , an opera based on a libretto by Gertrude Stein . 
 Of the famous Modernist writers who spent time in Paris , Ernest Hemingway never made an appearance at the salon . James Joyce came once or twice but didn 't care for it . Marcel Proust never attended a Friday , though he did come to 20 , Rue Jacob once to talk with Barney about lesbian culture whilst doing research for In Search of Lost Time . His visit was delayed repeatedly owing to his poor health , and when the meeting finally did happen he was too nervous to bring up the subject he had come to talk about . 
 = = <unk> and novel = = 
 Éparpillements ( <unk> , 1910 ) was Barney 's first collection of pensées — literally , thoughts . This literary form had been associated with salon culture in France since the 17th century , when the genre was perfected at the salon of Madame de Sablé . Barney 's pensées , like de Sablé 's own Maximes , were short , often one @-@ line epigrams or bon mots such as " There are more evil ears than bad mouths " and " To be married is to be neither alone nor together . " 
 Her literary career got a boost after she sent a copy of Éparpillements to Remy de Gourmont , a French poet , literary critic , and philosopher who had become a recluse after contracting the disfiguring disease lupus vulgaris in his thirties . He was impressed enough to invite her to one of the Sunday gatherings at his home , at which he usually received only a small group of old friends . She was a rejuvenating influence in his life , coaxing him out for evening car rides , dinners at the Rue Jacob , a masked ball , even a short cruise on the Seine . He turned some of their wide @-@ ranging conversations into a series of letters that he published in the Mercure de France , addressing her as l 'Amazone , a French word that can mean either horsewoman or Amazon ; the letters were later collected in book form . He died in 1915 , but the nickname he gave her would stay with her all her life — even her tombstone identifies her as " the Amazon of Remy de Gourmont " — and his Letters to the Amazon left readers wanting to know more about the woman who had inspired them . 
 Barney obliged in 1920 with Pensées d 'une Amazone ( Thoughts of an Amazon ) , her most overtly political work . In the first section , " Sexual Adversity , War , and Feminism " , she developed feminist and pacifist themes , describing war as an " involuntary and collective suicide ordained by man " . In war , she said , men " father death as women mother life , with courage and without choice " . The epigrammatic form makes it difficult to determine the details of Barney 's views ; ideas are presented only to be dropped , and some pensées seem to contradict others . Some critics interpret her as saying that the aggression that leads to war is visible in all male relationships . Karla Jay , however , argues that her philosophy was not that sweeping , and is better summed up by the epigram " Those who love war lack the love of an adequate sport — the art of living . " 
 Another section of Pensées d 'une Amazone , " Misunderstanding , or Sappho 's Lawsuit " , gathered historical writings about homosexuality along with her own commentary . She also covered topics such as alcohol , friendship , old age , and literature , writing " Novels are longer than life " and " Romanticism is a childhood ailment ; those who had it young are the most robust . " A third volume , Nouvelles Pensées de l 'Amazone ( New Thoughts of the Amazon ) , appeared in 1939 . 
 The One Who is Legion , or A.D. ' s After @-@ Life ( 1930 ) was Barney 's only book written entirely in English , as well as her only novel . Illustrated by Romaine Brooks , it concerns a suicide , known only as A.D. , who is brought back to life as a hermaphroditic being and reads the book of her own life . This book @-@ within @-@ a @-@ book , entitled The Love @-@ Lives of A.D. , is a collection of hymns , poems and epigrams , much like Barney 's own other writings . 
 = = Major relationships = = 
 Barney practiced , and advocated , non @-@ monogamy . As early as 1901 , in Cinq Petits Dialogues Grecs , she argued in favor of multiple relationships and against jealousy ; in Éparpillements she wrote " One is unfaithful to those one loves in order that their charm does not become mere habit . " While she could be jealous herself , she actively encouraged at least some of her lovers to be non @-@ monogamous as well . 
 Due in part to Jean Chalon 's early biography of her , published in English as Portrait of a <unk> , she had become more widely known for her many relationships than for her writing or her salon . She once wrote out a list , divided into three categories : liaisons , demi @-@ liaisons , and adventures . Colette was a demi @-@ liaison , while the artist and furniture designer Eyre de <unk> , with whom she had an off @-@ and @-@ on affair for several years , was listed as an adventure . Among the liaisons — the relationships that she considered most important — were Olive <unk> , Renée Vivien , Élisabeth de Gramont , Romaine Brooks , and Dolly Wilde . Of these , the three longest relationships were with de Gramont , Brooks , and Wilde ; from 1927 , she was involved with all three of them simultaneously , a situation that ended only with Wilde 's death . Her shorter affairs , such as those with Colette and Lucie Delarue @-@ Mardrus , often evolved into lifelong friendships . 
 = = = Élisabeth de Gramont = = = 
 Élisabeth de Gramont , the Duchess of Clermont @-@ Tonnerre , was a writer best known for her popular memoirs . A descendant of Henry IV of France , she had grown up among the aristocracy ; when she was a child , according to Janet Flanner , " peasants on her farm ... begged her not to clean her shoes before entering their houses " . She looked back on this lost world of wealth and privilege with little regret , and became known as the " red duchess " for her support of socialism . She was married and had two daughters in 1910 , when she met Barney ; her husband is said to have been violent and tyrannical . They eventually separated , and in 1918 she and Barney wrote up a marriage contract stating : " No one union shall be so strong as this union , nor another joining so tender — nor relationship so lasting . " 
 De Gramont accepted Barney 's <unk> — perhaps reluctantly at first — and went out of her way to be gracious to her other lovers , always including Romaine Brooks when she invited Barney to vacation in the country . The relationship continued until de Gramont 's death in 1954 . 
 = = = Romaine Brooks = = = 
 Barney 's longest relationship was with the American painter Romaine Brooks , whom she met around 1914 . Brooks specialized in portraiture and was noted for her somber palette of gray , black , and white . During the 1920s she painted portraits of several members of Barney 's social circle , including de Gramont and Barney herself . 
 Brooks tolerated Barney 's casual affairs well enough to tease her about them , and had a few of her own over the years , but could become jealous when a new love became serious . Usually she simply left town , but at one point she gave Barney an ultimatum to choose between her and Dolly Wilde — relenting once Barney had given in . At the same time , while Brooks was devoted to Barney , she did not want to live with her as a full @-@ time couple ; she disliked Paris , disdained Barney 's friends , hated the constant socializing on which Barney thrived , and felt that she was fully herself only when alone . To accommodate Brooks 's need for solitude they built a summer home consisting of two separate wings joined by a dining room , which they called Villa Trait d 'Union , the hyphenated villa . Brooks also spent much of the year in Italy or travelling elsewhere in Europe , away from Barney . They remained devoted to one another for over fifty years . 
 = = = Dolly Wilde = = = 
 Dolly Wilde was the niece of Oscar Wilde ( whom Natalie Barney had met as a little girl ) and the last of her family to bear the Wilde name . She was renowned for her epigrammatic wit but , unlike her famous uncle , never managed to apply her gifts to any publishable writing ; her letters are her only legacy . She did some work as a translator and was often supported by others , including Barney , whom she met in 1927 . 
 Like Vivien , Wilde seemed bent on self @-@ destruction . She drank heavily , was addicted to heroin , and attempted suicide several times . Barney financed Drug <unk> , which were never effective ; she emerged from one nursing @-@ home stay with a new dependency on the sleeping draught paraldehyde , then available over @-@ the @-@ counter . 
 In 1939 she was diagnosed with breast cancer and refused surgery , seeking alternative treatments . The following year , World War II separated her from Barney ; she fled Paris for England while Barney went to Italy with Brooks . She died in 1941 from causes that have never been fully explained , possibly a paraldehyde overdose . 
 = = World War II and after = = 
 Barney 's attitudes during World War II have been controversial . In 1937 , Una , Lady Troubridge had complained that Barney " talked a lot of half @-@ baked nonsense about the tyranny of fascism " . Barney herself was one @-@ quarter Jewish , and since she spent the war in Italy with Romaine Brooks , risked deportation to a concentration camp — a fate she avoided only by wiring her sister Laura for a notarized document attesting to her confirmation . Nevertheless , having no other source of information about the war , she believed Axis propaganda that portrayed the Allies as the aggressors , so that pro @-@ Fascism seemed to her to be a logical consequence of her pacifism . An unpublished memoir she wrote during the war years is pro @-@ Fascist and anti @-@ Semitic , quoting speeches by Hitler , apparently with approval . 
 It is possible that the anti @-@ Semitic passages in her memoir were intended to be used as evidence that she was not Jewish ; alternatively , she may have been influenced by Ezra Pound 's anti @-@ Semitic radio broadcasts . Whatever the case , she did help a Jewish couple escape Italy , providing passage on a ship to the United States . By the end of the war her sympathies had again changed , and she saw the Allies as liberators . 
 Villa Trait d 'Union was destroyed by bombing . After the war , Brooks declined to live with Barney in Paris ; she remained in Italy , and they visited each other frequently . Their relationship remained monogamous until the mid @-@ 1950s , when Barney met her last new love , Janine Lahovary , the wife of a retired Romanian ambassador . Lahovary made a point of winning Romaine Brooks 's friendship , Barney reassured Brooks that their relationship still came first , and the triangle appeared to be stable . 
 The salon resumed in 1949 and continued to attract young writers for whom it was as much a piece of history as a place where literary reputations were made . Truman Capote was an intermittent guest for almost ten years ; he described the decor as " totally turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century " and remembered that Barney introduced him to the models for several characters in Marcel Proust 's In Search of Lost Time . Alice B. Toklas became a regular after Gertrude Stein 's death in 1946 . Fridays in the 1960s honored Mary McCarthy and Marguerite <unk> , who in 1980 — eight years after Barney 's death — became the first female member of the French Academy . 
 Barney did not return to writing epigrams , but did publish two volumes of memoirs about other writers she had known , Souvenirs <unk> ( Indiscreet Memories , 1960 ) and Traits et Portraits ( Traits and Portraits , 1963 ) . She also worked to find a publisher for Brooks 's memoirs and to place her paintings in galleries . 
 In the late 1960s Brooks became increasingly reclusive and paranoid ; she sank into a depression and refused to see the doctors Barney sent . Bitter at Lahovary 's presence during their last years , which she had hoped they would spend exclusively together , she finally broke off contact with Barney . Barney continued to write to her , but received no replies . Brooks died in December 1970 , and Barney on February 2 , 1972 of heart failure . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By the end of Barney 's life her work had been largely forgotten . In 1979 , Natalie Barney was honored with a place setting in Judy Chicago 's feminist work of art The Dinner Party . In the 1980s Barney began to be recognized for what Karla Jay calls an " almost uncanny anticipation " of the concerns of later feminist writers . English translations of some of her memoirs , essays , and epigrams appeared in 1992 , but most of her plays and poetry are still untranslated . 
 Her indirect influence on literature , through her salon and her many literary friendships , can be seen in the number of writers who have addressed or portrayed her in their works . Claudine S 'en Va ( Claudine and Annie , 1903 ) by Colette contains a brief appearance by Barney as " Miss Flossie , " echoing the nickname she had earlier been given in de Pougy 's novel Idylle Saphique . Renée Vivien wrote many poems about her , as well as a Symbolist novel , Une Femme M <unk> ( A Woman Appeared to Me , 1904 ) , in which she is described as having " eyes ... as sharp and blue as a blade .... The charm of peril emanated from her and drew me inexorably . " Remy de Gourmont addressed her in his Letters to the Amazon , and Truman Capote mentioned her in his last , unfinished novel Answered Prayers . She also appeared in two later novels by writers who never met her : Francesco <unk> 's Un Soir chez l 'Amazone ( An Evening with the Amazon , 2004 ) is a historical novel about Barney 's salon , while Anna Livia 's <unk> ( 1991 ) portrays both her and Renee Vivien as still @-@ living vampires . 
 According to Lillian Faderman , " There was probably no lesbian in the four decades between 1928 and the late 1960s capable of reading English or any of the eleven languages into which the book was translated who was unfamiliar with The Well of Loneliness . " Although the novel 's author , Radclyffe Hall , intended it as an argument for greater tolerance for what she called " sexual inverts " , it has often been criticized by lesbian readers for its protagonist 's self @-@ hatred and its use of terms like " freak " and " mistake of nature " . Barney , as the salon hostess Valérie Seymour , appears in the novel as the symbol of a different attitude . " Valérie , placid and self @-@ assured , created an atmosphere of courage ; everyone felt very normal and brave when they gathered together at Valérie Seymour 's . " 
 Lucie Delarue @-@ Mardrus wrote love poems to Barney in the early years of the century , and in 1930 depicted her in a novel , L <unk> et les <unk> ( The Angel and the Perverts ) , in which she said she " analyzed and described Natalie at length as well as the life into which she initiated me " . The protagonist of the novel is a hermaphrodite named Marion who lives a double life , frequenting literary salons in female dress , then changing from skirt to trousers to attend gay soirées . Barney is Laurette Wells , a salon hostess who spends much of the novel trying to win back an ex @-@ lover loosely based on Renée Vivien . The book 's portrayal of her is , at times , harshly critical , but she is the only person whose company Marion enjoys . He / she tells Wells that she is " perverse ... dissolute , self @-@ centered , unfair , stubborn , sometimes miserly ... [ but ] a genuine rebel , ever ready to incite others to rebellion .... [ Y ] ou are capable of loving someone just as they are , even a thief — in that lies your only fidelity . And so you have my respect . " 
 After meeting Barney in the 1930s , the Russian poet Marina Ivanovna <unk> addressed her in a Letter to the Amazon ( 1934 ) in which she expressed her conflicted feelings about love between women . The result , according to Terry Castle , is " an entirely cryptic , paranoid , overwhelming piece of reverie " . 
 Barney and the women in her social circle are the subject of Djuna Barnes 's Ladies Almanack ( 1928 ) , a roman à clef written in an archaic , Rabelaisian style , with Barnes ' own illustrations in the style of Elizabethan woodcuts . She has the lead role as Dame Evangeline Musset , " who was in her Heart one Grand Red Cross for the <unk> , the Relief and the Distraction , of such Girls as in their Hinder Parts , and their Fore Parts , and in whatsoever Parts did suffer them most , lament <unk> " . " [ A ] Pioneer and a Menace " in her youth , Dame Musset has reached " a witty and learned Fifty " ; she rescues women in distress , dispenses wisdom , and upon her death is elevated to sainthood . Also appearing pseudonymously are Élisabeth de Gramont , Romaine Brooks , Dolly Wilde , Radclyffe Hall and her partner Una , Lady Troubridge , Janet Flanner and <unk> Solano , and Mina Loy . The obscure language , inside jokes , and ambiguity of Ladies Almanack have kept critics arguing about whether it is an affectionate satire or a bitter attack , but Barney herself loved the book and reread it throughout her life . 
 On October 26 , 2009 , Barney was honored with a historical marker in her home town of Dayton , Ohio . The marker is the first in Ohio to note the sexual orientation of its honoree . This plaque was vandalized in July 2010 . 
 Barney 's French novel , Amants <unk> ou la troisième , believed to have been written in 1926 , was published in 2013 . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = In French = = = 
 <unk> Portraits @-@ Sonnets de Femmes ( Paris : Ollendorf , 1900 ) 
 Cinq Petits Dialogues Grecs ( Paris : La Plume , 1901 ; as " <unk> " ) 
 Actes et entr 'actes ( Paris : Sansot , 1910 ) 
 Je me <unk> ( Paris : Sansot , 1910 ) 
 <unk> ( Paris : Sansot , 1910 ) 
 Pensées d 'une Amazone ( Paris : Emile Paul , 1920 ) 
 Aventures de l 'Esprit ( Paris : Emile Paul , 1929 ) 
 Nouvelles Pensées de l 'Amazone ( Paris : Mercure de France , 1939 ) 
 Souvenirs <unk> ( Paris : Flammarion , 1960 ) 
 Traits et Portraits ( Paris : Mercure de France , 1963 ) 
 Amants <unk> ou la troisième ( Paris : <unk> , 2013 ) 
 = = = In English = = = 
 Poems & Poèmes : Autres Alliances ( Paris : Emile Paul , New York : Doran , 1920 ) – bilingual collection of poetry 
 The One Who Is Legion ( London : Eric Partridge , Ltd . , 1930 ; Orono , Maine : National Poetry Foundation , 1987 ) 
 = = = English translations = = = 
 A Perilous Advantage : The Best of Natalie Clifford Barney ( New Victoria Publishers , 1992 ) ; edited and translated by Anna Livia 
 Adventures of the Mind ( New York University Press , 1992 ) ; trans . John Spalding Gatton 
 = = = Books about Natalie Barney = = = 
 = = = Other references = = = 
 " Alice Pike Barney : Biography " . Smithsonian American Art Museum . Retrieved September 3 , 2006 . 
 Barnes , Djuna ; with an introduction by Susan <unk> <unk> ( 1992 ) . Ladies Almanack . New York : New York University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8147 @-@ 1180 @-@ 4 . 
 Barney , Natalie Clifford ; trans . John Spalding Gatton ( 1992 ) . Adventures of the Mind . New York : New York University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8147 @-@ 1178 @-@ 2 . 
 Barney , Natalie Clifford ; ed. and trans . Anna Livia ( 1992 ) . A Perilous Advantage : The Best of Natalie Clifford Barney . Norwich , VT : New Victoria Publishers Inc . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 38 @-@ 3 . 
 Benstock , Shari ( 1986 ) . Women of the Left Bank : Paris , 1900 – 1940 . Texas : University of Texas Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 292 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 <unk> , Katarina ( 2007 ) . Behind Straight Curtains : towards a queer feminist theory of architecture . Stockholm : Axl Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 91 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 @-@ 7 . 
 Castle , Terry ( 2003 ) . The Literature of Lesbianism . New York : Columbia University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 231 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Colette ; trans . <unk> <unk> ( 2000 ) . The Pure and the Impure . New York : New York Review of Books . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 48 @-@ X. 
 Conley , John J. ( 2002 ) . The Suspicion of Virtue : Women Philosophers in Neoclassical France . Ithaca : Cornell University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4020 @-@ 3 . 
 Conover , Anne ( 2001 ) . Olga Rudge and Ezra Pound : " What Thou <unk> Well ... " . New Haven & London : Yale University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Delarue @-@ Mardrus , Lucie ; trans . Anna Livia ( 1995 ) . The Angel and the Perverts . New York : New York University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8147 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Marc ( December 1937 ) . " Remy de Gourmont Critique " . <unk> ( Modern Language Association ) 52 ( 4 ) : 1147 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Faderman , Lillian ( 1981 ) . <unk> the Love of Men . New York : William Morrow & Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 688 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Flanner , Janet ( 1979 ) . Paris was Yesterday : 1925 – 1939 . New York : Penguin . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Hall , Radclyffe ( 1981 ) . The Well of Loneliness . New York : Avon . ISBN 0 @-@ 380 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Haskell , Susan ; Zora Martin Felton . " Record Unit <unk> , Alice Pike Barney Papers , circa 1889 – 1995 " . Smithsonian Institution Archives . Retrieved September 3 , 2006 . 
 Inness , Sherrie A. ( October 20 , 2005 ) . " Novel : Lesbian " . <unk> : An Encyclopedia of Gay , Lesbian , Bisexual , Transgender , and Queer Culture . Retrieved September 19 , 2006 . 
 Kling , Jean L. ( 1994 ) . Alice Pike Barney : Her Life and Art . Washington , DC : Smithsonian Institution Press. p . 24 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 344 @-@ 2 . 
 Livia , Anna ( 1995 ) . " Introduction : Lucie Delarue @-@ Mardrus and the <unk> Harlequinade . " In Delarue @-@ Mardrus , 1 – 60 . 
 Livia , Anna ( 1992 ) . " The Trouble with Heroines : Natalie Clifford Barney and Anti @-@ Semitism . " In Barney , A Perilous Advantage , 181 – 193 . 
 <unk> , Ray Anne ( 2002 ) . " Brooks , Romaine " . <unk> : An Encyclopedia of Gay , Lesbian , Bisexual , Transgender , and Queer Culture . Retrieved September 21 , 2006 . 
 Love , Heather ( Summer 2000 ) . " Hard Times and Heartaches : Radclyffe Hall 's The Well of Loneliness " . Journal of Lesbian Studies 4 ( 2 ) : 115 – 128 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1300 / <unk> _ 08 . 
 <unk> , Francesco ( Fall 2005 ) . " Elisabeth de Gramont , Natalie Barney 's ' eternal mate ' " . South Central Review ( Johns Hopkins University Press ) 22 ( 3 ) . doi : 10 @.@ 1353 / <unk> 
 <unk> , Joan ( 2000 ) . Truly Wilde : The Unsettling Story of Dolly Wilde , Oscar 's Unusual Niece . New York : Basic Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 465 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Secrest , Meryle ( 1974 ) . Between Me and Life : A Biography of Romaine Brooks . Garden City , NY : <unk> p . 275 . ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> , Diana ( 1999 ) . The Trials of Radclyffe Hall . New York : Doubleday . ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Stimpson , Catharine R. ( Winter 1981 ) . " Zero Degree <unk> : The Lesbian Novel in English " . Critical Inquiry 8 ( 2 ) : 363 – 379 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1086 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Weiss , Andrea ( 1995 ) . Paris Was a Woman : Portraits From the Left Bank . San Francisco : Harper San Francisco . ISBN 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 = Jeff White ( Australian footballer ) = 
 Jeffrey Newman " Jeff " White ( born 19 February 1977 ) is an Australian rules footballer who had a distinguished career in the Australian Football League ( AFL ) spanning 14 years . He played most recently and notably for the Melbourne Football Club , following a move from the Fremantle Dockers at the end of 1997 . He was Melbourne 's first @-@ choice ruckman for a decade , relying on his key attributes of athleticism and durability . He was an All @-@ Australian in 2004 , and was selected for Victoria several times . He was an important member of the Melbourne sides which made the 2000 AFL Grand Final and qualified for six finals series from 1998 to 2006 . 
 White 's career was punctuated by serious injuries to his shin and face , in 2003 and 2005 respectively . He cemented his reputation as one of the premier ruckmen in the AFL with consistent displays for Melbourne during his eleven years at the club . Former team @-@ mate , fellow long @-@ serving Melbourne ruckman , and Melbourne chairman Jim Stynes called White an " ornament to the game and particularly to the Melbourne Football Club . " His contract with Melbourne was not renewed in 2008 and White signed to play in 2009 with the Redland Australian Football Club in the AFL Queensland State League . 
