 = Who 's Next = 
 Who 's Next is the fifth studio album by English rock band The Who . It developed from the aborted Lifehouse project , a multi @-@ media rock opera written by the group 's Pete Townshend as a follow @-@ up to the band 's 1969 album Tommy . The project was cancelled due to its complexity and conflicts with Kit Lambert , the band 's manager , but Townshend was persuaded to record the songs as a straightforward studio album . 
 The Who recorded Who 's Next with assistance from recording engineer Glyn Johns . After producing the song " Won 't Get Fooled Again " in the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio , they relocated to Olympic Studios to record and mix most of the album 's remaining songs . They made prominent use of the synthesizer on the album , particularly on " Won 't Get Fooled Again " and " Baba O 'Riley " , which were both released as singles . The cover photo was shot by Ethan Russell and made reference to the monolith in the 1968 film 2001 : A Space Odyssey , as it featured group members having urinated against a concrete piling protruding from a slag heap . 
 Who 's Next was an immediate success when it was released on 14 August 1971 . It has since been viewed by critics as the Who 's best record and one of the greatest albums of all time . It was reissued on CD several times with additional songs originally intended for Lifehouse . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1970 , the Who had obtained significant critical and commercial success , but they had started to become detached from their original audience . The mod movement had vanished , and the original followers from Shepherd 's Bush had grown up and acquired jobs and families . The group had started to drift apart from manager Kit Lambert due to his preoccupation with their label , Track Records . They had been touring since the release of Tommy the previous May , with a set that contained most of that album , but realized that millions had now seen their live performances , and Pete Townshend in particular recognized that they needed to do something new . A single , " The Seeker " , and a live album , Live at Leeds were released in 1970 , and an EP of new material ( " Water " , " Naked Eye " , " I Don 't Even Know Myself " , " Postcard " and " Now I 'm a Farmer " ) was recorded , but not released as the band felt it would not be a satisfactory follow @-@ up to Tommy . 
 Instead , the group tackled a project called Lifehouse . This evolved from a series of columns Townshend wrote for Melody Maker in August 1970 , in which he discussed the importance of rock music , and in particular what the audience could do . Of all the group , he was the most keen to use music as a communication device , and wanted to branch out into other media , including film , to get away from the traditional album / tour cycle . Townshend has variously described Lifehouse as a futuristic rock opera , a live @-@ recorded concept album and as the music for a scripted film project . The basic plot was outlined in an interview Townshend gave to Disc and Music Echo on 24 October 1970 . Lifehouse is set in the near future in a society in which music is banned and most of the population live indoors in government @-@ controlled " experience suits " . A rebel , Bobby , broadcasts rock music into the suits , allowing people to remove them and become more enlightened . Some elements accurately describe future technology ; for example , The Grid resembles the internet and " grid sleep " virtual reality . 
 The group held a press conference on 13 January 1971 , explaining that they would be giving a series of concerts at the Young Vic theatre , where they would develop the fictional elements of the proposed film along with the audience . After Keith Moon had completed his work on the film 200 Motels , the group performed their first Young Vic concert on 15 February . The show included a new <unk> public address system which cost £ 30 @,@ 000 and the audience was mainly invited from various organisations such as youth clubs , with only a few tickets on sale to the general public . 
 After the initial concerts , the group flew to New York 's Record Plant Studios at Lambert 's suggestion , for studio recordings . The group were joined by guests Al Kooper on Hammond organ , Ken Ascher on piano and Leslie West on guitar . Townshend used a 1957 Gretsch guitar , given to him by Joe Walsh , during the session and it went on to become his main guitar for studio recording . Lambert 's participation in the recording was minimal , and he proved to be unable to mix the final recordings . He had started taking hard drugs , while Townshend was drinking brandy regularly . After returning to Britain , engineer Glyn Johns made safety copies of the Record Plant material but decided that it would be better to re @-@ record it from scratch at Olympic Sound Studios in Barnes . 
 The group gave a further series of concerts at the Young Vic on 25 and 26 April , which were recorded on the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio by Andy Johns , but Townshend grew disillusioned with Lifehouse and further shows were cancelled . The project proved to be intractable on several levels and caused stress within the band as well as a major falling out between Townshend and Lambert . Years later , in the liner notes to the remastered CD , Townshend wrote that the failure of the project led him to the verge of a nervous breakdown . Audiences at the Young Vic gigs were not interested in interacting with the group to create new material , but simply wanted the Who to play " My Generation " and smash a guitar . At the time , Roger Daltrey said the Who " were never nearer to breaking up " . 
 Although the Lifehouse concept was abandoned , scraps of the project remained in the final album , including the use of synthesizers and computers . An early concept for Lifehouse featured the feeding of personal data from audience members into the controller of an early analogue synthesizer to create a " universal chord " that would have ended the proposed film . Abandoning Lifehouse gave the group extra freedom due to the absence of an overriding musical theme or storyline ( which had been the basis of Tommy ) . This allowed the band to concentrate on maximising the impact of individual tracks , and providing a unifying sound for them . 
 Although he gave up his original intentions for the Lifehouse project , Townshend continued to develop the concepts , revisiting them in later albums , including a 6 @-@ CD set , The Lifehouse Chronicles in 1999 . In 2007 he opened a website called The Lifehouse Method to accept personal input from applicants that would be turned into musical portraits . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The first session for what became Who 's Next was at Mick Jagger 's house , Stargroves , at the start of April 1971 , using the Rolling Stones Mobile . The backing track of " Won 't Get Fooled Again " was recorded there before the band decided to relocate recording to Olympic at Johns ' suggestion ; the first session was on 9 April , attempting a basic take of " Bargain " . The bulk of the sessions occurred during May , when the group recorded " Time is Passing " , " Pure and Easy " , " Love Ain 't for Keeping " ( which had been reworked from a rock track into an acoustic arrangement ) , " Behind Blue Eyes " , " The Song Is Over " , " Let 's See Action " and " Baba O 'Riley " . Nicky Hopkins guested on piano , while Dave Arbus was invited by Moon to play violin on " Baba O 'Riley " . John Entwistle 's " My Wife " was added to the album at the last minute late in the sessions , and was originally intended for a solo album . 
 In contrast to the Record Plant and Young Vic sessions , recording with Johns went well as he was primarily concerned about creating a good sound , whereas Lambert had always been more preoccupied about the group 's image . Townshend recalled , " we were just getting astounded at the sounds Glyn was producing " . Townshend used the early synthesizers and modified keyboard sounds in several modes : as a drone effect on several songs , notably " Baba O 'Riley " and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , as well as on " Bargain " , " Going Mobile " and " The Song Is Over " . The synthesizer was used as an integral part of the sound , as opposed to providing gloss as was the case on other artists ' albums up to this point . Moon 's drumming had a distinctly different style from earlier albums , being more formal and less reliant on long drum fills – partly due to the synthesizer backing , but also due to the no @-@ nonsense production techniques of Johns , who insisted on a good recording performance that only used flamboyancy when truly necessary . Johns was instrumental in convincing the Who that they should simply put a single studio album out , believing the songs to be excellent . The group gave him free rein to assemble a single album of whatever songs he wanted in any order . Despite Johns ' key contributions , he only received an associate producer credit on the finished album , though he maintained he acted mainly in an engineering capacity and based most of the arrangements on Townshend 's original demos . 
 The album opened with " Baba O 'Riley " , featuring piano and synthesizer @-@ processed Lowrey organ by Townshend . The song 's title pays homage to Townshend 's guru , Meher Baba , and minimalist composer Terry Riley ( and is informally known as " Teenage Wasteland " from a line in the lyrics ) . The organ track came from a longer demo by Townshend , portions of which were later included on a Baba tribute album I Am , that was edited down for the final recording . Townshend later said this part had " two or three thousand edits to it " . The opening lyrics to the next track , " Bargain " , " I 'd gladly lose me to find you " , came from a phrase used by Baba . Entwistle wrote " My Wife " after having an argument with his wife and exaggerating the conflict in the lyrics . The track features several overdubbed brass instruments recorded in a single half @-@ hour session . " Pure and Easy " , a key track from Lifehouse , did not make the final track selection , but the opening line was included as a coda to " The Song is Over " . 
 " Behind Blue Eyes " featured three @-@ part harmony by Daltrey , Townshend and Entwistle and was written for the main antagonist in Lifehouse , Brick . Moon , uncharacteristically , did not appear on the first half of the track , which was later described by Who biographer Dave Marsh as " the longest time Keith Moon was still in his entire life . " The closing track , " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , was critical of revolutions . Townshend explained , " a revolution is only a revolution in the long run and a lot of people are going to get hurt " . The song features the Lowrey organ fed through an ARP synthesizer , which came from Townshend 's original demo and was re @-@ used for the finished track . 
 = = Cover art = = 
 The cover artwork shows a photograph , taken at Easington Colliery , of the band apparently having just urinated on a large concrete piling protruding from a slag heap . The decision to shoot the picture came from Entwistle and Moon discussing Stanley Kubrick and the film 2001 : A Space Odyssey . According to photographer Ethan Russell , most of the band members were unable to urinate , so rainwater was tipped from an empty film canister to achieve the desired effect . The rear cover showed the band backstage at De Montfort Hall , Leicester , amongst a debris of furniture . In 2003 , the television channel VH1 named Who 's Next 's cover one of the greatest album covers of all time . 
 Other suggestions for the cover included the group urinating against a Marshall Stack and an overweight nude woman with the Who 's faces in place of her genitalia . An alternative cover featuring Moon dressed in black lingerie and a brown wig , holding a whip , was later used for the inside art for the 1995 and 2003 CD releases . Some of the photographs taken during these sessions were later used as part of Decca 's United States promotion of the album . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The lead single , " Won 't Get Fooled Again " ( edited down to three and a half minutes ) , was released on 25 June 1971 in the UK and 17 July in the US ahead of the album . It reached # 9 and # 15 in the charts respectively . The album was released on 14 August in the US and 27 August in the UK . It became the only album by the Who to top the UK charts . 
 The Who starting touring the US just before the album was released . The group used the Lifehouse PA , though soundman Bob Pridden found the technical requirements of the equipment to be over @-@ complicated . The set list was revamped , and while it included a smaller selection of numbers from Tommy , several new numbers from the new album such as " My Wife " , " Baba O 'Riley " and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " became live favourites . The latter two songs involved the band playing to a backing track containing the synthesizer parts . The tour moved to the UK in September , including a show at The Oval , Kennington in front of 35 @,@ 000 fans , and the opening gig at the Rainbow Theatre in Finsbury Park , before going back to the US , ending in Seattle on December 15 . The group then took eight months off touring , the longest break of their career at that point . 
 Several additional songs recorded at the Who 's Next sessions were released later as singles or on compilations . " Let 's See Action " was released as a single in 1971 , followed by " Join Together " in June 1972 and " Relay " in November . " Pure and Easy " , " Put The Money Down " and " Too Much of Anything " were released on the album Odds & Sods , while " Time is Passing " was added to the 1998 CD version . A cover of " Baby Don 't You Do It " was recorded and the longest version currently available is on the deluxe edition of the album . 
 The album has been re @-@ issued remastered several times using tapes from different sessions . The master tapes for the Olympic sessions are believed to be lost , as Virgin Records threw out a substantial number of old recordings when they purchased the studio in the 1980s . Video game publisher Harmonix wanted to release Who 's Next as downloadable , playable content for the music video game series Rock Band , but were unable to do so due to difficulty finding the original multi track recordings . Instead , a compilation of Who songs dubbed " The Best of The Who , " which includes three of the album 's songs ( " Behind Blue Eyes " , " Baba O 'Riley " , and " Going Mobile " ) , was released as downloadable content , in lieu of the earlier @-@ promised Who 's Next album . The 16 @-@ track tapes to " Won 't Get Fooled Again " and the 8 @-@ track tapes to the other material except " Bargain " and " Getting In Tune " have since been discovered . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 In a contemporary review for The Village Voice , music critic Robert Christgau called Who 's Next " the best hard rock album in years " and said that , while their previous recordings were marred by a thin sound , the group now " achieves the same resonant immediacy in the studio that it does live " . Billy Walker from Sounds highlighted the songs " Baba O 'Riley " , " My Wife " , and " The Song Is Over " , and wrote , " After the unique brilliance of Tommy something special had to be thought out and the fact that they settled for a straight @-@ forward album rather than an extension of their rock opera , says much for their courage and inventiveness . " Rolling Stone magazine 's John Mendelsohn felt that , despite some amount of seriousness and artificiality , the album 's brand of rock and roll is " intelligently @-@ conceived , superbly @-@ performed , brilliantly @-@ produced , and sometimes even exciting " . At the end of 1971 , the record was voted the best album of the year in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics published by The Village Voice . 
 Since then , Who 's Next has often been viewed as the Who 's best album . In a retrospective review for AllMusic , Stephen Thomas Erlewine said its music was more genuine than Tommy or the aborted Lifehouse project because " those were art — [ Who 's Next ] , even with its pretensions , is rock & roll . " BBC Music 's Chris Roberts cited it as the band 's best record and " one of those carved @-@ in @-@ stone landmarks that the rock canon doesn 't allow you to bad @-@ mouth . " Mojo claimed its sophisticated music and hook @-@ laden songs featured innovative use of rock synthesizers that did not weaken the Who 's characteristic " power @-@ quartet attack " . In The Encyclopedia of Popular Music ( 1998 ) , Colin Larkin said it raised the standards for both hard rock and the Who , whose " sense of dynamics " was highlighted by the contrast between their powerful playing and a counterpoint produced at times from acoustic guitars and synthesizer <unk> . Christgau , on the other hand , was less enthusiastic about the record during the 1980s when the Who became what he felt was " the worst kind of art @-@ rock band " , writing that Who 's Next revealed itself to be less tasteful in retrospect because of Daltrey 's histrionic singing and " all that synth noodling " . 
 According to Acclaimed Music , Who 's Next is the 35th most ranked record in critics ' lists of the all @-@ time greatest albums . In 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked it 28th on its list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . The album appeared at number 15 on Pitchfork Media 's list of the 100 best records from the 1970s . It was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die ( 2005 ) . The Classic Albums BBC documentary series aired an episode on Who 's Next , initially on radio in 1989 , and then on television in 1998 , which was released in 2006 on DVD as Classic Albums : The Who – Who 's Next . That year , the album was chosen by Time as one of their 100 best records of all time . In 2007 , it was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame for " lasting qualitative or historical significance " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Pete Townshend , except " My Wife " by John Entwistle . 
 = = = 1995 bonus tracks = = = 
 = = = 2003 deluxe edition = = = 
 The first disc of the Deluxe Edition contains the nine tracks from the original album containing the original mix , followed by six outtakes , of which " Getting in Tune " and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " were previously unreleased . Each of the six outtakes was recorded during the Record Plant sessions in March 1971 before work restarted in the UK . 
 The tracks on the second disc were recorded live at the Young Vic Theatre , London , on 26 April 1971 . All of the tracks were previously unreleased except for " Water " and " Naked Eye " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = The Who = = = 
 Roger Daltrey – vocals 
 Keith Moon – drums , percussion 
 John Entwistle – bass , brass , vocals , piano on " My Wife " 
 Pete Townshend – guitar , VCS3 , organ , <unk> synthesiser , vocals , piano on " Baba O 'Riley " 
 = = = Additional musicians = = = 
 Dave Arbus – violin on " Baba O 'Riley " 
 Nicky Hopkins – piano on " The Song Is Over " and " Getting in Tune " 
 Al Kooper – organ on alternate version of " Behind Blue Eyes " 
 Leslie West – lead guitar on " Baby , Don 't You Do It " 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The Who – production 
 Glyn Johns – associate production , recording , mixing 
 Doug Sax - mastering 
 Kit Lambert – executive production 
 Chris Stamp – executive production 
 Pete Kameron – executive production 
 John Kosh – album design 
 Ethan Russell – photography 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Glorious Revolution in Scotland = 
 The Glorious Revolution in Scotland was part of a wider change of regime , known as the Glorious Revolution or Revolution of 1688 , in the British kingdoms of the Stuart monarchy in 1688 – 89 . It began in England and saw the removal of the Catholic James VII of Scotland and II of England from the thrones of England , Scotland and Ireland and his replacement with his Protestant daughter Mary and her husband William of Orange . 
 After the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 in the person of Charles II , Scotland was ruled from London through a series of commissioners . The reintroduction of episcopacy led to divisions in the church as some Presbyterians began to attend separate conventicles . The Catholicism of Charles 's heir , James , Duke of Albany and of York , alienated some support , but he built up a following among some of the Highland clans . After his accession in 1685 attempts at invasion by his opponents failed , but the birth of an heir , Prince James , prompted English politicians to call for support from William of Orange , and after a major invasion from the Netherlands , James fled to France . Scotland had little option but to accept a change of monarch and a Presbyterian @-@ dominated convention offered the crown of Scotland to William and Mary . Episcopacy was abolished and the Whigs became dominant in politics . There were a series of Jacobite risings between 1689 and 1746 in favour of James and his heirs . As a result of the Revolution , Scotland was drawn into major international wars and ultimately into full union with England in 1707 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1638 the Scots had rebelled against the religious policies of Charles I , established a national Covenant and abolished episcopacy . During the 1650s Scotland had been militarily defeated , occupied and for a short time annexed to the English Commonwealth , under the leadership of Oliver Cromwell . The Restoration of the monarchy in England in 1660 meant a parallel restoration in Scotland as a fait accompli , with the Scots in a very weak bargaining position . In the event Scotland regained its system of law , parliament and kirk , but also the Committee of the Articles ( through which the crown controlled parliamentary business ) , bishops . They also had a king in Charles II who did not visit the country and ruled largely without reference to Parliament through a series of commissioners . These began with John Middleton and ended with the king 's brother and heir , James , Duke of York ( known in Scotland as the Duke of Albany ) , who effectively ran a small Scottish court at Holyrood Palace . 
 Church ministers were forced to accept the restoration of episcopacy or lose their livings . Up to a third , at least 270 , of the ministry refused . Many ministers chose voluntarily to abandon their own parishes rather than wait to be forced out by the government . Most of the vacancies occurred in the south @-@ west of Scotland , an area particularly strong in its Covenanting sympathies . Abandoning the official church , many of the people here began to attend illegal field assemblies led by excluded ministers , known as conventicles . They became known after one of their leaders as the Cameronians . Official attempts to suppress these led to a rising in 1679 , defeated by James , Duke of Monmouth , the King 's illegitimate son , at the Battle of Bothwell Bridge . In the early 1680s a more intense phase of persecution began , in what was later to be known in Protestant historiography as " the Killing Time " , with dissenters summarily executed by the dragoons of James Graham , Laird of Claverhouse or sentenced to transportation or death by Sir George Mackenzie , the Lord Advocate . 
 In England , the Exclusion crisis of 1678 – 81 divided political society into Whigs ( given their name after the Scottish <unk> ) , who attempted , unsuccessfully , to exclude the openly Catholic Duke of Albany from the succession , and the Tories , who opposed them . Similar divisions began to emerge in Scottish political life , but there was little organised opposition to the succession and James ' rights as heir received explicit recognition when the Scottish Parliament passed a Succession Act in 1681 . Charles and James acted against Archibald Campbell , 9th Earl of Argyll , whose feudal rights in the south @-@ west Highlands made him one of the most powerful figures in the kingdom . His rights were eroded in favour of other families and James may have been consciously building up his own following in the region . Argyll was eventually tried and fled to the Dutch court , which became the focus of both Scottish and English political dissidents and exiles . These included Scottish peer Lord George Melville , who was implicated in the Rye House Plot , an alleged attempt to assassinate Charles and James in 1683 . 
 = = Deposition of James VII = = 
 Charles died in 1685 and his brother succeeded him as James VII of Scotland ( and II of England ) . James put Catholics in key positions in the government and even attendance at a conventicle was made punishable by death . He disregarded parliament , purged the Council and forced through religious toleration for Roman Catholics , alienating his Protestant subjects . The failure of an invasion , led by the Earl of Argyll and timed to co @-@ ordinate with the Duke of Monmouth 's rebellion in England , demonstrated the strength of the regime . Argyll was unable to raise a sufficient force to threaten the regime and was soon captured and executed . 
 It was believed that the king would be succeeded by his daughter Mary , a Protestant and the wife of William of Orange , Stadtholder of the main provinces of the Netherlands , but when in 1688 James produced a male heir , James Francis Edward Stuart , it was clear that his policies would outlive him . An invitation by seven leading Englishmen prompted William to launch an invasion , landing in England with 14 @,@ 000 men on 5 November . In Edinburgh there were rumours of Orange plots and on 10 December the Lord Chancellor of Scotland , the Earl of Perth , quit the capital for Drummond Castle , planning an abortive escape to Ireland ( he was later captured as he embarked for France ) . As rioters approached Holyrood Abbey they were fired on by soldiers , resulting in some deaths . The city guard was called out , but the Abbey was stormed by a large mob . The Catholic furnishings , placed there when it was restored as a chapel for James , were torn down and the tombs of the Stuart kings desecrated . A crowd of students burnt the Pope in effigy and took down the heads of executed Covenanters that were hanging above the city gates . 
 The crisis was resolved when James fled from England on 23 December , leading to the almost bloodless revolution . Although there had been no significant Scottish involvement in the coup , most members of the Scottish Privy Council went to London to offer their services to William . As a result , the Revolution in Scotland was not carried out by opponents of the existing regime , but by its agents , who were keen to preserve their offices . I. B. Cowen described these as " reluctant revolutionaries " . In contrast Tim Harris argues that there was a lack of popular support for James ' regime and that William 's political support grew as the crisis unfolded in a similar way to England . On 7 January 1689 members of the Scottish Privy Council asked William to take over the responsibilities of government in Scotland . 
 = = Convention of Estates = = 
 William called a Scottish Convention , which convened on 14 March in Edinburgh . Initially William 's supporters did not have a clear advantage and the Marquis of Hamilton , chosen by William to represent him , only gained the presidency over the Marquess of Atholl , who was associated with James , by a narrow margin . The faction that supported James , including many Episcopalians and led by figures including John Paterson , the Archbishop of Glasgow , were divided by James ' previous attempts to achieve tolerance for Roman Catholics . A letter from James , received on 16 March , contained a threat to punish all who rebelled against him and declared the assembly illegal . This resulted in his followers abandoning the Convention , leaving the Williamites largely unopposed . William 's supporters had control of the burgh , but Edinburgh Castle , with its formidable arsenal , was held by the Catholic Earl of Gordon . With Dundee raising troops in the Highlands , the convention met in a highly charged political atmosphere , behind closed doors and guarded by some 1 @,@ 000 Cameronians . 
 On 4 April , with only five dissenting votes , the Convention formulated two documents , the Claim of Right and the Articles of Grievances . These suggested that James had forfeited the crown by his actions ( in contrast to England , which relied on the legal fiction of an abdication ) and offered it to William and Mary . On 11 May they accepted the Crown of Scotland as co @-@ regents , as William II and Mary II . The principles of the two documents were that no Roman Catholic could hold the crown or any other office , that the royal prerogative could not override the law , that parliament should meet frequently and that it should be able to debate freely ( that is without the interference of the Committee of Articles ) and that there could only be taxation with the consent of parliament . They also condemned episcopacy as an " insupportable grievance and trouble to this nation " . A proposal for union between the kingdoms was discussed , but dropped because of opposition from the English parliament . As in England , the convention was then converted into a regular parliament on 5 June 1689 . 
 In the view of the Convention , William had accepted the crown on the basis of the articles and the claim , but he did not agree to this , arguing that he was only constrained by his oath to uphold " true religion " and to maintain a balance between " <unk> and <unk> <unk> in this realm " and the " just privileges of the Crown " in Scotland , none of which were clearly defined . Neither did William accept the Scottish Parliament 's interpretation of its constitutional position as the primary political institution in the kingdom , leading to a series of disputes between the Parliament in Edinburgh and the government in London . 
 = = Parliament = = 
 Leading figures in the parliament included political rivals Melville , who had returned from exile , and a former servant of James VII 's regime , John Dalrymple , 1st Earl of Stair . In 1689 Melville was made Earl of Melville and sole Secretary of State over Scotland and Stair was made Lord Advocate . In 1691 Stair was appointed as the joint Secretary of State . The first session of parliament deteriorated into a stalemate over the constitutional position . Although William had been able to appoint ministers , parliament withheld taxation and refused to accept his right to nominate to judicial offices , meaning that the law courts remained closed . The parliament passed a series of acts , but William refused to give royal assent . The two major issues of contention were episcopacy and the committee of articles . The result was the emergence of an organised opposition , known as " the Club " . With most of its support among the shire members , it had a theoretical 75 of the 125 parliamentary votes . The court conceded over the issue episcopacy in July 1689 , but continued to resist over the Committee of the Articles . Soon after the news of the defeat of Williamite forces at Battle of Killiecrankie parliament was prorogued on 2 August . 
 Against the background of James VII 's invasion of Ireland , the possibility of an Irish invasion of Scotland and continued pockets of resistance in the Highlands , parliament met again in April 1690 . The stalemate was broken by the discovery of the Montgomery Plot . Sir James Montgomery had been a major supporter of William 's cause in the Convention , but had been frustrated when he was only offered a minor office in the government . He entered into secret negotiations with extreme Presbyterians , Episcopalian magnates and Jacobites . The plot involved part of the Club and some conservative magnates , including the Duke of Queensbury . In the resulting panic Melville conceded over the Committee of the Articles , which was agreed on 8 May . A series of agreements were then made between the court and parliament , with an act abolishing episcopacy and a grant of supply for the king , both agreed on 7 June . The constitutional settlement that emerged in parliament during the 1689 and 1690 sessions was less radical than that arrived at in 1641 as William and Mary retained important prerogative powers , particularly the right to summon , prorogue and dissolve parliament , allowing William to keep the same parliament until his death in 1702 , but parliament had made considerable gains towards independence and would now be much more difficult to manage from the court . On 19 June the parliament exercised its new found independence by passing an act that abolished lay patronage in the kirk , by which local landholders or heritors had the right to appoint ministers to their parishes . 
 = = Religious settlement = = 
 The General Assembly of the kirk did not meet until November 1690 . In the months between the fall of the Stuart regime and its convention , there were a series of " ramblings " by which bands of Cameronians ejected over 200 conformist and Episcopalian ministers from their livings . As a result , only 180 ministers and elders attended , all from south of the River Tay , where <unk> sympathies were strongest . In the second half of 1690 182 ministers were deprived for refusing to say prayers for William and Mary , turning the restoration of Presbyterianism into a militant purge . Two commissions were created , one for south and one for north of the Tay . Over the next 25 years they would remove almost two @-@ thirds of all ministers . The General Assembly of 1692 refused to reinstate even those Episcopalian ministers who pledged to accept Presbyterianism . As a result , many presbyteries were left with few or no parish clergy . However , the king was more tolerant than the kirk tended to be and issued two acts of indulgence in 1693 and 1695 , allowing those who accepted him as king to return to the church . Around a hundred clergy took advantage of the offer . All but the hardened Jacobites would be given toleration in 1707 , leaving only a small remnant of Jacobite Episcopalians . The final settlement was closer to the position of 1592 than the more radical position of 1649 and despite frequent statements that the kirk was independent of the state the relationship remained ambiguous . Although lay patronage was in theory abolished , heritors and elders still had the right to nominate candidates for their parishes , who could then be " called " by the congregation . 
 = = Jacobite resistance = = 
 Although William 's supporters dominated the government and parliament , there remained a significant following for James , particularly in the Highlands . His cause , which became known as Jacobitism , from the Latin ( Jacobus ) for James , led to a series of risings . An initial Jacobite military attempt was led by John Graham , now Viscount Dundee . His forces , almost all Highlanders , defeated William 's forces at the Battle of Killiecrankie in 1689 , but they took heavy losses and Dundee was slain in the fighting . Without his leadership the Jacobite army was soon defeated at the Battle of Dunkeld , by a newly raised government regiment of Cameronians . The last land forces of the Jacobites were defeated at the Battle of <unk> in Strathspey on 1 May 1690 and Gordon surrendered Edinburgh Castle on 17 June . The complete defeat of James 's cause in Ireland by forces under William at the Battle of Aughrim ( 1691 ) , ended the first phase of the Jacobite military effort . 
 = = Massacre of Glencoe = = 
 In the aftermath of the Jacobite defeat , on 13 February 1692 , in an incident known as the Massacre of Glencoe , 38 members of the Clan MacDonald of Glencoe were killed by members of the Earl of Argyll 's Regiment of Foot , who had accepted their hospitality , on the grounds that they had not been prompt in pledging allegiance to the new monarchs . Another forty women and children died of exposure after their homes were burned . The brutality of the incident was embarrassing for the new government and after a subsequent inquiry Dalrymple , who had ordered the massacre , was forced to resign . The massacre helped create greater sympathy for the Stuart cause and may have contributed to later support for Jacobite risings . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Glorious Revolution settled the dominance of the Presbyterians in the Church of Scotland and of the Whigs in politics . The Whig dominance continued ( in both Scotland and England ) well into the mid @-@ eighteenth century , . In both countries , the Revolution marked the triumph of Parliamentary say in determining the legal monarch and succession . Furthermore , the Revolution decisively determined the future structure of the kirk . In the short term the removal of so many Episcopalian ministers probably made the impact of the famines of the seven ill years more severe , as they were not able to operate the system of parish poor relief . The revolution also provided a political and dynastic dimension to cultural and religious divisions , particularly between the largely Episcopalian Highlands and the more Presbyterian Lowlands . This helped to make the Scottish Highlands the main focus of Jacobite resistance to the Williamite regime , resulting in a series of military adventures , of which the most threatening were those of 1715 and 1745 . The revolution also led to Scotland 's involvement in large scale European wars from 1689 – 96 and 1702 – 13 , resulting in heavy demands in men and taxation . It led ultimately to the Acts of Union that created the Kingdom of Great Britain , as the danger of a divided succession between Scotland and England drove the need for a lasting resolution . 
 = Britt Dillmann = 
 Britt Dillmann ( born 4 April 1963 ) is a 1 @.@ 0 @-@ point wheelchair basketball forward , who plays for RSV Lahn @-@ Dill in the German wheelchair basketball league . She has also played for the national team , winning a silver medal at the 1988 Summer Paralympics in Seoul . She retired soon afterwards , but staged a comeback in 2011 , rejoining the national team , which went on to win the European championships , and then a gold medal at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . President Joachim Gauck awarded the team Germany 's highest sporting honour , the Silbernes Lorbeerblatt ( Silver Laurel Leaf ) . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Britt Tuna was born on 4 April 1963 . She played wheelchair basketball for RSV Lahn @-@ Dill , and the German national team which won the European Wheelchair Basketball Championship in 1987 . At the 1988 Summer Paralympics in Seoul , Tuna was considered to be the strongest wheelchair basketball player in her 1 @.@ 0 @-@ point class . The German team went through the tournament undefeated until the final match , which they lost to the United States , 38 – 31 . Tuna was bitter about the defeat , which she blamed on a tactical error by the German coach . She later conceded , " So habe ihr diese <unk> noch über Jahre <unk> " ( " I indulged in this defeat for many years " ) . 
 In the early 1990s , Tuna quit basketball to focus on her work . She married , changing her surname to Dillmann , and raised three children ( Jana Dillmann , Charlotte Dillmann , Valentin Joshua Dillmann ) . But in the summer of 2009 , Dillmann felt that she had become overweight and unfit . A low @-@ carbohydrate diet and daily exercise at the gym , in the pool , and on the <unk> , saw her weight drop by 30 kilograms ( 66 lb ) in a year . 
 Dillmann then decided to try wheelchair basketball again . She retrieved her old basketball chair , now somewhat mouldy and smelly , from the basement , and sought a game with her old team , RSV Lahn @-@ Dill . Her debut game with the seconds saw the basketball officials reaching for their rulebooks to see if the old chair , of a type they had never seen , was still legal . 
 Although RSV Lahn @-@ Dill , eager to develop young players , would only let her play in the seconds , Dillmann caught the attention of national coach Holger Glinicki , who was looking for a top @-@ notch 1 @.@ 0 @-@ point player . In 2010 , she rejoined the national team that she had played on before many of her new teammates were born . The team went on to win the European Championships in 2011 . Dillmann 's treatment contrasted with that of national team mate Gesche Schünemann . While Schünemann received endorsements and could train in the hall of RSV Lahn @-@ Dill 's Rivers Barracks , Dillmann got none , and trained outdoors . 
 In June 2012 she was named as one of the team that competed at the 2012 Summer Paralympic Games in London . At the age of 49 , she was the oldest wheelchair basketball player there . In the Gold Medal match , the team faced the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , a team that had beaten them 48 – 46 in Sydney just a few months before . They defeated the Australians 44 – 58 in front of a crowd of over 12 @,@ 000 at the North Greenwich Arena to win the gold medal , the first that Germany had won in women 's wheelchair basketball in 28 years . They were awarded a Silver Laurel Leaf by president Joachim Gauck in November 2012 , and were again named Team of the Year for 2012 . For Dillmann , the gold medal victory removed the pain of the loss 24 years before . " Das hat mich <unk> mit Seoul " ( " This has reconciled me with Seoul " ) she said . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 1987 : Gold at the European Championships ( Lorient , France ) 
 1988 : Silver at Paralympic Games ( Seoul , South Korea ) 
 2011 : Gold at the European Championships ( Nazareth , Israel ) 
 2012 : Gold at the Paralympic Games ( London , England ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 2012 : Team of the Year 
 2012 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 = Colin McCool with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 = 
 Colin McCool was a member of Donald Bradman 's famous Australian cricket team , which toured England in 1948 . Bradman ’ s men were undefeated in their 34 matches and this unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned them the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 A frontline leg spinner and middle @-@ order batsman , McCool was not prominent in the team 's success . Although McCool started his Test career strongly , his form began to decline during the previous Australian season . After starting the tour in Bradman 's first @-@ choice team , a bloodied callus on his spinning finger troubled McCool . This prevented him from bowling for prolonged periods , and along with Ron Hamence , he was one of two squad members who did not play a Test on tour . Along with Doug Ring , the trio called themselves " ground staff " because of the paucity of their on @-@ field duties in the major matches and they often sang ironic songs about their status . 
 During the tour , McCool took 57 first @-@ class wickets at a bowling average of 17 @.@ 82 ; he was the fifth most prolific wicket @-@ taker and had the fourth best average among Australia 's seven frontline bowlers . With England agreeing to have a new ball available after every 55 overs , more frequently than the old rule of replacing the ball after every 200 runs , fast bowling dominated over spin . As a result , McCool did not play in the Tests , but was used heavily in the tour matches so the leading pacemen could conserve their energy for the important matches . Outside the Tests , McCool had the fourth heaviest workload among the regular bowlers , although overall , he delivered the least overs because of his injured finger . McCool took five wickets in an innings three times , his best return being 7 / 78 against Cambridge University . 
 Although McCool also played as a frontline batsman during his career , his performances during the tour were far below his usual standards , scoring only 306 runs at a batting average of 20 @.@ 40 with three half @-@ centuries . However , he remained prominent with his fielding , taking 20 catches in 17 matches . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the resumption of cricket after World War II , McCool had started his Test career strongly . After making his debut in a one @-@ off Test against New Zealand in 1945 – 46 , he played in all five Tests against England during the 1946 – 47 home season , scoring 272 runs at an average of 54 @.@ 40 and taking 18 wickets at just over 27 apiece . Wisden said his batting featured " wristy cuts " and " vigorous hooks " , adding that there were " few better players of spin bowling on a difficult pitch " . Wisden judged his slow and loopy leg spin " a clever mixture of leg @-@ breaks and googlies " . However , when India toured Australia for the first time in 1947 – 48 , McCool played in three Tests without much success , scoring only 46 runs and taking only four wickets . As a result , he was dropped for the last Test . 
 = = Early tour = = 
 Nevertheless , McCool gained selection as part of Australian team to tour England in 1948 under Donald Bradman . Australia had traditionally fielded its first @-@ choice team in the opening match of the tour , which was customarily against Worcestershire . Although he was only selected sporadically during the preceding Test series against India , McCool was chosen alongside off spinner Ian Johnson and appeared to be part of Bradman 's Test plans . The home side batted first and McCool took his maiden wicket on English soil , having former England captain Bob Wyatt stumped by fellow Queenslander Don Tallon . He removed Wyatt 's replacement for a duck without further addition to the score and ended with 2 / 38 as the home side were dismissed for 233 . McCool returned the favour during Australia 's innings . Coming in at No. 5 , he made a fifth ball duck and was part of a middle @-@ order collapse that saw Australia lose 4 / 38 before steadying to declare at 8 / 462 . In the second innings , McCool did the bulk of the damage , taking four of the five first wickets — two of whom were stumped by Tallon — to leave the hosts at 5 / 122 before Australia completed an innings victory . McCool had been the most successful bowler in the opening match . 
 McCool was rested for the second tour match against Leicestershire , which Australia won by an innings . The next match against Yorkshire — on a damp pitch favourable to slower bowling — was the closest Australia came to defeat for the whole tour . McCool made three in the first innings as Australia replied to Yorkshire 's 71 with 101 . After the hosts were bowled out for 89 in their second innings , Australia collapsed to 5 / 20 in pursuit of 60 for victory when McCool arrived at the crease . To make matters worse , Sam Loxton was injured and could not bat , so Australia effectively only had four wickets in hand and faced the prospect of losing to an English county for the first time since 1912 . McCool scored five before hitting a long hop back to left @-@ arm spinner Johnny Wardle to leave Australia at 6 / 31 . However , Australia lost no further batsmen and scraped home by four wickets . McCool ’ s leg spin was used as Keith Miller and Bill Johnston bowled almost unchanged for the entire match . 
 McCool was rested as the Australians travelled to London to play Surrey at The Oval and won by an innings . McCool returned for the next match , which was Cambridge University . After going wicketless for 31 runs in the first innings , he did not bat as Australia declared at 4 / 414 in reply to the hosts ’ 167 . In the second innings , McCool took the first four wickets — including two stumpings by Ron Saggers — to leave the hosts at 4 / 73 . He returned to take three more wickets and end with 7 / 78 as Cambridge fell for 196 to lose by an innings and 51 runs . 
 McCool was rested as Australia defeated Essex by an innings and 451 runs , its largest winning margin for the summer . During this match , the other batsmen set a world record by scoring 721 on the first day , the most first @-@ class runs compiled in a day ’ s play . He returned for the innings victory against Oxford University . McCool made his first substantial contribution with the bat , coming in at 5 / 214 and scoring 50 in a 91 @-@ run partnership with Loxton as Australia made 431 . He removed Indian Test cricketer Abdul Hafeez Kardar in the first innings , before taking 3 / 29 in the second as Australia won by an innings . 
 The next match was against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) at Lord 's . The MCC fielded seven players who would represent England in the Tests , and were basically a full strength Test team , while Australia fielded their first @-@ choice team . It was a chance to gain a psychological advantage , with Len Hutton , Denis Compton and Bill Edrich — three of England 's top four batsmen — all playing . Batting at No. 8 , McCool made a duck as Australia collapsed late in their innings , losing 5 / 54 to be bowled out for 552 . He was not required to bowl in the first innings as the three pacemen Ray Lindwall , Ernie Toshack and Miller skittled England for 189 . McCool was given the shortest spell of the frontline bowlers in the second innings as the fast bowlers again made early inroads . He sent down 7 @.@ 2 overs , and disposed of the tail , removing the last four wickets , including MCC and England captain Norman Yardley . McCool ended with 4 / 35 as the MCC lost their last four wickets for 28 to be all out for 205 , giving Australia a victory by an innings and 158 runs . 
 Four matches followed the MCC fixture before the First Test at Trent Bridge . McCool was rested for the first of these against Lancashire at Manchester , a rain @-@ affected draw that was Australia 's first non @-@ victory of the season . He returned for the following match against Nottinghamshire , which was drawn , but had little success , taking a total of 0 / 68 . He failed to maximise his promotion to No. 4 , making only 17 as Australia scored 400 in their only innings . McCool did not get any more opportunities to push for selection , as he was rested from the next two matches against Hampshire and Sussex . Australia won the former by eight wickets after conceding a first innings lead for the first time on the tour , before winning the second by an innings by 325 runs . 
 = = Test omission = = 
 Bill Johnston — a left arm bowler who could bowl both pace and spin — was not initially in Bradman 's plan for the First Test at Trent Bridge . However , Bradman changed his mind on the morning when rain was forecast . Johnston was played in the hope of exploiting a wet wicket ; he had previously taken match @-@ winning figures of 10 / 40 and 11 / 117 against Yorkshire and Hampshire respectively on rain @-@ affected surfaces . In addition , McCool had been struggling with an injury on his spinning finger , and Bradman was worried McCool would not have the endurance required for a five @-@ day Test , which was two days longer than a normal tour match . Johnston 's inclusion at the expense of McCool was the only difference between the team for the First Test and those against Worcestershire and the MCC . Johnston subsequently cemented his position by taking nine wickets in the match — the most among the Australians . Johnson , the only specialist spinner chosen , took 1 / 85 . 
 Between Tests , McCool was recalled for the match against Northamptonshire . He took 1 / 19 in the first innings before coming in at the fall of the fifth wicket and scoring an unbeaten 50 as Australia declared at 8 / 352 . McCool only bowled three overs in the second innings and went wicketless as Australia won by an innings . Johnson , the incumbent Test spinner , took 4 / 59 . In the second match before the Second Test , against Yorkshire , McCool made only four and seven not out before Australia declared in their second innings . After not being bowled in the first innings , he took 2 / 33 in the last hour of the match as Yorkshire ended at 4 / 85 to secure a draw . McCool was overlooked for the Second Test at Lord 's , where Australia fielded the same XI that had won the First Test by eight wickets . Bradman 's men went on to complete a crushing win by 409 runs , and Johnson registered match figures of 3 / 75 . 
 The next match was against Surrey and started the day after the Second Test . McCool bowled only three overs in the first innings , before contributing 26 with the bat in Australia 's reply . After the tourists had taken a first innings lead of 168 , McCool bowled heavily as Bradman eased the workload on his Test players in the second innings . McCool removed Surrey 's top three batsmen — two of them stumped by Saggers — to leave the hosts at 3 / 94 . A 107 @-@ run seventh wicket stand saw Surrey recover to 6 / 267 before McCool took three of the last four wickets to end the innings at 289 . McCool ended with 6 / 113 from 45 @.@ 5 overs , having bowled approximately 40 % of the overs . Australia chased down the 122 runs required for victory in less than hour to complete a 10 @-@ wicket win . 
 In the following match against Gloucestershire before the Third Test , McCool came to the crease late on the first day with Australia at 5 / 529 . Unbeaten on eight at stumps , with the score at 5 / 560 , he continued the next morning and proceeded to add 140 for the sixth wicket with Loxton , before falling for 76 , his highest first @-@ class score of the season . Australia reached 7 / 774 declared , its highest of the tour , laying the foundation for an innings victory . McCool bowled a total of 19 overs to end with 0 / 51 , while Johnson took 11 / 100 and retained his place for the Third Test at Old Trafford , which was drawn amid inclement weather . 
 The match against Middlesex was the only fixture between the Tests . McCool toiled for 18 overs before snaring the last two wickets to end with 2 / 54 after the hosts had batted first . He made a duck as Australia scored 317 to take a 114 @-@ run lead . In the second innings , McCool took 3 / 54 including the wickets of John Dewes and Leslie Compton as the hosts lost 4 / 22 to be all out for 135 . With only 22 runs needed for victory , Bradman let McCool and fellow leg spinner Doug Ring open the batting . The pair duly saw Australia home without losing a wicket , with McCool on seven . 
 McCool was again overlooked for the Fourth Test at Headingley , in which Australia posted 3 / 404 in the second innings to win by seven wickets , setting a world record for the highest successful run @-@ chase in a Test . Immediately after the Headingley Test , McCool made 31 — batting at No. 8 — as Australia amassed 456 against Derbyshire . After taking 0 / 45 in the first innings , McCool bounced back as Australia enforced the follow on . A 100 @-@ run second wicket partnership by Arnold Townsend and Denis Smith took Derbyshire to 1 / 110 . McCool removed Townsend for 46 and quickly dismissed the next two batsmen to leave Derbyshire at 4 / 116 . He returned with the score at 5 / 163 and took three further wickets in close succession to dismiss the hosts for 182 , sealing victory by an innings . McCool ended with 6 / 77 from 29 overs . 
 In the next match against Glamorgan , McCool neither batted nor bowled in a rain @-@ affected draw that did not reach the second innings . In the following fixture against Warwickshire , McCool did not bowl in the first innings and scored 19 , before taking 4 / 56 in the second innings , helping to set up a win by nine wickets . McCool was then rested as Australia faced and drew with Lancashire for the second time on the tour . He returned for the non @-@ first @-@ class match against Durham , and came to the crease with Australia in trouble at 3 / 22 . He top @-@ scored with 64 to help Australia reach 282 all out . McCool took 1 / 17 as the hosts fell to 5 / 73 in reply when rain ended the match after the first day . After taking only seven wickets at 61 @.@ 00 in the first four Tests , Johnson was dropped for the Fifth Test at The Oval . However , it was fellow leg spinner Ring and not McCool who was called in . Australia crushed England by an innings and 149 runs to take the series 4 – 0 . 
 = = Later tour matches = = 
 Seven matches remained on Bradman 's quest to go through a tour of England without defeat . Australia batted first against Kent and McCool made a duck in their total of 361 . He then took 2 / 13 as the hosts were skittled for 51 . Forced to follow on , Kent were bowled out for 124 to lose by an innings , but not before attacking McCool and taking 42 runs from his five wicketless overs . In the next match against the Gentlemen of England , McCool was rested as Australia amassed 5 / 610 and won by an innings . He returned for the next match against Somerset . Promoted to fourth drop , McCool could only make six as Australia declared at 5 / 560 . Somerset reached 2 / 63 in reply before McCool took four quick wickets amid their collapse to 7 / 68 . McCool ended with 4 / 21 as the hosts folded for 115 . Forced to follow on , Somerset reached 3 / 49 before McCool took four of the next five wickets as the hosts fell to 8 / 66 , and eventually 71 all out , handing Australia victory by an innings and 374 runs . In the following match against the South of England , McCool batted at No. 8 and made five as Australia declared at 7 / 522 . McCool toiled for 36 overs in taking 2 / 89 as the hosts were bowled out for 298 when rain caused the match to end in a draw . 
 Australia 's biggest challenge in the post @-@ Test tour matches was against the Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI . During the last tour in 1938 , this team was effectively a full @-@ strength England outfit , but this time Bradman insisted only six current England Test players be allowed to play . After the hosts had complied , Bradman selected a full @-@ strength team , with the only difference from the Fifth Test team being Ring ’ s omission for Johnson , so McCool was left out . After Australia had taken a 312 @-@ run first innings lead , the match ended in a draw after multiple rain delays . 
 The tour ended with two non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland . In the first match , McCool came in with Australia 4 / 91 and put on 109 with Arthur Morris to consolidate the innings . When McCool was out for 52 and Morris for 109 , the Australians collapsed and lost 6 / 36 to end with 236 . McCool took 1 / 19 and 1 / 20 as Australia enforced the follow on and completed an innings victory . In the second match , McCool took 3 / 31 as the hosts made 178 after batting first . He opened the innings with the bat and made 108 in three hours , with 13 fours . Australia declared at 6 / 407 and McCool took 0 / 19 in seven overs as Australia wrapped up the tour with another innings victory . 
 = = Role = = 
 A frontline leg spinner and middle @-@ order batsman , McCool was not prominent in the team 's success . Although he had started his Test career strongly , McCool 's form began to decline in the previous Australian season of 1947 – 48 . In his first full Test season in 1946 – 47 , which featured five Tests against England , McCool batted at No. 6 and scored 95 and 104 not out . He also took five wickets in an innings on two occasions . He ended the series with 272 runs at an average of 54 @.@ 40 and took 18 wickets at just over 27 apiece . However , in the following season he made only 46 runs and took only three wickets in three Tests against India before being dropped . Nevertheless , McCool started the tour in Bradman 's first @-@ choice team , and was selected in the tour opener against Worcestershire and later against the MCC in his role as an all rounder . 
 Bowling for long periods caused McCool to continually tear a callus on his third finger , which he used to impart spin on the ball . As a result , Bradman felt compelled to leave him out of the Test matches , feeling that his finger would not be able to handle the necessarily long bowling spells . This decision was aided by England and Australia ’ s agreement to allow a new ball to be used every 55 overs , instead of the incumbent regulation of permitting a new ball for every 200 runs scored , which usually took longer than 55 overs . This meant the ball was in a shiny state more often , and therefore more conducive to fast and swing bowling , so Bradman relied heavily on his pacemen . For the rest of his career , McCool was troubled by the skin rubbing off his spinning finger . 
 McCool was thus one of two players along with Ron Hamence who did not play a Test during the season . Along with Doug Ring , Hamence and McCool called themselves " ground staff " because of the paucity of their on @-@ field duties in the major matches , and they often sang ironic songs about their status . The cricket writer Alan Gibson , who knew McCool well in his later cricket career at Somerset , said the omission " distressed him greatly at the time , though he could be philosophical enough about it later " . 
 McCool took 57 first @-@ class wickets at 17 @.@ 82 ; he was the fifth most prolific wicket @-@ taker and had the fourth best average among Australia 's seven frontline bowlers . As England agreed to have a new ball available after every 55 overs , fast bowling dominated in the Tests , so McCool was used heavily in the tour matches to allow the leading pacemen to conserve their energy in preparation for the Tests . Outside the Tests , McCool had the fourth heaviest workload among the regular bowlers , although overall he bowled the least overs due to his injured finger . McCool had the worst economy rate among the regular bowlers , but he took his wickets at a faster rate ; his strike rate was second only to paceman Ray Lindwall . 
 Although McCool also played as a frontline batsman during his career , with a first @-@ class average of 32 @.@ 85 and 18 centuries , his batting performances during the tour were far below his usual standards , garnering only 306 runs at 20 @.@ 40 with three half @-@ centuries . His highest score was 76 against Gloucestershire , although he added two more fifties and a century against Scotland in the three non @-@ first @-@ class fixtures . During the tour , McCool usually batted from Nos. 5 to <unk> A specialist at first slip , McCool remained prominent with his fielding , taking 20 catches in 17 matches . 
 = = = Statistical note = = = 
 = = = General notes = = = 
 = Halifax Gibbet = 
 The Halifax Gibbet / <unk> <unk> / was an early guillotine , or decapitating machine , used in the town of Halifax , West Yorkshire , England . It was probably installed during the 16th century as an alternative to beheading by axe or sword . Halifax was once part of the Manor of Wakefield , where ancient custom and law gave the Lord of the Manor the authority to execute summarily by decapitation any thief caught with stolen goods to the value of 13 ½ d or more , or who confessed to having stolen goods of at least that value . Decapitation was a fairly common method of execution in England , but Halifax was unusual in two respects : it employed a guillotine @-@ like machine that appears to have been unique in the country , and it continued to decapitate petty criminals until the mid @-@ 17th century . 
 The device consisted of an axe head fitted to the base of a heavy wooden block that ran in grooves between two 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) tall uprights , mounted on a stone base about 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) high . A rope attached to the block ran over a pulley , allowing it to be raised , after which the rope was secured by attaching it to a pin in the base . The block carrying the axe was then released either by withdrawing the pin or by cutting the rope once the prisoner was in place . 
 Almost 100 people were beheaded in Halifax between the first recorded execution in 1286 and the last in 1650 , but as the date of the gibbet 's installation is uncertain , it cannot be determined with any accuracy how many were dealt with by the Halifax Gibbet . By 1650 public opinion considered beheading to be an excessively severe punishment for petty theft ; use of the gibbet was forbidden by Oliver Cromwell , Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England , and the structure was dismantled . The stone base was rediscovered and preserved in about 1840 , and a non @-@ working replica was erected on the site in 1974 . The names of 52 people known to have been beheaded by the device are listed on a nearby plaque . 
 = = History = = 
 What became known as the Halifax Gibbet Law gave the Lord of the Manor of Wakefield , of which the town of Halifax was a part , the power to try and execute any felon for the theft of goods to the value of 13 ½ d or more : 
 If a felon be taken within their liberty or precincts of the said forest [ the Forest of Hardwick ] , either <unk> [ caught with the stolen goods in his hand or in the act of stealing ] , <unk> [ caught carrying stolen goods on his back ] , or <unk> [ having confessed to the crime ] cloth or any other commodity to the value of 13 ½ d , that they shall after three market days or meeting days within the town of Halifax after such his apprehension , and being condemned he shall be taken to the gibbet and there have his head cut off from his body . 
 The Gibbet Law may have been a last vestige of the Anglo @-@ Saxon custom of infangtheof , which allowed landowners to enforce summary justice on thieves within the boundaries of their estates . Samuel Midgley in his Halifax and its Gibbet @-@ Law Placed in a True Light , published in 1761 , states that the law dates from a time " not in the memory of man to the contrary " . It may have been the consequence of rights granted by King Henry III to John de Warenne ( 1231 – 1304 ) , Lord of the Manor of Wakefield . Such baronial jurisdiction was by no means unusual in medieval England and was described in the 11th @-@ century legal text entitled De <unk> , qui <unk> <unk> <unk> et <unk> ( Concerning the barons who have their courts of law and customs ) . Neither was the decapitation of convicted felons unique to Halifax ; the earls of Chester amongst others also exercised the right to " behead any malefactor or thief , who was apprehended in the action , or against whom it was made apparent by sufficient witness , or confession , before four inhabitants of the place " , recorded as the Custom of Cheshire . 
 A commission appointed by King Edward I in 1278 reported that there were at that time 94 privately owned gibbets and gallows in use in Yorkshire , including one owned by the Archbishop of York . What was unusual about Halifax was that the custom lingered on there for so long after it had been abandoned elsewhere . 
 Suspected thieves were detained in the custody of the lord of the manor 's bailiff , who would summon a jury of 16 local men " out of the most wealthy and best reputed " , four each from four local townships . The jury had only two questions to decide on : were the stolen goods found in the possession of the accused , and were they worth at least 13 ½ d . The jury , the accused , and those claiming that their property had been stolen , were brought together in a room at the bailiff 's house . No oaths were administered and there was no judge or defence counsel present ; each side presented their case , and the jury decided on guilt or innocence . 
 So strictly was the law applied that anyone who apprehended a thief with his property was not allowed to recover it unless the miscreant and the stolen goods were presented to the bailiff . The goods were otherwise forfeited to the lord of the manor , and their previous rightful owner was liable to find himself charged with <unk> , or conniving in the felony . Halifax 's reputation for strict law enforcement was noted by the antiquary William Camden and by the " Water Poet " John Taylor , who penned the Beggar 's Litany : " From Hell , Hull , and Halifax , Good Lord , deliver us ! " 
 Before his execution a convicted felon was usually detained in custody for three market days , on each of which he was publicly displayed in the stocks , accompanied by the stolen goods . After the sentence had been carried out a county coroner would visit Halifax and convene a jury of 12 men , sometimes the same individuals who had found the felon guilty , and ask them to give an account under oath of the circumstances of the conviction and execution , for the official records . 
 The punishment could only be meted out to those within the confines of the Forest of Hardwick , of which Halifax was a part . The gibbet was about 500 yards ( 460 m ) from the boundary of the area , and if the condemned person succeeded in escaping from the forest then he could not legally be brought back to face his punishment . At least two men succeeded in cheating the executioner in that way : a man named Dinnis and another called Lacy . Dinnis was never seen in Halifax again , but Lacy rather unwisely decided to return to the town seven years after his escape ; he was apprehended and finally executed in 1623 . 
 The earliest known record of punishment by decapitation in Halifax is the beheading of John of Dalton in 1286 , but official records were not maintained until the parish registers began in 1538 . Between then and 1650 , when the last executions took place , 56 men and women are recorded as having been decapitated . The total number of executions identified since 1286 is just short of 100 . 
 Local weavers specialised in the production of kersey , a <unk> and inexpensive woollen fabric that was often used for military uniforms ; by the 16th century Halifax and the surrounding Calder Valley was the largest producer of the material in England . In the final part of the manufacturing process the cloth was hung outdoors on large structures known as <unk> and left to dry , after having been conditioned by a fulling mill . Daniel Defoe wrote a detailed account of what he had been told of the gibbet 's history during his visit to Halifax in Volume 3 of his A tour thro ' the whole island of Great Britain , published in 1727 . He reports that " Modern accounts pretend to say , it [ the gibbet ] was for all sorts of felons ; but I am well assured , it was first erected purely , or at least principally , for such thieves as were apprehended stealing cloth from the <unk> ; and it seems very reasonable to think it was so " . 
 Eighteenth @-@ century historians argued that the area 's prosperity attracted the " wicked and ungovernable " ; the cloth , left outside and unattended , presented easy pickings , and hence justified severe punishment to protect the local economy . James Holt on the other hand , writing in 1997 , sees the Halifax Gibbet Law as a practical application of the Anglo @-@ Saxon law of infangtheof . Royal assizes were held only twice a year in the area ; to bring a prosecution was " vastly expensive " , and the stolen goods were forfeited to the Crown , as they were considered to be the property of the accused . But the Halifax Gibbet Law allowed " the party injured , to have his goods restored to him again , with as little loss and damage , as can be contrived ; to the great encouragement of the honest and industrious , and as great terror to the wicked and evil doers . " 
 The Halifax Gibbet 's final victims were Abraham Wilkinson and Anthony Mitchell . Wilkinson had been found guilty of stealing 16 yards ( 15 m ) of russet @-@ coloured kersey cloth , 9 yards of which , found in his possession , was valued at " 9 shillings at the least " , and Mitchell of stealing and selling two horses , one valued at 9 shillings and the other at 48 shillings . The pair were found guilty and executed on the same day , 30 April 1650 . Writing in 1834 John William Parker , publisher of The Saturday Magazine , suggested that the gibbet might have remained in use for longer in Halifax had the bailiff not been warned that if he used it again he would be " called to public account for it " . Midgley comments that the final executions " were by some persons in that age , judged to be too severe ; thence came it to pass , that the gibbet , and the customary law , for the forest of Hardwick , got its suspension " . 
 Oliver Cromwell finally ended the exercise of Halifax Gibbet Law . To the Puritans it was " part of ancient ritual to be jettisoned along with all the old feasts and celebrations of the medieval world and the Church of Rome " . Moreover , it ran counter to the Puritan objection to imposing the death penalty for petty theft ; felons were subsequently sent to the Assizes in York for trial . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 It is uncertain when the Halifax Gibbet was first introduced , but it may not have been until some time in the 16th century ; before then decapitation would have been carried out by an executioner using an axe or a sword . The device , which seems to have been unique in England , consisted of two 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) tall parallel beams of wood joined at the top by a transverse beam . Running in grooves within the beams was a square wooden block 4 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 37 m ) in length , into the bottom of which was fitted an axe head weighing 7 pounds 12 ounces ( 3 @.@ 5 kg ) . The whole structure sat on a platform of stone blocks , 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) square and 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) high , which was ascended by a flight of steps . A rope attached to the top of the wooden block holding the axe ran over a pulley at the top of the structure , allowing the block to be raised . The rope was then fastened by a pin to the structure 's stone base . 
 The gibbet could be operated by cutting the rope supporting the blade or by pulling out the pin that held the rope . If the offender was to be executed for stealing an animal , a cord was fastened to the pin and tied to either the stolen animal or one of the same species , which was then driven off , withdrawing the pin and allowing the blade to drop . 
 In an early contemporary account of 1586 Raphael Holinshed attests to the efficiency of the gibbet , and adds some detail about the participation of the onlookers : 
 In the nether end of the sliding block is an axe keyed or fastened with an iron into the wood , which being drawn up to the top of the frame is there fastened by a wooden pin ... unto the <unk> of which pin also there is a long rope fastened that cometh down among the people , so that when the offender hath made his confession , and hath laid his neck over the <unk> block , every man there present doth either take hold of the rope ( or <unk> forth his arm so near to the same as he can get , in token that he is willing to see true justice executed ) and pulling out the pin in this manner , the head block wherein the axe is fastened doth fall down with such violence , that if the neck of the transgressor were so big as that of a bull , it should be cut in sunder at a stroke , and roll from the body by an huge distance . 
 An article in the September 1832 edition of The Imperial Magazine describes the victim 's final moments : 
 The persons who had found the verdict , and the attending clergymen , placed themselves on the scaffold with the prisoner . The fourth psalm was then played round the scaffold on the bagpipes , after which the minister prayed with the prisoner till he received the final stroke . 
 In Thomas <unk> 's novel Thomas of Reading ( 1600 ) the invention of the Halifax Gibbet is attributed to a friar , who proposed the device as a solution to the difficulty of finding local residents willing to act as hangmen . 
 Although the guillotine as a method of beheading is most closely associated in the popular imagination with late 18th @-@ century Revolutionary France , several other decapitation devices had long been in use throughout Europe . It is uncertain whether Dr Guillotin was familiar with the Halifax Gibbet , but its design was reported to have been copied by James Douglas , 4th Earl of Morton , in the production of a similar device that became known as the Scottish Maiden , now on display in the National Museum of Scotland . The Maiden was rather shorter than the Halifax Gibbet , standing only 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) tall , the same height as the French guillotine . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 The Halifax Gibbet was dismantled after the last executions in 1650 , and the site was neglected until the platform on which the gibbet had been mounted was rediscovered in about 1840 . A full @-@ size non @-@ working replica was erected on the original stone base in August 1974 ; it includes a blade made from a casting of the original , which as of 2011 is displayed in the Bankfield Museum in <unk> on the outskirts of Halifax . A commemorative plaque nearby lists the names of the 52 people known to have been executed by the device . 
 = Still Reigning = 
 Still Reigning is a live performance DVD by the thrash metal band Slayer , released in 2004 through American Recordings . Filmed at the Augusta Civic Center on July 11 , 2004 , the performance showcases Slayer 's 1986 album , Reign in Blood , played in its entirety with the four original band members on a set resembling their 1986 " Reign in Pain " tour . Still Reigning was voted " best live DVD " by the readers of Revolver magazine , and received gold certification in 2005 . 
 The DVD is notable for the finale , which features Slayer covered in stage blood while performing the song " Raining Blood " , leading to a demanding mixing process plagued by production and technical difficulties . The DVD 's producer Kevin Shirley spent hours replacing cymbal and drum hits one @-@ by @-@ one . He publicly aired financial disagreements he had with the band and criticized the quality of the recording , and as a result was allegedly subjected to threats and insults from people associated with the band . 
 = = Conception = = 
 Reign in Blood was released in 1986 and was Slayer 's first album to enter the Billboard 200 — at 94 — and their first to be awarded gold certification . Music critics praised the album ; Kerrang ! described it as the " heaviest album of all time " , while Steve Huey of Allmusic wrote that the album was a " stone @-@ cold classic " . The positive reception led to the band 's European agent John Jackson , to suggest that the band play Reign in Blood in its entirety on the Jägermeister tour of 2003 and 2004 , under the tour banner " Still Reigning " . Original drummer Dave Lombardo , who recorded drums on the album , re @-@ joined the band in 2001 , after departing in 1991 . This influenced the band 's decision to play the album in its entirety , as they had the original members and all members regard the album as a high @-@ point in their career . The band was going to enter the recording studio to record their next album ( Christ Illusion ) . However , the band 's producer Rick Rubin insisted the band not enter the recording studio due to problems between himself and the band 's record label , American Recordings . The band 's manager suggested they record a performance of one of the Jägermeister shows and release it on a DVD — the band agreed . 
 The final track of the DVD , " Raining Blood " , culminates with the band drenched by stage blood . Guitarist Jeff Hanneman came up with the idea of the blood two years after Reign in Blood 's release , but the band lacked the funding to do so . The beginning of the film Blade ( released in 1998 ) features a " bloodbath " with vampires dancing in a club with blood coming from the roof via a sprinkler system . The scene revived Jeff Hanneman and guitarist Kerry King 's interest , and since the band released a DVD the previous year — War at the Warfield — they decided to add something different for the new DVD — raining blood . King asserted that since Lombardo was not on the previous DVD , this one was going to be important . Due to the short length of the DVD , director Dean Karr chose an additional bonus six songs from the same show as he thought certain members excelled in the performances . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Still Reigning was recorded at the Augusta Civic Center in Augusta , Maine on July 11 , 2004 , prior to the 2004 Ozzfest . A ten @-@ man camera crew under the direction of Dean Karr was on hand to document the show , backstage action , and exclusive interviews inside the band 's tour bus . The interview , " Slayer : In their own words " , is a seventeen @-@ minute piece which features the band talking about their early years , influences , writing lyrics , Lombardo 's return , and the band 's eventual retirement . At one point Lombardo rejected the possibility of a future " good @-@ bye tour " for Slayer , and states if the band realize they have " lost a step " they will " call it a day " . 
 The stage was converted to resemble the band 's 1986 " Reign in Pain " tour , which featured the Slayer eagle and inverted crosses as part of the lighting rig . The stage was modified to absorb the " blood " and have it recirculate back down upon the band , which allowed for easier clean @-@ up and lowered the chance of injury by slipping . The DVD was recorded in 1 @.@ 85 : 1 video , which caused macro blocking errors such as aliasing and a murky stage when fully lit , and the audio featured English Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 and 2 @.@ 0 stereo , with no subtitles . 
 Kevin Shirley , who has worked with the bands Iron Maiden and Dream Theater , produced the DVD . He issued a statement describing the demanding mixing process which took place at his New York Studio : " It 's OK — some places it rocks hard , and others are a bit sloppy , but I 'm sure they won 't use the whole concert . It was tough to mix . " The following day Shirley apologized for his " unprofessional comment " towards the band , and altered his post on his personal website to read : " The rest of the week I finished mixing a live Slayer set for a DVD , in stereo and surround , and it 's great — it rocks hard , but it was tough to mix . " 
 On September 30 , 2006 , Shirley issued a further statement claiming he had not been paid for his work , and had received threats and insults from people associated with the band : " I 've just mixed a really wonderful band with one of the worst sounding recordings ever . It 's kinda disgraceful that they won 't spend anything on a decent recording ! I won 't say who , because last time I commented on a sloppy recording ( on this page ) , they refused to pay me and I got all manner of threats and insults from people associated with the band , so I 'd best be quiet ! " 
 The stage blood caused technical difficulties as it soaked the microphone , guitars , and cymbals , which according to Shirley sounded like " coffee mugs being tapped with a spoon " . A review of the DVD observed that " If it wasn 't for guitarist Jeff Hanneman being out of position and missing all of the blood , the guitar might have sounded pretty bad . " Hanneman missed the initial downpour due to a technical problem with his guitar , and was deluged by a light shower when coming back on @-@ stage . Shirley replaced thousands of cymbal and drum hits with those used on previous recordings ; the process took several days to complete . After recording the DVD , the band used a sprinkler system with diluted water rather than a bucket with blood that was like tar when recording the DVD . King later remarked , " My guitar didn ’ t like it , that was the last time I played it , " and he donated it to the Hard Rock Cafe after the show . Vocalist Tom Araya felt the same and admitted ; " It was messy . I couldn 't play because the initial dump at the beginning of the song got all over me . I couldn 't hold my pick . I was slapping my bass trying to get sound out of it . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Still Reigning debuted on the Billboard DVD chart at number seven — selling 9 @,@ 813 copies . It became the band 's second DVD to receive gold certification on July 20 , 2005 , after War at the Warfield , which received gold certification a year earlier for sales in excess of 50 @,@ 000 . The readers of Revolver magazine voted it " best live DVD " in 2005 , making it the second consecutive year the band topped the category . 
 Slayer received a positive reception when performing at the Augusta Civic Center . On finishing half the set list , the band briefly left the stage and returned to play the 28 @-@ minute album , Reign in Blood as an encore . On the final song , " Raining Blood " the lights were turned off and Slayer members were deluged by two buckets of stage blood . According to King , the crowd went quiet for a few seconds until they realized the blood was part of the show . King thought Araya looked like a psychotic mass murderer , which contributed to the crowd 's reaction . Following the two large drops , stage blood mixed with water was used so it looked like it was " raining blood " . 
 Andy Patrizio of IGN awarded the DVD six out of ten commenting , " Tom Araya lost his piercing shriek that opens ' Angel of Death ' and the end of ' <unk> ' " , praising Lombardo 's return by saying the drummer " ... hasn 't lost a step at all . With barely any breathing time between songs , the underground drum legend shows that an impending 40th birthday ( next month ) isn 't going to slow him down . " Patrizio stated the production was not of the highest caliber , as the rapid " MTV @-@ style " cuts were distracting , as was the switch from black and white to color shots . Patrizio ended the review with the comment , " This is what you get for letting Uwe Boll direct your music video " , Boll being a heavily criticized film director . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = St Michael 's Church , Llanfihangel Ysgeifiog = 
 St Michael 's Church , Llanfihangel Ysgeifiog , is a former parish church in Anglesey , Wales , which is now closed and in ruins . The structure dates from the 15th century and a chapel was added to the north side in the 17th century . A replacement church ( St Michael 's , Gaerwen ) was built elsewhere in the parish in 1847 , and the old church was closed , partly demolished and abandoned . Some restoration work has taken place in the 21st century and some occasional services have been held . 
 It is a Grade II listed building , a national designation given to " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " , in particular because it is " an important survival , retaining unrestored original late medieval features . " 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Michael 's Church is set in a churchyard in the countryside of Anglesey , north Wales , about 1 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 87 mi ) from the village of Gaerwen . A footpath leads to the church from the nearest road , 200 metres ( 660 ft ) away . The area takes its name , in part , from the church : the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and " ‑ <unk> " is a modified form of Michael ( Welsh : Mihangel ) , the saint to whom the church is dedicated . 
 The present structure dates from the 15th century and was extended in 1638 when a local family added a chapel on the north side . A decision was taken in the 1840s to build a new church on a different site within the parish ; the centre of population for the area had shifted because of coal mining in Pentre <unk> and the construction of the A5 road across Anglesey as part of Thomas Telford 's road from London to Holyhead . St Michael 's , Gaerwen , opened in 1847 . The old church then closed . By 1865 , when the Welsh politician and church historian Sir Stephen Glynne visited , only the chancel and north chapel remained , and a new wall had been built at the west end of the chancel where it once joined the nave . Some restoration work has taken place in the 21st century , assisted by funding from the Welsh Government and Cadw ( the statutory body responsible for the built heritage of Wales ) , and services have occasionally been held . 
 By 1535 , the positions of rector of St Michael 's and vicar of St Ffinan 's Church were combined and held by the Dean of Bangor to increase the dean 's income . Other people associated with the church include Nicholas Owen ( appointed perpetual curate in 1790 ) , the priest and antiquarian John Jones ( better known as " <unk> o 'r Nant " ; curate 1809 – 15 ) , and Evan Lewis ( curate 1845 – 46 , and later Dean of Bangor ) . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 All that remains of the church is the chancel , which is 18 feet 6 inches by 14 feet 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 6 by 4 @.@ 4 m ) , and the north chapel which is 15 feet 6 inches by 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 7 by 4 @.@ 0 m ) ; the nave , south chapel and the roof have been demolished or removed . The walls are built from rubble masonry dressed with sandstone . The church is now entered through a doorway at the west end of the chancel ; the doorway reuses a 15th @-@ century pointed arch . The south wall still shows where there was formerly a chapel on that side . On the opposite wall , there is a window from the late 16th century with three lights ( sections of window separated by stonework ) ; the entrance to the north chapel has been reduced in width . The three @-@ light east window also dates from the late 16th century . An inscribed stone above the window records the date 1598 . 
 The north chapel has windows in the north and east wall in similar style to those in the chancel . There is an inscription above the north window recording the construction of the chapel in 1638 . The west wall of the chapel has a blocked round @-@ headed window , and there is a blocked @-@ up pointed @-@ arch doorway in the north wall . 
 The priest and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones visited St Michael 's in 1845 . At that time , the church was 68 by 16 feet ( 20 @.@ 7 by 4 @.@ 9 m ) internally ; he recorded the north chapel as measuring 12 feet 8 inches by 17 feet ( 3 @.@ 9 by 5 @.@ 2 m ) and the south chapel , which was separated from the main body of the church by five rotting wooden columns , as 40 by 15 feet ( 12 @.@ 2 by 4 @.@ 6 m ) . The main entrance was through a porch on the south side of the nave , and there was another door on the north side . A bench under the windows on the north side of the nave was inscribed " T. M. 1684 " . The southern chapel , he said , had similar windows to those in the north chapel . On the external wall above the east window , he noted a shield topped by a coronet , apparently that of a viscount , and the date 1638 . On a step by the altar he noted two gravestones that appeared to be those of priests , given that they had each been inscribed with a cross , and a third gravestone , similarly marked , was in use as the lintel above one of the doorways . A survey in 1937 by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire dated one of the gravestones by the altar to the 11th or 12th century . 
 The churchyard contains some chest tombs from the 18th and 19th centuries , made of slate . The Royal Commission 's survey also noted a fragment of a gravestone from between the 9th and 11th centuries that had been built into the bellcote , and two 18th @-@ century memorials within the church . The bell , church plate , and two benches bearing the inscription " T. M. 1684 " were moved to the new church . South east of the church is a Commonwealth war grave of a Marine from World War II . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from unauthorised alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II listed building – the lowest of the three grades of listing , designating " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " . It was given this status on 30 January 1968 , and has been listed because it consists of " the substantial remains of a 15th @-@ century church with 17th @-@ century additions . " Cadw , which is responsible for the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists , also notes that because many old churches on Anglesey were rebuilt in the 19th century but this one was not , " these remains constitute an important survival , retaining unrestored original late medieval features . " 
 Writing in 1833 , before the church was closed , the antiquarian Angharad Llwyd described St Michael 's as " a spacious and ancient structure . " She also noted the " ancient stained glass " in the east window , " of brilliant colours " . Visiting twelve years later , Harry Longueville Jones said that St Michael 's was " greatly dilapidated " but had been " one of the most interesting in the island " . He described the north doorway of the nave as having " singularly elegant though mutilated details " and the bellcote as being " of good design " . The state of the church , he wrote , was such that it was " almost unfit for the purposes of public worship . " 
 Sir Stephen Glynne noted on his visit in 1865 that the church was now abandoned and presenting " a wretched scene of decay " internally . He commented upon the " good mouldings and spandrels " of the doorway at the west end of the chancel , and also referred to the " debased character " of the north chapel . 
 A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey describes it as being in " a lonely spot " and says that it is " well worth a visit . " 
 = Invasion of Guadeloupe ( 1810 ) = 
 The Invasion of Guadeloupe was a British amphibious operation fought between 28 January and 6 February 1810 over control of the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe during the Napoleonic Wars . The island was the final remaining French colony in the Americas , following the systematic invasion and capture of the others during 1809 by British forces . During the Napoleonic Wars , the French colonies had provided protected harbours for French privateers and warships , which could prey on the numerous British trade routes in the Caribbean and then return to the colonies before British warships could react . In response , the British instituted a blockade of the islands , stationing ships off every port and seizing any vessel that tried to enter or leave . With trade and communication made dangerous by the British blockade squadrons , the economies and morale of the French colonies began to collapse , and in the summer of 1808 desperate messages were sent to France requesting aid . 
 Despite repeated efforts , the French Navy failed to reinforce and resupply the garrison , as their ships were intercepted and defeated either in European waters or in the Caribbean itself . The British had intercepted a number of these messages , and launched a series of successful invasions during 1809 , until Guadeloupe was the only French colony remaining . A British expeditionary force landed on 28 January 1810 , and found that much of the island 's militia garrison had deserted . Advancing from two landing beaches on opposite sides of the island , they were able to rapidly push inland . It was not until they reached <unk> – St. Louis Ridge outside the capital Basse @-@ Terre that the expeditionary force faced strong opposition , but in a battle lasting for most of 3 February , the French were defeated and driven back . The island 's commander , Jean Augustin Ernouf , began surrender negotiations the following day . 
 = = Background = = 
 The French West Indian colonies during the Napoleonic Wars were almost completely cut off from France due to the British naval strategy of close blockade : squadrons of British Royal Navy warships patrolled the coasts of both France itself and the West Indian islands under French control . This hindered communications , severely restricted trade and prevented the reinforcement of the French garrisons during the conflict . As a result , the colonies began to suffer food shortages , their economies stagnated and public and military morale began to severely erode . In desperation , the commanders of the main colonies , the Leeward Islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe , sent a series of messages to France during the summer of 1808 , entreating the French government to send food and military supplies . The French responded with a series of frigates and smaller vessels , sailing to the Caribbean independently or in small squadrons . Some of these ships reached their destinations , but the majority were captured by the Royal Navy blockades off France or the islands . Those few ships that did safely make port were trapped there , unable to make the return journey without risking defeat by the British ships waiting offshore . 
 The British had intercepted a number of the messages sent to France , and the decision was made to invade and capture the French West Indies before substantial reinforcements could arrive . During the winter of 1808 , ships and troops from across the Caribbean began gathering off Barbados under the command of Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane and Lieutenant General George Beckwith , with the intention of invading Martinique early in 1809 . A smaller force was sent to Cayenne , which was invaded and captured in early January 1809 . In late January the invasion of Martinique began , and despite resistance in the central highlands , the island fell to the invaders in 25 days . Cochrane then split his attention , sending a number of ships and men to aid the Spanish in the Siege of Santo Domingo while still maintaining a strong blockade force in the Leeward Islands . In April 1809 , a strong reinforcement squadron of three ship of the line and two frigates " en flute " with supplies arrived at the Îles des Saintes , south of Guadeloupe . There they were blockaded until 14 April , when a British force under Major @-@ General Frederick Maitland invaded and captured the islands . The French squadron managed to escape during the following night , and the three ship of the line went to the north with the British following . Behind them the two French frigates went for Basse @-@ Terre on the <unk> with their supplies and reinforcements . Later the three ship of the line split up and the Hautpoult was captured after three days close to the south coast of Puerto Rico while the other two escaped to France . The two French frigates were trapped in Basse @-@ Terre . In June , the frigates attempted to return to France . Only one of the frigates escaped the blockade squadron , although the escapee was also captured a month later in the North Atlantic . 
 Subsequent French attempts to supply their one remaining colony on Guadeloupe were minor , most of the brigs sent were seized without reaching the island . The only significant attempt , launched in November 1809 , achieved initial success in the destruction of the British frigate HMS Junon on 13 December , but ultimately failed when the two armed storeships , Loire and Seine were destroyed on 18 December in a battle with a British squadron off the southern coast of Guadeloupe . During the autumn and winter , British forces were collected from across the Caribbean at Fort Royal , Martinique , under Cochrane and Beckwith for the invasion of Guadeloupe . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Beckwith mustered 6 @,@ 700 men from a variety of garrisons and sources , his men belonging to the 3rd , 4th , 6th and 8th West India Regiments , the 1st Foot , 15th Foot , 19th Foot , 25th Foot , 63rd Foot , 90th Foot and the Royal York Rangers , as well as 300 garrison artillerymen and various militia forces . These troops were split into two divisions : the largest , 3 @,@ 700 men under Beckwith with subordinate command given to Major General Thomas Hislop , was to be deployed at Le <unk> on the island 's southern shore . The second division , 2 @,@ 450 men under Brigadier General George Harcourt , was initially ordered to wait on the Îles des Saintes before being deployed after the main attack to the rear of the French garrison . A small reserve under Brigadier General Charles Wale would follow the main assault to provide support if required . As the French had no significant naval resources on the island , the Royal Navy 's contribution was much smaller than that required for the Martinique invasion the year before . Cochrane attached ships of the line to both divisions , Beckwith sailing in Cochrane 's flagship HMS Pompee , accompanied by HMS Abercrombie with Commodore William Charles Fahie , while Harcourt sailed with Commodore Samuel James Ballard in HMS Sceptre . Ballard and Fahie were in command of the transports and smaller vessels that carried the invasion forces and bore responsibility for ensuring that the amphibious landings were successful as well as for any naval units that participated in the land campaign . 
 The French defenders of the island were weakened by years of isolation caused by the British blockade . Although the available French troops numbered between 3 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 000 , there was an epidemic on the island and a significant proportion of the garrison , principally formed by the <unk> Régiment , were unfit for duty . Apart from the capital , the rest of the island 's defences were manned by a militia formed from local inhabitants , among whom morale was low and desertion rates high . Military and food stores of all kinds were in short supply and the governor , General Jean Augustin Ernouf was unable to maintain garrisons around the island 's extensive perimeter . 
 = = Invasion = = 
 After a brief period of consolidation on Dominica , Cochrane and Beckwith sailed for Guadeloupe on 27 January 1810 , arriving off Le <unk> in the evening and landing the larger division at the village of Sainte @-@ Marie under the command of Hislop . The division split , with one half marching south towards Basse @-@ Terre and the other north . Neither met serious opposition , the militia forces deserting in large numbers and abandoning their fortifications as the British approached . Messages were sent by the approaching British ordering the surrender of towns and forts , and both forces made rapid progress over the following two days . On 30 January , Ernouf took up a position with his remaining garrison in the <unk> – St. Louis Ridge highlands that guarded the approaches to Basse @-@ Terre , Hislop forming his men in front of Ernouf 's position . Later in the day , Harcourt 's men came ashore to the north of Basse @-@ Terre , outflanking the strongest French positions at Trois @-@ Rivières and forcing their withdrawal to Basse @-@ Terre itself . 
 With his capital coming under bombardment from gun batteries set up by Royal Navy sailors organised into naval brigades , Ernouf marched to meet the British on the plain at <unk> on 3 February . Forming up , Ernouf attacked the British and initially drove them back , before superior numbers forced him to retire after he was outflanked by Wale 's force attacking from the north . General Wale was wounded in the attack , in which his men suffered 40 casualties . One eyewitness , an Irish sailor from HMS Alfred , claimed that Ernouf had laid a large land mine along his line of retreat and planned to detonate it as the British advanced but was prevented from doing so when Beckwith spotted the trap and refused to be drawn into it , although this story does not appear in other accounts . While Ernouf was retreating , Commodore Fahie seized the opportunity to attack the undefended town of Basse @-@ Terre , landing with a force of Royal Marines and capturing the town , cutting off Ernouf 's route of escape . Isolated and surrounded , the French general requested a truce at 08 : 00 on 4 February to bury the dead from the battle the day before . This was accepted , and on 5 February he formally surrendered . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 British casualties in the operation numbered 52 killed and 250 wounded , with seven men missing . French losses were heavier , in the region of 500 – 600 casualties throughout the campaign . 3 @,@ 500 soldiers were captured with their officers , cannon and the French Imperial Eagle of the <unk> Régiment . As Napoleon had rescinded the prisoner exchange system previously in place , all of the prisoners would remain in British hands until 1814 . The captured eagle was sent to Britain , the first French eagle captured during the Napoleonic Wars . By 22 February , the nearby Dutch colonies of Sint Maarten , Sint Eustatius and Saba were all persuaded to surrender without a fight by ships sent from Cochrane 's fleet . The British officers were rewarded for their successes : Beckwith remained in the Caribbean until he retired in 1814 from ill @-@ health , while Cochrane and Hislop were promoted . All of the expedition 's officers and men were voted the thanks of both Houses of Parliament and ten years later the regiments and ships that participated ( or their descendents ) were awarded the battle honour Guadaloupe 1810 . Four decades after the operation , it was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal and the Military General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . 
 Guadeloupe was taken over as a British colony for the remainder of the war , only restored to France after Napoleon 's abdication in 1814 . The following year , during the Hundred Days , Guadeloupe 's governor Charles @-@ Alexandre Durand Linois declared for the Emperor once more , requiring another British invasion , although of much smaller size and duration , to restore the monarchy . The fall of Guadeloupe marked the end of the final French territory in the Caribbean ; the entire region was now in the hands of either the British or the Spanish , except the independent state of Haiti . The lack of French privateers and warships sparked a boom in trade operations , and the economies of the Caribbean islands experienced a resurgence . It also made a significant reduction in French international trade and had a corresponding effect on the French economy . Finally , the capture of the last French colony struck a decisive blow to the Atlantic slave trade , which had been made illegal by the British government in 1807 and was actively persecuted by the Royal Navy . Without French colonies in the Caribbean , there was no ready market for slaves in the region and the slave trade consequently dried up . 
 = Pride & Joy ( comics ) = 
 " Pride & Joy " is a six @-@ issue story arc from the comic book series Runaways ( vol . 1 ) , published in issues one through six in 2003 by Marvel Comics ' imprint Tsunami , which was created to attract young readers . It was written by Brian K. Vaughan and illustrated by Adrian Alphona . While it was initially intended to be a six @-@ part miniseries , the popularity of " Pride & Joy " and new ideas from writer Vaughan allowed Runaways to grow into a regular monthly Marvel title . " Pride & Joy " has subsequently won several comics awards , including the 2006 Harvey Award for Best Continuing or Limited Series . 
 Although the Tsunami imprint was unsuccessful , " Pride & Joy " ( and the series Runaways that continued it ) was one of the very few Tsunami series to do well in sales and to continue being published . The story arc has been critically acclaimed for its simple story set in the typically complex Marvel Universe . Vaughan is known for avoiding the clichés of the superhero genre , locating the group in Los Angeles rather than New York City , where most Marvel Comics superhero titles are set . In order to create an everyday setting and tone , Vaughan included various references to current popular culture , including television series , films , events and celebrities . 
 The story arc 's primary purpose was to introduce the main characters , six children who discover their parents are evil after seeing them murder a girl in a sacrificial ceremony . It centers upon the children 's relationships with their parents as the children learn that they themselves have inherited their parents ' powers . Once The Pride realizes their offspring have disappeared , they begin to use their considerable influence to track down their sons and daughters . " Pride & Joy " sets up the main concept of the series , which involves children versus their parents . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Pride & Joy " was launched in 2003 as a part of Marvel 's Tsunami imprint , the goal of which was to attract new readers , particularly young readers and the manga audience . Marvel editorial staff agreed to it immediately , prompting Wizard Magazine to name the series as " one of the best original concept from Marvel in thirty years . " The imprint was unsuccessful , and " Pride & Joy " ( and the series Runaways that continued it ) was one of the very few series from that imprint to continue being published and to do well in sales . Writer Brian K. Vaughan has claimed that he had only planned to create " Pride & Joy " to be set for six months ( six issues ) , but because of the popularity of the series and new ideas from Vaughan , Marvel decided to continue issuing it on for a monthly basis . The character of Catherine Wilder was originally designed to look like singer @-@ songwriter Sade . 
 Several of the characters went through subsequent changes as well . In Brian K. Vaughan 's original pitch for the series , Karolina Dean was originally called Leslie , a name which would eventually be given to the character 's mother . Her parents were originally real estate agents , as opposed to famous actors . Molly was one of the few Runaways to actually keep the name she had in Brian K. Vaughan 's original proposal ; she is named after Vaughan 's younger sister , Molly Hayes Vaughan , and was supposed to be thirteen years old instead of eleven . However , in the original pitch for the series , Molly 's parents were Hollywood actors ; this would eventually become the cover story of Karolina 's parents . Also , Molly 's sibling @-@ like relationship with Chase was originally supposed to be with Gert . Nico Minoru was called Rachel Messina . Her parents were still magicians , but posed as wealthy antique dealers ; this cover story was ultimately used for Gert 's parents . Nico 's source of power was not originally going to be her mother 's Staff , but Robert Minoru 's spellbook . Chase was originally called John , and Gert was called Gertie . Originally , Gert was meant to give Molly the name " Bruiser . " 
 = = Story = = 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 In the first issue of " Pride & Joy , " a group of youths unite to fight against their parents , who they then learn are known as " The Pride , " a band of villains . At the end of the issue , the youths witness the murder of a girl at the hands of their parents . In the middle of the night , they run away from home and attempt to bring their parents to justice . In the process , the youths realize that they are all inheriting special abilities : Nico Minoru learns she is a witch ; Karolina Dean finds out she is an alien ; Chase Stein steals his father 's futuristic gauntlets , " the <unk> " ; Gertrude <unk> discovers that she has a telepathic link to a dinosaur hidden by her time @-@ traveling parents ; Molly Hayes discovers she is a mutant with super strength ; and Alex Wilder , though having no supernatural powers , possesses a prodigal intellect and steals the mystical text that contains The Pride 's secrets , becoming the leader of the group . Using the book that contains The Pride 's secrets , the youth agree amongst themselves to make up for their parent 's sins by fighting crime . 
 Once The Pride realizes its offspring have disappeared , it begins to use its considerable influence to track down their sons and daughters . " Pride & Joy " sets Runaways for its main concept of the series , which involves children versus their parents . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 When Vaughan first pitched " Pride & Joy " to Marvel , they immediately accepted it and set Runaways in the Marvel Universe , the main string of story lines that ties Marvel 's canonical series . However , unlike most series ( which are often set in New York City ) , Runaways is set in Los Angeles , an unexplored area of the Marvel Universe . This , in turn , marked a significance for the story arc at the time ; being a new series , " Pride & Joy " had been expected to take place in New York City . Matt Fraction , a prominent writer for various Marvel Comics series quotes , " It was sort of great to see in Runaways that California was such a blank slate . It was refreshing to watch Brian create this sort of whole cloth . " Vaughan 's decision prompted Fraction to create a new series to take place in Los Angeles as well . Several notable landmarks in this story arc include Malibu , the Griffith Observatory , the James Dean memorial and Bronson Canyon in Griffith Park . In an interview with Comic Book Resources , Brian K. Vaughan quoted , " I imagine that <unk> in the Marvel Universe think of super heroes and villains the way that New Yorkers think of Hollywood celebrities . We see them on TV every day , so we know that they exist , but they still seem distant and unreal . " 
 In order to create familiarity with a common @-@ day setting and tone , Vaughan made this story arc include various references to current popular culture , including television series , films , and celebrities such as CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , the Matrix trilogy , and Dr. Phil . Vaughan even makes references to real @-@ world events , such as the Menendez brothers ' shootings , the Beltway sniper attacks , Saddam Hussein 's hiding and the O. J. Simpson murder case . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Unlike most authors , Vaughan is known for avoiding the clichés of the superhero genre , locating the group in Los Angeles and not the common New York . " Pride & Joy " struck interest mainly because it does away with the concept of superhero behaviour , such as aliases , uniforms , and team names . At the very end of the story arc , the Runaways ( minus Alex ) adopt code names , but later drop them . " Pride & Joy " starts off with four females and two males , which is uncommon in the Marvel Universe ( most teams have more males ) . Furthermore , the children never refer to themselves as " the Runaways " ; the group remains unnamed . Despite Vaughan 's efforts to break down the superhero clichés within Runaways , Marvel 's handbooks and website still refer to the characters by their codenames . Also , Vaughan doesn 't focus on an actual genre or tone ; despite humour , horror and fantasy are common themes and genres , Vaughan mentions that while it may not be a " mature readers book , " his style of writing is also dark , challenging and unpredictable . 
 Penciller Adrian Alphona 's style of drawing consists of crisp lines and monotone shading , and as a result , all of the characters are very clear and distinct . Shannon Appelcline of RPGnet Reviews praised Alphona 's style of drawing , calling it " attractive and evocative . " She did , however , criticize how Alphona sometimes " muddles action sequences a little bit by not drawing important actions with appropriate importance . " J. Bowers of <unk> praised the style Brian K. Vaughan brought to this story arc , comparing it to fellow Marvel Comics series Generation X. Because of this , he gave this story arc 9 out of 10 . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 When the story arc was first introduced , it was frequently praised for its large cast ; six children , each with two parents , and several auxiliary characters . Dave Wallace of Comics Bulletin praised author Vaughan 's efforts on making sure the main characters ' dynamic works well enough that " the occasional stereotypical elements do not detract from the characters too much . " 
 Alex Wilder , a child prodigy at strategic thinking and planning , leads the team . He is the son of mob bosses . 
 Karolina Dean discovers her alien heritage when she removes the bracelet which nullified her powers . She is the daughter of alien invaders . 
 Nico Minoru learns she is a witch after her mother jams her mystic Staff of One into her chest , causing her body to absorb it . She is the daughter of dark wizards . 
 Gertrude <unk> discovers her telepathic link to Old Lace , a dinosaur . She is the daughter of time travelers . 
 Chase Stein steals his father 's flame @-@ generating / manipulating gauntlets called " the <unk> . " He is the son of mad scientists . 
 Molly Hayes , the youngest , is a mutant whose powers include super @-@ strength and invulnerability . She is the daughter of telepathic mutants . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dave Brennan of " Shaking Through " has called the story arc " spectacular , " and said that even though it is aimed at a younger crowd , it is still a " lighthearted and engaging story that any fan of superhero comics can enjoy . " He called " Pride & Joy " a promising start for a comic series . The pilot issue of " Pride & Joy " received an A- on " The X @-@ Axis . " On many cases , Alphona is also often praised for his style of drawing . 
 Shannon Appelcline of RPGnet Reviews praised author Brian K. Vaughan for his work on the characters ' characterization . With six teens and twelve parents , she cited Vaughan as a strong storyteller for his work on characterizing eighteen crucial characters . She gave the story arc a 4 out of 5 , citing that the plotting is above average . She ended her review by citing that " Pride & Joy " was a superb example of the super @-@ hero genre at its best . The conclusion to the story arc received generally positive reviews . The issue sold an estimated 20 , 035 copies , a significant improvement from the previous issue . Paul McCoy of Comics Bulletin cited it as " another solid issue , filled with spectacular artwork and very nice character oriented writing . " He also went as far as to credit artist Alphona and inker David Yeung 's layouts . McCoy praised the detail in the character 's designs , from Chases ' gloves to the costuming of the Pride . 
 Dave Wallace of Comics Bulletin , however , cited that " Pride & Joy " felt " pedestrian and lacking in depth . " Wallace also called colouring of the early issues flat and static , which made it fairly uninteresting . Despite Molly often being considered a fan @-@ favorite character , the character is nevertheless criticized for being portrayed " far younger than a child who is about to hit puberty , " and is compared to acting more along the lines of a six- or seven @-@ year @-@ old as opposed to eleven . Similarly , the character is always considered being " naive . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Runaways , the series that grew out of " Pride & Joy , " has been nominated for and has won several awards . 
 In 2006 , the series won a Top Library Award . 
 In 2006 , series creator Brian K. Vaughan won an Eisner Award , which included his work for Runaways . 
 In 2006 , the series was nominated for a Shuster Award . 
 In 2006 , the series won the Harvey Award for Best Continuing or Limited Series . 
 In 2007 , this particular story arc 's digest was nominated for the prestigious Georgia Peach Award . 
 Runaways ' hardcover version listed on the 2006 American Library Association 's YALSA Top Ten Books for Young Adults ; it was the only graphic novel to make the list . 
 = = In other media = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 As of May 2008 , a film version of the comic is in the scripting stage , with Brian K. Vaughan writing and Kevin Feige , Marvel Studios President of Production , producing . Feige has said that while it may not be a precise story line of any of his comics , it will be similar to the tone or origins of its initial run . 
 = Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome = 
 Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome ( BHD ) , also Hornstein – Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome , Hornstein – Knickenberg syndrome , and fibrofolliculomas with trichodiscomas and acrochordons is a human autosomal dominant genetic disorder that can cause susceptibility to kidney cancer , renal and pulmonary cysts , and noncancerous tumors of the hair follicles , called fibrofolliculomas . The symptoms seen in each family are unique , and can include any combination of the three symptoms . <unk> are the most common manifestation , found on the face and upper trunk in over 80 % of people with BHD over the age of 40 . Pulmonary cysts are equally common ( 84 % ) , but only 24 % of people with BHD eventually experience a collapsed lung ( spontaneous pneumothorax ) . Kidney tumors , both cancerous and benign , occur in 14 – 34 % of people with BHD ; the associated kidney cancers are often rare hybrid tumors . 
 Any of these conditions that occurs in a family can indicate a diagnosis of Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome , though it is only confirmed by a genetic test for a mutation in the FLCN gene , which codes for the protein folliculin . Though its function is not fully understood , it appears to be a tumor suppressor gene that restricts cell growth and division . Versions of FLCN have been found in other animals , including fruit flies , German shepherds , rats , and mice . The disease was discovered in 1977 , but the connection with FLCN was not elucidated until 2002 , after kidney cancer , collapsed lungs , and pulmonary cysts were all definitively connected to BHD . 
 Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome can manifest similarly to other diseases , which must be ruled out when making a diagnosis . These include tuberous sclerosis , which causes skin lesions similar to fibrofolliculomas , and Von Hippel @-@ Lindau disease , which causes hereditary kidney cancers . Once diagnosed , people with BHD are treated preventatively , with monitoring of kidneys and lungs using medical imaging . <unk> can be removed surgically and pneumothorax and kidney cancer are treated according to the normal standard of care . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 = = = Skin = = = 
 Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome affects the skin and increases the risk of tumors in the kidneys and lungs . The condition is characterized by multiple noncancerous dome @-@ shaped tumors of the hair follicles ( fibrofolliculomas ) , particularly on the face , neck , and — more rarely — the upper chest . The fibrofolliculomas are generally described as having an opaque white color or a yellowish tone and have a waxy , smooth texture . The tumors are always found on and around the nose and on and behind the outer ear . Typically , they first appear in a person 's 20s or 30s , and are found in more than 80 % of people with the syndrome above the age of 40 . The tumors become larger and more numerous over time . Tumors differ between individuals : they may appear merged in plaques , look similar to a comedo with a plug of keratin , or include epidermoid cysts . A large number of tumors on the face can be associated with <unk> ( abnormally elevated sebum production ) . The presence of fibrofolliculomas on a person 's face can cause significant psychological distress . 
 Other tumors can include trichodiscomas ( tumors of the hair disc , which may be identical to fibrofolliculomas ) , angiofibromas , and <unk> <unk> . However , angiofibromas are more common in tuberous sclerosis . Along with the tumors , other skin conditions are seen in people with Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome . Approximately 40 % of people or families with the disease have papules in their mouth , which can be located on the cheeks ( buccal mucosa ) , tongue , gums , or lips . Either white or mucosa @-@ colored , they are discrete , small , and soft and consist of fibrous tissue covered in thickened epithelium . <unk> of the skin are also found in some families . Many people with BHD have skin lesions that appear to be acrochordons ( skin tags ) , but may instead be fibrofolliculomas . These lesions are usually found in the armpit , on the eyelids , and in folds of skin . Not all individuals develop the facial tumors ; some families with the mutation that causes BHD develop only kidney tumors or spontaneous pneumothorax . 
 = = = Kidneys = = = 
 People over 20 years of age with Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome have an increased risk of developing slow @-@ growing kidney tumors ( chromophobe renal carcinoma and renal oncocytoma , respectively ) , kidney cysts , and possibly tumors in other organs and tissues . These tumors often occur in both kidneys and in multiple locations in each kidney . The average number of kidney tumors found in a person with BHD is 5 @.@ 3 , though up to 28 tumors have been found . Hybrid oncocytoma / chromophobe carcinoma , found in 50 % of cases , is the most commonly found cancer , followed by chromophobe renal carcinoma , clear cell renal carcinoma , renal oncocytoma , and papillary renal cell carcinoma . People over 40 years old and men are more likely to develop kidney tumors , which are diagnosed at a median age of 48 . Kidney cancer associated with BHD have been diagnosed in people at ages as young as 20 . 
 In general , people with Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome are at roughly seven times the risk of kidney cancer compared to the unaffected population . Estimates of the incidence among people with the disease range from 14 % – 34 % . Rarely , it is associated with clear cell renal cell carcinoma and papillary renal cell carcinoma . If it develops in someone with BHD , renal cell carcinoma occurs later in life and has a poor prognosis . Though the types of tumor typically associated with BHD are considered less aggressive , cases of advanced or metastatic kidney cancer have been observed in people with the syndrome . Both benign and cancerous tumors can reduce kidney function over time as they grow larger . 
 = = = Lungs = = = 
 Along with fibrofolliculomas and kidney tumors , affected individuals frequently develop cysts ( blebs or bullae ) in the <unk> lung base or <unk> space that may rupture and cause an abnormal collection of air in the chest cavity ( pneumothorax ) , which could result in the collapse of a lung . The cysts do not cause other symptoms and lung function is usually normal . More than 83 % of people with Birt – Hogg – Dubé have cysts , however , the syndrome does not cause conditions like progressive chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) or generalized respiratory failure , though it does cause emphysema . Spontaneous , sometimes recurrent , pneumothorax occurs far more often and at a younger age with Birt – Hogg – Dubé than in the unaffected population . Approximately 24 % of people with the disease suffer at least one spontaneous pneumothorax , 30 times the occurrence in unaffected people . Though pneumothorax caused by Birt – Hogg – Dubé often occurs in middle age , at a median age of 38 , 17 % of affected people have a spontaneous pneumothorax before turning 40 . Pneumothoraces have been seen in people as young as 7 and 16 years of age . Some families have a form of BHD that only affects the lungs . 
 = = = Other organs = = = 
 Thyroid nodules have been associated with the Birt – Hogg – Dubé phenotype , present in 65 % of individuals and 90 % of families with the syndrome . However , a connection between BHD and thyroid cancer has not been substantiated . Other conditions have been reported to be associated but may not be caused by the mutation in FLCN or may not be related at all . These include <unk> goiter , medullary thyroid carcinoma , parotid oncocytoma , colonic polyposis , connective tissue nevus , <unk> , <unk> , parathyroid adenomas , flecked <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , angiofibromas of the face , <unk> , cutaneous focal <unk> , cutaneous <unk> , breast cancer , tonsillar cancer , colorectal cancer , sarcoma of the leg , lung cancer , melanoma , <unk> <unk> , basal cell carcinoma , cutaneous <unk> , and squamous cell carcinoma . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 An association with the folliculin ( FLCN ) gene was first reported in 2002 . This 14 @-@ exon gene is located on the short arm of chromosome 17 ( <unk> ) and has a cytosine @-@ rich region in exon 11 particularly susceptible to mutation . The most common mutation in this region is the insertion or deletion of a cytosine residue , found in 53 % of Birt – Hogg – Dubé families . There is no significant difference in the symptoms experienced by families with an insertion at that location compared to those who have a deletion . However , mutations in FLCN associated with Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome are heterogeneous , and are often nonsense mutations or frameshift mutations that cause early truncation of the protein product at the carboxy @-@ terminus . Very rarely , missense mutations are observed . Mutations are often passed from one generation to the next in an autosomal dominant fashion but can occur as a new mutation in an individual with no prior family history ( a de novo mutation ) . The children of an affected parent each have a 50 % chance of having the disease . Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome has very high penetrance . A correlation between different FLCN genotypes and phenotypes has not been discovered . 
 = = = Function = = = 
 FLCN creates a protein called folliculin that has two isoforms . It appears to act as a tumor suppressor and is expressed strongly in the skin , distal <unk> , and type I <unk> . It has also been found in the parotid gland , brain , breast , pancreas , prostate , and ovaries . Tumor suppressors normally prevent cells from growing and dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way . Mutations in the FLCN gene may interfere with the ability of folliculin to restrain cell growth and division , leading to the formation of noncancerous and cancerous tumors . Recent studies suggest that folliculin accomplishes this function through its involvement with cellular metabolism , possibly through modulation of the mTOR ( mammalian target of rapamycin ) pathway and / or oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria . <unk> interacts with <unk> and <unk> ( FLCN @-@ interacting protein ) to form a complex with AMP @-@ activated protein kinase . <unk> 's participation in the mTOR pathway may explain the similarity in phenotype between BHD syndrome , Cowden syndrome , tuberous sclerosis , and <unk> @-@ <unk> syndrome . 
 Most of the cancer @-@ causing mutations cause the protein to be truncated at the carboxy @-@ terminus . The C @-@ terminal end of folliculin has shown to be the domain through which it interacts with <unk> , and thereby possibly the mTOR pathway . FLCN is highly conserved in vertebrates — it is very similar between many vertebrate species . The 508th amino acid , normally lysine , is affected by a missense mutation in some people with Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome . The lysine at this position is found to be conserved between invertebrate and vertebrate orthologs of folliculin , indicating that it is important to the protein 's function . 
 People with Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome are born with one mutated copy of the FLCN gene in each cell . <unk> — only having one functional copy of the FLCN gene — is enough to cause the fibrofolliculomas and pulmonary cysts , however , one copy of the gene is enough to keep kidney cells in check . During their lifetime , random mutations might inactivate the normal copy of the gene in a subset of cells . When this occurs , the result is that these cells have no functional copies of the FLCN gene , allowing the cells grow out of control . This loss of heterozygosity is a common mechanism in cancer , and it is frequently detected in the renal cancers associated with BHD . The molecular genetic defects in renal tumors of people with BHD are different from two other similar kidney tumors , chromophobe renal cell carcinoma and renal oncocytoma . BHD @-@ associated tumorigenesis differs between the kidney , where loss of FLCN heterozygosity is responsible for cancers , and the skin , where FLCN is strongly expressed in heterozygotes . FLCN has been found to be overexpressed in <unk> tissue and to have very low levels of expression in affected kidneys . Furthermore , the mTOR pathway is shown to be activated in tumor tissue from both humans and mice . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 BHD can be suggested by clinical findings but is definitively diagnosed by molecular genetic testing to detect mutations in the FLCN gene . The classical clinical triad includes benign growths of the hair follicles ; pulmonary cysts and spontaneous pneumothorax ; and bilateral , multifocal renal tumors . 
 = = = Clinical triad = = = 
 The cutaneous manifestations of Birt – Hogg – Dubé were originally described as fibrofolliculomas ( abnormal growths of a hair follicle ) , trichodiscomas ( <unk> lesions with a hair follicle at the periphery , often found on the face ) , and acrochordons ( skin tags ) . <unk> manifestations are confirmed by histology . Most individuals ( 89 % ) with BHD are found to have multiple cysts in both lungs , and 24 % have had one or more episodes of pneumothorax . The cysts can be detected by chest CT scan . Renal tumors can manifest as multiple types of renal cell carcinoma , but certain pathological subtypes ( including chromophobe , oncocytoma , and <unk> hybrid tumors ) are more commonly seen . Although the original syndrome was discovered on the basis of cutaneous findings , it is now recognized that individuals with Birt – Hogg – Dubé may only manifest the pulmonary and / or renal findings , without any skin lesions . Though these signs indicate BHD , it is only confirmed with a genetic test for FLCN mutations . 
 = = = Genetic testing = = = 
 FLCN mutations are detected by sequencing in 88 % of <unk> with Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome . This means that some people with the clinical diagnosis have mutations that are not detectable by current technology , or that mutations in another currently unknown gene could be responsible for a minority of cases . In addition , <unk> and deletions in <unk> regions are also tested . Genetic testing can be useful to confirm the clinical diagnosis of and to provide a means of determining other at @-@ risk individuals in a family even if they have not yet developed BHD symptoms . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 Birt – Hogg – Dubé can be difficult to diagnose from symptoms alone , because hereditary renal cancers , pneumothorax , and cutaneous tumors occur with other syndromes . Hereditary bilateral , multifocal kidney tumors similar to those seen in <unk> occur with von Hippel – Lindau disease ( clear cell renal cell carcinoma ) , hereditary papillary renal cancer ( papillary renal cell carcinoma ) , and hereditary <unk> and renal cell cancer syndrome . They are differentiated with examination of the tumors ' histology . 
 Hereditary recurrent pneumothorax or pulmonary cysts are associated with Marfan syndrome , Ehlers – Danlos syndrome , Tuberous Sclerosis Complex ( TSC ) , <unk> @-@ antitrypsin deficiency , and cystic fibrosis . Non @-@ hereditary recurrent pneumothorax and / or pulmonary cysts can occur with Langerhans cell <unk> and <unk> . These conditions are differentiated from Birt – Hogg – Dubé through examining the patient history and performing a physical examination . In women suspected to have the disease , ruling out pulmonary or thoracic endometriosis may be necessary . 
 Though fibrofolliculomas are unique to Birt – Hogg – Dubé , they may present with an ambiguous appearance and must be confirmed histologically . Other diseases can mimic the dermatologic manifestations of BHD , including tuberous sclerosis complex , Cowden syndrome , familial <unk> , and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 . Tuberous sclerosis must be distinguished because both disorders can present with angiofibromas on the face , though they are more common in tuberous sclerosis . 
 = = Management = = 
 The different manifestations of Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome are controlled in different ways . The fibrofolliculomas can be removed surgically , through curettage , shave excision , skin resurfacing , or laser ablation ; however , this is not a permanent solution as the tumors often recur . The renal and pulmonary symptoms are managed preventatively : CT scans , ultrasounds , or MRIs of the kidneys are recommended regularly , and family members are advised not to smoke . MRIs are the preferred method for surveillance of the kidneys in people with BHD because they do not carry the same risk of radiation complications as CT scans and are more sensitive than ultrasounds . Smokers with Birt – Hogg – Dubé have more severe pulmonary symptoms than non @-@ smokers . Though nephrectomy is sometimes indicated , kidney tumors in cases of Birt – Hogg – Dubé are often removed without taking the whole kidney , in a procedure called partial nephrectomy . Knockout mouse studies have shown that administration of rapamycin may mitigate the effects of FLCN mutations on kidneys and improve renal cancer prognoses because of folliculin 's interaction with the mTOR pathway . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The disorder has been reported in more than 100 families worldwide , though some sources cite up to 400 families , and it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern . It is considered to be under @-@ diagnosed because of the variability in its expression . The pattern of mutations and spectrum of symptoms are heterogeneous between individuals . Less severe skin phenotypes are seen in women and people of both sexes who have a late onset of skin symptoms . 
 = = Patient Registry = = 
 Birt @-@ Hogg @-@ Dubé Syndrome patients , families , and caregivers are encouraged to join the NIH Rare Lung Diseases Consortium Contact Registry . This is a privacy protected site that provides up @-@ to @-@ date information for individuals interested in the latest scientific news , trials , and treatments related to rare lung diseases . 
 = = History = = 
 The syndrome was first well described in 1977 , by three Canadian physicians , Arthur R. Birt , Georgina R. Hogg and William J. Dubé . The earliest case of possible BHD in the medical literature was published by <unk> and <unk> in 1927 , who described a case of <unk> <unk> on a 56 @-@ year @-@ old woman 's face . <unk> were first described in 1974 by H.S. <unk> and H. Pinkus , but were not associated with BHD until Birt , Hogg , and Dubé . The first case of BHD with the systemic symptoms was described by Hornstein and Knickenberg and found in two siblings and their father , all of whom exhibited colon polyps and the characteristic fibrofolliculomas . Though the siblings did not have renal or pulmonary symptoms , their father had cysts in his lungs and kidneys . Hornstein @-@ Knickenberg syndrome is a now @-@ deprecated name for the inherited fibrofolliculomas inherent to Birt – Hogg – Dubé . 
 Birt , Hogg , and Dubé examined a family with a hereditary thyroid cancer and discovered that many of the members had fibrofolliculomas , trichodiscomas , and acrochordons , which became defined as the classical symptoms of the eponymous disease . The first case of spontaneous pneumothorax associated with BHD was discovered in 1986 ; the first case of renal cancer followed in 1993 and the presence of lung cysts in people with BHD was confirmed in 1999 . It was formerly thought that people with Birt – Hogg – Dubé syndrome were at higher risk for colorectal polyps and neoplasms , but this has been disproven . The BHD Foundation supports research into the syndrome and holds regular symposia in BHD and related disorders for researchers , clinicians , and family members . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 Genes related to FLCN and diseases similar to BHD have been found in dogs , fruit flies , rats , and mice . In German Shepherd dogs , missense mutations in the canine <unk> of FLCN cause a similar phenotype to human BHD — kidney cancers ( in this case , <unk> renal <unk> ) and skin tumors ( nodular <unk> ) . They had a similar pattern of tumorigenesis to human BHD in that the skin lesions were heterozygous for the FLCN mutation and the renal tumors were likely caused by loss of heterozygosity . Female German shepherds with a FLCN mutation are also prone to uterine <unk> . 
 A homolog of FLCN called DBHD has been discovered in the common fruit fly , Drosophila melanogaster . Decrease expression of the DBHD results in loss of male germline stem cells ( GSC ) , which suggest that DBHD is required for male GSC maintenance in the fly testis . Further , DBHD regulates GSC maintenance downstream or in parallel of the <unk> / STAT and <unk> signal @-@ transduction pathways , which suggest that BHD regulates tumorigenesis by controlling stem cells in human { Singh et al . 2006 } 
 A line of rats with hereditary kidney cancer were developed by Japanese researchers . They have a mutation in the FLCN homolog that produces a truncated protein , though they do not develop the cutaneous or pulmonary symptoms seen in humans . <unk> have renal abnormalities seen very early in life that develop into clear cell and hybrid tumors , significantly shortening the animals ' lifespan ; they also are prone to endometrial and salivary gland clear cell hyperplasia as well as rhabdomyolysis . Homozygotes do not survive to birth . When a wild @-@ type FLCN gene was added , the phenotype was rescued . 
 Knockout mice have been created for a kidney @-@ cancer causing mutation of BHD ; heterozygotes develop kidney cysts and tumors that lead to renal failure within three weeks of birth . In these mice , the mTOR pathway was inappropriately activated , indicating that the mouse homolog of FLCN plays a regulatory role in this pathway . <unk> partially rescued the phenotype by regulating mTOR . Homozygotes die in utero . 
 = Ramsay Weston Phipps = 
 Ramsay Weston Phipps ( 10 April 1838 – 24 June 1923 ) was an Irish @-@ born military historian and officer in Queen Victoria 's Royal Artillery . The son of Pownoll Phipps , an officer of the British East India Company 's army , he was descended from the early settlers of the West Indies ; many generations had served in the British , and the English military . Phipps served in the Crimean War , had a stint of duty at Malta , and helped to repress the Fenian uprising in Canada in 1866 . 
 Phipps is known for his study of The Armies of the First French Republic and the Rise of the Marshals of Napoleon I , a five volume set published posthumously from 1926 – 1939 by Oxford University Press . He also edited L.A. Fauvelet de Bourrienne 's Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte , a three volume work published in 1885 and Madame Campan 's The private life of Marie Antoinette , queen of France and Navarre ; with sketches and anecdotes of the courts of Louis XVI , published in 1889 . 
 = = Family = = 
 Ramsay Weston Phipps descended from generations of military and political men . Colonel William Phipps , a Yeoman of Lincolnshire , raised a regiment of horse for Charles I. Another of his ancestors was Lord Chancellor of Ireland in the reign of Queen Anne . Captain James Phipps settled the Island of St. Christopher , in the West Indies in 1676 . The family was rewarded for its loyalty with titles and lands in Ireland . Ramsay Phipps was also a cousin of the Earls of Mulgrave . 
 In 1791 , Phipps ' grandfather , Constantine ( 1746 – 1797 ) , rented the Hotel d <unk> in Caen , France , from the Duke of Harcourt ; in 1793 , he returned briefly to England in 1793 for the wedding of one of his daughters , leaving eight of his children in France . When War of the First Coalition broke out in 1793 , the children were separated from their parents . Ramsay Phipps ' father , Pownoll Phipps ( 1780 – 1858 ) and his siblings grew up in the French city during the French revolution , and lived under the threat of anti @-@ English violence . Only after the Treaty of Campo Formio could the children return to England , arriving on 2 October 1798 , all of them fluent in French ; Pownoll Phipps reportedly spoke with French @-@ accented English for the rest of his life . By the end of October , Pownoll had a commission as a lieutenant and joined the Bengal Army of the East India Company . The following June , he embarked for India on the Bombay @-@ built ship Britannica . 
 Upon arrival in India , Pownoll Phipps joined the force under command of Colonel Arthur Wellesley . He participated in Sir David Baird 's expedition from India to Egypt in 1801 , for which participation he eventually became a Knight of the Crescent . Phipps married Henrietta <unk> ; orphaned by the French Revolution , she had taken refuge with him and his siblings at the Hotel d <unk> , on 10 August 1802 , in Calcutta . Pownoll Phipps ' second wife , Sophia Matilda Arnold , was Benedict Arnold 's daughter . Phipps retired from the East India Company service on 1 July 1825 , with the rank of colonel . Living for a time in London , he was a popular regular at Exeter Hall events . A well @-@ versed , informed and articulate speaker and storyteller , Phipps was a gallant gentleman , readily at ease in all society , and very friendly : " a tall , stout , officer @-@ like person , about 60 @-@ years of age , with white hair , short , sharp features , and a pleasant cast of countenance . " He also had a strict sense of honor . In 1857 , a year before his death , he wrote a letter to the Editor of The Times , in which he asserted his belief in the good character and quality of the Sepoys , despite the popular outrage against them during the Indian Mutiny . Pownoll Phipps developed bronchitis after presiding over the closing of an art exhibit in Clonmel , Ireland ; he died in November 1858 . His funeral was attended by Protestant and Catholics , and the procession was over a mile long . 
 Ramsay Weston Phipps was the second son of Pownoll Phipps and Phipps ' third wife , the Irish @-@ born Anna Charlotte Smith . Born at the family estate , Oaklands , in Tipperary , Ireland , he was named Ramsay in honor of an uncle who pioneered slave emancipation in the West Indies , and Weston after another uncle , a scientific clergyman . By 1841 , his father had returned to England , to reside in Kent , where the family lived in <unk> . They lodged at the Parsonage with a local farmer , Ramsey Warde ; Ramsey Warde was also a relative of Phipps ' mother . The family of four included three @-@ year @-@ old Ramsay , his older brother , Pownoll ( age five ) , his mother ( age 30 ) and his father . Eventually , two more children joined the family : Henrietta Sophia and Robert Constantine , twins born 23 September 1841 . The boy died 9 October , but Henrietta lived into adulthood , marrying Lieutenant @-@ Colonel William Smith . After suffering a bout of measles in spring 1847 , Ramsay Phipps attended Mr. Barron 's School at Stanmore with his older brother , Pownoll , with the intent to following his brother in a year or two to Rugby in Warwickshire . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Before he could enter Rugby , Phipps was offered instead a cadetship and entered the government preparatory school at <unk> , in Surrey . In 1849 , at the age of 11 , he put on a uniform , and he wore it , or a variation of it , until his retirement in 1887 . Phipps later attended the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich . After his graduation , he expected a commission in the Royal Artillery , and while awaiting it , he lived for a few months with his uncle at <unk> , Ireland ; his lieutenant 's commission arrived , dated 1 August 1855 , and with it instructions him to join his Royal Artillery unit at Woolwich , for service in the Crimean War . He reached the Crimea in November 1855 , and participated in the Siege of Sevastopol . Assigned to the Matthew Dixon 's 5th Company , 9th Battalion , he was part of the right siege train , and his chief occupation was blowing up the <unk> docks . He was still small for his age , and looked very young , which drew teasing from his company . The siege work was difficult and the living conditions were brutal ; he recounted to his brother that the soldiers were plagued not only by the Russian fire , but by dysentery , bad food , and wintering in tents . He returned to England the following year on the <unk> , arriving in March 1856 . Although he was given a medal to wear when Queen Victoria reviewed the troops , it was later collected from him ; the decision was made at higher commands that only those who had landed in the Crimea prior to September 1855 would be awarded the Crimea Medal . 
 After his return to England , Ramsay Phipps was quartered at the Tower of London . After this assignment , he was sent to Plymouth , serving at the Prince of Wales Redoubt . In 1861 , Phipps was stationed in South <unk> , Essex . He was promoted to the Royal Artillery 's unique rank of second captain on 7 April 1864 , and appointed brigade adjutant on 14 October 1868 . The brigade adjutant functioned as the staff officer for the brigade commander : he supervised all brigade books and records , monitored the execution of orders , supervised the education and training of subalterns , prosecuted in all courts @-@ martial proceedings , and accepted and transmitted all orders . 
 Ramsay Phipps married Anne Bampfylde , the daughter of a Bath physician , in September 1864 . With a few exceptions , most of Phipps ' posts included garrison duty in southern England in the vicinity of the Royal Artillery barracks at Woolwich . Phipps traveled to the United States , arriving in Boston on 30 April 1866 ; he went to Canada to participate in operations against the Fenian uprising . In 1869 , his brother and a friend sought to climb the Zermatt and the <unk> , during which climb the friend fell over 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) to bottom of the <unk> glacier . In the emergency , Ramsay Phipps joined his brother in Grindelwald while guides recovered the body . 
 In 1881 , Phipps was stationed in Ireland ; his wife remained in Bath , living in the prestigious Royal Crescent ( No. 19 ) , with her three children , a female cousin , and several servants . Phipps was promoted to major on 12 April 1873 , to brevet lieutenant @-@ colonel on 1 July 1881 , and substantive lieutenant @-@ colonel on 26 April 1882 . 
 Phipps had little tolerance for foolishness and retained a professional soldier 's dislike of civilian interference in military affairs , and ineffective administration , whether from civilians or government . In 1887 , shortly after his retirement , he wrote a letter to the editor of The Times addressing some of the highly publicized problems of desertions from the ranks . " War Office civilians , " he wrote , " like the plan of indiscriminate enlist , as it swells their list of recruits . Then , when the list of deserters grows , they put on long faces , and say , ' it must be those wicked officers . ' The officers would stop this plan in a day if they were allowed . " The problem with recruiters , Phipps maintained , lay in the need for quantity , not quality . " What fools you civilians are to pay for these blackguards , " he wrote . " If you would let the officers select their men , for the first year or so , you would have fewer men on paper , fewer men in prison , and just as many men for service .... I will then give you another hint for saving money ... why not do away with the Inspector @-@ General of Recruiting , and spend his pay in horse artillery , who would be very ornamental and very serviceable ? What use is the Inspector General ? " He had retired from active service in 1883 , and Phipps fully retired in 1887 , after attaining the rank of colonel . 
 Phipps and his wife had seven children , five of whom survived into adulthood . The first son , Edmund , born 1867 , died less than two months later while the family was stationed at Plymouth . During a short stint on Malta in 1869 , a daughter Mary was born and died immediately . Edmund Bampfylde was born in 1869 , and followed a career in education ; he attended New College , Oxford , and became a Deputy Secretary on the Board of Education . In 1906 , he married Margaret Percy Phipps , who was Mayor of Chelsea for two terms . In 1916 , he was appointed Companion of the Order of the Bath , followed by a knighthood in 1917 ; he served in the Ministry of Munitions during the latter part of World War I. Charles Fossett , born in 1872 , and Henry , the youngest son , pursued military careers . Charles and Henry were awarded the Distinguished Service Order for their roles in the British Expeditionary Force in 1914 . Charles attained the rank of lieutenant @-@ colonel in the Royal Garrison Artillery during World War I , assigned to the VI Corps Heavy Artillery , and in 1918 moved to Parkgate , in Dublin . Henry married Lorna Campbell in 1906 , and they had three children . Henry eventually attained the rank of lieutenant @-@ colonel in the Royal Artillery , and died on 24 August 1949 . The youngest , Gertrude Annie , was born on 13 December 1876 . She married in 1907 to Lieutenant Colonel E.C. Sandars , CMG , also a Royal Artillery officer ; the couple had a daughter , Elizabeth . 
 Phipps ' wife died in October 1885 . In 1888 , Phipps settled with his three youngest children at Chalfont St Giles . The 1891 Buckingham census shows Phipps on the Royal Artillery retired list and living at a country manor house , The Stone , with his sons , 21 @-@ year @-@ old Edmund , a student at Oxford University , and 16 @-@ year @-@ old Henry , a student at Wellington , and 14 @-@ year @-@ old Gertrude . Four servants supported this small family , including a cook , a lady 's maid for Gertrude , a housemaid , and a scullery maid . In 1901 , Henry had left the family household , but Edmund and Gertrude still lived with their father in St. Giles . Phipps remained at The Stone until 1920 . 
 = = Career as military historian = = 
 Chalfont St Giles lies 25 miles ( 40 km ) from London , and about the same distance to Oxford , maintained a foot in the social world of London and the academic world of Oxford . Phipps was chairman of the magistrates for the Burnham division , sitting at Beaconsfield , and was a member of the County Standing Joint Committee and the County Licensing Committee . He also attended annual Diocesan Conferences at Oxford . 
 Phipps pursued his life @-@ long interest in the Napoleonic Wars . In 1885 , he edited a revised edition of what was then the standard authority on Napoleon , Louis Antoine Fauvelet de Bourrienne 's Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte . He also wrote the revision 's chapters XXIV and XXVI . Subsequently , he edited a new edition of the surgeon Barry Edward O 'Meara 's Napoleon at Saint Helena , another Napoleonic Wars classic , to which he wrote a new introduction : O 'Meara had been Napoleon 's doctor on Helena . Historians praised Phipps ' introduction as a convincing exposition against the treatment of Napoleon on Helena . In 1889 , he edited a revised edition of Jeanne @-@ Louise @-@ Henriette Campan 's The private life of Marie Antoinette , queen of France and Navarre ; with sketches and anecdotes of the courts of Louis XVI , which was also well received . 
 = = = Creation of his magnum opus = = = 
 Initially interested in the ministers of the Empire , Phipps was diverted to a deeper interest in Napoleon 's marshals , primarily by the difficulty of obtaining facts about them . He capitalized on the growing interest of both Britons and the French in the Napoleonic period by purchasing , as they came out , the many personal memoirs published by the descendants of the participants . Indeed , by 1920 , he had acquired over 2 @,@ 000 volumes , plus sundry maps and letters . That year , in failing health , he moved to the house of his son , Charles , in Carlyle Square ( 21 ) , Chelsea , London . There was no room for the books at his son 's house , so Phipps gave them to All Souls College , Oxford ; the majority of them were placed in the Codrington Library . He selected All Souls for its established reputation in military history , and for the Codrington 's collection left to it by Sir Foster Cunliffe , who had been killed in action in 1916 . The collection , called the Phipps Collection , numbered more than 2 @,@ 000 volumes , and includes Napoleon 's published correspondence , that of the marshals , and has been kept up to date with modern works issued by the Historical Department of the French General Staff . 
 By the 1920s , there was still little published in English about the French marshals , and Phipps ' proposed Lives of the Marshals was enthusiastically anticipated by scholars of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars . Despite his diligent activity on the project , Phipps ' work was complicated by the regular appearance of new material , which he felt he had to read , verify , and digest ; he sometimes incorporated the new material into his own work , and sometimes counter @-@ balanced it with other material . Phipps was convinced of the importance of his subject , particularly the experience of the future marshals in the Republican armies . The French field armies of the Revolutionary Wars ( 1793 – 1800 ) formed the military education of the future marshals . Although there was great interest in the marshals , little had been published in either French or English about their early military experience . Phipps called these revolutionary armies the Schools for Marshals . Furthermore , he postulated , " the Consulate and the Empire cannot be judged until the Revolutionary period has been studied in detail . " 
 Consequently , the scope of his work expanded . On the one hand , Phipps wished to avoid rehashing the same information that was available , but the careers of the marshals required some duplication . The published works were often filled with inconsistencies , not only in the French sources , but from the French to the English sources . The French sources frequently misinterpreted the English sources , and vice versa . Phipps wrote both an introduction to his work and a summary of the histories of the armies of the Republic and the Consulate , from 1791 to 1804 , and at certain points in his narrative , he paused to review the positions of the various future marshals and other well @-@ known generals . He reflected on the development of their experience , the characteristics of their leadership , and the relationships to one another and to Napoleon . Critically , he posited that generals rarely improved with practice . 
 Ultimately the work that emerged was a massive typescript unfinished upon Phipps ' death in June 1923 . It included an introduction , a summary of the armies , a detailed history of the armies and the coup d 'etat in Paris , a complete history of the French armies in Spain 1808 – 1814 , plus accounts of Napoleon 's 1814 campaign in which the marshals played such an important role and an account of the marshals during the First and Second Restorations . It also included material on the lives of the individual marshals and notes on the ministers of the Empire , who had been the subjects of Phipps ' original plan . At some point in the compilation of this typescript , Phipps realized that he would not live to finish his work . He hoped that his children might be able to prepare it for publication , and he made some provision for the publication of all or a part of his manuscript . After Phipps ' death , with the assistance and encouragement of Charles Oman , the authority on the Peninsular War , his son , Charles F. Phipps , supervised the publication of the first three volumes . Charles died in June 1932 before proofing the final galleys of volume three and prior to the publication of volumes four and five . Volumes four and five were left in the hands of Phipps ' " very capable granddaughter " and literary executor , Elizabeth Sandars . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Phipps ' effort , and that of his literary executors , was well received as both interesting and informative . " The narrative is that of a gallant gentleman whose life was spent as a ' soldier of the Queen ' and in contributing to the greatness of the British Empire , who narrates to his listeners the facts which he has gathered , after his retirement from the army , in the pursuit of his favorite hobby . " The narrative itself is informal and charming , not only full of analysis , but also relaying interesting stories and anecdotes about the marshals themselves . Other reviewers found the narrative clear , but undistinguished and " fatigued . " 
 In the first volume , Phipps ' analysis covers a categorization of the marshals , although the narrative itself is largely confined to the Armée du Nord . In the beginning , he points out , the French army was well disciplined and the class of non @-@ commissioned officers was " especially good . " As the integration of the so @-@ called volunteers — the revolutionary conscripts — into the units of regular troops undermined morale , discipline , and conditions , the army 's cohesion fell apart . Phipps highlighted in particular the problems of armies moving without magazines or supplies . His analysis of the classes of marshals — citizen , soldier , officer — offers a noteworthy and solid refutation of the marshals as a class of leadership rising from the rough soldiery ; his criticism of the French Revolutionary army system resulting from the two amalgamations is acute , targeted and well @-@ documented . However , by limiting his sources to only those in English or French , in which he also was fluent , Phipps necessarily restricted his details , ignoring the actions of the Austrians and the Russians . The evidence , though , is always well assembled , even though , by volume three , it becomes much more sparse . 
 Of the five volumes , the second may be the most interesting : it dealt with more interesting times , and more consistent military operations . The army of the north was a " bad army , " and the story of its command is one of " honest and brave men hurried in turn to the guillotine , or of less honest men going over to the enemy . " Some of Phipps ' own eccentricities also appear in volume two ; he frequently lapses into sarcasm , revealing his disdain for civilian administration of military affairs , and there are points at which he fails to follow through fully on his criticism ; for example , he holds back on his critique of Jean Victor Moreau despite his assertion that he wanted to demolish once and for all the myth that Moreau was as great a soldier as Napoleon . Phipps adeptly describes the game of cat and mouse that Moreau , Jean Baptiste Jourdan , and the Archduke Charles played with one another in the summer of 1796 as their armies criss @-@ crossed south @-@ western Germany ; neither general came to grips with the other until October , and even then , after the Battle of Schliengen , Charles was content to chase Moreau and Jourdan over the Rhine , not to demolish the French army . They were lacking , Phipps postulated , the instinct and nerves of Napoleon . 
 The problems associated with Phipps ' lack of professional training as an historian become clear by the third volume . Despite his reading of newly published works , Phipps ' idea of what constituted new material included the publications of memoirs and journals of the participants , not the extensive secondary literature and array of historiographical material in the periodic literature written by professional historians seeking to understand the French revolution and the Napoleonic Wars . Consequently , Phipps ' perceptions of the French revolution remained rooted in the outdated theories of Archibald Alison , Adolphe Thiers , and others , while ignoring some of the new theories of Albert Sorel , François Victor Alphonse <unk> and Albert <unk> . His military background emerged clearly in his hostility to the meddling of the French government in the affairs of soldiers . 
 Despite his amateur standing , Phipps plowed through an alarmingly confusing mass of material , especially that covering the 1796 – 1797 campaigns in Ireland and the Pyrenees . He hacked through a tangle of French material to provide a path for the English language reader . This feat in itself made volume three a useful tool ; furthermore , Phipps offered an even @-@ handed treatment of the suppression of Lyon and Toulon , two French cities whose revolts alarmed the Revolutionary government . Despite his lack of professional training , Phipps provided a valuable assessment to these widely studied revolts . 
 Reviewers also gave credit to Elizabeth Sanders , Phipps ' granddaughter and literary executor , for her skillful handling of the last two volumes . The purpose of the work becomes even more apparent and direct under her management and editing of the material . The role of the future marshals becomes more clear in the campaigns of 1797 , and especially in the Italian campaign ; her handling of the material kept it fully focused on the future marshals Massena , Augereau , Berthier , and Brune . 
 By the time of the publication of the final volume , Phipps ' work had established for itself a place in the pantheon of Napoleonic literature . It " will always be regarded as a valuable source , " well @-@ known to students of the Napoleonic era , and the last volume , critics maintained , was " as interesting as its predecessors . " Not only did Phipps achieve his goal of creating a record of the development of the marshals , but his volumes have become a useful history of the progress of the wars themselves , from 1792 to 1799 . The true value of the first volume , and indeed the subsequent four , lies in its repeated use as a reference work . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Ramsay Weston Phipps . The Armies of the First French Republic and the Rise of the Marshals of Napoleon I , Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1926 – 39 . 
 = = = Edited works = = = 
 Jeanne @-@ Louise @-@ Henriette Campan , The private life of Marie Antoinette , queen of France and Navarre ; with sketches and anecdotes of the courts of Louis XVI , Revised edition edited by R.W. Phipps , London , Bentley , 1889 . 
 Barry Edward O 'Meara , Napoleon on Saint Helena . Revised edition edited by R.W. Phipps , 2 volumes , London : Bentley , 1888 . 
 Louis Antoine Fauvelet de Bourrienne , Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte , revised edition edited by R. W. Phipps , 3 volumes , London , Bentley , 1885 . 
 = Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney = 
 Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney , known in Japan as Gyakuten Saiban ( 逆転裁判 , lit . " Turnabout Trial " ) , is a visual novel adventure video game developed by Capcom . It was originally released for the Game Boy Advance in 2001 in Japan , and has since been ported to multiple platforms . The Nintendo DS version , titled Gyakuten Saiban Yomigaeru Gyakuten in Japan , was released in 2005 in Japan and North America , and in 2006 in Europe , and includes an English language option . The game is the first entry in the Ace Attorney series , and has received several sequels and spin @-@ offs . 
 The story follows Phoenix Wright , a rookie defense attorney who attempts to get his clients declared " not guilty " . Among other characters are Phoenix 's boss , Mia Fey ; his assistant and Mia 's sister , Maya ; and prosecutor Miles Edgeworth . The player controls Phoenix through two types of sections : investigations and courtroom trials . During investigations , they gather information and evidence , and during trials , they cross @-@ examine witnesses and answer questions from the judge , the prosecutor , and the witnesses . The story is split into five cases , the fifth being introduced in the Nintendo DS version to take advantage of gameplay elements using the handheld 's touchscreen and not available in the original Game Boy Advance version . 
 Development of the game was handled by a team of seven people over the course of ten months . It was directed and written by Shu Takumi , and was originally planned to be a Game Boy Color game about a private investigator . The game was designed to be simple , as Takumi wanted it to be easy enough for even his mother to play . While the original version of the game takes place in Japan , the localization is set in the United States ; this became an issue when localizing later games , where the Japanese setting was more obvious . 
 The game has been mostly positively received by critics , who have appreciated its premise , writing , characters and presentation . The game has been a commercial success both in Japan and internationally , with the North American release selling higher than expectations and being hard to find in stores shortly after release . Other media based on the game has been made : a manga series premiered in 2006 ; a film adaptation of the game , titled Ace Attorney , premiered in 2012 ; and an anime series adaptation started airing in 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney is a visual novel adventure game in which the player takes the role of Phoenix Wright , a rookie defense attorney , and attempts to defend their clients in five cases . These cases are played in a specific order ; after having finished cases , the player can re @-@ play them in any order . Each case starts with an opening cinematic showing a murder ; shortly thereafter , the player is given the job of defending the prime suspect of the case . The gameplay is split into two types of sections : investigations and courtroom trials . 
 During investigations , which usually take place before or in between trial sessions , the player gathers information and evidence by talking to characters such as their client , witnesses , and the police . The player is able to move around a cursor to examine various things in the environment . By using a menu , the player can move to different locations , examine evidence , and present evidence to other characters ; by showing certain pieces of evidence to some witnesses , the player can get access to new information . In the game 's fifth case , created for the DS version and used in all subsequent releases , the player is able to examine evidence more closely , rotating it to view it from all sides and zooming in or out on it using touchscreen controls ; they are also able to move a cursor to investigate specific parts of the evidence . The fifth case also features forensics tests that the player can use at crime scenes to find clues : the player can spray <unk> by tapping areas they want to examine on the touch screen , which makes the player able to see otherwise invisible blood stains ; and they can touch the touch screen to apply aluminum flake powder in order to search for finger prints . After applying it , they can blow into the microphone to reveal the prints . Once the player has gathered enough evidence , the investigation section ends . 
 In the courtroom trials , the player aims to get their client declared " not guilty " . In order to do so , they cross @-@ examine witnesses ; during these cross @-@ examinations , the player aims to find lies and inconsistencies in the witnesses ' testimonies . They are able to go back and forth between the different statements in the testimony , and can press the witness for more details on a statement . When the player finds an inconsistency , they can present a piece of evidence that contradicts the statement . In the Nintendo DS version , the player can choose to press and present by using vocal commands , and in the Wii version , players have the option to present evidence by swinging the Wii Remote . At certain points , the player has to answer questions from the judge , the witnesses , or the prosecutor through a multiple @-@ choice answer selection , or by presenting evidence that supports Phoenix 's claims . On the screen , a number of exclamation marks are shown ; if the player presents an incorrect piece of evidence , one of the exclamation marks disappear . If all disappear , the player loses the game . When the player solves a case , they unlock a new one to play . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The first case of the game portrays defense attorney Phoenix Wright 's first trial , in which he successfully defends his childhood friend Larry Butz , who was suspected of murder . In the second episode , Mia Fey , the owner of the law office Phoenix works at , is murdered for being aware of corporate blackmail , and her younger sister Maya is charged with the crime because her name was found written on a piece of evidence . Phoenix defends her , and meets another childhood friend , Miles Edgeworth , who is the prosecutor of the case . Maya is found not guilty , and becomes Phoenix 's assistant ; as she is a spirit medium , she is able to channel Mia 's spirit , who offers Phoenix help at some points . In the third case , which Edgeworth is also the prosecutor of , Phoenix and Maya investigate the murder of an actor . They learn that the victim was accidentally killed in self @-@ defense by a producer , whom the actor tried to kill over a matter of blackmail while dressed as another actor in order to frame him . 
 In the fourth case , Edgeworth is charged with murder , and is defended by Phoenix . They learn that Edgeworth was set up by his mentor , Manfred von Karma . Several years earlier , von Karma had shot and killed Edgeworth 's father Gregory , a defense attorney , after Gregory had ruined von Karma 's perfect record ; von Karma led Edgeworth to believe he had shot his own father . It is revealed that Edgeworth was what inspired Phoenix to become an attorney : Edgeworth and Larry had defended him when they were children , after Phoenix had been accused of stealing money . The three became friends , until Edgeworth moved away after his father 's death . Phoenix exposes von Karma 's cover @-@ up and gets Edgeworth declared not guilty . After the case , Edgeworth thinks about taking time off from his position to consider the events , while Maya announces she is going back to her home in Kurain Village for spiritual training . 
 The fifth case ( not present in the original Game Boy Advanced release , but added for the DS and subsequent releases ) has Phoenix defending chief prosecutor Lana Skye when she is charged with murdering a detective . With the aid of Lana 's younger sister Ema during the investigations and the help of Edgeworth during the trial , Phoenix learns that Lana was blackmailed by the chief of police , Damon Gant , into covering for a murder she thought that Ema had committed several years before . Gant himself is revealed to have committed the murder and pinned the blame on Ema . Though Lana is cleared of murder charges , she willingly goes to jail for being an accomplice . Ema says her goodbyes as she heads to Europe to study forensic science . 
 = = Development = = 
 Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney was developed by a team of seven people , and took ten months to make . It was directed by Shu Takumi and produced by Atsushi Inaba , with music by Masakazu Sugimori , character design by Kumiko Suekane , and art by Tatsuro Iwamoto . In 2000 , after Takumi had finished his work on Dino Crisis 2 , his boss at the time , Shinji Mikami , gave him six months to create any type of game he wanted to . Takumi had originally joined Capcom wanting to make mystery and adventure games , and felt that this was a big chance for him to make a mark as a creator . 
 At first , the game was planned to be released for the Game Boy Color , but after the development team were shown the Game Boy Advance system 's screen and footage of Mega Man Battle Network , Takumi felt that the Game Boy Advance would be perfect for Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney . The game was designed to be simple , as Takumi wanted it to be easy enough for even his mother to play . As it was less common at the time to use professional voice actors , the game 's voice clips were provided by the development team : each staff member recorded every sample that was needed for the game , and then the best ones were used . Takumi used his privilege as a director to cast himself as Phoenix , however , while Edgeworth was voiced by Iwamoto , and von Karma by Sugimori . 
 The game was originally going to be a detective game , with Phoenix being a private investigator who found a body at the office of his client and got arrested ; as the lawyer who was assigned to the case was useless , Phoenix took up his own defense . One staff member suggested that Phoenix should be a hamster ; while this didn 't happen , this early version of Phoenix did have a pet hamster . It was decided early during development to refer to the game as " <unk> : Attorney Detective <unk> @-@ kun " , with " <unk> " being a portmanteau of " survival " and the Japanese word " <unk> " ( <unk> , " court " or " trial " ) . Among other names considered were " Boogie @-@ Woogie Innocence " and " Bingo <unk> " , with " bingo " referring to answering correctly and " <unk> " ( <unk> ) being Japanese for legal representation . At one point , Takumi realized that finding and taking apart contradictions was not related to detective work , and felt that the main setting of the game should be courtrooms . The game was in danger of getting cancelled at one point , as two of the staff members decided to leave the company , but Takumi 's division leader and Inaba got a member of the Resident Evil development team to help them part @-@ time . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Takumi felt that the best way to write a mystery with a good climax is to reveal various clues , and then pull them together into one conclusion , and not have multiple possible endings . He said that the biggest challenge with that was to make the gameplay and story work together ; the goal was to make the player feel like they have driven the story forward themselves , with their own choices , even though the game is linear . When writing the episodes , Takumi ranked each after its importance : the first episode was the most important , to make sure that the player likes the game ; the second episode was the second most important , to solidify the player 's interest ; and the finale was the third most important . In general , each scenario was finished before anything else was done ; after this , characters were designed based on the scenarios , and then Takumi adjusted dialogue as needed to make sure that it fit the designs . At this point , it was also decided what scenes were going to have specific cut @-@ in illustrations made for them ; Takumi drew rough sketches of them , and also drew the storyboards for the episodes ' openings , which consist of series of detailed drawings that show what is happening . 
 In Takumi 's initial draft of the story , the second episode , " Turnabout Sisters " , was the first episode of the game . The development team decided that it did not work well as something that would ease players into the game , because of its length among other factors . Because of this , Takumi wrote a shorter episode , " The First Turnabout " , which was used as the game 's first episode . Takumi wanted players to focus on the thrill of " nailing the culprit " , especially for the first episode ; because of this , the culprit of the first episode is shown in that episode 's opening , as this was the most direct way Takumi could think of doing it . According to Takumi , it was a challenge to write the episode , as , in addition to keeping it short , he had to set up the world of Ace Attorney and the types of characters that players would meet . The third episode was written for the sake of the character Miles Edgeworth , and the theme of the fourth episode was " rekindling the relationship " . In it , Takumi tried to portray an intensively strong friendship between Phoenix and Edgeworth ; he did wonder if that was what people got from it , saying that some people interpreted the bond between Phoenix and Edgeworth as an " intensively passionate bond " . Because of these two episodes , Takumi considered Edgeworth to in a way be the game 's protagonist . The classroom trial in the game 's fourth episode was based on real events : when Takumi was in second grade , he had found a 5 yen coin and put it in his pocket ; his teacher accused him of stealing it from another student , and made him apologize to her . 
 Takumi only spent little time on writing a backstory for Phoenix before writing the game 's story , and instead made up dialogue and developed Phoenix 's personality as he went along . Takumi said that Phoenix is Shu Takumi in everything but name , with dialogue similar to what Takumi would have said in each situation in the games ; he attributed this to him being a first @-@ time writer who did not think about developing characterization prior to writing the story . Takumi didn 't write a backstory for Dick Gumshoe ; instead , Gumshoe 's character and personality just " fell into place " after Takumi decided that the character would end his sentences with " pal " . Other aspects of the character came about organically as Takumi wrote the story ; for instance , at one point Edgeworth says that he will cut Gumshoe 's salary , which became part of Gumshoe 's backstory . Takumi came up with the partner character Maya because he thought it would be more fun for players to have another character with them , giving them advice , than investigating on their own . Originally , she was going to be a lawyer @-@ in @-@ training , preparing to take the bar exam . 
 Takumi found the game 's first defendant , Larry Butz , to be particularly difficult to write , and had to re @-@ write him several times . Originally , Larry was going to be an " average Joe " type of character , who only appeared in the game 's fourth episode , but after his inclusion in the first episode , Suekane and Iwamoto told Takumi to give the character " some oomph " . Following this , Takumi wrote him as a " prickly tough @-@ guy " who had the habit of telling people he was going to kill them . Some of the higher @-@ ups at Capcom did not like this , so Takumi changed him into a character who laments his lot in life , saying " I 'm going to die ! " or that the situation is killing him . The culprit of the third episode was originally going to be male , until Suekane pointed out that all villains in the game were male . The development team debated over what to do with the now female character ; some staff members thought it would be odd to have a female character be the director of an action show , and some wondered what to do with the director role if she could not fill it . In the end , Takumi changed the scriptwriter character into a director , and made the culprit a " strong , glamorous , fashionable , and cool @-@ headed " producer . 
 = = = Nintendo DS version = = = 
 The game 's fifth episode , " Rise from the Ashes " , was not included in the original version of the game ; it was created four years later , as part of the Nintendo DS version of the game . The fifth episode was produced by Minae Matsukawa , under supervision of Inaba and Mikami . New music pieces for " Rise from the Ashes " were composed by Naoto Tanaka . When writing the episode , Takumi wanted it to link up with Edgeworth 's disappearance in the second game , Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney − Justice for All , so he thought about what would be the thing that would be the most damaging to Edgeworth 's psyche . He decided on corruption and betrayal from within the prosecutor 's office , despite the seriousness of the topic . The character Jake Marshall was created as a parallel to Godot , in an analogy between the Skye sisters and the Fey sisters . The idea to include the use of the Nintendo DS system 's microphone came from American Capcom staff members ; the Japanese staff did not like the idea of adding unnecessary features , but Takumi thought it was important to make the American audience happy , so it was included as an optional feature . 
 = = Release = = 
 The original version of the game was released for the Game Boy Advance in Japan on October 12 , 2001 . The Nintendo DS port , which was titled Gyakuten Saiban : Yomigaeru Gyakuten ( 逆転裁判 <unk> , " Turnabout Trial : Revived Turnabout " ) , was released in Japan on September 15 , 2005 , and included a new episode and an English language option ; the English option was a selling point in Japan , with the hope that Japanese people who were studying English would play the game . North American and European releases followed on October 11 , 2005 , and March 31 , 2006 , respectively . A PC port of the Game Boy Advance version , developed by a company called <unk> , was released in Japan in an episodic format , starting on March 18 , 2008 . Yomigaeru Gyakuten was later released on Wii via WiiWare in Japan on December 15 , 2009 , in North America on January 11 , 2010 , and in Europe on January 15 , 2010 . The fifth episode was released separately on WiiWare , on March 16 , 2010 , in Japan , in May 2010 in Europe , and on May 24 , 2010 , in North America . An iOS version of Yomigaeru Gyakuten was released in Japan on December 21 , 2009 , and in the West on May 24 , 2010 . 
 A high @-@ definition iOS version of the first three Ace Attorney games , Ace Attorney : Phoenix Wright Trilogy HD , was released in Japan on February 7 , 2012 , and in the West on May 30 , 2013 . Another collection of the first three games , Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney Trilogy , was released for the Nintendo 3DS in Japan on April 17 , 2014 , in North America on December 9 , 2014 , and in Europe on December 11 , 2014 . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 The localization of the game was outsourced to a company called Bowne Global , and was handled by writer Alexander O. Smith , who was not familiar with the Ace Attorney series prior to working on it , and editor Steve Anderson . While the Japanese version of the game takes place in Japan , the localized version is set in the United States . They would normally have left the setting vague while adapting cultural differences that the target audience would not understand , but because one of the episodes involves time zones , they had to specify where the game takes place , and chose the United States without thinking a lot about it . This became an issue in later games , where the Japanese setting was more obvious . All the voice roles in the localized version of the game were handled by localization staff ; Takumi had wanted to do the English voice for Phoenix , but it was handled by Ben Judd . 
 Smith faced several problems related to the game 's use of puns ; in the Japanese version , each character has a name that relies on Japanese wordplay . While Smith and Anderson had a lot of freedom when it came to localizing the names of minor characters , they had to discuss the names of the main cast with Capcom . Smith came up with a list of first names and last names for Phoenix , with the first suggestion being " Roger Wright " ; " Phoenix " was also on the list , but further down . Smith felt that " Wright " had to be the character 's surname , because Phoenix 's surname in the Japanese version – " Naruhodō " , meaning " I see " or " I understand " – was used many times in the game 's text as a joke . The reason for the suggested first name " Roger " was alliteration , and " Roger " being a good source of jokes . A staff member of the development team , however , thought that " Roger Wright " was too similar to " Roger Rabbit " . Among other suggested first names were " Pierce " , " Xavier " , " Marcus " , and " Zane " . In the end , " Phoenix " was chosen due to how heroic it sounded . 
 As the game 's dialogue consists of a lot of wordplay and misunderstandings , Smith would analyze scenes before writing them : he would see what the scenes were trying to accomplish , and where the beats in them were . After he had the structure of a scene in his head , he would write it ; at times he was able to make use of the original Japanese dialogue , but most of the time he had to come up with new ideas himself . At several points , the English wordplay was inspired by the wordplay in the Japanese version . At some points , it was not possible to do wordplay in the same places as in the Japanese version , so Smith would change the structure of the scene slightly . At other points , Smith came up with a joke or funny line , and changed the scene to make the joke work . Around half of the jokes were rewritten based on the characters present in the scene , rather than being translations of the Japanese jokes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Most versions of the game have received " generally favorable reviews " according to the review aggregator Metacritic , with aggregate scores ranging from high 70s to low 80s out of 100 ; an exception is the Wii version , which holds the aggregate score of 67 / 100 , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Famitsu praised the idea of making a game based around trials , which they found to be innovative . Thomas Bowskill at Nintendo Life said that the game had changed his idea of what can make for a great game , and called it a masterpiece . Carrie Gouskos at GameSpot said that the game revitalized the adventure game genre . Michael Cole at Nintendo World Report said that the game 's design and interface would make it a good choice for non @-@ gamers as well . Famitsu found it exhilarating and fun to uncover witnesses ' lies . Bowskill called the investigation sections tedious and boring at times , but said that they were outweighed by the feeling of accomplishment from solving the cases . Craig Harris at IGN felt that the main issues with the game were its linearity , and how the puzzles are simple because of how the player can stop a witness testimony at any time . Cole , too , felt that the game was very linear , and that it was unclear how to proceed at certain points . He said that , because of how story @-@ driven it is , the game has low replay value ; he still felt that players might want to replay it after a few years . 
 Bowskill appreciated the 2D presentation of the investigations , saying that they suited the gameplay well and that it might have been difficult to find clues if 3D graphics had been used instead . Gouskos appreciated the game 's presentation , calling it " unique and outstanding " ; she said that the music and sound effects work well with the drama , and that the cross @-@ examination graphics , showing the two opposing lawyers along with the sound effect of a sword being unsheathed , gave an atmosphere similar to that of a fighting game . Harris , too , likened the style to that of a fighting game . Gouskos said that the graphics , while simple , work well to show each character 's mood and personality . Harris said that the visuals were well @-@ drawn and that the soundtrack was " nicely rendered " , but felt that the character animation was very limited . Cole said that the graphics , while dated , have " visual flair " . He appreciated the opening cinematics for the cases , which he thought were both stylish and ambiguous , and the character animations , which he called " priceless " . Nadia Oxford at USgamer said that early Ace Attorney games , despite the " tinny " sound of the Game Boy Advance versions , had spawned some of the most iconic music themes in video games ; she noted " The Detective That Came From the Wild West " - the theme of Jake Marshall - as a particularly good track . 
 Bowskill found the mood of the game to be hilarious , and said that the game never gets stale ; he attributed this to the diversity of the game 's characters . Gouskos called the game 's characters cohesive , over @-@ the @-@ top , and quirky . Harris called the story interesting and well written , citing the characters , situations , and dialogue . Cole was impressed by the mysteries and their resolutions , calling them " novel , unpredictable and plausible " . He also appreciated the character development arcs through the game , which he felt provided pacing and made the cases cohesive . He called the English localization " top @-@ notch " , and appreciated its humor . 
 = = = Wii , iOS , and Nintendo 3DS versions = = = 
 Spencer McIlvaine at Nintendo Life was disappointed in how the Wii version only had a single use for motion controls , and how low @-@ resolution graphics from handheld versions of the game were used . Dan Whitehead at Eurogamer similarly thought that the motion controls were only a minor addition , and was disappointed in how little effort Capcom had put into the port compared to LucasArts ' remake of The Secret of Monkey Island . Craig Harris at IGN called it " incredibly lazy " , wishing that it had included improved art and sharper text . Cara Ellison at Eurogamer called the Trilogy HD port " perfunctory " , saying that animations are slow at times , that the high @-@ definition graphics take away from the charm of the pixel art in previous versions , and that there is a delay after button presses . 
 Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney Trilogy was better received . Bob Mackey at USgamer appreciated how the games were mostly left untouched , while getting minor improvements , such as the ability to read the text at the player 's own pace rather than waiting for it to " slowly [ crawl ] across the screen " . He said that the game 's graphical upgrades were hit or miss , with certain characters , including Phoenix and Edgeworth , looking great , while elements that originally had less definition , such as the judge 's beard , were " a little wonky " . Thomas Whitehead at Nintendo Life said that Capcom had done a " solid job " with the port , and appreciated the stereoscopic 3D effect and the game 's faithfulness to the original ; he , however , felt that the lack of an orchestral soundtrack similar to that in Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney − Dual Destinies was a minor disappointment . Geoff Thew at Hardcore Gamer called the updated art gorgeous , and noted that it did not have the same animation @-@ related problems as the Trilogy HD on iOS . He appreciated the 3D effect , which he said works well most of the time , but said that the window frame in the detention center was not rendered on its own layer ; he said that it was not a huge problem , but that it was distracting as the player visits that area often . He also commented on the lack of a remastered soundtrack , calling it a letdown . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Eurogamer ranked the game as the 18th best video game of 2005 . Destructoid named the game the 48th best video game of the 2000s , citing the courtroom gameplay and characters , and calling it " one of the most unique and surprising games " of the decade . They felt that the third game in the series had the best story , but thought it relied too heavily on story events in previous Ace Attorney games ; meanwhile , they found Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney to be fresh and have challenging cases , making it the best in the series . Game Informer named it the 178th best video game of all time in 2009 . Adventure Gamers named it the 29th best adventure game of all time in 2011 , citing its story , characters , and creative gameplay . In 2015 , GamesRadar named it the 55th best video game of all time , citing its music , story and look , calling it " Shu Takumi 's masterpiece " . 
 = = Sales = = 
 The Game Boy Advance version was the 163rd best selling video game of the year in Japan in 2001 , with 62 @,@ 169 copies sold . Another 37 @,@ 143 copies were sold in Japan in 2003 , of the budget @-@ priced Game Boy Advance re @-@ release , making it the 277th best selling game of the year in Japan . The Nintendo DS version was the 127th best selling game of the year in Japan in 2005 , with 101 @,@ 902 copies sold , the 133rd in 2006 , with 113 @,@ 000 copies , the 122nd in 2007 , with 141 @,@ 681 copies , the 139th in 2008 , with 96 @,@ 146 copies , the 244th in 2009 , with 47 @,@ 081 copies , the 557th in 2010 , with 12 @,@ 586 copies sold , and the 650th in 2011 , with 9 @,@ 460 copies sold . 
 Demand for the North American release of the Nintendo DS version was higher than expected , leading to the game being hard to find in stores shortly after its release ; the third printing sold out in around a week . As of February 2007 , 100 @,@ 000 copies had been shipped in North America , which Capcom 's vice @-@ president of marketing found to be surprising . Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney Trilogy was the 139th best selling game of the year in Japan in 2014 , with 46 @,@ 819 copies sold . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the release of the game , sequels , spin @-@ offs , and a crossover have been made . The second and third games in the series , Justice for All and Trials and Tribulations , were released in 2002 and 2004 . The fourth game , Apollo Justice : Ace Attorney , which features the new protagonist Apollo Justice , was released in 2007 . The fifth game , Dual Destinies , was released in 2013 , and a sixth game , Spirit of Justice , was released in 2016 . Two spin @-@ off games starring Miles Edgeworth , Ace Attorney Investigations and Ace Attorney Investigations 2 , were released in 2009 and 2011 , and one featuring Phoenix 's ancestor Ryūnosuke Naruhodō , Dai Gyakuten Saiban , was released in 2015 . A crossover with the Professor Layton series , titled Professor Layton vs. Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney , was released in 2012 . 
 A manga based on the game , written by Kenji Kuroda and drawn by Kazuo Maekawa , premiered in 2006 in Bessatsu Young Magazine . It was released in North America by Kodansha in five volumes from June 2011 to July 2012 . The third and fourth volumes both ranked 2nd on The New York Times Manga Best Seller List for one week each in 2011 and 2012 , respectively . A live action film adaptation of the game , titled Ace Attorney , premiered in Japanese theaters on February 11 , 2012 . It was produced at Toei Company , and was directed by Takashi Miike . An anime series adaptation premiered in April 2016 . 
 = Ilyushin Il @-@ 6 = 
 The Ilyushin Il @-@ 6 was a Soviet long @-@ range bomber developed from the Ilyushin Il @-@ 4 during 1942 . Originally intended as a high @-@ speed replacement for the Il @-@ 4 , it was recast as a very long @-@ range bomber with fuel @-@ conserving diesel engines before production of the single prototype began in December 1942 . Flight testing showed controllability issues when landing at high weights and the engines proved to be hard to start at low temperatures and were slow to respond to throttle movements . Further development was canceled in 1944 . 
 = = Development = = 
 Outwardly similar to the Il @-@ 4 , the Il @-@ 6 was faster and had a longer and slimmer fuselage fitted with a completely new , highly tapered wing with an aspect ratio of 8 . The engine nacelles were streamlined to reduce drag and increase speed as the engine radiators were mounted in the wing center section , fed by slits in the leading edge of the wing . Defensive armament was greatly improved with five 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) cannon fitted on flexible mountings in the nose , dorsal turret , two waist positions and a ventral blister forward of the tailplane . 
 The Il @-@ 6 was originally intended as a high @-@ speed replacement for the Il @-@ 4 . But after the initial design was completed in August 1942 , the VVS requested that the bomber have extended range instead of high speed . So the original M @-@ 71 radial engines were replaced by Charomskiy ACh @-@ 30 diesel engines with low fuel consumption which promised to give the Il @-@ 6 the required range , especially when operated at moderate weights . The revised design was completed in December 1942 and production of the prototype was initiated . First flight of the Il @-@ 6 was made in Irkutsk on 7 August 1943 with lower @-@ powered ACh @-@ 30B engines substituted for the unavailable ACh @-@ 30BF engines . 
 Flight tests revealed difficult handling , and a lack of power due to the non @-@ availability of the intended ACh @-@ 30BF engines . Flight tests continued without the waist guns and their gunner until the ACh @-@ 30BF 's were fitted between May and July 1944 . Despite modifications , the aircraft still suffered from poor controllability at low speeds and high weights as well as very poor gliding performance . Throughout the flight tests the engines performed satisfactorily in the air , but were found to be very difficult to start in low ambient temperatures and had slow response to throttle movements . Further development was canceled . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Il @-@ 6 – intended production version with Charomskiy ACh @-@ 30BF engines ( also known as M @-@ 30 ) . 
 Il @-@ 6 – bomber with M @-@ 90 engines - projected variant with M @-@ 90 engines , production drawings were issued but nothing further was heard of it , presumably as all effort was focused on the diesel @-@ powered version . 
 = = Specifications ( Il @-@ 6 ) = = 
 Data from Gordon , OKB Ilyushin : A History of the Design Bureau and its Aircraft . 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 6 
 Length : 17 @.@ 38 m ( 57 ft 0 in ) 
 Wingspan : 26 @.@ 07 m ( 85 ft 6 in ) 
 Wing area : 84 @.@ 8 m2 ( 912 @.@ 9 ft2 ) 
 Empty weight : 11 @,@ 930 kg ( 26 @,@ 301 lb ) 
 Gross weight : 19 @,@ 600 kg ( 43 @,@ 220 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Charomskiy ACh @-@ 30BF ( M @-@ 30 ) , 1 @,@ 417 kW ( 1 @,@ 900 hp ) each each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 464 km / h ( 288 mph ) 
 Range : 5 @,@ 450 km ( 3 @,@ 387 miles ) 
 Service ceiling : 7 @,@ 000 m ( 22 @,@ 970 ft ) 
 Rate of climb : 2 @.@ 9 m / s ( 571 ft / min ) 
 Armament 
 5 × 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) ShVAK Sh @-@ 20 cannon in a dorsal turret , and flexible mountings at the nose , beam and ventral positions . 
 2 @,@ 500 kg ( 5 @,@ 500 lb ) of bombs , maximum , internally 
 2 × 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) bombs on external racks 
 or 2 × 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) torpedoes on external racks 
 = American Palestine Line = 
 The American Palestine Line was a steamship company , formed in 1924 in the U.S. , for the purpose of providing direct passenger service from New York to Palestine and was reportedly the first steamship company owned and operated by Jews . The company negotiated to purchase three ocean liners from the United States Shipping Board , but it was only able to purchase one , SS President Arthur , a former North German Lloyd steamer that operated as Princess Alice before being seized by the United States during World War I. After refurbishing the liner , the company inaugurated service between New York and Palestine in March 1925 , when President Arthur sailed on her maiden voyage . A crowd of 15 @,@ 000 witnessed ceremonies that included songs , prayers , and speeches in English and Yiddish . The company claimed that President Arthur was the first ocean liner to fly the Zionist flag at sea and the first ocean liner ever to have female officers . 
 The line had labor difficulties and financial difficulties throughout its existence . On President Arthur ' s first trip in 1925 , rumors of a mutiny were reported in The New York Times , and several crew members got into an altercation with members of the Blackshirts , the Italian fascist paramilitary group , when the liner made an intermediary stop in Naples . On her second voyage , the ship 's master @-@ at @-@ arms was killed by a fellow crew member . Financial difficulties included unpaid bills and resultant court actions as well as accusations of fraud against company officers that were leveled in the press . In late 1925 the company was placed in the hands of a receiver ; President Arthur — after a two @-@ alarm fire in her forward cargo hold — ended up back in the hands of the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) , and the company 's office furniture and fixtures were sold at auction in early 1926 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The newly formed American Palestine Line , reportedly the first ever steamship company owned and operated by Jews , began working to institute direct passenger service from New York to Palestine . To that end , the company began negotiations with the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) to purchase three former German ocean liners , sister ships President Fillmore and President Arthur and the smaller Mount Clay . On October 9 , 1924 , the American Palestine Line 's president — Jacob S. Strahl , a New York Supreme Court justice — announced the purchase of President Arthur from the USSB , with plans to begin the Palestine service the following March . Strahl also publicly announced American Palestine 's intent to acquire President Fillmore at the same time ; plans for that acquisition and that of Mount Clay , however , never materialized . 
 = = The ship = = 
 SS President Arthur was formerly Kiautschou , a Barbarossa @-@ class ocean liner launched in September 1900 for the Hamburg America Line 's Far East passenger and mail service . When Hamburg America withdrew from the service , the liner was traded to North German Lloyd , and regularly used — under the new name of Princess Alice — on both North Atlantic and Far East passenger routes . The liner was interned in the U.S.-controlled Philippines at the outset of World War I and was seized upon the American entry to the conflict . The ship was used as a transport ship for both the U.S. Navy and U.S. Army under the name Princess Matoika . After some post @-@ war use as a passenger liner and yet another name change — this one in honor of the 21st U.S. President , Chester A. Arthur — she was taken out of service when changes in U.S. laws severely curtailed the number of immigrants that could enter the country in the early 1920s . At the time of the purchase by American Palestine , the ship had been laid up in Baltimore since late 1923 . 
 News reports the following month fixed the purchase price of President Arthur at $ 60 @,@ 000 cash , plus assurances that the liner would be reconditioned within six months . Announced plans for reconditioning included reducing passenger capacity to 675 and increasing the cargo capacity to 4 @,@ 000 long tons ( 4 @,@ 100 t ) . Also on tap were swimming pools , a game room , a gymnasium , a lecture hall , a social hall , and a moving picture theater . The line had originally planned to change the name of the liner to White Palace , but that was never brought about . 
 After undergoing reconditioning at Morse Dry Dock & Repair in Brooklyn , President Arthur was taken out for a 100 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 190 km ) shakedown cruise on March 7 , 1925 . Steaming off the New Jersey coast , President Arthur , expected by American Palestine officials to top out at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ) , reached a reported maximum cruising speed of 19 @.@ 7 knots ( 36 @.@ 5 km / h ) , which company officials claimed would reduce her travel time to Palestine by two or three days . At the end of the shakedown , the liner was docked at the foot of West Houston Street in preparation for her maiden voyage five days later . 
 The acquisition of President Arthur by American Palestine inspired Jewish lyricist Solomon Small to pen the song " President Arthur 's Zion Ship " which contained these lines in its refrain : 
 President Arthur , sail 
 Blazing for my children a trail . 
 I have waited ages long 
 With a mother 's yearning strong . 
 = = Palestine service begins = = 
 On the morning of March 12 , 1925 , crowds started gathering at President Arthur ' s pier at 7 : 00 a.m. By the time the ceremonies — broadcast by New York 's municipal radio station , WNYC — opened with the singing of both " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " and " Hatikvah " , the crowd had swelled to 15 @,@ 000 in number . The festivities included speeches and prayers from Orthodox Rabbi Morris S. Margolies ; David Yellin , Vice Mayor of Jerusalem , who addressed the crowd in Yiddish ; Rabbi David de Sola Pool ; and Rabbi Stephen S. Wise . Cantor Josef Rosenblatt sang to the crowd and a telegram from New York merchant Nathan Straus , unable to attend the event , was read aloud . American Palestine Line president Jacob S. Strahl , in his remarks , made the claim that the sailing of President Arthur marked the first appearance " in more than 2 @,@ 000 years of the flag of Judea on the high seas " . 
 The ship , with Stars of David painted on her funnels , pulled away from the dock at eight minutes before noon , nearly an hour later than her planned departure time , and headed to Haifa , with an intermediate stop in Naples . On board were some 400 passengers from all over the United States and Canada , most of whom were tourists wanting to see the Holy Land . Many of the passengers , including a contingent from the University of Manitoba in Winnipeg , were also sailing in order to attend the dedication of the Hebrew University at Mount Scopus by former British Foreign Secretary Lord Balfour . President Arthur also carried agricultural equipment and trucks to be used for farm development in Palestine . In addition , the liner featured Bernice P. Schmitt and <unk> Adelman , who , according to contemporary news reports , were the first ever female officers on an ocean liner . 
 Herman Hirsch , a Jewish male from Chicago on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land , kept an account of President Arthur ' s maiden voyage . On Friday , March 13 , one day into the voyage , Hirsch reported that the <unk> was dedicated and a procession to songs and music accompanied a march over all parts of the ship . Afterwards , Rabbi Aaron <unk> of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , officiated at a service held in a chapel provided for the passengers . 
 Newspapers published radio dispatches emanating from President Arthur throughout her maiden voyage , thanks to a powerful new radio set installed aboard the liner . On March 14 the liner was able to avoid the worst of a gale that slowed Leviathan of the United States Lines , and on March 26 President Arthur was able to avoid a waterspout 50 nautical miles ( 93 km ) east of Gibraltar . At Gibraltar , the local Jewish community chartered a ship to escort President Arthur through the Mediterranean . The ship docked at Naples on March 27 , four days later than her planned arrival there , and departed the same day . 
 The liner arrived at Haifa on March 31 , nearly a week late . Herman Hirsch reported that a passenger from Chicago , Jacob <unk> , 72 , had died aboard the ship on March 24 . The man 's dying wish was to be buried in the Holy Land , and the crew of President Arthur helped fulfill his wishes . After arrival in Haifa , his flag @-@ draped coffin was placed on deck and services were conducted in English and Hebrew by Rabbi <unk> before the body was taken ashore for interment . A sizable crowd , comprising delegations from Jerusalem , Jaffa , and Tel Aviv , greeted the arriving ship . Most of the passengers on President Arthur were hurried to Jerusalem for the Hebrew University dedication ceremony the next day . 
 President Arthur departed Haifa on April 4 for a ten @-@ day excursion in the Mediterranean , calling at Jaffa , Beirut , Alexandria , and Naples , among others , before sailing for the United States from Haifa on April 17 . While docked at Naples on April 23 , crewmen from President Arthur got into a confrontation with members of the Blackshirts , the Italian fascist paramilitary group . Five of the Blackshirts had broken noses and black eyes ; five American seamen were arrested and a further 15 Americans swam out to their steamer to avoid arrest . After calling at Halifax , the liner docked at Pier 86 in New York on March 8 , carrying among its cargo 75 @,@ 000 bags of onions from Alexandria , 16 @,@ 000 cases of lemons from Palermo , and two cases of Jaffa oranges for Nathan Straus . Only 500 well @-@ wishers greeted the ship , arriving as it did on the Jewish sabbath , but President Arthur was greeted by the largest police detail in many years because of rumors of a mutiny on board the ship . Sources are unclear as to what actually happened aboard the ship , but it is known that virtually the entire crew , including the captain , was replaced before the next voyage . 
 On May 12 President Arthur sailed on her second voyage to Palestine , counting <unk> Ben @-@ <unk> , the widow of Hebrew linguist Eliezer Ben @-@ Yehuda , among her passengers . During the trip , an altercation between a Steward and the ship 's master @-@ at @-@ arms resulted in the death of the latter while the ship was in Naples . Though the steward was arrested by Italian authorities , he was acquitted of murder by the Assize Court at Naples . After a return to New York , President Arthur sailed for Haifa on July 19 for what would be her last voyage for American Palestine . 
 = = The demise of American Palestine = = 
 By this time , the company , perpetually undercapitalized by its own admission , faced mounting financial troubles . On July 10 , the company had to post an indemnity bond to avoid the impoundment of President Arthur for a disputed bill owed to Morse Dry Dock for the ship 's 1924 refit . The following month , President Arthur was used as collateral for $ 100 @,@ 000 loan from a Bronx bank , but it was too little , too late . American Palestine Line was placed in receivership on September 11 by federal judge Thomas D. Thacher of the U.S. District Court after suit was brought by a creditor . Eight days later , President Arthur , docked at the foot of West 34th Street , experienced a two @-@ alarm fire in her forward cargo hold that brought out both land @-@ based firefighters and the New York City Fire Department fireboat James Duane . In December , the line was accused of fraud in some of its prior financial dealings , charges the company denied . By the time all the legal wrangling was finished , President Arthur was back in the hands of the USSB , and the furniture and fixtures of the American Palestine offices were sold at public auction by the company 's receiver in early March 1926 . 
 = Ecgric of East Anglia = 
 Ecgric ( killed circa 636 ) was a king of East Anglia , the independent Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom that today includes the English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . He was a member of the ruling Wuffingas dynasty , but his relationship with other known members of the dynasty is not known with any certainty . Anna of East Anglia may have been his brother , or his cousin . It has also been suggested that he was identical with Æthelric , who married Hereswith and was the father of Ealdwulf of East Anglia . The primary source for the little that is known about Ecgric 's life is Bede 's Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum . 
 In the years that followed the reign of Rædwald and the murder of Rædwald 's son ( and successor ) Eorpwald in around 627 , East Anglia lost its dominance over other Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms . Three years after Eorpwald 's murder at the hands of a pagan , Ecgric 's kinsman Sigeberht returned from exile and they ruled the East Anglians together , with Ecgric perhaps ruling the northern part of the kingdom . Sigeberht succeeded in re @-@ establishing Christianity throughout East Anglia , but Ecgric may have remained a pagan , as Bede praises only Sigeberht for his accomplishments , and his lack of praise for his co @-@ ruler is significant . Ecgric ruled alone after Sigeberht retired to his monastery at Beodricesworth in around 634 : it has also been suggested that he was a sub @-@ king who only became king after Sigeberht 's abdication . Both Ecgric and Sigeberht were killed in battle in around 636 , at an unknown location , when the East Anglians were forced to defend themselves from a Mercian military assault led by their king , Penda . Ecgric , whose grave may have been the ship burial under Mound 1 at Sutton Hoo , was succeeded by Anna . 
 = = East Anglian allegiances = = 
 After 616 , Rædwald , who ruled East Anglia during the first quarter of the seventh century , was the most powerful of the southern Anglo @-@ Saxon kings . In the following decades , from the reign of Sigeberht onwards , East Anglia became increasingly dominated by Mercia . Raedwald 's son Eorpwald was murdered by a pagan noble soon after he was baptised in around 627 , after which East Anglia reverted into paganism for three years . In the void left by the death of Rædwald , the first overlord who originated north of the Thames , the pagan Penda of Mercia , emerged to challenge the pre @-@ eminence of the new overlord ( or bretwalda ) , Edwin of Northumbria . The reversion of East Anglia to rule by Eorpwald 's successor , the pagan Ricberht , possibly due to Mercian influence , temporarily overthrew an important pillar of Edwin 's authority . 
 In contrast , two sons of Rædwald 's brother Eni , who were both eager to renew their Christian alliances , made diplomatic marriages during this period : Anna , who was to become a devout Christian ruler , married a woman of East Saxon connection and his brother Æthelric married a Northumbrian princess , Hereswitha , who was Edwin of Northumbria 's grand @-@ niece . This marriage was probably intended to reinforce the conversion of East Anglia to Christianity . 
 = = Wuffingas identity = = 
 Ecgric was a member of the Wuffingas royal family , but his exact descent is not known , as the only information historians have is from Bede , who named him as Sigeberht 's cognatus or ' kinsman ' . The 12th century English historian William of Malmesbury contradicts Bede , stating that Sigeberht was Rædwald 's stepson . The name Sigeberht is not of East Anglian , but of Frankish origin . Rædwald may have exiled his step @-@ son , so as to protect the inheritance of his son Ecgric , who was of his own blood @-@ line . 
 It has been suggested by Sam Newton that Ecgric may in fact be identical to Eni 's son Æthelric , whose descendants became kings of East Anglia . Æthelric 's son Ealdwulf ruled from about 664 to 713 . After Ecgric 's death , three other sons of Eni ruled in succession before Ealdwulf , an indication that Raedwald 's line was extinct . Æthelric 's marriage to Hereswith suggests that it was expected that he would rule East Anglia and he may have been promoted by Edwin before 632 . Æthelric was apparently dead by 647 , at which time Anna was already ruling and Hereswith had gone to Gaul to lead a religious life . It has therefore been argued that Æthelric and Ecgric were in fact the same person , a suggestion that is disputed by the historian Barbara Yorke , who notes that the two names are too distinct to be compatible . 
 Ecgric / Æthelric placed as the son of Rædwald or the son of Eni 
 = = Joint rule = = 
 Rædwald 's son ( or stepson ) Sigeberht renewed Christian rule in East Anglia after returning as a Christian from exile in Gaul ( into which Rædwald had driven him ) . His assumption of power may have involved a military conquest . His reign was devoted to the conversion of his people , the establishment of the see of Dommoc as the bishopric of Felix of Burgundy , the creation of a school of letters , the endowment of a monastery for Fursey and the building of the first monastery of Beodricesworth ( Bury St Edmunds ) , all accomplished within about four years . 
 During at least part of Sigeberht 's reign , Ecgric ruled jointly with him over part of the kingdom of East Anglia . A passage in Bede 's Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis Anglorum describing the reasons for Sigeberht 's abdication also mentions Ecgric : 
 " This king became so great a lover of the heavenly kingdom , that quitting the affairs of his crown , and committing the same to his kinsman , Ecgric , who before held a part of that kingdom , he went himself into a monastery , which he had built , and having received the tonsure , applied himself rather to gain a heavenly throne " : 
 — Bede , Ecclesiastical History of the English People 
 According to Richard Hoggett , the practice of being ruled by more than one individual may have been a common occurrence in East Anglia as it was for the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms of Kent and Northumbria . Ecgric and Sigeberht may have simultaneously ruled the peoples known as the North @-@ folk and South @-@ folk , who lived in the parts of their kingdom that would later become the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . However , Carver notes that Ecgric may not have reigned jointly with Sigeberht , but could just have plausibly ruled as a sub @-@ king or served as an administrator within a region under East Anglian hegemony , only rising as king of the East Angles after Sigeberht 's abdication . 
 In contrast with Sigebert , Ecgric seems to have remained a pagan . There is no evidence that he was baptised or that he promoted Christianity in East Anglia , according to D. P. Kirby , who notes that Bede wrote nothing that could imply that Ecgric was a Christian , in contrast to his praise of Sigeberht ’ s efforts to establish Christianity in East Anglia . 
 = = Reign following Sigeberht 's abdication = = 
 In 633 the Christian kingdoms had suffered a dual shock : Edwin of Northumbria 's death at the hands of Penda of Mercia and Cadwallon ap Cadfan , and the retreat of Edwin 's household and bishop from York to Kent . After 633 the Northumbrian situation was stabilised under Oswald of Northumbria , and East Anglia shared with Northumbria the benefits of the Irish missions of Fursey and Aidan of Lindisfarne . Sigeberht was Fursey 's patron and perhaps soon after his arrival Sigeberht abdicated and retired to the monastery at Beodricesworth ( modern Bury St. Edmunds ) . His abdication , which cannot be dated , left Ecgric to rule the East Anglians alone . Ecgric therefore ruled a kingdom that had been " evangelised in the united spirit of the Roman and Irish Churches " , according to Plunkett , who notes that Felix would have respected the teachings of the Irish missionaries , despite his own strong allegiance towards Canterbury . 
 = = Death = = 
 After Ecgric had been ruling alone for two years , East Anglia was attacked by a Mercian army , led by Penda . The date of the invasion is usually given as around 636 , although Kirby suggests it could have been so late as 641 . Ecgric was sufficiently forewarned as to be able to gather an army , described by Bede as <unk> or splendid . Realising that they would be inferior in battle to the war @-@ hardened Mercians and remembering that Sigeberht was once their most vigorous and distinguished leader , the East Anglians urged him to lead them in battle , hoping that his presence would encourage them not to flee from the Mercians . After he refused , on account of his religious calling , he was borne off against his will to the battlefield . He refused to bear weapons and so was killed . Ecgric was also slain during the battle and many of his countrymen either perished or were put to flight . The location of the site of the battle in which the East Anglians were routed and their king was killed is unknown , but it can be presumed to have been close to the kingdom ’ s western border with the Middle Angles . 
 Ecgric is a possible contender , as well as Rædwald , Eorpwald and Sigeberht , for being the East Anglian king who was buried within Mound 1 at Sutton Hoo . Rupert Bruce @-@ Mitford suggests that it is perhaps unlikely that Ecgric ’ s successor Anna , a devout Christian , would have given him a ship burial , but he does not dismiss the theory entirely . 
 = Dante Lavelli = 
 Dante Bert Joseph " <unk> " Lavelli ( February 23 , 1923 – January 20 , 2009 ) was an American football end who played for the Cleveland Browns in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) and National Football League ( NFL ) from 1946 to 1956 . Starring alongside quarterback Otto Graham , fullback Marion Motley , placekicker Lou Groza and fellow receiver Mac Speedie , Lavelli was an integral part of a Browns team that won seven championships during his 11 @-@ season career . Lavelli was known for his sure hands and improvisations on the field . He was also renowned for making catches in critical situations , earning the nickname " Mr. Clutch " . " Lavelli had one of the strongest pairs of hands I 've ever seen , " Browns coach Paul Brown once said of him . " When he went up for a pass with a defender , you could almost always count on him coming back down with the ball . " 
 Lavelli grew up in Hudson , Ohio and played football , baseball and basketball at his local high school . After graduating , he enrolled at Ohio State University , where he played only a handful of games before he was drafted for service in the U.S. Army during World War II . Returning in 1945 after serving in Europe , he joined the Browns in the team 's first @-@ ever season in the AAFC . Helped by Lavelli 's play , the Browns won each of the AAFC 's championships before the league dissolved in 1949 and the team was absorbed by the NFL . Cleveland continued to succeed in the NFL , winning championships in 1950 , 1954 and 1955 . Lavelli , who helped found the National Football League Players Association toward the end of his career , retired after the 1956 season . 
 After retiring from football , Lavelli held a variety of coaching and scouting jobs and was active in NFL alumni affairs . He also ran a furniture store in Rocky River , Ohio . He was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1975 . He died in a Cleveland hospital in 2009 . 
 = = Early life and high school career = = 
 Lavelli was born and grew up in Hudson , Ohio , a small town in the northeastern part of the state . Both of his parents were Italian immigrants . His father Angelo Lavelli was a blacksmith who made shoes for horses on nearby farms . As a child , he practiced catching by throwing baseballs against walls and trying to catch them when they bounced back . He liked to have friends throw ping @-@ pong balls at him to see if he could catch them . 
 Lavelli was a standout as a running back at Hudson High School and developed a reliable set of hands . Lavelli 's Hudson High Explorers football team had three undefeated seasons and won three county championships . He also played baseball and basketball in high school . 
 Notre Dame offered Lavelli a scholarship , and he committed to attend the school . After he had a chance encounter with Eddie Prokop , however , an able running back who was a fifth @-@ string player for Notre Dame , Lavelli was convinced to look elsewhere . " If Eddie Prokop were a fifth @-@ string player , I was not one to sit on anyone 's bench , " he later said . Lavelli enrolled at Ohio State University in 1941 after learning that Paul Brown was appointed the football team 's new head coach . Brown had developed a sterling reputation as the high school coach at Massillon Washington High School in Massillon , Ohio , losing only eight games in nine years there . Lavelli 's catching ability had made him a star infielder in high school , and the Detroit Tigers of Major League Baseball recruited him to play second base in the low minor leagues . He refused the invitation , opting to concentrate on football . 
 = = College career and military service = = 
 On arrival at Ohio State , Lavelli roomed with Les Horvath and Don McCafferty and played on the freshman team under coach Trevor Rees . Brown switched Lavelli to end ( the position is now called wide receiver ) . His playing time with the football team was limited , however , due to injury . He became a first @-@ string end as a sophomore in 1942 , but was ailing from a <unk> horse in his thigh and sat out the first game of the season against a Fort Knox military team . He had recovered by the third game of the season and started in a game against Southern California . Lavelli was hit in the knee while grabbing for a pass near the end of the game , however , and broke a bone . He was sidelined for the rest of the season . The Buckeyes won the college football national championship that year . 
 After the 1942 season , Lavelli was drafted by the U.S. Army as American involvement in World War II intensified . After basic training and a number of other specialized courses on land @-@ sea assaults , he was sent with the 28th Infantry Division to fight in the European Theatre of World War II . There his division landed on Omaha Beach , part of the Allied invasion of Germany @-@ occupied France in 1944 . He was involved with American forces in Germany 's Battle of the Bulge offensive and in the Siege of Bastogne later the same year . One in five members of his division was killed in battle . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 After returning from the war , Lavelli was again offered a chance to play baseball with the Tigers . He saw a matchup in late 1945 between the National Football League 's New York Giants and Washington Redskins and noticed that a former teammate at Ohio State named Sam Fox was an end for the Giants . " I thought if he could make the grade , so could I , " Lavelli later said . When Paul Brown offered him a chance to play on a new professional team he was coaching in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) in 1946 , Lavelli jumped at the opportunity . He was given a $ 500 bonus ( $ 6 @,@ 067 in today 's dollars ) for signing with the team , called the Cleveland Browns . 
 Lavelli attended the Browns ' first training camp in 1946 . Competition was fierce for a spot on the roster , but Lavelli was one of the men who made it . He was up against a number of National Football League veterans and former college stars . " The toughest game I ever played in was the first intrasquad scrimmage game , " he said later . " Nobody talked to each other for two days . " He joined an offense that featured quarterback Otto Graham , fullback Marion Motley , placekicker Lou Groza and fellow end Mac Speedie . Lavelli quickly became Graham 's top passing target and led the AAFC in receiving as a rookie with 40 receptions and 843 yards . The Browns made it to the league championship that season , and Lavelli caught the game @-@ winning touchdown in a 14 – 9 victory over the AAFC 's New York Yankees . The victory " didn 't mean so much then , but as time goes on , it builds , " Lavelli said in 2008 . 
 The Browns won the AAFC championship again in 1947 . Lavelli finished second in the league in receiving behind his teammate Speedie . Both Lavelli and Speedie were named to all @-@ AAFC teams , as they had been in 1946 . Lavelli broke his leg in a preseason game in 1948 and sat out seven weeks . He came back later in the year and helped Cleveland finish a perfect season , catching a touchdown pass in a 31 – 21 win over the AAFC 's Brooklyn Dodgers in the championship game . In a game against the Los Angeles Dons the following year , Lavelli caught four touchdowns and had 209 receiving yards , an AAFC record . In 1949 Cleveland won the AAFC championship for the fourth year in a row . The AAFC dissolved before the 1950 season and three of its teams , including the Browns , were absorbed by the more established National Football League ( NFL ) . Lavelli was the AAFC 's all @-@ time leader in yards per catch and second in receiving yards behind Speedie . 
 As the Browns won in the AAFC , Lavelli continued his studies at Ohio State between seasons and got his degree in 1949 . He married Joy Wright of <unk> , Ohio that year . 
 When Cleveland entered the NFL in 1950 , questions lingered about whether the team could sustain its early dominance . The Browns , however , began the season by beating the defending NFL champions , the Philadelphia Eagles . The team finished with a 10 – 2 regular @-@ season record and reached the championship game after winning a playoff game against the New York Giants . In the championship against the Los Angeles Rams , Lavelli caught 11 passes – then a record for a title game – and had two touchdown receptions . The Browns won the game 30 – 28 . 
 Cleveland reached the NFL championship game the following year but lost to the Rams . The 1952 and 1953 seasons followed a similar pattern : the Browns made it to the championship game but lost both times to the Detroit Lions . Lavelli was named to the Pro Bowl in 1951 and 1953 . He was seventh in the NFL in receiving yards in 1951 , with 586 . He gained 783 receiving yards in 1953 , the fifth @-@ highest total in the league . 
 Over the years , Lavelli developed a reputation for making big plays when they counted most , as he had done with his touchdown reception in the Browns ' first championship game in 1946 . He was nicknamed " Mr. Clutch " in a Pittsburgh Steelers scouting report , although " <unk> " – a name bestowed upon him by Browns announcer Bob Neal – was more widely used . He practiced with Graham tirelessly to refine routes and was not afraid to run over the middle , where he risked a pounding from defenders when the ball came his way . " Dante was the greatest guy at catching a ball in a crowd that I have ever seen , " Brown once said . Among other innovations , he and Graham also mastered sideline patterns at a time when few teams used them . 
 The Browns won another championship in 1954 , thanks in part to a strong regular @-@ season performance from Lavelli . Lavelli led the team in receiving that year and made the Pro Bowl after the Browns beat the Lions for their second NFL title . A third NFL championship followed in 1955 . In the championship game against the Rams , Lavelli caught a touchdown in the second quarter and scored a second time on a 50 @-@ yard pass just before the end of the first half . The Browns won 38 – 14 . 
 Lavelli initially planned to retire in 1955 but came back for a final year in 1956 , when the Browns posted a 5 – 7 record , the team 's first @-@ ever losing season . In his 11 @-@ year career , Lavelli caught 386 passes for 6 @,@ 488 yards and 62 touchdowns . He was a confident receiver , former teammates said in later years . He could often be heard calling for Graham to throw him the ball while running routes . He was also known for his ability to improvise on the field . In a 1955 game against the Eagles in slippery conditions , he caught the winning touchdown with less than a minute left by swinging around the goalpost with his arm to get open . 
 During his Browns career , Lavelli was involved in the creation of the National Football League Players Association . The concept of a union to represent players in league matters was hatched in Lavelli 's basement in 1954 . Lavelli and two teammates , Abe Gibron and George Ratterman , met every Wednesday to discuss the union . They approached Creighton Miller , a Cleveland lawyer and former Notre Dame star who had worked briefly as an assistant coach with the Browns , for help . The union was founded at a meeting before the NFL championship game in 1956 . The following year , the players got $ 50 per exhibition game , a $ 5 @,@ 000 minimum salary , injury pay and medical care . The union is now the primary representative of players in labor negotiations and disputes with the NFL . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After retiring from football , Lavelli ran an appliance business on Cleveland 's west side . From 1961 through 1963 , he served as an assistant to Graham , who was coaching college stars in the annual College All @-@ Star Game . Lavelli was also an assistant coach with the Browns and a scout for the Chicago Bears . He later owned a furniture store in Rocky River , Ohio and had an interest in two bowling alleys . He had a hand in founding the NFL Alumni Association , a charitable organization . 
 Lavelli was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1975 , joining former teammates Graham , Motley and Groza and coach Paul Brown . Later in life , he <unk> and attended NFL alumni events and lobbied to get the NFL to recognize his and other players ' AAFC statistics . The NFL refused to incorporate AAFC statistics into its own when the league dissolved and the Browns became part of the NFL , in contrast to the NFL 's recognition of statistics from the American Football League ( AFL ) following the AFL @-@ NFL merger . Lavelli called it a " double standard " . He died in 2009 at 85 at Fairview Hospital in Cleveland of congestive heart failure and bladder and kidney infections and is buried in St. Mary 's Cemetery , Hudson , OH . He and his wife Joy had three children , Lucinda , Edward and Lisa ; as well as four grandchildren , Aaron , Noah , Luke and Danielle . Hudson High 's stadium is named in honor of him . 
 The Akron Community Foundation established a Dante Lavelli Scholarship Fund in 2010 to help Hudson High athletes pay for college . “ He was one of the best I ’ d ever seen , ” Willie Davis , a defensive end who played for the Browns shortly after Lavelli retired , said . “ He set the mold with his running patterns and catching the ball . ” After Lavelli died , Graham praised his abilities and remembered his eagerness to get his hands on the ball . " He was always coming into the huddle and telling me he was open and that I should throw to him , " Graham said . " He wasn 't saying that to be a big shot . He just loved to play . If he was open by a few inches , he 'd be yelling , ' Otto , Otto . ' Many a time when I was stuck and heard that voice I would throw it in his direction and darned if he didn 't come down with it . He had fantastic hands . " 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Air Mata Iboe = 
 Air Mata Iboe ( Perfected spelling : Air Mata Ibu ; Malay for A Mother 's Tears ) is a 1941 film from the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) directed and written by Njoo Cheong Seng . Starring Fifi Young , Rd Ismail , Ali Sarosa , and Ali Joego , it followed a mother who raises her children lovingly but is ultimately betrayed by her eldest sons when she falls upon hard times . The film , billed as a musical extravaganza , featured a soundtrack by R. Koesbini , and an eponymous title song written by Njoo . 
 The last production completed by Fred Young 's Majestic Film Company , Air Mata Iboe was released in December 1941 , shortly before the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies . This film , now possibly lost , received positive reviews . A remake was produced under the same title in 1957 ; Young retook her role . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Soegiati ( Fifi Young ) is the mother of four children : sons Achmad ( Rd Ismail ) , Idris ( S Poniman ) and Soemadi ( Ali Sarosa ) , and a daughter named Soepinah ( Soelami ) . She loves them all , but Soemadi receives the most of her attention because he receives little from his father , the merchant Soebagio ( Ali Joego ) . As the children grow , they marry and move away , and eventually only Soemadi is left . Although he begins a relationship with a young woman named <unk> ( Soerip ) , he does not marry her as his income is not enough to support them . 
 On the night of Eid al @-@ Fitr , the family gathers for the holiday . Unknown to the family , Soebagio is leading a double life as a robber , and that evening the police come to arrest him . To protect his father , Soemadi declares himself the culprit , and he is exiled . Feeling guilty for his sins , Soebagio falls ill and dies soon afterwards . Because of their debts , their home and belongings are repossessed , leaving Soegiati to fend for herself . 
 Though wealthy , Achmad and Idris refuse to take Soegiati in , fearing their respective wives <unk> ( Titing ) and Mariam ( Ning @-@ Nong ) . Soepinah and her husband Bakar ( Koesbini ) are willing to take her in , but they live in poverty . Unwilling to burden them , ultimately Soegiati decides to leave and find her own way , depending on the kindness of strangers . Years pass , and Soemadi returns from exile . Encountering his mother , who now lives in poverty , he decides to take revenge on his brothers . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Malang @-@ based Majestic Film Company announced Air Mata Iboe in June 1941 together with two other films , Boedi <unk> ( Hidden Wisdom ) and <unk> Karam ( <unk> Ark ) . Production began soon afterwards and , by early December 1941 , over 55 reels had been shot , as well as 60 sound reels . 
 Air Mata Iboe was written and directed by Njoo Cheong Seng under his penname M. d 'Amour ; he had previously directed <unk> Hati ( Heart and Soul ; 1941 ) , which also had a tragic ending , for the company . The film was produced by the company 's owner , Fred Young . It starred Njoo 's wife Fifi Young ( no relation to Fred ) , Rd Ismail , Ali Sarosa , and Ali Joego . Other roles were held by established singers of keroncong ( traditional music with Portuguese influences ) , including Soerip , Titing , Soelami , Ning Nong , and Poniman . The film , which used make @-@ up to make Fifi Young age into an old woman over the course of its plot , was the actress ' first for Majestic ; she had been ill during the production of her husband 's debut for the company . 
 The black @-@ and @-@ white film featured eleven keroncong songs written by music director R. Koesbini , who also had a role in the film . Backing music was provided by Koesbini 's troupe , the <unk> <unk> , while songs were performed by the cast . Notes and lyrics for the film 's title song , " Air Mata Iboe " , were published in the December 1941 edition of Pertjatoeran Doenia dan Film . 
 = = Release and legacy = = 
 Air Mata Iboe , which was rated for all ages , was distributed by Columbia Pictures and premiered at Sampoerna Theatre in Surabaya on 24 December 1941 . Also advertised under the Dutch title Tranen <unk> Moeder ( a literal translation from Malay ) , the film was promoted as a " musical extravaganza " ; other advertisements emphasised the size of the cast . An anonymous review in the Soerabaijasch Handelsblad noted the extensive use of keroncong and praised the acting and singing , suggesting that native audiences would flock to see the film . 
 Air Mata Iboe was the last film produced by Majestic Film Company , which closed following the Japanese occupation . During the occupation Njoo , Fifi Young , and Fred Young established their own travelling theatrical troupe , Pantjawarna , though all returned to cinema in the 1950s . Joego likewise returned to film after spending the occupation in theater . Poniman , Sarosa , Ismail , and Soerip all returned to cinema , the men in the 1950s and Soerip in 1973 . Soelami is not recorded as acting in any further productions . 
 A remake of Air Mata Iboe was produced in 1957 , after Indonesia had obtained its independence . Directed by Fred Young , the film had Fifi Young retake her role as <unk> , while Rd Ismail took the role of Subagio . The remake 's other cast members had not appeared in the original film . The sons Achmad , Idris , and Soemadi were portrayed by Sukarno M. Noor , Boes Boestami , and <unk> , respectively . The couple 's daughter , renamed Atikah , was played by Farida <unk> . 
 Air Mata Iboe may be lost . Movies in the Indies were recorded on highly flammable nitrate film , and after a fire destroyed much of Produksi Film Negara 's warehouse in 1952 , old films shot on nitrate were deliberately destroyed . Thus , the American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider wrote that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Indonesian Film Catalogue ) records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and Biran writes that several Japanese propaganda films have survived at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Ocean of Sound = 
 Ocean of Sound is a compilation album compiled and produced by English musician and author David Toop . The two @-@ disc , cross @-@ licensed " various artists " compilation contains 32 tracks culled from a variety of musical sources , including dub , exotica , free jazz , and field recordings . Toop compiled the recordings to serve as both a historical survey of ambient music and an aural companion to his 1995 book Ocean of Sound : Aether Talk , Ambient Sound and Imaginary Worlds . 
 Ocean of Sound was released in January 1996 by Virgin Records . It was well received by music critics and finished fourth in the voting for The Village Voice 's annual Pazz & Jop poll . The album later went out of print . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1995 , David Toop published his second book , Ocean of Sound : Aether Talk , Ambient Sound and Imaginary Worlds , which examined music as a medium for deep mental involvement . In the book , Toop said that ambient music can be defined as music listened for relaxation or music that " taps into the disturbing , chaotic undertow of the environment " . As an aural companion to the book , Toop curated the compilation album Ocean of Sound , which would also serve as a historical survey of ambient music . The album was released in January 1996 by Virgin Records . It later went out of print , which music journalist <unk> Matos said was because such cross @-@ licensed compilation albums " seldom stay available for very long " . 
 = = Music = = 
 Ocean of Sound is a two @-@ disc , cross @-@ licensed " various artists " compilation that contains 32 tracks culled from a variety of musical sources , including dub , exotica , free jazz , and field recordings . According to AllMusic 's John Bush , all of the songs compiled for the album recapitulate the theme of the book — " that Les Baxter , Aphex Twin , The Beach Boys , Herbie Hancock , King Tubby and My Bloody Valentine are all related by their effect on sound pioneering . " In an interview for Perfect Sound Forever , Toop explained why he included free jazz on an album of ambient music , which is commonly thought of as background music : 
 Toop programmed the recordings for the album so that they would segue into one another . Ocean of Sound begins with three songs by Jamaican dub producer King Tubby , American jazz keyboardist Herbie Hancock , and English electronic musician Aphex Twin , respectively , before transitioning to compositions by Claude Debussy , John Cage , the Beach Boys , and Peter <unk> , as well as an audio recording of Buddhist monks . Toop programmed the Velvet Underground 's 1968 song " I Heard Her Call My Name " so that its muted feedback would segue into an underwater recording of bearded seals barking . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In a contemporary review for The Wire , Peter Shapiro said he was impressed by how Ocean of Sound highlighted musical similarities among its disparate artists , calling it a manifestation of the book 's discussion and " a remarkable collection of great music " . The Independent wrote that " Toop navigates smoothly between the various strands that have contributed to the current techno / ' fourth @-@ world ' style of ambient @-@ pop " , because he used sources such as Oriental music , minimalism , and classical composers . Michaelangelo Matos from the Chicago Reader viewed it as an idyllic compilation whose songs segued fluently because of Toop 's aesthetic , while noting they could also stand alone as interesting , if not excellent , separate pieces : " Ocean of Sound is one of those records that have something to teach even the most jaded music fan about how to listen to music . " In a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five @-@ star review , AllMusic 's John Bush recommended the album to any " wide @-@ ranging ambient fan " and said that it illustrates the ideas in Toop 's book " beautifully " . 
 Ocean of Sound was voted the fourth best compilation of 1996 in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics published by The Village Voice . Robert Christgau , the poll 's supervisor , named it the year 's best compilation in his own list for the Pazz & Jop . In a retrospective review , he gave the record an " A " grade and deemed it a " gorgeously segued 32 @-@ track tour of trad ambient " with recordings that were smaller representations of larger generational concerns such as disorder and anxiety : " For Toop , it answers a need that 's both postmodern and millennial , synthesizing insecurity and hope , ' bliss ' and ' non @-@ specific dread . ' " In a 2011 list for Spin , Chuck Eddy named Ocean of Sound the most essential album of ambient music , writing that its 32 tracks " flowed into each other like the seven seas " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Ocean of Sound are adapted from AllMusic . 
 = Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic = 
 The Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic ( also known as The Bud Billiken Day Parade ) is an annual parade held since 1929 in the Bronzeville neighborhood of Chicago , Illinois , United States ; it is the largest African @-@ American parade in the nation . It is held annually on the second Saturday in August . 
 Robert S. Abbott , the founder and publisher of the Chicago Defender , created the fictional character of Bud Billiken , which he featured in a column in his paper . David Kellum suggested the parade as a celebration of African @-@ American life . It is now the second largest annual parade in the United States . The focus of the parade is on educating Chicago 's youth . 
 In the 21st century , the parade features celebrities , politicians , businessmen , civic organizations and youth . It begins in the Bronzeville neighborhood on Chicago 's South Side and ends in Washington Park . The parade has been televised on WGN @-@ TV ( 1978 – 2012 ) , WLS @-@ TV ( 1984 – present ) and <unk> @-@ TV ( 2012 – 2014 ) . National and international celebrities have attended and some have served as the parade 's Grand Marshal . The 86th Annual Parade took place on August 8 , 2015 , and was televised on WLS @-@ TV . In 2016 , the second Saturday in August falls on August 13 . 
 = = History = = 
 Bud Billiken is a fictional character created in 1923 by Abbott , who had been considering adding a youth section to the Chicago Defender newspaper . While dining at a Chinese restaurant he noticed a Billiken . Some of the early Billiken columns were written by Willard Motley , who later became a prominent novelist . During the early 1930s , names of international youth were listed in the " Bud Billiken " section of the newspaper every week . Between 1930 @-@ 34 , approximately 10 @,@ 000 names appeared and were archived in the Carter G. Woodson Regional Library of the Chicago Public Library . 
 During the Great Depression , Abbott featured the Bud Billiken character in his newspaper as a symbol of pride , happiness and hope for black residents . The character gained prominence in a comic strip and the Chicago Defender newspaper . Although the character was created in 1923 , the parade did not begin until 1929 , when David Kellum initiated it as a celebration of the " unity in diversity for the children of Chicago " . It has since grown to become a locally televised event and the second largest parade in the nation . 
 The parade , which began on August 11 , 1929 , now includes politicians , beauty queens , celebrities , musical performers , and dozens of marching , tumbling and dancing groups . It has grown from a locally sponsored event to one with major corporate presence and is seen as a signal of the impending end of summer and beginning of the new school year . As such the parade sponsors raise money for college scholarships for local youth . 
 The parade route has changed over the years . The original route was along Michigan Avenue beginning at 31st Street , then turned east into Washington Park . Concern for north @-@ south traffic flow caused rerouting the parade route to South Parkway ( now named Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr . Drive ) , which runs directly into the park . At various times , street repairs have necessitated use of the Michigan route , but the current route is now the King Drive route . Freeman <unk> and Charles Correll of Amos ' n ' Andy fame were the first guests of honor in the original parade . Robert S. Abbott led the first parade in his Rolls Royce . Dr. Marjorie Stewart Joyner , president of the Chicago Defender Charities , Inc . , organized the parade for over 50 years . Numerous high @-@ profile celebrities and dignitaries have attended the parade over the years , including U.S. President Harry S. Truman , Michael Jordan , Joe Louis , Muhammad Ali , Duke Ellington , Adelaide Hall , Oprah Winfrey , Diana Ross , Lena Horne , Ethel Waters , Cab Calloway , Paul Robeson and Billie Holiday . Truman rode alongside John H. <unk> , who was Abbott 's nephew and took over the Chicago Defender in 1948 , and Mayor Richard J. Daley in the 1956 Parade . 
 Recent parades have featured popular musical acts as concert performers at the post @-@ parade picnic . In 2006 , approximately 26 million people saw the parade , including 25 million television viewers and 1 @.@ 2 million attendees . The 2006 parade included 74 @,@ 000 participants and 160 floats and vehicles . The 2008 parade was dedicated to actor and comedian Bernie Mac ( star of The Bernie Mac Show ) and a native of Chicago ; he died an hour before the start of the parade . 
 In 1993 , a request by a black LGBT group to participate in the parade was declined by the organizers . Following legal action and the involvement of Lambda Legal , the Ad Hoc Committee of Proud Black Lesbians and Gays was allowed to participate in the parade . 
 = = Parade = = 
 The parade has categorized contests for participants such as best float , and best marching band . It takes place in Chicago 's Bronzeville neighborhood , starting at 35th Street and Dr. Martin Luther King Drive at the southern border of the Douglas community area , south of the landmark Victory Monument . It continues south to 55th Street in Washington Park . This route covers approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . This route takes the parade through the Grand Boulevard and Washington Park community areas . 
 = = = 2007 Parade = = = 
 At the 78th annual parade in 2007 , then @-@ U.S. Senator Barack Obama served as the Grand Marshal for the second year in a row . Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley attended , and march participants included U.S. Senator Dick Durbin , Lieutenant Governor of Illinois Pat Quinn and the Rev. Al Sharpton . One float represented the Chicago 2016 Committee and included past Chicago Olympians Bob Pickens , Willie May , Diane Simpson @-@ Bundy and Kenny Johnson as well as the son of <unk> Nicholson . The Chicago Bulls ' mascot made a guest appearance . 
 = = Grand Marshal = = 
 A notable figure is invited each year to serve as Grand Marshal , often featuring politicians or entertainers . Chicago native and R & B singer Chaka Khan served as Grand Marshal at the 85th annual parade in 2014 . 
 = = Theme = = 
 Bud Billiken Parade is themed every year by the parade committee . The tradition began in 1940 when the parade organizers themed the parade " Americanism " to demonstrate patriotism in the US within the African @-@ American community . Other themes over the years : 
 = = Picnic = = 
 The parade begins at 10 A.M. and ends at 4 P.M. After the parade , visitors are welcomed to stay in Washington Park for a picnic . The picnic has various festivities and vendor booths . The post @-@ parade festivities often include a concert . The 2006 parade featured Yung Joc , and the 2007 parade featured Pretty Ricky . However , it seems neither picnic included a concert . 
 = = Violence = = 
 The 2003 parade featured B2K . The concert was free with virtually unlimited space in the park for viewing . However , the crowd became unruly causing the concert to be curtailed . Over 40 attendees were taken to hospitals as a result of injuries in the violence , including two teenagers who were shot . At the 2014 parade , Two teenagers were shot after an altercation involving a group of black youths along the parade route near the 4200 block of King Drive around 12 : 30 pm . 
 = Hillsboro , Oregon = 
 Hillsboro is the fifth @-@ largest city in the State of Oregon and is the county seat of Washington County . Lying in the Tualatin Valley on the west side of the Portland metropolitan area , the city hosts many high @-@ technology companies , such as Intel , that comprise what has become known as the Silicon Forest . At the 2010 Census , the city 's population was 91 @,@ 611 . 
 For thousands of years before the arrival of European @-@ American settlers , the Atfalati tribe of the Kalapuya lived in the Tualatin Valley near the later site of Hillsboro . The climate , moderated by the Pacific Ocean , helped make the region suitable for fishing , hunting , food gathering , and agriculture . Settlers founded a community here in 1842 , later named after David Hill , an Oregon politician . Transportation by riverboat on the Tualatin River was part of Hillsboro 's settler economy . A railroad reached the area in the early 1870s and an interurban electric railway about four decades later . These railways , as well as highways , aided the slow growth of the city to about 2 @,@ 000 people by 1910 and about 5 @,@ 000 by 1950 , before the arrival of high @-@ tech companies in the 1980s . 
 Hillsboro has a council – manager government consisting of a city manager and a city council headed by a mayor . In addition to high @-@ tech industry , sectors important to Hillsboro 's economy are health care , retail sales , and agriculture , including grapes and wineries . The city operates more than twenty parks and the mixed @-@ use Hillsboro Stadium , and ten sites in the city are listed on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) . Modes of transportation include private vehicles , public buses and light rail , and aircraft using the Hillsboro Airport . The city is home to Pacific University 's Health Professions Campus . Notable residents include two Oregon governors . 
 = = History = = 
 The first people of the Tualatin Valley were the Atfalati or <unk> tribe of the Kalapuya , who inhabited the region for up to 10 @,@ 000 years before white settlers arrived . The valley consisted of open grassland maintained through annual burning by the Atfalati , with scattered groves of trees along the streams . The Kalapuya moved from place to place in good weather to fish and hunt and to gather nuts , seeds , roots , and berries . Important foods included camas and wapato , and the Atfalati traded for salmon from Chinookan tribes near Willamette Falls on the Willamette River . During the winter , they lived in longhouses in settled villages , some near what became Hillsboro and Beaverton . Their population was greatly reduced after contact in the late 18th century with Europeans , who carried smallpox , syphilis , and malaria . Of the original population of 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 Atfalati reported in 1780 , only 65 remained in 1851 . In 1855 , the U.S. government sent the survivors to the Grande Ronde reservation further west . 
 The European @-@ American community was founded by David Hill , Isaiah Kelsey , and Richard Williams , who arrived in the Tualatin Valley in 1841 , followed by six more pioneers in 1842 . The locality went by two other names — East Tualatin Plains and Columbia — before it was named " Hillsborough " in February 1850 in honor of Hill , when he sold part of his land claim to the county . On February 5 , 1850 , commissioners chosen by the territorial legislature selected the community to be the seat of the county government . Hill was to be paid $ 200 for his land after plots had been sold for the town site , but he died before this occurred , and his widow Lucinda received the funds . The town 's name was later simplified to Hillsboro . A log cabin was built in 1853 to serve as the community 's first school , which opened in October 1854 . Riverboats provided transportation to Hillsboro as early as 1867 when the side @-@ wheel steamer Yamhill worked on the Tualatin River . 
 In 1871 , the Oregon and California Railroad line was extended to the area , but it ran just south of town because the city did not want to give the railroad land in exchange for the rail connection . Hillsboro was incorporated as the Town of Hillsboro on October 19 , 1876 , by the Oregon Legislature . The first mayor was A. <unk> , who took office on December 8 , 1876 , and served a one @-@ year term . Notable later mayors included Congressman Thomas H. Tongue ( 1882 and 1886 ) and state senator William D. Hare ( 1885 ) . In 1923 , the city altered its charter and adopted a council @-@ manager government with a six @-@ person city council , a part @-@ time mayor who determined major policies , and a city manager who ran day @-@ to @-@ day operations . 
 On September 30 , 1908 , 5 @,@ 000 people gathered as the Oregon Electric Railway opened a connection between the city and Portland with an interurban electric rail line , the first to reach the community . In January 1914 , the Southern Pacific Railroad introduced its own interurban service , known as the Red Electric , on a separate line and serving different communities between Hillsboro and Portland . SP discontinued its Hillsboro service on July 28 , 1929 , while the Oregon Electric Railway 's passenger service to Hillsboro lasted until July 1932 . 
 A brick building was constructed in 1852 to house the county government , followed by a brick courthouse in 1873 . In 1891 , the courthouse was remodeled and a clock tower was added , and the building was expanded with an annex in 1912 . A new courthouse replaced the brick structure in 1928 . The last major remodel of the 1928 structure occurred in 1972 , when the Justice Services Building was built and incorporated into the existing building . 
 The city 's first fire department was a hook and ladder company organized in 1880 by the board of trustees ( now city council ) . A drinking water and electricity distribution system added in 1892 – 93 gave the town three fire hydrants and minimal street lighting . Hillsboro built its first sewer system in 1911 , but sewage treatment was not added until 1936 . In 1913 , the city built its own water system , and the first library , Carnegie City Library , opened in December 1914 . From 1921 to 1952 , the world 's second @-@ tallest radio tower stood on the south side of the city , but in 1952 , the wireless telegraph tower was demolished . 
 In 1972 , the Hillsboro City Council passed a Green River Ordinance banning door @-@ to @-@ door solicitation , but it was ruled unconstitutional by the Oregon Supreme Court in a 1988 decision . The court determined that the city ordinance was overly broad , in a case that was seen as a test case for many similar laws in the state . In 1979 , Intel opened its first facility in Hillsboro . The Hawthorn Farm campus was followed by the Jones Farm campus adjacent to the airport in 1982 , and finally by the Ronler Acres campus in 1994 . TriMet opened a Metropolitan Area Express ( MAX ) light rail line into the city in 1998 . A cultural center was added in 2004 , and a new city hall was completed in 2005 . In 2008 , <unk> opened a facility producing solar wafers , crystals , and cells , the largest plant of its kind in the Western Hemisphere . U.S. President Barack Obama visited the city and Intel 's Ronler Acres campus in February 2011 . 
 = = = Registered Historic Places = = = 
 Properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) in and around Hillsboro include the Old Scotch Church , completed in 1876 north of the city . Near the Orenco neighborhood is Imbrie Farm , which includes a house built in 1866 and the Frank Imbrie Barn , both of which McMenamins converted for use as a brewpub . Built in 1935 , the Harold Wass Ray House is near Intel 's Hawthorn Farm campus . Historic properties in downtown include the Zula Linklater House ( completed 1923 ) , Rice – Gates House ( 1890 ) , Edward Schulmerich House ( c . 1915 ) , and Charles Shorey House ( c . 1908 ) . The Richard and Helen Rice House is adjacent to the Sunset Highway on the north side of the city and houses the Rice Northwest Museum of Rocks and Minerals . The Old Washington County Jail had been at the Washington County Fairgrounds in the city , but was restored and moved to the Washington County Museum outside the city in 2004 , and was de @-@ listed from the NRHP in 2008 . In 2007 , the Manning – <unk> Farm was added to the NRHP and includes 10 buildings , dating to as early as 1883 . The Malcolm McDonald House in Orenco was added to the Registry in 2015 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Hillsboro is located at 45 ° 31 ′ N 122 ° 59 ′ W. The United States Census Bureau reports the city has a total area of 21 @.@ 6 square miles ( 55 @.@ 9 km2 ) , all of which is land . In 2013 , Hillsboro itself reported an area of 23 @.@ 88 square miles ( 61 @.@ 8 km2 ) , equivalent to 15 @,@ 283 acres ( 61 @.@ 8 km2 ) . The city is located in the Tualatin Valley , and the Tualatin River forms part of the southern city limits . The city 's terrain is fairly level , consistent with an agricultural past and the farms still in operation . Hillsboro is about 17 miles ( 27 km ) west of Portland and immediately west of Beaverton , at an elevation of 194 feet ( 59 m ) above sea level . In addition to the Tualatin River , streams include Dairy Creek , McKay Creek , Rock Creek , Dawson Creek , and Turner Creek . Neighboring communities in addition to Beaverton are Aloha , Cornelius , North Plains , Reedville , Scholls , and West Union . 
 Hillsboro 's street system differs from many others in the county . Most cities in Washington County use a numbering system and cardinal direction orientation based on a grid that begins at the Willamette River in downtown Portland , which was originally part of Washington County . For example , the street names in Beaverton generally include Southwest ( SW ) prefixes because Beaverton lies in the southwest quadrant of the Portland grid . In Hillsboro , some county road names and addresses conform to the Portland grid instead of Hillsboro 's internal cardinal direction grid , and the city has been working to make addresses and streets within Hillsboro conform to the internal grid . 
 The internal grid in Hillsboro centers on the downtown intersection of Main Street , which runs east – west , and First Avenue , which runs north – south . Most addresses within the city include a quadrant prefix : NW , NE , SW , or SE . Main Street is simply designated as East Main or West Main , and First Avenue is only North First or South First . Addresses on the streets ' south side and the avenues ' east side have even numbers , while odd numbers are on the opposite side . Hillsboro 's street system contains 20 blocks per mile ( 12 @.@ 5 blocks per kilometer ) . 
 North – south through roadways are called avenues , while east – west roadways are called streets . All cul @-@ de @-@ sacs are named as either places or courts . Roads that curve can be named drives . Non @-@ city streets may not conform to these naming conventions . 
 The city is divided into eight planning areas , each of which contains several neighborhoods . The east planning area contains the Tanasbourne neighborhood and Oregon Health & Science University 's West Campus . The northeast planning area includes the Orenco , Orenco Station , Airport , and West Union neighborhoods . Jackson School , Sunrise , and Glencoe neighborhoods lie in the northwest area , and the Dennis , Garibaldi , and Connell neighborhoods are in the west area . The central area includes the Downtown , Jackson Bottom , Henry , and Eastwood neighborhoods . Blocks in the downtown core are 400 feet ( 120 m ) long on each side . The Minter Bridge , Rood Bridge , and River Road neighborhoods are in the south planning area ; the southeast area consists of the Reedville and Witch Hazel neighborhoods , and the Brookwood planning area in the center of the city contains the Cedar , Bentley , and Brogden neighborhoods . 
 Landmarks in Hillsboro include the Washington County Courthouse , the seat of county government . Along the western edge of the city is Hillsboro Pioneer Cemetery , established in 1870 , which serves as the final resting place of city pioneers and politicians . Next to the airport is the Washington County Fair Complex , home to the annual county fair . Located at Shute Park is the 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) tall wood sculpture Chief <unk> @-@ Tah , donated to Hillsboro and dedicated in 1987 as part of Peter Wolf Toth 's Trail of the Whispering Giants . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Summers in Hillsboro are generally warm , but temperatures year @-@ round are moderated by a marine influence from the Pacific Ocean . The Willamette Valley in which Hillsboro lies receives the majority of its precipitation during the winter months , with the wettest period from November through March . This occasionally includes snowfall . Hillsboro receives precipitation on 161 days per year , on average . The average yearly precipitation between 1930 and 1998 was 38 inches ( 970 mm ) . August is the warmest month with an average high temperature of 81 ° F ( 27 ° C ) , while January is the coolest month with an average high of 46 ° F ( 8 ° C ) . The highest recorded temperature , 108 ° F ( 42 ° C ) , occurred on July 19 , 1956 , and the lowest , − 10 ° F ( − 23 ° C ) , occurred on January 31 , 1950 . 
 According to the Köppen climate classification system , Hillsboro has a warm @-@ summer Mediterranean climate ( Köppen Csb ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Hillsboro 's population grew from 402 in 1880 to 2 @,@ 016 by 1910 , making it the county 's most populated city , according to the 1910 census data . By 1970 , it had increased to more than 15 @,@ 000 , although neighboring Beaverton had overtaken it as the county 's most populous city . By 1990 there were more than 37 @,@ 000 residents , and commuters raised this to 110 @,@ 000 during daytime . At the 2010 Census , the population was 91 @,@ 611 , fifth in rank among the state 's largest cities behind Portland , Eugene , Salem and Gresham and slightly ahead of Beaverton , which ranked sixth . This figure was a 30 @.@ 5 percent increase from Hillsboro 's 70 @,@ 186 residents in 2000 , which made Hillsboro the fourth fastest @-@ growing city in the state during the 2000s ( decade ) , and the fastest @-@ growing city in the Willamette Valley over the same period . In 2007 , there were 17 @,@ 126 houses lived in by their owners , with an average home price in the city of $ 246 @,@ 900 . Bloomberg Businessweek listed the city as the fastest @-@ growing in Oregon for the period between 1990 and 2010 , for cities with populations over 10 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = 2010 census = = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 91 @,@ 611 people , 33 @,@ 289 households , and 22 @,@ 440 families residing in the city . The population density was about 3 @,@ 800 inhabitants per square mile ( 1 @,@ 500 / km2 ) . There were 35 @,@ 487 housing units at an average density of about 1 @,@ 500 per square mile ( 600 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was approximately 73 % White , 2 % African American , 1 % Native American , 9 % Asian , less than 1 % Pacific Islander , 10 % from other races , and 5 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were about 23 % of the population . 
 There were 33 @,@ 289 households of which about 38 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 51 % were married couples living together , 11 % had a female householder with no husband present , 5 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 33 % were non @-@ families . About 24 % of all households were made up of individuals and 6 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 71 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 24 . 
 The median age in the city was 32 years . About 27 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 9 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 35 % were from 25 to 44 ; 21 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 8 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 50 @.@ 2 % male and 49 @.@ 8 % female . 
 = = = 2000 census = = = 
 At the time of the 2000 census , there were 25 @,@ 079 households , of which about 38 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 55 % were married couples living together , 9 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 32 % were non @-@ families . About 23 % of all households were made up of individuals and 5 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 8 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 3 . 
 City residents included about 28 % under the age of 18 , 11 % from 18 to 24 , 37 % from 25 to 44 , 17 % from 45 to 64 , and 6 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 30 years . For every 100 females there were about 106 males . 
 The median household income was about $ 52 @,@ 000 and the median family income was $ 57 @,@ 000 . Males had a median income of $ 41 @,@ 000 compared to $ 30 @,@ 000 for females . The per capita income for the city was about $ 22 @,@ 000 . Approximately 6 % of families and 9 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 11 % of those under age 18 and 8 % of those age 65 or over . In 2007 , 28 % of people 25 and older held at least a bachelor 's degree , while an additional 11 % held an associate degree . Those with less than a high school diploma made up 15 % of the population , and 22 % of residents had more than a high school diploma but less than a college degree . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 For the year 2011 , the city had 180 violent crimes reported to law enforcement , and 2 @,@ 154 reports of property crimes . The violent crime rate was 157 @.@ 2 per 100 @,@ 000 people compared to a national average of 309 @.@ 3 and 287 for Oregon . Property crime nationally was 3 @,@ 335 per 100 @,@ 000 compared to 3 @,@ 203 in Hillsboro , and 4 @,@ 402 for the state . Violent offenses include forcible rape , robbery , murder , non @-@ negligent manslaughter , and aggravated assault . Property crimes include arson , motor vehicle theft , larceny , and burglary . Statistics published by the Oregon Criminal Justice Commission showed a slight downward trend in the Washington County crime rate between 1991 and 2005 . The rate for index crimes , a group comprising the combined violent offenses and property crimes mentioned above , was 3 @,@ 930 per 100 @,@ 000 in 1991 and rose to 4 @,@ 440 per 100 @,@ 000 in 1997 before falling to 3 @,@ 410 per 100 @,@ 000 in 2005 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Manufacturing is the leading employment sector in Hillsboro , employing 24 % of the workforce , followed by health care , education , and social services with a total of 15 % . One example of a manufacturer headquartered in Hillsboro is Beaverton Foods , a family @-@ owned condiment manufacturer since 1929 , with 70 + employees and $ 25 million in annual sales ; it moved to its current headquarters in 2001 . Retail employment constitutes 12 % , construction makes up 7 % , and 13 % of workers are employed in the administrative , scientific , professional , or waste management industries . Sixty @-@ eight percent of workers commute alone to the workplace , and eight percent use public transportation . The average one @-@ way commute time is about 24 minutes . 
 Many technology companies operate in Hillsboro , making it the center of Oregon 's Silicon Forest . In particular , Intel 's largest site is in Hillsboro , and includes three large campuses : Ronler Acres , Jones Farm , and Hawthorn Farm , along with several smaller campuses that employ about 16 @,@ 000 workers . Other high @-@ tech companies operating facilities in Hillsboro include Yahoo ! , Credence Systems , <unk> , <unk> , Salesforce , and Oracle 's ( formerly Sun Microsystems ) High @-@ End Operations . Hillsboro is the co @-@ corporate headquarters for <unk> ( formerly <unk> Semiconductor ) , <unk> , and Planar Systems among others . 
 In 2006 , Genentech announced plans to locate a packaging and distribution facility on 100 acres ( 0 @.@ 40 km2 ) in Hillsboro . The $ 400 million facility opened in 2010 , which Oregon officials hoped would eventually also be used for research and development for the biotechnology company . Other biotech or medical companies based in Hillsboro include FEI Company and <unk> . 
 The city is also a landing point on three fiber optic cable systems linking the United States across the Pacific Ocean : <unk> , Southern Cross Cable , and VSNL <unk> . These cable landings , lower energy costs , and tax breaks led to a boom of data centers being built starting about 2010 . Data centers include those for Adobe , NetApp , Umpqua Bank , OHSU , and Fortune Data Centers . 
 Hillsboro serves as the corporate headquarters for Rodgers Instruments , <unk> , Norm Thompson Outfitters , <unk> , and Parr Lumber , among others . Fujitsu and NEC Corporation formerly had factories in Hillsboro . Hillsboro is also home to the Laika stop @-@ motion animation studio , creator of the Oscar @-@ nominated feature films Coraline ( 2009 ) and <unk> ( 2012 ) . 
 The Hatfield Government Center in Hillsboro is the western terminus of the MAX Blue Line , part of the Portland metropolitan area 's light @-@ rail system . The presence of MAX prompted the development of the pedestrian @-@ oriented community of Orenco Station within Hillsboro . ( See also : Orenco , Oregon . ) Orenco Station was called the Best Planned Community of 1999 by the National Association of Home Builders . It was also named " Best new <unk> " by Sunset magazine in 2006 . Hillsboro overall was listed on CNN Money Magazine 's list of best places to live in 2010 for cities with populations between 50 @,@ 000 and 300 @,@ 000 residents . The city came in at 92 , the highest ranking for any city in the state . 
 Hillsboro 's primary commercial cores are concentrated along Tualatin Valley Highway and Cornell Road . Additionally , the Tanasbourne neighborhood is a regional shopping area on the eastern edge of the city . The neighborhood is home to the lifestyle shopping center The Streets of Tanasbourne . The $ 55 million outdoor complex with 368 @,@ 000 square feet ( 34 @,@ 200 m2 ) of retail space opened in 2004 with Meier & Frank ( later Macy 's ) as the anchor tenant . 
 The other large shopping center in the city is The Sunset Esplanade , located along Tualatin Valley Highway . In November 2005 , the world 's largest Costco , a warehouse club store , opened in Hillsboro . The store , with 205 @,@ 000 square feet ( 19 @,@ 000 m2 ) of floor space , is about 60 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 600 m2 ) bigger than the average Costco . 
 Wineries near the city include Oak Knoll Winery , established in 1970 , the oldest and largest winery in Washington County . Helvetia Winery & Vineyards to the north of Hillsboro started in the 1980s . Wineries to the south include Gypsy Dancer Estates Winery and Raptor Ridge . Local wines include pinot noir , pinot gris , and chardonnay . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Within the city are three commercial movie theaters with a total of 30 screens . This includes the Venetian Theatre that re @-@ opened at the site of the old Town Theater in 2008 . The Oregon Chorale ( a 60 @-@ person symphonic choir ) , a men 's barbershop chorus , the Hillsboro Symphony Orchestra , and the Hillsboro Artists ' Regional Theatre are also located in Hillsboro . The orchestra was founded in 2001 under the direction of Stefan Minde . In 2004 , the city opened the Glenn & Viola Walters Cultural Arts Center in a remodeled church in downtown . The center provides space for galleries and performances , as well as classrooms for art instruction . The Rice Northwest Museum of Rocks and Minerals is located on the northern edge of the city . The Washington County Museum returned to downtown Hillsboro in 2012 when it moved into the Civic Center . 
 Hillsboro operates two library branches . Opened in 2007 after a smaller location was closed , the 38 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 500 m2 ) main branch is located in the north @-@ central section of the city . The older , smaller second branch is in Shute Park in the southwest area of the city . The Hillsboro libraries are part of Washington County Cooperative Library Services , which allows residents to use other libraries in the county and includes interlibrary loans . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 AM radio station <unk> , the weekly Hillsboro Argus newspaper ( twice @-@ weekly until 2015 ) , and the Hillsboro Tribune are based in Hillsboro . The Argus is published on Wednesdays , and has been in circulation since 1873 . <unk> is a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ watt station broadcasting at the 1360 frequency . The Tribune started in September 2012 and now publishes weekly . The city is also served by Portland @-@ area media outlets including The Oregonian , Willamette Week , and all broadcast stations . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 Hillsboro 's Department of Parks and Recreation operates more than 20 facilities , including Hillsboro Stadium . There are 23 parks , two sports complexes , the Walters Cultural Arts Center , the Shute Park Aquatic & Recreation Center , and three other mixed @-@ use facilities . The city also owns the Jackson Bottom Wetlands Preserve along the Tualatin River on the south side of the community . South of city is Bald Peak State Scenic Viewpoint , which is day @-@ use only , and is the closest state park to Hillsboro . L.L. " Stub " Stewart Memorial State Park is the closest full @-@ service state park . 
 Local golf courses include The Reserve Vineyards and Golf Club ( 36 holes ) that was completed in 1997 , Meriwether National Golf Course ( 27 holes ) established in 1961 , and the 9 @-@ hole McKay Creek Golf Course that was built in 1995 . Other courses in the area include Killarney West Golf Club ( 9 holes ) , Rock Creek Country Club ( 18 holes ) , Forest Hills Country Club ( 18 holes ) , and Pumpkin Ridge Golf Club ( 36 holes ) . 
 Hillsboro 's annual Fourth of July Parade is the second @-@ largest Independence Day parade in Oregon . The Oregon International Air Show , Oregon 's largest air show , is held each year during the summer at the Hillsboro Airport . Each summer the city offers a free concert series at Shute Park ( Showtime at Shute ) , while the Washington County Fair is held annually at the county fairgrounds adjacent to the airport . 
 Hillsboro Farmers ' Markets operates weekend farmers ' markets on Saturdays downtown and on Sundays at Orenco Station , from May to October . The Saturday market began in 1982 and sells arts and crafts , food , produce , and plants . A different organization , Hillsboro Tuesday Marketplace , operates a downtown farmers ' market on Tuesdays from mid @-@ June through September 1 . Farmers ' markets also operate on Wednesday afternoons from June through August at Kaiser Permanente and on Thursday afternoons at Tuality Hospital from June through August . 
 The city has one professional sports team , the Hillsboro Hops of the Northwest League , a Minor League Baseball club affiliated with the Arizona Diamondbacks . The baseball team relocated from Yakima , Washington in 2012 and began play as the Hops on June 14 , 2013 , with its inaugural home game at the new Ron Tonkin Field on June 17 . 
 = = Government = = 
 Hillsboro operates under a council – manager form of city government . Voters elect six at @-@ large councilors and a mayor , who each serve four @-@ year terms , subject to a charter @-@ imposed limitation of two consecutive terms . The mayor and council appoint a city manager to conduct the ordinary business of the city . Policy decisions are the responsibility of the council and mayor . Administrative functions are carried out by the manager and manager @-@ appointed staff . Government functions are centered at the Hillsboro Civic Center , which houses the office of the city manager and is the location of the twice @-@ monthly city council meetings . As of November 2015 , Jerry Willey was mayor with Darell <unk> , Rick Van Beveren , Kyle Allen , Olga Acuña , Steve Callaway , and Fred Nachtigal as the city councilors . Michael Brown serves as the city 's manager . 
 Hillsboro operates its own library system , fire department , parks department , water system , and police department . The Hillsboro Fire Department has five stations , and the Hillsboro Police Department operates two standard precincts and a mobile precinct . Wastewater treatment is provided through the county @-@ wide Clean Water Services . 
 At the federal level , Hillsboro lies in Oregon 's 1st congressional district , represented by Suzanne <unk> . In the State Senate , Hillsboro is in District 15 , represented by Bruce Starr , District 13 , represented by Larry George , and District 12 represented by Brian Boquist . In the House , Districts 24 ( Jim Weidner ) , 26 ( John Davis ) , 29 ( Ben Unger ) and 30 ( Joe Gallegos ) cover the city . Parts of county commissioner districts 1 ( Dick Schouten ) , 2 ( <unk> <unk> ) , and 4 ( Andy <unk> ) overlap the city . In addition , Hillsboro lies within District 4 ( Kathryn Harrington ) of the Metro regional government . 
 = = Education = = 
 Public schools in Hillsboro are operated by the Hillsboro School District ( 1J ) . The district is a unified school district with twenty @-@ three elementary schools , four middle schools , and four high schools . The district also operates the Miller Education Center , an alternative school , the Hare Field athletic complex , and City View Charter School . The school district covers Hillsboro , Scholls , Reedville , North Plains , West Union , and other surrounding communities . Total enrollment as of 2012 was 20 @,@ 903 students , making it the fourth largest district in the state . The four traditional public high schools are , in order of creation : 
 Post @-@ secondary educational opportunities include the west campus of Oregon Health & Science University ( OHSU ) while Pacific University operates a satellite Health Professions Campus in downtown adjacent to Tuality Community Hospital . The OHSU site was formerly that of the Oregon Graduate Institute ( now <unk> School of Science and Engineering ) and the Oregon National Primate Research Center portions of OHSU . Other educational opportunities are available at the Work Force Training Center ( Portland Community College ) and a branch of the University of Phoenix . Hillsboro is home to private primary and secondary schools including Faith Bible High School , St. Matthew Catholic School , Tualatin Valley Academy , and Renaissance Alternative School , among others . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Public transportation is available by bus and light rail , managed by regional transit agency TriMet . The first MAX light rail line , now known as the Blue Line , was extended to serve Hillsboro on September 12 , 1998 . The western terminus is located downtown . The Willow Creek and Hillsboro transit centers ( TC ) are the main hubs of the public transit system , although seven other MAX stations provide varying degrees of bus interconnection . MAX Stations ( west to east ) are the Hatfield Government Center , Hillsboro Central TC , Tuality Hospital , Washington / Southeast 12th Avenue , Fair Complex / Hillsboro Airport , Hawthorn Farm , Orenco , <unk> , and Willow Creek TC . Located next to the Tuality Hospital station is the Hillsboro Intermodal Transit Facility , which opened in 2010 and was jointly paid for by the hospital , Pacific University , and the city . The facility is primarily a parking garage , but includes lockers and showers for bicyclists along with electric vehicle charging stations . 
 Freight rail service from Portland and Western Railroad with interconnections to the BNSF Railway and the Union Pacific Railroad both serve Hillsboro . The city is not served by passenger rail service over a heavy @-@ rail line . Air travel is available at the Hillsboro Airport in the center of the city and at Stark 's Twin Oaks Airpark , a general aviation field south of the city . The Hillsboro Airport is a general aviation airport operated by the Port of Portland , and is the second @-@ busiest airport in the state after Portland International Airport . The airport mainly serves private pilots and corporate flights , with no scheduled airline flights from its two runways , but does have an on @-@ call customs service . 
 Oregon Route 8 , known locally as the Tualatin Valley Highway ( TV Highway ) , is the primary east – west highway . U.S. Route 26 , also known as the Sunset Highway , bisects the northeast corner of the city . Other major east – west roads are Cornell Road and Main Street / Baseline Road . Major north – south routes are Oregon Route 219 / 1st Street , 10th Street / Cornell Road , Cornelius Pass Road , and Brookwood . The easternmost north – south route , 185th Avenue , borders Beaverton and runs between the Tanasbourne Town Center and the rest of Hillsboro . TV Highway connects to Cornelius and Forest Grove to the west and Beaverton to the east . 
 = = = Health care = = = 
 Hospital services in the city are provided by Tuality Community Hospital in the downtown area of the city . Opened in 1918 as the city 's first hospital , the 167 @-@ bed facility is operated by Tuality Healthcare . Other significant medical facilities include Kaiser Permanente 's Sunset Medical Office and Providence Health & Services ' immediate care center , both in the Tanasbourne neighborhood . Kaiser Permanente also opened the Kaiser Westside Medical Center , a 126 @-@ bed hospital in 2013 , next to its Sunset Medical Office . The Department of Veterans Affairs opened a medical clinic in the Tanasbourne area in 2008 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 For more than 150 years , the city has had residents as varied as David Hill , the city 's founder , to Tiffeny Milbrett , an Olympic and World Cup champion soccer player . Two governors of Oregon , James Withycombe and Paul L. Patterson , have called the city home . Other politicians included Congressmen Thomas H. Tongue and Samuel Thurston ; mayors William N. Barrett , Benjamin P. Cornelius , and William D. Hare , patriarch of the Hare political family . Athletes include Erik Ainge , Scott Brosius , Colt <unk> , Ad <unk> , Wes Schulmerich , Wally Backman , and Olympic medalists Josh Inman , Thomas <unk> , and Jean <unk> . Hillsboro has also been home to Peggy Y. Fowler , the former chief executive officer of Portland General Electric , producer Bryce Zabel , the " Mother Queen of Oregon " Mary Ramsey Wood , Tommy Overstreet , and professional wrestler Roddy Piper . 
 = = Sister city = = 
 Hillsboro 's only sister city relationship is with Fukuroi , a city of about 85 @,@ 000 residents in the Shizuoka Prefecture in central Japan . The cities , which have similar economic bases in agriculture and high technology , began their relationship in November 1988 . The relationship has included exchanges of students between schools in each city . In the late 2000s , Hillsboro unsuccessfully explored finding a sister city in Mexico and also neglected the relationship with Fukuroi . However , in 2008 , a Fukuroi contingent of adults visited Hillsboro to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the Sister City agreement . 
 = Cayman Islands at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 The Cayman Islands sent a delegation to compete at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . The delegation included fifteen people ; of the delegation , four athletes participated under the Caymanian flag . In the track and field events was Ronald Forbes , who also served as the Cayman Islands ' flag @-@ bearer during the Opening Ceremony and reached quarterfinals in the 110m hurdles , and Cydonie Mothersille , who reached finals and ranked eighth in the 200m dash . Brothers Shaune and Brett Fraser , both swimmers , participated in the 100 and 200m freestyle and in the 200m backstroke , respectively . The Cayman Islands ' appearance at the Beijing Olympics marked its ninth appearance since its debut at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal . The Cayman Islands , up to and including Beijing , have yet to medal . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Cayman Islands first participated in the Olympics when they sent two male athletes to compete in the <unk> 1976 Summer Olympic Games . Between then and Beijing , the Cayman Islands participated in eight Olympic games , including every summer Olympic competition excluding the Moscow 1980 Summer Olympics . The number of Caymanian athletes participating in Olympic events peaked at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona with ten athletes , but has since fallen . In the Beijing Olympics , the Cayman Islands sent four athletes — three men and a woman — to participate in two distinct sports . Two athletes progressed to post @-@ preliminary rounds ( Ronald Forbes and Cydonie Mothersille ) in their events , and Mothersille , ranked eighth in the final round of her event . However , as of and including its participation in Beijing , the Cayman Islands had yet to medal . Ronald Forbes carried the Caymanian flag at ceremonies . 
 The Cayman Islands Olympic Committee financed the participation of Brett Fraser in swim meets to prepare for the Beijing Olympics . Runner Cydonie Mothersill and swimmer Shaune Fraser were recipients of the Beijing Olympic Scholarship , which was awarded by the International Olympic Committee and paid for their training expenses . The Caymanian Olympic delegation received donations from the Cayman Islands Post Office , Atlantic Star , Ltd , and its director , Fahad Al Rashid , in addition to sponsorships that the athletes garnered . In addition to the athletes , the delegation to Beijing included eleven people . Among the rest of the delegation was <unk> president Donald McLean , athletics coach Kendrick Williams , swimming coaches Dominic Ross and Mark Block , and past president <unk> Miller . 
 In addition to the actual Olympic delegation , the Cayman Islands sent two 17 @-@ year @-@ old athletes — Courtney Stafford , a squash player , and Joseph Jackson , a sailor — to attend the Olympic Youth Camp in Beijing and witness the opening ceremony , torch relay , and various Olympic events . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Former Florida International University athlete Ronald Forbes participated in the men 's 110 meters hurdles event on behalf of the Cayman Islands . His participation in the Beijing Olympics marked his debut at the Olympic games . Forbes ' qualification in the hurdle event made him the first British Virgin Islander to participate in Olympic hurdling . While at the Olympics , Forbes was placed in Heat 3 of the 17 August first round in the event against , among others , Colombia 's Paulo Villar and Barbadian Ryan Brathwaite , who scored first and second in the heat . Forbes ranked fifth out of eight with a time of 13 @.@ 59 seconds ; he was 0 @.@ 06 seconds behind China 's Shi <unk> and 0 @.@ 13 seconds ahead of Puerto Rico 's Hector Cotto Gonzalez . Overall , Forbes tied Russia 's Igor <unk> for 19th place out of 43 athletes . He progressed to the second round on 19 August , where he was placed in Heat 4 against France 's <unk> <unk> and American David Oliver . He again ranked fifth out of eight with a time of 13 @.@ 72 seconds . Overall , Forbes ranked 26th out of 32 athletes , and did not progress to semifinals . 
 Women 
 Jamaica @-@ born former Clemson University athlete Cydonie Mothersill qualified for the women 's 200 meter dash and participated on behalf of the Cayman Islands . 30 years old at the time of the Beijing Olympics , Mothersill had been participating in the Olympics since she was 18 at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta . She also attended the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney and the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , but only started running her present event in Sydney . In Beijing , Mothersill participated in the first round of her event on 18 August , where she was placed in Heat 1 versus the United States ' Muna Lee and France 's Muriel Hurtis @-@ Houari . Mothersill ranked third in the heat with a time of 22 @.@ 76 seconds , placing behind Hurtis @-@ Houari by 0 @.@ 04 seconds . Overall , Mothersill ranked third in the event out of 48 athletes , behind Lee and Hurtis @-@ Houari . She progressed to the 19 August second round and was placed in Heat 1 , which included Jamaica 's Veronica Campbell and the Bahamas ' Debbie Ferguson . Mothersill ranked fourth of eight , earning a time of 22 @.@ 83 seconds . She fell behind Ferguson by 0 @.@ 06 seconds , and placed ahead of fifth place heat finalist <unk> <unk> of Romania by 0 @.@ 29 seconds . Cydonie Mothersill tied Muna Lee in Round 2 for ninth place out of 32 athletes . Mothersill qualified for semifinals on 20 August , and was placed in Heat 2 . Mothersill ranked fourth out of eight , this time running the event in 22 @.@ 61 seconds and falling behind Jamaican Sherone Simpson and American Marshevet Hooker by 0 @.@ 11 seconds , but beating Hurtis @-@ Houari by 0 @.@ 1 seconds . Mothersill ranked ninth in the event out of sixteen . During the final races , Mothersill ran the event in 22 @.@ 68 seconds , and ranked eighth overall . 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Then @-@ University of Florida student Brett Fraser was the youngest participant in the Caymanian delegation during the Beijing Olympics , at age 18 . He swam for the Cayman Islands alongside his brother , Shaune Fraser , although Brett Fraser specifically qualified for the Men 's 200 meter backstroke event . Brett Fraser 's participation in the Beijing Olympics marked the first time he participated in any Olympic games . During the Olympics themselves , Fraser was placed in Heat 1 during the 13 August preliminary round , where he challenged two other athletes : Oleg <unk> of Kazakhstan , and Sergey Pankov of Uzbekistan . Fraser completed his event with a time of 2 : 01 @.@ 17 , placing him 0 @.@ 78 seconds ahead of second @-@ place heat finalist <unk> , and almost two seconds ahead of third @-@ place heat finalist Pankov . Fraser lead his heat , but ranked 29th place out of 42 athletes overall , falling approximately five seconds behind round leader Ryan Lochte of the United States , who later medaled gold in the event . Brett Fraser did not progress to the next round . 
 Former University of Florida student Shaune Fraser , elder brother of Brett Fraser , also participated in swimming events at Beijing . The Olympic games in Beijing marked the second appearance by Shaune Fraser , who appeared before in the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens when he was 16 years old . Fraser qualified for three events in Beijing : the 100 meters freestyle , the 200 meters freestyle , and the 100 meters butterfly . He previously participated in the 200 meters freestyle in Athens . In the 200 meters freestyle , Fraser participated in Heat 5 during the 10 August preliminaries . Other swimmers in his heat were Israel 's Nimrod Shapira Bar @-@ Or and South Africa 's Darian Townsend , who respectively ranked first and second in the heat , while Fraser ranked fifth out of eight athletes with a time of 1 : 48 @.@ 60 . Fraser ranked behind Japan 's Sho Uchida by 0 @.@ 26 seconds , and ahead of Greece 's Andreas <unk> by 0 @.@ 22 seconds . Overall , Fraser ranked 26th out of 58 athletes . He did not progress to the semifinals in the event . In the 100 meters freestyle , Fraser participated in Heat 5 during the 12 August preliminary rounds . He swam against athletes including the Czech Republic 's Martin Verner and Hungary 's Balazs <unk> , and completed the event in 49 @.@ 56 seconds . Fraser placed fourth out of eight athletes , placing between Uruguay 's Martin <unk> ( 5th place , 50 @.@ 08 seconds ) and Balazs and Lithuania 's <unk> <unk> ( tied for 2nd place , 49 @.@ 27 seconds ) . Overall , Fraser tied Yuriy <unk> for 36th place out of 64 athletes . He did not advance to semifinals . Lastly , in the 100 meters butterfly , Shaune Fraser participated in Heat 2 of the 14 August preliminary rounds . He competed against , among others , Malaysia 's Daniel Bego and Suriname 's Gordon Touw Ngie Tjouw . Fraser ranked first in the heat out of seven athletes with a time of 54 @.@ 08 seconds . Bego , the second @-@ place heat finalist , was 0 @.@ 3 seconds behind him . Overall , Fraser ranked 51st out of 66 athletes , and did not progress to the semifinal round . 
 Men 
