 = The Price of Gold = 
 " The Price of Gold " is the fourth episode of the American fairy tale / drama television series Once Upon a Time . The series takes place in the fictional seaside town of Storybrooke , Maine , in which the residents are actually characters from various fairy tales that were transported to the " real world " town by a powerful curse . This episode centers on Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) coming to the aid of a young pregnant woman ( Jessy Schram ) who is trying to escape from Storybrooke and Mr. Gold ( Robert Carlyle ) , which parallels with Cinderella 's ( Schram ) regrettable deal she made with Rumpelstiltskin ( Carlyle ) . 
 The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer David H. Goodman , while being directed by David Solomon . Goodman used the newly introduced character of Cinderella to reveal more of Emma 's backstory , as she had no flashbacks to draw upon . Schram 's casting was confirmed in August 2011 , when it was revealed that Cinderella 's storyline would differ from the traditional fairytale . Goodman wrote the character as a naive though sweet woman who makes bad decisions that places her in even more " unfortunate circumstances . " 
 " The Price of Gold " first aired in the United States on ABC on November 13 , 2011 . An estimated 11 @.@ 327 million viewers watched the episode , placing second in its timeslot and seventeenth overall for the week . Television critics have viewed the episode positively , with many believing it was an improvement over previous installments . Carlyle 's performance was also cited as a highlight , as was the episode 's deviation from Cinderella 's traditional story . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Opening Sequence = = = 
 Cinderella 's Fairy Godmother is shown <unk> in the forest . 
 = = = In the Characters ' Past = = = 
 In the Enchanted Forest , Cinderella ( " Ella " ) is about to receive a wish from her fairy godmother , but the godmother is killed first by Rumpelstiltskin ( Robert Carlyle ) and robbed of her wand . He grants Ella ( Jessy Schram ) her wish to escape her home , but in return requires her to sign a contract . Rumpelstiltskin transforms Ella into an elegant woman complete with glass slippers , warning her that all magic has a price . Several months later , at a gala wedding ball for Ella and her new husband , Prince Thomas ( Tim Phillipps ) , Snow White ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) and Prince Charming ( Joshua Dallas ) congratulate the couple on their wedding , as does Rumpelstiltskin who tells Ella that he does not care for her riches or baubles , but instead shall claim her firstborn child . 
 Ella tells Thomas about the deal with Rumpelstiltskin . Seeking to avoid fulfilling this deal , Thomas , Charming , Grumpy , and The Blue Fairy ( Keegan Connor Tracy ) come up with a plot to capture Rumpelstiltskin by luring him into signing another contract . Hours later , Ella and Rumpelstiltskin meet to sign the deal . Ella lies to him and says she is expecting twins and will give him both of the babies in exchange for improving the crops and wealth of the kingdom . A skeptical Rumpelstiltskin agrees , but as he signs the contract , he is rendered powerless due to a special red quill pen , that was created by The Blue Fairy . He is captured , but Thomas disappears soon after . Ella demands that Rumpelstiltskin tell her what has happened , but he claims not to have done anything . He reminds her that all magic has a price , and that until her debt is paid she will never see Thomas again . 
 = = = In Storybrooke = = = 
 In the present day , Sheriff Graham ( Jamie Dornan ) gives Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) an offer to become his deputy . Later , Regina ( Lana Parrilla ) tells Emma that she is no longer afraid of her staying in the town , and cites Emma 's mobile lifestyle . Emma encounters a 19 @-@ year @-@ old pregnant maid named Ashley Boyd ( Schram ) , crying about not having a future for both her and her baby . Emma tells Ashley that she knows how it feels to have a baby at a young age . She encourages Ashley to take charge and change her life . Later that evening , Ashley breaks into Mr. Gold 's pawn shop and steals a contract from a safe . While there , she is confronted by Mr. Gold , who attempts to stop her . Ashley attacks him , leaving him unconscious on the floor of his shop . 
 The next day , Mr. Gold asks Emma to track down Ashley . He claims that she has something that belongs to him and that Ashley is unstable and troubled . Emma reluctantly agrees , and learns from Ruby ( Meghan Ory ) that she should stop by the home of her ex @-@ boyfriend Sean ( Phillipps ) . Emma goes there and speaks to Sean and his father , finding out that it is the latter that has told him not to get involved with the pregnant teenager . Emma discovers that Ruby has given her car to Ashley so that she can leave Storybrooke and head to Boston . Emma and Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) find the vehicle has crashed just short of the city 's limits , with Ashley about to deliver the baby . 
 Back at the hospital , Ashley gives birth to a girl , just in time for Mr. Gold to pick up his " merchandise . " Emma tells Mr. Gold that even if he was to take the child away , he could face legal troubles that could cost him dearly . Mr. Gold then offers a deal for Emma in which he 'll give up his questionable claim to the child and in return , Emma will owe him a favor . Emma agrees . After she leaves , Sean shows up to see his child , and they name the girl Alexandra . Later , Emma agrees to Graham 's offer to become his deputy . While on the phone , it is revealed that the sheriff had just gotten out of the shower at his home , just moments after he had a presumed sexual tryst with Regina . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer David H. Goodman , while being directed by Buffy the Vampire Slayer veteran David Solomon . Goodman used Cinderella 's storyline to produce more character development for Emma , a character with no flashbacks to draw upon . Morrison stated that Ashley / Cinderella " is definitely a character Emma relates to . " Executive producer Steve Pearlman developed the series to have standalone episodes that still encouraged viewers to watch each week . In an interview , he used " The Price of Gold " as an example of this , as the episode " introduce [ s ] Cinderella in the first act and we resolve the story in the final act . [ But then there 's an ] Emma portion of that story that kind of continues . " Pearlman added that " there are other twists and turns along the way that don 't have anything to do with the specifics of the Cinderella story that are additive to our character development . Hopefully , what we 're doing over the course of the season is continuing to build each week , give the audience something new about our main characters that keeps them coming back . " 
 In August 2011 , Zap2It confirmed that actress Jessy Schram , then 25 years old , would be appearing in the new series as Cinderella . While the traditional fairytale involved Cinderella serving her step @-@ mother and step @-@ sisters and eventually being helped by a fairy godmother to marry her prince , Once Upon a Time portrayed her in differing circumstances . Schram explained that her " very kind and very sweet " character finds herself in an " unfortunate situation of having lost someone in her life . The Cinderella that you 'll see is a portrayal of someone that 's desperate to get out of the situation that she 's in . Because of that , some bad decisions are made and she 's stuck in even more unfortunate circumstances . Though she 's matured through her upbringing and being alone most of the time , she 's naïve to the outer world . " 
 The episode was included in Reawakened : A Once Upon a Time Tale – a novelization of the first season – which was published by Hyperion Books in 2013 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Emma is stated to have lived in Tallahassee for two years , which is a reference to the Lost episode " The Man from Tallahassee " . Ruby 's car contains a wolf charm , a reference to her character Red Riding Hood 's traditional enemy the Big Bad Wolf . Henry is seen reading an issue of Ultimate Wolverine vs. Hulk , which was written by Damon Lindelof , the co @-@ creator of Lost . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Price of Gold " first aired on November 13 , 2011 in the United States . The episode scored 3 @.@ 8 / 9 among adults aged 18 to 49 , meaning that it was seen by 3 @.@ 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . Among overall viewers , the score was 6 @.@ 8 / 10 . With an estimated 11 @.@ 327 million viewers tuning in , it ranked second in its timeslot all together once again behind Football Night In America on NBC but ahead of The Amazing Race on CBS and The Simpsons on the Fox network . The episode was the seventeenth most watched program for the week among all networks . In Canada , the episode finished in sixteenth place for the week , garnering an estimated 1 @.@ 59 million viewers , a decrease from the 1 @.@ 732 million of the previous episode . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode was met with positive reviews . 
 Writing for Zap2it , Andrea Reiher considered it to be " another excellent episode " and gave it a ranking of three out of four . She expressed appreciation for the " charismatic and captivating " Robert Carlyle , but wished that she could see Schram and other guest stars every week instead of infrequently . Entertainment Weekly columnist Shaunna Murphy was confused as to why Ashley and Sean received a happy ending , wondering that because of the accepted mythology of the curse , " aren 't people supposed to have happy endings in Fairy Tale , and miserable lives over in Storybrooke ? " The episode also made Murphy appreciate the " bold and bright " Snow White , when compared to Cinderella 's naive agreement with Rumpelstiltskin . TV Fanatic writer Christine Orlando was not shocked by the affair , but was surprised that " Emma fell into Mr. Gold 's clutches so easily . " Orlando added that she enjoyed the few appearances of Regina , opining that " who else could tell you to enjoy your cocoa and make it sound menacing ? " 
 IGN 's Amy Ratcliffe gave the episode 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 , and stated that she " like [ d ] the addition of more fairy tale characters , " especially as " their stories don 't follow traditional paths . " Ratcliffe added that " the transition between worlds works and has a natural feel . It can 't be easy to pull off , " but wished that the pace of the main storyline would increase . The A.V. Club writer Oliver Sava graded the episode with a B and considered it the best of the series up to that point , citing its " fair share of forward momentum , " Morrison 's large amount of screen time , and an improvement in flashbacks . Sava compared it to the previous episode , believing " The Price of Gold " to be superior because it deviated further from the traditional fairytale formula . He lauded <unk> 's " more dimensional " performance , but said that Regina continued to be a " caricature . " Sava concluded that Goldman " does strong work showing the juxtaposition between reality and fantasy in a less contrived way than last week ’ s episode . " 
 = Thomas Dudley = 
 Thomas Dudley ( 12 October 1576 – 31 July 1653 ) was a colonial magistrate who served several terms as governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony . Dudley was the chief founder of Newtowne , later Cambridge , Massachusetts , and built the town 's first home . He provided land and funds to establish the Roxbury Latin School , and signed Harvard College 's new charter during his 1650 term as governor . Dudley was a devout Puritan who was opposed to religious views not conforming with his . In this he was more rigid than other early Massachusetts leaders like John Winthrop , but less confrontational than John Endecott . 
 The son of a military man who died when he was young , Dudley saw military service himself during the French Wars of Religion , and then acquired some legal training before entering the service of his likely kinsman the Earl of Lincoln . Along with other Puritans in Lincoln 's circle , Dudley helped organize the establishment of the Massachusetts Bay Colony , sailing with Winthrop in 1630 . Although he served only four one @-@ year terms as governor of the colony , he was regularly in other positions of authority . 
 Dudley 's descendants include his daughter Anne Bradstreet ( 1612 – 1672 ) , The prominent early American Poet , and many famous Americans . One of the gates of Harvard Yard , which existed from 1915 to 1947 , was named in his honor , and Harvard 's Dudley House is named for the family . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Thomas Dudley was born in Yardley Hastings , a village near Northampton , England , on 12 October 1576 , to Roger and Susanna ( Thorne ) Dudley . His father , a captain in the English army , was apparently killed in battle . It was for some time believed he was killed in the 1590 Battle of Ivry , but this is unlikely because Susanna Dudley was later found to be widowed by 1588 . The 1586 battle of Zutphen has also been suggested as the occasion of Roger Dudley 's death . The family has long asserted connections to the Sutton @-@ Dudleys of Dudley Castle ; there is a similarity in their coats of arms , but association beyond probable common ancestry has not yet been conclusively demonstrated . Dudley 's mother was descended from Henry II of England through her Purefoy ancestors , and like many other young men of good birth Thomas Dudley became a page , in his case in the household of William , Baron Compton at nearby Castle Ashby . Later he raised a company of men following a call to arms by Queen Elizabeth , and served in the English army led by Sir Arthur Savage fighting with King Henry IV of France during the French Wars of Religion . He fought the Spanish at the Siege of Amiens in 1597 which in September surrendered and was the final action of the war . 
 After he was discharged from his military service , Dudley returned to Northamptonshire . He then entered the service of Sir Augustine Nicolls , a relative of his mother 's , as a clerk . Nicolls , a lawyer and later a judge , was recognized for his honesty at a time when many judges were susceptible to bribery and other malfeasance . He was also sympathetic to the Puritan cause ; the exposure to legal affairs and Nicolls ' religious views probably had a significant influence on Dudley . After Nicolls ' sudden death in 1616 , Dudley took a position with Theophilus Clinton , 4th Earl of Lincoln , serving as a steward responsible for managing some of the earl 's estates . The earl 's estate in Lincolnshire was a center of Nonconformist thought , and Dudley was already recognized for his Puritan virtues by the time he entered the earl 's service . According to Cotton Mather 's biography of Dudley , he successfully disentangled a legacy of financial difficulties bequeathed to the earl , and the earl consequently came to depend on Dudley for financial advice . Dudley 's services were not entirely pecuniary in nature : he is also said to have had an important role in securing the engagement of Clinton to Lord Saye 's daughter . In 1622 , Dudley acquired the assistance of Simon Bradstreet who was eventually drawn to Dudley 's daughter Anne . The two were married six years later , when she was 16 . 
 Dudley was briefly out of Lincoln 's service between about 1624 and 1628 . During this time he lived with his growing family in Boston , Lincolnshire , where he likely was a parishioner at St Botolph 's Church , where John Cotton preached . The Dudleys were known to be back on Lincoln 's estate in 1628 , when his daughter Anne came down with smallpox and was treated there . 
 = = Massachusetts Bay Colony = = 
 In 1628 Dudley and other Puritans decided to form the Massachusetts Bay Company , with a view toward establishing a Puritan colony in North America . Dudley 's name does not appear on the land grant issued to the company that year , but he was almost certainly involved in the formative stages of the company , whose investors and supporters included many individuals in the Earl of Lincoln 's circle . The company sent a small group of colonists led by John Endecott to begin building a settlement , called Salem , on the shores of Massachusetts Bay ; a second group was sent in 1629 . The company acquired a royal charter in April 1629 , and later that year made the critical decision to transport the charter and the company 's corporate governance to the colony . The Cambridge Agreement , which enabled the emigrating shareholders to buy out those that remained behind , may have been written by Dudley . In October 1629 John Winthrop was elected governor , and John Humphrey was chosen as his deputy . However , as the fleet was preparing to sail in March 1630 , Humphrey decided he would not leave England immediately , and Dudley was chosen as deputy governor in his place . 
 Dudley and his family sailed for the New World on the Arbella , the flagship of the Winthrop Fleet , on 8 April 1630 and arrived in Salem Harbour on 22 June . Finding conditions at Salem inadequate for establishing a larger colony , Winthrop and Dudley led forays into the Charles River watershed , but were apparently unable to immediately agree on a site for the capital . With limited time to establish themselves , and concerns over rumors of potential hostile French action , the leaders decided to distribute the colonists in several places in order to avoid presenting a single target for hostilities . The Dudleys probably spent the winter of 1630 – 31 in Boston , which was where the leadership chose to stay after its first choice , Charlestown , was found to have inadequate water . A letter Dudley wrote to the Countess of Lincoln in March 1631 narrated the first year 's experience of the colonists that arrived in Winthrop 's fleet in an intimate tone befitting a son or suitor as much as a servant . It appeared in print for the first time in a 1696 compilation of early colonial documents by Joshua <unk> . 
 = = = Founding of Cambridge = = = 
 In the spring of 1631 the leadership agreed to establish the colony 's capital at Newtowne ( near present @-@ day Harvard Square in Cambridge ) , and the town was surveyed and laid out . Dudley , Simon Bradstreet , and others built their houses there , but to Dudley 's anger , Winthrop decided to build in Boston . This decision caused a rift between Dudley and Winthrop — it was serious enough that in 1632 Dudley resigned his posts and considered returning to England . After the intercession of others , the two reconciled and Dudley retracted his resignations . Winthrop reported that " [ e ] ver after they kept peace and good <unk> in love and friendship . " During the dispute , Dudley also harshly questioned Winthrop 's authority as governor for a number of actions done without consulting his council of assistants . Dudley 's differences with Winthrop came to the fore again in January 1636 , when other magistrates orchestrated a series of accusations that Winthrop had been overly lenient in his judicial decisions . 
 In 1632 Dudley , at his own expense , erected a palisade around Newtowne ( which was renamed Cambridge in 1636 ) that enclosed 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 ha ) of land , principally as a defense against wild animals and Indian raids . The colony agreed to reimburse him by imposing taxes upon all of the area communities . The meetings occasioned by this need are among the first instances of a truly representative government in North America , when each town chose two representatives to advise the governor on the subject . This principal was extended to govern the colony as a whole in 1634 , the year Dudley was first elected governor . During this term the colony established a committee to oversee military affairs and to manage the colony 's munitions . 
 The colony came under legal threat in 1632 , when Sir Ferdinando Gorges , attempting to revive an earlier claim to the territory , raised issues of the colony 's charter and governance with the Privy Council of King Charles I. When the colony 's governing magistrates drafted a response to the charges raised by Gorges , Dudley was alone in opposing language referring to the king as his " sacred majesty " , and to bishops of the Church of England as " Reverend Bishops " . Although a quo warranto writ was issued in 1635 calling for the charter to be returned to England , the king 's financial straits prevented it from being served , and the issue eventually died out . 
 = = = Anne Hutchinson affair = = = 
 In 1635 , and for the four following years , Dudley was elected either as deputy governor or as a member of the council of assistants . The governor in 1636 was Henry Vane , and the colony was split over the actions of Anne Hutchinson . She had come to the colony in 1634 , and began preaching a " covenant of grace " following her mentor , John Cotton , while most of the colony 's leadership , including Dudley , Winthrop , and most of the ministers , espoused a more Legalist view ( " covenant of works " ) . This split divided the colony , since Vane and Cotton supported her . At the end of this colonial strife , called the Antinomian Controversy , Hutchinson was banished from the colony , and a number of her followers left the colony as a consequence . She settled in Rhode Island , where Roger Williams , also persona non @-@ grata in Massachusetts over theological differences , offered her shelter . Dudley 's role in the affair is unclear , but historians supportive of Hutchinson 's cause argue that he was a significant force in her banishment , and that he was unhappy that the colony did not adopt a more rigid stance or ban more of her followers . 
 Vane was turned out of office in 1637 over the Hutchinson affair and his insistence on flying the English flag over the colony 's fort — many Puritans felt that the Cross of St George on the flag was a symbol of popery and was thus anathema to them . Vane was replaced by Winthrop , who then served three terms . According to Winthrop , concerns over the length of his service led to Dudley 's election as governor in 1640 . 
 Although Dudley and Winthrop clashed with each other on a number of issues , they agreed on the banning of Hutchinson , and their relationship had some significant positive elements . In 1638 Dudley and Winthrop were each granted a tract of land " about six miles from Concord , northward " . Reportedly , Winthrop and Dudley went to the area together to survey the land and select their parcels . Winthrop , then governor , graciously deferred to Dudley , then deputy governor , to make the first choice of land . Dudley 's land became Bedford , and Winthrop 's Billerica . The place where the two properties met was marked by two large stones , each carved with the owner 's name ; Winthrop described the spot as the " ' Two Brothers ' , in remembrance that they were brothers by their children 's marriage " . 
 = = = Other political activities = = = 
 During Dudley 's term of office in 1640 , many new laws were passed . This led to the introduction the following year of the Massachusetts Body of Liberties , a document that contains guarantees that were later placed in the United States Bill of Rights . During this term he joined moderates , including John Winthrop , in opposing attempts by the local clergy to take a more prominent and explicit role in the colony 's governance . When he was again governor in 1645 the colony threatened war against the expansionist Narragansetts , who had been making war against the English @-@ allied Mohegans . This prompted the Narragansett leader Miantonomi to sign a peace agreement with the New England colonies which lasted until King Philip 's War broke out 30 years later . Dudley also presided over the acquittal of John Winthrop in a trial held that year ; Winthrop had been charged with abuses of his power as a magistrate by residents of Hingham the previous year . 
 In 1649 Dudley was appointed once again to serve as a commissioner and president of the New England Confederation , an umbrella organization established by most of the New England colonies to address issues of common interest ; however , he was ill ( and aging , at 73 ) , and consequently unable to discharge his duties in that office . Despite the illness , Dudley was elected governor for the fourth and last time in 1650 . The most notable acts during this term were the issuance of a new charter for Harvard College , and the judicial decision to burn The Meritorious Price of Our Redemption , a book by Springfield resident William Pynchon that expounded on religious views heretical to the ruling Puritans . Pynchon was called upon to retract his views , but he chose to return to England instead of facing the magistrates . 
 During most of his years in Massachusetts , when not governor , Dudley served as either deputy governor or as one of the colony 's commissioners to the New England Confederation . He also served as a magistrate in the colonial courts , and sat on committees that drafted the laws of the colony . His views were conservative , but he was not as strident in them as John Endecott . Endecott notoriously defaced the English flag in 1632 , an act for which he was censured and deprived of office for one year . Dudley sided with the moderate faction on the issue , which believed the flag 's depiction of the Cross of St George had by then been reduced to a symbol of nationalism . 
 Nathaniel Morton , an early chronicler of the Plymouth Colony , wrote of Dudley , " His zeal to order appeared in contriving good laws , and faithfully executing them upon criminal offenders , heretics , and <unk> of true religion . He had a piercing judgment to discover the wolf , though clothed with a sheepskin . " Early Massachusetts historian James Savage wrote of Dudley that " [ a ] hardness in public , and rigidity in private life , are too observable in his character " . In a more modern historical view , Francis Bremer observes that Dudley was " more precise and rigid than the moderate Winthrop in his approach to the issues facing the colonists " . 
 = = = Founding of Harvard and Roxbury Latin = = = 
 In 1637 the colony established a committee " to take order for a new college at Newtown " . The committee consisted of most of the colony 's elders , including Dudley . In 1638 , John Harvard , a childless colonist , bequeathed to the colony his library and half of his estate as a contribution to the college , which was consequently named in his honor . The college charter was first issued in 1642 , and a second charter was issued in 1650 , signed by then @-@ Governor Thomas Dudley , who also served for many years as one of the college 's overseers . Harvard University 's Dudley House , now only an administrative unit located in Lehman Hall after the actual house was torn down , is named in honor of the Dudley family . Harvard Yard once had a Dudley Gate bearing words written by his daughter Anne ; it was torn down in the 1940s to make way for construction of Lamont Library . 
 In 1643 , Reverend John Eliot established a school at Roxbury . Dudley , who was then living in Roxbury , gave significant donations of both land and money to the school , which survives to this day as the Roxbury Latin School . 
 = = Family and legacy = = 
 Dudley married Dorothy Yorke in 1603 , and with her had five children . Samuel , the first , also came to the New World , and married Winthrop 's daughter Mary in 1633 , the first of several alliances of the Dudley @-@ Winthrop family . He later served as the pastor in Exeter , New Hampshire . Daughter Anne married Simon Bradstreet , and became the first poet published in North America . The third child , Sarah , married Benjamin <unk> , a militia officer . This union was an unhappy one , and resulted in the first reported instance of divorce in the colony ; <unk> returned to England and repudiated the marriage . Although no formal divorce proceedings are known , Sarah eventually married again . Patience , the fourth child , also married a colonial militia officer , and Mercy , the last of his children with Dorothy , married minister John Woodbridge . Dorothy Yorke died 27 December 1643 at 61 years of age , and was remembered by her daughter Anne in a poem : 
 Here lies , 
 A worthy matron of unspotted life , 
 A loving mother and obedient wife , 
 A friendly neighbor , pitiful to poor , 
 Whom oft she fed and clothed with her store ; 
 Dudley married his second wife , the widow Katherine ( Deighton ) <unk> , descendant of the noble Berkeley , Lygon and Beauchamp families , in 1644 . They had three children , Deborah , Joseph , and Paul . Joseph served as governor of the Dominion of New England and of the Province of Massachusetts Bay . Paul ( not to be confused with Joseph 's son Paul , who served as provincial attorney general ) was for a time the colony 's register of probate . 
 In 1636 Dudley moved from Cambridge to Ipswich , and in 1639 moved to Roxbury . He died in Roxbury on 31 July 1653 , and was buried in the Eliot Burying Ground there . Some of his descendants , including son Joseph and grandson Paul , are also buried there . Dudley 's many famous descendants include Dudley Saltonstall , Revolutionary War naval commander , Paul Dudley Sargent , Revolutionary War military commander and privateer , John Kerry , the 2004 Democratic presidential candidate and United States Senator from Massachusetts , now Secretary of State , as well as former United States Supreme Court Justice David Souter and past political figures such as U. S. President Herbert Hoover and New Hampshire Senator Nicholas Gilman . Dudley , Massachusetts is named for his grandsons Paul and William , who were its first proprietors . 
 The Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation owns a parcel of land in Billerica called Governor Thomas Dudley Park . The " Two Brothers " rocks are located in the Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge in Bedford , in an area that has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the Two Brothers Rocks @-@ Dudley Road Historic District . 
 Thomas Dudley is the 12th great @-@ grandfather of Heather Lindsay McRae , <unk> Feb 1990 in Tampa , Hillsborough County , Florida . 
 = Twin Spica = 
 Twin Spica ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> no Supika ) is a Japanese seinen manga series written and illustrated by Kou Yaginuma . The " realistic , slice @-@ of @-@ life science fiction series " tells the story of a group of Japanese high school students training to become astronauts in the early 21st century after the country 's first human spaceflight launch ends in a disaster that causes many civilian casualties . It was serialized in the seinen manga magazine Comic Flapper from September 2001 to August 2009 and was later published in 16 tankōbon volumes by Media Factory from January 2002 to October 2009 . 
 The series is named after Spica , a binary star system and the brightest star in the constellation Virgo . In the manga , Yaginuma includes many references to historical events related to the development of human spaceflight as well as literary works such as Kenji Miyazawa 's novel Night on the Galactic Railroad . American publishing company Vertical announced acquisition of the manga 's license for English @-@ language translation at the New York Anime Festival in September 2009 , and the translated first volume was published in May 2010 . The series was described by Vertical marketing director Ed Chavez as " technically sound " and " heartfelt " during its initial assessment . 
 The manga was adapted into an anime television series by animation studio Group TAC . It premiered on November 1 , 2003 , on Japan 's NHK BS Hi @-@ Vision satellite service . Twenty episodes of the anime aired until March 27 , 2004 , when the series concluded prematurely before the manga was completed . Satellite television network Animax has broadcast the anime in multiple regional language releases , including English . A live @-@ action adaptation was produced by NHK in cooperation with the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency and aired between June 18 and July 30 , 2009 . 
 = = Story = = 
 Author and creator Kou Yaginuma began writing the back @-@ story of Twin Spica in 2000 with his debut work " 2015 : Fireworks " ( <unk> , " 2015 Nen no <unk> Hanabi " ) . In it and in subsequent writings , Yaginuma constructed a future history of the development of Japan 's spaceflight program . He introduces readers to a future following the launch of Japan 's first manned spaceflight mission , the Lion ( <unk> , <unk> ) , in 2010 . The mission ends in disaster when the liquid rocket booster fuel catches fire 72 seconds after liftoff . Mission controllers are unable to activate the craft 's abort sequence , and the rocket crashes into the city of <unk> , causing many casualties among residents . 
 The Lion 's explosion becomes one of the major accidents in spaceflight history and sets Japan 's spaceflight program back by over a decade . In the years following the accident , the public accuses those involved with the Lion program of negligence . Rumors also begin to circulate about the offshore outsourcing of the rocket 's production despite the government 's claims that it was developed domestically . To promote recovery from the tragedy , the Ministry of Education , Culture , Sports , Science and Technology establishes the Tokyo National Space School in 2014 as a vocational high school dedicated to training a new generation of students in the space sciences . Japan 's spaceflight program is finally reactivated ten years later with the admission of students into the academy 's astronaut training program . In the same year , the last operating module of the International Space Station is retired and destroyed by atmospheric reentry following completion of the station 's long @-@ term mission . Subsequent development projects are to be completed by individual countries with active spaceflight programs . Of the students in the inaugural class of the astronaut training program , one is selected to join the crew of Japan 's second manned mission in 2027 . It is the final mission toward completing a space @-@ based solar power satellite . 
 = = Main characters = = 
 Yaginuma 's work prior to serialization introduces readers to Asumi Kamogawa and her mentor , the ghost of a Lion astronaut whom she calls Mr. Lion . Their friendship develops in several short stories in which , throughout her childhood , he nurtures Asumi 's interest in space . As her interest and dreams grow , Asumi is often ridiculed by classmates , especially because she immerses herself in books about space and rarely engages in classroom activities . When she decides to apply for admission to the Tokyo Space Academy , her teachers urge her to reconsider because she is below average height . Her friendship with Mr. Lion continues to grow after Asumi successfully enters the academy , and she often consults him during periods of self @-@ doubt . 
 Asumi 's elementary and middle school classmate Shinnosuke <unk> also enters the academy much to her surprise . He defended Asumi from ridicule by other classmates throughout their childhood despite occasionally teasing her as well , and it has been suggested that he sees her as a romantic interest . The two eventually befriend three other students in the astronaut training program . Shu Suzuki , who is named student representative for the astronaut program , has an easygoing personality . He wears a distinctive face by shaving his eyebrows as a symbol of defiance against his father . Kei <unk> befriends Asumi during the academy 's entrance examination and is portrayed with an outgoing personality and a deep sense of loyalty toward her friends . Marika Ukita initially responds coldly toward gestures of friendship , but she moves into Asumi 's dormitory following an argument with her father . The five students later make a promise to complete the astronaut program together as their friendship grows stronger . After three years in the astronaut program , Asumi is chosen out of eleven remaining students to take part in Japan 's second human spaceflight mission , making her , at the age of eighteen , the youngest person to go into space . 
 Throughout their time at the academy , astronaut candidates must overcome numerous physical and mental trials . Readers discover from a pre @-@ serialization story that Asumi 's mother dies following the Lion disaster , but this is not known to Asumi 's friends until Kei discovers the obituary listing in a newspaper article . Marika is revealed to be the genetic copy of a deceased Marika Ukita despite a standing ban on human cloning . <unk> suffers from red @-@ green color blindness after his eyes are exposed to an exploding firework at close range in a childhood accident . Unknown to the group , Shu suffers from hereditary hemoptysis ( coughing up of blood ) and dies from the condition soon after his selection as an exchange student to the American space program . This tragedy reveals Kei 's feelings for him , which she keeps hidden for much of the series . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The series is named after Spica , a binary star system in the constellation Virgo and one of the brightest stars in the nighttime sky . It appears as one star because of the relatively low center @-@ to @-@ center distance between the two component stars , estimated at an average of 11 million miles ( 17 @.@ 7 million km ) . Astronomical observations also suggest that there may be additional stars in the Spica system . In the story , Asumi mentions Spica 's distance to Earth as 350 light @-@ years . This figure is also cited by the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency ; however , other sources indicate a distance of approximately 260 light @-@ years . 
 Kou Yaginuma 's initial inspiration for the story came from a statement he once read describing the Hohner Little Lady harmonica as one of the first musical instruments taken into space . However , as an aspiring manga artist , Yaginuma had neither resources to conduct research on nor knowledge pertaining to spaceflight . He also hesitated to write the series because his own life experiences did not reflect the dreams of his characters . Despite these challenges , Yaginuma found comfort in the determination of his characters , especially that of Asumi Kamogawa . 
 Although Twin Spica began serialization in the October 2001 issue of Media Factory 's Comic Flapper magazine , its lead character Asumi had appeared in Yaginuma 's debut work " 2015 : Fireworks " . This short story published in the July 2000 issue of Comic Flapper also introduced readers to Asumi 's father , her elementary school teacher Yuko <unk> , and the astronaut ghost Mr. Lion . Four additional short stories that predate the series also feature Asumi as the central character : " Asumi " ( <unk> ) , " Campanella 's Forest " ( <unk> , " <unk> no Mori " ) , " Our Stars , Leaf Stars " ( <unk> <unk> , " Futari no Hoshi , <unk> Hoshi " ) , and " Asumi 's Cherry Tree " ( <unk> , " Asumi no Sakura " ) . These slice @-@ of @-@ life stories eventually served as prequels to Twin Spica . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 Twin Spica and its prequel stories make various references to historical figures and events in space exploration . Throughout the manga and the anime , Mr. Lion carries with him a harmonica , one of the first musical instruments to be played in space . A harmonica and bell set was carried aboard the Gemini 6A spaceflight in December 1965 by American astronauts Wally Schirra and Thomas Patten Stafford . During the mission , the two men used these instruments to play " Jingle Bells " . Asumi is nicknamed " Seagull " by Shu Suzuki in the anime . The same name was used as the call sign of Soviet cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova , the first woman in space , during her 1963 mission aboard Vostok 6 . Prior to Shu 's death in the live @-@ action adaptation , he reveals to his friends that the New Horizons spacecraft destined for Pluto carries the cremated ashes of the dwarf planet 's discoverer , Clyde Tombaugh . Asumi later brings Shu 's ashes during her first journey into space . 
 There are also various references to real @-@ world literary and musical works . The titles of two short stories in the manga , " Campanella 's Forest " and " Giovanni 's Ticket " ( <unk> , " <unk> no <unk> " ) , refer to the two main characters of Kenji Miyazawa 's novel Night on the Galactic Railroad . It appears in the penultimate episode of the anime and is also a favorite book of the original Marika Ukita . In both the manga and the live @-@ action adaptation , Kei makes a request for Shu to play the piano piece " Der <unk> " , known in Japan as " Neko <unk> " ( <unk> , lit . " I Stepped on the Cat " ) , if he becomes the first in their group to go into space . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Twin Spica began serialization in the October 2001 issue of the seinen ( aimed at younger adult men ) manga magazine Comic Flapper . It continued until the publication of the 89th chapter on August 5 , 2009 . The series was also published in tankōbon format in 16 volumes , with the final volume being published on October 23 , 2009 . Yaginuma 's prequel short stories published prior to serialization are interspersed throughout these compilations . Two were included in the first volume ; two were included in the second volume ; and one was included in the third volume . Three additional prequel stories were also written by Yaginuma during serialization and published in the fourth , sixth , and ninth volumes , respectively . On March 23 , 2006 , Media Factory published the 80 @-@ page Twin Spica Illustration Book ( <unk> , <unk> no Supika <unk> , ISBN 978 @-@ 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1380 @-@ 9 ) featuring color art from the manga . It also included a 24 @-@ month calendar and an interview with Kou Yaginuma . 
 The series is licensed by Tong Li Publishing for Chinese @-@ language release in Taiwan under the title Dream of Spica ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> zhī <unk> ) . It was translated by Li Lin @-@ hui ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Lǐ <unk> ) , and the first volume was released in May 2005 . Following a three @-@ week contract negotiation , the American publishing company Vertical announced at the 2009 New York Anime Festival that it had acquired the license to publish the series in English . Marketing director Ed Chavez explained that the motivation to acquire Twin Spica came from the company 's desire to license works from Japanese publishers that have yet to form committed partnerships with major American publishers . He proposed continuing a previous partnership with Media Factory , from which Vertical licensed The Guin Saga 's manga adaptation . Vertical 's distributor Random House announced a release date of May 4 , 2010 , for the first translated volume , contrary to the initial announcement that it will be released in August 2010 . Chavez later confirmed via Twitter that Vertical will condense its North American releases into 12 volumes . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Japanese animation studio Group TAC produced Twin Spica 's anime adaptation , which was broadcast by NHK . The 20 @-@ episode series premiered on November 1 , 2003 , and aired until its conclusion on March 27 , 2004 . Tomomi Mochizuki directed the anime series , and Rika <unk> wrote its screenplay . Masako Goto designed the characters for animation . When the series reached its conclusion , only 30 chapters of the manga had been published . Chapter 25 , which concludes the story of Asumi and her classmates undergoing a test of their survival skills , was the final chapter to be adapted for the anime . Consequently , the series concludes prematurely with Asumi 's ghost companion Lion @-@ san leaving when he no longer has anything to teach her and her friends . The manga , however , continues with Lion @-@ san appearing in subsequent chapters until his eventual departure in chapter 88 . The anime series also aired in other parts of Asia on Animax . It was released in VHS and DVD formats by King Records in five compilation volumes each . A special DVD collection containing the five flashback episodes — episodes 1 , 5 , 9 , 12 , and 16 — was released on May 26 , 2004 , and a five @-@ disc DVD box set was released on July 22 , 2004 . A two @-@ part novelization of the anime and an official guide book to the adaptation were published in April 2004 . The English @-@ language dubbing of the Twin Spica anime premiered on Animax Asia on January 24 , 2005 . 
 = = = Drama = = = 
 NHK announced a seven @-@ episode live @-@ action television drama adaptation on March 30 , 2009 , produced in cooperation with the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency , the country 's national aerospace agency . Sixteen @-@ year @-@ old actress Nanami Sakuraba was cast for the role of Asumi Kamogawa , and filming for the series began on April 2 . The drama was scheduled to air on June 11 but was eventually postponed by one week until June 18 . Its airing coincided with the celebration of the International Year of Astronomy . Screenplay for the series was written by <unk> Arai and Daigo Matsui . While writing the script , Arai found himself encouraged by the characters who must overcome various struggles in order to achieve their dreams . He also specified hopes and dreams as central themes in the story . Among the changes made in this adaptation is the removal of Lion @-@ san as a central character . Yaginuma did not make any restrictions for Arai and Matsui as he believed they knew the television audience best . " Nevertheless , " he said , " I think the little Asumi I know and the Asumi portrayed by Ms. Nanami are both looking at the same sky . " A three @-@ disc DVD compilation box set of the adaptation was released by Geneon Universal Entertainment on December 23 , 2009 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The song " Venus Say " by female pop musical group <unk> was used as the anime 's opening theme , and it was released as a maxi single with two other songs on March 3 , 2004 . The single remained on the Oricon music charts for seven weeks with a peak position at 29th place . Male pop group Begin adapted Kyu Sakamoto 's 1963 single " <unk> Goran Yoru no Hoshi o " ( <unk> , lit . " Look Up at the Stars at Night " ) as the ending theme song . A full soundtrack containing the two theme songs and 33 additional instrumental tracks by composer Kazunori Miyake was released on May 26 , 2004 . Alternative rock band Orange Range 's song " Hitomi no Saki ni " ( <unk> , lit . " Ahead of Eyes " ) was used as the ending theme for the live @-@ action series . It was released as a maxi single with two other songs on July 8 , 2009 , and remained on the Oricon music charts for six weeks with a peak position at 5th place . A full soundtrack for the series containing 21 instrumental tracks was released by Harbor Records on August 5 , 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In an interview with the Yomiuri Shimbun , Japanese astronaut Koichi <unk> named Twin Spica , because of its nostalgic story , as one of five manga series which highlight the dream of reaching space . While assessing the series for licensing in English , Vertical marketing director Ed Chavez , a fan of science fiction , found its story " technically sound " and noted it as " possibly one of the most heartfelt series I 've read in ages " . He hoped that the series would rank in top 10 of The New York Times Graphic Books Best Seller List for manga and believed that it would make Vertical a " known name , not only amongst better comic shops and independent book stores , but also with anime fans and casual graphic novel readers " . While the series was originally published in a seinen magazine , Chavez expected that it would also appeal to fans of shōjo manga . He believed that the word seinen " means adult and does not make reference to gender " . He hoped Twin Spica will prove to be a financial success and enable Vertical to fund future licenses of classic works by Osamu Tezuka and the Forty @-@ Niners . The first volume in English was listed by Publishers Weekly as one of the most anticipated graphic novels of 2010 . 
 Jennifer Berman of THEM Anime Reviews rated the anime adaptation of Twin Spica five out of five stars but told readers , " <unk> a star if you don 't like anime that have a somewhat slow pace . " Berman praised its artistic design and noted that the character designs reminded her of works by Studio Ghibli . She found the characters " likeable " and saw Marika Ukita as the most intriguing character . Despite her praises , Berman noted one weakness in the anime adaptation . She observed the ending as " a rather open @-@ ended one , and while it wasn 't a bad ending , they probably should have thought of something better " . Similar to the manga , the anime series was seen as gender neutral . Sony Pictures Entertainment vice president Todd Miller stated that Twin Spica was one of the titles aired on Animax which appealed to both genders . The first episode of the drama series aired with a 3 @.@ 4 percent domestic viewership rating . Reviewers from the Yomiuri Shimbun rated the live @-@ action adaptation an average two out of three stars and ranked it third overall among 11 series airing in summer 2009 . 
 = Atari video game burial = 
 The Atari video game burial was a mass burial of unsold video game cartridges , consoles , and computers in a New Mexico landfill site , undertaken by American video game and home computer company Atari , Inc. in 1983 . The goods buried were rumored to be unsold copies of E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial , one of the biggest commercial failures in video gaming and often cited as one of the worst video games ever released , and the Atari 2600 port of Pac @-@ Man , which was commercially successful but critically maligned . 
 Since the burial was first reported in the press , there had been doubts as to its veracity and scope , leading to it being frequently dismissed as an urban legend . In either case the event had become a cultural icon and a reminder of the North American video game crash of 1983 ; it was the end result of a disastrous fiscal year which saw Atari , Inc. sold off by its parent company Warner Communications . Though it was believed that millions of copies of E.T. were disposed of in the landfill , Atari officials later verified the numbers to be around 700 @,@ 000 cartridges of various titles , including E.T. 
 In 2014 , Fuel Industries , Microsoft , and others worked with the New Mexico government to excavate the site to validate the contents of the landfill as part of a documentary called Atari : Game Over . On April 26 , 2014 , the excavation revealed discarded games and hardware . Only a small fraction , about 1300 games , were recovered during the excavation period , with a portion given for curation and the rest auctioned to raise money for a museum to commemorate the burial . 
 = = Circumstances = = 
 = = = Financial difficulty = = = 
 Atari , Inc. had been purchased by Warner Communications in 1976 for $ 28 million , and had seen its net worth grow to $ 2 billion by 1982 . By this time , the company accounted for 80 % of the video gaming market ; and was responsible for over half of its parent company 's revenues , earning some 65 – 70 % of their operating profits . By the last quarter of 1982 , its growth in the following year was expected to be in the region of 50 % . However , on December 7 , 1982 , the company reported that its earnings had only increased by 10 – 15 % , rather than the predicted figure . The next day saw Warner Communications ' share prices fall by a third , and the quarter ended with Warner 's profits falling by 56 % . In addition , Atari 's CEO , Ray Kassar , was later investigated for possible insider trading charges as a result of selling some five thousand shares in Warner less than half an hour before reporting Atari 's lower @-@ than @-@ expected earnings . Kassar was later cleared of any wrongdoing , although he was forced to resign his position the following July . Atari , Inc. would go on to lose $ 536 million in 1983 , and was sold off by Warner Communications the following year . 
 = = = Problem titles = = = 
 Atari 's tendency to port arcade games for its home console had led to some of its most commercially successful games , including the port of its own coin @-@ op Asteroids , and the licensed versions of Taito 's Space Invaders and Namco 's Pac @-@ Man . When the latter game received its official port to the Atari 2600 , Atari was confident that sales figures would be high , and manufactured 12 million cartridges — despite having sold only around 10 million Atari 2600 consoles . It was believed that the game would be successful enough not only to earn an estimated $ 500 million , but also to boost sales of the console itself by several million as gamers sought to play the home conversion . However , the finished product , released in March 1982 , was critically panned for its poor gameplay , and although it became the console 's best @-@ selling title after shipping 7 million units , it still left Atari with over 5 million unsold cartridges — a problem compounded by the high rate of customers returning the game for refunds . 
 Further to the problems caused by Pac @-@ Man 's underwhelming sales , Atari also faced great difficulty as a result of its video game adaptation of the film E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial . The game , also titled E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial , was a result of a deal between Warner Communications and the film 's director Steven Spielberg . The concept of a video game based on a film , instead of porting an arcade coin @-@ op or building on an established franchise , was unheard of at the time . It was later reported that Warner had paid $ 20 – 25 million for the rights , which was at the time quite a high figure for video game licensing . Atari manufactured 5 million cartridges for the game ; however , upon its release in December 1982 , only 1 @.@ 5 million copies were sold , leaving Atari still holding onto over half of the game cartridges . The game was critically panned , and is now seen as one of the worst ever made . Billboard magazine 's Earl Paige reported that the large number of unsold E.T the Extra @-@ Terrestrial games , along with an increase in competition , prompted retailers to demand official return programs from video game manufacturers . 
 The failures of these titles were further compounded by Atari 's business dealings from 1981 . Confident in strong sales , the company had told its distributors to place their 1982 orders all at once . However , video game sales in 1982 had slowed , and distributors who had ordered en masse in expectation of high turnover were left to simply return large quantities of unsold stock to Atari . As a result , the company soon found itself in possession of several million essentially useless video game cartridges , which it would be entirely unable to sell . 
 = = Burial = = 
 In September 1983 , the Alamogordo Daily News of Alamogordo , New Mexico reported in a series of articles , that between 10 and 20 semi @-@ trailer truckloads of Atari boxes , cartridges , and systems from an Atari storehouse in El Paso , Texas , were crushed and buried at the landfill within the city . It was Atari 's first dealings with the landfill , which was chosen because no scavenging was allowed and its garbage was crushed and buried nightly . Atari 's stated reason for the burial was that it was changing from Atari 2600 to Atari 5200 games , but this was later contradicted by a worker who claimed that this was not the case . Atari official Bruce Enten stated that Atari was mostly sending broken and returned material to the Alamogordo dump and that it was " by @-@ and @-@ large inoperable stuff . " 
 On September 27 , 1983 , the news service UPI reported that " people watching the operation said it included cassettes of the popular video games E.T. , Pac @-@ Man , Ms. Pac @-@ Man , the consoles used to convey the games to television screens and high @-@ priced personal computers . " The news service Knight @-@ Ridder further reported on the looting of the dump on September 28 by local kids , stating " kids in this town of 25 @,@ 000 began robbing the Atari grave , coming up with cartridges of such games as E.T. , Raiders of the Lost Ark , Defender , and Berzerk . " 
 On September 28 , 1983 , The New York Times reported on the story of Atari 's dumping in New Mexico . An Atari representative confirmed the story for the newspaper , stating that the discarded inventory came from Atari 's plant in El Paso , which was being closed and converted to a recycling facility . The reports noted that the site was guarded to prevent reporters and the public from affirming the contents . The Times article never suggested any of the specific game titles being destroyed , but subsequent reports have generally linked the story of the dumping to the well @-@ known failure of E.T. Additionally , the headline " City to Atari : ' E.T. ' trash go home " in one edition of the Alamogordo News seems to imply some of the cartridges were E.T. , but then follows with a humorous interpretation of E.T. meaning " Extra @-@ territorial " and never specifically mentions the game . 
 Starting on September 29 , 1983 , a layer of concrete was poured on top of the crushed materials , a rare occurrence in waste disposal . An anonymous workman 's stated reason for the concrete was : " There are dead animals down there . We wouldn 't want any children to get hurt digging in the dump . " Eventually , the city began to protest the large amount of dumping Atari was doing , with one commissioner stating that the area did not want to become " an industrial waste dump for El Paso . " The local manager ordered the dumping to be ended shortly afterwards . Due to Atari 's unpopular dumping , Alamogordo later passed an Emergency Management Act and created the Emergency Management Task Force to limit the future flexibility of the garbage contractor to secure outside business for the landfill for monetary purposes . Alamogordo 's then mayor , Henry Pacelli , commented that , " We do not want to see something like this happen again . " 
 = = Cultural symbolism and speculation = = 
 All of these factors have led to wide speculation that most of the 3 @.@ 5 million unsold copies of E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial ultimately wound up in this landfill , crushed and encased in concrete . It has also been reported that prototypes for the proposed Atari <unk> controller system were disposed of at the site , which only further fuels speculation , since Atari Museum owner Curt Vendel actually currently owns the <unk> prototypes . Writing for the Pacific Historical Review , John Wills speculated that location 's place in the public psyche — its proximity to the sites of both the Trinity nuclear test and Roswell UFO incident — has aided the popularity of the story . 
 The conflicting information surrounding the burial has led to the claim of it being an " E.T. Dump " being referred to as an urban legend , which in turn has led to a degree of skepticism and doubt over the veracity of the dumping story itself , and the relevance of conflating the event with the later industry downturn . As recently as October 2004 , Howard Scott Warshaw , the programmer responsible for the E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial game , expressed doubts that the destruction of millions of copies of the game ever took place . Warshaw also believes that Atari 's downfall was more a result of their business practices — including alleged block booking of poorly selling games with successful ones when dealing with distributors — than any specific failed games . This latter view has been echoed by Travis Fahs of IGN , who believes that Atari 's problems , including their huge surplus of unsold stock , arose from the company 's overestimation of the sustainability of Atari 2600 sales , rather than being due to the individual quality of games being released . 
 The incident has also become something of a cultural symbol representative of the North American video game crash of 1983 , often cited as a cautionary tale about the hubris of poor business practices , despite suggestions that the burial allowed the company to write off the disposed @-@ of material for tax relief purposes . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 The legacy of the burial has led it to be referenced in popular culture . 
 The music video for the song " When I Wake Up " by Wintergreen depicts the band traveling to the landfill site and proceeding to dig up the abandoned cartridges ; the video 's director Keith Schofield had worked with video game @-@ based music videos before . 
 The novel Lucky Wander Boy by D.B. Weiss features a scene which takes place outside of Alamogordo , in which two of the characters discuss a parking lot which has been built over the site of the burial . 
 The 2014 film Angry Video Game Nerd : The Movie features a plot centered on the burial . 
 In December 2015 a fictionalized account of the burial and its legacy is a key element of the episode The Games <unk> of the TV series Elementary . 
 = = Excavation = = 
 On May 28 , 2013 , the Alamogordo City Commission granted Fuel Industries , a Canadian entertainment company , six months of access to the landfill to film a documentary called Atari : Game Over about the burial and to excavate the dump site . Xbox Entertainment Studios planned to air this documentary series as an exclusive to the Xbox One and Xbox 360 in 2014 as part of a multi @-@ part documentary series being produced by Lightbox , a US / UK production company . Though the excavation was momentarily stalled due to a complaint by the New Mexico Environmental Protection Division Solid Waste Bureau citing potential hazards , the issues were resolved in early April 2014 to allow the excavation to proceed . 
 Excavation started on April 26 , 2014 as an open event to the public . E. T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial designer Howard Scott Warshaw , Ready Player One author Ernest Cline and film director Zak Penn attended the event as part of a documentary about the burial , as did local residents such as Armando Ortega , a city official who is reportedly one of the original children to raid the dump in 1983 . Ortega stated that although he and his friends found dozens of quality games , they gave the E.T. cartridges away because the " game sucked ... you couldn 't finish it " . James Heller , the former Atari manager in charge of the original burial , was also on hand at the excavation . Heller revealed that he had originally ordered the site to be covered in concrete . Contrary to the urban legend that claims millions of cartridges were buried there , Heller stated that only 728 @,@ 000 cartridges were buried . 
 Remnants of E.T. and other Atari games were discovered in the early hours of the excavation , as reported by Microsoft 's Larry <unk> . A team of archaeologists was present to examine and document the Atari material unearthed by excavation machinery : Andrew Reinhard ( American School of Classical Studies at Athens ) , Richard <unk> ( Trefoil Cultural and Environmental ) , Bill <unk> ( University of North Dakota ) , with support from video game historian Raiford <unk> ( SUNY - Stony Brook ) and historian Bret Weber ( University of North Dakota ) . 
 Only about 1300 cartridges of the estimated 700 @,@ 000 were removed from the burial , as the remaining materials were deeper than expected , and made them more difficult to access , according to Alamogordo mayor Susie Galea . The burial was refilled following this event . Joseph <unk> , who had worked to arrange the unearthing with the city , said that this was a one @-@ time shot to recover materials from the site , as they do not expect the city to agree to a similar event again . 
 The documentary Atari : Game Over , which features the burial site and its excavation , was released on November 20 , 2014 . 
 = = <unk> and auction = = 
 Of the recovered materials , a fraction has been given to the New Mexico Museum of Space History for display , and another 100 to the documentary producers Lightbox and Fuel Entertainment . Galea believes the remaining cartridges can be sold by the city of Alamogordo through the Museum of Space History . She hopes that the sale of these games can help fund recognition of the burial site as a tourist attraction in the future . The City of Alamogordo approved the auction of the games in September 2014 , to be sold through eBay and the Alamogordo Council website . As of September 2015 , over $ 107 @,@ 000 has been raised through the sales of about 880 unearthed cartridges , with one E.T. copy selling for more than $ 1 @,@ 500 . About 300 cartridges remain to be sold at a later date given the historical value of the cartridges . 
 One of the E.T. cartridges that had been dug up was taken by the Smithsonian Institution for its records , calling the cartridge both representative of the burial site but also in terms of video games , how the cartridge represents " the ongoing challenge of making a good film to a video game adaptation , the decline of Atari , the end of an era for video game manufacturing , and the video game cartridge life cycle " . 
 = Tamerlane and Other Poems = 
 Tamerlane and Other Poems is the first published work by American writer Edgar Allan Poe . The short collection of poems was first published in 1827 . Today , it is believed only 12 copies of the collection still exist . 
 Poe abandoned his foster family , the Allans , and moved to Boston to find work in 1827 . Having only minor success , he enlisted in the United States Army . He brought with him several manuscripts , which he paid a printer named Calvin F. S. Thomas to publish . The 40 @-@ page collection was called Tamerlane and Other Poems and did not include Poe 's name . Distribution was limited to 50 copies and it received no critical attention . The poems were largely inspired by Lord Byron , including the long title poem " Tamerlane " , which depicts an historical conqueror who laments the loss of his first romance . Like much of Poe 's future work , the poems in Tamerlane and Other Poems include themes of love , death , and pride . 
 Poe 's first published collection is so rare that after Poe 's death , Rufus Wilmot Griswold believed it had never existed until one was found in 1859 . It has since been recognized as one of the rarest first editions in American literature . 
 = = Background = = 
 Edgar Poe was unable to complete studies at the University of Virginia due to gambling debts . He left the university in March 1827 and the already @-@ strained relationship with his foster father , John Allan , grew worse . Poe determined to go to Boston , where he was born . When Poe 's biological mother Eliza Poe died , the only object she left him was a watercolor painting of the city , on the back of which she had written , " For my little son Edgar , who should ever love Boston , the place of his birth , and where his mother found her best and most sympathetic friends . " John Allan , a merchant in Richmond , Virginia , refused to give his foster son the $ 12 for the trip , though it is likely Poe got the money from his foster mother Frances Allan . John Allan was not aware of Poe 's decision or whereabouts and , not concerned , wrote " I 'm thinking Edgar has gone to Sea to seek his own fortunes " . After arriving in Boston in April 1827 , Poe served briefly as clerk for a wholesale merchandise warehouse on the waterfront , then as an office clerk and reporter for an obscure newspaper , the Weekly Report . After several weeks , in desperation , he enlisted in the United States Army for a five @-@ year term under the pseudonym " Edgar A. Perry " ; he gave his age as 22 , though he was only 18 , likely because he would have needed parental consent if under 21 . He was assigned to the First Regiment of Artillery and stationed at Boston Harbor 's Fort Independence . 
 Up to this point , Poe had not written much poetry . His earliest lines of verse were a couplet labeled " Poetry " , presumably written sometime in 1824 in the ledger book of Allan & Ellis , his foster father 's mercantile company . The lines read : " Last night with many cares & toils oppress 'd / Weary , I laid me on a couch to rest — " . The earliest known full @-@ length poem by Poe , " O , <unk> ! O , Mores ! " , is a satirical poem whose authorship is the subject of some dispute . Nevertheless , calling himself " irrecoverably a poet " , he had been working on a few longer poems at the University of Virginia , whose manuscripts he brought with him to Boston . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Sometime in the spring of 1827 , Poe turned over his manuscripts to an 18 @-@ year @-@ old printer named Calvin F. S. Thomas , whose family may have been known by Poe 's birth parents . Thomas had previously only printed labels , flyers , and other small jobs . Poe used his own money to pay for the publication of his poems as the 40 @-@ page collection Tamerlane and Other Poems , the only known book printed by Thomas . The collection was pamphlet @-@ sized , 6 @.@ 75 by 4 @.@ 5 inches . Poe was 18 years old when the collection was released in July 1827 and only 50 copies were printed . The total production number is the subject of dispute ; various scholars believe the number was slightly lower ( only 20 copies ) or substantially higher ( as many as 200 ) . 
 Tamerlane and Other Poems was published anonymously with the credit granted to " a Bostonian " . His name , typically listed as " Edgar A. Poe " , was not published with his work until his second collection , Al Aaraaf , Tamerlane , and Minor Poems in late 1829 . Poe may have chosen not to give his name so that his foster father , John Allan , would not know where he was ; moreover , his choice to embrace his Bostonian heritage may have been an attempt to distance himself from the Allan family in Richmond . Boston was , at the time , a center for publishing and the literary world . By the time the book was released , Poe was already in the Army . 
 Poe introduced the collection with an apologetic notice admitting the low quality of his poems . He said they were not intended to ever be published and " why they are now published concerns no one " but the author . He claimed , however , that the majority of the poems were written between 1820 and 1821 , " when the author had not completed his fourteenth year " though this is assumed to be an exaggeration . Poe used the low circulation of this collection to attract readers later in his career , suggesting the 1827 poetry book had been " suppressed through circumstances of a private nature " . That second collection , Al Aaraaf , Tamerlane , and Minor Poems , included revised versions of five of the nine poems from Tamerlane and Other Poems . 
 Distribution of Tamerlane and Other Poems was so light that Rufus Wilmot Griswold in 1850 claimed it had never existed , noting that none had been found . The first known copy turned up in 1859 with a second found in 1874 . A type facsimile of a copy held by the British Museum , edited and introduced by Richard Herne Shepherd , was published as a limited edition in 1884 . Another copy of Tamerlane and Other Poems was published in a 1941 facsimile by Thomas <unk> <unk> , who provided the introduction ; his correction and additions to this are found in a subsequent publication . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The poems , many of which had a theme of youth , were inspired in part by the works of Percy Bysshe Shelley , and Samuel Taylor Coleridge . The largest inspiration on Poe , however , came from the work of Lord Byron ; the character of the title poem " Tamerlane " has a daughter named " Ada " , named after Byron 's own daughter Ada Lovelace . Poe admired Byron both for his poetry and for his rebellious personality . John Allan blamed Poe 's interest in Byron for his licentiousness . Some biographers suggest that Poe 's wandering to Boston and joining the Army represent a need to live like an outcast inspired by Byron . 
 The title poem , " Tamerlane " , depicts a dying conqueror who regrets leaving his childhood sweetheart and his home to pursue his ambitions . In its original form , " Tamerlane " , based on the historical Timur , was 406 lines . The choice of an eastern character was unusual for a westerner at the time , though Byron , François @-@ René de Chateaubriand , Thomas Moore and others had written other Orientalist works . Autobiographical overtones suggest Poe based the poem on the loss of his own early love , Sarah Elmira Royster , or of his birth mother Eliza Poe . The poem may also mirror Poe 's relationship with his foster father John Allan ; similar to Poe , Tamerlane is of uncertain parentage , with a " feigned name " . 
 The " other poems " , which Poe admitted " perhaps savour too much of egotism ; but they were written by one too young to have any knowledge of the world but from his own breast " . These poems present the poet as solitary figure who was faced some unnamed transforming childhood event . Poe adopted some of the common themes of the day , including imagery of heavenly bliss and angelic beauty . He steps away from the typical use of didacticism of the time and instead focuses on psychological reverie and symbolist aesthetics , beginning his lifelong poetic refusal to write for the masses . Poe would continue to revisit themes of death , beauty , love , and pride in his later works . He would later rewrite one poem , " Imitation " , as " A Dream Within a Dream " and use images from " Evening Star " in " Ulalume " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Tamerlane and Other Poems was virtually ignored and received no significant critical attention upon its publication . The only public notice of it was a mention of the title in a couple lists of recent books : The United States Review and Literary Gazette listed it in August and the North American Review listed it in October 1827 . Samuel <unk> listed Tamerlane and Other Poems in his " Catalogue of American Poetry " section of his three @-@ volume anthology Specimens of American Poetry in 1829 . Literary historian Joel Porte suggests the American reading public during this period was more interested in fiction than poetry . Despite its lack of attention , the publication of Tamerlane and Other Poems gave a young Poe the confidence to continue writing . 
 After Poe became more popular with " The Raven " , a reviewer who saw parts of Tamerlane and Other Poems commented , " ' Poems written during youth ' no matter by whom written , are best preserved for the eye of the writer " . Modern scholar Joseph Wood Krutch said the collection " save for a few poems , [ was ] distinctly <unk> work " . Poe biographer Arthur Hobson Quinn wrote : " The perfection which marked Poe 's great lyrics was , of course , not yet present . But the promise was there . " Quinn also credits Poe for publishing a collection of poetry before slightly older contemporaries who would become popular poets , including Ralph Waldo Emerson , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , John Greenleaf Whittier , and Oliver Wendell Holmes , Sr. Scholar Harry Lee Poe , a distant relative of Poe , wrote in 2008 that the collection did not include great poetry . However , he added , " it was the trumpet blast announcing that a new poet had stepped upon the stage " . 
 It is believed only a dozen copies of the original printing of Tamerlane and Other Poems remain , making it one of the rarest of first editions in American literature . Ironically , the value of one copy today is more money than Poe ever made in his lifetime . Its rarity was recognized in 1925 , when the Saturday Evening Post ran an article titled " Have You A Tamerlane in Your Attic " ? After the article ran , a woman in Worcester , Massachusetts named Ada S. Dodd searched and found a copy , prompting others to search as well . Today , most of the surviving copies are owned by libraries and museums . Two copies , for example , were purchased by The Huntington Library in New York in 1915 . One copy is on display as part of the collection at the Edgar Allan Poe Museum in Richmond , Virginia . Though copies do not circulate often , they command high prices when they do . One sold at auction for $ 125 @,@ 000 and , later , another sold for $ 198 @,@ 000 . In December 2009 , a copy from the William E. Self collection sold at Christie 's , New York for $ 662 @,@ 500 , a record price paid for a work of American literature . 
 = = Content = = 
 The work was originally published without a table of contents , later editions and commentary use the titles or first lines to identify the poems . Much of the content was reworked , occasionally retitled , by Poe for later collections 
 The preface , pages iii @-@ iv 
 " Tamerlane " 
 Other poems , also known as " Fugitive pieces " 
 " To — — " ( now known as " Song " ) 
 Dreams 
 " Visits of the Dead " ( now known as " Spirits of the Dead " ) 
 " Evening Star " 
 " Imitation " 
 Untitled poem : " In youth have I known . . . " ( " Stanzas " ) 
 Untitled poem : " A wilder 'd being from my birth . . . " ( see " A Dream " ) 
 Untitled poem : " The happiest day — the happiest hour . . . " ( see " The Happiest Day " ) 
 " The Lake " 
 The author 's endnotes 
 = Brachytarsomys mahajambaensis = 
 Brachytarsomys mahajambaensis is an extinct rodent from northwestern Madagascar . It is known from nine isolated molars found in several sites during field work that started in 2001 . First described in 2010 , it is placed in the genus Brachytarsomys together with two larger living species , which may differ in some details of molar morphology . The presence of B. mahajambaensis , a rare element in the local rodent fauna , suggests that the region was previously more humid . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Remains of Brachytarsomys mahajambaensis were found during fieldwork in northwestern Madagascar that started in 2001 . The species was described in a 2010 paper by Pierre Mein and colleagues , together with another extinct rodent , Nesomys narindaensis . The specific name , mahajambaensis , refers to <unk> Bay , which is close to the places where the species has been found . It is placed in the genus Brachytarsomys , together with two larger living species , B. albicauda and B. villosa . Brachytarsomys is classified in the exclusively Madagascan subfamily Nesomyinae of the family Nesomyidae , which includes various African rodents . 
 = = Description = = 
 Brachytarsomys mahajambaensis is known from nine isolated molars , including two first upper molars ( M1 ) , one of which is broken , two second upper molars ( M2 ) , one M3 , two second lower molars ( m2 ) , and two m3 . It is generally similar to the other two species , but smaller . There are a few differences in molar structure , which may not hold in larger samples . 
 Both the M1 and M2 have flat crowns . The M1 is convex on the lingual ( inner ) side and concave on the outer side , rendering it kidney @-@ shaped . The anterocone , the cusp at the front of the tooth , appears not to be divided in two , as it is in living Brachytarsomys . It is narrowly connected to the protocone , another cusp behind it on the labial side , which is connected in the same way to the paracone . This lingually located cusp displays a broader connection to the hypocone on the labial side , which is isolated from the metacone lingually behind it . The metacone is broadly connected to another labial cusp behind it , referred to as the " post @-@ hypocone " , which it is expected to fuse to with increasing wear . Behind this pair of cusps , a small posteroloph ( a crest at the back of the tooth ) is present . In general , the back part of the tooth is more highly developed than in B. albicauda . The <unk> cingulum on the M2 , a crest on the front lingual corner , is absent or very small ; it is well @-@ developed in B. albicauda . The cusps form three transverse crests , with the labial cusp behind the lingual one . In one specimen , the second and third lophs are weakly connected . The posteroloph is more highly developed than on the M1 . The M3 also has three such crests , which display narrow connections along the length of the tooth . In the first crest , the two cusps are about next to each other , but in the second one , the hypocone ( on the labial side ) is a bit behind the paracone . The post @-@ hypocone and the metacone , in the third crest , are joined at the back . There are three roots , two at the front and one at the back , on the M1 and M2 ; the roots are missing from the only known M3 . 
 The m1 is unknown . In m2 , there are two well @-@ developed transverse crests and one smaller one behind them . The first one consists of two cusps , the anteroconid ( labial ) and the metaconid ( lingual ) and the second one joins the protoconid at the labial side with the entoconid at the lingual side . The second crest is weakly joined to the third one , which joins the hypoconid at the labial side to the posteroconid at the back . In one specimen , a cingulum ( ridge ) is present at the back of the tooth and a small cusp , the ectostylid , is also present . The m3 becomes narrower towards the back , rendering its form triangular , and contains three crests . The first one again consists of the anteroconid and the metaconid and the second of the protoconid and the entoconid . The third is smaller and consists of the hypoconid with the posteroconid in one specimen , but in the other the posteroconid is reduced to a narrow crest , the posterolophid . Unlike in B. albicauda , the hypoconid remains separate from the posterolophid and is not fused to it . Both m2 and m3 have two roots . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Teeth of Brachytarsomys mahajambaensis have been found at the sites of <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> in northwestern Madagascar , which are late Pleistocene ( 126 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 years ago ) and Holocene ( less than 10 @,@ 000 years ago ) in age . Brachytarsomys is a rare element of the rodent fauna , which is dominated by multiple species of Eliurus and Macrotarsomys . Modern Brachytarsomys are large rats that live in trees and eat fruits at middle to high altitudes . The modern , dry environment in northwestern Madagascar is decidedly inhospitable to these animals , and they no longer occur there ; the former presence of B. mahajambaensis could indicate that the region was more humid in the past . 
 = Rush Street ( Chicago ) = 
 Rush Street is predominantly a northbound one @-@ way street in the Near North Side community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States . The street , which starts at the Chicago River between Wabash and North Michigan Avenues , runs directly north until it slants on a diagonal as it crosses Chicago Avenue then it continues to Cedar and State Streets , making it slightly less than a mile long . One lane also runs southbound from Ohio Street ( <unk> ) to Kinzie Street ( <unk> ) as part of a two @-@ way street segment . It runs parallel to and one block west of the Magnificent Mile on the two @-@ way traffic North Michigan Avenue , which runs at 100 east up to 950 north . The street , which is also one block east of the one @-@ way southbound Wabash Avenue , formerly ran slightly further south to the Chicago River where over time various bridges connected it to the Loop , Chicago 's central business district . 
 Rush Street 's history traces back to the original incorporation of the city in the 1830s . It has since hosted important residences , such as the house of the first Mayor of Chicago , and significant commerce . Today , it continues to be part of one of the wealthiest neighborhoods in the country and has businesses that correspond to the demands of its residents . The neighborhood hosts highly rated restaurants , five @-@ star hotels , four @-@ star spas , an elite senior citizen residence and prominent bars . The street , which was named after Declaration of Independence <unk> Benjamin Rush , is currently known for its nightlife , especially at the northern end , which features entertainment that attracts locals and visitors . The southern end of the street was an integral part of the city as a main river crossing at various incarnations of the Rush Street Bridge across the main branch of the Chicago River from the mid @-@ 19th century until the 1920s . The Rush Street Bridges have a rich cultural history , which includes both a prominent role in facilitating vehicular land traffic and a prominent role as a commercial port location . However , commerce on the Chicago River has declined since the 1930s and the Michigan Avenue Bridge has taken over the role as the primary river crossing for this neighborhood . 
 = = Background = = 
 Rush Street was named after Benjamin Rush , one of the four physician <unk> of the United States Declaration of Independence . It is one of several places named after Rush in Chicago ; other such places are Rush Medical College and Rush @-@ Presbyterian @-@ St. Luke 's Medical Center . 
 As part of the original incorporated city of Chicago in 1837 , Rush Street is one of the city 's oldest thoroughfares . Like Clark Street , parts of Rush Street roughly follow the path of an Indian trail called Green Bay trail ( later Green Bay Road ) that ran to Green Bay , Wisconsin . Early Rush Street was commonly agreed to be desirable place of residence , and hosted the first house designed by an architect in Chicago ( designed for the first Mayor of Chicago William Ogden by John M. Van <unk> ) . The house , bounded by Erie , Ontario , Rush and Cass ( now Wabash Avenue ) Streets , did not survive the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 . 
 After the Great Chicago Fire , the Near North Side became a refuge for many due to its wide streets , high ground , good drainage , and proximity to both the Lake Michigan lakeshore and Lincoln Park . Cyrus McCormick built a mansion at 675 Rush Street between 1875 and 1879 . The mansion , located at the corner of Rush and Erie , lured so many relatives to move nearby that the neighborhood became known as " <unk> " by the 1880s . The street subsequently hosted elite Chicago socialites . Cyrus ' brother Leander J. McCormick built the Virginia Hotel at the northwest corner of Rush and Ohio . Opening just a few years before the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition , the 400 @-@ room hotel was advertised as " an absolutely fire @-@ proof building and a finished hotel second to no other . " The hotel featured ornate granite interiors decorated with marble statues , separate " gentlemen 's smoking room " and " ladies dining room " , and a room of boilers and dynamos to offer the latest technology : electric lights . Well into the 20th century , residential buildings faced Rush Street until the demands of the expanding commerce — especially concentrations of restaurants and night clubs — consumed its real estate . 
 In the 1950s , the Chicago City Council began to use the Uniform Vehicle Code of 1931 to fight traffic congestion by creating one @-@ way streets . This was most effectively used in the Loop and Near North Side community areas . Most of the Near North Side streets remain one @-@ way today as a result . Rush Street is among the area 's one @-@ way streets : except for a short segment , only northbound travel is permitted . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Rush Street runs partly north – south and partly in a north @-@ northwest direction ( see map in external links ) . It runs north – south at 65 east from 400 north at its southern terminus at Kinzie Avenue to 800 north at Chicago Avenue between Michigan Avenue to the east at 100 east and Wabash Avenue to the west at 44 east . On the north side of Chicago it runs straight on a slight diagonal to the street grid . By the time it travels three blocks north to Delaware Place at 900 north , it intersects Wabash . It then continues on a diagonal for four more blocks where it intersects the north – south running State Street ( the centerline between east and west ) at Cedar Street which runs at 1120 north . It is crossed by Ohio Street and Ontario Street which feed from and to the Kennedy Expressway to the west . 
 On the north side of Chicago Avenue Rush Street is part of the Gold Coast neighborhood of the Near North Side community area . The Gold Coast is the nation 's second wealthiest neighborhood , trailing only the Central Park East neighborhood of Manhattan 's Upper East Side . Between Chicago Avenue and the Chicago River , Rush Street is part of the River North Gallery District . The River North District hosts more art galleries than any neighborhood outside of Manhattan . 
 Both of the diagonal crossings border Chicago Park District parks that are situated on the resulting triangular land plots . At the Wabash crossing , which has an official address of 871 North Wabash , a park exists that was renamed Connors Park for former Illinois State Senate Minority Leader William Connors in 1970 . This park was acquired by the city in 1848 and has been renamed several times . At the State Street crossing , which has an official address of 1031 North State Street , Mariano Park exists and was renamed for Louis Mariano in 1970 . This park was acquired by the city in 1848 and was transferred to the Park District in 1959 . It hosts a structure designed by Birch Burdette Long , who was a Frank Lloyd Wright protege , according to a plaque in the park . In the area surrounded by the Trump International Hotel & Tower to the west , the Chicago River to the south , Rush Street and the Wrigley Building to the east and McDonald 's and River Plaza to the north the towers designers have planned a 1 @.@ 2 @-@ acre ( 4 @,@ 856 @.@ 2 m2 ) Riverfront Park & Riverwalk along a space that is 500 feet ( 152 @.@ 4 m ) . 
 In the Gold Coast neighborhood , honorary streets such as Frank Sinatra Way ( Bellevue Place at 1030 north ) and Mike Ditka Way ( East Chesnut Street at 860 north ) cross Rush Street . Ditka has a restaurant at 100 East Chestnut and coached the Chicago Bears to a Super Bowl XX victory . Sinatra made " My Kind of Town ( Chicago is ) " and " Chicago ( That Toddlin ' Town ) " famous . 
 = = Bridge = = 
 The main stem of the Chicago River has been crossed by four bridges at Rush Street . The first bridge was a floating bridge that was hinged to one bank . Ropes were used to open and close this bridge . A March 1849 ice storm was the first of two instances in which all bridges on the main stem of the Chicago River were destroyed overnight . An iron and timber swing bridge with center supports was built in 1857 at a cost of $ 48 @,@ 000 . The bridge stood until , on November 3 , 1863 , a passing ship 's whistle spooked a herd of cattle that was crowding the bridge and stampeded into the river . The bridge was repaired and still in use on October 8 , 1871 when it was destroyed in the Great Chicago Fire . In 1872 the Detroit Bridge and Iron Works company built a wrought @-@ iron replacement that stood until 1883 , when a barge struck and collapsed the bridge . It was replaced by another swing bridge that lasted for several decades until after the Michigan Avenue Bridge was built in 1920 . This final 1884 bridge had trusses measuring 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) in the center and 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) on the ends . Its deck used 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) white pine planks . 
 The southeast corner of the Rush Street Bridge , which connected to Michigan Avenue , was the location of the Goodrich docks from which the SS Christopher Columbus made its daily round @-@ trip excursions to Milwaukee , Wisconsin . Although she was used for excursions elsewhere around the Great Lakes , her regular schedule was a daily trip to Milwaukee , leaving Chicago mid @-@ morning , sailing to Milwaukee for a two @-@ hour stopover , and then returning . The Goodrich Transportation Company used the Goodrich wharves from the time of the American Civil War until the 1930s to connect Chicago with other port locations throughout Lake Michigan and the Great Lakes . Today , <unk> have replaced the industrial structures that historically lined the riverbanks of the nations most significant inland port . 
 Before the Michigan Avenue bridge ( pictured right ) , vehicular traffic crossed the river at Rush and traveled up to Ontario Street before heading east to Pine Street ( now North Michigan Avenue after multiple renamings ) . The bridge carried 77 % of all the automobiles and 23 % of the commercial vehicles that commuted into the Loop each day . There were several plans starting in the 1880s for improving Michigan Avenue that involved Rush Street , but nothing came of any of them . The final Rush Street Bridge was not designed for automobile traffic , which caused congestion on the south bank of the River where both Michigan and Wabash fed onto River Street ( now Wacker Drive ) . In May 1904 , the Chicago Tribune declared that the 36 feet ( 11 m ) wide Rush Street Bridge , which handled approximately 50 % of the north – south traffic in the city , was unfit for the contemporary pedestrian and vehicular traffic . Thus Daniel Burnham 's 1909 Plan of Chicago called for the replacement of the bridge with a new bridge at Michigan Avenue and the redevelopment of Wacker Drive . The bridge was quickly removed after the completion of the new Michigan Avenue Bridge . 
 = = Commerce and education = = 
 In the 1960s , Rush Street was the center of the Chicago nightlife as home to many great cabarets , bars , clubs and restaurants . However , many of the bars migrated north to Division Street as the street gentrified . Currently , the late night establishments mostly lure suburbanites and tourists . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times describes it as the " hippest strip " in Chicago , with specific kudos to the part between Oak Street and Chicago Avenue . It continues to be the destination where visiting <unk> in pursuit of Chicago nightlife are brought by taxi as well as a preferred place for thirtysomething singles to congregate at night , especially in the summer . Although Rush Street ends two blocks south of Division Street , the nightlife ambiance now continues to Division and spreads west from there . 
 Rush Street is known for hosting some of the few highly rated and esteemed restaurants in the Chicago Gold Coast neighborhood . According to Frommer 's and Zagat Survey , <unk> Steakhouse is one of the favorite restaurants in Chicago , and is located on Rush Street . Rush Street is a block east of the original location of the Chicago @-@ style deep dish pizza , Uno Chicago Grill , and it hosts Giordano 's , its answer to Uno 's . Among the most prominent businesses along this strip is the Bentley and Lamborghini Gold Coast showroom , which is located across East Pearson Street from The Clare at Water Tower along Rush Street . The Clare is one of the tallest residential buildings reserved for seniors anywhere in the world . Rush Street 's southern terminus is adjacent to a rear entrance of the Wrigley Building as well as the Trump International Hotel and Tower which has a 401 @-@ North Wabash address . The 800 block of the Gold Coast neighborhood portion of Rush Street is a block away from Michigan Avenue and four of the tallest buildings in the world : John Hancock Center ( 875 North Michigan Avenue ) , 900 North Michigan , Water Tower Place ( 845 Michigan ) , & Park Tower ( 800 Michigan ) . Four more of the fifty tallest buildings in Chicago are also a block from Rush Street : Olympia Centre ( 737 Michigan ) , One Magnificent Mile , ( 980 Michigan ) , Chicago Place ( 700 Michigan ) , and Palmolive Building , ( 919 Michigan ) . 55 East Erie Street , which was the second tallest all @-@ residential building in the world from 2004 until 2007 when 340 on the Park was completed , is among the skyscrapers on or with entrances on Rush street . There is a current proposal to redevelop 740 North Rush Street ( at the corner of East Superior Street ) with a fifty @-@ story skyscraper designed by Skidmore , Owings & Merrill and developed by Fordham Company . This address currently houses the Chicago offices of Crain Communications Inc . , and it is just north of Giordano 's , which has a 730 North Rush Street address . 
 Several prominent hotels are located on or bounded by Rush street . The Peninsula Chicago is one of only three five star hotels in the Midwestern United States , is located on East Superior between Rush Street and Michigan . The Four Seasons Hotel Chicago , another of the Midwest 's five star hotels , is also located on a cross street between Rush Street and Michigan Avenue . These two hotels host the highest rated spas in Illinois . Although the main entrance and official address of the Chicago Marriott Downtown Magnificent Mile is 540 North Michigan Avenue , the driveway for the hotel has a 541 North Rush Street address . Similarly , the Chicago Conrad Hotel located at 521 North Rush Street is a reconstruction of the former 520 North Michigan Chicago Landmark McGraw @-@ Hill Building . 
 The former Archbishop Quigley Preparatory Seminary , which has been converted for use by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago is located on Rush Street between Superior and Chestnut . The Water Tower Campus of the Loyola University Chicago is located along East Pearson St. , which crosses Rush Street between the Bentley / Lamborghini Gold Coast Showroom to the North and The Clare @ Water Tower to the South on the west side of the street . The Quigley Seminary Building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on February 16 , 1996 . Rush Street also hosts one of three regional Royal Thai Consulate @-@ General locations to support Royal Thai Embassy in Washington , D.C. 
 = The Dark Defender = 
 " The Dark Defender " is the fifth episode of the second season and seventeenth overall episode of the American television drama series Dexter , which first aired on 28 October 2007 on Showtime in the United States . The episode was written by Timothy Schlattmann and was directed by Keith Gordon . 
 In the episode , Dexter Morgan ( Michael C. Hall ) investigates a crime scene in a comic book store where he sees a poster of The Dark Defender , a character inspired by Dexter 's own crimes under the guise of the " Bay Harbor Butcher " , who is currently under investigation in his own police department . After he dreams that The Dark Defender saved his mother 's life when he was young , Dexter 's Narcotics Anonymous sponsor Lila Tournay ( Jaime Murray ) encourages him to seek closure by confronting one of his mother 's killers , Santos Jimenez ( Tony Amendola ) . Meanwhile , Dexter 's sister Debra ( Jennifer Carpenter ) suspects that her new boyfriend Gabriel ( Dave Baez ) is using her to write a book about her engagement to the first season 's " Ice Truck Killer " . 
 Schlattmann was inspired to set the homicide case in a comic book store when he realized that an Aquaman snow globe on his desk " could easily be a murder weapon " . When he visited comic book artist Tone Rodriguez to draw and render the poster of The Dark Defender , comic book writer Dan Wickline was also at Rodriguez 's studio , and so Schlattmann arranged for the two to have cameo appearances in the episode . The episode was filmed in Los Angeles , California though set in Miami , Florida . " The Dark Defender " was praised by critics and Schlattmann was nominated for Writers Guild of America Award for his script . The episode was also submitted as Dexter 's sample episode to determine the nominees for Outstanding Drama Series at the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards ; though nominated , the series didn 't win . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While drinking coffee with his sister Debra , Dexter is called to a murder scene at a comic book store . Talking to a witness about the victim , a shopkeeper who had been bludgeoned to the head with a snow globe , he sees a poster of The Dark Defender , a vigilante killer based on the Bay Harbor Butcher . Later , at a Narcotics Anonymous meeting , Dexter falls asleep and dreams about the death of his mother , Laura Moser ( Katherine Kirkpatrick ) . In the dream , he enters the cargo container where she was killed , dressed in The Dark Defender 's cloak , and beats his mother 's murderers to the ground , saving her . When he tells his sponsor Lila about his dream , she tells him that he must confront them to seek closure . He and Lila travel to Naples , Florida where one of the three men , Santos Jimenez , is alive and running a tavern . Having been warned by his girlfriend Rita Bennett 's mother Gail ( JoBeth Williams ) to leave Rita ( Julie Benz ) and her children alone , Dexter tells Rita that he is going away while Gail is visiting . Leaving Lila in their motel room , he goes to Jimenez 's bar and waits until all of the patrons have left . Dexter tries to explain to Jimenez how he feels , but Jimenez takes out a baseball bat and threatens to beat him . In response , Dexter disarms and brutally beats him , revealing his past to Jimenez as one of the boys he left in his mother 's blood . Jimenez tells Dexter that his mother was killed because she was not only a narcotics informant to Harry Morgan ( James Remar ) — Dexter 's adoptive father and a police officer — but also his lover . Dexter punches Jimenez and is close to killing him when Lila phones and he tells her that he is about to " use " . Thinking that he is about to use drugs , she urges him not to go any further , because " using " will only leave him empty and alone inside . He returns to the motel , leaving Jimenez unconscious in the bar , and falls asleep in Lila 's lap , distraught and completely drained . 
 When the morning comes , Lila tells Dexter of why she went into rehab . She had been dating a man who introduced her to methamphetamine , a drug that she became very addicted to . But when her boyfriend broke up with her , Lila set his former house on fire after getting high . But later on , she would find out that her boyfriend was squatting inside the house , and had been burned alive . Dexter asks her if she thinks that he was bad and deserved to die , something that Lila silently agrees to . Comforting her now , Dexter tells her " It 's okay then . " 
 Debra is insecure in her relationship with Gabriel because her ex @-@ fiancé Brian Moser , the " Ice Truck Killer " , kidnapped and tried to kill her . When she looks through Gabriel 's e @-@ mail , she sees that he has sent a book titled The Ice Princess to a number of publishers . She assumes that the book is about her and angrily breaks up with him . Discussing the break @-@ up with FBI Special Agent Frank Lundy ( Keith Carradine ) , he gives her the background check that he had run on Gabriel , revealing that Gabriel is a children 's writer , and Debra realizes that The Ice Princess is a children 's book . 
 When Dexter visits Rita the next morning , Gail — who suspects that he is hiding something — announces that she will be staying in Miami and will live with Rita . Dexter realizes that he must protect his secrets , so he begins by cleaning his boat that night with a black light to detect any blood . He is unaware that the marina is being videotaped by the Miami @-@ Metro Police , who believe that the Bay Harbor Butcher may be keeping his boat at that marina . 
 = = Production = = 
 Schlattmann thought to write the comic book store homicide storyline when he picked up the Aquaman snow globe in his office and thought , " ' Wow , this thing could easily be a murder weapon , " because of its weight and its edge . The writers wanted to use the actual Aquaman globe but DC Comics would not allow the character and the snow globe to be used in the episode , so the Dexter art department custom @-@ made a snow globe . The superhero 's name ultimately became " Mariner " as other names including " Sea King " and " King of the Seas " could not be used for legal reasons . Trademark and copyright clearances was again an issue when finding a name for the superhero based on the Bay Harbor Butcher . " The Eradicator " and " Judge Justice " were considered , but the final choice was " The Dark Defender " . Cerone said that the name was " a little on the generic side , but it was one we could clear . " He said that The Dark Defender was in part an homage to Batman : The Dark Knight Returns and to Dexter 's Dark Passenger , featured in Jeff Lindsay 's series of Dexter novels on which the television series is based . On the poster , The Dark Defender , though hooded , was drawn with a smile to resemble Michael C. Hall . The poster was rendered by comic artist Tone Rodriguez , with whom Schlattmann had previously worked on a screenplay in development at 20th Century Fox . When Schlattmann visited Rodriguez 's studio in Los Angeles to discuss the art , comic book writer Dan Wickline was also there . Schlattmann thought that " by including the two of them , we could make things a bit more special and add some credibility to the show " . Wickline played the dead comic book shopkeeper , while Rodriguez played the prime suspect for the murder . The Dark Defender character also lent its name to a series of highly stylized Dexter webisodes , recapping Dexter 's victims of the second season . 
 The scenes at the marina where Dexter keeps his boat , Coral Cove , were filmed at the Leeward Bay Marina in Los Angeles ' Wilmington neighborhood , in spite of the show 's Miami setting . The episode opens in a coffee bar at Coral Cove Marina , which was filmed at Leeward Bay 's floating diner , the Chowder Barge . One of the empty barns at Long Beach , California 's Shoreline Village was set up as the comic book store . Doakes and LaGuerta discuss the homicide case while standing on the Shoreline Village boardwalk , and the Village car park was used to film Doakes and LaGuerta 's stake out . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Eric Goldman of IGN called " The Dark Defender " " a very satisfying episode of the show " and thought that " so far [ the cast and crew are ] doing a very good job " of replicating the tension seen in the first season . He was impressed by Dexter 's discoveries about his birth mother and adoptive father , but called Debra 's romance with Gabriel a " less successful " storyline . Writing for the Los Angeles Times , Tom O 'Neil called the episode a " standout " because of the parts of Dexter 's past that it explored . He stated that , for regular viewers , " this episode is a real knockout " , but for unfamiliar viewers , " this whole Dark Defender bit might look pretty corny " . TV Squad 's Keith McDuffee believed the revelation of Laura 's affair with Harry to be " certainly the most shocking moment of the episode " , and thought that " One of the brilliant moments of the season so far was Dexter going after one of his mom 's killers . " Paula Paige of TV Guide called Dexter 's monologue about his hollowness " very moving " . She thought that his confrontation with his mother 's killer " may have been one of the best shot [ scenes ] in the whole series " . Blogcritics ' Ray Ellis praised the " razor @-@ sharp sense of humor " seen in the episode and thought that " In a season of mostly dreary , bland series , Dexter remains the most daring show on television . " Dexter and Jimenez 's confrontation was named Hall 's best scene by Variety critic Stuart Levine . 
 In a short recap of seasons 1 and 2 in Film Quarterly , J. M. Tyree called " The Dark Defender " season 2 's " most intriguing episode " , and compared Dexter to Batman : 
 When the identities of the Butcher 's victims are revealed to be murderers , the public applauds him , elevating Dexter to the status of a folktale avenger or comic @-@ book anti @-@ hero . And indeed Rita excoriates him for disappearing at night " like Clark fucking Kent , " but the FBI describes the Butcher as more like one 's own " personal Batman . " Batman is an apt comparison , although Dexter prefers to violate Batman 's aversion to killing . Both live outside the law , " part human , part mutant , " as Dexter puts it . Both cling to an ethos riddled with perplexities and contradictions . Visiting a comic @-@ book shop , Dexter find himself transformed on a handmade superhero poster from Butcher into The Dark Defender , a protector of the city and the executioner of its predators . Vigilantes simultaneously share territory with cops and outlaws , they break the law in the hopes of helping society . ... Dexter describes being " half sick with the thrill , the complete wrongness , " when the " dark passenger " inside him takes command . 
 Schlattmann was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for his work on this episode in the Episodic Drama category . " The Dark Defender " was submitted to the Primetime Emmy Awards judging panel to determine nominees for the Outstanding Drama Series award ; Dexter was one of the top ten candidates and became one of the 6 series nominated for the award . The episode was also unsuccessfully submitted for Emmys for Outstanding Writing ( Timothy Schlattmann ) and Outstanding Directing ( Keith Gordon ) in a Drama Series . 
 = Music of Final Fantasy III = 
 The music of the video game Final Fantasy III was composed by regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu . Final Fantasy III Original Sound Version , a compilation of almost all of the music in the game , was released by Square Co . / NTT Publishing in 1991 , and subsequently re @-@ released by NTT Publishing in 1994 and 2004 . The soundtrack to the remake of Final Fantasy III for the Nintendo DS , Final Fantasy III Original Soundtrack was released by NTT Publishing in 2006 , with revamped versions of the tracks and additional tracks . A vocal arrangement album entitled Final Fantasy III Yūkyū no Kaze Densetsu , or literally Final Fantasy III Legend of the Eternal Wind , contained a selection of musical tracks from the game . The tracks were performed by Nobuo Uematsu and Dido , a duo composed of Michiaki Kato and Shizuru Ohtaka . The album was released by Data M in 1990 and by Polystar in 1994 . 
 The music received positive reviews from critics , and is lauded as one of the best soundtracks of any NES game . Several pieces from the soundtrack remain popular today , and have been performed numerous times in Final Fantasy orchestral concert series such as the Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy concert series and the Distant Worlds - Music from Final Fantasy series . Music from the game has also been published in arranged albums and compilations by Square as well as outside groups . 
 = = Final Fantasy III Original Sound Version = = 
 Final Fantasy III Original Sound Version is a soundtrack album of video game music from Final Fantasy III . The album contains the musical tracks from the game , composed by Nobuo Uematsu . It spans 44 tracks and covers a duration of 54 : 24 . It was released on July 15 , 1991 , by Square and NTT Publishing . Final Fantasy III has been described as the game in which Uematsu 's musical style " began to take a more definite form " . Many of the tracks in the soundtrack use " cascading rhythms " in both the foreground and background sounds , as well as a bass rhythm , pushing the limited sound hardware of the Nintendo Entertainment System further than in Final Fantasy II . 
 The tunes range in style , including " jazzy " and " new age " , and in tempo from slow , somber pieces to more upbeat rhythms . Including the smaller pieces not included in the original soundtrack , Final Fantasy III contained twice as many pieces as the soundtrack to Final Fantasy II . The original release bears the catalog number N23D @-@ 002 . It was re @-@ released on November 26 , 1994 and again on October 1 , 2004 by NTT Publishing under the catalog numbers PSCN @-@ <unk> and NTCP @-@ <unk> , respectively . 
 Final Fantasy III Original Sound Version was well received by critics . Ben Schweitzer of RPGFan felt that it was " one of the strongest soundtracks " of any NES game , a sentiment that Patrick Gann of RPGFan agreed with . Gann further declared the main theme " Eternal Wind " to " quite possibly be the best world map music " in a video game . Jon Turner of Soundtrack Central felt that , although the sound limitations of the album detracted it in the eyes of many listeners , the album was still well worth the purchase . Dave of Square Enix Music Online , however , disagreed , feeling that , although it was " charming " , it was " one of the weaker Final Fantasy albums " . 
 = = Final Fantasy III Yūkyū no Kaze Densetsu = = 
 Final Fantasy III Yūkyū no Kaze Densetsu ( <unk> <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī Surī Yūkyū no Kaze Densetsu , lit . Final Fantasy III Legend of the Eternal Wind ) is an arranged album containing a selection of vocal and arranged musical tracks from the game interspersed with English narration of a story similar to Final Fantasy III . The songs were performed by Nobuo Uematsu and sung by Dido , a duo composed of Michiaki Kato and Shizuru Ohtaka . The tunes have been described as being in the Romantic music style , with a slow feeling to them . The seven tracks of the album spans several genres , including orchestral tracks , tribal themes , and vocal tracks , and cover a duration of 52 : 32 . The album was first released on May 25 , 1990 by Data M and subsequently re @-@ released on March 25 , 1994 by Polystar . The original release bears the catalog number <unk> @-@ 1005 , and the re @-@ release bears the catalog number PSCR @-@ 5252 . 
 Final Fantasy III <unk> no Kaze Densetsu was received positively by critics , with Patrick Gann declaring that it was worth " searching long and hard " for the album . Ben Martin , Jason Strohmaier , and Aaron Lau of Soundtrack Central all agreed , finding the songs to be varied and interesting , though each added that the narration seriously detracted from the album . Dave of Square Enix Music Online also found the narration to be a flaw of the album , but termed it overall to be " a great effort from Nobuo Uematsu " . 
 = = Final Fantasy III Original Soundtrack = = 
 Final Fantasy III Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack released for the remake of Final Fantasy III for the Nintendo DS . The album contains the original tracks from the game rearranged by Tsuyoshi Sekito and Keiji Kawamori for the DS system , as well as two remixes , one from The Black Mages and the other by Yasuhiro Yamanaka , the synth operator for the soundtrack . The album also included a DVD containing the opening full motion video sequence of the game , a promotional video , and an interview with the game 's staff . It was released on September 20 , 2006 by Square Enix and bears the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 7 . The soundtrack disc contains 61 tracks and covers a duration of 70 : 56 . , while the DVD 's three tracks have a length of 28 : 24 . 
 Final Fantasy III Original Soundtrack received mixed reviews from critics , with Patrick Gann declaring that " even if you own the original Famicom version 's soundtrack , there is plenty of reason to own this soundtrack alongside it , " while Richard of Square Enix Music Online found it to be a " passable " album , but " mostly forgettable " . 
 Track listing 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Black Mages , a band led by Nobuo Uematsu that arranges music from Final Fantasy video games into a rock music style , have arranged two pieces from Final Fantasy III . These are " The Rocking Grounds " from the album The Skies Above , published in 2004 , and " <unk> " , a remix of " The Final Struggle " , from Darkness and Starlight , published in 2008 . Lyrical versions of " The Boundless Ocean " and " Elia , the Maiden of Water " , sung by Risa Ohki , appeared on Final Fantasy : Pray , a compilation album produced by Square . Additionally , lyrical versions of " Eternal Wind " and " Cute Little <unk> " , sung by Risa Ohki and Ikuko Noguchi , appeared on Final Fantasy : Love Will Grow . 
 The music of Final Fantasy III has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums , such as 20020220 music from FINAL FANTASY , a live recording of an orchestra performing music from the series including several pieces from the game . Additionally , " Elia , the Water Maiden " was performed as part of a medley by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra for the Distant Worlds - Music from Final Fantasy concert tour , while " Eternal Wind " and " Cute Little <unk> " were performed in a medley by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . The Black Mages performed " The Final Battle " at the Extra : Hyper Game Music Event 2007 concert in Tokyo on July 7 , 2007 . Independent but officially licensed releases of Final Fantasy III music have been composed by such groups as Project Majestic Mix , which focuses on arranging video game music . Selections also appear on Japanese remix albums , called dojin music , and on English remixing websites . 
 = White @-@ breasted nuthatch = 
 The white @-@ breasted nuthatch ( Sitta carolinensis ) is a small songbird of the nuthatch family which breeds in old @-@ growth woodland across much of temperate North America . It is a stocky bird , with a large head , short tail , powerful bill , and strong feet . The upperparts are pale blue @-@ gray , and the face and underparts are white . It has a black cap and a chestnut lower belly . The nine subspecies differ mainly in the color of the body plumage . 
 Like other nuthatches , the white @-@ breasted nuthatch forages for insects on trunks and branches and is able to move head @-@ first down trees . Seeds form a substantial part of its winter diet , as do acorns and hickory nuts that were stored by the bird in the fall . The nest is in a hole in a tree , and the breeding pair may smear insects around the entrance as a deterrent to squirrels . Adults and young may be killed by hawks , owls , and snakes , and forest clearance may lead to local habitat loss , but this is a common species with no major conservation concerns over most of its range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The nuthatches are a genus , Sitta , of small passerine birds which derive their English name from the propensity of some species to wedge large insects or seeds into cracks , and then hack at them with their strong bills . Sitta is derived from sittē , the Ancient Greek for nuthatch , and carolinensis means " of Carolina " in Latin . The white @-@ breasted nuthatch was first described by English ornithologist John Latham in his 1790 work , the Index <unk> . 
 Nuthatch taxonomy is complex , with geographically separated species sometimes closely resembling each other . The white @-@ breasted nuthatch has an appearance and contact call similar to those of the white @-@ cheeked nuthatch , Sitta leucopsis , of the Himalayas and was formerly considered to be conspecific with it . A study published in 2012 showed that four distinct lineages were genetically isolated from each other and could represent different species , recognizable by morphology and song . A molecular phylogeny published in 2014 and including all main species ' lineages within nuthatches concluded that the white @-@ breasted nuthatch was more closely related to the giant nuthatch ( S. magna ) than to S. przewalskii , formerly regarded as possibly conspecific with it ; S. przewalskii turned out to be basal in the family . 
 = = Description = = 
 Like other members of its genus , the white @-@ breasted nuthatch has a large head , short tail , short wings , a powerful bill and strong feet ; it is 13 – 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) long , with a wingspan of 20 – 27 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 – 10 @.@ 6 in ) and a weight of 18 – 30 g ( 0 @.@ 63 – 1 @.@ 06 oz ) . 
 The adult male of the nominate subspecies , S. c. carolinensis , has pale blue @-@ gray upperparts , a glossy black cap ( crown of the head ) , and a black band on the upper back . The wing coverts and flight feathers are very dark gray with paler fringes , and the closed wing is pale gray and black , with a thin white wing bar . The face and the underparts are white . The outer tail feathers are black with broad diagonal white bands across the outer three feathers , a feature readily visible in flight . 
 The female has , on average , a narrower black back band , slightly duller upperparts and buffer underparts than the male . Her cap may be gray , but many females have black caps and cannot be reliably distinguished from the male in the field . In the northeastern United States , at least 10 % of females have black caps , but the proportion rises to 40 – 80 % in the Rocky Mountains , Mexico and the southeastern U.S. Juveniles are similar to the adult , but duller plumaged . 
 Like other nuthatches , this is a noisy species with a range of vocalizations . The male 's mating song is a rapid nasal qui @-@ qui @-@ qui @-@ qui @-@ qui @-@ qui @-@ qui . The contact call between members of a pair , given most frequently in the fall and winter is a thin squeaky nit , uttered up to 30 times a minute . A more distinctive sound is a shrill kri repeated rapidly with mounting anxiety or excitement kri @-@ kri @-@ kri @-@ kri @-@ kri @-@ kri @-@ kri @-@ kri ; the Rocky Mountains and Great Basin subspecies have a higher , faster <unk> call , and Pacific birds a more nasal <unk> . 
 Three other , significantly smaller , nuthatches have ranges which overlap that of white @-@ breasted , but none has white plumage completely surrounding the eye . Further distinctions are that the red @-@ breasted nuthatch has a black eye line and reddish underparts , and the brown @-@ headed and pygmy nuthatches each have a brown cap , and a white patch on the nape of the neck . 
 = = = Geographical variation = = = 
 The white @-@ breasted nuthatch has nine subspecies , although the differences are small and change gradually across the range . The subspecies are sometimes treated as three groups based on close similarities in morphology , habitat usage , and vocalizations . These groups cover eastern North America , the Great Basin and central Mexico , and the Pacific coastal regions . The subspecies of the western interior have the darkest upperparts , and eastern S. c. carolinensis has the palest back . The eastern form also has a thicker bill and broader dark cap stripe than the interior and Pacific races . The calls of the three groups differ , as described above . The Great Basin and Eastern forms have been observed in secondary contact on the Great Plains , where they do not seem to mix . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The breeding habitat of the white @-@ breasted nuthatch is woodland across North America , from southern Canada to northern Florida and southern Mexico . In the eastern part of its range , its preferred habitat is old @-@ growth open deciduous or mixed forest , including orchards , parks , suburban gardens and cemeteries ; it is found mainly in the lowlands , although it breeds at 1 @,@ 675 m ( 5 @,@ 495 ft ) altitude in Tennessee . In the west and Mexico , this nuthatch is found in open montane pine @-@ oak woodlands , and nesting occurs at up to 3 @,@ 200 m ( 10 @,@ 500 ft ) altitude in Nevada , California and Mexico . <unk> @-@ juniper and riverside woodlands may be used locally where available . The white @-@ breasted nuthatch is the only North American nuthatch usually found in deciduous trees ; red @-@ breasted , pygmy and brown @-@ headed nuthatches prefer pines . 
 The presence of mature or decaying trees with holes suitable for nesting is essential , and trees such as oak , beech and hickory are favored in the east since they provide edible seeds . Although suitable habitat is distributed continentally , it is discontinuous , and the separate populations of this non @-@ migratory species have diverged to form distinct regional subspecies . 
 This nuthatch , like most of its genus , is non @-@ migratory , and the adults normally stay in their territory year @-@ round . There may be more noticeable dispersal due to seed failure or high reproductive success in some years , and this species has occurred as a vagrant to Vancouver Island , Santa Cruz Island , and Bermuda . One bird landed on the RMS Queen Mary six hours sailing east of New York in October 1963 . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The white @-@ breasted nuthatch is monogamous , and pairs form following a courtship in which the male bows to the female , spreading his tail and drooping his wings while swaying back and forth ; he also feeds her morsels of food . The pair establish a territory of 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 15 km2 ( 25 – 37 acres ) in woodland , and up to 0 @.@ 2 km2 ( 49 acres ) in semi @-@ wooded habitats , and then remain together year @-@ round until one partner dies or disappears . The nest cavity is usually a natural hole in a decaying tree , sometimes an old woodpecker nest . 
 The nest hole is usually 3 – 12 m ( 9 @.@ 8 – 39 @.@ 4 ft ) high in a tree and is lined with fur , fine grass , and shredded bark . The clutch is 5 to 9 eggs which are creamy @-@ white , speckled with reddish brown , and average 19 mm × 14 mm ( 0 @.@ 75 in × 0 @.@ 55 in ) in size . The eggs are incubated by the female for 13 to 14 days prior to hatching , and the altricial chicks fledge in a further 18 to 26 days . Both adults feed the chicks in the nest and for about two weeks after fledging , and the male also feeds the female while she is incubating . Once independent , juveniles leave the adults ' territory and either establish their own territory or become " floaters " , unpaired birds without territories . It is probably these floaters which are mainly involved in the irregular dispersals of this species . This species of nuthatch roosts in tree holes or behind loose bark when not breeding and has the unusual habit of removing its feces from the roost site in the morning . It usually roosts alone except in very cold weather , when up to 29 birds have been recorded together . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
 Predators of adult nuthatches include owls and diurnal birds of prey ( such as sharp @-@ shinned and Cooper 's hawks ) , and nestlings and eggs are eaten by woodpeckers , small squirrels , and climbing snakes such as the western rat snake . The white @-@ breasted nuthatch responds to predators near the nest by flicking its wings while making hn @-@ hn calls . When a bird leaves the nest hole , it wipes around the entrance with a piece of fur or vegetation ; this makes it more difficult for a predator to find the nest using its sense of smell . The nuthatch may also smear blister beetles around the entrance to its nest , and it has been suggested that the unpleasant smell from the crushed insects deters squirrels , its chief competitor for natural tree cavities . The estimated average lifespan of this nuthatch is two years , but the record is twelve years and nine months . 
 This nuthatch 's responses to predators may be linked to a reproductive strategy . A study compared the white @-@ breasted nuthatch with the red @-@ breasted nuthatch in terms of the willingness of males to feed incubating females on the nest when presented with models of predators . The models were of a sharp @-@ shinned hawk , which hunts adult nuthatches , and a house wren , which destroys eggs . The white @-@ breasted nuthatch is shorter @-@ lived than the red @-@ breasted nuthatch , but has more young , and was found to respond more strongly to the egg predator , whereas the red @-@ breasted showed greater concern with the hawk . This supports the theory that longer @-@ lived species benefit from adult survival and future breeding opportunities , while birds with shorter life spans place more value on the survival of their larger broods . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The white @-@ breasted nuthatch forages along tree trunks and branches in a similar way to woodpeckers and treecreepers , but does not use its tail for additional support , instead progressing in jerky hops using its strong legs and feet . All nuthatches are distinctive when seeking food because they are able to descend tree trunks head @-@ first and can hang upside @-@ down beneath twigs and branches . 
 This nuthatch is omnivorous , eating insects and seeds . It places large food items such as acorns or hickory nuts in crevices in tree trunks , and then hammers them open with its strong beak ; surplus seeds are cached under loose bark or crevices of trees . The diet in winter may be nearly 70 % seeds , but in summer it is mainly insects . The insects consumed by the white @-@ breasted nuthatch include caterpillars , ants , and pest species such as pine weevils , <unk> and other scale insects , and jumping plant lice . This bird will occasionally feed on the ground , and readily visits feeding stations for nuts , suet and sunflower seeds , the last of which it often takes away to store . The white @-@ breasted nuthatch was also observed visiting raccoon latrines in order to find seeds . 
 The white @-@ breasted nuthatch often travels with small mixed flocks in winter . These flocks are led by titmice and chickadees , with nuthatches and downy woodpeckers as common attendant species . Participants in such flocks are thought to benefit in terms of foraging and predator avoidance . It is likely that the attendant species also access the information carried in the chickadees ' calls and reduce their own level of vigilance accordingly . 
 = = Status = = 
 The white @-@ breasted nuthatch is a common species with a large range , estimated at 8 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 km2 ( 3 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . Its total population is estimated at 10 million individuals , and there is evidence of an overall population increase , so it is not believed to approach either the size criterion ( fewer than 10 @,@ 000 mature individuals ) or the population decline criterion ( declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) of the IUCN Red List . For these reasons , the species is evaluated as Least Concern . 
 The removal of dead trees from forests may cause problems locally for this species because it requires cavity sites for nesting ; declines have been noted in Washington , Florida , and more widely in the southeastern U.S. west to Texas . In contrast , the breeding range is expanding in Alberta , and numbers are increasing in the northeast due to regrown forest . This nuthatch is protected under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 , to which the three countries in which it occurs ( Canada , Mexico , and the United States ) are all signatories . 
 = Gottlob Berger = 
 Gottlob Christian Berger ( 16 July 1896 – 5 January 1975 ) was a senior German Nazi official who held the rank of SS @-@ Obergruppenführer und General der Waffen @-@ SS ( lieutenant general ) , and was the chief of the SS Main Office responsible for Schutzstaffel ( SS ) recruiting during World War II . Berger served in the German Army during World War I , was wounded four times and also awarded the Iron Cross First Class . Immediately after the war he was a leader of the <unk> militia in his native North Württemberg . He joined the Nazi Party in 1922 , but lost interest in right @-@ wing politics during the 1920s , training and working as a physical education teacher . 
 In the late 1920s he rejoined the Nazi Party and became a member of the paramilitary Sturmabteilung ( SA ) in 1931 . He clashed with other leaders of the SA , and joined the Allgemeine @-@ SS in 1936 . Initially responsible for physical education in an SS region , he was soon transferred to the staff of Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler as head of the sports office . In 1938 , he was appointed as head of the recruiting office of the SS Main Office ( SS @-@ HA ) , taking over as chief of the SS @-@ HA the following year . To a significant extent , Berger was the " father " of the Waffen @-@ SS , as he not only implemented recruiting structures and policies that assisted the Waffen @-@ SS to circumvent Wehrmacht controls over conscription , but also extended Waffen @-@ SS recruiting first to " Germanic " volunteers from Scandinavia and western Europe , then Volksdeutsche ( ethnic Germans ) outside the Reich , and finally to peoples who in no way reflected Himmler 's ideas of " racial purity " . He also sponsored and protected his friend Oskar Dirlewanger , who he placed in command of a unit of convicted criminals . The Sonderkommando Dirlewanger subsequently committed many war crimes in the areas it operated . Berger often clashed with senior officers of the Wehrmacht and even with senior Waffen @-@ SS officers over his recruiting methods , but his organisational skills were largely responsible for the growth of the Waffen @-@ SS to a total of 38 divisions by war 's end . 
 Berger undertook several other roles in the latter stages of the war , while continuing as chief of the SS @-@ HA . He had a key role in the Reich Ministry for the Occupied Eastern Territories from mid @-@ 1942 , allowing the SS to direct much of the economic activity in the east . In this role he proposed a plan to kidnap and enslave 50 @,@ 000 Eastern European children between the ages of 10 and 14 , under the codename Heuaktion , a plan that was subsequently carried out . In response to the Slovak National Uprising in August 1944 , Berger was appointed as Military Commander in Slovakia , and was responsible for suppressing the revolt . The following month he was appointed as one of the two chiefs of staff of the Volkssturm militia , and as chief of the prisoner of war camps . In the final months of the war he commanded German forces in the Bavarian Alps , which included remnants of several of the Waffen @-@ SS units he had helped recruit . He surrendered to U.S. troops near Berchtesgaden , and was promptly arrested . He was tried and convicted in the Ministries Trial of the U.S. Nuremberg Military Tribunals for war crimes , and was sentenced to 25 years imprisonment . His sentence was soon reduced to 10 years , and he was released after serving six and a half years . After release he advocated for the rehabilitation of the Waffen @-@ SS and worked in several manufacturing businesses . He died in his hometown in 1975 . 
 = = Early life and involvement with Nazi Party = = 
 Berger was born on 16 July 1896 at <unk> in the Kingdom of Württemberg , the son of saw @-@ mill owners Johannes and Christine ( née Moser ) , and was one of eight children . He attended Volksschule ( elementary school ) and Realschule ( junior high school ) and then teacher training in <unk> . He volunteered for military service at the beginning of World War I , and rose to the rank of Leutnant in the infantry by the time of his discharge in 1919 . Wounded four times , he was awarded the Iron Cross First Class , and was considered 70 per cent disabled at the time of his discharge . During the war , all three of his brothers died , two killed in action and the other executed as a spy in the United States . Berger 's combative temperament and very conservative politics fitted him for a leadership role with the North Württemberg <unk> militia in 1918 – 19 . He married Maria ( née <unk> ) in 1921 . After joining the Nazi Party in 1922 , he was arrested and briefly held in custody after Adolf Hitler 's Munich Beer Hall Putsch in November 1923 . He trained and worked as a physical education teacher , despite his injuries , and lost interest in politics for some years , before rejoining the Nazi Party in 1929 , and the paramilitary Sturmabteilung ( SA ) in January 1931 . 
 Berger 's SA career was limited by his soldierly ideas of politics and leadership , but after the Nazi seizure of power in January 1933 , he was found to be very suitable to lead <unk> operations , which involved the rounding up of Jews and " political undesirables " . In April 1933 , his clashes with younger leaders meant his SA career had met a dead @-@ end . His SA peers criticised Berger 's ambitious nature , outspokenness and lack of self @-@ reflection . Beginning in July 1934 , Berger worked with the SA training chief SA @-@ Obergruppenführer Friedrich @-@ Wilhelm Krüger . Between 1933 and 1935 , he was a school inspector in Esslingen am Neckar near Stuttgart , and in 1935 was a senior official in the Gau Württemberg – Hohenzollern Ministry of Culture . He was recruited into the Allgemeine SS by Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler in 1936 , on Krüger 's recommendation . Initially appointed to oversee sports and physical training for SS @-@ Oberabschnitt Südwest ( SS Regional Headquarters Southwest ) , he then moved to Himmler 's personal staff as head of the sports office . 
 Berger interceded on behalf of his World War I comrade Oskar Dirlewanger , who had been imprisoned for two years in 1935 for offences against a minor . On his release from prison , Berger used his influence to ensure Dirlewanger could join the Condor Legion and fight in the Spanish Civil War . 
 On 1 July 1938 , Himmler appointed Berger as chief of the recruiting department of the SS @-@ Hauptamt ( SS Main Office , or SS @-@ HA ) , which he quickly developed into a powerful tool for Himmler 's ambitions . According to Berger , the German Army was initially dismissive of the idea of SS combat troops . He quoted the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Army , Generaloberst Werner von Fritsch as saying , " If the Reich Transport Minister has his militarily @-@ trained Railway Police , why shouldn 't Himmler also play at soldiers ? " Berger played a key role in directing the fifth column <unk> Freikorps during the Sudeten Crisis in Czechoslovakia in 1938 , and the organisational skills he had displayed there marked him as highly suitable for the SS recruiting role . 
 Berger later claimed that he had come up with the idea of SS combat troops wearing camouflage jackets from his own hunting days , and had suggested it to SS @-@ Obergruppenführer Sepp Dietrich , commander of the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler Regiment ( LSSAH ) . From 1938 , various forms of Flecktarn camouflage were issued . The author Adrian Weale doubts Berger 's account . Berger had achieved the rank of Major der Reserve in the Wehrmacht by 1938 , but his initial rank upon joining the Allgemeine SS was SS @-@ Standartenführer , based upon his SA service . 
 = = Chief of the SS @-@ Hauptamt = = 
 = = = 1939 – 40 = = = 
 = = = = Initial expansion of the Waffen @-@ SS = = = = 
 Prior to the outbreak of World War II , the SS @-@ HA had been responsible for organising an erstwhile " civilian " political organisation , the Allgemeine SS . After the war began , it was clear that those departments of the SS @-@ HA looking after the SS @-@ Verfügungstruppe ( SS dispositional troops or SS @-@ VT ) had performed poorly . During the invasion of Poland , deficiencies in organisation , equipment and training had become obvious . The SS @-@ HA , and specifically its chief , SS @-@ Obergruppenführer August Heissmeyer , were held responsible , and Heissmeyer soon made way for Berger . As head of recruiting , Berger had already unified the recruiting system for the three main SS organisations , the Allgemeine SS , SS @-@ VT and police , and in August 1938 he negotiated a recruiting agreement between Himmler and the <unk> ( Reich Youth Leader ) Baldur von Schirach which created a strong recruiting pathway for the young men of the Hitler Youth into the SS . 
 Following the Polish campaign , Hitler approved the expansion of the SS combat troops to three divisions as well as bringing the LSSAH up to the strength of a reinforced motorised regiment . To achieve this goal before the commencement of the planned invasion of France and the Low Countries , Berger needed at least partially @-@ trained personnel . To do this , he circumvented the recruiting primacy of the Wehrmacht by transferring men from forces already under Himmler 's control , the SS @-@ Totenkopfverbände ( SS @-@ TV ) that ran the concentration camps , and combat @-@ trained police reinforcements of the Ordnungspolizei ( Order Police or Orpo ) . By adding these men to the LSSAH and the existing three regiments of the SS @-@ VT , he expanded the force to the approved ceiling , including 50 @,@ 000 trained replacements . The three new divisions were the SS @-@ Verfügungs @-@ Division ( later given the name Reich and then Das Reich ) commanded by the Inspector of the SS @-@ VT , SS @-@ Gruppenführer Paul Hausser , the SS @-@ Division Totenkopf commanded by the Inspector of Concentration Camps , SS @-@ Gruppenführer Theodor Eicke , and the Polizei @-@ Division , commanded by SS @-@ Gruppenführer und Generalleutnant der Polizei Karl Pfeffer @-@ <unk> . 
 On 1 December 1939 , Himmler promoted Berger to chief of the SS @-@ HA . To a significant extent , Berger was the " father " of the Waffen @-@ SS , a term he coined in an agreement dated 2 March 1940 . He used the new term to smooth over friction between the SS @-@ VT and SS @-@ TV , as they were combined in new formations . Berger 's new @-@ found authority for SS recruiting matters irritated the chiefs of the Allgemeine SS districts , who had previously been responsible for this function . This came to a head when the chief of SS @-@ Oberabschnitt Südwest , SS @-@ Gruppenführer Kurt Kaul refused to recognise Berger 's delegate in his district , referring to Berger as a " low @-@ ranking empire builder " . 
 Kaul 's series of letters to Berlin came to nothing , as the power and influence of the Allgemeine SS had waned with the outbreak of war and the conscription of many of its members into the Wehrmacht , Waffen @-@ SS and police . Ultimately , when Kaul threatened to arrest Berger 's delegate in SS @-@ Oberabschnitt Südwest , Himmler intervened personally in February 1940 , stating that " the most unpleasant consequences " would befall Kaul if he did not throw his support behind Berger and his recruiting organisation . Kaul acquiesced , and Berger 's supremacy as SS recruiting supremo was firmly established . 
 = = = = The first " Germanic " recruits = = = = 
 Despite this success , Berger still had to negotiate with the Wehrmacht , which opposed his attempts to expand the Waffen @-@ SS at almost every turn . In early 1940 , Himmler and Berger were outmaneuvered by Generaloberst Wilhelm Keitel , Chief of Oberkommando der Wehrmacht ( Wehrmacht High Command or OKW ) on a number of issues around Waffen @-@ SS recruiting , reflecting the strong influence the Wehrmacht still had with Hitler . On 20 April 1940 , Berger was promoted to SS @-@ Brigadeführer . According to Berger , Himmler never intended that the Waffen @-@ SS would supplant the Army , and after the war he intended that it would be reduced to seven active and five reserve divisions . Berger created a recruiting structure throughout the Reich , mirroring that of the Army , but while the Wehrmacht , which controlled the draft , was willing to allow Berger enough recruits to maintain the three divisions and the LSSAH , it did not want to see any further expansion . To get around this , Berger had to look outside the Reich . 
 By this time , the Waffen @-@ SS numbered just under 125 @,@ 000 , of whom more than 40 @,@ 000 originated from post @-@ Anschluss Austria and other areas outside the pre @-@ 1933 borders of Germany . In April 1940 , the Germans had invaded and occupied Denmark and Norway , opening up a source of " Nordic " or " Germanic " recruits , which Berger was quick to exploit . After the invasion of France and the Low Countries , the resulting regiment , SS @-@ Nordland , was joined by a Dutch @-@ Belgian @-@ Flemish regiment , SS @-@ Westland . At the same time as they were recruiting for these " Germanic " regiments , Berger 's delegates were also focusing on gaining ethnic German volunteers from outside the Reich , men not subject to the Wehrmacht @-@ controlled draft . In May , more than 1 @,@ 000 Romanian Volksdeutsche had been recruited , with the help of Andreas Schmidt , Berger 's son @-@ in @-@ law and the political leader of the Romanian Volksdeutsche . Three weeks after the invasion of Belgium , Berger was appointed as the president of the German @-@ sponsored pro @-@ Nazi Belgian political party , DeVlag . Berger also worked to bring the Yugoslav Volksdeutsche under the influence of the SS , which he was able to achieve six months prior to the invasion of that country by the Axis in April 1941 . Berger 's recruiting work with the Flemish and Croatian communities was facilitated by his chairmanship of both the Deutsche @-@ <unk> <unk> ( German @-@ Flemish Studies Group ) and the Deutsche @-@ <unk> Gesellschaft ( German @-@ Croatian Society ) . 
 = = = = Friction with the Wehrmacht = = = = 
 By the end of May 1940 , Berger had filled the authorised quota of new recruits , but his recruiters kept signing up young men to create a reserve that could replace the many older Allgemeine SS reservists in the three field divisions . To supplement this pool , Berger also continued recruiting for the SS @-@ TV and police regiments , which were not under Wehrmacht control , and were still below the strengths approved by Hitler . This continued to create friction between the Wehrmacht and SS , as potential Wehrmacht recruits were siphoned off to forces under Himmler 's control . By a range of methods , Berger diverted manpower from the younger age groups , and also targeted areas outside the Reich , that were not subject to Wehrmacht recruiting controls . 
 Berger 's evasion of Wehrmacht @-@ imposed recruiting restrictions came to a head in June , when the Chief of the OKW Operations Staff , Generalmajor Alfred Jodl initiated an investigation of SS recruiting operations within the Reich . The result was that around 15 @,@ 000 SS inductions were held up by various Wehrmacht military district headquarters . Berger became aware of Jodl 's inquiry and advised Himmler that even their inquiries had underestimated his success , giving the example that the Wehrmacht believed he had exceeded the June quota for SS @-@ Division @-@ Totenkopf by 900 men , when in fact the true figure was 1 @,@ 164 . He boasted to Himmler that during the whole recruiting campaign , he had signed up 15 @,@ 000 men for SS @-@ Division @-@ Totenkopf , when Hitler had only authorised the recruiting of 4 @,@ 000 for the division in the same period . To justify his actions , Berger pointed to the fact that , just before the French surrender , Hitler had ordered the release of over @-@ age SS reservists . In the SS @-@ Division @-@ Totenkopf , this meant 13 @,@ 246 of the 20 @,@ 000 @-@ strong formation . 
 Berger had been remarkably successful , despite the obstacles placed in his path by the Wehrmacht , having recruited nearly 60 @,@ 000 men for the Waffen @-@ SS between mid @-@ January and the end of June . These fresh troops were more than sufficient to replace those released when Himmler demobilised several categories of SS reservists in late July . But Himmler knew that the future of the Waffen @-@ SS was assured ; Hitler was already considering invading the Soviet Union . 
 = = = = Re @-@ organisation = = = = 
 In August 1940 , Berger reorganised the SS @-@ HA to focus better on its main role of recruiting for the Waffen @-@ SS , creating separate sections to deal with recruiting inside and outside the Reich . This latter section developed out of a briefing he received from the Chief of the SS @-@ Führungshauptamt ( SS Command Main Office , or SS @-@ FHA ) SS @-@ Brigadeführer Hans Jüttner on Hitler 's expectations of the Waffen @-@ SS for the upcoming invasion of the Soviet Union , which included the raising of a fourth division and the expansion of the LSSAH to a motorised brigade . Berger realised that the Wehrmacht quotas for the Waffen @-@ SS would fall short of its manpower needs by at least 6 @,@ 000 per year . Berger 's SS @-@ HA had a problematic relationship with the SS @-@ FHA , which was responsible for organising , training and equipping the Waffen @-@ SS . The SS @-@ FHA wanted the Waffen @-@ SS to be a small elite corps , but Berger and Himmler knew that Hitler needed as many divisions as possible , even if that meant some Waffen @-@ SS formations would be of lesser quality . Jüttner 's initial efforts at integrating the recruits from western Europe and Scandinavia were inadequate , with insufficient emphasis on training and appointing officers and non @-@ commissioned officers from the ranks of the new recruits . The SS @-@ FHA had also paid scant attention to retention of ranks for former members of national armed forces , liaison with home territories , and even mail . Berger 's well @-@ researched report to Himmler on these failures was damning , and the Reichsführer @-@ SS soon issued detailed instructions on the handling of these new recruits , from the moment they joined the Waffen @-@ SS . 
 One of the obvious sources for Waffen @-@ SS manpower was the nearly 40 @,@ 000 troops of the SS @-@ TV regiments , which consisted of youths below conscription age for the Wehrmacht , as well as older Allgemeine SS reservists . These regiments were under Himmler 's control , and were deployed across German @-@ occupied Europe as political police , but the security functions they carried out were clearly within the capabilities of the Orpo . In September 1940 , Dirlewanger 's unit was deployed to the area of the General Government ( occupied Poland ) , where they established defensive positions and provided guards for a Jewish labour camp . 
 In late 1940 , in order to ensure that Himmler 's instructions were carried out , Berger established a special camp at <unk> in occupied Alsace , where non @-@ Reich German recruits could be brought up to physical standards and ideologically indoctrinated prior to Waffen @-@ SS training . This was an attempt to address the concerns of some commanders about the quality of these recruits , and their ability to be integrated into units composed mostly of Reich Germans . Recruits sent to this camp included Volksdeutsche ( ethnic Germans from outside the Reich ) , Danes , Norwegians , Dutch and Flemings . Berger also created a network of offices throughout German @-@ occupied Europe to ensure the welfare of the families of such recruits , influence the local communities to support Waffen @-@ SS recruiting , and prepare potential recruits for indoctrination . This network and its activities was strongly resisted by the Main Welfare Office for Ethnic Germans ( German : Hauptamt Volksdeutsche Mittelstelle or VoMi ) the Nazi Party arm responsible for guiding the ethnic German communities outside the Reich . Himmler , unhappy with the work of VoMi in supporting SS recruiting , did not abolish VoMi , he just authorised Berger to circumvent it . 
 By the end of 1940 , SS @-@ Nordland and SS @-@ Westland had become the basis for the formation of the fourth division , SS @-@ Division Wiking . Casting about for another source of recruits , Berger struck upon the idea of enlisting convicted criminals , who were concentrated in the Sonderkommando Dirlewanger , commanded by Berger 's friend , Dirlewanger . Dirlewanger had returned from Spain and been reinstated as a SS @-@ <unk> der Reserve in the Allgemeine SS at Berger 's instigation . 
 = = = 1941 = = = 
 In March 1941 , Berger founded the German Guidance Office which was responsible for the recruitment of " Germanic " men for the Waffen @-@ SS . The German Guidance Office encompassed the camp at <unk> , as well as the network of recruiting offices already established throughout occupied Europe , and became a separate department of the SS @-@ HA , with separate sections for leadership , recruiting and education , and six regional sub @-@ sections . 
 After the Balkan Campaign of April 1941 , the LSSAH was expanded to divisional strength , and following the commencement of the invasion of the Soviet Union commenced , a sixth Waffen @-@ SS division , SS @-@ Division Nord was formed from four of the former " SS @-@ Totenkopf " regiments , all of which had been re @-@ designated " SS Infantry " regiments . These new divisions had an initial strength only two @-@ thirds of that of the original divisions . The Polizei @-@ Division was also renamed the SS @-@ Polizei @-@ Division . The expectations on Berger 's recruiting network continued to increase , just as casualties began to mount in earnest . 
 = = = = The West Europeans = = = = 
 In early April 1941 , Hitler had agreed to the creation of the SS @-@ <unk> Nordwest ( SS Volunteer Regiment Northwest ) , with an authorised strength of 2 @,@ 500 men recruited from Flanders and the Netherlands . This formation capitalised on the push for an autonomous Flemish @-@ Dutch region within the Reich . Significant proponents of such a union were Anton Mussert of the National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands and <unk> De Clercq of the Flemish National League . In this , Berger was exploiting Mussert and De <unk> , because he was actually working towards Hitler 's idea of incorporating Flanders and Wallonia into the Reich as two Gaue , not a unified autonomous entity . 
 At the end of April , Himmler ordered Berger to obtain 20 @,@ 000 new recruits for the Waffen @-@ SS by the end of May . With Hitler 's authorisation , the recruitment quotas were lifted by the Wehrmacht , allowing Berger an essentially free hand for a limited time . He did not disappoint , misleading the new recruits as to the length of their service obligation , and signing up 22 @,@ 361 new troops by 29 May , many of whom were only 18 years old . To meet Himmler 's target , Berger had also called up eligible members of the Allgemeine SS and intensified efforts to recruit western Europeans . The latter initiative proved disappointing , with only 2 @,@ 000 of the total coming from that source . A total of 400 Finnish combat veterans also volunteered to join the Waffen @-@ SS in this period , and they were sent to join the SS @-@ Division @-@ Wiking . 
 = = = = The " national legions " = = = = 
 In June 1941 , just after the commencement of Operation Barbarossa , Hitler decreed that the Waffen @-@ SS could recruit foreigners for service on the Eastern Front . He wanted a legion to be raised from each of the occupied countries of Western Europe , but Himmler was only interested in recruiting " Germanic " people into the Waffen @-@ SS . Himmler decided that there were large numbers of potential pro @-@ German but nationalistic recruits available from the " Germanic " races in occupied countries , and directed Berger to explore this manpower source . As a result of Himmler 's decision , the Wehrmacht was permitted to recruit Frenchmen , Spaniards and Croats , while Dutch , Flemish , Swedish , Norwegian and Danish men were Berger 's domain . The " national legions " each numbered 1 @,@ 000 , except the Netherlands Legion , which had a maximum strength of 2 @,@ 000 . The idea was poorly managed , with many of the new recruits being badly treated by their German instructors , and once news of this reached their home territories , the flow of volunteers dried up . 
 In November 1941 , the Netherlands Legion and Flemish Legion had completed light infantry training and were sent to join the 2nd SS Infantry Brigade on the Leningrad Front . While they swore a personal oath to Hitler and were subject to SS rules and regulations , they were not members of the SS , and wore national symbols place of the sig runes . The SS @-@ FHA failed to carry through the commitments made to the men of the " national legions " when they enlisted , and combined with mistreatment and abuse from their German cadre staff and instructors , this had a negative impact on morale and the willingness of more men to volunteer . This was something from which the " national legions " never fully recovered , despite Himmler 's intervention at Berger 's behest . 
 = = = = A Volksdeutsche division = = = = 
 Encouraged by the success he had achieved in Romania in 1940 with the help of his son @-@ in @-@ law , Berger had proposed to Himmler that the next recruiting sphere be the Volksdeutsche communities of Romania , Hungary and Yugoslavia , which together contained about 1 @.@ 5 million ethnic Germans . Little could be done to further this proposal until mid @-@ 1941 , by which time Yugoslavia had been overrun by the Axis , and Romania and Hungary had joined the pact . Immediately after the lightning @-@ quick defeat of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , Hausser was being pressed to accept Yugoslav Volksdeutsche into his renamed SS @-@ Division @-@ Reich , even before it was withdrawn to prepare for Operation Barbarossa . On his way back to Germany from Yugoslavia , Hausser had transited through Romania and gathered another 600 ethnic German volunteers who he smuggled out of the country . 
 Not content with this fairly minor and surreptitious recruiting effort , Berger proposed to raise a seventh Waffen @-@ SS division from the ethnic Germans of Yugoslavia , something that had been a long @-@ term plan of Berger 's . By the end of 1941 , faced with the Partisan @-@ led uprising in Yugoslavia , Hitler authorised the raising of the SS @-@ Freiwilligen @-@ Division Prinz Eugen . It was to be the first of the many " foreign " divisions that would dramatically change the composition of the Waffen @-@ SS during the remainder of the war . The division was formed around an existing SS @-@ controlled Selbstschutz ( militia ) drawn from ethnic Germans in the Banat , but Berger had misread the willingness of the local ethnic German population to volunteer for service outside their homeland . His recruiters initially struggled to attract volunteers , so coercion was applied , and ultimately , Himmler approved conscription on the basis of an archaic law , the <unk> <unk> ( Tyrolean General Levy Act ) of 1872 . 
 = = = 1942 = = = 
 On 29 January 1942 , Himmler issued an order which re @-@ titled Dirlewanger 's unit as SS @-@ Sonderkommando Dirlewanger , and formally incorporated it into the Waffen @-@ SS . Later that year , when an SS judge issued an arrest warrant for Dirlewanger , the SS @-@ HA chief intervened with Himmler saying , " Better to shoot two Poles too many than one too few . A savage country cannot be governed in a decent manner . " 
 = = = = Baltic Legions = = = = 
 Within a few weeks of the invasion of the Soviet Union , Berger 's teams had begun recruiting Baltic volunteers for SS police units , forming several security battalions of Latvian and Estonian volunteers . The Wehrmacht also recruited eight Estonian battalions . This split approach to recruiting in the Baltic region continued into 1942 , with some units being decimated in front line fighting . In May of that year , Berger decided to exploit the nationalists within the Baltic states in order to gain access to recruits for the Waffen @-@ SS . Himmler was lukewarm on his initial proposal , but as casualties started to mount in 1942 , he changed his mind , and approved the formation of a Waffen @-@ SS Estonian Legion . Despite initial misgivings , Berger also proposed the formation of a Latvian Legion , which was approved at the end of 1942 . 
 = = = = Further Volksdeutsche recruiting = = = = 
 In the meantime , the Waffen @-@ SS had suffered over 43 @,@ 000 casualties up to February 1942 , particularly in the Battle of Moscow , and Berger had to replace them . Berger next turned his attention to the Hungarian Volksdeutsche . Through an agreement with the Royal Hungarian Army , his recruiters enlisted more than 16 @,@ 500 ethnic German recruits from Hungary between March and May 1942 . While this campaign was ongoing , on 20 April 1942 Berger was promoted to SS @-@ Gruppenführer . In September 1942 , the SS @-@ FHA complained bitterly about Berger 's recruiters , stating that many of the recruits were medically unsuitable , had been coerced or duped into enlisting , or were in fact ethnic Hungarians . Late in 1942 , more Volksdeutsche from the Banat and Romania were combined with the SS Cavalry Brigade to form the SS @-@ Kavallerie @-@ Division . On 24 November 1942 , the Chief of the Gestapo , Heinrich Müller advised Himmler of a proposal he had received from Berger that a Hungarian SS division could be financed by selling emigration permits to Slovak Jews . 
 = = = = The " national legions " = = = = 
 The " national legions " were attached to the Waffen @-@ SS , and fought on the Eastern Front in 1942 and early 1943 . Unable to replace their losses , most of the survivors were incorporated into SS @-@ Panzergrenadierdivision Nordland , authorised by Hitler at the end of 1942 . The three regiments of the new division were formed using survivors of the Freikorps <unk> , Legion Niederlande and Legion Norwegen , supplemented by transfers from SS @-@ Division Wiking , new recruits from the occupied West European countries , and Reich Germans . Legion Flandern was broken up and used as replacements in a number of Waffen @-@ SS formations . While Weale states that they were mainly motivated by anti @-@ communism , the historian George C. Stein observes that few of the " national legion " recruits were motivated by " political or ideological idealism " . According to Stein , Berger had no illusions about the motives of his West European recruits , but paid mere lip service to the idea that they joined the " anti @-@ communist " cause out of idealism . 
 = = = 1943 = = = 
 In November 1942 , orders were issued for the conversion of LSSAH , Das Reich and Totenkopf into panzergrenadier divisions , and the following month , Hitler ordered the formation of two more panzergrenadier divisions , the first new Waffen @-@ SS divisions to be raised from Reich Germans since 1940 . These were named Hohenstaufen and Frundsberg . 
 In February 1943 , Berger told Himmler that the SS needed stronger ideological training . As a result , the SS @-@ HA issued a series of pamphlets on racial ideology , including Der <unk> ( The Sub @-@ Human ) , which described certain peoples as spiritually and mentally lower than animals . On 13 February , following an approach from <unk> ( German Youth Leader ) Artur Axmann for a Waffen @-@ SS division to be raised from the Hitler Youth , Berger and Axmann were told the idea had been approved by Hitler and that they could commence planning . Berger implored Himmler to appoint him as the commander of this new division , but the <unk> demurred , telling Berger not to be impatient . In March 1943 , Wiking was also upgraded to a panzergrenadier division . 
 In April , losses at Stalingrad and in Tunisia allowed Berger to recruit from foreign workers in the Reich , over the objections of Reichsminister Albert Speer , the Minister for Armaments and War Production . By August , he had recruited 8 @,@ 105 of these labourers , and 3 @,@ 154 had already completed selection for the Waffen @-@ SS . In June , Berger was promoted to SS @-@ Obergruppenführer und General der Waffen @-@ SS , and later the same month the new division , 12th SS Panzergrenadier Division Hitlerjugend was officially activated . 
 On 5 July 1943 , Berger was awarded the German Cross in silver . By the end of 1942 , the " Germanic " SS had been integrated into the wider Allgemeine SS , and Berger drew up a badge to reward sporting prowess , skills highly prized among SS members . The result was the Germanic Proficiency Runes , which Himmler approved on 1 August 1943 , although it is believed less than 200 were actually awarded . 
 By the end of 1943 , the former " national legions " had been significantly expanded . The Dutch regiment of SS @-@ Panzergrenadierdivision Nordland was used to form an independent SS @-@ <unk> Nederland , and a revamped Flemish contingent was assembled into the SS @-@ Freiwilligen @-@ Sturmbrigade Langemarck . The Wehrmacht also gave up its French volunteer regiment and the Wallonian Legion , which became the SS @-@ Freiwilligen @-@ Sturmbrigade France and SS @-@ Freiwilligen @-@ Sturmbrigade Wallonien . By the end of the war , all of these formations had been given divisional status in the Waffen @-@ SS , despite the fact that they never grew to more than brigade strength . 
 The complaints from the SS @-@ FHA about the quality of Volksdeutsche recruits had no effect on Berger 's approach . He concluded further agreements with Hungary and Romania , and imposed on the puppet regimes of the Independent State of Croatia and the Slovak State , to effectively authorise the unrestricted conscription of ethnic Germans in those territories . In the German @-@ occupied territory of Serbia , the General Government ( annexed Poland ) and parts of the Soviet Union , ethnic Germans were conscripted into the Waffen @-@ SS in the same arbitrary manner Reich Germans were conscripted by the Wehrmacht . By the end of 1943 , a quarter of the strength of the Waffen @-@ SS was made up of Volksdeutsche . 
 = = = = The Baltic divisions = = = = 
 Before either Baltic legion could complete training , these developments were overtaken by the decimation of the West European legions on the Eastern Front , and like the West European legions , it was decided to combine the Baltic legions into larger formations . This resulted in the <unk> SS @-@ Freiwilligen Brigade , consisting of the Estonian Legion and elements of the 1st SS Infantry Brigade , and the <unk> SS @-@ Freiwilligen Brigade , formed around the Latvian Legion and parts of the 2nd SS Infantry Brigade . The origins of many of the men of the two SS infantry brigades was Reich German or Volksdeutsche , so these two formations were never purely Baltic . Not long after the two new volunteer brigades had been formed and committed to battle , they were upgraded to divisional status , and a third Baltic division was authorised , using the manpower of the Latvian security battalions . To man and maintain these three new divisions , Himmler ordered the conscription of Estonian and Latvian men , and made all former Estonian Army officers and non @-@ commissioned officers liable for service . By 1944 , the Waffen @-@ SS included the three divisions , namely ; the 15th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS ( 1st Latvian ) , the 19th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS ( 2nd Latvian ) , and the 20th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS ( 1st Estonian ) . The two Latvian divisions were later combined into the VI SS Army Corps ( Latvian ) , and all three divisions fought the Soviet Red Army in defence of their homelands during 1944 , and were encircled there or destroyed in subsequent fighting elsewhere . 
 = = = = The Balkan Muslim divisions = = = = 
 By February 1943 , Himmler 's ideals of Waffen @-@ SS racial purity had been significantly diluted . The first division to be raised by Berger 's recruiters that was clearly outside the Waffen @-@ SS racial and ethnic strictures used manpower from the Muslim community of Bosnia . The 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar ( 1st Croatian ) first went into action in February 1944 , and was of limited value , especially outside of its area of operations in eastern Bosnia . While it achieved successes and proved itself competent in counter @-@ insurgency operations against the Partisans in eastern Bosnia , the division earned a reputation for brutality and savagery , not only during combat operations , but also through atrocities committed against Serb and Jewish civilians in the security zone . Its reprisal attacks in northern and eastern Bosnia left many hundreds and possibly as many as several thousand Serb civilians dead by the spring and summer of 1944 . 
 During 1944 , two more Muslim divisions were raised , the 21st Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Skanderbeg ( 1st Albanian ) made up Kosovar Albanians , and the 23rd Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Kama ( 2nd Croatian ) , also made up of Bosnian Muslims . Neither of these divisions were of significant combat value , and all three Muslim divisions were dissolved before the end of 1944 . 
 = = = = A Ukrainian SS division = = = = 
 At the same time as the Balkan Muslim experiment , divisions were raised from Ukrainian , Russian and Hungarian men , demonstrating that racial exclusivity was no longer an entry requirement for the Waffen @-@ SS . In April 1943 , a recruiting campaign began among Ukrainians living in that part of General Government ( Polish ) territory that had been in Austrian Galicia prior to 1919 . These Ukrainian nationalists had been referred to by Himmler as " sub @-@ human " only a matter of months before . The resulting division was the 14th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS ( 1st Galician ) . After a brief period of desperate fighting in mid @-@ 1944 during the Soviet Lvov – Sandomierz Offensive , only 3 @,@ 000 members of the division escaped encirclement and destruction . Less than outstanding in combat , the division never saw action again . 
 = = = 1944 = = = 
 In early 1944 , the SS directed the governments of Hungary and the Slovak State to transfer to the Waffen @-@ SS all the Volksdeutsche serving in their armed forces . This amounted to another 50 @,@ 000 troops . 
 The Galician approach was repeated in mid @-@ 1944 in the face of mounting casualties from Soviet offensives . Security units manned by Russians and Ukrainians were combined to form two more divisions , the 29th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS ( 1st Russian ) and 30th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS ( 2nd Russian ) . Neither reached more than regimental size . The first division was handed over to the Russian Liberation Army of Andrey Vlasov before it saw combat , and the second saw action on the Western Front in late 1944 before being reconstituted as a " White Ruthenian " brigade in March 1945 . It too saw no further action . 
 In the period from late 1944 , more Eastern European formations were hurriedly raised by Berger 's recruiters or converted from existing smaller units . These included the 25th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Hunyadi ( 1st Hungarian ) , 26th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS ( 2nd Hungarian ) , 31st SS Volunteer Grenadier Division , and a number of smaller formations of brigade and regimental size . Several Cossack units were also transferred from the Wehrmacht . Even the Sonderkommando Dirlewanger was increased in size , taking on Russian prisoners of war to boost its numbers . 
 = = Other wartime activities = = 
 = = = Eastern Territories = = = 
 In July 1942 , Berger was appointed as Himmler 's liaison officer with the Reichsminister for the Occupied Eastern Territories , Alfred Rosenberg . In mid @-@ 1943 , Berger convinced Rosenberg to appoint him as the Chief of Political Operations in the Occupied Eastern Territories . Himmler had long wanted such responsibilities to be placed in SS hands , and this appointment meant that Berger could sabotage any resistance to SS domination of the economy and population of the subjugated east . The appointment took effect on 10 August 1943 , and lasted until January 1945 . In this role , Berger proposed a plan to kidnap and enslave 50 @,@ 000 Eastern European children between the ages of 10 and 14 , under the codename Heuaktion . On 14 June 1944 , Rosenberg issued orders implementing Berger 's idea . 
 = = = Prisoners of war = = = 
 On 20 July 1944 , the responsibility for administration of German prisoner of war ( POW ) camps was transferred to Berger . This followed the failed attempt on Hitler 's life earlier that month , when the Führer turned to his " faithful Heinrich " to head the Replacement Army , and the SS chief quickly delegated the responsibility to Berger . By September , the responsibility had been formally transferred to Himmler , but Berger did not act to integrate his new responsibilities into the SS bureaucracy . Instead , he allowed the camps to continue as they were , with the same staff and procedures . 
 After the war , Berger claimed that he had been reluctant to take on this new responsibility , and had told Hitler , resulting in a dressing down . He also claimed that Hitler had told him to destroy stored Red Cross supplies , stop Red Cross inspections , and block the arrival of further Red Cross supplies to the camps . Further , he asserted that Hitler had wanted more shootings of POWs and harsher punishments . According to Berger , he had quietly avoided carrying out these orders , and even countered a plan by the Luftwaffe to establish POW centres in major cities , using the POWs as human shields against air raids . Authors John Nichol and Tony Rennell observed that none of these claims have ever been independently verified , but some testimony has refuted Berger 's claims . They concluded that most , if not all , of Berger 's claims about his actions to assist POWs are " unbelievable " , and noted that he did not raise any of these claims during his trial at Nuremberg after the war , or even in his autobiography . One of the few claims that has been verified to some extent is his work to protect the <unk> , a group of high @-@ ranking or otherwise important POWs that had been held at Colditz Castle until 13 April 1945 . A total of 21 <unk> , including Viscount Lascelles and the Master of Elphinstone , both nephews of two nephews of King George VI , and Giles Romilly , a nephew of the British Prime Minister Winston Churchill . Berger arranged for them to be evacuated from Colditz and transported south and handed over to advancing U.S. Army troops . 
 = = = Slovak uprising = = = 
 On 23 August 1944 , an uprising broke out against the German puppet government in the Slovak State . The revolt was centred on Banská Bystrica high in the Low Tatra mountains . The rebellion was led by several former members of the Government , and included elements of the Slovak Army and some British @-@ trained parachutists . The uprising was relying on a rapid advance of the Red Army into the Slovak State . Despite the fact that the Soviet armies were just over 160 kilometres ( 100 mi ) away at the time the revolt began , they did not reach the rebels in time . On 31 August , Berger was appointed Military Commander in Slovakia , and held sway for the next three weeks . On 9 September , Himmler advised him that he had been awarded the Iron Cross Second Class for his work in Slovakia . He was replaced by a HSSPF , Hermann Höfle , and relinquished the role of Military Commander in Slovakia on 19 September . He was then appointed to organise the Volkssturm ( Home Guard ) in Germany . 
 = = = Volkssturm chief of staff = = = 
 As Germany 's situation deteriorated , Hitler decided to form the Volkssturm , a Nazi Party local militia to defend communities within the Reich . On 24 September 1944 , Hitler appointed his private secretary and head of the Reich Chancellery , Reichsleiter Martin Bormann to form the Volkssturm . Himmler was given responsibility for the military organisation and equipment of the new militia , which he delegated to Berger , who became one of two chiefs of staff for the organisation . Bormann resisted Berger 's attempts to take over the Volkssturm , and it remained largely under Bormann 's control , with local recruiting conducted by the Gauleiters . 
 = = = Field command = = = 
 In the last few months of the war , the Western Allies became concerned that Hitler would concentrate his remaining forces in a redoubt in the Alps . While this idea was more along the lines of a potential refuge from the Russians rather than a fortress , fears of the existence of an " Alpine Fortress " resulted in the diversion of strong forces towards the southern parts of the Reich to forestall such a plan . In fact , at a surrender ceremony on 5 May , German General der Infanterie Hermann Foertsch astonished General Jacob L. Devers , commander of the Sixth United States Army Group , when he told him that as many as 350 @,@ 000 German troops were still cut off in the Alps . Berger commanded some of these remnants of the XIII SS Army Corps , including fragments of the 17th SS Panzergrenadier Division Götz von Berlichingen , 35th SS and Police Grenadier Division , and the 2nd Mountain Division . Berger intended to surrender separately to American forces , and after two days delay , managed to locate a regimental commander of the 101st Airborne Division near Berchtesgaden south of Salzburg . On the following day , Berger was arrested . 
 = = Assessments = = 
 Berger has been described as " blustery " , and " one of Himmler 's most competent and ruthless war @-@ time lieutenants " . An ardent anti @-@ Semite , he was also a proponent of the Final Solution . The historian Gerhard <unk> described him as a skilled bureaucratic manipulator , who was " unscrupulous , blunt , and inelegant in manner and expression , yet also full of genial loquacity and racy humour " . 
 Within the SS , Berger was known as one of Himmler 's " Twelve Apostles " , and was nicknamed " der <unk> Gottlob " ( " the Almighty Gottlob " , a play on " The Almighty God " , as " Gott " is the German word for " God " ) . He was also referred to by the phrase " Praise God " and another nickname was " The Duke of Swabia " , reflecting his Swabian origins . 
 Ultimately , Berger was responsible for the large numbers of non @-@ Reich foreign recruits that joined the Waffen @-@ SS between 1940 and 1945 . Despite the fact that Berger would have preferred a field command , he was one of Himmler 's few trusted senior lieutenants , and his recruiting and organisational skills meant he was kept as chief of the SS @-@ HA throughout the war . The only exception was a short period as Higher SS and Police Leader <unk> in the German client Slovak State in the autumn of 1944 during an attempted uprising . In September 1939 , the number of non @-@ Germans in what soon became the Waffen @-@ SS was minimal . By May 1945 , the force included 38 divisions , and the majority were non @-@ Germans . None of the 38 divisions were exclusively manned by Reich Germans , and half were made up of mostly of personnel from outside the Reich . 
 = = War crimes trial = = 
 After his arrest in May 1945 , Berger remained in Allied custody pending a trial before a US military tribunal for various war crimes . He was initially to be a defendant in the proposed " Prisoners of War " Trial , but was eventually included in what became known as the Ministries Trial of the subsequent Nuremberg trials . The final indictment against Berger and his co @-@ defendants was lodged on 18 November 1947 , the trial commenced on 6 January 1948 , before Judges Christianson ( presiding ) , Maguire and Powers , and ended on 13 April 1949 . 
 = = = Indictment = = = 
 There were eight counts that formed the indictment against Berger : 
 Crimes against peace 
 Common plan and conspiracy 
 War crimes , murder , and ill @-@ treatment of belligerents and prisoners of war 
 This count was stricken during the trial 
 War crimes and crimes against humanity , atrocities and offences committed against civilian populations 
 Plunder and spoliation 
 Slave labour 
 Membership in criminal organisations 
 = = = Berger 's evidence = = = 
 During his trial , Berger claimed that he had not been aware of the Final Solution until after the war , but the prosecution produced evidence that he had been present at the first of Himmler 's infamous 1943 Posen speeches in which the <unk> @-@ SS had explicitly spoken of the extermination of Jews . Berger 's defence counsel claimed that his client did not believe the word " extermination " had been used by Himmler with regard to Jews during the speech . Berger 's lawyer went on in an attempt to mitigate Berger 's actions by claiming that the Cold War bore strong parallels to the Nazi fight against " Jews and Bolsheviks " , and the possibility that the US would also have to fight the Soviet Union in the near future . During the war , Berger wrote in an article , " We the National Socialists believe the Fuhrer when he says that the annihilation of Jewry in Europe stands at the end of the fight instigated by the Jewish World Parasite against us as his strongest enemy . " Berger and others also claimed that the unit commanded by Dirlewanger was not part of the SS , although when the text of Himmler 's second Posen speech was uncovered in 1953 , it " cast dubious light " on Berger 's claim . He displayed no remorse for his actions . 
 The majority of the tribunal declared that " it seems impossible to believe Berger 's testimony that he knew nothing of the plans to destroy the Jews or that he never heard of the " final solution " until after the war . " However , the court accepted his claim that he saved the lives of Allied POWs whose safety was gravely imperiled by Hitler 's orders that they be shot or held as hostages . The court determined that Berger had disobeyed orders and placed himself in danger in order to intervene on behalf of the POWs in question . In contrast , Berger was found guilty of transporting Hungarian Jews to concentration camps and recruiting concentration camp guards . Berger also stated in his evidence that he considered Himmler " an <unk> half @-@ breed and unfit for the SS " . 
 = = = Judgement = = = 
 Berger was acquitted under counts one , and two , and some parts of counts three , and five , and was also acquitted under count six . He was convicted under that part of count three relating to the murder of French Général de division Gustave Mesny , a POW who was killed in reprisal for the death of Generalleutnant Fritz von <unk> at the hands of the French resistance in October 1944 , and under those parts of count five relating to his involvement with the Sonderkommando Dirlewanger , for being a conscious participant in the concentration camp program , and the conscription of nationals of other countries . He was also convicted under that part of count seven relating to the children and youth slave labour program , including the Heuaktion , and was also convicted under count eight . Judge Powers handed down a dissenting opinion , stating that he was of the view that Berger was not responsible for the murder of Mesny . 
 = = = Sentence and review = = = 
 On the counts under which he was convicted , Berger was sentenced to 25 years imprisonment , but received credit for the nearly four years during which he been in custody awaiting trial . Peter Maguire observes that given the status of the defendants and the body of evidence against them , the sentences given to all those indicted in the Ministries Trial were light . 
 The sentences were reviewed by an Advisory Board for Clemency for War Criminals , which was responsible for providing advice to the U.S. High Commissioner for Germany John J. McCloy . On 31 January 1951 , McCloy determined to reduce Berger 's sentence to 10 years imprisonment , stating that he appeared to have been unjustly convicted for the murder of Mesny , and that McCloy had given greater weight to Berger 's active interventions " to save the lives of Allied officers and men who under Hitler orders were held for liquidation or as hostages " . McCloy did not explain why Berger could not be held responsible for the murder of Mesny , despite the majority finding of the tribunal that Berger bore " command responsibility " for the murder . Berger was released from Landsberg prison in December 1951 , having spent a total of six and a half years in custody . 
 = = After release = = 
 After his release from prison in 1951 , Berger worked in Stuttgart and Böblingen in his native Baden @-@ Württemberg , and managed a curtain rail factory . He also contributed articles to the monthly right @-@ wing journal Nation Europa published in Coburg , and occasionally wrote articles encouraging the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation to give greater consideration to former members of the Waffen @-@ SS . He and his wife Christine had four children : Krista , Wolf , <unk> and <unk> . He died on 5 January 1975 in <unk> . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Berger received the following awards and medals during his life : 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Delphine LaLaurie = 
 Born Marie Delphine Macarty or Maccarthy , ( c . 1780 – 1849 ) , more commonly known as Madame LaLaurie , was a New Orleans Creole socialite and alleged serial killer , infamous for torturing and likely murdering her household slaves . 
 Born during the Spanish colonial period , Delphine Macarty married three times in Louisiana , having twice been widowed . She maintained her position in New Orleans society until April 10 , 1834 , when rescuers responded to a fire at her Royal Street mansion and discovered bound slaves in her attic who showed evidence of cruel , violent treatment over a long period . Lalaurie 's house was subsequently sacked by an outraged mob of New Orleans citizens . She escaped to France with her family . 
 The mansion where Lalaurie lived is a landmark in the French Quarter , in part because of its history and in part because there were relatively few homes of such massive size in the Quarter . 
 = = Early life and family history = = 
 Marie Delphine Macarty was born 1780 , one of five children . Her father was Louis Barthelemy Macarty , originally Chevalier de Maccarthy ) whose father Barthelemy ( de ) Maccarthy brought the family to New Orleans from Ireland around 1730 , during the French colonial period . ( The Irish surname Maccarthy was shortened to Macarty or de Macarty . ) Her mother was Marie Jeanne Lovable , also known as " the widow Lecomte " , whose marriage to Louis B. Macarty was her second . Both were prominent in the town 's white Creole community . Delphine 's cousin , Augustin de Macarty , was mayor of New Orleans from 1815 to 1820 . 
 = = First marriage and death of husband = = 
 On June 11 , 1800 , Mlle. Marie Delphine Macarty married Don Ramón de Lopez y Angulo , a Caballero de la Royal de Carlos , a high @-@ ranking Spanish royal officer , at the Saint Louis Cathedral in New Orleans . Luisiana , as it was spelled in Spanish , had become a Spanish colony in the 1760s . In 1804 , after the American acquisition , Don Ramón had been appointed to the position of consul general for Spain in the Territory of Orleans . 
 Also , in 1804 , Delphine and Ramón Lopez traveled to Spain . Accounts of the trip vary . Grace King wrote in 1921 that the trip was Lopez 's " military punishment " and that Señora Delphine Lopez met the Queen , who was impressed with Mrs. Lopez 's beauty . Stanley Arthur 's 1936 report differed ; he stated that on March 26 , 1804 , Don Ramón Lopez was recalled to Spain " to take his place at court as befitting his new position , " but that Lopez never arrived in Madrid because he died in en route , in Havana . 
 During the voyage , Delphine gave birth to a daughter , named Marie @-@ Borja / Borgia Delphine Lopez y Angulo de la Candelaria , nicknamed <unk> . Delphine and her daughter returned to New Orleans afterwards . 
 = = Second marriage and death of husband = = 
 In June 1808 , Delphine married Jean Blanque , a prominent banker , merchant , lawyer , and legislator . At the time of the marriage , Blanque purchased a house at 409 Royal Street in New Orleans for the family , which became known later as the Villa Blanque . Delphine had four more children by Blanque , named Marie Louise Pauline , Louise Marie Laure , Marie Louise Jeanne , and Jeanne Pierre Paulin <unk> died in 1816 . 
 = = Third marriage = = 
 Delphine married her third husband , physician Leonard Louis Nicolas LaLaurie , who was much younger than she , on June 25 , 1825 . In 1831 , she bought property at 1140 Royal Street , which she managed in her own name with little involvement of her husband , and in 1832 had built a three @-@ story mansion there , complete with attached slave quarters . She lived there with her third husband and two of her daughters , and maintained a central position in New Orleans society . 
 = = Torture and murder of slaves and 1834 LaLaurie mansion fire = = 
 The <unk> maintained several black slaves in slave quarters , attached to the Royal Street mansion . Accounts of Delphine Lalaurie 's treatment of her slaves between 1831 and 1834 are mixed . Harriet Martineau , writing in 1838 and recounting tales told to her by New Orleans residents during her 1836 visit , claimed Lalaurie 's slaves were observed to be " singularly haggard and wretched ; " however , in public appearances Lalaurie was seen to be generally polite to black people and solicitous of her slaves ' health , and court records of the time showed that Lalaurie manumitted two of her own slaves ( Jean Louis in 1819 and <unk> in 1832 ) . Nevertheless , Martineau reported that public rumors about Lalaurie 's mistreatment of her slaves were sufficiently widespread that a local lawyer was dispatched to Royal Street to remind LaLaurie of the laws relevant to the upkeep of slaves . During this visit , the lawyer found no evidence of wrongdoing or mistreatment of slaves by Lalaurie . 
 Martineau also recounted other tales of Lalaurie 's cruelty that were current among New Orleans residents in about 1836 . She claimed that , subsequent to the visit of the local lawyer , one of Lalaurie 's neighbors saw one of the LaLaurie 's slaves , a twelve @-@ year @-@ old girl named Lia ( or Leah ) , fall to her death from the roof of the Royal Street mansion while trying to avoid punishment from a whip @-@ wielding Delphine LaLaurie . Lia had been brushing Delphine 's hair when she hit a snag , causing Delphine to grab a whip and chase her . The body was subsequently buried on the mansion grounds . According to Martineau , this incident led to an investigation of the Lalauries , in which they were found guilty of illegal cruelty and forced to forfeit nine slaves . These nine slaves were then bought back by the Lalauries through the intermediary of one of their relatives , and returned to the Royal Street residences . Similarly , Martineau reported stories that LaLaurie kept her cook chained to the kitchen stove , and beat her daughters when they attempted to feed the slaves . 
 On April 10 , 1834 , a fire broke out in the LaLaurie residence on Royal Street , starting in the kitchen . When the police and fire marshals got there , they found a seventy @-@ year @-@ old woman , the cook , chained to the stove by her ankle . She later confessed to them that she had set the fire as a suicide attempt for fear of her punishment , being taken to the uppermost room , because she said that anyone who was taken there never came back . As reported in the New Orleans Bee of April 11 , 1834 , bystanders responding to the fire attempted to enter the slave quarters to ensure that everyone had been evacuated . Upon being refused the keys by the Lalauries , the bystanders broke down the doors to the slave quarters and found " seven slaves , more or less horribly mutilated ... suspended by the neck , with their limbs apparently stretched and torn from one extremity to the other " , who claimed to have been imprisoned there for some months . 
 One of those who entered the premises was Judge Jean @-@ Francois Canonge , who subsequently deposed to having found in the LaLaurie mansion , among others , a " <unk> ... wearing an iron collar " and " an old negro woman who had received a very deep wound on her head [ who was ] too weak to be able to walk . " Canonge claimed , that when he questioned Madame LaLaurie 's husband about the slaves , he was told in an insolent manner that " some people had better stay at home rather than come to others ' houses to dictate laws and meddle with other people 's business . " 
 A version of this story circulating in 1836 , recounted by Martineau , added that the slaves were emaciated , showed signs of being flayed with a whip , were bound in restrictive postures , and wore spiked iron collars which kept their heads in static positions . 
 When the discovery of the tortured slaves became widely known , a mob of local citizens attacked the Lalaurie residence and " demolished and destroyed everything upon which they could lay their hands " . A sheriff and his officers were called upon to disperse the crowd , but by the time the mob left , the Royal Street property had sustained major damage , with " scarcely any thing [ remaining ] but the walls . " The tortured slaves were taken to a local jail , where they were available for public viewing . The New Orleans Bee reported that by April 12 up to 4 @,@ 000 people had attended to view the tortured slaves " to convince themselves of their sufferings . " 
 The Pittsfield Sun , citing the New Orleans Advertiser and writing several weeks after the evacuation of LaLaurie 's slave quarters , claimed that two of the slaves found in the LaLaurie mansion had died since their rescue , and added , " We understand ... that in digging the yard , bodies have been disinterred , and the condemned well [ in the grounds of the mansion ] having been uncovered , others , particularly that of a child , were found . " These claims were repeated by Martineau in her 1838 book Retrospect of Western Travel , where she placed the number of unearthed bodies at two , including the child . 
 = = Escape from justice and self @-@ imposed , exile in France = = 
 Delphine LaLaurie 's life after the 1834 fire is not well documented . Martineau wrote in 1838 , that LaLaurie fled New Orleans during the mob violence that followed the fire , taking a coach to the waterfront and travelling , by schooner , from there to Mobile , Alabama and then on to Paris . Certainly by the time Martineau personally visited the Royal Street mansion in 1836 it was still unoccupied and badly damaged , with " gaping windows and empty walls " . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 The circumstances of her death are also unclear . George Washington Cable recounted in 1888 , a then @-@ popular but unsubstantiated story , that LaLaurie had died in France , in a boar @-@ hunting accident . Whatever the truth , in the late 1930s , Eugene Backes , who served as sexton to St. Louis Cemetery # 1 until 1924 , discovered an old cracked , copper plate in Alley 4 of the cemetery . The inscription on the plate read " Madame LaLaurie , née Marie Delphine Maccarthy , <unk> à Paris , le 7 Décembre , 1842 , à l <unk> de <unk> . " 
 According to the French archives of Paris , however , Marie Delphine Maccarthy died on December 7 , 1849 . 
 = = LaLaurie mansion = = 
 The New Orleans house occupied by Delphine LaLaurie at the time of the 1834 fires stands today at 1140 Royal Street , on the corner of Royal Street and Governor Nicholls Street ( formerly known as Hospital Street ) . At three stories high , it was described in 1928 as " the highest building for squares around " , with the result that " from the cupola on the roof one may look out over the Vieux Carré and see the Mississippi in its crescent before Jackson Square " . The entrance to the building bears iron grillwork , and the door is carved with an image of " Phoebus in his chariot , and with wreaths of flowers and depending garlands in bas @-@ relief " . Inside , the vestibule is floored in black and white marble , and a curved mahogany @-@ railed staircase runs the full three stories of the building . The second floor holds three large drawing rooms connected by ornamented sliding doors , whose walls are decorated with plaster rosettes , carved woodwork , black marble mantle pieces and fluted pilasters . 
 Subsequent to LaLaurie 's departure from America , the house remained ruined at least until 1836 , but at some point prior to 1888 it was " <unk> restored " , and over the following decades was used as a public high school , a conservatory of music , a tenement , a refuge for young delinquents , a bar , a furniture store , and a luxury apartment building . 
 In April 2007 , Nicolas Cage bought the LaLaurie House through Hancock Park Real Estate Company , LLC , for a sum of $ 3 @.@ 45 million . The mortgage documents were arranged in such a way that Cage 's name did not appear on them . On November 13 , 2009 , the property , then valued at $ 3 @.@ 5 million , was listed for auction as a result of bank foreclosure and purchased by Regions Financial Corporation for $ 2 @.@ 3 million . 
 = = LaLaurie in folklore = = 
 Folk histories of Lalaurie 's poor treatment of her slaves circulated in Louisiana during the nineteenth century , and were reprinted in collections of stories by Henry Castellanos and George Washington Cable . Cable 's account ( not to be confused with his unrelated 1881 novel Madame Delphine ) was based on contemporary stories in newspapers such as the New Orleans Bee and the Advertiser , and upon Martineau 's 1838 account , Retrospect of Western Travel , but mixed in some synthesis , dialogue and supposition entirely of his own creation . 
 After 1945 , stories of the Lalaurie slaves became considerably more explicit . Jeanne deLavigne , writing in Ghost Stories of Old New Orleans ( 1946 ) , alleged that Lalaurie had a " sadistic appetite [ that ] seemed never appeased until she had inflicted on one or more of her black servitors some hideous form of torture " and claimed that those who responded to the 1834 fire had found " male slaves , stark naked , chained to the wall , their eyes gouged out , their fingernails pulled off by the roots ; others had their joints skinned and festering , great holes in their buttocks where the flesh had been sliced away , their ears hanging by shreds , their lips sewn together ... Intestines were pulled out and knotted around naked waists . There were holes in skulls , where a rough stick had been inserted to stir the brains . " DeLavigne did not directly cite any sources for these claims , and they were not supported by the primary sources . 
 The story was further popularized and embellished in Journey Into Darkness : Ghosts and Vampires of New Orleans ( 1998 ) by Kalila Katherina Smith , the operator of a New Orleans ghost tour business . Smith 's book added several more explicit details to the discoveries allegedly made by rescuers during the 1834 fire , including a " victim [ who ] obviously had her arms amputated and her skin peeled off in a circular pattern , making her look like a human caterpillar , " and another who had had her limbs broken and reset " at odd angles so she resembled a human crab " . Many of the new details in Smith 's book were unsourced , while others were not supported by the sources given . 
 Today , modern re @-@ tellings of the Lalaurie legend often use deLavigne and Smith 's versions of the tale to found claims of explicit tortures , and to place the number of slaves who died under Lalaurie 's care at as many as one hundred . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The former , now defunct , historically @-@ themed wax museum in the French Quarter , the Musée Conti Wax Museum , on Conti Street , traditionally included a scene depicting abused slaves in Madame LaLaurie 's attic . 
 Poet Jennifer Reeser has written a poem in terza rima titled " The Lalaurie Horror " , chronicling the mansion 's history and folklore , done as a poetic " ghost tour " . 
 In 2000 , Ted Nicolaou directed a found footage movie called The St. Francisville Experiment about people who spend the night in a disused Louisiana plantation house and encounter hostile ghosts . While not the LaLaurie house in New Orleans , the plantation house is one location LaLaurie is alleged to have fled to after the 1834 fire incident . The fictional camera crew finds physical and supernatural evidence suggesting , that LaLaurie did indeed flee to the house and continue her cruelty there . 
 In 2004 , James <unk> directed " Trespassing , " aka " Evil Remains , " about a grad student of folklore leading his friends on a research expedition to an old plantation estate near New Orleans . The site , once the home of a woman whose backstory is directly taken from the bio of LaLaurie , is reputed to mysteriously cause madness and death to all who enter it . 
 Kathy Bates portrays a heavily fictionalized Delphine LaLaurie in the 2014 third season of the American anthology horror television series American Horror Story . 
 Delphine LaLaurie is a character in the board game Evil Baby Orphanage . 
 Delphine LaLaurie appears as a character in Deadtime Stories , a PC game , ( Deadtime Stories ; developed by I @-@ play and distributed by Big Fish Games ) , as a voodoo queen , named Jessie Bodeen , tells you her story of her commission by Delphine LaLaurie to drive away another socialite who was new in town and already more popular than Delphine Lalaurie , only for Delphine LaLaurie to renege on the deal when Jessie Bodeen had kept up her end of it . Jessie Bodeen seeks revenge on Delphine LaLaurie by invoking the Loa , ( who punish Delphine LaLaurie , and then Jessie Bodeen , 10 @-@ years @-@ later , for having taken on Delphine LaLaurie 's commission ) . 
 Delphine LaLaurie appears in the second of Barbara Hambly 's Benjamin January mysteries , Fever Season . 
 The story of the LaLaurie house is told and fictionally expanded on in issues 13 @-@ 18 of Serena Valentino 's Nightmares & Fairy Tales . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Arthur , Stanley Clisby ( 1936 ) . Old New Orleans : A History of the Vieux Carré , Its Ancient and Historical Buildings . New Orleans , LA : <unk> . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Cable , George Washington ( 1888 ) . Strange True Stories of Louisiana . New York : The Century Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 559 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Castellanos , Henry C ; Kelleher Schafer , Judith ; Reinecke , George F ( 1895 ) . New Orleans as it was : episodes of Louisiana life . Baton Rouge : Louisiana State University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8071 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 <unk> Love , Victoria ; Shannon , Lorelei ( 2011 ) . Mad Madame Lalaurie . Charleston , SC : The History Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 de <unk> <unk> , Herman Boehm ( 1941 ) . Old Louisiana Plantation Homes and Family Trees . Gretna , LA : Pelican Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 263 @-@ 2 . 
 DeLavigne , Jeanne ( 1946 ) . Ghost Stories of Old New Orleans . New York ; Toronto : Rinehart & Co . OCLC <unk> . 
 <unk> , Timothy ( 2012 ) . L <unk> : Madame Lalaurie and the Voodoo Queen . Bellevue , WA : On Demand Publishing , LLC @-@ Create Space . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 King , Grace Elizabeth ( 1921 ) . Creole Families of New Orleans . New York : MacMillan & Co . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 142 @-@ 4 . OL <unk> . 
 Martineau , Harriet ( 1838 ) . Retrospect of Western Travel 2 . London : Saunders & Otley . OCLC <unk> . 
 Morrow Long , Carolyn ( 2012 ) . Madame Lalaurie Mistress of the Haunted House . Gainesville , FL : University Press of Florida . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Saxon , Lyle ( 1928 ) . Fabulous New Orleans . New York , London : The Century Co . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Smith , Kalila Katherina ( 1998 ) . Haunted History Tours presents ... Journey Into Darkness : Ghosts & Vampires of New Orleans . New Orleans , LA : De <unk> Publications . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 04 @-@ 6 . 
 = = = Academic papers = = = 
 <unk> , Katy Francis ( 2005 ) . La Madame Et La Mademoiselle : Creole Women In Louisiana , 1718 – 1865 ( PDF ) ( Master of Arts thesis ) . Louisiana State University . 
 Baker , Courtney R ( 2008 ) . <unk> : Looking at Images of Black Suffering and Death ( PhD thesis ) . Duke University . 
 = = = Periodicals = = = 
 " The conflagration at the house occupied by the woman Lalaurie .. " ( PDF ) . New Orleans Bee . April 11 , 1834 . – The relevant text appears at the top @-@ left of the linked scan . A transcript of this article can be found here for ease of reading . 
 " The popular fury which we briefly <unk> to in our paper of yesterday .. " ( PDF ) . New Orleans Bee . April 12 , 1834 . – The relevant text appears at the top @-@ left of the linked scan . A transcript of this article can be found here for ease of reading . 
 Pittsfield Sun . May 8 , 1834 . 
 " Epitaph @-@ Plate of ' Haunted ' House Owner Found Here " . The Times @-@ Picayune . January 28 , 1941 . – A transcript of this article can be found here for ease of reading . 
 " History of Delphine Macarty Lalaurie and the Haunted House on Royal Street " updated on 27 Sept 2013 at The Times @-@ Picayune 's <unk> ; retrieved 31 Oct 2015 . 
 = = = Web content = = = 
 Goldsborough , Bob ( April 24 , 2007 ) . " Nicolas Cage buys house in New Orleans ' French quarter for $ 3 @,@ 450 @,@ 000 " . Big Time Listings . Celebrity Real Estate Homes Big Time Listings . Retrieved November 26 , 2010 . 
 Taylor , Troy ( 2000 ) . " The Legacy of Madame Delphine LaLaurie " . Denise 's Dreams . Strange Nation . Retrieved January 10 , 2011 . 
 Yousuf , <unk> ( November 16 , 2009 ) . " Nicolas Cage loses 2 homes in foreclosure auction " . <unk> Cable News Network . Retrieved December 30 , 2010 . 
 = Sandi Jackson = 
 Sandra Lee " Sandi " Jackson ( née Stevens ; born September 14 , 1963 ) was elected to the Chicago City Council as an alderman of the 7th ward ( map ) of the City of Chicago in the 2007 municipal elections held on February 27 , 2007 . She succeeded Darcel A. Beavers who had been appointed by Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley after the 2006 November elections to succeed her father William Beavers , Jackson 's rival , as alderman of the 7th Ward . Jackson resigned from Chicago City Council , effective January 15 , 2013 . On February 20 , 2013 , Jackson pleaded guilty to one count of filing false tax returns . On August 14 , 2013 , she was sentenced to one year in prison for filing false income tax returns . 
 She is the wife of former U.S. Congressman Jesse Jackson , Jr. and daughter @-@ in @-@ law of Jesse Jackson . Her candidacy for the city council of a major city was part of national news stories in The New York Times , and thoughts of her running for a position in the United States House of Representatives were noted in Time . 
 Jackson has also been a longtime political consultant through her solely owned consulting firm J. Donatella & Associates . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Born in Kittery , Maine , Jackson grew up in Akron , Ohio . She is an alumna of Buchtel High School in Akron . Her mother , Sarah Stevens , who is from Atlanta , Georgia , worked three jobs cleaning homes to raise Jackson and two other children . Later Jackson helped her mother clean homes to pay her way through Bowling Green State University , where she earned her bachelor 's degree in 1985 . Jackson 's father , Robert Stevens , was from Akron . Jackson met her future husband while still a law student at Georgetown University Law Center and he convinced her to transfer to be with him at the University of Illinois College of Law , where she earned her Juris Doctor in 1992 . The couple married on June 1 , 1991 . The Jackson family keeps two homes . They own one in the South Shore community area , which is within both the Illinois ' 2nd congressional district that Congressman Jackson represented in the United States House of Representatives and within the seventh ward that Sandi Jackson represents on the Chicago City Council . The South Shore home serves as an election base . This home was the featured renovation on an HGTV Hidden Potential episode , first aired on March 24 , 2009 . They also own a home in Dupont Circle in Washington , D.C. , which served as the family home and base for his service in Congress prior to her election . Prior to being elected , Jackson resided four days a week in Chicago and three days a week in Washington D.C. 
 The Jacksons have two children , Jessica Donatella Jackson ( ( 2000 @-@ 03 @-@ 13 ) March 13 , 2000 ) and Jesse Louis Jackson , III , who is nicknamed " Tre " , ( ( 2003 @-@ 09 @-@ 19 ) September 19 , 2003 ) . Sarah Stevens accompanies the family on commutes between Chicago and Washington . Jessica attended school in the Washington Metropolitan Area before Jackson 's service on the city council . After Jackson was elected to serve as a full @-@ time politician in a local legislative body in Chicago , she and her husband decided to have their children attend school in Chicago starting in the fall of 2007 . Later , however , the family decided to keep their base in Washington . The family 's residential choice has been a campaign issue as well as fodder for a local op @-@ ed <unk> . 
 Jackson had suffered multiple miscarriages before the birth of her two children . In a highly publicized medical case , she lost a boy who was born four months premature at University of Utah Medical Center in 1998 . Complications arose while the couple was attending a youth leadership conference in Deer Valley 20 miles east of Salt Lake City , Utah . Jackson survived a three @-@ hour surgical removal of a benign tumor from her neck on May 7 , 2008 . During the 2008 Christmas holidays , the family suffered a fire and was forced to spend the holiday season in a downtown hotel . In 2001 , Jackson had a chili recipe published in " The Barking Gourmet , " the St. Albans School family cookbook . 
 = = Early political experience = = 
 Early in Jackson 's political career she served as press secretary for United States Congressman Mickey Leland . After the 1988 Democratic National Convention , she began working for Michael Dukakis who had become the Democratic party 's nominee for United States President in the 1988 United States presidential election . 
 Jackson 's political career prior to her election as 7th Ward Alderman included the following positions : Deputy Director of Training for the Democratic National Committee , Director of Scheduling Operations for Rev. Jesse Jackson , Vice President of Congressional and External Affairs for the Export @-@ Import Bank of the United States ( appointed by Bill Clinton ) , Director of VIP Relations for the Presidential Inaugural Committee , National Outreach Coordinator for the Clinton / Gore 96 Campaign , and campaign manager and chief political strategist for many other politicians . 
 While Jackson was serving as the Export @-@ Import Bank 's director of congressional affairs , she lobbied in opposition of her husband 's proposal to tighten the restrictions on the activities in Africa of the Export @-@ Import Bank . She did so successfully , as her husband 's amendment failed . 
 Jackson considered running for public office during the 2003 Chicago municipal elections . At the time , Jackson , Jr. discouraged his wife from running for public office . However , he felt his wife should be eligible to run for Alderman , despite the controversy surrounding such a candidacy . 
 = = 2007 election = = 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 In 2006 , William Beavers announced that he would resign his 7th ward aldermanic seat to pursue the Cook County Board seat being vacated by John Stroger , after Stroger was forced to resign following a stroke . Beavers requested that Mayor Daley appoint his daughter to replace him , in order for her to have the incumbency advantage in the February 27 , 2007 municipal elections . The deal also allowed for Todd Stroger to replace his father John as the president of the County Board and Beavers to surrender his ward seat after presiding over Mayor Daley 's 2007 City Council budget hearings . In July 2007 , when it first became public that Sandi Jackson was considering running for the 7th ward alderman seat , which would disrupt all the backroom dealings between the <unk> and the Beavers with Daley 's approval , Jackson , Jr. encouraged her to run . In the November 2006 elections , William Beavers won the County Board seat while Stroger won the County Board President 's office that had been part of the dealings . On December 5 , 2006 , Jackson officially filed paperwork with state election officials . On December 12 , Mayor Daley appointed Darcel Beavers to succeed her father until the Spring municipal elections . Then , on December 18 , which is the filing deadline for petitions , Jackson filed 5 @,@ 000 petition signatures to run for alderman . 
 Jackson carried numerous endorsements including The Chicago Tribune and numerous labor unions . Jackson was not endorsed by the Cook County Democratic Party . 
 The Jackson family ( Sandi , Rev. Jesse Jackson Sr. , and Congressman Jesse Jackson , Jr . ) have occasionally not seen eye to eye with Mayor Daley . In fact , Congressman Jackson was considering contesting Daley for Mayor until the Democratic Party success in the 2006 fall elections made it clear he could be very productive by remaining in Congress because of his party 's majority . Sandi Jackson , who is credited with encouraging Jackson , Jr. to run for Congress , had been supportive of the idea of him running for mayor . William Beavers had been a longtime Daley ally . However , Jackson says she has good relations with the <unk> , especially Bill Daley . 
 Jackson took leave from her position as deputy political director of training for the Democratic National Committee to run and her husband bought up the billboards in the ward to post an image of the couple . Jackson , Jr. had acquired the rights to 1 @,@ 800 billboards in the city in preparation for his own possible mayoral candidacy . He relinquished the rights to all but those useful to his wife in her ward and a few candidates that he endorsed . Jackson , Jr. invested US $ 200 @,@ 000 in his wife 's campaign to pay for billboards , mailers , phone banks , a campaign manager and other professional staffers . William Beavers was unimpressed with the spending and had his employees remind voters that Jackson did not live in the Ward and his daughter did . William Beavers attempted to make Jackson 's Washington residence an issue , and there was mudslinging in the public press between the Beavers and the Jacksons . Jackson campaigned for the 7th ward alderman position based on the issues of economy , education , and public safety . She also described the lakefront ward as prime commercial real estate ripe for development . 
 = = = = Results = = = = 
 Darcel Beavers 4004 ( 33 @.@ 50 % ) 
 Ron David 951 ( 7 @.@ 96 % ) 
 Eric Brown 216 ( 1 @.@ 81 % ) 
 Jackson <unk> ( 56 @.@ 74 % ) 
 Beavers was one of only four incumbents on the 50 @-@ member City Council to lose during the municipal elections . Five new alderman supported by organized labor and Jackson Jr. won seats . 
 = = Aldermanic career = = 
 The city of Chicago is divided into fifty wards that are each represented by an alderman in the Chicago City Council . The northern portion of Chicago 's seventh ward is adjacent to the Lake Michigan lakefront , and the ward includes portions of the South Shore , South Chicago , Calumet Heights , and South Deering community areas . 
 Jackson 's aldermanic career began inauspiciously when she complained to the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , one of Chicago 's major daily newspapers , that she was caught off @-@ guard by the need to pay office start @-@ up expenses up front . This provided fodder for a columnist in the Chicago Tribune , the other major daily , and anonymous on @-@ line commenters on the Chicago Sun @-@ Times web site made light of the issue . At the time , Jackson was considered by one local political writer as the most closely watched of the nine newly elected aldermen that were sworn in on May 21 , 2007 and by another as the " star " of the incoming class of nine freshman aldermen . 
 Her first political statement as an alderman was disappointment in Mayor Daley 's decision to force his affordable housing ordinance through the council with nine lame duck councilmen during the week before the new class was sworn in because new alderman would be " forced to live by " the new ordinance . Meanwhile , her husband propounded a 10 @-@ point ethics reform that would give the city 's inspector general power to investigate aldermen ; reduce the number of City Council committees to 10 ; limit municipal campaign contributions for each election cycle ; and strip the mayor of the authority to appoint replacements for aldermanic vacancies . 
 Upon assuming office , she stated that she would emphasize economic development as her primary goal for her ward . One of her goals has been to redevelop the 570 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 31 km2 ) landfill on the site of the former U.S. Steel mill into a lakefront community . 
 A local political writer immediately looked for signs that the nine new councilmen who were supported by pro @-@ labor forces would form a block against the pro @-@ business Mayor and old guard members . Five of the new members were among eleven dissenters in a vote on mandatory public art purchase procedures during their first month on the job . In the fall of 2007 , Jackson along with several other African @-@ American alderman took issue with the allotment of contracts on the O 'Hare Airport runway expansion project because African @-@ American firms were only awarded 8 % of the contracts and no general contractor roles . ( Jackson 's husband is a main proponent of the proposed Chicago south suburban airport in <unk> , Illinois ) . Jackson voted with the minority in the 29 @-@ 21 vote approving the Mayor 's November 2007 property tax increase . The February 2008 Real Estate Transfer Tax Increase also drew opposition from Jackson and a small minority of aldermen . 
 Jackson was among the co @-@ sponsors of a council resolution in opposition of U.S. military attacks against Iraq . 
 There has been international press covering the City Council 's deliberations regarding Grant Park and the Chicago Children 's Museum . Mayor Daley has propounded a controversial proposal to relocate the Chicago Children 's Museum from Navy Pier to a City park , Grant Park that passed 33 – 16 , with Jackson in the minority . 
 Jackson called attention to American Airlines ' newly imposed luggage handling fees for even the first checked bag . She claimed that the fees were contrary to Section 26 @-@ 04 of the Airport Use Agreement with the City of Chicago , which is the contract that permits American Airlines to be a carrier in Chicago airports . The initial plan exempted Platinum and Executive card holders who were generally business travelers and placed an inordinate burden of new fees on the common traveler in contravention of the non @-@ discriminatory price agreement in the agreement . She expressed interest in a City Council forum on the issue . She wrote directly to American Airlines and then wrote an article in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times on the issue . 
 Jackson was among the councilman and citizens who expressed outrage at the light punishment issued by the mayor 's office over a multimillion @-@ dollar city contract scheme . Jackson viewed it as a moral issue where the Mayor did not appropriately condemn immoral activity , which in her eyes encourages similar behavior . During a Summer 2008 violent crime rash she was among the aldermen calling for <unk> emphasis on adequate police support . 
 She continues to tout a plan to redevelop the <unk> steel mill as an effort to revitalize her ward . She foresees 17 @,@ 000 new residences , a high @-@ end mall , and significant amounts of parkland with construction beginning in 2009 . By the beginning of her second year on the 50 @-@ person city council , Jackson had already amassed the 17th largest pool of campaign funds . 
 She has been vocal in pursuit of transparency on the issue of whether Mayor Daley should transfer the monitoring of city hiring to Inspector General David Hoffman and has voted against the mayors proposal to create a separate Office of Compliance . Her voting record earned her praise from the Independent Voters of Illinois @-@ Independent Precinct Organization . A year and a half into Jackson 's first term , local political commentator Don Rose writing in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times included Jackson among four aldermen he considered to be inheriting a mantle of reform . 
 In 2001 , the Federal Election Commission ruled that Jackson , Jr. could hire his wife on his campaign payroll . The ruling stated that relatives can be employed as long as they were compensated " no more than the fair market value " for their services . At the time , Sandi Jackson was employed by the Democratic National Committee ( DNC ) as the deputy director of training . Many other lawmakers have made similar arrangements without contacting the FEC for a ruling . When House Majority Leader Tom DeLay was charged with ethical infractions , matters such as these came to light . Jackson remained on the payroll of her husband 's main campaign fund , Jesse Jackson Jr. for Congress , in 2006 as she considered a run for public office . She also continued to be employed by Howard Dean of the DNC . Between 2001 and early 2009 , Jesse Jackson Jr . ’ s congressional campaign paid Sandra at least $ 247 @,@ 500 , including at least $ 95 @,@ 000 after Sandra became Alderman . 
 Jackson received a $ 4 @,@ 000 digital radio from Chicago 's Office of Emergency Management and Communications ( Chicago 's 911 Center ) to monitor snow removal and emergency operations in her ward . The radio was returned when the controversy that arose led to a personnel reshuffling that included the reassignment of a high ranking Hispanic city employee . 
 When Congressman Bobby Rush was battling cancer , Time and other publications mentioned Jackson as a potential future candidate for the United States House of Representatives in Illinois 's 1st congressional district . Responding to resignation requests , Rush noted that he would be returning to his congressional duties following post @-@ operative treatment . When he returned to full health he noted his disappointment in the premature consideration of his replacement . The issue led to a public reconciliation initiated by Jackson , Jr. at the 2008 Democratic National Convention , termed a " <unk> " by the press . While considering the possibility of Jackson , Jr. being appointed to fill Barack Obama 's United States Senate seat , the Chicago Sun @-@ Times mentioned her as a possible candidate for Jackson , Jr . ' s Illinois 's 2nd congressional district seat . 
 During the Rod Blagojevich corruption scandal , Jackson 's name was mentioned in the pay @-@ to @-@ play activities of then @-@ Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich . Allegedly , the governor had considered her for the state lottery director and then asked for contributions from her husband Congressman Jackson . After the Congressman Jackson did not make a contribution , she was not selected and Blagojevich made the causality of the non @-@ contribution in the matter . 
 In 2008 , her second year as alderman , Jackson directed more than $ 32 @,@ 000 in payments from her aldermanic expense account to her American Express account . Jackson said she used an <unk> account to launch her office during her freshman term . 
 = = Criminal Investigation , Resignation and Conviction = = 
 In 2012 federal prosecutors reviewed evidence that Jackson faced potential criminal liability for misuse of her husband 's campaign funds ; allegedly she and the Congressman used campaign funds to decorate their Washington , DC home . Jackson resigned from Chicago City Council , effective January 15 , 2013 . On February 15 , 2013 Jackson agreed to a plea deal . On February 20 , 2013 , Jackson plead guilty to one count of filing false tax returns after neglecting to declare nearly $ 580 @,@ 000 in income . 
 On August 14 , 2013 , Jackson was sentenced to 12 months in federal prison , while her husband was sentenced to 30 months in jail . Judge Berman Jackson said she ’ d let the couple decide who should first serve out their prison term . Court documents also showed she had spent campaign funds on personal items such as vacations , electronics and furs . She was ordered to pay $ 22 @,@ 000 in restitution . 
 = = Non @-@ Aldermanic work = = 
 In October 2007 , Jackson filed to pursue William Beavers ' 7th ward Democratic Committeeman post . Among other duties , committeemen determine appointments for vacated political posts in and including their ward . Two days later , Beavers filed to run to retain his position . In the race for the local post , her husband requested permission from the Federal Election Commission to use his campaign funds in support of her local race . The commission voted in favor of allowing unlimited contributions to his wife 's candidacy from his $ 827 @,@ 000 fund . On February 5 , 2008 , Sandi Jackson defeated rival William Beavers in the election for 7th Ward Democratic <unk> by 77 @.@ 5 % – 22 @.@ 5 % . , a 3 – 1 margin over Beavers . 
 Jackson has also been a long @-@ time political consultant through her solely owned consulting firm J. Donatella & Associates . She has run and advised on several Democratic campaigns including her husband 's Congressional races . She continued to be active in this arena while serving as an alderman . She has served as a campaign manager and chief political strategist for Robin Kelly , David Miller , William Davis and James Meeks . 
 = Genesis ( 2007 ) = 
 Genesis ( 2007 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion , which took place on November 11 , 2007 , at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the third event under the Genesis chronology , the last held in the month of November , and the eleventh event of the 2007 TNA PPV schedule . Eight professional wrestling matches were featured on the event 's card , four of which were for championships . 
 The main event was a tag team match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , in which then @-@ champion Kurt Angle and Kevin Nash defeated the team of Sting and Booker T ; Angle gained the pinfall to retain the title . The final round of The 2007 Fight for the Right Tournament was determined in a ladder match , in which Kaz defeated Christian Cage to become number one contender to the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . Samoa Joe versus Robert Roode was also featured on the card , which Joe won . The Motor City Machine Guns ( Alex Shelley and Chris Sabin ) defeated Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) in a tag team match . 
 Genesis is noted for the TNA debut of Booker T. The professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer website rated the entire event a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 stars , higher than the 2006 event 's rating of 5 . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The third Genesis event was announced in mid @-@ August 2007 , scheduled for November 11 , 2007 at the TNA Impact Zone in Orlando , Florida . The promotional poster for the gathering was released some time prior through PPV providers featuring various TNA wrestlers . It featured the tagline " A New Breed of Company ... A New Breed of Wrestler ... A New Breed in Wrestling " . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Genesis featured eight professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers were portrayed as either villains or heroes in the scripted events that build tension and culminate into a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The primary storyline heading into Genesis involved the TNA World Heavyweight Championship held by then @-@ champion Kurt Angle . On the October 25 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! , Management Director Jim Cornette announced that the title would be defended in a tag team match with Angle and Kevin Nash against Sting and a partner of his choosing . The lead @-@ up to this decision began at TNA 's previous PPV event Bound for Glory on October 12 . There , Sting defeated Angle to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . On the October 25 episode of Impact ! , with help from Nash , Angle defeated Sting to win back the title . Due to the controversial circumstances , Cornette announced that Angle would defend the title in a tag team match , in which the person that got the pinfall or submission would win the title . 
 The 2007 Fight for the Right Tournament was held in the weeks prior to the Genesis PPV event . It was an eight @-@ man single @-@ elimination tournament to decide the number contender to the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . It began at Bound for Glory , where a 16 @-@ man reverse battle royal was held to determine the participants , where the last remaining eight advanced to the second round and were seeded in order of elimination . Eric Young , Robert Roode , James Storm , Junior Fatu , Chris Sabin , Kaz , Lance Hoyt , and Alex Shelley all advanced to round two . The first bout of the quarterfinals took place on the October 18 episode of Impact ! between Shelley and Sabin , which ended in a no contest . This led to a vacant spot in the tournament , which was filled later in the episode when Christian Cage defeated Samoa Joe . Kaz defeated Hoyt , Storm defeated Young , and Fatu defeated Roode in the remaining quarterfinal matches , which took place on the 18 and 25 episodes , respectively . The semi @-@ finals were held on the November 1 episode of Impact ! , where Kaz defeated Storm , and Cage defeated Chris Harris — who was a replacement for Fatu — to advance to the finals . On the November 8 episode of Impact ! , Cage defeated Kaz , with interference from Cage 's allies A.J. Styles and Tomko , to win the tournament . Afterwards , Cornette 's stand @-@ in for the night Matt Morgan declared the match a no contest and announced that the tournament would be decided in a ladder match between Cage and Kaz at Genesis due to the interference . 
 At Bound for Glory , Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) fought The Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott Steiner ) in a two out of three falls tables match . They were unsuccessful at defeating the Steiners as The Motor City Machine Guns ( Alex Shelley and Chris Sabin ; MCMG ) interfered and helped the Steiners win the match . On the October 18 episode of Impact ! , Team 3D attacked MCMG during their match in The 2007 Fight for the Right Tournament , injuring them in the plot , which led to a spot being vacant . Afterwards , they stated they were going to destroy the X Division , for which MCMG belonged . On the November 1 episode of Impact ! , MCMG returned from injury and attacked Team 3D . Afterwards , Shelley challenged Team 3D to a fight at Genesis , which was later made official by TNA . 
 Joe versus Roode was another featured contest on the event 's card . On the October 18 episode of Impact ! , Joe fought Cage for the vacant spot in The 2007 Fight for the Right Tournament . During which Roode interfered by attacking Joe , which led to Joe losing the bout . Joe retaliated on the October 25 episode of Impact ! by interfering in Roode 's quarterfinal match with Fatu , causing him to also lose . TNA commentator Mike Tenay announced on the November 1 episode of Impact ! that the two would face in a bout at Genesis . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = On @-@ air employees = = = 
 The event featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . There were four overall commentators for the event ; Mike Tenay and Don West provided English commentary , while Hector Guerrero and Willie Urbina served as the Spanish announce team . David Penzer was the ring announcer for the event , while Earl Hebner , Rudy Charles , Mark " Slick " Johnson , and Andrew Thomas participated as referees for the encounters . Jeremy Borash and Crystal Louthan were used as interviewers throughout the event . Besides wrestlers who were appearing in a wrestling role , James Mitchell , Awesome Kong , SoCal Val , B.G. James and Kip James of the Voodoo Kin Mafia ( <unk> ) , Ms. Brooks , Karen Angle , and Sharmell were also featured on the broadcast . A series of backstage segments featured on the show involved James Storm and Eric Young , with Jackie Moore as an observer , involved in a beer drinking contest over what Storm called the " World Beer Drinking Championship " . It eventually led to Storm passing out and Young stealing the TNA World Beer Drinking Championship belt . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The event opened with a Shop of Horrors match between Abyss and Black Reign , which lasted 10 minutes and 13 seconds . In a Shop of Horrors match , all weapons are legal to use , a wrestler can not be counted out , and it can only be won by pinfall or submission . James Mitchell interfered on Reign 's behalf during the encounter . Abyss won the contest by pinfall after slamming Reign into the mat with a his maneuver , the Black Hole Slam . After the encounter , Abyss grabbed a key that hung around Reign 's neck and used it to open a locked building on the stage , which unknowingly was occupied by an unknown wrestler . Reign and the unknown wrestler then proceeded to lock Abyss in the building and push it off the stage . 
 A series of other preliminary matches followed the Shop of Horrors match . MCMG fought Team 3D in a match that lasted 17 minutes and 37 seconds . MCMG won the contest , after the pair performed their <unk> Rush combination on Ray , which involves a series of kicks to the head and midsection , to gain the pinfall . The TNA Women 's World Championship was defended in a Four Way match involving then @-@ champion Gail Kim , Roxxi Laveaux , ODB , and Angel Williams . <unk> accompanied Roxxi Laveaux to the ring ; they were eventually sent to the backstage area during the contest . After nine minutes and one second , Kim pinned ODB after slamming her into the mat with her maneuver the Happy Ending to retain the title . Sonjay Dutt challenged Jay Lethal for the TNA X Division Championship next . Lethal successfully retained the title after gaining the pinfall following an elbow drop from the top of a padded turnbuckle at 12 minutes and one second . Afterwards , Team 3D attacked Dutt and Lethal , and stole the X Division Championship belt , claiming they were holding it " hostage " . Christian 's Coalition ( A.J. Styles and Tomko ) defended the TNA World Tag Team Championship against The Steiner Brothers in a match lasting 10 minutes and 43 seconds . The pair retained the titles , when Styles pinned Rick following a shot to the groin and a chair shot to the head , neither of which was seen by the referee . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The sixth match was between Samoa Joe and Robert Roode , who was accompanied by Ms. Brooks . It lasted 15 minutes and 43 seconds , with Joe becoming the victor after slamming Roode into the mat with his Muscle Buster maneuver . Ms. Brooks legitimately passed out at ringside during the contest , believed to be due to overheating . She recovered later in the night after <unk> helped her to the backstage area . 
 Next , the finals of The 2007 Fight for the Right Tournament were held between Christian Cage and Kaz in a ladder match that lasted 15 minutes and 13 seconds . In a ladder match , an object is hung above the ring and the first to climb a ladder and retrieve the object is the winner . During the match , Cage was legitimately busted open above his eye . Mid @-@ way through the encounter , the contract fell off the clipboard that hung above the ring , which changed the objective to just grabbing the clipboard to win . Kaz won the contest after causing Cage to fall off the ladder onto Styles and Tomko , who were interfering on Cage 's behalf , and then ascending the ladder to grab the clipboard , becoming number one contender to the TNA World Heavyweight Championship in the process . 
 The main event was a tag team match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , pitting the teams of then @-@ champion Kurt Angle , who was accompanied by Karen Angle , and Kevin Nash against Sting and a mystery partner . Before the contest began , Sting introduced his partner as the debuting Booker T , who was accompanied by the also debuting Sharmell . During the 13 minute and 41 second long encounter , the team of Styles and Tomko interfered on Angle 's behalf by attacking Booker T and Sting . This led later to Angle hitting Nash with the World Heavyweight Championship belt and the slamming of Sting into the mat with his Olympic Slam maneuver to gain the pinfall and retain the title . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The attendance for the event was 900 . Canadian Online Explorer writer Chris Sokol rated the entire event 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , which was higher than the 2006 event 's rating of 5 out of 10 by Bob Kapur . Sokol rated the ladder match between Cage and Kaz an 8 @.@ 5 , his highest rating of the review , while the main event match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship was rated a 7 . The Women 's Title match was rated the lowest with a 5 . Sokol stated in his review of the event when referring to Booker T being Sting 's mystery partner , he gave TNA " major props " . In his comments on the finish to the main event he stated that it was an " intriguing ending to an excellent PPV " . Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch gave the main event two and 1 / 4 stars out of five , and stated he felt it " wasn 't anything special " ; however , he felt Booker T looked " refreshed and full of spunk " . He believed the ladder match was a " really good spectacle match " and gave it three and a half stars . James Caldwell of the Pro Wrestling Torch gave the main event two stars out of five , while the ladder match three and 3 / 4 stars . He felt the ladder match was a " very good ladder match " and was the " best match " up to that point . Dan Wilkenfeld of the Pro Wrestling Torch gave the overall event a B rating and believed it was a " step down " from the previous month 's Bound for Glory . The event was released on DVD on January 15 , 2008 by TNA Home Video . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following Genesis , A.J. Styles and Tomko went on to join Kurt and Karen Angle to form The Angle Alliance . Due to Angle 's attack on Nash at Genesis , Nash and Scott Hall went on to request a Six Man Tag Team match for TNA 's Turning Point PPV event on December 2 . Nash and Hall were granted their request , and Samoa Joe later was revealed as their mystery partner for the encounter . Hall ended up no @-@ showing the event , and as a result Eric Young filled his place in the bout , which was won by Joe , Nash , and Young . 
 Team 3D and MCMG continued their rivalry heading into Turning Point , with MCMG now joined by Lethal . On the November 15 episode of Impact ! , Johnny Devine , an X Division wrestler , betrayed and attacked MCMG and Lethal , joining Team 3D in the process . This led to the six meeting in a Six Man Tag Team Tables match at Turning Point . Team 3D and Devine went on to win the contest . 
 The mystery wrestler revealed after the Shop of Horrors match at Genesis was soon after dubbed Rellik . Abyss , now joined by Rhino , went on to feud with both Reign and Rellik leading into Turning Point . The four were promoted to fight in a Match of 10 @,@ 000 Tacks at the event , but Rhino ended up being replaced by Raven due to an injury . Abyss and Raven won the contest at Turning Point . 
 Kaz got his TNA World Heavyweight Championship match on the November 15 episode of Impact ! against Angle , but failed to win the title . Kaz then went on to team with Booker T in a match against Christian Cage and Robert Roode at Turning Point , which the pair won . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) = 
 " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " is a song by Canadian recording artist Nelly Furtado , taken from her fifth studio album , The Spirit Indestructible . It was released on April 17 , 2012 , through Interscope Records , as the lead single from the album . The song was written by Furtado in a collaboration with its producer Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins . " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " is a R & B song influenced by hip hop collective Odd Future and 1990s productions . The track 's lyrics refer to the singer 's life as a teenager , describing her passion for hip hop and R & B music at that time . " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " received mixed to positive reviews from music critics , who praised the song 's breakdown but criticized Furtado 's vocals . 
 The song achieved moderate commercial success , reaching the top thirty in Belgium , Canada , The Netherlands and United Kingdom . In the United States , " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " failed to enter the Billboard Hot 100 , however , it charted within the top forty on Pop Songs and reached the top ten on Hot Dance Club Songs . The accompanying music video was directed by Little X , and features Furtado <unk> down a city block wearing a giant pair of stilts , as she is joined by dancers throughout the video . To promote the song , Furtado performed it on Alan Carr : Chatty Man , at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards and the 2012 MuchMusic Video Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " was one of the first songs that Furtado worked on with producer Rodney Jerkins for The Spirit Indestructible . The singer stated that the song 's instrumentation was influenced by the 1990s hip hop and R & B as a tribute to the music she listened to in her teenage years , also citing inspiration from hip hop group Odd Future 's " dark sound [ ing ] , heavy and visceral " sound as she tried to recreate a similar style on " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " . 
 The lyrics of " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " also concern Furtado 's teenage period , with the singer describing the song 's lyrical content as " my swagger @-@ in @-@ spades , rhyme @-@ writing 14 @-@ year @-@ old self find [ ing ] liberation through hip hop and R & B attending ' music jams ' in suburban Victoria " . There are references to Furtado 's favourite groups at the period — such as Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa , A Tribe Called Quest and Blackstreet , many of whom were produced by Jerkins himself — and her teenage wardrobe . The song 's title references the hoop earrings she liked to wear . Furtado said that the song describes " a certain unique swagger you have at that young age and that the music gives you , " and that she was " the kid who used to pick up the mic at parties and just rock the crowd , sing my way through the storm and know my voice could penetrate . " The singer stated that as " hip @-@ hop was super @-@ exotic to us in Canada " , she felt that " it was very liberating , finding that confidence through the music " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " was written by Furtado , with production and additional writing being provided by <unk> R & B song features a sound evocative of the genre in the 1990s , infused with hip hop beats , electropop influences , and staccato percussion . Robbie Daw of Idolator noticed the use of pitch @-@ correcting software Auto @-@ Tune on Furtado 's voice . 
 Furtado 's manager Chris Smith stated that " Big Hoops " was an attempt to translate Furtado 's versatility as " a free @-@ range artist " , being " free form ; not contained versus a structured typical song . " As an in @-@ joke to Smith 's reaction to when he first heard the track , the song starts with the manager saying " Time release the fresh " , Furtado laughing at the phrase , and Interscope Records A & R representative Thom Panunzio replying “ You ’ re 100 percent right Chris . ” The title and intro , during which Furtado chants " the bigger the better " against a bass line , references the character finding strength in the size of her earrings . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Smith declared that " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " was not originally intended as a single , only " a big club banger " , as he and Furtado felt the track 's status as " a song that would be the best of Nelly , Nelly ’ s attitude , Nelly ’ s freshness " would not be " really about chart positions " . Eventually it became the lead single for The Spirit Indestructible . Furtado stated that the song earned this status because it represented her intentions " to detach myself from all shackles and play freely " as her ambitious younger self was always " pushing the boundaries " . It was released via digital download on April 17 , 2012 , and was released physically in Germany on May 18 , 2012 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " has received mixed to favourable reviews from music critics , some of whom compared the vocals on the song to those of Rihanna in songs like " Rude Boy " and " Cheers ( Drink to That ) " . Billboard 's Maria Sherman wrote that " Big Hoops " is " easily in the running to be one of the best summer club anthems of the year " , and " if this song doesn 't roll out the carpet for her comeback , nothing will . " MTV reviewer Jenna Hally Rubenstein praised Jerkins ' production and the song 's originality , considering that " Big Hoops " was " unlike anything you 've heard in a hot minute " . 
 Robbie Daw of Idolator , gave the song a mixed review , criticizing the singer 's " unnecessary Rihanna @-@ esque vocal delivery " while adding that it " isn 't the strongest lead single we 've heard from an album . " Jessica Sager of Pop Crush rated it 0 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , comparing Furtado 's vocals to the ones of a " child wailing through a cardboard tube . " She also wrote that " Sager also noted that the singer " wants to depart from Loose as well , but she doesn ’ t have anything to say beyond getting dressed and having a guy ignore her " and concluded that " the song is more irritating than catchy , and the beat isn ’ t strong enough to make many people dance . " Melinda Newman of HitFix deemed the song " It ’ s a meaningless little ditty that is all about the military beat and bragging rights . It doesn ’ t have enough of a hook to work its way up the radio charts , but will likely do very well in the clubs . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " debuted at number sixty on the Canadian Hot 100 chart and peaked at number twenty @-@ eight . It debuted at number forty @-@ six on the Belgian Tip Chart , where it reached a peak of number twenty @-@ four . On the Dutch singles chart , the track debuted at number eighty @-@ one and peaked at twenty @-@ six . On the UK Singles Chart , " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " debuted at number fourteen , becoming Furtado 's highest charting single since 2006 's All Good Things ( Come to an End ) . On the North American Billboard charts , the song became Furtado 's first since 2010 's " Night Is Young " to not enter the Billboard Hot 100 . However , " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " reached the top forty of the Pop Songs chart and the top ten of the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . Smith felt the underperformance was helped by moving The Spirit Indestructible 's release date , " so there ’ s no need to get this thing that supposed to be this club banger intro track and force it up the chart . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Big Hoops ( Bigger the Better ) " was directed by Little X , who previously worked with Furtado on the video for " Promiscuous " . The video premiered on May 3 , 2012 in Much Music , and on May 7 , 2012 on VEVO . 
 The video opens with Furtado strolling down a city block wearing a giant pair of stilts . After several outfit changes , Furtado is seen accompanied by Native American hoop dancers , including champion hoop dancer Tony Duncan . The dancers create shapes with their hoops as a giant Furtado towers over the cityscape . 
 Becky Bain of Idolator wrote that " the singer struts down a city street in a pair of stilts , exuding the most swag we ’ ve ever seen from someone nearly 12 feet tall . Eventually , Nelly grows to Godzilla @-@ esque proportions – and so does her jewelry . Those really are some big hoops . " Jenna Rubenstein of MTV News wrote that " Nelly 's ' Big Hoops ' video is totally weird and makes no sense . Do we care ? No . Because any gal that can look that hot while on stilts deserves our full respect . " 
 Two alternate videos were produced : a " lyrics " video and a " Home Made " video , directed by Aaron A and filmed in a parking lot on Sunset Boulevard during the production of The Spirit Indestructible 's album artwork . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In May 2012 , Furtado performed " Big Hoops " on UK show Alan Carr : Chatty Man . Furtado performed the song for the first time in the United States during the 2012 Billboard Music Awards on May 20 , 2012 , and in Canada during the 2012 MuchMusic Video Awards on June 17 , 2012 . It is part of her setlist on The Spirit Indestructible Tour , which started on January 2013 . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from The Spirit Indestructible album liner notes . 
 Technical 
 Recorded and mixed at 2nd Floor Studios , Hollywood , California . 
 Personnel 
 Nelly Furtado — lyrics , lead and background vocals 
 Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins — music , production , vocal production , mixing 
 Thom Panunzio — vocals 
 Chris " Governor " Smith — vocals 
 Greg Morgan — sound design 
 Matt Champlin — recording , mixing 
 Orlando <unk> — recording 
 Brandon N. Caddell — engineering assistance 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Rwanda = 
 Rwanda ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ( listen ) ; Kinyarwanda : U Rwanda [ <unk> ] ) , officially the Republic of Rwanda ( Kinyarwanda : <unk> y 'u Rwanda ; French : République du Rwanda ) , is a sovereign state in central and east Africa and one of the smallest countries on the African mainland . Located a few degrees south of the Equator , Rwanda is bordered by Uganda , Tanzania , Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo . Rwanda is in the African Great Lakes region and is highly elevated ; its geography dominated by mountains in the west and savanna to the east , with numerous lakes throughout the country . The climate is temperate to subtropical , with two rainy seasons and two dry seasons each year . 
 The population is young and predominantly rural , with a density among the highest in Africa . Rwandans are drawn from just one cultural and linguistic group , the Banyarwanda , although within this group there are three subgroups : the Hutu , Tutsi and Twa . The Twa are a forest @-@ dwelling pygmy people descended from Rwanda 's earliest inhabitants . Scholars disagree on the origins of and differences between the Hutu and Tutsi ; some believe differences are derived from former social castes within a single people , while others believe the Hutu and Tutsi arrived in the country separately , and from different locations . Christianity is the largest religion in the country ; the principal language is Kinyarwanda , spoken by most Rwandans , with English and French serving as official languages . Rwanda has a presidential system of government . The president is Paul Kagame of the Rwandan Patriotic Front ( RPF ) , who took office in 2000 . Rwanda today has low corruption compared with neighbouring countries , although human rights organisations report suppression of opposition groups , intimidation and restrictions on freedom of speech though the government says its protecting its territories as any other country may do if its in it situation . The country has been governed by a ordered administrative hierarchy since pre @-@ colonial times ; there are five provinces delineated by borders drawn in 2006 . Rwanda is one of only two countries with a female majority in the national parliament . 
 Hunter gatherers settled the territory in the stone and iron ages , followed later by Bantu peoples . The population coalesced first into clans and then into kingdoms . The Kingdom of Rwanda dominated from the mid @-@ eighteenth century , with the Tutsi kings conquering others militarily , centralising power , and later enacting anti @-@ Hutu policies . Germany colonised Rwanda in 1884 as part of German East Africa , followed by Belgium , which invaded in 1916 during World War I. Both European nations ruled through the kings and perpetuated a pro @-@ Tutsi policy . The Hutu population revolted in 1959 . They massacred numerous Tutsi and ultimately established an independent , Hutu @-@ dominated state in 1962 . The Tutsi @-@ led Rwandan Patriotic Front launched a civil war in 1990 . Social tensions erupted in the 1994 genocide , in which Hutu extremists killed an estimated 500 @,@ 000 to 1 @.@ 3 million Tutsi and moderate Hutu . The RPF ended the genocide with a military victory . 
 Rwanda 's economy suffered heavily during the 1994 Rwandan Genocide , but has since strengthened . The economy is based mostly on subsistence agriculture . Coffee and tea are the major cash crops for export . Tourism is a fast @-@ growing sector and is now the country 's leading foreign exchange earner . Rwanda is one of only two countries in which mountain gorillas can be visited safely , and visitors are prepared to pay soft prices for gorilla tracking permits . Music and dance are an integral part of Rwandan culture , particularly drums and the highly choreographed <unk> dance . Traditional arts and crafts are produced throughout the country . 
 = = History = = 
 Modern human settlement of what is now Rwanda dates from , at the latest , the last glacial period , either in the Neolithic period around 8000 BC , or in the long humid period which followed , up to around 3000 BC . Archaeological excavations have revealed evidence of sparse settlement by hunter gatherers in the late stone age , followed by a larger population of early Iron Age settlers , who produced dimpled pottery and iron tools . These early inhabitants were the ancestors of the Twa , aboriginal pygmy hunter @-@ gatherers who remain in Rwanda today . Between 700 BC and 1500 AD , a number of Bantu groups migrated into Rwanda , clearing forest land for agriculture . The forest @-@ dwelling Twa lost much of their habitat and moved to the mountain slopes . Historians have several theories regarding the nature of the Bantu migrations ; one theory is that the first settlers were Hutu , while the Tutsi migrated later to form a distinct racial group , possibly of Cushitic origin . An alternative theory is that the migration was slow and steady , with incoming groups integrating into rather than conquering the existing society . Under this theory , the Hutu and Tutsi distinction arose later and was a class distinction rather than a racial one . 
 The earliest form of social organisation in the area was the clan ( <unk> ) . The clans were not limited to genealogical lineages or geographical area , and most included Hutu , Tutsi , and Twa . From the 15th century , the clans began to coalesce into kingdoms ; by 1700 around eight kingdoms existed in present @-@ day Rwanda . One of these , the Kingdom of Rwanda , ruled by the Tutsi <unk> clan , became increasingly dominant from the mid @-@ eighteenth century . The kingdom reached its greatest extent during the nineteenth century under the reign of King Kigeli Rwabugiri . Rwabugiri conquered several smaller states , expanded the kingdom west and north , and initiated administrative reforms ; these included ubuhake , in which Tutsi patrons ceded cattle , and therefore privileged status , to Hutu or Tutsi clients in exchange for economic and personal service , and uburetwa , a corvée system in which Hutu were forced to work for Tutsi chiefs . Rwabugiri 's changes caused a rift to grow between the Hutu and Tutsi populations . The Twa were better off than in pre @-@ Kingdom days , with some becoming dancers in the royal court , but their numbers continued to decline . 
 The Berlin Conference of 1884 assigned the territory to Germany as part of German East Africa , marking the beginning of the colonial era . The explorer Gustav Adolf von Götzen was the first European to significantly explore the country in 1894 ; he crossed from the south @-@ east to Lake Kivu and met the king . The Germans did not significantly alter the social structure of the country , but exerted influence by supporting the king and the existing hierarchy and delegating power to local chiefs . Belgian forces took control of Rwanda and Burundi during World War I , beginning a period of more direct colonial rule . Belgium simplified and centralised the power structure , and introduced large @-@ scale projects in education , health , public works , and agricultural supervision , including new crops and improved agricultural techniques to try to reduce the incidence of famine . Both the Germans and the Belgians promoted Tutsi supremacy , considering the Hutu and Tutsi different races . In 1935 , Belgium introduced identity cards labelling each individual as either Tutsi , Hutu , Twa or Naturalised . While it had previously been possible for particularly wealthy Hutu to become honorary Tutsi , the identity cards prevented any further movement between the classes . 
 Belgium continued to rule Rwanda as a UN Trust Territory after World War II , with a mandate to oversee independence . Tension escalated between the Tutsi , who favoured early independence , and the Hutu emancipation movement , culminating in the 1959 Rwandan Revolution : Hutu activists began killing Tutsi , forcing more than 100 @,@ 000 to seek refuge in neighbouring countries . In 1961 , the now pro @-@ Hutu Belgians held a referendum in which the country voted to abolish the monarchy . Rwanda was separated from Burundi and gained independence in 1962 . Cycles of violence followed , with exiled Tutsi attacking from neighbouring countries and the Hutu retaliating with large @-@ scale slaughter and repression of the Tutsi . In 1973 , Juvénal Habyarimana took power in a military coup . Pro @-@ Hutu discrimination continued , but there was greater economic prosperity and a reduced amount of violence against Tutsi . The Twa remained marginalised , and by 1990 were almost entirely forced out of the forests by the government ; many became beggars . Rwanda 's population had increased from 1 @.@ 6 million people in 1934 to 7 @.@ 1 million in 1989 , leading to competition for land . 
 In 1990 , the Rwandan Patriotic Front ( RPF ) , a rebel group composed mostly of Tutsi refugees , invaded northern Rwanda , initiating the Rwandan Civil War . Neither side was able to gain a decisive advantage in the war , but by 1992 it had weakened Habyarimana 's authority ; mass demonstrations forced him into a coalition with the domestic opposition and eventually to sign the 1993 Arusha Accords with the RPF . The cease @-@ fire ended on 6 April 1994 when Habyarimana 's plane was shot down near Kigali Airport , killing him . The shooting down of the plane served as the catalyst for the Rwandan Genocide , which began within a few hours . Over the course of approximately 100 days , between 500 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Tutsi and politically moderate Hutu were killed in well @-@ planned attacks on the orders of the interim government . Many Twa were also killed , despite not being directly targeted . The Tutsi RPF restarted their offensive , and took control of the country methodically , gaining control of the whole country by mid @-@ July . The international response to the genocide was limited , with major powers reluctant to strengthen the already overstretched UN peacekeeping force . When the RPF took over , approximately two million Hutu fled to neighbouring countries , in particular Zaïre , fearing reprisals ; additionally , the RPF @-@ led army was a key belligerent in the First and Second Congo Wars . Within Rwanda , a period of reconciliation and justice began , with the establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda ( ICTR ) and the reintroduction of Gacaca , a traditional village court system . Since 2000 Rwanda 's economy , tourist numbers , and Human Development Index have grown rapidly ; between 2006 and 2011 the poverty rate reduced from 57 % to 45 % , while life expectancy rose from 46 @.@ 6 years in 2000 to 59 @.@ 7 years in 2015 . 
 = = Politics and government = = 
 The President of Rwanda is the head of state , and has broad powers including creating policy in conjunction with the Cabinet , exercising the prerogative of mercy , commanding the armed forces , negotiating and ratifying treaties , signing presidential orders , and declaring war or a state of emergency . The President is elected by popular vote every seven years , and appoints the Prime Minister and all other members of Cabinet . The incumbent President is Paul Kagame , who took office upon the resignation of his predecessor , Pasteur Bizimungu , in 2000 . Kagame subsequently won elections in 2003 and 2010 , although human rights organisations have criticised these elections as being " marked by increasing political repression and a crackdown on free speech " . Article 101 of the current constitution limits presidents to two terms in office , but as of 2015 there is a motion underway in the Rwandan parliament to amend this and allow Kagame to run for a third term . The motion , which would require ratification by referendum , was brought following receipt of a petition signed by 3 @.@ 8 million Rwandans . 
 The constitution was adopted following a national referendum in 2003 , replacing the transitional constitution which had been in place since 1994 . The constitution mandates a multi @-@ party system of government , with politics based on democracy and elections . However , the constitution places conditions on how political parties may operate . Article 54 states that " political organizations are prohibited from basing themselves on race , ethnic group , tribe , clan , region , sex , religion or any other division which may give rise to discrimination " . The government has also enacted laws criminalising genocide ideology , which can include intimidation , defamatory speeches , genocide denial and mocking of victims . According to Human Rights Watch , these laws effectively make Rwanda a one @-@ party state , as " under the guise of preventing another genocide , the government displays a marked intolerance of the most basic forms of dissent " . Amnesty International is also critical ; in its 2014 / 15 report Amnesty said that laws against inciting insurrection or trouble among the population had been used to imprison people " for the legitimate exercise of their rights to freedom of association or of expression " . 
 The Parliament consists of two chambers . It makes legislation and is empowered by the constitution to oversee the activities of the President and the Cabinet . The lower chamber is the Chamber of Deputies , which has 80 members serving five @-@ year terms . Twenty @-@ four of these seats are reserved for women , elected through a joint assembly of local government officials ; another three seats are reserved for youth and disabled members ; the remaining 53 are elected by universal suffrage under a proportional representation system . Following the 2013 election , there are 51 female deputies , up from 45 in 2008 ; as of 2015 , Rwanda is one of only two countries with a female majority in the national parliament . The upper chamber is the 26 @-@ seat Senate , whose members are selected by a variety of bodies . A mandatory minimum of 30 % of the senators are women . Senators serve eight @-@ year terms . 
 Rwanda 's legal system is largely based on German and Belgian civil law systems and customary law . The judiciary is independent of the executive branch , although the President and the Senate are involved in the appointment of Supreme Court judges . Human Rights Watch have praised the Rwandan government for progress made in the delivery of justice including the abolition of the death penalty , but also allege interference in the judicial system by members of the government , such as the politically motivated appointment of judges , misuse of prosecutorial power , and pressure on judges to make particular decisions . The constitution provides for two types of courts : ordinary and specialised . Ordinary courts are the Supreme Court , the High Court , and regional courts , while specialised courts are military courts and a system of commercial courts created in 2011 to expedite commercial litigations . Between 2004 and 2012 , a system of Gacaca courts was in operation . Gacaca , a Rwandan traditional court operated by villages and communities , was revived to expedite the trials of genocide suspects . The court succeeded in clearing the backlog of genocide cases , but was criticised by human rights groups as not meeting legal fair standard . 
 Rwanda has low corruption levels relative to most other African countries ; in 2014 , Transparency International ranked Rwanda as the fifth cleanest out of 47 countries in Sub @-@ Saharan Africa and 55th cleanest out of 175 in the world . The constitution provides for an Ombudsman , whose duties include prevention and fighting of corruption . Public officials ( including the President ) are required by the constitution to declare their wealth to the Ombudsman and to the public ; those who do not comply are suspended from office . 
 The Rwandan Patriotic Front ( RPF ) has been the dominant political party in the country since 1994 . The RPF has maintained control of the presidency and the Parliament in national elections , with the party 's vote share consistently exceeding 70 % . The RPF is seen as a Tutsi @-@ dominated party but receives support from across the country , and is credited with ensuring continued peace , stability , and economic growth . Human rights organisation Freedom House claims that the government suppresses the freedoms of opposition groups ; in its 2015 report , Freedom House alleged that the RPF had " prevented new political parties from registering and arrested the leaders of several existing parties , effectively preventing them from fielding candidates " in elections . Amnesty International also claims that the RPF rules Rwanda " without any meaningful opposition " . 
 Rwanda is a member of the United Nations , African Union , Francophonie , East African Community , and the Commonwealth of Nations . For many years during the Habyarimana regime , the country maintained close ties with France , as well as Belgium , the former colonial power . Under the RPF government , however , Rwanda has sought closer ties with neighbouring countries in the East African Community and with the English @-@ speaking world . Diplomatic relations with France were suspended in 2006 following the indictment of Rwandan officials by a French judge , and despite their restoration in 2010 , as of 2015 relations between the countries remain strained . Relations with the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) were tense following Rwanda 's involvement in the First and Second Congo Wars ; the Congolese army alleged Rwandan attacks on their troops , while Rwanda blamed the Congolese government for failing to suppress Hutu rebels in North and South Kivu provinces . Relations soured further in 2012 , as Kinshasa accused Rwanda of supporting the M23 rebellion , an insurgency in the eastern Congo . As of 2015 , peace has been restored and relations are improving . Rwanda 's relationship with Uganda was also tense for much of the 2000s following a 1999 clash between the two countries ' armies as they backed opposing rebel groups in the Second Congo War , but improved significantly in the early 2010s ; as of 2015 , the two countries enjoy a good relationship . 
 The Rwanda Defence Force ( RDF ) is the national army of Rwanda . Largely composed of former Rwandan Patriotic Army ( RPA ) soldiers , it includes the Rwanda Land Force , Rwanda Air Force and specialised units . After the successful conquest of the country in 1994 in the aftermath of the Rwandan Genocide , the Rwandan Patriotic Front decided to split the RPF into a political division ( which retained the RPF name ) and the RDF , a military division which was to serve as the official army of the Rwandan state . Defence spending continues to represent an important share of the national budget , largely due to continuing security problems along the frontiers with the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi , and lingering concerns about Uganda 's intentions towards its former ally . In 2010 , the United Nations released a report accusing the Rwandan army of committing wide scale human rights violations and crimes against humanity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo during the First and Second Congo Wars , charges denied by the Rwandan government . 
 = = Administrative divisions = = 
 Rwanda has been governed by a strict hierarchy since precolonial times . Before colonisation , the King ( Mwami ) exercised control through a system of provinces , districts , hills , and neighbourhoods . The current constitution divides Rwanda into provinces ( <unk> ) , districts ( <unk> ) , cities , municipalities , towns , sectors ( <unk> ) , cells ( <unk> ) , and villages ( <unk> ) ; the larger divisions , and their borders , are established by Parliament . 
 The five provinces act as intermediaries between the national government and their constituent districts to ensure that national policies are implemented at the district level . The " Rwanda <unk> Strategic Framework " developed by the Ministry of Local Government assigns to provinces the responsibility for " coordinating governance issues in the Province , as well as monitoring and evaluation " . Each province is headed by a governor , appointed by the President and approved by the Senate . The districts are responsible for coordinating public service delivery and economic development . They are divided into sectors , which are responsible for the delivery of public services as mandated by the districts . Districts and sectors have directly elected councils , and are run by an executive committee selected by that council . The cells and villages are the smallest political units , providing a link between the people and the sectors . All adult resident citizens are members of their local cell council , from which an executive committee is elected . The city of Kigali is a provincial @-@ level authority , which coordinates urban planning within the city . 
 The present borders were drawn in 2006 with the aim of decentralising power and removing associations with the old system and the genocide . The previous structure of twelve provinces associated with the largest cities was replaced with five provinces based primarily on geography . These are Northern Province , Southern Province , Eastern Province , Western Province , and the Municipality of Kigali in the centre . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 26 @,@ 338 square kilometres ( 10 @,@ 169 sq mi ) , Rwanda is the world 's 149th @-@ largest country , and the fourth smallest on the African mainland after Gambia , Swaziland , and Djibouti . It is comparable in size to Burundi , Haiti and Albania . The entire country is at a high altitude : the lowest point is the <unk> River at 950 metres ( 3 @,@ 117 ft ) above sea level . Rwanda is located in Central / Eastern Africa , and is bordered by the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the west , Uganda to the north , Tanzania to the east , and Burundi to the south . It lies a few degrees south of the equator and is landlocked . The capital , Kigali , is located near the centre of Rwanda . 
 The watershed between the major Congo and Nile drainage basins runs from north to south through Rwanda , with around 80 % of the country 's area draining into the Nile and 20 % into the Congo via the <unk> River and Lake Tanganyika . The country 's longest river is the <unk> , which rises in the south @-@ west , flows north , east , and southeast before merging with the <unk> to form the Kagera ; the Kagera then flows due north along the eastern border with Tanzania . The <unk> @-@ Kagera eventually drains into Lake Victoria , and its source in Nyungwe Forest is a contender for the as @-@ yet undetermined overall source of the Nile . Rwanda has many lakes , the largest being Lake Kivu . This lake occupies the floor of the Albertine Rift along most of the length of Rwanda 's western border , and with a maximum depth of 480 metres ( 1 @,@ 575 ft ) , it is one of the twenty deepest lakes in the world . Other sizeable lakes include Burera , Ruhondo , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , the last being the largest of a string of lakes in the eastern plains of Akagera National Park . 
 Mountains dominate central and western Rwanda . They are part of the Albertine Rift Mountains that flank the Albertine branch of the East African Rift , which runs from north to south along Rwanda 's western border . The highest peaks are found in the Virunga volcano chain in the northwest ; this includes Mount <unk> , Rwanda 's highest point , at 4 @,@ 507 metres ( 14 @,@ 787 ft ) . This western section of the country lies within the Albertine Rift montane forests ecoregion . It has an elevation of 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 500 metres ( 4 @,@ 921 to 8 @,@ 202 ft ) . The centre of the country is predominantly rolling hills , while the eastern border region consists of savanna , plains and swamps . 
 Rwanda has a temperate tropical highland climate , with lower temperatures than are typical for equatorial countries because of its high elevation . Kigali , in the centre of the country , has a typical daily temperature range between 12 and 27 ° C ( 54 and 81 ° F ) , with little variation through the year . There are some temperature variations across the country ; the mountainous west and north are generally cooler than the lower @-@ lying east . There are two rainy seasons in the year ; the first runs from February to June and the second from September to December . These are separated by two dry seasons : the major one from June to September , during which there is often no rain at all , and a shorter and less severe one from December to February . Rainfall varies geographically , with the west and northwest of the country receiving more precipitation annually than the east and southeast . Global warming has caused a change in the pattern of the rainy seasons . According to a report by the Strategic Foresight Group , change in climate has reduced the number of rainy days experienced during a year , but has also caused an increase in frequency of torrential rains . Both changes have caused difficulty for farmers , decreasing their productivity . Strategic Foresight also characterise Rwanda as a fast warming country , with an increase in average temperature of between 0 @.@ 7 ° C to 0 @.@ 9 ° C over fifty years . 
 = = = Biodiversity = = = 
 In prehistoric times montane forest occupied one @-@ third of the territory of present @-@ day Rwanda . Naturally occurring vegetation is now mostly restricted to the three National Parks , with terraced agriculture dominating the rest of the country . Nyungwe , the largest remaining tract of forest , contains 200 species of tree as well as orchids and <unk> . Vegetation in the Volcanoes National Park is mostly bamboo and moorland , with small areas of forest . By contrast , Akagera has a savanna ecosystem in which acacia dominates the flora . There are several rare or endangered plant species in Akagera , including <unk> lutea and <unk> guineensis . 
 The greatest diversity of large mammals is found in the three National Parks , which are designated conservation areas . Akagera contains typical savanna animals such as giraffes and elephants , while Volcanoes is home to an estimated one @-@ third of the worldwide mountain gorilla population . Nyungwe Forest boasts thirteen primate species including chimpanzees and Ruwenzori colobus arboreal monkeys ; the Ruwenzori colobus move in groups of up to 400 individuals , the largest troop size of any primate in Africa . Rwanda 's population of lions was destroyed in the aftermath of the genocide of 1994 , as national parks were turned into camps for displaced people and remaining animals were poisoned by cattle herders . In June 2015 , two South African parks donated seven lions to Akagera National Park , reestablishing a lion population in Rwanda . The lions were held initially in a fenced off area of the park , and then collared and released into the wild a month later . 
 There are 670 bird species in Rwanda , with variation between the east and the west . Nyungwe Forest , in the west , has 280 recorded species , of which 26 are endemic to the Albertine Rift ; endemic species include the Ruwenzori turaco and handsome francolin . Eastern Rwanda , by contrast , features savanna birds such as the black @-@ headed <unk> and those associated with swamps and lakes , including storks and cranes . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Rwanda 's economy suffered heavily during the 1994 genocide , with widespread loss of life , failure to maintain infrastructure , looting , and neglect of important cash crops . This caused a large drop in GDP and destroyed the country 's ability to attract private and external investment . The economy has since strengthened , with per @-@ capita GDP ( PPP ) estimated at $ 1 @,@ 784 in 2015 , compared with $ 416 in 1994 . Major export markets include China , Germany , and the United States . The economy is managed by the central National Bank of Rwanda and the currency is the Rwandan franc ; in August 2015 , the exchange rate was 755 francs to the United States dollar . Rwanda joined the East African Community in 2007 , and has ratified a plan for monetary union amongst the five member nations , which could eventually lead to a common East African shilling . 
 Rwanda is a country of few natural resources , and the economy is based mostly on subsistence agriculture by local farmers using simple tools . An estimated 90 % of the working population farms , and agriculture constituted an estimated 32 @.@ 5 % of GDP in 2014 . Farming techniques are basic , with small plots of land and steep slopes . Since the mid @-@ 1980s , farm sizes and food production have been decreasing , due in part to the resettlement of displaced people . Despite Rwanda 's fertile ecosystem , food production often does not keep pace with population growth , and food imports are required . 
 Subsistence crops grown in the country include <unk> ( green bananas ) , which occupy more than a third of the country 's farmland , potatoes , beans , sweet potatoes , cassava , wheat and maize . Coffee and tea are the major cash crops for export , with the high altitudes , steep slopes and volcanic soils providing favourable conditions . Reliance on agricultural exports makes Rwanda vulnerable to shifts in their prices . Animals raised in Rwanda include cows , goats , sheep , pigs , chicken , and rabbits , with geographical variation in the numbers of each . Production systems are mostly traditional , although there are a few intensive dairy farms around Kigali . Shortages of land and water , insufficient and poor @-@ quality feed , and regular disease epidemics with insufficient veterinary services are major constraints that restrict output . Fishing takes place on the country 's lakes , but stocks are very depleted , and live fish are being imported in an attempt to revive the industry . 
 The industrial sector is small , contributing 14 @.@ 8 % of GDP in 2014 . Products manufactured include cement , agricultural products , small @-@ scale beverages , soap , furniture , shoes , plastic goods , textiles and cigarettes . Rwanda 's mining industry is an important contributor , generating US $ 93 million in 2008 . Minerals mined include cassiterite , wolframite , gold , and coltan , which is used in the manufacture of electronic and communication devices such as mobile phones . 
 Rwanda 's service sector suffered during the late @-@ 2000s recession as bank lending , foreign aid projects and investment were reduced . The sector rebounded in 2010 , becoming the country 's largest sector by economic output and contributing 43 @.@ 6 % of the country 's GDP . Key tertiary contributors include banking and finance , wholesale and retail trade , hotels and restaurants , transport , storage , communication , insurance , real estate , business services and public administration including education and health . Tourism is one of the fastest @-@ growing economic resources and became the country 's leading foreign exchange earner in 2007 . In spite of the genocide 's legacy , the country is increasingly perceived internationally as a safe destination . The number of tourist arrivals in 2013 was 864 @,@ 000 people , up from 504 @,@ 000 in 2010 . Revenue from tourism was US $ 303 million in 2014 , up from just US $ 62 million in 2000 . The largest contributor to this revenue was mountain gorilla tracking , in the Volcanoes National Park ; Rwanda is one of only two countries in which mountain gorillas can be visited safely ; the gorillas attract thousands of visitors per year , who are prepared to pay high prices for permits . Other attractions include Nyungwe Forest , home to chimpanzees , Ruwenzori colobus and other primates , the resorts of Lake Kivu , and Akagera , a small savanna reserve in the east of the country . 
 = = = Media and communications = = = 
 The largest radio and television stations are state @-@ run , and the majority of newspapers are owned by the government . Most Rwandans have access to radio ; during the 1994 genocide , the radio station Radio Télévision Libre des Mille <unk> broadcast across the country , and helped to fuel the killings through anti @-@ Tutsi propaganda . As of 2015 , the state @-@ run Radio Rwanda is the largest station and the main source of news throughout the country . Television access is limited , with most homes not having their own set . The government rolled out digital television in 2014 , and a year later there were seven national stations operating , up from just one in the pre @-@ 2014 analogue era . The press is tightly restricted , and newspapers routinely self @-@ censor to avoid government reprisals . Nonetheless , publications in Kinyarwanda , English , and French critical of the government are widely available in Kigali . Restrictions were increased in the run @-@ up to the Rwandan presidential election of 2010 , with two independent newspapers , <unk> and <unk> , being suspended for six months by the High Media Council . 
 The country 's oldest telecommunications group , <unk> , went into liquidation in 2011 , having been 80 % owned by Libyan company <unk> Green . The company was acquired in 2013 by Liquid Telecom , a company providing telecommunications and fibre optic networks across eastern and southern Africa . As of 2015 , Liquid Telecom provides landline service to 30 @,@ 968 subscribers , with mobile operator MTN Rwanda serving an additional 15 @,@ 497 fixed line subscribers . <unk> are mostly used by government institutions , banks , NGOs and embassies , with private subscription levels low . As of 2015 , mobile phone penetration in the country is 72 @.@ 6 % , up from 41 @.@ 6 % in 2011 . MTN Rwanda is the leading provider , with 3 @,@ 957 @,@ 986 subscribers , followed by <unk> with 2 @,@ 887 @,@ 328 , and Bhati Airtel with 1 @,@ 336 @,@ 679 . <unk> has also previously operated a mobile phone network , but the industry regulator revoked its licence in April 2011 , following the company 's failure to meet agreed investment commitments . Internet penetration is low but rising rapidly ; in 2015 there were 12 @.@ 8 internet users per 100 people , up from 2 @.@ 1 in 2007 . In 2011 , a 2 @,@ 300 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 400 mi ) fibre @-@ optic telecommunications network was completed , intended to provide broadband services and facilitate electronic commerce . This network is connected to <unk> , a submarine fibre @-@ optic cable connecting communication carriers in southern and eastern Africa . Within Rwanda the cables run along major roads , linking towns around the country . Mobile provider MTN also runs a wireless internet service accessible in most areas of Kigali via pre @-@ paid subscription . 
 = = = Infrastructure = = = 
 The Rwandan government prioritised funding of water supply development during the 2000s , significantly increasing its share of the national budget . This funding , along with donor support , caused a rapid increase in access to safe water ; in 2015 , 74 % of the population had access to safe water , up from about 55 % in 2005 ; the government has committed to increasing this to 100 % by 2017 . The country 's water infrastructure consists of urban and rural systems that deliver water to the public , mainly through standpipes in rural areas and private connections in urban areas . In areas not served by these systems , hand pumps and managed springs are used . Despite rainfall exceeding 750 millimetres ( 30 in ) annually in most of the country , little use is made of rainwater harvesting , and residents are forced to use water very sparingly , relative to usage in other African countries . Access to sanitation remains low ; the United Nations estimates that in 2006 , 34 % of urban and 20 % of rural dwellers had access to improved sanitation . Government policy measures to improve sanitation are limited , focusing only on urban areas . The majority of the population , both urban and rural , use public shared pit latrines . 
 Rwanda 's electricity supply was , until the early 2000s , generated almost entirely from hydroelectric sources ; power stations on Lakes Burera and Ruhondo provided 90 % of the country 's electricity . A combination of below average rainfall and human activity , including the draining of the <unk> wetlands for cultivation and grazing , caused the two lakes ' water levels to fall from 1990 onwards ; by 2004 levels were reduced by 50 % , leading to a sharp drop in output from the power stations . This , coupled with increased demand as the economy grew , precipitated a shortfall in 2004 and widespread <unk> . As an emergency measure , the government installed diesel generators north of Kigali ; by 2006 these were providing 56 % of the country 's electricity , but were very costly . The government enacted a number of measures to alleviate this problem , including rehabilitating the <unk> wetlands , which supply water to Burera and Ruhondo and investing in a scheme to extract methane gas from Lake Kivu , expected in its first phase to increase the country 's power generation by 40 % . Only 18 % of the population had access to electricity in 2012 , though this had risen from 10 @.@ 8 % in 2009 . The government 's Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy for 2013 – 18 aims to increase access to electricity to 70 % of households by 2017 . 
 The government has increased investment in the transport infrastructure of Rwanda since the 1994 genocide , with aid from the United States , European Union , Japan , and others . The transport system consists primarily of the road network , with paved roads between Kigali and most other major cities and towns in the country . Rwanda is linked by road to other countries in the East African Community , namely Uganda , Tanzania , Burundi and Kenya , as well as to the eastern Congolese cities of Goma and Bukavu ; the country 's most important trade route is the road to the port of Mombasa via Kampala and Nairobi , which is known as the Northern Corridor . The principal form of public transport in the country is the minibus , accounting for more than half of all passenger carrying capacity . Some minibuses , particularly in Kigali , operate an unscheduled service , under a shared taxi system , while others run to a schedule , offering express routes between the major cities . There are a smaller number of large buses , which operate a scheduled service around the country . The principal private hire vehicle is the motorcycle taxi ; in 2013 there were 9 @,@ 609 registered motorcycle taxis in Rwanda , compared with just 579 taxicabs . Coach services are available to various destinations in neighbouring countries . The country has an international airport at Kigali that serves several international destinations , the busiest routes being those to Nairobi and Entebbe ; there is one domestic route , between Kigali and <unk> Airport near <unk> . The national carrier is <unk> , and the country is served by seven foreign airlines . As of 2015 the country has no railways , but there is a project underway , in conjunction with Burundi and Tanzania , to extend the Tanzanian Central Line into Rwanda ; the three countries have invited expressions of interest from private firms to form a public private partnership for the scheme . There is no public water transport between the port cities on Lake Kivu , although a limited private service exists and the government has initiated a programme to develop a full service . The Ministry of Infrastructure is also investigating the feasibility of linking Rwanda to Lake Victoria via shipping on the Akagera River . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of 2015 , the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda estimates Rwanda 's population to be 11 @,@ 262 @,@ 564 . The 2012 census recorded a population of 10 @,@ 515 @,@ 973 . The population is young : in the 2012 census , 43 @.@ 3 % of the population were aged 15 and under , and 53 @.@ 4 % were between 16 and 64 . According to the CIA World Factbook , the annual birth rate is estimated at 40 @.@ 2 births per 1 @,@ 000 inhabitants in 2015 , and the death rate at 14 @.@ 9 . The life expectancy is 59 @.@ 67 years ( 61 @.@ 27 years for females and 58 @.@ 11 years for males ) , which is the 26th lowest out of 224 countries and territories . The sex ratio of the country is relatively even . 
 At 445 inhabitants per square kilometre ( 1 @,@ 150 / sq mi ) , Rwanda 's population density is amongst the highest in Africa . Historians such as Gérard Prunier believe that the 1994 genocide can be partly attributed to the population density . The population is predominantly rural , with a few large towns ; dwellings are evenly spread throughout the country . The only sparsely populated area of the country is the savanna land in the former province of <unk> and Akagera National Park in the east . Kigali is the largest city , with a population of around one million . Its rapidly increasing population challenges its infrastructural development . According to the 2012 census , the second largest city is Gisenyi , which lies adjacent to Lake Kivu and the Congolese city of Goma , and has a population of 126 @,@ 000 . Other major towns include Ruhengeri , Butare , and Gitarama , all with populations below 100 @,@ 000 . The urban population rose from 6 % of the population in 1990 , to 16 @.@ 6 % in 2006 ; by 2011 , however , the proportion had dropped slightly , to 14 @.@ 8 % . 
 Rwanda has been a unified state since pre @-@ colonial times , and the population is drawn from just one cultural and linguistic group , the Banyarwanda ; this contrasts with most modern African states , whose borders were drawn by colonial powers and did not correspond to ethnic boundaries or pre @-@ colonial kingdoms . Within the Banyarwanda people , there are three separate groups , the Hutu , Tutsi and Twa . The CIA World Factbook gives estimates that the Hutu made up 84 % of the population in 2009 , the Tutsi 15 % and Twa 1 % . The Twa are a pygmy people who descend from Rwanda 's earliest inhabitants , but scholars do not agree on the origins of and differences between the Hutu and Tutsi . Anthropologist Jean Hiernaux contends that the Tutsi are a separate race , with a tendency towards " long and narrow heads , faces and noses " ; others , such as <unk> <unk> , believe there is no discernible physical difference and the categories were not historically rigid . In precolonial Rwanda the Tutsi were the ruling class , from whom the kings and the majority of chiefs were derived , while the Hutu were agriculturalists . The current government discourages the Hutu / Tutsi / Twa distinction , and has removed such classification from identity cards . The 2002 census was the first since 1933 which did not categorise Rwandan population into the three groups . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The largest faith in Rwanda is Roman Catholicism , but there have been significant changes in the nation 's religious demographics since the genocide , with many conversions to Evangelical Christian faiths and , to a lesser degree , Islam . According to the 2012 census , Roman Catholics represented 43 @.@ 7 % of the population , Protestants ( excluding Adventists and Jehovah 's Witnesses ) 37 @.@ 7 % , Seventh @-@ day Adventists 11 @.@ 8 % , and Muslims 2 @.@ 0 % ; 0 @.@ 2 % claimed no religious beliefs and 1 @.@ 3 % did not state a religion . Traditional religion , despite officially being followed by only 0 @.@ 1 % of the population , retains an influence . Many Rwandans view the Christian God as synonymous with the traditional Rwandan God <unk> . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 The country 's principal language is Kinyarwanda , which is spoken by most Rwandans . The major European languages during the colonial era were German , and then French , which was introduced by Belgium and remained an official and widely spoken language after independence . The influx of former refugees from Uganda and elsewhere during the late 20th century has created a linguistic divide between the English @-@ speaking population and the French @-@ speaking remainder of the country . Kinyarwanda , English and French are all official languages . Kinyarwanda is the language of government and English is the primary educational medium . Swahili , the lingua franca of the African Great Lakes , and the official language of the East African Community , is also spoken by some as a second language , particularly returned refugees from Kenya and Tanzania . In 2015 , Swahili was introduced as a mandatory subject in secondary schools . Inhabitants of Rwanda 's <unk> Island speak <unk> , a language closely related to Kinyarwanda . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Music and dance are an integral part of Rwandan ceremonies , festivals , social gatherings and storytelling . The most famous traditional dance is a highly choreographed routine consisting of three components : the <unk> , or cow dance , performed by women ; the <unk> , or dance of heroes , performed by men ; and the drumming , also traditionally performed by men , on drums known as <unk> . The best known dance group is the National Ballet . It was established by President Habyarimana in 1974 , and performs nationally and internationally . Traditionally , music is transmitted orally , with styles varying between the social groups . Drums are of great importance ; the royal drummers enjoyed high status within the court of the King ( Mwami ) . Drummers play together in groups of varying sizes , usually between seven and nine in number . The country has a growing popular music industry , influenced by African Great Lakes , Congolese , and American music . The most popular genre is hip hop , with a blend of rap , ragga , R & B and dance @-@ pop . 
 Traditional arts and crafts are produced throughout the country , although most originated as functional items rather than purely for decoration . Woven baskets and bowls are especially common . <unk> , a unique cow dung art , is produced in the southeast of Rwanda , with a history dating back to when the region was part of the independent <unk> kingdom . The dung is mixed with natural soils of various colours and painted into patterned ridges to form geometric shapes . Other crafts include pottery and wood carving . Traditional housing styles make use of locally available materials ; circular or rectangular mud homes with grass @-@ thatched roofs ( known as <unk> ) are the most common . The government has initiated a programme to replace these with more modern materials such as corrugated iron . 
 Rwanda does not have a long history of written literature , but there is a strong oral tradition ranging from poetry to folk stories . Many of the country 's moral values and details of history have been passed down through the generations . The most famous Rwandan literary figure was Alexis Kagame ( 1912 – 1981 ) , who carried out and published research into oral traditions as well as writing his own poetry . The Rwandan Genocide resulted in the emergence of a literature of witness accounts , essays and fiction by a new generation of writers such as Benjamin <unk> . A number of films have been produced about the Rwandan Genocide , including the Golden Globe @-@ nominated Hotel Rwanda , Shake Hands with the Devil , Sometimes in April , and Shooting Dogs , the last two having been filmed in Rwanda and having featured survivors as cast members . 
 Fourteen regular national holidays are observed throughout the year , with others occasionally inserted by the government . The week following Genocide Memorial Day on 7 April is designated an official week of mourning . The victory for the RPF over the Hutu extremists is celebrated as Liberation Day on 4 July . The last Saturday of each month is <unk> , a national morning of mandatory community service lasting from 8am to 11am , during which all able bodied people between 18 and 65 are expected to carry out community tasks such as cleaning streets or building homes for vulnerable people . Most normal services close down during <unk> , and public transportation is limited . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 The cuisine of Rwanda is based on local staple foods produced by subsistence agriculture such as bananas , plantains ( known as <unk> ) , pulses , sweet potatoes , beans , and cassava ( manioc ) . Many Rwandans do not eat meat more than a few times a month . For those who live near lakes and have access to fish , tilapia is popular . The potato , thought to have been introduced to Rwanda by German and Belgian colonialists , is very popular . <unk> ( or <unk> ) is a paste made from cassava or maize and water to form a porridge @-@ like consistency that is eaten throughout the African Great Lakes . <unk> is made from mashed cassava leaves and served with dried fish . Lunch is usually a buffet known as mélange , consisting of the above staples and sometimes meat . <unk> are the most popular food when eating out in the evening , usually made from goat but sometimes tripe , beef , or fish . In rural areas , many bars have a <unk> seller responsible for tending and slaughtering the goats , skewering and barbecuing the meat , and serving it with grilled bananas . Milk , particularly in a fermented yoghurt form called <unk> , is a common drink throughout the country . Other drinks include a traditional beer called <unk> , made from sorghum or bananas , which features in traditional rituals and ceremonies . The major drinks manufacturer in Rwanda is <unk> , which was established in the 1950s and is now listed on the Rwandan Stock Exchange . <unk> manufactures soft drink products from The Coca @-@ Cola Company , under license , including Coca @-@ Cola , Fanta , and Sprite , and a range of beers including Primus , <unk> , Amstel , and Turbo King . In 2009 a new brewery , <unk> des Mille <unk> ( BMC ) opened , manufacturing <unk> beer and a local version known as <unk> <unk> ; BMC is now owned by Belgian company <unk> . East African Breweries also operate in the country , importing Guinness , <unk> , and Bell , as well as whisky and spirits . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 The Rwandan government , through its Sports Development Policy , promotes sport as a strong avenue for " development and peace building " , and the government has made commitments to advancing the use of sport for a variety of development objectives , including education . The most popular sports in Rwanda are association football , volleyball , basketball , athletics and Paralympic sports . Cricket has been growing in popularity , as a result of refugees returned from Kenya , where they had learned to play the game . Cycling , traditionally seen largely as a mode of transport in Rwanda , is also growing in popularity as a sport ; and Team Rwanda have been the subject of a book , Land of Second Chances : The Impossible Rise of Rwanda 's Cycling Team and a film , Rising from Ashes . 
 Rwandans have been competing at the Olympic Games since 1984 , and the Paralympic Games since 2004 . The country sent seven competitors to the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , representing it in athletics , swimming , mountain biking and judo , and 15 competitors to the London Summer Paralympics to compete in athletics , powerlifting and sitting volleyball . The country has also participated in the Commonwealth Games since joining the Commonwealth in 2009 . The country 's national basketball team has been growing in prominence since the mid @-@ 2000s , with the men 's team qualifying for the final stages of the African Basketball Championship four times in a row since 2007 . The country bid unsuccessfully to host the 2013 tournament . Rwanda 's national football team has appeared in the African Cup of Nations once , in the 2004 edition of the tournament , but narrowly failed to advance beyond the group stages . The team have failed to qualify for the competition since , and have never qualified for the World Cup . Rwanda 's highest domestic football competition is the Rwanda National Football League ; as of 2015 , the dominant team is APR FC of Kigali , having won 13 of the last 17 championships . Rwandan clubs participate in the Kagame <unk> Cup for Central and East African teams , sponsored since 2002 by President Kagame . 
 = = Education = = 
 Prior to 2012 , the Rwandan government provided free education in state @-@ run schools for nine years : six years in primary and three years following a common secondary programme . In 2012 , this started to be expanded to 12 years . A 2015 study suggests that while enrolment rates in primary schools are " near ubiquity " , rates of completion are low and repetition rates high . While schooling is fee @-@ free , there is an expectation that parents should contribute to the cost of their children 's education by providing them with materials , supporting teacher development and making a contribution to school construction . According to the government , these costs should not be a basis for the exclusion of children from education , however . There are many private schools across the country , some church @-@ run , which follow the same syllabus but charge fees . From 1994 until 2009 , secondary education was offered in either French or English ; because of the country 's increasing ties with the East African Community and the Commonwealth , only the English syllabi are now offered . The country has a number of institutions of tertiary education . In 2013 , the public University of Rwanda ( UR ) was created out of a merger of the former National University of Rwanda and the country 's other public higher education institutions . In 2013 , the gross enrolment ratio for tertiary education in Rwanda was 7 @.@ 9 % , from 3 @.@ 6 % in 2006 . The country 's literacy rate , defined as those aged 15 or over who can read and write , was 71 % in 2009 , up from 38 % in 1978 and 58 % in 1991 . 
 = = Health = = 
 The quality of healthcare in Rwanda has historically been very low , both before and immediately after the 1994 genocide . In 1998 , more than one in five children died before their fifth birthday , often from malaria . 
 President Kagame has made healthcare one of the priorities for the Vision 2020 development programme , boosting spending on health care to 6 @.@ 5 % of the country 's gross domestic product in 2013 , compared with 1 @.@ 9 % in 1996 . The government has devolved the financing and management of healthcare to local communities , through a system of health insurance providers called <unk> de santé . The <unk> were piloted in 1999 , and were made available nationwide by the mid @-@ 2000s , with the assistance of international development partners . Premiums under the scheme were initially US $ 2 per annum ; since 2011 the rate has varied on a sliding scale , with the poorest paying nothing , and maximum premiums rising to US $ 8 per adult . As of 2014 , more than 90 % of the population was covered by the scheme . The government has also set up training institutes including the Kigali Health Institute ( <unk> ) , which was established in 1997 and is now part of the University of Rwanda . In 2005 , President Kagame also launched a program known as The Presidents ' Malaria Initiative . This initiative aimed to help get the most necessary materials for prevention of malaria to the most rural areas of Rwanda , such as mosquito nets and medication . 
 In recent years Rwanda has seen improvement on a number of key health indicators : 
 Between 2005 and 2013 , life expectancy increased from 55 @.@ 2 to 64 @.@ 0 @,@ 
 under @-@ 5 mortality decreased from 106 @.@ 4 to 52 @.@ 0 per 1 @,@ 000 live births , 
