 a fellow of the American Psychological Society ; 
 the vice @-@ president of the Society for the Study of Social Biology for 1976 – 1980 ; 
 the president of the Behavior Genetics Association in 1976 – 1977 ; 
 member of the American Society of Human Genetics ; 
 the president of the Society for Research in Psychopathology in 1993 ; and 
 a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Gottesman has been recognized by professional organizations in the United States , Britain , and Japan . He has received the following awards : 
 Hofheimer Prize for Research in 1973 from the American Psychiatric Association ; 
 Dobzhansky Lifetime Achievement Award in 1990 from the Behavior Genetics Association ; 
 William James Book Award in 1991 from the APA Division of General Psychology ; 
 Kurt Schneider Prize from the University of Bonn ( Germany ) ( the first non @-@ German to win the prize ) ; 
 Distinguished Scientific Contributions Award in 2001 from the APA , is highest honor ( previous honorees include Jean Piaget and B.F. Skinner ; 
 Gold Medal Award for Life Achievement in the Science of Psychology in 2007 from the American Psychological Foundation ; 
 Outstanding Achievement for Research on Mental Health Disorders <unk> ( National Alliance for Research in Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders ) Award in 2008 from the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation and 
 University of Louisville Grawemeyer Award in Psychology 2013 
 James McKeen Cattell Fellow Award from the Association for Psychological Science . 
 = = Books = = 
 Gottesman , Irving I. ; Erlenmeyer @-@ <unk> , L. ( 1970 ) . Differential Reproduction in Individuals with Mental and Physical Disorders : Conference Sponsored by the American Eugenics Society and the Biomedical Division of the Population Council Held at the Rockefeller University , Nov. 13 – 14 , 1970 . Chicago University Press. p . 136 . 
 Gottesman , Irving I. ; Shields , James T. ( 1972 ) . Schizophrenia and Genetics : A Twin Study Vantage Point . Boston : Academic Press. p . 433 . ISBN 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Gottesman , Irving I. ; Shields , James T. ( 1973 ) . Schizophrenia and Genetics ( Personality and psychopathology ) . Boston : Academic Press. p . 433 . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 — — ( 1982 ) . Schizophrenia . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press. p . 249 . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Gottesman , Irving I. ; Shields , James T. ( 1982 ) . Schizophrenia : The Epigenetic Puzzle . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press. p . 258 . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 — — ( 1991 ) . Schizophrenia Genesis : The Origins of Madness . San Francisco : <unk> p . 296 . ISBN 0 @-@ 7167 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Shields , James T. ; Gottesman , Irving I. ( 1971 ) . Man , Mind , and <unk> : Selected Papers of Eliot Slater on Psychiatry and Genetics . The Johns Hopkins University Press. p . 432 . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Fuller , Torrey E. ; Bowler , Ann E. ; Taylor , Edward H. ; Gottesman , Irving I. ( 1995 ) . Schizophrenia and manic @-@ depressive disorder : The biological roots of mental illness as revealed by the landmark study of identical twins . Basic Books. p . 304 . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 <unk> , Peter ; Owen , Michael , J. ; Gottesman , Irving I. ( 2004 ) . Psychiatric Genetics and Genomics . Oxford University Press. p . 502 . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 = Third Amendment to the United States Constitution = 
 The Third Amendment ( Amendment III ) to the United States Constitution places restrictions on the quartering of soldiers in private homes without the owner 's consent , forbidding the practice in peacetime . The amendment is a response to Quartering Acts passed by the British parliament during the buildup to the American Revolutionary War , which had allowed the British Army to lodge soldiers in private residences . 
 The Third Amendment was introduced in Congress in 1789 by James Madison as a part of the United States Bill of Rights , in response to Anti @-@ Federalist objections to the new Constitution . Congress proposed the amendment to the states on September 28 , 1789 , and by December 15 , 1791 , the necessary three @-@ quarters of the states had ratified it . Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson announced the adoption of the amendment on March 1 , 1792 . 
 The amendment is one of the least controversial of the Constitution and is rarely litigated , with the American Bar Association calling it the " runt piglet " of the U.S. Constitution . As of 2016 , it has never been the primary basis of a Supreme Court decision . 
 = = Text = = 
 The amendment as proposed by Congress in 1789 reads as follows : 
 No Soldier shall , in time of peace be quartered in any house , without the consent of the Owner , nor in time of war , but in a manner to be prescribed by law . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1765 , the British parliament enacted the first of the Quartering Acts , requiring the American colonies to pay the costs of British soldiers serving in the colonies , and requiring that if the local barracks provided insufficient space , that the colonists lodge the troops in alehouses , inns , and livery stables . After the Boston Tea Party , the Quartering Act of 1774 was enacted . One of the Intolerable Acts that pushed the colonies toward revolution , it authorized British troops to be housed wherever necessary , including in private homes . The quartering of troops was cited as one of the colonists ' grievances in the United States Declaration of Independence . 
 = = Adoption = = 
 After several years of comparatively weak government under the Articles of Confederation , a Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia proposed a new constitution on September 17 , 1787 , featuring a stronger chief executive and other changes . George Mason , a Constitutional Convention delegate and the drafter of Virginia 's Declaration of Rights , proposed that a bill of rights listing and guaranteeing civil liberties be included . Other delegates — including future Bill of Rights drafter James Madison — disagreed , arguing that existing state guarantees of civil liberties were sufficient and that any attempt to enumerate individual rights risked the implication that other , unnamed rights were unprotected . After a brief debate , Mason 's proposal was defeated by a unanimous vote of the state delegations . 
 For the constitution to be ratified , however , nine of the thirteen states were required to approve it in state conventions . Opposition to ratification ( " Anti @-@ Federalism " ) was partly based on the Constitution 's lack of adequate guarantees for civil liberties . Supporters of the Constitution in states where popular sentiment was against ratification ( including Virginia , Massachusetts , and New York ) successfully proposed that their state conventions both ratify the Constitution and call for the addition of a bill of rights . Several state conventions specifically proposed a provision against the quartering of troops in private homes . At the 1788 Virginia Ratifying Convention , Patrick Henry stated , " One of our first complaints , under the former government , was the quartering of troops among us . This was one of the principal reasons for dissolving the connection with Great Britain . Here we may have troops in time of peace . They may be billeted in any manner — to <unk> , oppress , and crush us . " 
 = = = Proposal and ratification = = = 
 In the 1st United States Congress , following the state legislatures ' request , James Madison proposed twenty constitutional amendments based on state bills of rights and English sources such as the Bill of Rights 1689 ; one of these was a prohibition against quartering troops in private homes . Several revisions to the future Third Amendment were proposed in Congress , which chiefly differed in the way in which peace and war were distinguished ( including the possibility of a situation , such as unrest , which was neither peace nor war ) , and whether the executive or the legislature would have the authority to authorize quartering . However , the amendment ultimately passed Congress almost unchanged and by unanimous vote . Congress reduced Madison 's proposed twenty amendments to twelve , and these were submitted to the states for ratification on September 25 , 1789 . 
 By the time the Bill of Rights was submitted to the states for ratification , opinions had shifted in both parties . Many Federalists , who had previously opposed a Bill of Rights , now supported the Bill as a means of silencing the Anti @-@ Federalists ' most effective criticism . Many Anti @-@ Federalists , in contrast , now opposed it , realizing that the Bill 's adoption would greatly lessen the chances of a second constitutional convention , which they desired . Anti @-@ Federalists such as Richard Henry Lee also argued that the Bill left the most objectionable portions of the Constitution , such as the federal judiciary and direct taxation , intact . 
 On November 20 , 1789 , New Jersey ratified eleven of the twelve amendments , rejecting Article II , which regulated Congressional pay raises . On December 19 and 22 , respectively , Maryland and North Carolina ratified all twelve amendments . On January 19 , 25 , and 28 , 1790 , respectively , South Carolina , New Hampshire , and Delaware ratified the Bill , though New Hampshire rejected the amendment on Congressional pay raises , and Delaware rejected Article I , which regulated the size of the House . This brought the total of ratifying states to six of the required ten , but the process stalled in other states : Connecticut and Georgia found a Bill of Rights unnecessary and so refused to ratify , while Massachusetts ratified most of the amendments , but failed to send official notice to the Secretary of State that it had done so . 
 In February through June of 1790 , New York , Pennsylvania , and Rhode Island ratified eleven of the amendments , though all three rejected the amendment on Congressional pay raises . Virginia initially postponed its debate , but after Vermont was admitted to the Union in 1791 , the total number of states needed for ratification rose to eleven . Vermont ratified on November 3 , 1791 , approving all twelve amendments , and Virginia finally followed on December 15 , 1791 . Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson announced the adoption of the ten successfully ratified amendments on March 1 , 1792 . 
 = = Judicial interpretation = = 
 The Third Amendment is among the least cited sections of the U.S. Constitution . In the words of Encyclopedia Britannica , " as the history of the country progressed with little conflict on American soil , the amendment has had little occasion to be invoked . " As of 2015 , no major Supreme Court decision has used the amendment as its primary basis . 
 The Third Amendment has been invoked in a few instances as helping establish an implicit right to privacy in the Constitution . Justice William O. Douglas used the amendment along with others in the Bill of Rights as a partial basis for the majority decision in Griswold v. Connecticut ( 1965 ) , which cited the Third Amendment as implying a belief that an individual 's home should be free from agents of the state . 
 In one of the seven opinions in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer ( 1952 ) , Justice Robert H. Jackson cited the Third Amendment as providing evidence of the Framers ' intent to constrain executive power even during wartime : 
 " [ t ] hat military powers of the Commander in Chief were not to supersede representative government of internal affairs seems obvious from the Constitution and from elementary American history . Time out of mind , and even now in many parts of the world , a military commander can seize private housing to shelter his troops . Not so , however , in the United States , for the Third Amendment says ... [ E ] ven in war time , his seizure of needed military housing must be authorized by Congress . " 
 One of the few times a federal court was asked to invalidate a law or action on Third Amendment grounds was in Engblom v. Carey ( 1982 ) . In 1979 , prison officials in New York organized a strike ; they were evicted from their prison facility residences , which were reassigned to members of the National Guard who had temporarily taken their place as prison guards . The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled : ( 1 ) that the term owner in the Third Amendment includes tenants ( paralleling similar cases regarding the Fourth Amendment , governing search and seizure ) , ( 2 ) National Guard troops count as soldiers for the purposes of the Third Amendment , and ( 3 ) that the Third Amendment is incorporated ( that is , that it applies to the states ) by virtue of the Fourteenth Amendment . The case was remanded to the district court , which dismissed the case on the grounds that state officials could not have been aware of this interpretation . 
 In the most recent Third Amendment decision handed down by a federal court , on February 2 , 2015 , the United States District Court for the District of Nevada held in Mitchell v. City of Henderson that the Third Amendment does not apply to intrusions by municipal police officers since they are not soldiers . 
 In an earlier case , United States v. Valenzuela ( 1951 ) , the defendant asked that a federal rent @-@ control law be struck down because it was " the incubator and hatchery of swarms of bureaucrats to be quartered as storm troopers upon the people in violation of Amendment III of the United States Constitution . " The court declined his request . Later , in Jones v. United States Secretary of Defense ( 1972 ) , Army reservists unsuccessfully cited the Third Amendment as justification for refusing to march in a parade . Similar arguments in a variety of contexts have been denied in other cases . 
 = Psittacosaurus = 
 Psittacosaurus ( / <unk> / SIT @-@ ə @-@ kə @-@ SOR @-@ əs ; " parrot lizard " ) is a genus of extinct ceratopsian dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous of what is now Asia , existing between 123 @.@ 2 and 100 million years ago . It is notable for being the most species @-@ rich dinosaur genus . Up to 11 species are known , from across Mongolia , Siberia , China , and possibly Thailand . The species of Psittacosaurus were obligate bipeds at adulthood , with a high skull and a robust beak . One individual was found preserved with long filaments on the tail , similar to those of Tianyulong , and scales across the rest of the animal . Psittacosaurus probably had complex behaviours , based on the proportions and relative size of the brain . It may have been active for short periods of time during the day and night , and had well @-@ developed senses of smell and vision . 
 Psittacosaurus was one of the earliest ceratopsians , but closer to Triceratops than Yinlong . Once in its own family , Psittacosauridae , with other genera like Hongshanosaurus , it is now considered to be senior synonym of the latter and an early offshoot of the branch that led to more derived forms . The genera closely related to Psittacosaurus are all from Asia , with the exception of Aquilops , from North America . The first species was either P. lujiatunensis or closely related , and it may have given rise to later forms of Psittacosaurus . 
 Psittacosaurus is one of the most completely known dinosaur genera . Fossils of hundreds of individuals have been collected so far , including many complete skeletons . Most age classes are represented , from hatchling through to adult , which has allowed several detailed studies of Psittacosaurus growth rates and reproductive biology . The abundance of this dinosaur in the fossil record has led to the labelling of Lower Cretaceous sediments of east Asia the Psittacosaurus <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The species of Psittacosaurus vary in size and specific features of the skull and skeleton , but share the same overall body shape . The best @-@ known — P. mongoliensis — can reach 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 5 ft ) in length . The maximum adult body weight was most likely over 20 kilogrammes ( 44 lb ) in P. mongoliensis . Several species approach P. mongoliensis in size ( P. lujiatunensis , P. neimongoliensis , P. xinjiangensis ) , while others are somewhat smaller ( P. sinensis , P. meileyingensis ) . The smallest known species , P. ordosensis , is 30 % smaller than P. mongoliensis . The largest are P. lujiatunensis and P. sibiricus , although neither is significantly larger than P. mongoliensis . Psittacosaurus postcranial skeletons are more typical of a ' generic ' bipedal ornithischian . There are only four digits on the manus ( ' hand ' ) , as opposed to the five found in most other ornithischians ( including all other ceratopsians ) , while the four @-@ toed hindfoot is very similar to many other small ornithischians . 
 The skull of Psittacosaurus is highly modified compared to other ornithischian dinosaurs of its time . Extremely tall in height and short in length , the skull has an almost round profile in some species . The portion in front of the orbit ( eye socket ) is only 40 % of total skull length , shorter than any other known ornithischian . The lower jaws of psittacosaurs are characterised by a bulbous vertical ridge down the centre of each tooth . Both upper and lower jaws sport a pronounced beak , formed from the rostral and predentary bones , respectively . The bony core of the beak may have been sheathed in keratin to provide a sharp cutting surface for cropping plant material . As the generic name suggests , the short skull and beak superficially resemble those of modern parrots . Psittacosaurus skulls share several adaptations with more derived ceratopsians , such as the unique rostral bone at the tip of the upper jaw , and the flared jugal ( cheek ) bones . There is still no sign of the bony neck frill or prominent facial horns which would develop in later ceratopsians . Bony horns protrude from the skull of P. sibiricus , but these are thought to be an example of convergent evolution . 
 = = = Species characteristics = = = 
 Skulls of P. mongoliensis are flat on top , especially over the back of the skull , with a triangular depression , the antorbital fossa , on the outside surface of the maxilla ( an upper jaw bone ) . A flange is present on the lower edge of the dentary ( the tooth @-@ bearing bone of the lower jaw ) , although it is not as prominent as in P. meileyingensis or P. major ( = P. lujiatunensis ) . P. mongoliensis is among the largest known species . The skull of the type specimen , which is probably a juvenile , is 15 @.@ 2 centimetres ( 6 in ) long , and the associated femur is 16 @.@ 2 centimetres ( 6 @.@ 4 in ) in length . Other specimens are larger , with the largest documented femur measuring about 21 centimetres ( 8 @.@ 25 in ) long . 
 P. sinensis is readily distinguished from all other species by numerous features of the skull . Adult skulls are smaller than those of P. mongoliensis and have less teeth . Uniquely , the premaxillary bone contacts the jugal ( cheek ) bone on the outside of the skull . The jugals flare out sideways , forming ' horns ' proportionally wider than in any other known Psittacosaurus species except P. sibiricus and P. lujiatunensis . Because of the flared cheeks , the skull is actually wider than it is long . A smaller ' horn ' is present behind the eye , at the contact of the jugal and postorbital bones , a feature also seen in P. sibiricus . The mandible ( lower jaw ) lacks the hollow opening , or fenestra , seen in other species , and the entire lower jaw is bowed outwards , giving the animal the appearance of an <unk> . The skull of an adult P. sinensis can reach 11 @.@ 5 centimeters ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) in length . 
 P. sibiricus is the largest known species of Psittacosaurus . The skull of the type specimen is 20 @.@ 7 centimetres long ( 8 @.@ 25 in ) , and the femur is 22 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 75 in ) in length . It is also distinguished by its neck frill , which is longer than any other species , at 15 to 18 % of skull length . A very striking feature of P. sibiricus is the number of ' horns ' around the eyes , with three prominences on each postorbital , and one in front of each eye , on the palpebral bones . Similar horns found on the postorbital of P. sinensis are not as pronounced but may be homologous . The jugal has extremely prominent ' horns ' and may contact the premaxilla , both features also seen in the possibly related P. sinensis . There is a flange on the dentary of the lower jaw , similar to P. mongoliensis , P. meileyingensis , and P. sattayaraki . It can be told apart from the other species of Psittacosaurus by a combination of 32 anatomical features , including six that are unique to the species . Most of these are skull details , but one unusual feature is the presence of 23 vertebrae between the skull and pelvis , unlike the 21 or 22 in the other species where the vertebrae are known . 
 P. xinjiangensis is distinguished by a prominent jugal ' horn ' that is flattened on the front end , as well as some features of the teeth . The ilium , one of the three bones of the pelvis , also bears a characteristically long bony process behind the acetabulum ( hip socket ) . An adult femur has a published length of about 16 centimetres ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) . P. meileyingensis has the shortest snout and neck frill of any species , making the skull nearly circular in profile . The orbit ( eye socket ) is roughly triangular , and there is a prominent flange on the lower edge of the dentary , a feature also seen in specimens of P. lujiatunensis , and to a lesser degree in P. mongoliensis , P. sattayaraki , and P. sibiricus . The complete type skull , probably adult , is 13 @.@ 7 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) long . The dentary of P. sattayaraki has a flange similar to that found in P. mongoliensis , P. sibiricus , P. lujiatunensis and P. meileyingensis , although it is less pronounced than in those species . The material appears to be roughly the same size as P. sinensis . The frontal bone of P. neimongoliensis is distinctly narrow compared to that of other species , resulting in a narrower skull overall . The ischium bone of the pelvis is also longer than the femur , which differs from other species in which these bones are known . The type specimen has a skull length of 13 @.@ 2 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 2 in ) and a femoral length of 13 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) , but is not fully grown . An adult P. neimongoliensis was probably smaller than P. mongoliensis , with a proportionately longer skull and tail . P. ordosensis can be distinguished by numerous features of the jugals , which have very prominent ' horns ' . It is also the smallest known species . One adult skull measures only 9 @.@ 5 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 75 in ) in length . 
 The type skull of P. lujiatunensis measures 19 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) in length , while the largest known skull is 20 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 8 in ) long , so this species was similar in size to P. mongoliensis and P. sibiricus . There is a fossa in front of the eye , as in P. mongoliensis . The jugal bones flare outwards widely , making the skull wider than it is long , as seen in P. sinensis . Widely flared jugals are also found in P. sibiricus . Overall , this species is thought to exhibit several primitive characteristics compared to other species of Psittacosaurus , which is consistent with its greater geological age . P. <unk> was small @-@ bodied ( 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long ) and differs from other species of Psittacosaurus by " significant , but structurally minor , details . " These include the presence of a pyramidal horn on the postorbital , a depression on the postorbital @-@ jugal contact , and enamel thickness . P. mongoliensis was a contemporary . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The integument , or body covering , of Psittacosaurus is known from a Chinese specimen , which most likely comes from the Yixian Formation of Liaoning Province , China . The specimen , which is not yet assigned to any particular species , was illegally exported from China , in violation of Chinese law , but was purchased by a German museum . It was described while awaiting repatriation . 
 Most of the body was covered in scales . Larger scales were arranged in irregular patterns , with numerous smaller scales occupying the spaces between them , similarly to skin impressions known from other ceratopsians , such as Chasmosaurus . A series of what appear to be hollow , tubular bristle @-@ like structures , approximately 16 centimetres ( 6 @.@ 4 in ) long , were also preserved , arranged in a row down the dorsal ( upper ) surface of the tail . These were confirmed by the authors , as well as an independent scientist , to not represent plant material . The bristle @-@ like integumentary structures extend into the skin nearly to the vertebrae , and were likely circular or tubular before being preserved . Under ultraviolet light , they gave off the same fluorescence as scales , providing the possibility they were keratinized . As the authors of the study said , " At present , there is no convincing evidence which shows these structures to be homologous to the structurally different integumentary filaments of theropod dinosaurs " , however , they stated that all other feathery integument from the Yixian Formation is indeed feathers . 
 In 2008 , another study was published describing the integument and dermis of Psittacosaurus sp . , from two different specimens . The skin remains could be observed by a natural cross @-@ section to compare them to modern animals , showing that dinosaurian dermal layers evolved in parallel to those in many other large vertebrates . The collagen tissue fibres in Psittacosaurus are complex , virtually identical to all other vertebrates in structure but having an exceptional thickness of about forty layers . As the sections of dermis were collected from the abdomen , where the scales were eroded , the tissue may have assisted with the musculature of the stomach and intestines and offered protection against predators . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 The brain of P. lujiatunensis is well known ; a study on the anatomy and functionality of three specimens was published in 2007 . Until the study , it was generally thought the brain of Psittacosaurus would have been similar to other ceratopsians with low <unk> <unk> . Russell and Zhao ( 1996 ) believed " the small brain size of psittacosaurs implies a very restrictive behavioural repertoire relative to that of modern mammals of similar body size " . However , the 2007 study dispelled this theory when it found the brain to be more advanced . There is generally negative allometry for brain size with development in vertebrates , but this was shown not to be true in Psittacosaurus . The EQ score for P. lujiatunensis is 0 @.@ 31 , significantly higher than genera such as Triceratops . A higher EQ correlates with more complex behaviour , and various dinosaurs have high EQs , similar to birds , which range from 0 @.@ 36 to 2 @.@ 98 . Thus , Psittacosaurus behaviour could have been as complex as that in Tyrannosaurus , whose EQ ranges from 0 @.@ 30 to 0 @.@ 38 . Behaviours influenced by high EQs include nest @-@ building , parental care , and bird @-@ like sleeping , some of which have been shown to be present in Psittacosaurus . 
 The senses of Psittacosaurus can be inferred from the endocast . Large olfactory bulbs are present , indicating the genus had an acute sense of smell . The size of these bulbs are comparable to large predatory theropods , although they likely evolved to avoid predators instead of to seek out prey . The sclerotic rings in reptiles directly show the size of the eyeball . The rings are not well preserved in Psittacosaurus , with one individual preserving them likely contracted postmortem , but if they are similar to those of Protoceratops , Psittacosaurus would have had large eyes and acute vision . The curvature of the semicircular canals is related to the agility of reptiles , and the large curved canals in Psittacosaurus show that the genus was much more agile than later ceratopsians . Comparisons between the scleral rings of Psittacosaurus and modern birds and reptiles suggest that it may have been cathemeral , active throughout the day and for short intervals at night . 
 Ford and Martin ( 2010 ) proposed that Psittacosaurus was semi @-@ aquatic , swimming with its tail like a crocodile , and paddling and kicking . They based their interpretation on evidence including : the lacustrine ( lake ) depositional setting of many specimens ; the position of the nostrils and eyes ; interpretations of the motions of the arms and legs ; tails with long chevrons ( and with the bristles on the tail interpreted as possibly skin @-@ covered , forming a fin ) , providing a propulsive surface ; and the presence of gastroliths , interpreted as ballast . They further suggested that some species of Psittacosaurus were more terrestrial than others . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 <unk> had self @-@ sharpening teeth that would have been useful for cropping and slicing tough plant material . Unlike later ceratopsians , they did not have teeth suitable for grinding or chewing their food . Instead , they used gastroliths — stones swallowed to wear down food as it passed through the digestive system . Sometimes numbering more than fifty , these stones are occasionally found in the abdominal cavities of psittacosaurs , and may have been stored in a gizzard , as in modern birds . 
 Unlike many other dinosaurs , psittacosaurs had <unk> skulls : that is to say , the upper and lower jaws each behaved as a single unit , without internal joints . The only joint was the jaw joint itself , and psittacosaurs could slide their lower jaws forward and backward on the joint , permitting a shearing action . Unlike most ceratopsians , their beaks did not form curved tips , but were instead rounded and flattened . If the jaws were aligned , the beaks could be used to crop objects , but if the lower jaw was retracted so that the lower beak was inside the upper beak , the jaws may have served a <unk> function . A <unk> or seed @-@ rich diet would also match well with the gastroliths often seen in well @-@ preserved psittacosaur skeletons . 
 = = = Limb function = = = 
 Studies by Phil Senter in 2007 conducted on P. neimongoliensis and P. mongoliensis concluded that the forelimbs of these taxa ( and likely those of other Psittacosaurus species ) were too short ( only about 58 % as long as the hindlimbs ) to reach the ground , and their range of motion indicates they could neither be pronated nor generate propulsive force for locomotion , suggesting that Psittacosaurus was entirely bipedal . The forelimbs were also too short to be used in digging or bringing food to the mouth , and Senter suggested that if Psittacosaurus needed to dig depressions in the ground it may have used its hindlimbs instead . The forelimbs could be used for two @-@ handed grasping of objects or scratching the body , but due to their extremely limited flexibility and reach , they could have only been used to grasp objects very close to the belly or sides of the animal and could have scratched only the belly , flank and knees . Even though the hands could not reach the mouth , Psittacosaurus could have still used them to carry nesting material or food to a desired location . 
 However , Psittacosaurus may not have been entirely bipedal for its entire lifespan . Taking sections from the limb bones of 16 specimens of Psittacosaurus , ranging in age from less than a year old to ten @-@ year old adults , Qi Zhao from the University of Bristol found that Psittacosaurus was probably secondarily bipedal . The infants ' front limbs grew at faster rates than the hind limbs at between birth and three years of age . At the age of between four and six years , arm growth slowed and leg growth accelerated as the animal became mature . At this stage , <unk> would switch to a bipedal stance . These findings further reveal that the ancestor of Psittacosaurus was likely quadrupedal and eventually gained the ability to become bipedal as it evolved , with the young retaining the quadrupedal gait of the ancestor in question . These findings also lead to the hypothesis that many such dinosaur families may have evolved along this path at some point in their evolution . 
 = = = Growth rate = = = 
 Several juvenile Psittacosaurus have been found . The smallest is a P. mongoliensis hatchling conserved in the American Museum of Natural History ( AMNH ) , which is only 11 to 13 centimetres ( 4 – 5 inches ) long , with a skull 2 @.@ 8 centimetres ( 1 in ) in length . Another hatchling skull at the AMNH is only 4 @.@ 6 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 8 inches ) long . Both specimens are from Mongolia . Juveniles discovered in the Yixian Formation are approximately the same age as the larger AMNH specimen . 
 A histological examination of P. mongoliensis has determined the growth rate of these animals . The smallest specimens in the study were estimated at three years old and less than 1 kilogramme ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) , while the largest were nine years old and weighed almost 20 kilogrammes ( 44 lb ) . This indicates relatively rapid growth compared to most reptiles and marsupial mammals , but slower than modern birds and placental mammals . An age determination study performed on the fossilized remains of P. mongoliensis by using growth ring counts suggest that the longevity of the basal ceratopsian was 10 to 11 years . 
 = = = Gregarious juveniles = = = 
 The find of a herd of six Psittacosaurus individuals killed and buried by a volcanic mudflow indicates the presence of at least two age groups from two distinct clutches gathered together . This find has been taken as evidence for group fidelity and gregariousness extending beyond the nest ; the earliest such evidence for any ceratopsian . Even very young psittacosaur teeth appear worn , indicating they chewed their own food and may have been precocial . Another juvenile @-@ only cluster shows that specimens of different ages grouped together . These juveniles may have associated together as a close knit , mixed @-@ age herd either for protection , to enhance their foraging , or as putative helpers at the parental nest . There is no evidence for parental care . 
 In 2004 , a specimen found in the Yixian Formation was claimed as evidence for parental care in dinosaurs . The specimen <unk> <unk> consists of 34 articulated juvenile Psittacosaurus skeletons , closely associated with the skull of an adult . The juveniles , all approximately the same age , are intertwined in a group underneath the adult , although all 34 skulls are positioned above the mass of bodies , as they would have been in life . This suggests that the animals were alive at the time of burial , which must have been extremely rapid , perhaps due to the collapse of a burrow . However , a 2013 paper pointed out that the adult specimen did not belong with the nest , its skull having no sedimentary connection to the main slab where the juveniles occurred , but had been glued onto it . This artificial association led to the inference that the skull belonged to an individual , possibly a " mother " , that was providing parental care for the 34 juveniles – a claim that is unfounded . Furthermore , the adult was also shown to be six years old , whereas histological studies have shown P. mongoliensis was unable to breed until it reached ten years of age . It is also unlikely that a single female would have so many offspring at one time . 
 A 2014 analysis of the same specimen concluded that the proximity of the six @-@ year @-@ old specimen to the post @-@ hatchlings may indicate post @-@ hatchling cooperation , making the six @-@ year @-@ old specimen a possible caretaker . Such behaviour is also found in cooperative breeding modern birds . 
 = = = Pathology = = = 
 Out of the hundreds of known Psittacosaurus specimens , only one has been described to possess any sort of pathology . The specimen in question , consisting of a complete adult skeleton and tentatively assigned to P. mongoliensis , was found in the lower beds of the Yixian Formation . There is no sign of a bone fracture , but very clear signs of an infection can be seen near the midpoint of the right fibula . The bone exhibits a large round pit , evidence of necrosis due to a lack of blood supply to the region . The pit is surrounded by a massive amount of swelling along the lower third of the bone . This large amount of bone deposited around the injury indicates that the animal survived for quite a while despite the injury and subsequent infection . As <unk> were bipedal animals , a similar injury to a weight bearing bone in the leg would most likely have been fatal . Unlike the femur and tibia , the fibula is not a weight @-@ bearing bone , so this animal would still have been able to walk to some extent . The source of the injury remains unknown . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
 Another fossil from the Yixian Formation provides direct evidence of Psittacosaurus as a prey animal . One skeleton of <unk> robustus , a large <unk> mammal , is preserved with the remains of a juvenile Psittacosaurus in its abdominal cavity . Several of the juvenile 's bones are still articulated , indicating that the carnivorous mammal swallowed its prey in large chunks . This specimen is notable in that it is the first known example of Mesozoic mammals preying on live dinosaurs . Heavy predation on juvenile Psittacosaurus may have resulted in R @-@ selection , the production of more numerous offspring to counteract this loss . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Psittacosaurus is known from hundreds of individual specimens , of which over 75 have been assigned to the type species , P. mongoliensis . All Psittacosaurus fossils discovered so far have been found in Early Cretaceous sediments in Asia , from southern Siberia to northern China , and possibly as far south as Thailand . The most common age of geologic formations bearing Psittacosaurus fossils is from the late Barremian through Albian stages of the Early Cretaceous , or approximately 123 to 100 mya ( million years ago ) . Many terrestrial sedimentary formations of this age in Mongolia and northern China have produced fossils of Psittacosaurus , leading to the definition of this time period in the region as the Psittacosaurus <unk> . 
 The earliest known species is P. lujiatunensis , found in the lowest beds of the Yixian Formation . Over 200 specimens attributed to this genus have been recovered from these and other beds of the Yixian , the age of which is the subject of much debate . Although many early studies using radiometric dating put the Yixian in the Jurassic Period , tens of millions of years outside of the expected temporal range of Psittacosaurus , most recent work dates it to the Early Cretaceous . Using argon @-@ argon dating , a team of Chinese scientists dated the lowest beds in the formation to about 128 mya , and the highest to approximately 122 mya . A more recent Chinese study , using uranium @-@ lead dating , suggests that the lower beds are younger , approximately 123 @.@ 2 mya , while agreeing with an age of 122 mya for the upper beds . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 Psittacosaurus was first described as a genus in 1923 , by Henry Fairfield Osborn . He named the type species P. mongoliensis , for the location of its discovery in Mongolia , placing it in the new family Psittacosauridae . Remains of this dinosaur were first discovered the year before , on the third American Museum of Natural History expedition to the Gobi Desert of Mongolia , when one of the expedition 's drivers found the type specimen ( AMNH <unk> ) , which preserves a nearly complete skull , as well as a post cranial skeleton lacking sections of the limbs . This same expedition turned up the remains of many other famous Mongolian dinosaurs , including Protoceratops , Oviraptor , and Velociraptor . Many later expeditions by various combinations of Mongolian , Russian , Chinese , American , Polish , Japanese , and Canadian paleontologists also recovered specimens from throughout Mongolia and northern China . In these areas , Psittacosaurus mongoliensis fossils are found in most sedimentary strata dating to the Aptian to Albian stages of the Early Cretaceous Period , or approximately 125 to 100 Ma ( million years ago ) . Fossil remains of over 75 individuals have been recovered , including nearly 20 complete skeletons with skulls . Individuals of all ages are known , from hatchlings less than 13 centimetres ( 5 in ) long , to very old adults reaching nearly 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 5 ft ) in length . 
 When describing Psittacosaurus mongoliensis in 1923 , Osborn also gave the name Protiguanodon mongoliense to another skeleton found nearby , believing it to represent an ancestor of the ornithopod Iguanodon , in the new subfamily <unk> . Protiguanodon mongoliense , AMNH <unk> , measured 1 @.@ 35 m ( 4 @.@ 4 ft ) long , and was known from much of the skeleton , although at the time of description the neck vertebrae were still covered by matrix . Osborn diagnosed his taxa on the basis of features of the teeth and snout . However , modern taxonomists find these features insignificant , instead placing Protiguanodon mongoliense within Psittacosaurus mongoliensis . When the skeleton was prepared further , it became clear that it was nearly identical to Psittacosaurus mongoliensis . In 1958 , Chinese paleontologist Yang <unk> ( better known as C. C. Young ) renamed the skeleton Psittacosaurus <unk> . Today the specimen is generally referred to as the species Psittacosaurus mongoliensis and the names Protiguanodon mongoliense and Psittacosaurus <unk> are considered junior synonyms of the name Psittacosaurus mongoliensis , which was coined first . 
 In 1931 , C. C. Young named a new species of Psittacosaurus for a partial skull discovered in Inner Mongolia , China . The skull was named P. osborni after Henry Fairfield Osborn . The validity of this species is now considered equivocal . Sereno ( 1990 ) considered it a synonym of P. mongoliensis , which is found in nearby strata of the same age . You and Dodson ( 2004 ) listed it as valid in a table , but not in their text . In a 2010 review , Sereno again regarded P. osborni as a synonym of P. mongoliensis , but noted it was tentative because of the presence of multiple valid psittacosaur species in Inner Mongolia . Young also described the species P. <unk> in the same 1931 report which contained P. osborni . It is based on several skull fragments . He later synonymised the two species under the name P. osborni . You and Dodson ( 2004 ) followed this in a table , but Sereno regarded both species as synonyms of P. mongoliensis ; a table in the latter reported P. <unk> as a nomen dubium , however . The front half of a skull from <unk> County in Inner Mongolia was described as Psittacosaurus guyangensis in 1983 . <unk> postcranial remains representing multiple individuals were found at the same locality and were assigned to the species . While it differs from the type specimen of P. mongoliensis , it falls within the range of individual variation seen in other specimens of that species and is no longer recognised as a valid species . You and Dodson ( 2004 ) included P. guyangensis in a table of valid taxa , but did not include it as such in their text . 
 = = = Assigned species = = = 
 Seventeen species have been referred to the genus Psittacosaurus , although only nine to eleven are considered valid today . This is the highest number of valid species currently assigned to any single dinosaur genus ( not including birds ) . In contrast , most other dinosaur genera are monospecific , containing only a single known species . The difference is most likely due to artifacts of the fossilisation process . While Psittacosaurus is known from hundreds of fossil specimens , most other dinosaur species are known from far fewer , and many are represented by only a single specimen . With a very high sample size , the diversity of Psittacosaurus can be analysed more completely than that of most dinosaur genera , resulting in the recognition of more species . Most extant animal genera are represented by multiple species , suggesting that this may have been the case for extinct dinosaur genera as well , although most of these species may not have been preserved . In addition , most dinosaurs are known solely from bones and can only be evaluated from a morphological standpoint , whereas extant species often have very similar skeletal morphology but differ in other ways which would not normally be preserved in the fossil record , such as behaviour , or colouration . Therefore , actual species diversity may be much higher than currently recognised in this and other dinosaur genera . As some species are known only from skull material , species of Psittacosaurus are primarily distinguished by features of the skull and teeth . Several species can be recognised by features of the pelvis as well . 
 In the 1950s , a new Chinese species of Psittacosaurus was found in the Aptian @-@ Albian <unk> Formation of Shandong Province , southeast of Beijing . C. C. Young called it P. sinensis to differentiate it from P. mongoliensis , which had originally been found in Mongolia . Fossils of more than twenty individuals have since been recovered , including several complete skulls and skeletons , making this the most well @-@ known species after P. mongoliensis . Chinese paleontologist Zhao Xijin named a new species after his mentor , C. C. Young , in 1962 . However , the type specimen of P. youngi ( a partial skeleton and skull ) was discovered in the same rocks as P. sinensis and appears to be very similar , so P. youngi is generally considered a junior synonym of that better @-@ known species . As with P. guyangensis and P. osborni , You and Dodson ( 2004 ) listed it as valid in a table , but not in their text . 
 In 1988 , Zhao and American paleontologist Paul Sereno described P. xinjiangensis , named after the Xinjiang Autonomous Region in which it was discovered . Several individuals of different ages were discovered in the early 1970s by Chinese paleontologists and described by Sereno and Zhao , although the holotype and most complete skeleton belonged to a juvenile . An adult skeleton was later discovered at a different locality in Xinjiang . These specimens come from the upper part of the <unk> Group , which is regarded as Aptian @-@ Albian in age . A second species described in 1988 by Sereno and Zhao , along with two Chinese colleagues , was P. meileyingensis from the Jiufotang Formation , near the town of <unk> , Liaoning Province , northeastern China . This species is known from four fossil skulls , one associated with some skeletal material , found in 1973 by Chinese scientists . The age of the Jiufotang in Liaoning is unknown , but in the neighbouring province of Inner Mongolia , it has been dated to about 110 Ma , in the Albian stage of the Early Cretaceous . 
 French paleontologist Eric Buffetaut and a Thai colleague , <unk> <unk> , described a partial upper and lower jaw from the Aptian @-@ Albian <unk> <unk> Formation of Thailand in 1992 , giving it the name Psittacosaurus sattayaraki . In 2000 , Sereno questioned the validity of this species , citing its eroded and fragmentary nature , and noted an absence of features characteristic of the genus Psittacosaurus . However , in 2002 the original authors published new images of the fossil which seem to show teeth in the lower jaw that exhibit the bulbous vertical ridge characteristic of psittacosaurs . Other authors have also defended its validity , while some continue to regard it as dubious . Sereno ( 2010 ) proposed that the best assignment for the type material may be Ceratopsia incertae sedis . 
 Two new species of Psittacosaurus were described by Canadian Dale Russell and Zhao in 1996 . The first was named P. neimongoliensis , after the Mandarin Chinese name for Inner Mongolia . It is based on a nearly complete fossil skeleton , including most of the skull , found in the Early Cretaceous <unk> Formation with seven other individuals . Russell and Zhao also named P. ordosensis in 1996 , after the Ordos prefecture of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region . The type specimen is a nearly complete skeleton , including part of the skull . However , only the skull , lower jaw , and foot have been described . Three other specimens were referred to this species but remain undescribed . Like P. neimongoliensis , this species was discovered in the <unk> Formation . Sereno ( 2010 ) found the species as described to be indistinguishable from P. sinensis , another small species , but suggested that additional study of P. ordosensis might reveal diagnostic features . He provisionally designated P. ordosensis a nomen dubium . 
 Xu Xing , another Chinese paleontologist , named a new species of Psittacosaurus in 1997 , based on a complete skull with associated vertebrae and a forelimb . This material was recovered in Gansu Province , near the border with Inner Mongolia . This species is named P. <unk> after the nearby mountain called <unk> ( Horse Mane Mountain ) and has been described in a preliminary manner . Unfortunately , the skull was damaged while in the care of the Chinese Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology ( IVPP ) , and several fragments have been lost , including all of the teeth . The remains were found in the Lower <unk> Formation , which have not been precisely dated , although there is some evidence that they were deposited in the late Barremian through Aptian stages . Sereno suggested in 2000 that P. <unk> was a nomen dubium , with no unique features that separate it from any other species of Psittacosaurus . However , more recent authors have noted that it can be distinguished by its proportionally long snout compared to other species of Psittacosaurus , as well as a prominent bony protuberance , pointing outwards and downwards , on the maxilla of the upper jaw . The maxillary protuberance is also now missing . Other features originally used to distinguish the species have been recognised as the results of the deformation of the skull after fossilisation . Sereno ( 2010 ) remained unconvinced of its validity . 
 Beginning in the 1950s , Russian paleontologists began excavating Psittacosaurus remains at a locality near the village of <unk> in the oblast of <unk> in Siberia . Two other nearby localities were explored in the 1990s , one of which produced several complete skeletons . This species was named P. sibiricus in 2000 in a scientific paper written by five Russian paleontologists , but credit for the name is officially given to two of those authors , Alexei <unk> and Alexander Averianov . The remains were not completely described until 2006 . Two nearly complete , articulated skeletons and a variety of disarticulated material from other individuals of all ages are known from the <unk> Formation of Siberia , which ranges from the Aptian to Albian stages of the Early Cretaceous . 
 P. lujiatunensis , named in 2006 by Chinese paleontologist Zhou Chang @-@ Fu and three Chinese colleagues , is one of the oldest known species , based on four skulls from the lower beds of Yixian Formation , near the village of <unk> . While this bed has been dated differently by different authors , from 128 Ma in the Barremian stage , to 125 Ma in the earliest Aptian , revised dating methods have shown them to be about 123 million years old . P. lujiatunensis was contemporaneous with another <unk> species , Hongshanosaurus houi , which was found in the same beds . It is potentially synonymous with H. houi ; Sereno ( 2010 ) , who proposed that Hongshanosaurus is a synonym of Psittacosaurus , opted to leave P. lujiatunensis and H. houi separate species due to the inadequacies of the latter 's type specimen . One nearly complete skeleton of P. lujiatunensis from the same lower beds of the Yixian Formation had previously been classified in its own species , Psittacosaurus major , named for the large size of its skull by Sereno , Zhao and two colleagues in 2007 . You and colleagues described an additional specimen and concurred that it was distinct from P. lujiatunensis . P. major was originally characterised by a proportionately large skull , which was 39 % of the length of its torso , compared to 30 % in P. mongoliensis , and other features . However , a 2013 study utilising morphometric analysis showed that the supposed differences between P. lujiatunensis and P. major were due to differences in preservation and crushing . The study concluded that both represented a single species . 
 A third species of <unk> psittacosaur , the first to be named , was described as Hongshanosaurus houi in 2003 . The generic name Hongshanosaurus was derived from the Mandarin Chinese words <unk> ( hóng : " red " ) and <unk> ( <unk> : " hill " ) , as well as the Greek word sauros ( " lizard " ) . This name refers to the ancient <unk> culture of northeastern China , who lived in the same general area in which the fossil skull of Hongshanosaurus was found . The type and only named species , H. houi , honours Hou <unk> , a professor at the IVPP in Beijing , who curated the specimen . Genus and species were both named by Chinese paleontologists You <unk> , Xu Xing , and Wang Xiaolin in 2003 . Sereno ( 2010 ) regarded its distinct proportions as due to crushing and compression of the Hongshanosaurus skulls . He regarded Hongshanosaurus as a junior synonym of Psittacosaurus , and potentially the same as P. lujiatunensis . He did not <unk> the two species because of difficulties with the holotype skull of H. houi , instead considering new combination P. houi a nomen dubium within Psittacosaurus . Sereno 's hypothesis was supported by a morphometric study in 2013 , which found P. houi and P. lujiatunensis to be synonymous . While P. houi is the oldest available name , the researchers argued that because the type specimen of P. lujiatunensis was better preserved , the correct name for this species should be P. lujiatunensis rather than P. houi , which would normally have priority . 
 P. <unk> is named for the region it was found in 2001 , and first described by Sereno , Zhao and Lin in 2010 . It is known from a skull and partial articulated skeleton with gastroliths . Many other specimens either cannot be determined to belong to any particular species , or have not yet been assigned to one . These specimens are generally all referred to as Psittacosaurus sp . , although it is not assumed that they belong to the same species . More than 200 specimens of Psittacosaurus have been found in the Yixian Formation , which is famous for its fossils of feathered dinosaurs . The vast majority of these have not been assigned to any published species , although many are very well preserved and some have already been partially described . Nearly 100 Psittacosaurus skeletons were excavated in Mongolia during the summers of 2005 and 2006 by a team led by Mongolian paleontologist <unk> <unk> and American Jack Horner from the Museum of the Rockies in Montana . Although only P. mongoliensis has been described from Mongolia so far , these specimens are still in preparation and have not yet been assigned to a species . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Psittacosaurus is the type genus of the family Psittacosauridae , which was also named by Osborn in 1923 . <unk> were basal to almost all known ceratopsians except Yinlong and perhaps the <unk> . While Psittacosauridae was an early branch of the ceratopsian family tree , Psittacosaurus itself was probably not directly ancestral to any other groups of ceratopsians . All other ceratopsians retained the fifth digit of the hand , a <unk> or primitive trait , whereas all species of Psittacosaurus had only four digits on the hand . In addition , the antorbital fenestra , an opening in the skull between the eye socket and nostril , was lost during the evolution of Psittacosauridae , but is still found in most other ceratopsians and in fact most other archosaurs . It is considered highly unlikely that the fifth digit or antorbital fenestra would evolve a second time . 
 In 2014 , the describers of a new taxon of basal ceratopsian published a phylogenetic analysis encompassing Psittacosaurus . The below cladogram is from their analysis , placing the genus as one of the most primitive ceratopsians . The authors ( Farke et al . ) noted that all taxa outside of Leptoceratopsidae and Coronosauria with the exception of their genus Aquilops are from Asia , meaning the group likely originated there . 
 Although many species of Psittacosaurus have been named , their relationships to each other have not yet been fully explored and no scientific consensus exists on the subject . Several phylogenetic analyses have been published , with the most detailed being those by Alexander Averianov and colleagues in 2006 , Hai @-@ Lu You and colleagues in 2008 , and Paul Sereno in 2010 . The middle one is shown below . 
 In 2005 , Zhou and colleagues suggested that P. lujiatunensis is basal to all other species . This would be consistent with its earlier appearance in the fossil record . 
 = Wait & See ( Risk ) = 
 " Wait & See ( Risk ) " ( stylized as Wait & See ~ <unk> ~ ) is a song recorded by Japanese – American recording artist Utada Hikaru for her third studio and second Japanese language album , Distance ( 2000 ) . It premiered on April 19 , 2000 as the second single from the album in Japan . It was written and composed by Utada , whilst production and arrangement was handled by Utada and American duo Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis . The single also included the two B @-@ side track 's ; " Hayatochiri " and " Fly Me to the Moon ( In Other Words ) , to which the former song appeared on the parent album . Musically , " Wait & See ( Risk ) " is an R & B song , influenced by dance @-@ pop and rock . 
 Upon its release , the track garnered positive reviews from music critics . Many critics highlighted the track as one of Utada 's best singles , and commended the production and composition . It was also successful in Japan , peaking at number one on both the Oricon Singles Chart and Tokyo Broadcasting System 's ( TBS ) Count Down TV singles chart . It was certified million by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of one million units , and is amongst one of the best selling singles in Japan . An accompanying music video was shot by Wataru Takeishi ; it features Utada driving through Shibuya , Tokyo on a futuristic hover – cycle , with inter cut scenes of her dancing . It was performed on some of her concert tours , including the Bohemian Summer ( 2000 ) and Utada United tours ( 2006 ) . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Wait & See ( Risk ) " was written and composed by Utada , whilst production and arrangement was handled by Utada and American duo Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis . It was the second time Utada worked with Jam and Lewis , and not with her father Teruzane Utada and Miyake Akira . The song included live instrumentation by Xavier Smith ( drum machine ) and Dave Barry ( bass and acoustic guitar ) , whilst Jam and Lewis incorporated synthesizers and keyboards . The song was recorded and mixed by Steve Hodge , <unk> Mitsuhiro , and Ugajin Masaaki in 2000 at Flyte Tyme Studios , Minneapolis , Minnesota , and mixed at Flyte Tyme , Edina , Minnesota . It premiered on April 19 , 2000 as the second single from Utada 's third studio and second Japanese language album , Distance ( 2001 ) in Japan . Since then , the song has been remastered and re @-@ released twice ; the first on April 1 , 2004 , and the second time on December 9 , 2014 for Utada 's first greatest hits album Utada Hikaru Single Collection Vol . 1 ( 2003 ) . 
 The single also included the two B @-@ side tracks ; " Hayatochiri " and " Fly Me to the Moon ( In Other Words ) " . The original version of " Hayatochiri " appears on the single , whilst a remixed version by Utada appeared on Distance . " Fly Me to the Moon ( In Other Words ) " is a cover version that was originally written and performed by Bart Howard and Kaye Ballard in 1954 ; a second cover version sung by Utada appeared eight years later on her single " Kiss & Cry " / " Beautiful World " . The maxi CD of the single contains all three new recordings , plus a remix by Baton Girl and instrumental version of " Wait & See ( Risk ) " . The cover artwork of the single featured four images of Utada in front of a brown backdrop , two of which are transparent . The DVD single was released on June 30 , 2000 , which included new artwork of Utada in the speed bike , and the music video and the behind the scenes video . Musically , " Wait & See " is an R & B song , influenced by rock and dance @-@ pop . Rock musician and music journalist David Bertrand Wilson had reviewed the parent album , and labelled it a " bouncy dance track " . Kano , editor in chief for Rockin 'On Japan magazine noted elements of R & B music through the song 's composition . When a staff editor from CD Journal reviewed Utada 's first greatest hits album , Utada Hikaru Single Collection Vol . 1 ( 2004 ) , he labeled the composition as " urban " and " speedy " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Wait & See ( Risk ) " received positive reviews from most music critics . Nagasawa <unk> from <unk> selected the song as one of the album 's best tracks . Editor in chief for Rockin 'On Japan magazine Kano commended the " excellent " composition of the song , and the " innovative " production by Jam and Lewis . AllMusic 's Ian Martin praised Jam and Lewis ' involvement , saying that " providing a stark contrast to the cheap , tinny sound that characterized much Japanese pop of the previous decade , with " Wait & See " and " Addicted to You " both featuring the production talents of Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis . " A staff reviewer from Yahoo ! GeoCities was positive in their review , whom highlighted the single as one of the best tracks on the album . 
 Conversely , rock musician and music journalist , David Bertrand Wilson , had reviewed the parent album with journalist John Alroy , and gave it a mixed review ; whilst they praised the composition , they felt its production was " distressingly drab " . A staff review from CD Journal discussed Utada 's compilation Utada Hikaru Single Collection Vol . 1 , and said although the vocal delivery " floats " and is " basic " , it molded into one of Utada 's " masterpieces " . At the 15th Japan Gold Disc Awards , Utada won the Song of the Year award for " Wait & See ( Risk ) " ; she had also won two same awards that year for her singles " For You " and " Time Limit " . In December 2015 , in honor of Utada 's comeback into the music business , Japanese website Goo.ne.jp hosted a poll for fans to rank their favourite songs by Utada out of 25 positions ; the poll was held in only twenty @-@ four hours , and thousands submitted their votes . As a result , " Wait & See ( Risk ) " was ranked at number 10 with 40 votes in total . 
 = = Commercial response = = 
 Commercially , " Wait & See ( Risk ) " was a success in Japan . It became her third single to debut at number one on the Oricon Singles Chart , with over 804 @,@ 570 units sold in its first week . Its first week sales made it the 13th highest on Oricon Database , her second single behind " Addicted to You " with 1 @.@ 067 million first week units , and the only female artist to occupy the top twenty with three entries . It stayed at number one for a sole week , and spent a total of 21 weeks on that chart . By the end of 2000 , the single was ranked at number three on Oricon 's Annual 2000 chart ; it sold 1 @,@ 662 @,@ 060 units by the end of the year . This became Utada 's highest entry in that annual chart , the highest selling female recording artist based on single sales , and made " Wait & See ( Risk ) " the highest selling single of 2000 by a female recording artist . The single was <unk> million by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of one million units . 
 The single debuted at number one on Tokyo Broadcasting System 's ( TBS ) Count Down TV chart during the chart week of April 29 , 2000 , her fifth consecutive single to do so . The single stayed in the chart for 20 weeks , and was ranked at number four on their 2000 Annual Chart . The B @-@ side track , " Fly Me to the Moon ( In Other Words ) " , debuted at number 22 during the chart week of May 20 , 2000 . It slipped to number 87 the following week , and was present for two weeks . According to Oricon Style database , the single is Utada 's second highest selling single , and is currently ranked by Music TV Program as the fiftieth best selling single in Japanese music history , her third highest entry behind " Addicted to You " and " Automatic / Time Will Tell " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video was directed by Wataru Takeishi . The video opens with Utada entering a warehouse , and lifts a tarp off a hover cycle . As the camera pans away from the bike , Utada sits down and starts the bike . The first verse opens with Utada singing to the camera in a warehouse , whilst intercut scenes have her driving throughout Shibuya , Japan . As the verse progresses , two more clones of Utada appear and sing behind the original Utada . As the chorus starts , the hover cycle starts grinding against the road as she rides through small streets and corners . During the second verse , Utada stops through a city centre as shots of the clones appear on city billboards . She takes of her goggles , and stares at the moon , while close @-@ up of the clone 's faces are seen singing to the track . 
 The second chorus has the clones singing in different parts of the warehouse , with scenes of Utada driving through the subways in Shibuya . By the bridge section , the clones disappear and the original Utada is singing in the warehouse . She is then driving through tunnels at night , and stops at the warehouse she started from . She turns it off during the final scene of the video , puts the tarp back on , and walks outside of the warehouse . The music video and the " behind the scenes " video was included on her Single Clip Collection Vol . 2 ( 2000 ) . 
 = = Live performances and promotion = = 
 The single has been performed on majority of Utada 's concert tours . Its first performance was during her Bohemian Summer Tour in 2000 , which was included on the live release on December 9 , 2000 . It was then included on Utada 's exclusive MTV Unplugged concert , serving as the opening number . It was included on the live DVD , released on November 28 , 2001 . She later performed it in 2004 , during her Bokuhan concert tour . It appeared on the live DVD , which was released on July 28 , 2004 . It was included on Utada 's debut English concert tour named Utada United , which was later included on the live DVD , released on December 20 , 2006 . Since the track 's release , it has appeared on three compilation releases : Utada Hikaru Single Collection Vol . 1 ( 2003 ) , it 's 2014 remastered version , and a special bundle of the compilation and the vol . 2 collection on a USB . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Details adapted from the liner notes of the single 's CD release . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Flyte Tyme Studios , Minneapolis , Minnesota , and mixed at Flyte Tyme , Edina , Minnesota . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certification = = 
 = Battle of Bonchurch = 
 The Battle of Bonchurch took place sometime in late July 1545 at Bonchurch on the Isle of Wight . No source of information states a specific date , although it could have happened on 21 July . The battle was a part of the wider Italian War of 1542 – 1546 , and took place during the 1545 French invasion of the Isle of Wight . Several landings were made by the French during the invasion of the Isle of Wight , including the one at Bonchurch . The two combatants were the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of France . England won the battle , and the French advance across the Isle of Wight was halted . 
 The battle was fought between French regular soldiers , and English militiamen . The number of French soldiers involved is believed to be around 500 . The number of English militiamen is uncertain , with one source of information stating 300 , and another stating 2800 . English forces at the battle are understood to have been commanded by Captain Robert Fyssher , whilst French forces engaged were commanded by Le Seigneur de Tais . The battle was one of several that were fought between the English and the French on the Isle of Wight . The majority of sources of information regarding the battle state that the English won , although one source of information states that the French were victorious . The battle was fought because it was part of the French attempt to cause enough damage to the Isle of Wight to force the English ships standing off the coast of England to leave their defensive positions and attack in conditions favourable to the French . The landing at Bonchurch was one of several made by the French on the Isle of Wight , with others taking place at Sandown , Bembridge and St Helens . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Italian War of 1542 @-@ 1546 occurred because the disputes between the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and Francis I of France had not been settled by the Italian War of 1535 @-@ 1538 , and those disputes resulted in a war between France , aided by the Ottoman Empire and Jülich @-@ Cleves @-@ Berg , and the Holy Roman Empire , aided by the Kingdom of England , Spain , Saxony , and Brandenburg . After two years of fighting Charles V , and Henry VIII of the Kingdom of England , invaded France . In September 1544 , English forces captured Boulogne . France attempted to re @-@ capture the city by force , but failed . Peace talks to end the fighting between England and France did not yield any positive results , partly because Henry VIII refused to consider returning Boulogne . As a result of the failure of diplomacy to get back Boulogne for France , Francis I decided to invade England , hoping that Henry VIII would return Boulogne to France in return for French forces leaving England . Thirty thousand French troops and a fleet of some 400 vessels were assembled . The fleet left Le Havre , in France , on 16 July . 
 On 18 July , the hostile engagement of French and English ships by the English coast marked the beginning of the Battle of the Solent . On that day , the outnumbered English ships withdrew . The English hoped to lure the French ships into the shallows and narrow channels of the Spithead , but the French wanted to attack the English in the more open waters of the eastern Spithead where the English ships could be encircled and annihilated . To entice the English ships to abandon their defensive position , and engage the numerically greater French ships , the French decided to invade the Isle of Wight , burning buildings and crops . France hoped that the residents of the Isle of Wight would support them , and rebel against England , and that the Isle of Wight could be used a base to challenge the English . French troops landed on the Isle of Wight , on 21 July . England would oppose this invasion of the Isle of Wight . 
 The Hundred Years War had resulted in the society which existed on the Isle of Wight being very militarised . Every male adult was obligated to fight when needed , and they participated in regular military training . The Captain of the Isle of Wight , Sir Richard Worsley of Appuldurcombe House , is considered to have been a “ capable and energetic commander ” . He was assisted by Sir Edward Bellingham , an officer in the regular English army , along with a headquarters staff . The English militiamen were equipped with " long pikes topped with a bill hook , and daggers , knives and clubs for close fighting " , as well as the Welsh longbow . The French soldiers were equipped with firearms , and steel blades . The militiamen had the advantage of superior morale , speed and agility . 
 The plan for the advance of the French soldiers at Bonchurch may have been to burn <unk> and Appuldurcombe , capture and consolidate a position on the heights of St. Boniface Down , and then move towards Sandown to link up with a French landing there . The area around Bonchurch became important in its own right because <unk> Point , near Bonchurch , offered a safe anchorage for French ships . There were also sources of fresh water nearby that could be used by the soldiers and sailors of the fleet . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 French troops were landed at three locations on the coast of the Isle of Wight , and the total number of French soldiers who were landed was 2000 . Bonchurch was one of the three places where French troops landed , and the number of soldiers who landed at Bonchurch is believed to be around 500 . The landing was unopposed and the French forces began to advance inland , up steep thickly wooded slopes . The Isle of Wight militia , however , learnt about the French invasion very quickly . 300 soldiers of the militia , under the command of Captain Robert Fyssher , were waiting at St. Boniface Down for the French to advance from Monks Bay . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Reports of the fighting are confused , and therefore no fully comprehensive account of the battle has been agreed upon . However , the battle could have taken place at dawn ( the day of the battle is unknown ) , and lasted until midday . Some records of the battle say that some women of the Isle of Wight participated in the battle by shooting arrows at the French . 
 = = = Did the French win the battle ? = = = 
 One source of information states that the French won the battle at Bonchurch . This source says that the English forces opposing the French were not local militiamen , but militiamen from Hampshire . The English forces took up a defensive position , a fact which is agreed upon by another account of the fighting , and were flanked by cliffs and screened by woods . According to this account , the number of English troops was 2 @,@ 800 . The first French attack was repelled but Le Seigneur de Tais , commander of the French forces involved in the battle , rallied his troops . A second French attack against the English forces was launched , with the French forces arranged into the ' array ' fighting formation . The account concludes its description of the fighting by saying that , after heavy casualties were sustained by both sides , the English line broke and the militia routed as a result of the second attack by the French . The account also states that Captain Robert Fyssher , which another source of information states commanded the English forces during the battle , is reported to have shouted out , as the militia routed , offering £ 100 for anyone who could bring him a horse , because he was too fat to run . A quote by Sir John Oglander is recorded , which reads that “ but none could be had even for a kingdom ” . The captain was never heard from again , and the account states that he was either killed , or captured and then buried at sea . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The casualties for both sides were heavy . The battle resulted in the French invasion of the Isle of Wight being stopped . Another skirmish took place at Bonchurch several days after the battle , when English forces engaged with French men who had disembarked from French ships retreating from Portsmouth looking for water . A senior French commander , Chevalier D <unk> , was killed as a result of the engagement . The English victory at Bonchurch only had a marginal impact on the course of the Italian War of 1542 @-@ 1546 , because the battle only involved a very small number of men relative to the numbers of men that were engaged throughout the entirety of the war . The fact that it only had a marginal impact is also because , if the French had captured the Isle of Wight , it is unlikely that that capture would have drastically affected the course of the war , because there were more significant territories that were being contested . The Isle of Wight could have been used to support French operations against England had it been captured ; Claude d 'Annebault , commander of the French armada , recorded that “ having it [ the Isle of Wight ] under our control , we [ the French ] could then dominate Portsmouth ... and so put the enemy to extraordinary expense in maintaining a standing army and navy to contain us . ” Although some sources do state that the victory at Bonchurch was responsible for the French withdrawal from the Isle of Wight , the source of information which states that the French won the battle says that fighting at Bembridge was what drove the French from the island . 
 = Tim Rogers ( journalist ) = 
 Tim Rogers ( born June 7 , 1979 ) is an American video game journalist and developer . In games journalism , he is known for his association with mid @-@ 2000s New Games Journalism , his verbose writing style , and his video game reviews website <unk> The Guardian cited his 2005 " Dreaming in an empty room : a defense of Metal Gear Solid 2 " as a core example of New Games Journalism , a style of video game journalism that emphasizes the author 's subjective and personal experiences in relation to the game world . Rogers has also written for Next Generation , GamesTM , Play , Game Developer , and Kotaku . 
 In game development , he is a co @-@ founder of Action Button Entertainment , where he designed games including Ziggurat and Videoball . The four @-@ person studio specializes in simple aesthetics and controls , following from Rogers 's own video game aesthetic and minimalist eSports interests . He compared the studio 's design philosophy to the spartan menu selections of Gordon Ramsay 's Kitchen Nightmares . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Tim Rogers graduated from Indiana University Bloomington in 2001 with a degree in East Asian Languages and Cultures . He is a " self @-@ avowed messy guitar player " in his rock band , Large Prime Numbers . He has written that Mother 2 made him a vegetarian . 
 = = Video games journalism = = 
 Rogers is a video games journalist known for his verbosity . Danny Cowan of IndieGames.com described him as " infamous " in New Games Journalism , a style of subjective video game journalism in which authors emphasize their personal experiences in relation to the game world . The Guardian cited Rogers as one of the " unmissable examples of New Games Journalism " in 2005 for his Insert Credit piece on Metal Gear Solid 2 , " Dreaming in an empty room : a defense of Metal Gear Solid 2 " . Gaming journalist Kieron Gillen called the article " highly discussed and fairly brilliant " . In 2006 , Simon Carless of GameSetWatch remarked that online communities were fascinated with Rogers as an originator of New Games Journalism , which Carless found at odds with their mistreatment of him , citing a Something Awful mock review of Sonic Riders . The next year , the same author cited Rogers ' 80 @,@ 000 @-@ word article , " the <unk> <unk> 2006 : GAME OF THE YEAR EDITION " , in calling Rogers " the Lester Bangs of video games " for being the only person " disruptive and iconoclastic enough " for the title . In 2011 , Jim Rossignol of Rock , Paper , Shotgun recommended " Who Killed Videogames ? " , a new Rogers essay , as a standout work . 
 Rogers started ActionButton.net , a video games reviews website , in early 2007 as an outgrowth from Insert Credit and its forums , <unk> . At the time of its launch , Simon Carless of GameSetWatch called the site " great writing " in a signature " self @-@ conscious <unk> " style . GamesRadar called Tim Rogers " loquacious " and " a character " as profiled in Cara Ellison 's " <unk> With ... " profile series , where they discussed " <unk> " as the role of " sticky friction " in Super Mario Bros. 3 and how it was used in Rogers ' own Ziggurat and Videoball . Edge described Rogers as a " polarising author of so much ' publish @-@ now @-@ edit @-@ never ' brain spew " . In 2013 , Rogers was selected to publish in the first round of digital books on games criticism published by Press Select . Rogers has also written for Insert Credit , Next Generation , GamesTM , Play , N @-@ Revolution , Kotaku , <unk> , and Game Developer magazine . As of June 2016 , Rock , Paper , Scissors reported ActionButton.net to be " dormant " . 
 = = Action Button Entertainment = = 
 Rogers is a co @-@ founder of Action Button Entertainment , a four @-@ person studio that consists of Rogers , Brent Porter , Michael Kerwin , and Nicholas Wasilewski , who together have built all of the studio 's four games from Ziggurat through Videoball . Their games are consistently simple in their aesthetics and controls , following from Rogers 's own video game aesthetic interests . Rogers became known for producing " infomercial @-@ style trailers " . Rogers interest in minimalist eSports and simple games parlays into his design philosophy , which he compared to Gordon Ramsay 's Kitchen Nightmares , where Ramsay advises failing restaurants to improve by trimming their menus to a spartan few great dishes . Rogers also felt simple games were " less work " . 
 Rogers has said that he aspires for Action Button Entertainment to make games that share his preferred gaming styles and his hobbies . In finding that the common link between his top 25 video games ( including Panzer Dragoon , Cave Story , Canabalt , and his favorite , Out of This World ) was minimalist aesthetics with no overt story to tell other than through game mechanics , Rogers wanted Ziggurat and future games to live up to those expectations and used his gut to fine @-@ tune design decisions . The games also reflect aspects of Rogers 's personality , such as in the " scream sound effect " on Ziggurat made and distorted from his guitar based on sounds made by eccentric Japanese musicians whose records he owned . He also called Ziggurat a descendant of his hobbies : the video game Ibara : Black Label and the Rubik 's Cube . 
 = = = Ziggurat = = = 
 Ziggurat is a retro @-@ style arcade shooter video game where the player fights off incoming aliens as the world 's last human from atop a ziggurat . The player uses simple touch controls to charge and shoot the enemies away , and dies if hit by an enemy . The game has 16 @-@ bit graphics style and an 8 @-@ bit chiptune soundtrack . 
 Rogers co @-@ founded Action Button Entertainment while working on Ziggurat , which began with an idea Rogers had while playing Angry Birds about pushing back a swarm of bats by shooting projectiles at them . He decided that he could not make the game alone . Rogers put out a call for artists on Twitter with a submissions request of " fan art of the Japanese box art of Phantasy Star II " , and Action Button artist Brent Porter replied in under an hour with an entry Rogers called " incredible " . In mid 2011 , Rogers decided to work on an iPhone game for a few weeks as a break from a larger project . Rogers said the team was convinced by his design document — this game would become Ziggurat . Rogers contacted an Internet acquaintance who had previously mocked up a design idea from Rogers 's Kotaku column , programmer Michael Kerwin , who came through with a rough draft within a week . Andrew Toups converted a soundtrack created by Rogers 's rock band into an 8 @-@ bit soundtrack . After six months of hiatus and working at a social games company , Rogers rekindled development and the team finished the Ziggurat , which was released in February 2012 for iOS platforms . 
 Edge related the " unexpectedly poignant " red screen and sound effect that flashes upon the player 's death to Rogers 's personal interest in noise rock . They called it a " beguiling personal signature " . 
 = = = TNNS = = = 
 TNNS , pronounced " tennis " , is a brick @-@ breaking action game where players use a paddle along the screen 's left side to bounce a ball towards breakable objects on the right side of the screen , and to avoid getting the ball in their goal . It was released with little advanced notice in November 2012 for iOS as a universal app playable on iPhones , iPads , and iPods . Danny Cowan of IndieGames.com compared it with Sidhe Interactive 's Shatter and VG247 called it a rendition of Breakout . Pocket Gamer likened it to both and further compared it with Alleyway , Arkanoid , and Super Hexagon with a " telekinetic power " to alter the ball 's direction apart from the panel ( as in Shatter ) . 
 = = = 10 × 8 = = = 
 Ten by Eight , stylized as 10 × 8 , is a puzzle video game where players match tiles . Players align similarly colored blocks and trace the path they create when aligned . Star blocks act as power @-@ ups that extend combos . Rogers produced an " infomercial @-@ style trailer " for the game , which VG247 called one of his signature moves and that IndieGames.com called " glorious " . It was released on July 31 , 2013 in North America for PlayStation Mobile — the PlayStation Vita and compatible devices . Around the same time , Rogers presented at the GDC 2013 Indie Soapbox , where he told the story of how he " went indie " . 
 = = = Videoball = = = 
 In Videoball , players use solely one analog stick and one button to control triangles that shoot projectiles to knock a circular ball into the opposing team 's endzone . The triangle shoots a projectile , which charges the longer the button is held , such that a charged " slam " shot can sail across the full screen . Rogers , the game 's designer , describes the game as " an abstract minimalist electronic sport " . Its development began as a dare from QWOP developer Bennett Foddy , Rogers 's friend , to make a " one @-@ button StarCraft " . Rogers compared the game 's design process to Gordon Ramsay 's Kitchen Nightmares , where Ramsay convinces failing restaurants to provide fewer menu options and to make those dishes well . Rogers noted the role of noted basketball @-@ like strategy in its <unk> , and the difficulty in crafting a minimalist game with a high importance on nuanced detail . He <unk> prerelease sessions of Videoball via Twitch and broadcast gameplay from Twitch 's booth at PAX East 2014 with indie publisher Midnight City . The game is expected for release in 2015 with cross @-@ platform multiplayer and support for more than six simultaneous players . 
 = Battle of Borgerhout = 
 The Battle of Borgerhout was a battle during the Eighty Years ' War , of the Spanish Army of Flanders led by Alexander Farnese , Prince of Parma , upon a fortified camp at the village of Borgerhout , near Antwerp , where several thousand French , English , Scottish and Walloon soldiers in service of the recently created Union of Utrecht were stationed . It took place during the reconquest by the armies of Philip II of Spain of the Burgundian Netherlands , whose different provinces had united in 1576 under the Pacification of Ghent to drive out the foreign troops out and to grant religious liberty to Protestants . 
 Despite the rebel victory at the Battle of <unk> in July 1578 , much of the Southern Netherlands were lost to the Spanish Army during the autumn ; Brussels was menaced , and the States General were moved to the safer Antwerp . Taking advantage of the Dutch rebel army 's indiscipline , Farnese decided at the beginning of 1579 to besiege Maastricht . As a feint to distract the Dutch rebels from his goal , but also aiming to scare Antwerp 's inhabitants , Farnese moved with his troops to surprise the village of Borgerhout , very close to Antwerp , where a part of the Dutch States Army had its quarters , namely 3 @,@ 000 or 4 @,@ 000 infantry which were the backbone of the rebel army and consisted of French Calvinists under François de la Noue , and English and Scottish troops under John Norrey 's orders . 
 On 2 March Farnese deployed elements of his army in a plain stretching between his position at the village of <unk> and the Dutch camp at Borgerhout , which Norreys and De la Noue had fortified with moats , palisades and earthworks . The assault was divided into three columns , each one provided with a mobile bridge to pass over the camp 's moat . After one of the attacks , undertaken by Walloon troops , succeeded in securing a bridge , the Spanish forces were able to attack the States @-@ General 's soldiers inside their camp . Norreys and De la Noue 's men opposed a strong defence , but Farnese , throwing his light cavalry to the battle , forced the Dutch troops to abandon Borgerhout and look for shelter under the artillery of Antwerp 's walls . William of Orange , leader of the Dutch revolt , and archduke Matthias of Habsburg , Governor @-@ General of the Netherlands appointed by the States General , witnessed the fight from Antwerp 's walls . 
 The battle meant the destruction of the villages of Borgerhout and Deurne and saw up to 1 @,@ 500 men killed between both armies . Farnese then proceeded to besiege Maastricht , which the Spanish Army invested less than a week after the battle and was taken by assault on 29 June of the same year . Farnese 's successful campaign opened the way to a nine @-@ year period of Spanish reconquest of much of the Netherlands . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1566 the Burgundian Netherlands , Charles V of Habsburg 's original realm , which had passed to his son Philip II of Spain on his abdication in 1556 , were in disarray due to religious tensions between Protestants and Catholics and the nobility and cities ' <unk> of funding Philip 's wars and ceding its powers to the Royal administration . In 1567 Philip sent an army to the Netherlands under Fernando Álvarez de Toledo , Duke of Alba , to restore his authority , but Alba 's persecution of the religious and political dissenters led William of Orange , the leader of the nobility , to exile into Germany and prepare an invasion of the Netherlands to expel Alba . Orange invaded the Netherlands twice , in 1568 and 1572 , but in both occasions Alba defeated him . The second time , however , the revolt spread into the provinces of Holland and Zealand , and Alba was unable of quelling it . In 1576 , the lack of an authority due to the death of Alba 's successor Luis de <unk> , together with a Spanish general bankruptcy , led the Spanish <unk> soldiers to sack several towns , including Antwerp . In reaction , the loyal and rebel provinces united to expel the foreign troops under the Pacification of Ghent . 
 John of Austria , the victor of Lepanto and replacement to <unk> , had no choice but to sign the Perpetual Edict in 1577 , accepting the Pacification of Ghent , but later , frustrated by the intransigence of Orange and his supporters , he seized the citadel of Namur and recalled his troops . John 's striking victory at the Battle of Gembloux in January 1578 , was followed by a tactical defeat at <unk> in July , and John himself died of plague in October . However , despite the Spanish failure to exploit militarily the victory of Gembloux , it rendered important political benefits to the royal cause in the Netherlands , as it shattered the unity of the Dutch rebels . As a consequence of the battle 's outcome , the leaders of the main families of the Southern provinces lost faith in Orange 's cause and the promises of aid made by the English queen Elizabeth I , which meant an important setback to Orange . Aiming to restore the military capability of the Dutch rebels , Elizabeth arranged with John Casimir , son to the Calvinist Elector Palatine , the raising of a German Army under English pay to assist the Dutch troops John Casimir brought to the Netherlands 11 @,@ 000 men , but instead of fighting the Spanish , he sided with the Calvinist extremists at Ghent and widened the gap between the Catholic and Protestant rebels . The States General also called for help Francis , Duke of Anjou , brother and heir of the King of France , who entered Mons in July 1578 , but was back in France in a short time . 
 The Catholic nobility and southern provinces ' defections , already started in the autumn 1578 , expanded further when the provinces of Hainaut and Artois concluded on 6 January 1579 , the Union of Arras , which the Walloon Flanders joined soon – the Catholic provinces of Namur , Luxembourg and Limburg were already controlled by the Spanish – . The Union of Arras opened talks in February with Alexander Farnese , who succeeded his uncle John of Austria as the Royal @-@ appointed Governor @-@ General of the Netherlands , to reconcile with Philip II . In response , a meeting took place in Utrecht shortly thereafter between deputies from the northern provinces of Holland , Zealand , Utrecht , Friesland , Gelderland and Ommelanden , which signed an alliance and union on 23 January . In the south , meanwhile , Farnese was planning the capture of Maastricht to use the city with its stone bridge over the Meuse as a base to conquer Brussels and Antwerp in the following campaigns . In November 1578 , the Spanish Army left Namur and crossed the Ardennes and Limburg . However , Farnese deemed too risky starting the siege of <unk> at midwinter and with the John Casimir 's numerous cavalry on the countryside . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 For the 1579 campaign , Farnese planned two different movements . A portion of his army , under Cristóbal de Mondragón , was to clean the area between Maastricht and the German border from Dutch garrisons , while Farnese himself , ahead of the main army , decided to move against <unk> with two objectives : to neutralize the Dutch field army , or primarily its German cavalry , before laying siege to Maastricht and to distract the Dutch from the campaign 's real objective . The first part of the plan was accomplished when Mondragón took the towns of Kerpen , <unk> and <unk> between 7 and 15 January . On 24 January , Farnese moved to attack the States General army , which was at Weert , east of Antwerp . Outnumbered , François de la Noue , who had taken to role of field commander of the States ' army after the Count of Bossu 's death , left some States ' troops in the Castle of Weert and withdrew to Antwerp with his unpaid men . They asked the city council to allow them to enter the city , but it was refused , and De la Noue had no choice but to entrench his army outside the walls , in the village of Borgerhout . This was a residential area for the wealthy inhabitants of Antwerp where they had country houses and gardens , among them <unk> van <unk> 's botanical garden , which had more than 600 exotic plants . 
 In the meantime , Farnese entrusted to Count Hannibal d 'Altemps the capture of Weert and continued his advance upon the Dutch Army . D 'Altemps encircled Weert with 6 @,@ 000 men and breached its walls with a two @-@ cannon battery . The defenders of the castle surrendered at discretion but , on Farnese orders , were hanged on the windows , which the Count willingly did because his steward had lost an eye during the siege . Farnese , instead of following the Dutch Army to its quarters , lodged in Turnhout with his troops and his court to forage . Before moving to Antwerp he dealt with John Casimir 's German Army . Spanish troops attacked and defeated part of the German reiters near Eindhoven on 10 February . Moreover , while John Casimir himself was in England dealing with Elizabeth I , Farnese agreed with his lieutenant , Maurice of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , the withdrawal of the Calvinist Army , which the Spaniards allowed to leave the Netherlands freely . Once this matter was finished , Farnese advanced upon Borgerhout . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The Dutch States ' troops quartered in the village of Borgerhout numbered 25 or 40 infantry companies which comprised from 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 soldiers , plus 100 additional mounted troops . They were the backbone of the rebel army and William of Orange referred to them as " his braves " . Moreover , they were led by officers of renown such as François de la Noue and John Norreys . To confront the Spanish Army , they were detached along the village of Borgerhout , which they had fortified by digging a moat and building an earth rampart around the village , from the bridge of Deurne over the Groot Schijn stream , which flowed into the Scheldt , to the road of <unk> , which ran parallel to the canal of Herentals . Orange deployed four additional French infantry regiments and Walloon troops from the nearby garrisons of Ath and <unk> behind Borgerhout and under the protection of Antwerp 's citadel and moat . The city 's civic guard , numbering 80 flags of armed and trained burghers , was ready to defend the city if necessary , but not willing to get out to join the battle nor to allow the regular troops to come within Antwerp . The Spanish soldier and chronicler Alonso Vázquez claimed that Orange 's army had , in all , 25 @,@ 000 men . 
 Farnese deployed a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ man vanguard , both infantry and cavalry , in the plain which separated his camp at <unk> from Borgerhout . Three small battalions , not surpassing 12 companies each one , but made up of chosen men , went in advance ; the right was taken by the Spanish tercio of Lope de Figueroa , the center by a Lower German regiment under Francisco de Valdés and the right by a Walloon regiment under Claude de Berlaymont , known as Haultpenne . Each formation was supported by a sleeve of 100 musketeers , a group of men armed with axes to cut the <unk> and a wheeled bridge to cross the moat . A corps of light cavalry led by Antonio de Olivera followed the infantry at some distance with instructions to cover its withdrawal if the attack went bad , or to follow up the victory , if it took place . According to Alonso Vázquez , Farnese made the Walloon soldiers of the Spanish Army wear white shirts over their armors , a practise common in night attacks known as <unk> , to distinguish themselves from the Walloons who fought for the Union of Utrecht . Thus the Walloons look , in his words , like " a very colorful procession of clerics and <unk> " . 
 In reserve , Farnese deployed a large battalion made up by the German regiments of Hannibal d 'Altemps and Georg von Frundsberg , flanked on its right by troops of reiters under Duke Francis of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , elder brother of Duke Maurice , John Casimir 's former lieutenant , and on its left by lancers under Pierre de Taxis . The remaining Spanish cavalry , led by Ottavio Gonzaga , covered the rear . Farnese led his troops personally , and before the battle was started , he scouted the Dutch position , having ordered his troops not to move until his return . On the Dutch side , while De la Noue and Norreys directed the men standing in Borgerhout , William of Orange witnessed the battle from the walls of Antwerp in company of archduke Matthias , brother of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II , whom the States General had elected as Governor of the Netherlands in opposition to the deceased John of Austria . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The fight started with the three battalions of the Spanish first line advancing upon the Dutch camp , each one trying to be the first to laid its bridge over the moat . Haultpenne 's <unk> , headed by Sergeant @-@ Major Camille <unk> , moved up to Deurne , crossing the Schijn river at the small village of <unk> . Valdés ' Germans advanced frontally to Borgerhout across the <unk> road , and Figueroa 's Spaniards took the <unk> road to assault the Dutch camp from the south . While the sleeves of musketeers from the Spanish and German units exchanged fire with the Dutch troops covered by the rampart , <unk> 's Walloons drove the defenders of Deurne behind the Groot Schijn stream and took its bridge . De la Noue sent reinforcements there to content the assault , but they arrived too late to prevent the Walloons from laying their bridge over the moat and began to climb the rampart , starting a close combat with the Dutch troops . In the meantime , the Spanish and German troops , supported by two or three artillery pieces , breached the rampart , crossed the moat and also started to come inside Borgerhout , where De la Noue and Norreys ' men reorganized and stood on the barricaded streets . 
 Farnese , seeing that his attack was going well , ordered Olivera to advance with his cavalry to support the infantry 's push . While the light horsemen penetrated into Borgerhout across the breach opened by Figueroa 's men , Farnese himself took the command of Taxis ' lancers and did the same across Valdés ' path . The French and English soldiers offered a strong resistance , but after two hours of battle inside the quarters , De la Noue began to withdraw his forces to Antwerp to avoid destruction . The retreating troops set fire to their <unk> and looked for shelter under the coverage of Antwerp 's artillery . Many of the Spanish soldiers went in persecution , despite their officers ordered them to stay together , and chased the rebels until Antwerp 's moat . At William of Orange 's orders , the artillery of the city walls fired then <unk> over the Spanish troops with different results , depending on the sources . The Spanish soldier Alonso Vázquez claimed that the shots were ineffective because the battlefield was covered of the smoke produced by the fire of Borgerhout . On the other hand , the Flemish official Guillaume Baudart claimed that it was precise and made " arms and legs fly on the air " . 
 By then , Farnese , unwilling of having for a longer time his troops close to Antwerp 's cannons , made drums and trumpets to call for withdrawal and gathered his men at Borgerhout . Meanwhile , people from Antwerp sallied to carry the wounded French , British and Walloon officers and soldiers into the city to receive treatment . The Spanish soldiery , once the fire of Borgerhout was finished , looted the basements of the burned buildings and had a meal before praying to thank God . After that , the Spanish Army marched across the roads of Lier and Herentals to Turnhout , where Farnese wanted to arrive the next day . Fearing a new attack , Antwerp 's civic guards spent the night at their posts . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The number of casualties endured by both armies differs according to the authors . The Italian Jesuit Famiano Strada noted that Farnese , in a letter to his father Ottavio , Duke of Parma , put the Dutch loss as 600 men killed and gave eight men killed and 40 wounded amongst his troops . Strada also mentions that other estimations pointed to 1 @,@ 040 men killed in the Dutch ranks . On the other hand , the Flemish author Guillaume Baudart set the Dutch loss as 200 men killed and claimed that the Spanish Army lost 500 men . The villages of Deurne and Borgerhout were seriously damaged by the fire during the battle : in 1580 Deurne had 133 standing buildings , while 146 had been destroyed by the fire ; in Borgerhout 206 buildings remained and 280 were ruined . 
 Farnese 's attack achieved his goal of distracting the Dutch States forces from Maastricht . After the battle , the Spanish Army moved quickly to Turnhout , taking the castle of <unk> on its way and appearing before <unk> on 8 March , just six days after the battle of Borgerhout . François de la Noue followed the Spanish till Herentals with some troops , but when he realized that Farnese was to lay siege to Maastricht , it was too late for him to reinforce the city 's garrison . Moreover , mutinies and defections hampered the Dutch efforts to save the city . The English soldiers under John Norrey 's orders , who remained out of Antwerp , kidnapped the abbot of St. Michael 's Abbey in demand for back pays , and William of Orange 's had to mediate to placate them . In political terms , the battle increased the Walloon defections from the States General to the Spanish party in the following months . Emanuel Philibert de Lalaing joined the Spanish Army with 5 @,@ 000 Walloon troops of the Dutch States army and expelled from Menen a garrison loyal to the States General . 
 Farnese besieged Maastricht in command of 15 @,@ 000 infantry , 4 @,@ 000 cavalry , 20 cannons and 4 @,@ 000 sappers , joined later by 5 @,@ 000 additional troops . In May , while the siege developed , peace talks were held at Cologne under the mediation of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf to preserve the unity of the Netherlands . However , divisions become more serious during the process . In Brussels , fight erupted in early June between Catholics headed by Philip of Egmont , son of <unk> of Egmont , whom the Royalist authorities had executed in 1568 and Calvinists under Olivier van den <unk> , resulting in the expulsion of Egmont and his supporters . At Mechelen , the Catholic inhabitants forced the Dutch garrison to leave , while in ' s @-@ Hertogenbosch an armed struggle resulted in the magistrates declaring support to the Royalist side . The revolt took a character of civil war , and as a result of the religious problem , the peace conference at Cologne failed . Henceforth , Farnese reconquered Flanders and the Brabant town after town , even forcing Antwerp to surrender after a long and exhausting siege in 1585 . 
 = Lazarus W. Powell = 
 Lazarus Whitehead Powell ( October 6 , 1812 – July 3 , 1867 ) was the 19th Governor of Kentucky , serving from 1851 to 1855 . He was later elected to represent Kentucky in the U.S. Senate from 1859 to 1865 . 
 The reforms enacted during Powell 's term as governor gave Kentucky one of the top educational systems in the antebellum South . He also improved Kentucky 's transportation system and vetoed legislation that he felt would have created an overabundance of banks in the Commonwealth . Powell 's election as governor marked the end of Whig dominance in Kentucky . Powell 's predecessor , John J. Crittenden , was the last governor elected from the party of the Commonwealth 's favorite son , Henry Clay . 
 Following his term as governor , Powell was elected to the U.S. Senate . Before he could assume office , President James Buchanan dispatched Powell and Major Benjamin McCulloch to Utah to ease tensions with Brigham Young and the Mormons . Powell assumed his Senate seat on his return from Utah , just prior to the election of Abraham Lincoln as president . Powell became an outspoken critic of Lincoln 's administration , so much so that the Kentucky General Assembly asked for his resignation and some of his fellow senators tried to have him expelled from the body . Both groups later renounced their actions . 
 Powell died at his home near Henderson , Kentucky shortly following a failed bid to return to the Senate in 1867 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Powell was born on October 6 , 1812 near Henderson , Kentucky , the third son of Lazarus and Ann McMahon [ a ] Powell . He attended the common schools of Henderson , and was tutored by George Gayle . He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree from Saint Joseph College in Bardstown , Kentucky in 1833 , and began studying law under John Rowan . He then enrolled in the Transylvania University School of Law , studying under Justice George Robertson and Judge Daniel Mayes . He was admitted to the bar in 1835 , and partnered with Archibald Dixon to start a law practice in Henderson . The two remained partners until 1839 . 
 On November 8 , 1837 , Powell married Harriet Ann Jennings . The couple had three sons [ b ] before Jennings died on July 30 , 1846 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 A Democrat in a Whig district , Powell 's political career began with an 1836 bid for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives . He campaigned vigorously while his opponent , John G. Holloway , relied largely on his party affiliation to carry the election . This proved a critical misstep for Holloway , as Powell secured the surprise victory . Holloway apparently learned from his mistake . Upon the completion of Powell 's term in 1838 , Holloway challenged Powell again , and defeated him by a considerable majority . Six year later , Powell was chosen as a presidential elector on the Democratic ticket , supporting James K. Polk . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 In 1848 , Kentucky Democrats nominated Linn Boyd for governor , but Boyd declined the nomination . Powell was chosen to replace Boyd on the ticket , largely due to the influence of James Guthrie . The Whig party nominated Senator John J. Crittenden , and the race was complicated by former Vice President Richard Mentor Johnson 's announcement that he would run as an independent Democratic candidate . Knowing the Democrats ' chances were dimmed by having two candidates in the race , Powell arranged a meeting with Johnson , following which the latter withdrew his candidacy and pledged his support to Powell . Nevertheless , Crittenden won the election . 
 In the gubernatorial election of 1851 , Powell was once again the Democratic Party nominee . The Whigs nominated Powell 's friend and law partner , Archibald Dixon . Powell and Dixon traveled the state together , eating at the same taverns , speaking from the same platforms , and generally showing cordiality and friendliness that was rare in Kentucky politics in those days . Powell 's margin of victory in the general election was a thin 850 votes , while Whig candidate John P. Thompson defeated the Democratic nominee for lieutenant governor , Robert Wickliffe , by several thousand votes . A third candidate for governor , abolitionist Cassius M. Clay , received 3 @,@ 621 votes . Powell was the first Democrat elected to the office in almost twenty years . ( John L. Helm had ascended to the governorship on Crittenden 's resignation . ) 
 The Whigs also maintained control of the General Assembly , and although Governor Powell was largely able to cooperate with his political opponents , some clashes did occur . As a result of the 1850 census , the General Assembly re @-@ apportioned the state into ten congressional districts . Powell vetoed the redistricting , noting that the districts had been gerrymandered to give the fading Whig party control over the state delegation . The legislature overrode the veto . The governor was successful , however , in vetoing legislation that he felt would have created an overabundance of banks in the Commonwealth . 
 Powell implemented the use of the state 's sinking fund to pay interest on school bonds , a measure which had passed over Governor Helm 's veto , but Helm refused to carry out . In 1855 , Kentucky 's voters passed by landslide a measure to raise the school tax from two cents per hundred dollars of taxable property to five cents per hundred dollars . The measure enjoyed the support of both Governor Powell and superintendent of public schools Robert Jefferson Breckinridge . Under the leadership of Powell and Breckinridge , Kentucky 's school system became among the strongest in the antebellum South . 
 Among Powell 's other successes as governor was his successful lobbying of the legislature to conduct a geological survey in 1854 . He also encouraged private investment in transportation in the state . During his term , the state went from having 78 miles ( 126 km ) of railroad track in operation to having 242 miles ( 389 km ) in operation . 
 = = = United States Senator = = = 
 In January 1858 , Powell was elected to the United States Senate . In April of that year , President James Buchanan appointed Powell and Major Benjamin McCulloch commissioners to negotiate settlements with the Mormons in Utah . On arriving in Utah , Powell and McCulloch issued a proclamation by President Buchanan offering clemency to Mormons who agreed to submit to Federal authority . The offer was accepted , and violence was averted . 
 Senator Powell favored Kentucky 's neutrality policy during the Civil War , but nationally , the conflict put him in a tenuous political situation . On one hand , he favored a strong national government and a strict interpretation of the U.S. Constitution . On the other hand , he was an opponent of coercion , and due to Kentucky 's proximity to the Southern states , maintained a more sympathetic view of the southern cause than legislators from more northern states . During his term as governor , Powell had been critical of Northern states that refused to abide by the Fugitive Slave Act . 
 In 1861 , Senator Powell vigorously condemned President Lincoln 's decision to suspend the writ of habeas corpus . In 1862 , he denounced the arrest of some citizens of Delaware — officially , the arrests were called " resolutions of inquiry " — as a violation of constitutional rights . These stances led to calls for his resignation by the Kentucky General Assembly in 1861 , and some of his colleagues , led by Kentucky 's other senator , Garrett Davis , unsuccessfully attempted to have him expelled from the Senate . Before the end of the war , both the General Assembly and Davis admitted being wrong in their attempts to remove him . 
 Following his successful defense against calls for his removal , Powell continued speaking against what he saw as violations of constitutional rights . In 1864 , he condemned General Order No. 11 , an edict of Ulysses S. Grant that barred Jews from the Department of Tennessee , which included regions of Kentucky . In the same speech , he rebuked federal military interference with the elections in Kentucky . In 1864 , he opposed a constitutional amendment aimed at freeing the slaves . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 Following his term in the Senate , he returned to Henderson and resumed his law practice . He was a delegate to the Union National Convention in 1866 . In 1867 , he was again nominated to the U.S. Senate , but after several ballots over several months , the General Assembly had not elected him . Powell believed that many of the legislators had been elected as a result of election interference by Northern forces , and that their intent was to prevent Kentucky from electing a senator at all , diminishing her influence nationally . In light of this belief , he urged the Democrats to withdraw his name and nominate someone more palatable to Union sympathizers . This they did , putting forth the name of Garrett Davis , who was subsequently elected . 
 Powell died in his home on July 3 , 1867 . The cause of death was apoplexy , apparently the result of the toll years of rheumatism had exacted on his nervous system . He is buried at the Fernwood Cemetery in Henderson , Kentucky . The state erected a 22 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) high marble monument over his grave in 1870 . Powell County , Kentucky , is named in honor of Governor Powell . 
 = Gymnopilus maritimus = 
 Gymnopilus maritimus is a fungus species of the family Cortinariaceae first collected in northern Sardinia , Italy , in 2006 . The species produces moderately sized , sturdy mushrooms of a reddish @-@ orange colour . The cap , which can measure up to 70 millimetres ( 3 in ) across , is covered in orange fibrils , and sometimes has small scales . The yellowish stem measures up to 110 mm ( 4 in ) in length by 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) in width , and sometimes shows remnants of the partial veil . The mushrooms have thick gills of a variable colour , ranging from yellow to rust but staining darker , and the yellow flesh has a mild taste . The mushrooms leave a rusty @-@ brown spore print , while the spores themselves measure from 7 @.@ 5 – 11 @.@ 5 micrometres ( 0 @.@ 00030 – 0 @.@ 00045 in ) in length . The species is most similar in appearance to G. arenophilus and G. fulgens , but can be differentiated from both morphologically . Despite the similarities , it is not closely related to either , suggesting convergent evolution . Instead , within the genus Gymnopilus , it is most closely related to the spectabilis – imperialis clade . However , it is not particularly similar to any of its closest relatives . 
 The species has been found only on coastal sand dunes near Olbia , in Sardinia , where it was observed growing at the base of Juncus maritimus ( the sea rush ) , between the winter months of October and January . However , there is speculation that it may also grow elsewhere in Europe . Mushrooms were seen growing from both the sandy soil and decaying plants ; however , as a saprotrophic feeder , it is possible that the species would be able to grow on other substrates . The mushrooms grow in close groups or tight tufts . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Gymnopilus maritimus was first described by mycologists Laura Guzmán @-@ <unk> ( a specialist in Gymnopilus ) , Antonio Ortega , Marco Contu and Alfredo Vizzini in 2009 in an article in the journal Mycological Progress . The description was based on several specimens collected during field work by Contu in Sardinia between January 2006 and January 2007 ; the holotype was collected on 15 January 2006 . The discovery has contributed to Sardinia 's reputation as an area of mycological significance . The description was later published in Italian by Contu and Vizzini in the journal <unk> e <unk> Mediterranea , along with the description of G. <unk> , because the original descriptions of both of these species were in English , and difficult for non @-@ specialists to obtain . The specific epithet maritimus refers to the typical habitat of coastal sand dunes , on sandy soil or decomposing Juncus maritimus . The holotype has been deposited in the University of Granada 's herbarium . 
 Within the genus Gymnopilus , it is located in the subgenus Gymnopilus and section <unk> . The subgenus Gymnopilus was proposed by Henri Romagnesi as <unk> ( while the genus was known as <unk> ) in 1942 , though the name Gymnopilus was given later by Rolf Singer . The subgenus is characterised by mushrooms that feature either no veils , or veils that do not form rings . The section <unk> , proposed by Guzmán @-@ <unk> in 1995 , is made up of large @-@ spored species with ringless mushrooms . Molecular analysis revealed that G. maritimus forms a sister group to ( that is , shares an immediate common ancestor with ) the spectabilis – imperialis clade , a clade that includes G. imperialis , G. spectabilis , G. junonius ( often considered synonymous with G. spectabilis ) , G. <unk> , and others . G. maritimus forms a more inclusive clade along with the members of spectabilis – imperialis ; while it produces the smallest fruit bodies , it shares with the other members strong , sturdy mushrooms , caps with fibrils ( sometimes with scales ) and large , warty spores that turn red in Melzer 's reagent or Lugol 's iodine . 
 = = Description = = 
 Gymnopilus maritimus mushrooms have a cap of between 15 and 70 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 6 and 3 in ) in width that is convex to flattened @-@ convex in shape . There is sometimes a broad umbo , and in older specimens , the cap is depressed in the centre . The margin of the cap is somewhat <unk> . The cap surface is dry and dull , coloured red to red @-@ orange , and yellow towards the margin . It is covered in fibrils of an orange colour , and sometimes has minute scales . The dried cap turns blackish @-@ red when potassium hydroxide is applied . The stem is 35 to 110 mm ( 1 to 4 in ) in length by 4 to 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 3 in ) in width . It is attached centrally to the cap , and is either completely cylindrical , with equal thickness throughout its length , or slightly narrower towards the base , where whitish or cream mycelia are sometimes visible . It is dry , with fibres and furrows . It is a yellowish colour , bruising reddish @-@ brown . Traces of the partial veil are sometimes visible on the stem , though it does not form a ring . The yellow ( brown at the bottom of the stem ) flesh can be up to 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick in the cap and does not bruise . It dries dark brown . There is no distinctive odour , and the taste is mild or slightly bitter . The thick gills can be adnate ( connected to the stem by the entire depth of the gill ) or sinuate ( wavy , with the gills becoming shallower then deeper ) . They are subdistant ( neither close nor distant ) and swollen in the middle . In colour , they are yellow in the youngest mushrooms , turning an ochre @-@ orange , while the oldest mushrooms they are rust . The gill edges are paler than the faces , and the gills stain orange @-@ brown or darker . No reference is made in the original description to the edibility of the mushrooms . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 Gymnopilus maritimus leaves a rusty @-@ brown spore print . The basidiospores can measure 7 @.@ 5 – 11 @.@ 5 micrometres ( 0 @.@ 00030 – 0 @.@ 00045 in ) in length , though the typical range is 8 – 10 @.@ 5 micrometres ( 0 @.@ 00031 – 0 @.@ <unk> in ) . In width , they typically measure 5 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 5 micrometres ( 0 @.@ <unk> – 0 @.@ 00030 in ) , but they can be up to 8 μm wide . In shape , they are ellipsoid or sometimes broadly ellipsoid . The top of the spore ( the side where it was once attached to the sterigma , the connection between the basidium and the spore ) is rounded and blunt . The spores are covered with fairly large warts , measuring from 0 @.@ 5 – 2 micrometres ( 2 @.@ 0 × 10 − 5 – 7 @.@ 9 × 10 − 5 in ) from the main spore in height . There is no germ pore or plage , and there is no clear depression around the hilum ( the area where the spore was attached to the sterigma ) . The spores turn an orange @-@ yellow to orange @-@ brown colour in potassium hydroxide , and turn reddish @-@ brown in Melzer 's reagent and in Lugol 's iodine , but they are not metachromatic . 
 The four @-@ spored basidia typically measure 24 – 35 micrometres ( 0 @.@ 00094 – 0 @.@ <unk> in ) in length by 7 – 9 micrometres ( 0 @.@ 00028 – 0 @.@ 00035 in ) in width , but can be as much as 10 @.@ 5 μm wide . They are club @-@ shaped , but narrower in the middle . They are hyaline ( translucent ) and yellow to yellowish @-@ brown . The sterigmata are between 1 @.@ 6 and 7 μm long . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the edge of the gill ) are typically 30 to 42 ( though sometimes as much as 50 ) μm long by 6 – 10 @.@ 5 micrometres ( 0 @.@ 00024 – 0 @.@ <unk> in ) wide . They are shaped like a flask or wine @-@ skin . The top of the cell suddenly widens , and the cell as a whole is thin @-@ walled , hyaline and yellowish , and sometimes appears to contain small grains . The caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) can be found in tufts at the top of the stem , and measure from 24 – 60 micrometres ( 0 @.@ 00094 – 0 @.@ <unk> in ) by 3 – 9 micrometres ( 0 @.@ <unk> – 0 @.@ 00035 in ) . They are cylindrical , or narrowly flask @-@ shaped , sometimes with a long neck . They are , again , yellow and hyaline . 
 The yellowish hyphae are between 15 and 13 @.@ 5 μm wide with a wall of variable thickness . There are clamp connections at the septa ( the walls dividing individual hypha cells ) . The flesh in the cap is radial , and is made up of yellowish hyphae of between 2 @.@ 4 and 20 μm wide . The pileipellis , the outermost layer of hyphae , forms a cutis , and on older specimens ( and on the small scales ) forms a trichoderm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 There are five species similar in appearance to G. maritimus : G. arenophilus , G. decipiens , G. flavus , G. fulgens and G. <unk> . G. arenophilus and particularly G. fulgens are the most similar . Though G. maritimus and G. arenophilus show similarities in their biogeography and ecology , the typically slightly smaller G. arenophilus differs from G. maritimus morphologically . While G. maritimus has a cap covered in fibrils with small scales , G. arenophilus can sometimes be completely smooth , and spore ornamentation differs , with G. maritimus typically displaying larger warts . Like G. maritimus , G. fulgens has been recorded growing on sand @-@ dune heathland ; further , the spores are similar in appearance to those of G. maritimus . However , G. fulgens requires soil rich in peat and must grow among moss . Moreover , there are a number of morphological differences ; G. maritimus mushrooms are larger and thicker , there are never remains of the partial veil on G. fulgens stems , the shape of the top of the spores differs between the two species , and the cheilocystidia and caulocystidia are significantly larger on G. maritimus . G. fulgens var. <unk> is even more distinct from G. maritimus than the nominate variety . Despite the similarities between the three species , the three have been shown to be in different clades within Gymnopilus , suggesting ecological convergence between G. arenophilus and G. maritimus , and morphological convergence between G. fulgens and G. maritimus . 
 Gymnopilus flavus , despite also appearing on land near the Mediterranean , can be differentiated from G. maritimus as it lives among grass , especially Dactylis glomerata , and it has distinctly smaller spores , typically measuring 5 to 6 by 3 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 2 μm . G. <unk> , also collected in Italy , shows two major morphological differences : it produces smaller mushrooms , and spores that are of a different shape with smaller warts . G. decipiens , another species that grows on sandy soil , again has spores that are markedly different . The American species G. arenicola also favours sandy soil , but has significantly smaller spores than G. maritimus . Two other species of Gymnopilus found around the Mediterranean are G. <unk> and G. spadiceus . G. <unk> has no veil remnants on the stem , and spores that do not turn red in Melzer 's reagent or Lugol 's iodine , and so can easily be differentiated from G. maritimus . G. spadiceus shows several similarities to G. maritimus , but grows only on pine wood and has rectangular spores . 
 <unk> maritimus is clearly a different species from other members of its clade , despite their close relation . All other species in the clade grow upon dead wood and have well @-@ developed rings on their stems . The spores also differ ; in the case of G. junonius and G. spectabilis ( often considered synonymous ) , as well as G. <unk> , they are narrower , and in the case of G. imperialis , they are wider . Of the other members of the clade , only G. junonius and G. spectabilis also grow in Europe . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Gymnopilus maritimus is known only from a single site in <unk> , an area of Olbia , in Sardinia , Italy , which is the type locality . There , mushrooms were found growing in close groups and tufts on coastal sand dunes around 10 metres ( 33 ft ) from the high tide line . They were observed at the base of live Juncus maritimus ( sea rush ) plants , growing on sandy soil or decaying plants , where they were feeding as saprotrophs . As such , it is possible that the species would be able to grow on other substrates . They were observed growing from autumn to winter , between the end of October and January . In addition to the collections in Sardinia , Contu and Vizzini speculate that reports of G. fulgens growing in " sand @-@ dune heaths " on Great Britain , an unusual habitat for that species , may in fact show the presence of G. maritimus on the island . 
 = Brooks & Dunn = 
 Brooks & Dunn is an American country music duo consisting of Kix Brooks and Ronnie Dunn , both vocalists and songwriters . The duo was founded in 1990 through the suggestion of Tim DuBois . Before the foundation , both members were solo recording artists . Brooks wrote number one singles for John <unk> , Nitty Gritty Dirt Band , and Highway 101 ; both he and Dunn also charted two solo singles a piece in the 1980s , with Brooks also releasing an album for Capitol Records in 1989 . However , they began hitting the charts together in 1991 . 
 Signed to Arista Nashville in 1991 , the duo has recorded ten studio albums , one Christmas album , and three compilation albums for the label . They also have released fifty singles , of which twenty went to number one on the Hot Country Songs charts and nineteen more reached top ten . Two of these number @-@ one songs , " My Maria " ( a cover of the B.W. Stevenson song ) and " Ain 't Nothing ' Bout You " , were the top country songs of 1996 and 2001 , respectively , according to the Billboard Year @-@ End charts . The latter is also the duo 's longest @-@ lasting number one , at six weeks . Several of their songs have also reached the Billboard Hot 100 , with the number 25 peaks of " Ain 't Nothing ' bout You " and " Red Dirt Road " being their highest there . Brooks & Dunn also won the Country Music Association Vocal Duo of the Year award every year between 1992 and 2006 , except for 2000 . Two of their songs won the Grammy Award for Best Country Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal : " Hard Workin ' Man " in 1994 and " My Maria " in 1996 . All but two of the duo 's studio albums are certified platinum or higher by the Recording Industry Association of America ; their highest @-@ certified is their 1991 debut Brand New Man , which is certified sextuple @-@ platinum for shipments of six million copies . 
 The duo 's material is known for containing influences of honky @-@ tonk , mainstream country , and rock , as well as the contrast between Brooks ' and Dunn 's singing voices and on @-@ stage personalities , although some of their music has also been criticized as formulaic . Their 1992 single " Boot Scootin ' Boogie " helped re @-@ popularize line dancing in the United States , and 2001 's " Only in America " was used by both George W. Bush and Barack Obama in their respective presidential campaigns . Brooks & Dunn has collaborated with several artists , including Reba McEntire , Vince Gill , Sheryl Crow , Mac Powell , Billy Gibbons , and Jerry Jeff Walker among others . Brooks and Dunn was deemed country music 's most successful duo . 
 After announcing their retirement in August 2009 , they performed their final concert on September 2 , 2010 at the Bridgestone Arena in Nashville , Tennessee . Both Brooks and Dunn have continued to record for Arista Nashville as solo artists . Dunn released a self @-@ titled album in 2011 , which included the Top 10 country hit " Bleed Red " , while Brooks released New to This Town in September 2012 . The duo reunited in 2015 for a series of concerts with McEntire in Las Vegas , Nevada . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Kix Brooks = = = 
 Leon Eric " Kix " Brooks III was born May 12 , 1955 in Shreveport , Louisiana and before moving to Nashville in 1979 , he played at various venues in Maine . He was also a neighbor of country singer Johnny Horton . Brooks worked as a songwriter in the 1980s , co @-@ writing the number @-@ one singles " I 'm Only in It for the Love " by John <unk> , " Modern Day Romance " by the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band , and " Who 's Lonely Now " by Highway 101 , plus The Oak Ridge Boys ' top 20 hit " You Made a Rock of a Rolling Stone " , Nicolette Larson 's " Let Me Be the First " , and Keith Palmer 's " Don 't Throw Me in the <unk> " . Brooks also released several singles through the independent Avion label , charting at number 73 on Hot Country Songs in 1983 with " Baby , When Your Heart Breaks Down " . In 1989 , he released a self @-@ titled studio album through Capitol Records . This album included " Baby , When Your Heart Breaks Down " and the number 87 single " Sacred Ground " , which McBride & the Ride covered and took to number two on the country charts in 1992 . Brooks and Pam Tillis co @-@ wrote and sang on " Tomorrow 's World " , a multi @-@ artist single released on Warner Bros. Records in 1990 in honor of Earth Day , which peaked at number 74 on the country charts . Brooks also produced and co @-@ wrote " Backbone Job " , a Keith Whitley outtake that appeared on his compilation Kentucky Bluebird . 
 = = = Ronnie Dunn = = = 
 Ronnie Gene Dunn was born June 1 , 1953 in Coleman , Texas . He played bass guitar in local bands during high school and he briefly studied theology at Hardin @-@ Simmons University with the intention of becoming a Baptist preacher . Dunn was " kicked out " of the school because he played in bars . Between 1983 and 1984 , he recorded for the Churchill label , taking both " It 's Written All Over Your Face " and " She Put the Sad in All His Songs " to number 59 on the country charts . In 1989 , session drummer Jamie <unk> entered Dunn in a talent contest sponsored by Marlboro , which he won . The grand prize in the competition included a recording session in Nashville . The producer of that session , Scott Hendricks , recommended Dunn 's recordings to Tim DuBois , then an executive of Arista Nashville . DuBois paired Brooks and Dunn because he thought that they would work well together as songwriters , and after the two recorded a demo , he suggested that they form a duo . During this timespan , Dunn also wrote " Boot Scootin ' Boogie " , which Asleep at the Wheel recorded on their 1990 album Keepin ' Me Up Nights . 
 = = Musical career = = 
 = = = Brand New Man = = = 
 Brooks & Dunn 's first single , " Brand New Man " , entered the Hot Country Songs charts in June 1991 and went to number one . It was the title track to the duo 's debut album , Brand New Man , which was released two months later . Brooks and Dunn wrote this song and several other cuts in collaboration with songwriter Don Cook , who co @-@ produced the album with Hendricks . It was also Cook 's first credit as a producer . The next three single releases from Brand New Man ( " My Next Broken Heart " , " Neon Moon " , and their own rendition of " Boot Scootin ' Boogie " ) all made number one on the country music charts as well , making for the first time in country music history that a duo or group had sent its first four singles to the top of the charts . A fifth single , " Lost and Found " , peaked at number six . " Boot Scootin ' Boogie " , which had previously been the B @-@ side to " My Next Broken Heart " , also made number 50 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and its commercial success led to a renewed interest in line dancing throughout the United States . Brand New Man was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in August 1992 for shipments of one million copies ; by 2002 , the album had been certified sextuple @-@ platinum for shipments of six million . It spent more than 190 weeks on the Top Country Albums charts . In 1992 , the duo won the Duo of the Year Award from the Country Music Association ( CMA ) , which also nominated them for that year 's Album of the Year and Horizon awards . Brooks & Dunn won the association 's Duo award for every year from then until 2006 , except for 2000 when the award went to Montgomery Gentry . After the album 's release , Brooks & Dunn began touring as well . 
 Brand New Man received a positive review from Allmusic , whose critic Daniel Gioffre thought that the album showed the duo 's diversity of musical influences . Alanna Nash of Entertainment Weekly was less positive , criticizing the duo 's sound for being " imitative " . 
 = = = Hard Workin ' Man and Waitin ' on Sundown = = = 
 Hard Workin ' Man was the title of Brooks & Dunn 's second album , which was released in 1993 . The title track , also its first single , peaked at number 4 on the country music charts . The album included two number @-@ one singles in its third and fifth releases : " She Used to Be Mine " and its B @-@ side , " That Ain 't No Way to Go " . " We 'll Burn That Bridge " and " Rock My World ( Little Country Girl ) " ( respectively the second and fourth releases ) both made Top 5 on Billboard , with the former reaching number one on Radio & Records . Also included on the album was a remix of " Boot Scootin ' Boogie " . In 1994 , " Hard Workin ' Man " won the duo a Grammy Award for Best Country Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal , and the album was nominated for Best Country Album . Hard Workin ' Man earned its highest RIAA certification in 2002 , when it was certified quintuple platinum . Brian Mansfield gave a generally positive review in Allmusic , saying that its up @-@ tempo songs " rocked harder " than any of the songs from the first album . 
 By the end of 1994 , the duo released their third studio album , Waitin ' on Sundown . It also produced five charting singles , three of which made number one on the country charts : " She 's Not the Cheatin ' Kind " , " Little Miss Honky Tonk " and " You 're Gonna Miss Me When I 'm Gone " . The other two singles , " I 'll Never Forgive My Heart " and " Whiskey Under the Bridge " , both made top ten . Allmusic critic Thom Owens thought that the album 's singles were " solid " but that the rest of the songs were " filler " . A review of the single " She 's Not the Cheatin ' Kind " from the same site praised it for its " hard @-@ driving , honky @-@ tonk spirit " . Nash praised the honky @-@ tonk sound of " I 'll Never Forgive My Heart " , but thought that most of the other songs relied on " contrivance " . Randy Lewis of the Orlando Sentinel gave a generally positive review , saying that the " <unk> " of " A Few Good Rides Away " ( which Brooks co @-@ wrote ) was the strongest track on the album . 
 = = = Borderline = = = 
 The first single from Brooks & Dunn 's fourth album , Borderline , was a cover version of B.W. Stevenson 's 1972 single " My Maria " . Brooks & Dunn 's version of the song spent three weeks at number one in mid @-@ 1996 and peaked at number 79 on the Billboard Hot 100 ; it was also that year 's top country song according to the Billboard Year @-@ End charts . Dunn said that he was initially reluctant to record " My Maria " because the duo had not previously recorded any cover songs . The song won Brooks & Dunn its second Grammy Award for Best Country Performance by a Group or Duo , and the duo won the 1996 Entertainer of the Year award from both the Country Music Association and Academy of Country Music , making them the first duo to win that award from the former . In 1997 , Brooks & Dunn joined a double @-@ headliner tour with Reba McEntire . Borderline produced another number one in " A Man This Lonely " , along with the top ten hits " I Am That Man " and " Why Would I Say Goodbye " . " Mama Don 't Get Dressed Up for Nothing " , the third single and B @-@ side to " My Maria " , became their first release not to make the top ten . 
 Michael McCall of Allmusic and Alanna Nash of Entertainment Weekly both thought that the album 's material was " cliché " and that " My Maria " was the strongest song on it . A more positive review came from Larry Stephens of Country Standard Time , who thought that the album had " the right mix " of songs . 
 = = = The Greatest Hits Collection and If You See Her = = = 
 Their first greatest hits compilation was released on September 16 , 1997 . It comprised most of their singles to that point and three new songs : " Honky Tonk Truth " , " He 's Got You " , and " Days of Thunder " . The first two were released as singles , with respective peaks of three and two on the country charts . The Greatest Hits Collection was certified platinum in April 1998 , and double @-@ platinum in 2001 . 
 Brooks & Dunn collaborated with Reba McEntire to perform " If You See Him / If You See Her " , which was the lead @-@ off single to Brooks & Dunn 's If You See Her and McEntire 's If You See Him , both of which were released on the same day . Arista Nashville and MCA Nashville , the label to which McEntire was signed , both promoted the single . This cut went to number one , as did If You See Her 's next two singles : " How Long Gone " and a cover of Roger Miller 's " Husbands and Wives " , which also became the duo 's first top 40 hit on the Billboard Hot 100 . Dunn recorded the vocals for " Husbands and Wives " in one take . Also included on the album was " Born and Raised in Black and White " , the first song of the duo 's career in which they alternated on lead vocals . The album 's fourth single was " I Can 't Get Over You " , which was a top five country hit . Following it was " South of Santa Fe " , which peaked at number 41 on the country charts and thus became the duo 's lowest @-@ peaking single there . In 2001 , If You See Her reached double @-@ platinum certification in the United States . 
 Jana Pendragon , in her review for Allmusic , praised Dunn 's vocal performances on " Husbands and Wives " and " You 're My Angel " , but thought that a couple of the other cuts were " formula " . Country Standard Time writer Kevin Oliver criticized the album for having " wildly uneven " material , calling the McEntire collaboration a " snoozer " and " South of Santa Fe " " wretched " . 
 = = = Tight Rope = = = 
 Tight Rope ( 1999 ) , the duo 's sixth album , was also its least commercially successful release . It included three singles : a cover of John Waite 's " Missing You " , followed by " Beer Thirty " and " You 'll Always Be Loved By Me " . The former two failed to make Top 10 , while the latter peaked at number 5 in 2000 . Dunn co @-@ wrote some songs on this album with McBride & the Ride lead singer and bassist Terry McBride ( who would later join Brooks & Dunn 's road band ) , and Brooks collaborated with Bob DiPiero . The duo shared production duties with Byron Gallimore on all three singles and four other songs on the album , while retaining Cook as producer on the other six . While " Beer Thirty " was climbing , the album cut " Goin ' Under Gettin ' Over You " charted as high as number 60 based on unsolicited airplay . Tight Rope was certified gold for U.S. shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies , but did not receive any higher certification . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave this album a mixed review , referring to the " Missing You " cover as a " misstep " . Jon Weisberger thought that the album was " consistent " but added that it did not have any " surprises " . Brooks revealed in 2015 that the album 's poor performance almost led to the duo splitting up , as he felt that “ We weren ’ t really writing together anymore , and we were just kind of done " , but they ultimately stayed together at the suggestion of Joe Galante , then the head of their label . 
 = = = Steers & Stripes = = = 
 In addition to persuading the duo to stay together , Galante suggested that they record the song " Ain 't Nothing ' Bout You " , because he felt it had potential as a hit . The song served as the lead single from their seventh album , 2001 's Steers & Stripes . It became their longest @-@ lasting number 1 , with a six @-@ week stay at that position . This song was the second song of the duo 's career to be named the top single of the year according to Billboard Year @-@ End ; it was also their highest peak on the Billboard Hot 100 at the time , peaking at number 25 there . For this album , the duo worked with producer Mark Wright , who also produced for Lee Ann Womack and Gary Allan at the time . 
 The next two singles from Steers & Stripes both made number 1 as well : " Only in America " and " The Long Goodbye " , the latter of which was written by Irish pop singers Ronan Keating and Paul Brady . After it , the duo charted at number 5 with " My Heart Is Lost to You " and number 12 with a cover of Kim Richey 's " Every River " , featuring a backing vocal from Richey . All of these other singles also made the pop charts . " Only in America " was later used by George W. Bush in his 2004 re @-@ election campaign , and again in 2008 by Barack Obama in his campaign . Noting that the song was used by both a Republican and a Democrat candidate , Brooks ( who wrote the song with Cook and Ronnie Rogers ) said that it was " very flattering to know our song crossed parties and potentially inspires all Americans . " 
 This album was generally well received , with the reviews in Allmusic and Country Standard Time noting that the album was more consistent than the previous ones . Nash was less favorable , referring to the up @-@ tempos as " retreads " but praising Dunn 's voice . 
 = = = It Won 't Be Christmas Without You and Red Dirt Road = = = 
 Brooks & Dunn released a Christmas album in 2002 titled It Won 't Be Christmas Without You . Four of its cuts made the country music charts based on seasonal airplay : the title track , " Hangin ' ' round the Mistletoe " , " Rockin ' Little Christmas " and a rendition of " Winter Wonderland " . It was followed in early 2003 by the duo 's eighth studio album , Red Dirt Road , whose title track became the duo 's eighteenth number one on Billboard . Two more singles were released from it : " You Can 't Take the Honky Tonk Out of the Girl " , which spent five weeks in the number three position , and " That 's What She Gets for Loving Me " at number six . On the Hot 100 , these songs respectively peaked at 25 , 39 and 53 . As with Steers & Stripes , Red Dirt Road was certified platinum . 
 Erlewine described Red Dirt Road as a concept album in his review of it , saying that its title track and other songs offered a " tribute to their roots and upbringing . " Nash gave the album an A @-@ minus rating , saying that Brooks & Dunn " dig even deeper " on the album ; she also referred to the title track as a " gutsy account of the terrible beauty of coming of age . " A less favorable review came from Country Standard Time , whose critic Jeffrey B. Remz called it " satisfactory , but not much more . " Both Nash and Remz compared " You Can 't Take the Honky Tonk Out of the Girl " to the sound of The Rolling Stones . 
 = = = The Greatest Hits Collection II and Hillbilly Deluxe = = = 
 Arista Nashville released Brooks & Dunn 's second Greatest Hits package , The Greatest Hits Collection II , in October 2004 . The album included singles from If You See Her , Steers & Stripes and Red Dirt Road , and the previously unreleased " That 's What It 's All About " and " It 's Getting Better All the Time " . Respectively , these cuts peaked at numbers two and one on the country music charts , as well as 38 and 56 on the Hot 100 . 
 In August 2005 , the duo released the single " Play Something Country " . According to Dunn and co @-@ writer Terry McBride , it was inspired by Gretchen Wilson , who was touring with Brooks & Dunn and Big & Rich on the Deuces Wild tour at the time . " Play Something Country " was the lead @-@ off to their ninth studio album , Hillbilly Deluxe . Brooks & Dunn co @-@ produced with Tony Brown , with further production from Mark Wright on " My Heart 's Not a Hotel " . A month after the album 's release , " Play Something Country " became the duo 's twentieth and final number one on Hot Country Songs , and went to number 37 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The album 's second single , " Believe " , peaked at number eight , also winning the next year 's Single of the Year and Song of the Year awards from the Country Music Association . After it was " Building Bridges " , with guest vocals from Vince Gill and Sheryl Crow , which peaked at number four . Before the duo released this song , it had been released by co @-@ writer Larry Willoughby , a cousin of country singer Rodney Crowell , and later by Nicolette Larson . The final release from Hillbilly Deluxe was the title track , which peaked at number sixteen on Hot Country Songs . Erlewine gave this album a positive review , saying that it was not " quite as ambitious " as the previous two albums , but " just as satisfying " . 
 Brooks & Dunn began the Long Haul tour in mid @-@ 2006 , which featured Sugarland and Jack Ingram as opening acts . Of this tour , Brooks said , " They 've got a lot of shows under their belt , they 're really good at what they do , and they are great performers [ … ] We want everything about this show from opening act ' til the lights go down to be first class . " 
 = = = Cowboy Town = = = 
 Their tenth studio album , Cowboy Town , was released on October 2 , 2007 . Its lead @-@ off single " Proud of the House We Built " reached number 4 on the country charts and 57 on the Hot 100 . Following this song were " God Must Be Busy " at number 11 and " Put a Girl in It " at number 3 . After this song , the duo released " Cowgirls Don 't Cry " , which they later performed with Reba McEntire at the Country Music Association awards . Following this performance , the song was re @-@ released partway through its chart run with McEntire dubbed into the final chorus . In early 2009 , the song peaked at number two on the country charts . Although not released as a single , the title track spent three weeks on the charts and peaked at number 56 . Also included on the album is a collaboration with Jerry Jeff Walker on " The Ballad of Jerry Jeff Walker " . Cowboy Town was also the name of the duo 's 2009 tour , which featured Rodney Atkins and ZZ Top . The tour began on June 6 at the <unk> festival in Enterprise , Alabama . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote that " Brooks & Dunn have crafted these songs [ … ] with an eye on the middle of the road , and they do it well enough that this music will likely win them that audience yet again . " Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly rated it " B + " , saying that " even if the themes on their 11th studio CD are a bit predictable , their muscular riffs and handsome vocal harmonies give the material a boot @-@ <unk> vibrancy " . 
 = = = Retirement and solo careers = = = 
 On August 10 , 2009 , Brooks & Dunn announced that they would be splitting up after a tour titled The Last Rodeo . According to Brooks , the decision to split was on good terms ; he told CMT that he and Dunn are " still good friends " , while Dunn said that " We 've ended up more like brothers . " The duo released its final compilation , # 1s … and Then Some , on September 8 of the same year . The album features 28 past hits and two new songs . Both of these new songs , " Indian Summer " and " Honky Tonk Stomp " ( featuring guest vocals from Billy Gibbons of ZZ Top ) , peaked at number 16 on the country music charts . On May 23 , 2010 , CBS aired a tribute show presented by the Academy of Country Music titled The Last Rodeo , on which various country music stars performed Brooks & Dunn songs while the duo received a Milestone Award . The academy donated proceeds from the concert to help victims of the 2010 Tennessee floods . Brooks & Dunn performed their last concert together at the Bridgestone Arena in Nashville on September 2 , 2010 , with proceeds from the concert benefiting the Country Music Hall of Fame . 
 Both members stayed with Arista Nashville as solo artists after the split . Dunn released his self @-@ titled solo album in June 2011 , which produced the top 40 country hits " Bleed Red " , " Cost of Livin ' " and " Let the Cowboy Rock " . Dunn announced via Facebook on June 7 , 2012 that he had exited Arista Nashville . Restaurant chain Cracker Barrel re @-@ issued the album in late May with two bonus tracks ; proceeds from the re @-@ issue benefit the Wounded Warrior Project . In late 2013 , Dunn sang duet vocals with Kelly Clarkson on a cover of " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " from her Christmas album Wrapped in Red . Dunn 's second solo album , Peace , Love , & Country Music , was released in 2014 . In 2015 , he signed to Valory Music Group 's <unk> Icon . 
 In February 2012 , Brooks released the solo single " New to This Town " , which features Joe Walsh on slide guitar . Brooks ' first Arista album , also titled New to This Town , was released in September 2012 . 
 On December 3 , 2014 , it was announced that Brooks & Dunn will reunite and perform a series of concerts in Las Vegas , Nevada with Reba McEntire during throughout mid @-@ late 2015 . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Brooks & Dunn have also contributed to several soundtracks and compilation albums . In 1994 , they recorded " Ride ' em High , Ride ' em Low " for the soundtrack to the 1994 film 8 Seconds , and a cover of " Corrine , Corrina " in collaboration with Asleep at the Wheel for a tribute album to Bob Wills . Both of these cuts peaked at number 73 on the country charts while " Rock My World " was climbing . In early September 1994 , the duo collaborated with Johnny Cash on a rendition of his song " Folsom Prison Blues " for the album Red Hot + Country , a charity album made by the Red Hot Organization to benefit AIDS awareness . Also that year , they covered " Best of My Love " on the Eagles tribute album Common Thread : The Songs of the Eagles . They covered Bob Seger 's " Against the Wind " for the soundtrack to the cartoon King of the Hill ; this rendition charted at number 55 in late 1999 based on unsolicited airplay . They also recorded " Keep On Swinging " , which Brooks wrote with Five for Fighting , for the soundtrack to the 2006 animated film Everyone 's Hero . Finally , they collaborated with Mac Powell on " Over the Next Hill " from the soundtrack to the 2008 film Billy : The Early Years , and took the song to number 55 on the country charts . 
 Dunn has sung guest vocals on other artists ' songs , including Lee Roy Parnell 's mid @-@ 1994 cover of the Hank Williams song " Take These Chains from My Heart " ( from Parnell 's album On the Road ) , " Try Me " on Trisha Yearwood 's 2005 album Jasper County , " Raise the Barn " on Keith Urban 's 2006 album Love , Pain & the Whole Crazy Thing , and Ashley Monroe 's 2006 single " I Don 't Want To " , which reached number 37 on the country charts . He also sang duet vocals with Carlene Carter on a cover of Johnny Cash and June Carter Cash 's " Jackson " for the 2007 tribute album Anchored in Love : A Tribute to June Carter Cash . In 2011 , he covered Gary Stewart 's " She 's Actin ' Single ( I 'm Drinkin ' Doubles ) " for the soundtrack of the film Country Strong , and contributed duet vocals to Cledus T. Judd 's parody of " God Must Be Busy " , titled " Garth Must Be Busy " . 
 Dunn and Dean Dillon co @-@ wrote Shenandoah 's 1994 single " Darned If I Don 't ( <unk> If I Do ) " and the track " She Wants Me to Stay " on David Kersh 's debut album Goodnight Sweetheart . He also co @-@ wrote " Don 't Leave " on Toby Keith 's 2003 album Shock 'n Y 'all with Keith , and Reba McEntire 's 2010 single " I Keep On Loving You " with Terry McBride . Brooks & Dunn co @-@ wrote " Steady as She Goes " on Wade Hayes ' debut album Old Enough to Know Better and " Our Time Is Coming " ( originally an album cut from Hard Workin ' Man ) on his second album On a Good Night , while Dunn co @-@ produced his 2001 album Highways & Heartaches . 
 In January 2006 , Brooks succeeded Bob Kingsley as the host of the radio countdown show American Country Countdown , while Kingsley moved to his own show , Bob Kingsley 's Country Top 40 . Brooks received an Academy of Country Music nomination for National On @-@ Air Radio Personality in 2010 , and again in 2011 . Later that same year , he made his acting debut in an independent film called <unk> Cowboy . In 2011 , he starred in a second film , The Last Ride . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Steve Huey of Allmusic contrasts Brooks ' and Dunn 's voices , saying that Dunn " was the quietly intense singer with the soulful voice , while Kix Brooks played the part of the high @-@ energy showman . " He also describes their sound as " a winning formula of rambunctious , rocked @-@ up honky tonk with punchy , danceable beats [ alternated with ] smooth , pop @-@ tinged ballads . " In the book The New Generation of County Music Stars , David <unk> describes Dunn as " possess [ ing ] a soulful voice with a quiet intensity " and a " traditional country singer " , while calling Brooks " the opposite to Dunn 's musical personality , " " a high @-@ energy showman " and " the perfect accompaniment to his partner " . Brooks sang lead on " Lost and Found " , " Rock My World " , " You 're Gonna Miss Me When I 'm Gone " , " Mama Don 't Get Dressed Up for Nothing " , " Why Would I Say Goodbye " , and " South of Santa Fe " . 
 = = Slim & Howdy = = 
 In the liner notes to each of their studio albums , Brooks & Dunn wrote short stories about Slim & Howdy , fictionalized cowboy versions of themselves . The duo worked with Bill Fitzhugh in late 2008 and wrote a book titled The Adventures of Slim and Howdy . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 1991 : Brand New Man 
 1993 : Hard Workin ' Man 
 1994 : Waitin ' on Sundown 
 1996 : Borderline 
 1998 : If You See Her 
 1999 : Tight Rope 
 2001 : Steers & Stripes 
 2003 : Red Dirt Road 
 2005 : Hillbilly Deluxe 
 2007 : Cowboy Town 
 = = = Compilation albums = = = 
 1997 : The Greatest Hits Collection 
 1999 : Super Hits 
 2004 : The Greatest Hits Collection II 
 2008 : Playlist : The Very Best of Brooks & Dunn 
 2009 : # 1 's ... and Then Some 
 = = = Holiday album = = = 
 2002 : It Won 't Be Christmas Without You 
 = = Awards = = 
 Brooks & Dunn has 17 Country Music Association awards , 26 Academy of Country Music awards and 2 Grammy Awards . 
 = E language = 
 E ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ) or <unk> / <unk> ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ; literally : " Colored Language " ) is a Tai – Chinese mixed language spoken primarily in <unk> Miao Autonomous County , Guangxi , China . It contains features of both Tai and Chinese varieties , generally adopting Chinese vocabulary into Tai grammar . E is a tonal language — distinguishing between seven tones — and contains a few rare phonemes : voiceless versions of the more common nasal consonants and alveolar lateral approximant . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The E language 's unusual pinyin @-@ transliterated name , which is also an autonym , consists of a single letter e . The character , which is written " <unk> " in Simplified Chinese and " <unk> " in Traditional Chinese , denotes an expression of affirmation . The language 's speakers also refer to their language as <unk> E. <unk> is a derogatory name for E. 
 = = Geographical distribution = = 
 In 1992 , E was spoken by about 30 @,@ 000 people , but by 2008 this number had dwindled to 9 @,@ 000 . Most E speakers are classified as Zhuang by the Chinese government . E speakers live primarily in the Guangxi autonomous region of China , specifically in the <unk> Miao county and border areas of <unk> <unk> . Villages inhabited by E speakers include <unk> , Simo , <unk> , and the <unk> district . Ethnologue classifies E as rank 6b ( Threatened ) . E speakers ' most commonly spoken other languages are Yue Chinese and the <unk> variant of Southwestern Mandarin . 
 = = Phonology = = 
 E 's consonant and vowel inventories are mostly similar to those of its parent languages . However , it contains a few unusual consonants : the voiceless nasal consonants [ n ̥ ] , [ ŋ ̥ ] , [ m ̥ ] , and the voiceless alveolar lateral approximant [ l ̥ ] . All are voiceless versions of consonants that , in most languages , are always voiced . E allows syllabic consonants and diphthongs . 
 Like most Southeast Asian languages , including Tai and the varieties of Chinese , E is tonal . The language is described as having seven tones , with the seventh varying allophonically with the length of the vowel it is attached to . With numbers ranging from 1 to 5 , with 1 being the lowest tone and 5 the highest , the contours of the various tones in E are as follows . 
 = = Grammar and lexicon = = 
 E is usually classified as a mixed language deriving ultimately from the Tai @-@ Kadai and Sino @-@ Tibetan families , which both inhabit southern China and Southeast Asia . Some non @-@ Chinese scholars , however , consider it a Tai @-@ Kadai language with Chinese influence . Whatever its classification , the grammar resembles that of the Tai branch of Tai @-@ Kadai . Specifically , scholars consider E 's grammatical features a blend of Northern Zhuang , <unk> , and Kam . The <unk> language of Vietnam displays many similarities with E. 
 The vocabulary , however , is mostly Chinese , based on <unk> and the <unk> variant of <unk> . Out of the 2 @,@ 000 most commonly used E words , only about 200 are of Tai @-@ Kadai origin . E also inherits elements of these Chinese dialects ' phonology and compound word formation . E morphology is primarily analytic , with concepts such as negation expressed with auxiliary words ( <unk> , m2 ) and no pronominal agreement . 
 In its pronouns , E distinguishes for person between first , second , and third ; in number between singular and plural ; and , in the case of the second @-@ person plural , between inclusive and exclusive we . E does not , however , make distinctions for grammatical gender . 
 = Barlow Road = 
 The Barlow Road ( at inception , Mount Hood Road ) is a historic road in what is now the U.S. state of Oregon . It was built in 1846 by Sam Barlow and Philip Foster , with authorization of the Provisional Legislature of Oregon , and served as the last overland segment of the Oregon Trail . Its construction allowed covered wagons to cross the Cascade Range and reach the Willamette Valley , which had previously been nearly impossible . Even so , it was by far the most harrowing 100 miles ( 160 km ) of the nearly 2 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 3 @,@ 200 km ) Oregon Trail . 
 Before the opening of the Barlow Road , pioneers traveling by land from the east followed the Oregon Trail to Wascopam Mission ( now The Dalles ) and floated down the Columbia River to Fort Vancouver , then a perilous and expensive journey . It was also possible to drive livestock over Lolo Pass on the north side of Mount Hood , but that trail was too rugged for vehicles and unsuitable for wagons . 
 The Barlow Road begins at The Dalles and heads south to Tygh Valley ( some consider Tygh Valley to be the beginning ) , then turns west and roughly parallels the White River on the north and then west , crosses the south shoulder of Mount Hood at Barlow Pass , follows Camp Creek and the Sandy River for some way , and finally leads to Oregon City . The road was rendered largely irrelevant in the early 1900s by the construction of the Mount Hood Highway . It still exists as a dirt road in some places , while many other parts have been paved over by new modern streets and highways . 
 = = Planning and construction = = 
 When Sam Barlow arrived at The Dalles late September 1845 , as many as sixty families were waiting for river transport . The expected wait was more than ten days , and the transportation " exorbitantly " priced . Local inquiries turned up little information about traveling over the mountains except that water , timber , and grazing were plentiful . Barlow and H. M. Knighton set out to determine the feasibility of a route , seeking a more expedient and less expensive way to the Willamette Valley . Knighton decided it was impractical after 20 or 25 miles ( 30 – 40 km ) and returned . Barlow forged on with a train of seven wagons , intending to return for river transport if the mountain passage proved impractical . 
 On October 1 , 1845 , Barlow and three men scouted ahead of their company and entered Mount Hood 's foothills from the east near Tygh Creek , about 35 miles ( 56 km ) from the mouth of the Deschutes River . They came within perhaps 12 miles ( 19 km ) of Mount Hood . They thought they had glimpsed the Willamette Valley , and learned from the Indians of a trail leading to Oregon City , but returned to Tygh Creek about five days after their departure . There Joel Palmer was waiting for him with a 23 wagon party . Palmer had followed Barlow for a better route , and had just returned from exploring the same area . The combined company organized road clearing through the forest , mostly by burning . 
 The clearing party made it to the top of a ridge , now known as Barlow Pass , where they were effectively lost . Barlow , Palmer , and a man named Lock hiked the south face of Mount Hood west of Palmer Glacier to scout a westward route off the mountain . Palmer , in better physical condition than his companions , climbed high on the glacier ( likely Zigzag Glacier ) , and took detailed notes on the surrounding ridges and rivers . They returned to the group , arranged for guards for their wagons at a place they named Fort Deposit . Several families in wagons ill @-@ suited for travel through the wilderness remained at Fort Deposit , while the remainder returned to The Dalles . Barlow 's group followed the Sandy River west on foot . Palmer noted an intersection with a trail coming from The Dalles by way of Lolo Pass , around the north side of Mount Hood , which had previously been the only overland trail traversed by pioneers . Near the present @-@ day city of Sandy , they turned southwest to reach Eagle Creek and Philip Foster 's farm near present @-@ day Clackamas . 
 That autumn , Barlow considered the route over the mountains and petitioned the Provisional Legislature of Oregon for permission to build a road on December 9 , 1845 , claiming that his estimated cost of $ 4000 was lower than that of others familiar with the route . Permission was granted with a vote of 8 @-@ 2 on December 17 , 1845 , approved by Speaker pro @-@ tem Henry A. G. Lee , and signed into law by Governor George Abernethy . 
 The road 's toll was authorized for two years effective January 1 , 1846 and specified toll rates at five dollars ( about a week 's wages ) for each wagon and ten cents for each head of horse , mule , ass , or horned cattle . The grant named the route " Mount Hood Road " — but it was immediately known as the " Barlow Road . " 
 The road was built with the financial backing of Philip Foster and a crew of forty men . Five toll gates were eventually built along the route . Barlow 's estimate of $ 4000 had underestimated the number of trees to be cut down and forgotten the numerous challenging bridges that would have to be built over rivers such as the Sandy , Zigzag , White , and Salmon . The White River continues to challenge its bridges to this day . 
 In its first season of operation , Barlow recorded the passage of 152 wagons , 1300 sheep , 1559 mules , horses , and cattle . Despite ongoing maintenance , the general condition of the road was considered to vary from " rough to barely passable . " 
 = = Early use = = 
 The direction of travel was effectively one @-@ way until 1861 , when a better road was blasted through Laurel Hill . Despite the expense and difficulties of passage , the road was very popular , with more than a thousand immigrants and 145 wagons recorded in the first year of operation . Approximately three @-@ quarters of the pioneers entering the Willamette Valley traveled the Barlow Road , with most of the remainder choosing the Columbia River route . 
 Barlow 's concession expired in 1848 , and he and Foster terminated their largely unprofitable partnership on November 29 , 1848 . Others continued to operate the toll road , but weather and mountain conditions made this a financial struggle . By 1863 , the toll had decreased to $ 2 @.@ 50 per wagon and team . 
 In 1849 , a military wagon train destined for Oregon forts passed over the road . It carried 250 tons of munitions in more than 400 wagons pulled by 1700 mules . From the beginning of Barlow Road to the camp the soldiers made at what has been known since as Government Camp , they abandoned 45 wagons after dozens of mules died of starvation . 
 = = Later use and historic designations = = 
 Various owners operated the road until 1882 . Ownership then passed to the Mount Hood & Barlow Road Company . E. Henry Wemme purchased that company in 1912 , and made improvements to the road . Wemme 's attorney , George W. Joseph , became the owner upon Wemme 's death in 1914 , in a probate dispute so contentious that it shaped the 1930 race for Governor of Oregon . Joseph and his wife donated the road to the people of Oregon in 1919 . 
 The 1923 Oregon Legislative Assembly designated the path from Idaho to the Pacific Ocean as the " Old Oregon Trail " route and approved signage with a prairie schooner and oxen for modern travelers to navigate . In 1978 , the entire Oregon Trail , including the Barlow Road , was named a National Historic Trail by the U.S. Congress . In 1992 , the Barlow Road was placed on the National Register of Historic Places as a historic district . In 2005 , part of it was incorporated into the Mount Hood Scenic Byway . 
 The Oregon Trail , Barlow Road Segment is a small segment of an alternate route , near Wemme , that was separately listed on the National Register in 1974 . Also Rock Corral on the Barlow Road , a campsite on the Barlow Road near Brightwood , was also separately NRHP @-@ listed in 1974 . 
 = = Today = = 
 On the western side of the Cascades , U.S. Route 26 follows more or less the same route from Sandy to Government Camp ; south of Government Camp , US 26 follows a valley just west of the Barlow Road 's route along Barlow Creek . The route is concurrent with a few miles of the southern end of Oregon Route 35 , and much of the Mount Hood Highway . 
 The Barlow Road is intact as a dirt road in a roughly north – south stretch along Barlow Creek ; other portions are pristine ruts up to six feet deep . The easternmost part of the original Barlow Road in Wasco County traverses an unpopulated area within Mount Hood National Forest and follows small Forest Service roads and " Jeep trails " , then Rock Creek Dam Road , and finally <unk> Market Road , north of the White River , from the Cascades to Tygh Valley . The areas east of Mount Hood National Forest have always been sparsely populated . Good rut viewing is possible at Pioneer Woman 's Grave near Bennett Pass and in several other places . Much of the Clackamas County side is buried under US 26 . Overall , about twenty percent of the road is still visible today . 
 A roadside marker and trail at Laurel Hill ( just west of Government Camp ) provides history and access to the portion where a sixty percent grade was present in the early Barlow Road . Wagons were lowered down the hill winched by ropes wrapped around trees . 
 = Barbados at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Barbados sent a delegation to compete at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . The island nation made its tenth appearance as an independent nation upon its arrival in Beijing . Eight athletes across three sports and ten events represented Barbados , marking the smallest delegation in its history up to the Beijing Games . Its runners and swimmers advanced past the first rounds in their events in four of their nine events , although none advanced to their events ' final rounds or medaled . The nation 's flagbearer during the Beijing Games was swimmer Bradley Ally . 
 = = Background = = 
 Barbados is the easternmost of the islands located within the Caribbean Sea . Home to 280 @,@ 000 residents , Barbados was first settled by the British in the 1620s . The nation remained a British colony until it declared total independence from the United Kingdom in 1966 . The very first appearance of a uniquely Barbadian delegation at the Olympic games came two years after it declared independence from the United Kingdom . At its debut , nine male athletes arrived to participated at the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City . Previously , Barbados ( as a British colony ) constituted a major part of the West Indies Federation along with Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago , which sent a delegation to participate at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome . 
 Between its 1968 debut and its appearance at the Beijing Olympics , Barbadian delegations appeared at every Summer Olympics except for the 1980 Summer Olympics , which took place in Moscow in the Soviet Union . With the exceptions of the 1968 and the 2008 Barbadian teams , every appearance by Barbados at the Olympics ( as of Beijing ) included at least ten athletes ; its smallest delegation arrived in 2008 , carrying only eight competitors . All the delegations except the one that arrived in 1968 have included female athletes . Prior to and including the 2008 Beijing Olympics , there had been one medalist from Barbados . Obadele Thompson won a bronze medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney , Australia , as part of Barbados ' most successful showing at any Olympic games as of 2008 . 
 In Beijing , eight athletes participated across three sports ( swimming , track and field , and sailing ) in ten distinct events . Gregory Douglas , the nation 's only sailor in Beijing , was the youngest participant from Barbados at 18 years old ; runner Jade Bailey , the only female athlete in the delegation , was the oldest , at 25 years old . There were no medalists from Barbados at Beijing . Swimmer Bradley Ally bore the flag of Barbados at the ceremonies . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 In track and field events , there were two ways to qualify for later rounds . The first way , " qualifying by right " , involves ranking high enough in one 's heat . Athletes could also " qualify by result " ; if they did not rank high enough in their heats but were high enough in the event 's overall standings , they could also advance . 
 = = = Men 's competition = = = 
 Andrew Hinds participated for the Barbadian team at the Beijing Olympics , participating in the men 's 100 meters dash . Born in 1984 , he is the son of former Olympian Hadley Hinds , and has been affiliated in training with the MVP Track and Field Club in Kingston , Jamaica . Hinds participated in the Beijing Olympics at age 24 , and had not previously participated in any Olympic games prior to that . During the qualification round of the event , which took place on August 14 , Hinds participated in the third heat . He completed the race in 10 @.@ 35 seconds , placing fifth out of the heat 's eight athletes . Indonesia 's Suryo Agung Wibowo ranked behind him in sixth place ( 10 @.@ 46 seconds ) , while Ghana 's Aziz <unk> ranked ahead of him in fourth place ( 10 @.@ 34 seconds ) . Trinidad and Tobago 's Richard Thompson ( 10 @.@ 24 seconds ) and France 's Martial <unk> ( 10 @.@ 26 seconds ) led the Barbadian sprinter 's <unk> of the 80 athletes participating in the event , Hinds tied Colombia 's Daniel <unk> and the Netherlands Antilles ' Churandy Martina for 27th place . He advanced to the quarterfinal round . 
 During the quarterfinal round , which took place on August 15 , Hinds was placed in the second heat . Eight athletes participated in the heat , and Hinds placed fifth with a time of 10 @.@ 25 seconds . Brazil 's Jose Carlos Moreira ranked directly behind him ( 10 @.@ 32 seconds ) , while Nigeria 's Olusoji Fasuba ranked directly ahead of him ( 10 @.@ 21 seconds ) . Hinds ' heat was led by Richard Thompson again ( 9 @.@ 99 seconds ) and the United States ' Tyson Gay ( 10 @.@ 09 seconds ) . Of the 40 athletes who advanced to quarterfinals in the event , Hinds tied Russia 's Andrey Epishin for 24th place . He did not advance to later rounds . 
 Ryan Brathwaite is a hurdler who competed for Barbados at the Beijing Olympics . Born in 1988 in the Barbadian capital city of Bridgetown , Brathwaite attended Barton County Community College in rural central Kansas , competing in the school 's athletic programs . He competed in Beijing at age 20 in a single track event , the men 's 110 meters hurdles . Brathwaite had not previously competed at any Olympic games . During the qualification round of his event , which took place on August 17 , Brathwaite participated in the third heat against seven other athletes . He finished the race in 13 @.@ 38 seconds , placing second in the event ahead of the Czech Republic 's Petr Svoboda ( 13 @.@ 43 seconds ) and behind Colombia 's Paulo Villar ( 13 @.@ 37 seconds ) . 43 athletes competed in the qualification round of the event , and 40 finished their races ; of those , Brathwaite ranked third . He advanced to the quarterfinal round . 
 Brathwaite participated in the third heat of the quarterfinal round in the men 's 110 meters hurdles , which took place on August 19 . His heat included eight athletes , although one was disqualified and did not rank . With a time of 13 @.@ 44 seconds , Brathwaite ranked second in the event behind Jamaica 's Maurice Wignall ( 13 @.@ 36 seconds ) and ahead of Villar , who led Brathwaite 's qualification heat ( 13 @.@ 46 seconds ) . The quarterfinal round included 32 advancing athletes , and 30 of those competitors finished their races . Of those , Brathwaite ranked tenth . He again advanced , this time to the semifinal round . 
 Semifinals in the hurdling event took place on August 20 . Brathwaite competed in the eight @-@ person second heat . Running the race in 13 @.@ 59 seconds , Brathwaite finished in seventh place , defeating France 's Samuel Coco @-@ <unk> ( 13 @.@ 65 seconds ) but falling behind Dutch sprinter Marcel van der Westen ( 13 @.@ 45 seconds ) . The heat was led by the United States ' David Oliver ( 13 @.@ 31 seconds ) and Poland 's Artur Noga ( 13 @.@ 34 seconds ) . Of the 16 semifinalists , Brathwaite ranked 12th . He did not advance to the final round . 
 = = = Women 's competition = = = 
 Jade Latoya Bailey participated at the Beijing Olympics in track and field events on Barbados ' behalf . Born in 1983 , Bailey was 25 at the time she entered the Beijing Olympics . She had not previously competed in any Olympic games or events . One of the events in which she participated was the women 's 100 meters dash . During the qualification round of the event , which occurred on August 15 , Bailey was placed in the ninth heat against eight other athletes . She ranked second in the heat after finishing the race in 11 @.@ 46 seconds , displacing Jamaica 's Sherone Simpson ( 11 @.@ 48 seconds ) and falling behind Russia 's Evgeniya <unk> ( 11 @.@ 24 seconds ) . Of the 85 athletes who competed in and finished this round of the event , Bailey tied Tahesia Harrigan of the British Virgin Islands for 25th place . She advanced to the quarterfinal round . 
 The quarterfinal round of the women 's 100 meters took place on August 16 . Bailey competed in the first heat , which included eight athletes . Of those , Bailey placed last in the heat after finishing the race in 11 @.@ 67 seconds . Nigeria 's Franca <unk> ranked ahead of her ( 11 @.@ 66 seconds ) , while Cameroon 's Myriam Leonie Mani ranked ahead of <unk> ( 11 @.@ 65 seconds ) . The heat was led by Jamaica 's Shelly @-@ Ann Fraser ( 11 @.@ 06 seconds ) and <unk> , who led Bailey 's previous heat ( 11 @.@ 13 seconds ) . 40 athletes advanced to the quarterfinal round . Of those , the Barbadian sprinter tied Brazil 's <unk> Moura for 37th place . She did not advance to semifinals . 
 Jade Bailey also competed in the women 's 200 meters race . During the qualification round of the event , which took place on August 18 , Bailey was placed in the fourth heat , which included eight athletes . She finished in seventh place after finishing with a time of 23 @.@ 62 seconds , defeating Myanmar 's Lai Lai Win ( 24 @.@ 37 seconds ) but falling behind Uzbekistan 's <unk> <unk> ( 23 @.@ 44 seconds ) . Bailey 's heat was led by Bahraini sprinter <unk> Al <unk> ( 22 @.@ 81 seconds ) and Great Britain 's Emily Freeman ( 22 @.@ 95 seconds ) . 48 people competed in the qualification round , and 46 of those athletes finished the races . Bailey tied Slovenia 's Sabina Veit for 34th place overall . She did not advance to later rounds . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Sailing = = 
 Then 18 @-@ year @-@ old Canada @-@ raised Gregory Douglas participated in the Beijing Olympics on behalf of Barbados . He was the only Barbadian sailor to participate in the Beijing Olympics . Douglas competed in the one person dinghy event , where he was assessed using a score derived from his participation in nine distinct races . In the first race , Douglas ranked 41st place out of 43 ; in the second , 43rd out of 43 ; in the third , 43rd out of 43 ; in the fourth , 34th out of 43 ; in the fifth , 33rd out of 43 ; in the sixth , 30th out of 43 ; in the seventh , 40th out of 43 ; in the eighth , 37th out of 43 ; and in the ninth , 41st out of 43 . His total final score was 342 , and his net final score was 299 . Overall , Douglas ranked 43rd out of 43 , falling behind 42nd place finalist Adil Mohammad of the United Arab Emirates by 27 points , and behind gold medalist Paul Goodison of Great Britain by 236 points . 
 Men 
 M 
 = Medal race ; EL = 
 Eliminated – did not advance into the medal race ; CAN = Race cancelled ; 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Qualifiers for the latter rounds of swimming events were decided on a time only basis , therefore positions shown are overall results versus competitors in all heats . 
 Bradley Ally was the only Barbadian swimmer at the Beijing Olympics who competed in multiple events . Born in Barbados in 1986 , Ally was involved in the Pine Crest Swim Team in Fort Lauderdale , a city in southern Florida . His first appearance at the Olympics was the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , Greece , when he represented Barbados in the men 's 100 meters breaststroke ; the men 's 200 meters breaststroke ; the men 's 200 meters individual medley ; and the men 's 400 meters individual medley . He was 17 years old at the time . Ally returned to the Olympics as a 21 @-@ year @-@ old . One of the events to which he returned was the men 's 200 meters individual medley . During the course of the men 's 200 meters IM , Ally was placed in the fourth heat of the August 13 preliminary round . He competed against seven other athletes in this heat . Completing the event in 1 : 58 @.@ 57 , Ally placed third ahead of British swimmer Liam Tancock ( 1 : 59 @.@ 79 ) and behind Japan 's Ken <unk> ( 1 : 58 @.@ 51 ) . The heat itself was led by Hungary 's László Cseh ( 1 : 58 @.@ 29 ) . Of the 46 athletes who finished their races in this round , Ally ranked fifth . He advanced to the next round . 
 The event 's semifinal round took place later on August 13 . Ally was placed in the second heat , which included seven other athletes again . During this race , he finished with a time of 1 : 59 @.@ 53 , placing fourth in the heat . Great Britain 's James Goddard ranked ahead ( 1 : 59 @.@ 63 ) , while Japan 's Takuro Fujii ( 1 : 59 @.@ 59 ) ranked behind . The heat 's headers included American swimmer Ryan Lochte ( 1 : 57 @.@ 69 ) and Brazil 's Thiago Pereira ( 1 : 58 @.@ 06 ) . 16 swimmers competed in the semifinal round ; Ally ranked ninth , falling one position short of advancing to the final round . 
 Bradley Ally also returned to compete in the men 's 400 meters individual medley , an event in which he had participated while at the Athens Olympics in 2004 . He competed in the preliminary round on August 9 , when he was placed in the second heat against seven other athletes . Ally finished the event in 4 : 14 @.@ 01 , placing third ; Italy 's <unk> <unk> placed ahead ( 4 : 10 @.@ 68 ) , while Israel 's Gal Nevo placed behind ( 4 : 14 @.@ 03 ) . László Cseh of Hungary led the heat ( 4 : 09 @.@ 26 ) . 29 competitors participated in this round of the event . Ally placed tenth , and did not advance to the final round , which occurred later that day . 
 Andrei Cross participated for Barbados as a swimmer while the nation participated in the Beijing Olympics . Born on Barbados , Cross was affiliated with TeamBath , the sports organization of England 's University of Bath . He was 24 years old when he participated at the Beijing Olympics in the men 's 100 meters breaststroke event . He had not previously competed at any Olympic games . During the course of the August 9 preliminary round , Cross was placed in the third heat against seven other athletes . He finished the race in 1 : 04 @.@ 57 , ending up in seventh place ; he defeated Uzbekistan 's Ivan <unk> ( 1 : 05 @.@ 14 ) , but fell behind Argentina 's Sergio Andres <unk> ( 1 : 03 @.@ 65 ) . The heat was led by Puerto Rican swimmer Daniel Velez ( 1 : 01 @.@ 80 ) and India 's Sandeep <unk> ( 1 : 02 @.@ 19 ) . 65 athletes participated in the preliminary round , and 63 finished their races . Cross ranked 55th . He did not advance to later rounds . 
 Martyn Forde also swam on Barbados ' behalf at the Beijing Olympics . Born in Canada in 1985 , Forde was 23 years old when he made his appearance at the Beijing Olympics . He participated in the men 's 50 meters freestyle , which marked the first time he ever participated in an Olympic games . The preliminary round of his event took place on August 14 . Forde was placed in the seventh heat against seven other athletes . Finishing the race in 23 @.@ 08 seconds , the Barbadian swimmer placed sixth ahead of Josh Laban of the United States Virgin Islands ( 23 @.@ 28 seconds ) but behind Kazakhstan 's Stanislav Kuzmin ( 22 @.@ 91 seconds ) . The heat was led by Chile 's Oliver Elliot ( 22 @.@ 75 seconds ) and Romania 's Norbert <unk> ( 22 @.@ 80 seconds ) . 97 athletes participated in the preliminary round of the event , with Forde ranking 51st . He did not advance to later rounds . 
 Terrence Haynes represented Barbados in the men 's 100 meters freestyle while at the Beijing Olympics . He was born in Canada in 1984 , and first participated on Barbados ' behalf as a 19 @-@ year @-@ old in the Athens Olympics of 2004 . During the 2004 Olympics , Haynes raced in the men 's 50 meters freestyle and ranked 56th in the preliminary round . He returned to the Olympics as a 23 @-@ year @-@ old . During the preliminary round of the men 's 100 meters freestyle , which took place on August 12 , Haynes competed in the third heat against six other athletes . He finished the race in 50 @.@ 50 seconds , placing third . Alexandr <unk> of Kazakhstan placed behind him ( 51 @.@ 24 seconds ) , while Latvia 's Romans <unk> placed ahead ( 50 @.@ 40 seconds ) . India 's <unk> <unk> led the heat ( 50 @.@ 07 seconds ) . Of the 64 athletes who finished the preliminary round races , Haynes ranked 47th . He did not advance to later rounds . 
 Men 
 Legend : Q - Qualified 
 = 500 euro note = 
 The five hundred euro note ( € 500 ) is the highest @-@ value euro banknote and has been used since the introduction of the euro ( in its cash form ) in 2002 . It is one of the highest value circulating banknotes in the world , worth around 551 USD , 3 @,@ 677 CNY , 58 @,@ 254 JPY , 543 CHF or 417 GBP . The note is used in the 23 countries which have the euro as their sole currency ( with 22 legally adopting it ) , with a population of about 338 million . 
 It is the largest note measuring 160 × 82 mm and has a purple colour scheme . The five hundred euro banknotes depict bridges and arches / doorways in modern architecture ( around the late 20th century ) . 
 The five hundred euro note contains several complex security features such as watermarks , invisible ink , holograms and microprinting that make counterfeiting very difficult . Initially the high denomination notes were introduced very rapidly so that in first 7 years ( by Dec 2008 ) there were 530 @,@ 064 @,@ 413 five hundred euro banknotes in circulation . Subsequently rate of increase was radically slowed . In January 2016 there were 611 @,@ 833 @,@ 416 in circulation . 
 The European Central Bank announced on 4 May 2016 that it would phase out the 500 euro note by the end of 2018 . “ Authorities increasingly suspect that they ( € 500 notes ) are being used for illegal purposes , an argument that we can no longer ignore , ” according to a high @-@ ranking bank official , Benoît <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 The euro was founded on 1 January 1999 , when it became the currency of over 300 million people in Europe . For the first three years of its existence it was an invisible currency , only used in accountancy . Euro cash was not introduced until 1 January 2002 , when it replaced the national banknotes and coins of the countries in eurozone 12 , such as the Luxembourgish franc . 
 Slovenia joined the Eurozone in 2007 , Cyprus and Malta in 2008 , Slovakia in 2009 , Estonia in 2011 , Latvia in 2014 and Lithuania joined on 1 January 2015 . 
 = = = The changeover period = = = 
 The changeover period during which the former currencies ' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months , going from 1 January 2002 until 28 February 2002 . The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state . The earliest date was in Germany , where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001 , though the exchange period lasted for two months more . Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender , they continued to be accepted by national central banks for periods ranging from ten years to forever . 
 = = = Changes = = = 
 Notes printed before November 2003 bear the signature of the first president of the European Central Bank , Wim Duisenberg , who was replaced on 1 November 2003 by Jean @-@ Claude Trichet , whose signature appears on issues from November 2003 to March 2012 . Notes issued after March 2012 bear the signature of the third president of the European Central Bank , incumbent Mario Draghi . 
 As of June 2012 , current issues do not reflect the expansion of the European Union . Cyprus is not depicted on current notes as the map does not extend far enough east and Malta is also missing as it does not meet the current series ' minimum size for depiction . The European Central Bank is currently introducing a new series of Euro @-@ banknotes . The 500 euro denomination , however , will not be included in the new series as it was decided to phase out issuance of 500 euro banknotes . 
 = = Design = = 
 The five hundred euro note measures at 160 millimetres ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) × 82 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) with a purple colour scheme . All bank notes depict bridges and arches / doorways in a different historical European style ; the five hundred euro note shows Modern architecture ( around the 20th century ) . Although Robert Kalina 's original designs were intended to show real monuments , for political reasons the bridge and art are merely hypothetical examples of the architectural era . 
 Like all euro notes , it contains the denomination , the EU flag , the signature of the president of the ECB and the initials of said bank in different EU languages , a depiction of EU territories overseas , the stars from the EU flag and twelve security features as listed below . 
 = = = Security features = = = 
 The five hundred euro note is protected by : 
 Colour changing ink used on the numeral located on the back of the note , that appears to change colour from purple to brown , when the note is tilted . 
 A see through number printed in the top corner of the note , on both sides , appear to combine perfectly to form the value numeral when held against the light . 
 A glossy stripe , situated at the back of the note , showing the value numeral and the euro symbol . 
 A hologram , used on the note which appears to see the hologram image change between the value and a window or doorway , but in the background , it appears to be rainbow @-@ coloured concentric circles of micro @-@ letters moving from the centre to the edges of the patch . 
 A EURion constellation ; the EURion constellation is a pattern of symbols found on a number of banknote designs worldwide since about 1996 . It is added to help software detect the presence of a banknote in a digital image . 
 Watermarks , which appear when held up to the light . 
 Raised printing in the main image , the lettering and the value numerals on the front of the banknotes will be raised . 
 Ultraviolet ink ; the paper itself does not glow , fibres embedded in the paper do appear , and be coloured red , blue and green , the EU flag is green and has orange stars , the ECB President 's , currently Mario Draghi 's , signature turns green , the large stars and small circles on the front glow and the European map , a bridge and the value numeral on the back appear in yellow . 
 Microprinting , on various areas of the banknotes there is microprinting , for example , inside the " EYPΩ " ( EURO in Greek characters ) on the front . The micro @-@ text is sharp , but not blurred . 
 A security thread , embedded in the banknote paper . The thread will appear as a dark stripe when held up to the light . The word " EURO " and the value is embedded in tiny letters on the thread . 
 Perforations in the hologram which will form the euro symbol . There are also small numbers showing the value . 
 A matted surface ; the note paper is made out of pure cotton , which feels crisp and firm , but not limp or waxy . 
 Barcodes , 
 A serial number . 
 = = Crime = = 
 The value of the note is several times greater than many of the largest circulating notes of other major currencies , such as the United States 100 dollar bill . Thus a large monetary value can be concentrated into a small volume of notes . This facilitates crimes that deal in cash , including money laundering , drug dealing , and tax evasion . There have been calls to withdraw the note for this reason . However , some of the currencies the Euro replaced had widely used high @-@ value notes , including the 10 @,@ 000 Belgian francs ( € 247 @.@ 89 ) , 5 @,@ 000 Austrian <unk> ( € 363 @.@ 36 ) , and 1 @,@ 000 Dutch guilders ( € 453 @.@ 78 ) , although these did not exceed the value of the € 500 note . Two exceptions were the 1 @,@ 000 Deutsche Marks , which had an equivalent value of € 511 @.@ 29 , and 500 Latvian <unk> , which had an equivalent value of € 711 @.@ 44 . But while these national currency banknotes had similar face value , the numbers of banknotes circulated was considerably smaller . For instance approx 93 million of the German 1000 DEM banknotes was circulating in the year 2000 , far fewer than the over five hundred million 500 Euro banknotes circulating in less than 7 years after the Euro banknotes were introduced . 
 In particular , Spain had a quarter of all these high @-@ value bills within its borders in 2006 . This concentration of € 500 notes is far greater than expected for an economy of Spain 's size , as prior to Euro conversion the largest banknote was 10 @,@ 000 Spanish peseta worth ~ € 60 . These notes are rarely seen in every @-@ day commerce – they have been nicknamed " Bin <unk> " by the populace ( as the presence and appearance of the notes are well @-@ known , but the notes themselves are very difficult to find ) . British and Spanish police are using the bills to track money laundering . 
 As of 20 April 2010 , money exchange offices in the United Kingdom stopped selling € 500 notes due to their use in money laundering . The Serious Organised Crime Agency claimed that " 90 % of all € 500 notes sold in the UK are in the hands of organised crime " , revealed during an eight @-@ month analysis . The € 500 note is worth in the region of £ 400 , depending on exchange rates ( more than eight times the value of the Bank of England 's largest publicly circulated note ) , and had become the currency choice for gangs to hide their profits . 
 In fact , historical banknotes of the UK had higher values than the € 500 note , even up to £ 1000 in civil hands circulation . In the case of other banknotes , such as dollars ( which generally have lower value notes ) , it doesn 't prevent money laundering , as in the case of Mexico City , where a cash total of $ 207 million was found . Also , nowadays bank accounts and modern money laundering schemes show that removing cash from the market does not guarantee stopping crime altogether . 
 The EU directive 2005 / 06 / EC on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering and terrorist financing tries to prevent such crime by requiring banks , real estate agents and many more companies to investigate and report usage of cash in excess of € 15 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Circulation = = 
 As of December 2015 , there were approximately 613 @,@ 559 @,@ 542 € 500 banknotes in circulation around the Eurozone , therefore it is the second @-@ least circulated banknote in the Eurozone . That is approximately € 306 @,@ 779 @,@ 771 @,@ 000 worth of € 500 banknotes . The European Central Bank closely monitors the stock and circulation of euro notes and coins . It is the Eurosystem ’ s task to ensure an efficient and smooth supply of euro notes and to maintain their integrity . 
 = = Legal information = = 
 Legally , both the European Central Bank and the central banks of the eurozone countries have the right to issue the 7 different euro banknotes . In practice , only the national central banks of the zone physically issue and withdraw euro banknotes . The European Central Bank does not have a cash office and is not involved in any cash operations . 
 = = Tracking = = 
 There are several communities of people at European level , most of which is EuroBillTracker , that , as a hobby , it keeps track of the euro banknotes that pass through their hands , to keep track and know where they travel or have travelled . The aim is to record as many notes as possible to know details about its spread , like from where and to where they travel in general , follow it up , like where a ticket has been seen in particular , and generate statistics and rankings , for example , in which countries there are more tickets . EuroBillTracker has registered over 155 million notes as of May 2016 , worth more than € 2 @.@ 897 billion . 
 = Tropical Storm Bret ( 1981 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Bret made a rare landfall on the Delmarva Peninsula in June 1981 . The fifth tropical cyclone and second named storm of the season , Bret developed as a subtropical storm from a large area of frontal clouds near Bermuda on June 29 . Moving westward , the subtropical storm intensified while producing deep convection , and was consequently reclassified as a tropical storm early on June 30 . Around that time , Bret peaked with sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . The storm then began weakening and struck near Oyster , Virginia as a minimal tropical storm early on July 1 . Upon moving inland , Bret weakened to a tropical depression and subsequently accelerated prior to dissipating over northern Virginia that same day . 
 In its early stages , Bret dropped light rainfall on Bermuda , peaking at 3 @.@ 34 inches ( 85 mm ) . Impact in the United States was generally minor . In Virginia , the storm produced up to 4 @.@ 48 inches ( 114 mm ) of rain in Big Meadows section of Shenandoah National Park . Along the coast , minor beach erosion occurred due to tides up to 0 @.@ 9 feet ( 0 @.@ 27 m ) above normal . In western Pennsylvania , locally heavy rainfall flooded some streets and basements . Elsewhere , Bret dropped 1 to 3 inches ( 25 to 76 mm ) of precipitation to several states . One fatality was confirmed after a woman was killed by rip currents at Nags Head , North Carolina . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A large band of frontal clouds became situated over the northwestern Atlantic Ocean on June 27 . By the following day , satellite imagery indicated that a low @-@ pressure area began developing northwest of Bermuda , along the northwest periphery of the frontal cloud band . Substantial amounts of deep convection eventually formed north and west of the low center . Thus , the system was designated as a subtropical storm at 1200 UTC on June 29 , while centered approximately 575 miles ( 925 km ) east of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . The system continued to gain convection and intensify while tracking westward toward the Mid @-@ Atlantic states at a forward speed of 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) . Early on June 30 , a well @-@ defined atmospheric circulation became apparent on infrared satellite imagery . As a result , subtropical storm transitioned into Tropical Storm Bret later that day at 0600 UTC . 
 Upon becoming a tropical cyclone early on June 30 , Bret attained maximum sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . About six hours later , at 1200 UTC , the storm also attained its minimum barometric pressure of 996 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Around 2200 UTC on June 30 , a reconnaissance aircraft flight observed hurricane @-@ force winds , though Bret was not upgraded to a hurricane because the minimum barometric pressure was considered too high . About an hour later , the National Hurricane Center noted that Bret was moving westward toward Virginia at 20 mph ( 25 km / h ) and entering a region of colder sea surface temperatures , causing further intensification to become unlikely . Subsequently , the storm curved west @-@ northwestward and rapidly weakened . At 0500 UTC on July 1 , Bret made landfall near Oyster , Virginia on the Delmarva Peninsula as a minimal tropical storm . About an hour later , the storm emerged into the Chesapeake Bay and weakened to a tropical depression . Later on July 1 , Bret moved inland over mainland Virginia and continued to weaken , until dissipating over the northern portion of the state . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In its early stages , the subtropical precursor of Bret tracked north of Bermuda and dropped light rainfall on the island , peaking at 3 @.@ 34 inches ( 85 mm ) . 
 While Bret was approaching the East Coast of the United States , various National Weather Service offices issued gale warnings . At 2000 UTC on June 30 , a gale @-@ force warning was issued for a portion of the North Carolina coastline extending from Cape Hatteras northward , including Albemarle and Pamlico sounds . Simultaneously , another gale warning was issued for areas along the Chesapeake Bay south of the Patuxent River in Maryland and on the east coast from Ocean City , Maryland to Virginia Beach , Virginia . Around 0300 UTC on July 1 , all gale warnings were discontinued in North Carolina , while the remaining warnings in Maryland and Virginia were canceled about five hours later . Additionally , a small craft advisory was also posted for the North Carolina and Virginia coastlines . Officials in North Carolina closed off beaches at Nags Head , Kitty Hawk , and Kill Devil Hills from swimmers due to rip currents and tides . After Bret dissipated , the small craft warning remained in effect and mariners were told to remain in port until the weather calmed . 
 In Virginia , Bret produced relatively light rainfall , peaking at 4 @.@ 48 inches ( 114 mm ) in Big Meadows , a section of Shenandoah National Park . At the time of Bret 's landfall , portions of the Mid @-@ Atlantic states were experiencing a strong drought , though the amounts of precipitation were not enough for farmers in Virginia to save their crops . In Virginia Beach , local street flooding and a brief tornado were reported . Minor beach erosion occurred in the area due to tides reaching about 0 @.@ 9 feet ( 0 @.@ 27 m ) above normal . One fatality was confirmed in North Carolina when a woman was killed after getting stuck in rip currents at Nags Head . Offshore , two boats lost contact with the Coast Guard during the approach to land , one of which washed up at Cape May , New Jersey and the other on the Virginia coast . The Coast Guard began cleanup of an oil spill at Nags Head caused by Bret off the coast . About 8 miles ( 13 km ) of the shoreline was filled with oil , little of which polluted the water . Most of the oil was thin and easily cleanup private contractor . Locally heavy rainfall in western Pennsylvania flooded streets and basements in some areas . The town of Brookville was inundated with up to 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of water . Elsewhere , Bret dropped 1 to 3 inches ( 25 to 76 mm ) of precipitation in several states . Overall , no considerable damage was reported . 
 = Operation Ironside = 
 Operation Ironside was a Second World War military deception undertaken by the Allies in 1944 . It formed part of Operation Bodyguard , a broad strategic deception plan instigated by the Allies throughout the year to help cover the June 1944 invasion of Normandy . Ironside supported the overall deception by suggesting to the Germans that the Allies would subsequently land along the Bay of Biscay . It complemented efforts to deceive the Germans into believing that the Allies would also land in southern France at this time ( Operation Vendetta ) . Bordeaux was an important military port during the war and had already been a target of commando raids two years earlier . Ironside intended to play on German fears of an invasion in the region , with the aim of tying down defensive forces following Operation Overlord in June 1944 . 
 Planned by the London Controlling Section , Ironside was communicated to the Germans via double agents between May and June 1944 . Unlike other Bodyguard deceptions , the plan was put across entirely by double agents without support by physical deception . Agent Bronx took the lead with support from Tate , Rudloff and Garbo . Ironside 's story included an initial two @-@ division assault , using Overlord formations , staged out of the United Kingdom . This would then be followed up with six divisions sailing from the East Coast of the United States . Historians disagree on the impact of Ironside on German plans . There is no indication that the operation was successful in convincing the Germans of imminent Allied plans to invade the Bay of Biscay . On the other hand , Allied planners attributed the delay of a Panzer division moving to Normandy in part to the deception . 
 As Ironside was a marginal operation , and they were worried about exposing agents as false , the Twenty Committee for the most part utilised less important agents and added words of caution to the messages they sent , reducing the impact of the story . Allied landings around Bordeaux may also have seemed implausible because it was beyond air cover from the UK and lacked the normal physical elements ( such as Naval activities and dummy landing craft ) associated with an invasion . 
 After the operation closed , at the end of June 1944 , the threat of invasion from the US was informally kept alive . It was revisited as Ironside II in mid @-@ July as support for Operation Ferdinand . The invasion story was replaced with a supposed Allied plan to increase French resistance in the Bordeaux region to tie up German forces . Most of Ironside II was ignored by the Germans , whose interest had turned away from the Bordeaux region . 
 = = Background = = 
 Operation Ironside formed part of Operation Bodyguard , a broad strategic military deception intended to confuse the Axis high command as to Allied intentions during the lead @-@ up to the Normandy landings . The overall aim of Bodyguard was to tie down German forces away from Normandy by threatening other targets . Ironside 's specific objective was to tie up the 17th SS and 11th Panzer divisions deployed in the south of France . 
 Overall planning for Bodyguard and Ironside rested with John Bevan and the London Controlling Section ( LCS ) . The LCS had been set up in 1942 following successes in deception in the Middle East by Dudley Clarke . After initial attempts at deception planning the department was tasked with bringing Bodyguard to fruition . One of their most useful deception channels was through double agents . During the early stages of the war , the Abwehr ( German intelligence ) had sent spies to Britain , but all of them either surrendered or were captured . Some , along with other volunteers , were used as an extensive misinformation network under the control of the Twenty Committee . 
 Bordeaux was an important port for the German war effort , receiving a great deal of cargo , mostly raw materials , from overseas . The Gironde estuary and Bordeaux had already been a target for the Allies . Operation Frankton was a 1942 commando raid targeting important shipping in the port . In January 1944 , the Allies intercepted communications indicating that German commanders were concerned by the possibility of landings in the Bay of Biscay region of France . The next month , German naval and air units undertook anti @-@ invasion exercises in the area . Ironside was intended to amplify these concerns . 
 According to the storyline for Ironside , ten days following D @-@ Day , Allied forces would land in the Bordeaux region . This force would spend around twelve days establishing a bridgehead before advancing to meet formations supposedly part of an invasion of the Mediterranean coast of France ( in reality these were fictional landings as well , part of another Bodyguard deception called Operation Vendetta ) . The supposed target of Ironside was the Gironde estuary ( on the river <unk> ) with landing sites at Royan and Accord . 
 At first , Bevan suggested that the fictional invasion force should stage from the American East Coast . Newman Smith , based out of New York and responsible for the US elements of the deception , felt this was an unrealistic story and suggested a large force from the US might conceivably reinforce a bridgehead established by units from the UK . Formations intended for Normandy could be " re @-@ purposed " for the initial invasion . The final plan earmarked two Overlord divisions for the assault with the supposed reinforcements consisting of six real divisions ( the 26th , 94th , 95th , and 104th Infantry , and the 10th and 11th Armored ) under the notional command of Lieutenant General Lloyd Fredendall . 
 = = Operation = = 
 Ironside began on 23 May 1944 with the aim of having the threat established by 29 May and continued until 28 June ( 22 days after the Normandy landings ) . It was implemented via double agents , in Britain and the United States , under the control of the Twenty Committee . The operation did not receive any resources from the Allied navies or airforce , so the deception had no physical element . This meant that Ironside had none of the traditional accompaniments to an invasion , including reconnaissance flights , bombardment , and naval operations . As a result , the Twenty Committee was cautious about using important agents to pass over the deception . 
 The lead was given to the less important Agent Bronx , a Peruvian socialite named Elvira Chaudoir , who communicated with her German handlers via letter . From April 1944 , she had also begun sending codes as telegrams , which were faster than letters in the event of an imminent invasion . Her code was based on a financial theme , assigning different amounts of money to possible invasion sites . Mentioning her doctor ( almost certain ) or dentist ( certain ) showed Chaudoir 's confidence in the information . Asking for the money " straight away " , " urgently " or " quickly " identified when the invasion would take place ( within a week , a fortnight or a month , respectively ) . 
 Agent Tate ( a Dane sent to England in 1941 and turned double shortly after ) opened the operation , on 23 May , in a message to his German handlers stating that a friend from the US had identified an expeditionary force , consisting of six divisions , preparing to sail . On 29 May , Bronx sent a telegram identifying an invasion targeted at the Bordeaux region within a month , using the code " dentist " to say she was certain of the information . She also sent a follow @-@ up letter explaining that the information came from a drunken British officer in the Four Hundred Club who had later sworn her to secrecy . According to Bronx , the officer had boasted about an airborne assault in the Bordeaux region that would be in the papers the following morning . The next day he had told her the operation had been delayed by a month . 
 Although many messages were sent by agents , the Twenty Committee considered that Ironside was quite unrealistic and as a result was cautious about promoting it too heavily . Most of the information was sent with words of caution or uncertainty to ensure that the agent would not be compromised . One of the most critical Bodyguard agents , Garbo , did become involved on 5 June , but only in forwarding the message of a fictional sub @-@ agent who he had already identified as unreliable ( MI5 hoped that this would cover for , in their opinion , the implausible nature of the story ) . The agent 's report explained that a US division based in Liverpool was preparing to head to Bordeaux . 
 Messages were also sent from the US . Rudloff , an agent based in the New York , sent four reports between 2 and 20 June . He identified the six divisions under Fredendall being sidelined for specialist training in bridge building but not amphibious assault and under heavy security . A last @-@ minute deception involved an MI6 transmitter in France . Known to be under German control , when the operator asked about routes to send escaped prisoners of war the handlers replied that they should , from 15 June , be sent toward Bordeaux . 
 = = Impact = = 
 German intelligence documents indicate that there was never strong belief that the Allies were ready to land in the Bordeaux region . Intercepted situation reports suggested that the Germans believed rumours of landings in the area to be " cover operations of small caliber " and part of the cover for a main Allied thrust at Calais ( in itself a deception called Operation Fortitude South ) . Axis commanders had considered the idea and conducted exercises in preparation , and training continued in the region after D @-@ Day . Following the Normandy invasion , the Allies had expected both German divisions in the Bordeaux area to mobilise . In the end , only the 17th SS Panzer Division moved north , and even they were delayed by several days , whilst the 11th Panzer Division remained to guard the region . 
 Historians are divided over whether the deception played a major role in the German response . Most , such as historian Ben McIntyre , agree that Ironside added to the general picture of confusion for the German commanders . McIntyre quotes senior Allied figures , such as John Masterman ( chair of the Twenty committee ) and Hugh Astor ( MI5 ) , who attributed the delayed German response in part to Ironside . Michael Howard dismisses the impact of the operation saying that there is " no evidence that anyone took them seriously " . 
 Part of the problem was that Bordeaux may not have appeared a plausible Allied target because it was out of range of fighter aircraft cover from the United Kingdom . Historian Terry Crowdy 's analysis is that Ironside may have suffered simply from lack of resources . In common with other , higher @-@ impact , Bodyguard deceptions it preyed on a concern that the Allies knew Hitler and the German High Command had discussed . Crowdy suggests that with physical deception , and more effort , Ironside could have succeeded in the same way as deceptions aimed against Calais , Normandy and the Mediterranean . 
 = = Ironside II = = 
 John Bevan had asked Newman Smith to retain the threat of a US invasion force beyond 28 June when the initial deception was supposed to have ended . Agent Rudloff sent messages on 10 , 12 and 18 July referring to the Ironside force . In mid @-@ July , the Allies began Operation Ferdinand , a cover deception for Operation Dragoon , the August 1944 invasion of southern France . The Ironside story was considered as an option in support of Ferdinand , but Noel Wild and Ops ( B ) , the SHAEF deception planners were worried about the impact of a theoretical US invasion force on the continuing Fortitude deception . It was decided that a new story would be presented to the Germans , suggesting that the Allies intended to bolster French resistance in the south of the country . The operation went largely unnoticed and German interest in the Bordeaux region dissipated . 
 = Cody Ross = 
 Cody Joseph Ross ( born December 23 , 1980 ) , nicknamed " Toy Cannon " and " Ross the Boss , " is a former American professional baseball outfielder . He is 5 feet 10 inches ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) tall and weighs 195 pounds ( 88 kg ) . Ross has played in MLB for the Detroit Tigers ( 2003 ) , Los Angeles Dodgers ( 2005 – 2006 ) , Cincinnati Reds ( 2006 ) , Florida Marlins ( 2006 – 2010 ) , San Francisco Giants ( 2010 – 2011 ) , Boston Red Sox ( 2012 ) , Arizona Diamondbacks ( 2013 – 2014 ) and Oakland Athletics ( 2015 ) . He is one of the few Major League players to bat right @-@ handed but throw left @-@ handed . 
 Following high school , Ross embarked on his professional career , getting selected by the Detroit Tigers in the fourth round of the 1999 Major League Baseball draft . He reached the Major Leagues in 2003 , but suffered a torn ACL which caused him to miss most of September . He was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers following spring training in 2004 , appearing in a handful of games with them in 2005 . In 2006 , he played for the Los Angeles Dodgers , the Cincinnati Reds , and the Florida Marlins . It was in Florida that he finally established himself , as he played with the Marlins through 2010 . He was used mainly as a reserve outfielder in 2006 and 2007 , but during the 2008 season he took over a starting role . He would be a starting outfielder for the rest of his Marlins career , playing centerfield or right field . In 2009 , he hit a career @-@ high 24 home runs and won the Marlins ' Charlie Hough Good Guy award . 
 During the 2010 season , the Marlins placed Ross on waivers , and he was claimed by the San Francisco Giants . Named their starting right fielder for the 2010 playoffs , he went on to win the National League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award , hitting five home runs in the postseason while helping the Giants win the 2010 World Series . He re @-@ signed with San Francisco in 2011 , batting .240 during the year . In 2012 , he signed a one @-@ year contract with the Boston Red Sox , hitting 22 home runs while playing every day despite the fact that the Red Sox originally expected him to be a reserve player for them . The Arizona Diamondbacks signed him to a three @-@ year contract in December 2012 , but a season @-@ ending hip injury limited Ross to 94 games his first year with the team . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ross was born in Portales , New Mexico . Ross 's father was a chiropractor and professional bull rider ; and as a youth , Ross wanted to become a rodeo clown . He used to attend his father 's bull @-@ riding matches in clown outfits , complete with makeup . He did not give up on the aspiration until his family moved to Dallas , Texas . The Ross 's eventually moved back to New Mexico , and Ross played high school baseball at Carlsbad High School . Ross also played football until ninth grade . During high school , he was a Baseball America All @-@ American selection . As a senior , he threw a five @-@ inning perfect game . He graduated in 1999 . 
 = = Minor League career = = 
 Ross was drafted by the Detroit Tigers in the fourth round of the 1999 Major League Baseball draft . He began his minor league career that year with the rookie Gulf Coast League Tigers , batting .218 with 31 hits , eight doubles , three triples , four home runs , and 18 runs batted in ( RBI ) in 42 games . In 2000 , he played for the A West Michigan Whitecaps of the Midwest League , getting named the Midwest League Player of the Week from June 18 – 24 after he scored four runs , had two doubles and a triple , drove in six runs , and batted .636 . In 122 games , he batted .267 with 116 hits , 17 doubles , nine triples , seven home runs , 68 RBI , and 11 stolen bases . His nine triples were tied for second in the league . After the season , Baseball America said he had the best outfield arm in the Detroit system . 
 Ross played for the A @-@ advanced Lakeland Tigers of the Florida State League in 2001 . He was the league 's player of the week from June 18 – 24 after stealing four bases and batting .516 with 11 runs scored , three doubles , two home runs , and five RBI . Then , he was named Player of the Week from August 13 to 19 after batting .385 . In 127 games ( 10th in the league ) , Ross batted .276 with 84 runs scored ( fifth ) , 133 hits ( eighth ) , 34 doubles ( second to Matt Padgett 's 37 ) , five triples ( tied with eight other players for seventh ) , 15 home runs ( tied with Jason Jones for eighth ) , 80 RBI ( seventh ) , and 28 stolen bases ( tied with Josh McKinley for eighth ) . After the season , Baseball America ranked him the ninth best Tigers ' prospect and again said he had the best outfield arm in the organization . 
 In 2002 , Ross played for the AA Erie SeaWolves of the Eastern League , getting named to both the regular season and postseason All @-@ Star teams for the league . He was named the Tigers ' Minor League Player of the Month in June after hitting .336 with 29 runs , 10 doubles , two triples , eight home runs , 30 RBI , and 10 stolen bases ; he earned the same honor from Topps . A broken toe forced him out of action from July 1 through August 2 and limited him to 105 games . He finished the year with 112 hits , 28 doubles , three triples , 72 RBI , and 16 stolen bases . His 19 home runs were tied with Andy Phillips and Aaron McNeal for ninth in the league . After the season , he played for the Mesa Solar Sox of the Arizona Fall League . For the third year in a row , Baseball America said he had the best outfield arm in the Tigers ' system . 
 Ross began 2003 with the AAA Toledo Mud Hens of the International League . On July 4 , he was called up by the Tigers . He made his Major League debut that day , going hitless in two at bats before exiting after getting hit by a pitch in the sixth inning as the Tigers lost 9 – 8 to the Kansas City Royals . He got his first hit on July 9 , an RBI single against Bartolo Colón in a 4 – 2 victory over the Chicago White Sox . After he had one hit in four games , he was optioned back to Toledo on July 16 to make room for Danny Patterson , who was returning from the disabled list . From July 27 to 29 , and again from August 17 to 18 , Ross homered in three consecutive games for the Mud Hens . In 124 games for the Mud Hens , Ross batted .287 with 135 hits , 35 doubles ( tied for sixth in the International League with Andy Abad and Luis Rodríguez ) , six triples ( tied for fourth with Ross <unk> and Coco Crisp ) , 20 home runs ( tied for third with Brandon Larson behind Fernando <unk> 's 28 and Ernie Young 's 21 ) , 61 RBI , and 15 stolen bases . He was recalled to the big leagues in September when rosters expanded . On September 2 , he hit a grand slam off Cliff Lee for his first Major League home run in an 8 – 6 victory over the Cleveland Indians , becoming the first Tiger since Milt Cuyler in 1991 to hit a grand slam for his first home run . In that same game , he tore his ACL running to first base , which required season @-@ ending surgery . In six games with the Tigers , Ross had four hits in 19 at bats , including five RBI . Ross was named the Tigers ' Minor League Player of the Year , and he was named to Baseball America 's postseason All @-@ Star team . For the final time , he was rated as having the best outfield arm in the Detroit organization . 
 In 2004 , Ross was supposed to begin the season in the minors for Detroit . However , with Detroit desperate for bullpen help , Ross was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers on April 1 for relief pitcher Steve Colyer . He was assigned to the AAA Las Vegas 51s of the Pacific Coast League , where he was teammates with Jayson Werth and Shane Victorino , whom he went on to face in the 2010 National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) . Injuries marred Ross 's 2004 campaign ; a knee injury kept him out for two weeks early in the season , he missed time from May 26 to July 15 after smashing his hand in a car door and breaking his finger , and he broke his wrist on August 25 which ended his season . In 60 games , he batted .273 with 65 hits , 17 doubles , 14 home runs , and 49 RBI . Ross spent most of 2005 with Las Vegas . From July 26 to August 11 , he hit 10 home runs and had 25 RBI in 17 games . In 115 games , he batted .267 with 105 hits , 21 doubles , 22 home runs , and 63 RBI . 
 = = Major League career = = 
 = = = Los Angeles Dodgers / Cincinnati Reds = = = 
 On July 24 , 2005 , Ross was recalled by the Dodgers to give them another bat during interleague play . He appeared in 14 games , batting .160 with four hits ( one double , no home runs ) and one RBI before getting sent back down on July 14 in favor of Steve <unk> . He was not called up in September . 
 Ross was out of options in 2006 and made the Dodgers Opening Day roster as a backup outfielder only because of an injury to Kenny Lofton . On April 13 , he hit a tie @-@ breaking grand slam and a three run home run in a 13 – 5 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates . He batted .500 in eight games for the Dodgers before getting designated for assignment on April 17 to make room for Óscar Robles on the roster . A week later , he was traded to the Cincinnati Reds for cash or a player to be named later ( Ben Kozlowski ) . 
 Ross broke his finger in his debut with the Reds on April 29 and went on the disabled list . He returned to the Reds on May 23 and appeared in one more game before getting traded to the Florida Marlins on May 26 for cash considerations . 
 = = = Florida Marlins = = = 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 Upon joining the Marlins in 2006 , Ross was forced to shave his beard , in order to comply with the Marlins ' no facial hair policy . Manager Joe Girardi quipped , " Maybe he can put it on top of his head . " He was used as a backup outfielder but got many starts at all three outfield positions throughout the year , especially from June 10 through 30 , July 21 through August 8 , and September 11 through the end of the season . On September 11 , Ross hit a three @-@ run home run against David Williams and a pair of two @-@ run home runs against Heath Bell and Royce Ring in a 16 – 5 win over the New York Mets . His three home runs and seven RBI in the game tied Marlins records . Ross 's five home runs and 14 RBI in September were more than he had in any other month that season . In 91 games ( 250 at bats ) with the Marlins in 2006 , Ross batted .212 with 53 hits , 11 doubles , 11 home runs , and 37 RBI . 
 = = = = 2007 = = = = 
 Again a reserve outfielder in 2007 , Ross batted <unk> before going on the disabled list with a strained left hamstring on May 6 . He returned on July 19 and continued to be used in a variety of roles for the Marlins . For much of the year , he platooned with Alfredo Amézaga in centerfield . On April 20 , he hit his first career pinch @-@ hit home run against Chad Cordero to tie the Marlins with the Washington Nationals in the ninth inning ; however , the Marlins went on to lose 6 – 5 in 14 innings . Four days later , he homered and had five RBI against Mark Redman in an 11 – 6 loss to the Atlanta Braves . He had another pinch @-@ hit home run on August 23 against Brad Thompson in an 11 – 3 victory over the St. Louis Cardinals . In 66 games ( 173 at bats ) , Ross hit .335 with 58 hits , 19 doubles , 12 home runs , and 39 RBI . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 Ross began 2008 platooning with Amézaga again in center field , though Amézaga was eventually replaced by Jacque Jones as Ross 's centerfield partner . Ross played against left @-@ handed pitchers as Amézaga and Jones faced right @-@ handers . Ross struggled in April , batting .159 with no home runs and two RBI . After receiving a text message from his father at the beginning of May saying he would improve , Ross declared that he was restarting his season and had 10 home runs and 18 RBI in the month . During the month , Ross had a stretch where nine out of 10 hits were home runs , becoming the first player to have a streak of that sort since Mark McGwire in 2001 . On May 14 , he hit a game @-@ tying three @-@ run ninth inning home run against Francisco Cordero in a 10 @-@ inning , 7 – 6 loss to the Reds . Then , on June 7 he hit a game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run in the bottom of the ninth inning against Cordero to give the Marlins an 8 – 7 victory over the Reds . Jones was designated for assignment on June 11 , putting Ross in sole control of centerfield . In a four @-@ game series with the Colorado Rockies from July 3 through 6 , Ross had 15 RBI , becoming the first player to have that many in a four @-@ game series since Carlton Fisk in 1977 . Fourteen of those RBI came from July 4 through 6 , the most in a three @-@ game span since Sammy Sosa had 16 in 2002 . In 145 games ( 461 at bats ) , Ross hit .260 with 120 hits , 29 doubles , 22 home runs , and 73 RBI . 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 For the first time in his career in 2009 , Ross was a starting outfielder for the entire season . He began the year as the right fielder for the Marlins , who wanted prospect Cameron Maybin to play centerfield . On April 26 , he pitched a scoreless ninth inning for the Marlins to finish a 13 – 2 loss to the Philadelphia Phillies . After Maybin batted only .202 , Ross moved back to centerfield on May 10 when he was sent down . On June 12 , he hit his third grand slam of the season against Brandon League to give the Marlins a 7 – 3 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays . The grand slam tied Bobby Bonilla 's and Jeff <unk> 's record for grand slams in a season by a Marlin . Dan Uggla and he hit back @-@ to @-@ back solo home runs against Kevin Gregg in the ninth inning on August 2 to give the Marlins a 3 – 2 victory over the Chicago Cubs . On August 16 , he set a team record by notching six hits in a doubleheader against the Rockies . Ross returned to right field on August 31 when Maybin was recalled . He set career @-@ highs in most categories in 2009 . In 151 games ( 559 at bats ) , he batted .270 with 151 hits , 37 doubles , 24 home runs , and 90 RBI . In the daytime , he batted .349 , the fourth @-@ highest mark in the NL . Following the season , he was named the Marlins Charlie Hough Good Guy award winner . 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 Ross began 2010 in right field , but he moved to centerfield when Maybin was sent down on June 17 . He had four hits on April 7 in a 10 @-@ inning , 7 – 6 victory over the Mets . On May 10 , he stole home as part of a double steal with Maybin in a 4 – 2 victory over the Cubs , marking the first time a Marlin had stolen home since Reggie Abercrombie did so in 2006 . Six days later , he again had four hits in a 10 – 8 victory over the Mets . In his first 120 games ( 452 at bats ) , Ross batted .265 with 120 hits , 24 doubles , 11 home runs , and 58 RBI . After the Marlins fell out of contention in 2010 and with Ross due for a pay raise the following year , the Marlins put him on waivers in August in order save money and give their young players more playing time . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants = = = 
 On August 21 , 2010 , Ross was awarded to the San Francisco Giants on a waiver claim , partly to prevent him from being acquired by the San Diego Padres . He appeared in 33 regular season games for the Giants , batting .288 with three home runs . In 153 games combined with Florida and San Francisco ( 525 at bats ) , he batted .269 with 141 hits , 28 doubles , 14 home runs , and 65 RBI . The Giants went on to overtake the Padres late in the season to win the NL West Division title . 
 Ross was named the Giants ' starting right fielder for the playoffs because of a neck injury to José Guillén , according to Bruce Bochy at the start of the postseason . However , it was later revealed that Guillén had been left off the roster after a package of human growth hormone was intercepted as it was being shipped to his house . In the ensuing NL Division Series ( NLDS ) against the Atlanta Braves , Ross started all four games in right field , hit a home run to tie the deciding fourth game , and drove in the winning runs in two of the Giants ' three wins . Ross hit two home runs off of Roy Halladay in Game 1 in the following NLCS against the Phillies , and hit a solo home run against Roy Oswalt in Game 2 . Following the Giants ' Game 6 win of the NLCS , Ross was awarded the MVP award for the series , in which he hit .350 with three home runs , three doubles and recorded five RBI . Three of his five postseason home runs broke up no @-@ hitters . His home run off the Braves ' Derek Lowe was the Giants ' first hit in Game 4 of the NLDS . His first home run off Halladay in Game 1 of the NLCS , in addition to being the first hit off Halladay in the game , was the first hit off Halladay in 11 innings , as Halladay had thrown a no @-@ hitter in his previous start . Finally , his home run off Oswalt in Game 2 of the NLCS was the Giants ' first hit of the game . In Game 3 of the World Series against the Texas Rangers , he hit the first home run for the Giants off Colby Lewis ; however , the Giants went on to lose 4 – 2 . He won his first World Series ring as the Giants defeated the Rangers in five games to win their first World Series since 1954 . 
 In 2011 Ross re @-@ signed with the Giants on a one @-@ year contract worth $ 6 @.@ 3 million . Henry Schulman of the San Francisco Chronicle called it a " mild surprise " that Ross did not sign at least a two @-@ year deal . He began the season on the disabled list with a sprained right calf , but he assumed the Giants ' right field job upon his return on April 20 . On May 10 , Ross had a game @-@ ending single against David Hernandez in a 1 – 0 victory over the Diamondbacks . After May 10 , Ross began playing left field most of the time when Pat Burrell was moved to the bench . On May 18 , Ross hit a three @-@ run home run with two outs in the ninth inning against Lance Cormier to give the Giants an 8 – 5 victory over the Dodgers . From August through the end of the year , Ross began moving around between all three outfield positions , only once making four straight starts at the same position . He hit the 100th home run of his career against Alex White on September 16 in a 9 – 1 victory over Colorado . In the same game , Ross pulled his right hamstring , forcing him to miss the rest of the season . In 121 games ( 405 at bats ) , Ross hit .240 with 97 hits , 25 doubles , 14 home runs , and 52 RBI . He led the Giants with a career @-@ high 49 walks . 
 = = = Boston Red Sox = = = 
 On January 26 , 2012 , Ross finalized a one @-@ year contract with the Boston Red Sox . He was supposed to provide depth off the bench , but injuries , particularly to Carl Crawford , led to him holding a starting role for the entire season . He started almost every day for Boston in all three outfield positions , but mainly right field . On April 14 , Ross hit his first home run in a Red Sox uniform , a two @-@ run shot off the Tampa Bay Rays 's Dane De La Rosa in a 13 – 5 Red Sox victory . The next day , Ross hit a three @-@ run homer in the bottom of the second inning off Matt Moore in a 6 – 4 victory over the Rays . On May 18 , 2012 , Ross suffered a fractured foot after fouling a ball off his foot . He was placed on the disabled list and expected to miss from six to eight weeks . 
 On June 19 , Ross was activated from the disabled list . His first game back , he hit a home run against Mark Buehrle over the Green Monster at Fenway Park in a 7 – 5 victory over the Miami Marlins . Five days later , he hit two home runs and had five RBI in a 9 – 4 victory over the Braves . He hit two consecutive three @-@ run home runs against Pedro Hernández of the White Sox on July 18 in a 10 – 1 Red Sox victory . The next day , he hit a three @-@ run home run against Addison Reed for a walk @-@ off win against the White Sox . For the season , he had a .267 average , 127 hits , 34 doubles , 22 home runs , and 81 RBI in 130 games ( 476 at bats ) . 
 = = = Arizona Diamondbacks = = = 
 On December 22 , 2012 , Ross agreed to a three @-@ year contract with the Arizona Diamondbacks worth a reported $ 26 million , with a club option and a $ 1 million buyout . An injured left calf caused him to miss the beginning of the season ; he made his return April 13 . He began the 2013 season playing right field , but in May through the rest of the season he split time between right and left field . On June 19 , he hit a pinch @-@ hit three @-@ run home run against Mike Dunn in a 3 – 1 victory over the Marlins . He hit a three @-@ run home run against Matt Harvey to put the Diamondbacks ahead 3 – 2 on July 3 ; the Diamondbacks would wind up defeating the Mets 5 – 2 . Three days later , he set a career high with five hits and added three runs scored in an 11 – 1 victory over Colorado . On August 2 , he had four hits , two doubles , and three RBI , including a game @-@ winning solo home run against Pedro Beato in a 7 – 6 victory over Boston . On August 11 , Ross dislocated his right hip while running to first base . He was placed on the disabled list and missed the rest of the season . In 94 games ( 317 at bats ) in 2013 , Ross batted .278 with 88 hits , 17 doubles , eight home runs , and 38 RBI . 
 On April 4 , 2015 , Ross was released by the Diamondbacks . 
 = = = Oakland Athletics = = = 
 On April 8 , 2015 , Ross signed a one @-@ year deal with the Oakland Athletics for the league minimum salary of $ 507 @,@ 500 , with the Diamondbacks paying the remainder of his salary with them . He was released on May 3 , 2015 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ross has been a streaky player throughout his career . He described this in 2006 : " I have gotten in grooves before , and you try to stay in it as long as you can until it ends . And it does end . I 've been notorious for that my whole career , where I 'll hit five or six in a week , where it seems like I can 't miss the pitch and I feel good in the batter 's box . " The most famous of these came in 2010 , when Ross 's torrid hitting in the playoffs helped San Francisco win the 2010 World Series . 
 During his career , Ross has earned a reputation for bringing energy to his teams and being a positive influence to his teammates . He has been a fan favorite in his career , especially in Florida and San Francisco , where he earned the nicknames " Toy Cannon " and " Ross the Boss " , respectively . 
 Ross bats right @-@ handed and throws left @-@ handed ; one of the rarest dominant bats / throws combinations in the history of Major League baseball . The only position player in the Baseball Hall of Fame with this combination of " bats / throws " is Rickey Henderson , who , like Ross , also had stints with the Dodgers and Red Sox . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ross and his wife , Summer , live most of the year in Scottsdale , Arizona , with their two children : Hudson and Haven Leigh . His father , Kenny , played strong safety at the University of New Mexico but became a chiropractor and bull rider after undergoing three knee surgeries in college . Ross has a sister , Sarah , who was a long @-@ jumper and basketball player growing up . 
 = Keith Houchen = 
 Keith Morton Houchen ( born 25 July 1960 ) is a former English professional footballer and football manager . A forward , he scored 184 goals in 687 league and cup games . 
 He started his professional career at Hartlepool United in February 1978 , after failing to win a contract at Chesterfield . He was coached by Billy Horner to become a strong centre @-@ forward , using his natural strength and power to retain possession in attacking positions . Financial difficulties forced the club to sell him on to Leyton Orient for £ 25 @,@ 000 in March 1982 . After failing to impress in his two years in London , he was moved on to York City for £ 15 @,@ 000 in March 1984 . He played seven games in the club 's Fourth Division title winning season in 1983 – 84 , before transferring to Scunthorpe United for £ 40 @,@ 000 in March 1986 . He did not settle at the club , but in the summer he was fortunate enough to win a £ 60 @,@ 000 move up through three tiers to First Division side Coventry City . 
 Though never a prolific player for the " Sky Blues " , he scored a spectacular headed goal in the 1987 FA Cup Final at Wembley , which earned him Match of the Day 's Goal of the Season award . He featured in the 1987 FA Charity Shield , but faded from the first team picture at Highfield Road , and in March 1989 he joined Scottish Premier Division side Hibernian for a fee of £ 325 @,@ 000 . He returned to England in August 1991 when he was sold to Port Vale for £ 100 @,@ 000 . After falling out with manager John Rudge he returned to Hartlepool on a free transfer in June 1993 . He was appointed as player @-@ manager in April 1995 , but endured a tough time at Victoria Park , and left the club in November 1996 . He later coached at the Middlesbrough Academy and entered the property market . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Keith Morton Houchen was born in Middlesbrough to Ken and <unk> Houchen , who both worked in social clubs , and grew up some five minutes from Ayresome Park . He grew up with three brothers ; Jimmy , Dennis , and Patrick , who all joined the Coldstream Guards ; and one sister , Jackie . He attended St Mary 's College as a youth . A promising athlete and gifted footballer , as a youngster he travelled to London for a trial with Crystal Palace along with John and Terry Fenwick , but was told he was too lightweight at the time . After an unsuccessful trial with Aston Villa , he became an apprentice at Chesterfield in 1977 . 
 = = = Hartlepool United = = = 
 He was not offered a professional contract at Chesterfield by manager Arthur Cox and so left the club without making a senior appearance at Saltergate . However he was soon spotted playing amateur football in Nunthorpe by Hartlepool United manager Billy Horner . Houchen joined the " Monkey Hangers " on non @-@ contract terms , before turning professional in February 1978 , signing a one @-@ year contract on £ 30 a week . When he arrived at the Victoria Park , Hartlepool were a struggling Fourth Division club . He made his debut in a 1 – 1 home draw with Crewe Alexandra . Though grateful for the opportunity and training , Houchen lamented that " we used to have a mad rush to the bank to cash our cheques . Only about six of them would go through and the rest would bounce . " He scored his first senior goal against Barnsley on 24 March 1978 . He scored further goals against Darlington , Rochdale and Newport County to end the 1977 – 78 campaign with four goals in 13 games . He played regular first team football in 1978 – 79 , and scored 13 goals in 42 games to become the club 's top scorer . He then went on to score 14 goals in 44 games in 1979 – 80 , as the club finished 19th , just two points above the re @-@ election zone . His goalscoring record attracted the attention of bigger clubs , however club chairman Vince Barker told Reading that even if Houchen was available then they would not be able to afford him . His exploits continued into the following season , and the club rejected bids of up to £ 80 @,@ 000 from Plymouth Argyle and Cardiff City . He scored 17 goals in 48 appearances in 1980 – 81 , yet again becoming the club 's top scorer , as Hartlepool were in the promotion hunt until a late spell of bad form sent them down the table to ninth . He hit 19 goals in 38 games in 1981 – 82 to become the club 's top @-@ scorer for a fourth consecutive season . However , having scored 65 goals in 170 league appearances , Houchen wanted a move to a bigger club at a higher division ; he regularly handed in transfer requests , but all were ignored by the club . 
 = = = Leyton Orient = = = 
 Hartlepool United were in dire financial straits by March 1982 , and were £ 60 @,@ 000 in debt to the Inland Revenue . This crisis at the club allowed Leyton Orient manager Ken Knighton to take Houchen to Brisbane Road for a bargain price of £ 25 @,@ 000 . He signed a four @-@ year contract on £ 225 a week with a £ 1 @,@ 000 signing on fee . He scored one goal against Chelsea in 14 appearances , as the " O 's " finished in last place and were relegated out of the Second Division in 1982 . He missed the start of the 1982 – 83 campaign due to injury , but managed to hit ten goals in 38 games by the end of the season . His ten goals included one against Sheffield United on the last day of the season , in a win which kept Orient in the Third Division . He scored ten goals in 34 games in 1983 – 84 , but was not highly rated by new boss Frank Clark . For his part , Houchen said that Clark " would shout , and rant and rave , and tactically he wasn 't particularly brilliant . " He handed in a transfer request , which was accepted . 
 = = = York City = = = 
 On 22 March 1984 , York City manager Denis Smith signed Houchen for a £ 15 @,@ 000 fee , later saying that " anybody who could score sixty @-@ five goals playing for Hartlepool must have something " . He signed a two @-@ year contract on £ 225 a week . He scored on his debut against Aldershot at the Recreation Ground , despite missing a penalty ; he replaced Steve Senior in the second half , who had broken his leg . The " Minstermen " went on to win the Fourth Division championship by a 16 @-@ point margin , with Houchen featuring mostly as a substitute in the final seven games . With John Byrne and Keith Walwyn forming an effective striking partnership , Houchen played as an attacking midfielder . He hit a hat @-@ trick in a 7 – 1 thrashing of Gillingham at Bootham Crescent , and also converted a penalty that he had won to knock Arsenal out of the FA Cup at the Fourth Round . He scored a total of 18 goals in 45 appearances in 1984 – 85 to become the club 's top scorer . However injuries helped to limit him to eight goals in 38 games in 1985 – 86 , and he decided to accept a move back down to the Fourth Division . 
 = = = Scunthorpe United = = = 
 He was sold on to Scunthorpe United for £ 40 @,@ 000 in March 1986 , signing a contract of £ 250 a week and receiving a car and an ex gratia payment of £ 10 @,@ 000 . Houchen later said that " it was the only time I ever gave up ... it wasn 't the right club because it wasn 't going anywhere ... I said to Yvonne , ' I 'm just going to take the money ' " . In doing so he rejected moves to Preston North End and Third Division Bury . He quickly regretted the move , and despite getting along well with manager Frank Barlow he found himself hating everything at the club , from the supporters to the Old Showground itself . 
 = = = Coventry City = = = 
 After 97 days with the " Iron " he moved on to Coventry City for a £ 60 @,@ 000 fee , after impressing in a reserve team game between the two clubs . The management team of George Curtis and John Sillett offered Houchen £ 350 a week , £ 50 an appearance , a £ 10 @,@ 000 signing @-@ on fee , as well the chance to play First Division football . He struggled with injuries at the start of the 1986 – 87 campaign , but recovered to ensure his name went down in the club 's history for his exploits in the FA Cup . He bagged five goals in their 1986 – 87 cup @-@ winning run , the first being the winning goal away at Old Trafford against Alex Ferguson 's Manchester United . He then scored two against Sheffield Wednesday in the quarter @-@ finals , and one against Leeds United in the semi @-@ finals , both games being held at Hillsborough . The final and most famous goal of the run came in the 1987 FA Cup Final in front of 98 @,@ 000 spectators at Wembley Stadium in a 3 – 2 win over Tottenham Hotspur . However Houchen almost missed the match after catching food poisoning from a trout caught by reserve goalkeeper Jake Findlay . The goal came from a Dave Bennett cross and was an instinctive full @-@ stretch diving header that was impossible for Ray Clemence to save . It levelled the score at 2 – 2 on 63 minutes , and an own goal from Gary <unk> in extra time won the game for Coventry . As well as his FA Cup winning medal , Houchen 's header also earned him the BBC Match of the Day 's Goal of the Season award for the 1986 – 87 season . This was due to the acrobatic effort involved and partly due to the incredible run he had made from deep midfield to meet the crossed ball . It is generally considered as one of the most famous goals scored at Wembley , and certainly the best headed goal . 
 " I never took my eyes off the ball . I ran looking over my shoulder , watching the ball on the turn , running , running , so if it came , that was where I went ... I couldn 't honestly say to you that I was consciously thinking that if the ball comes in I can dive and head it – it 's all instinct . I think all football is instinct and the only way I could get on the end of the ball was to throw myself . It all finishes up as perfect timing – the perfect ball , the perfect run – but in a lot of ways it 's a fluke . When it is all perfect timing , it is like a dance – it all comes together . I do remember actually heading it . I knew I was getting it , I knew I was going to get a good head on it , and you do think in the split second , ' Don 't head it wide , don 't head it over , don 't miss @-@ head it . ' ... I headed right past him [ Clemence ] , right in the corner . It was past him before he could move , so it was just the perfect header . " 
 Ironically , manager John Sillett spent much of the money from Coventry 's FA Cup run ( £ 750 @,@ 000 ) on Chelsea striker David Speedie , who would replace Houchen in front of goal . Sillett 's one consolation to Houchen was that he would play him in the 1987 FA Charity Shield , which ended in a 1 – 0 defeat to Everton . The 1987 – 88 season was poor for both club and player , as illness , injury and competition from Speedie , Gary Bannister and Cyrille Regis restricted Houchen to just three goals and 24 appearances . On 14 August 1988 , he was selected by Graham Taylor to represent the Football League in a game against Scunthorpe United to celebrate the opening of Glanford Park ; Houchen scored once in a 6 – 1 victory . He scored just twice in sixteen appearances in 1988 – 89 , though one of these goals was the winner against Midlands rivals Aston Villa in a 2 – 1 Boxing Day victory at Highfield Road . He also featured as a substitute in the infamous 2 – 1 defeat to Conference club Sutton United at Gander Green Lane . The result was all the more remarkable considering that Coventry went on to finish seventh in the league and that Houchen was one of ten Coventry players that day who had won the FA Cup less than two years previously . 
 = = = Hibernian = = = 
 In March 1989 , he took a £ 325 @,@ 000 transfer to Scottish Premier Division side Hibernian , banking a £ 65 @,@ 000 signing @-@ on fee . He had come close to signing for Queens Park Rangers , but was not willing to move to London following his experience with Orient . He scored on his debut , in a 2 – 1 defeat to Edinburgh rivals Hearts at Tynecastle . A further goal against Aberdeen gave him two goals in eight games at the end of the 1988 – 89 campaign . He hit 12 goals in 39 games to become the club 's top scorer in 1989 – 90 , including two in wins over Rangers at Easter Road and Ibrox , and one in Europe against Hungarian side <unk> . " Hibs " exited the UEFA Cup at the Second Round following defeat to Belgian club R.F.C. de Liège . Already riled by a telling off from manager Alex Miller , Houchen had a run in with his own supporters following a defeat to Raith Rovers at Stark 's Park . Following this confrontation he was singled out for abuse at Easter Road . He made his last appearance for the club in a Scottish Cup game against St Johnstone , during which he was sent off for kicking Tommy Turner . Houchen later said that he liked Scotland but did not enjoy Scottish football , and was particularly critical of the standard of refereeing ; referees were unwilling to punish fouls from defenders but quick to brandish cards for attackers who reacted poorly to being kicked . 
 = = = Port Vale = = = 
 In August 1991 he returned to England with a £ 100 @,@ 000 move to Port Vale ; he was one of three new arrivals , along with Peter Swan ( who took him in as a lodger ) and Martin Foyle . He scored a brace against Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux on 3 September , but tore his hamstring later in the month . He finished 1991 – 92 with five goals in 24 games , and went on to help the " Valiants " to win the TNT Tournament in the summer . The club finished bottom of the Second Division , though the introduction of the Premier League meant that they were demoted to the Third Division , which was immediately re @-@ branded as the Second Division . He scored six goals in 28 league games in 1992 – 93 , and did not feature in the League Trophy final or the play @-@ off final . He fell out with manager John Rudge and the two stopped speaking to each other , and Houchen later admitted that " I should have knocked on the door and said , ' This is stupid ' " . 
 = = = Return to Hartlepool = = = 
 He left Vale Park on a free transfer in June 1993 and turned down a move to Cyprus outfit AC Omonia to return to former club Hartlepool United . Injury meant he did not play for the man who signed him , Viv Busby , and instead he made his second debut for the club under John MacPhail . Houchen went on to score eight goals in 37 games as Hartlepool were relegated into the bottom tier of the Football League in 1993 – 94 , finishing a massive 17 points behind Blackpool , who were one point above the relegation zone . MacPhail was quickly sacked and replaced by David McCreery ; MacPhail blamed the fact that the club was sometimes unable to pay the player 's wages as a reason for poor results on the field . Houchen was a coach at the club , but quickly fell out with temporary ' advisory coach ' Sandy Clark . Houchen scored a hat @-@ trick against Bury , though was later sent off in the match for allegedly swearing at referee Kevin Lynch ; at the time of the incident Houchen was receiving treatment for knee ligament damage which would keep him out of action for six weeks . McCreery resigned on 20 April 1995 , and chairman Harold Hornsey appointed Houchen as his replacement ; he became the 23rd manager at the club in 38 years . He appointed his former boss Billy Horner as youth team coach and also employed Brian Honour and Mick Tait . His first game in charge was a 4 – 0 home win over Hereford United , and a 3 – 0 defeat at Preston North End and a final day 3 – 2 victory over Mansfield Town ensured Hartlepool an 18th @-@ place finish . As a player , he was the club 's top scorer with 14 goals in 39 appearances in 1994 – 95 , and was voted Player of the Year by the club 's supporters . 
 The 1995 – 96 season was to be his only full season as a manager . He scored six goals in 41 games , leading " Pools " to a 20th @-@ place finish on a budget of £ 260 @,@ 000 a year . His team were beaten 8 – 0 by Arsenal over two legs in the League Cup and – more worryingly – were beaten 8 – 0 by Crewe Alexandra in the Football League Trophy . He sold Nicky Southall to Grimsby Town for £ 40 @,@ 000 and spent the same amount on striker Joe Allon . He proved a disappointment , and both Allon and Houchen were sent off against Gillingham on 28 October . Houchen 's final career goal came in a 3 – 0 win over Bury on New Year 's Day . 
 He released goalkeeper Brian Horne , who he described as a " fat slob " ; this proved to be an unpopular move with " a lot of nasty people who support Hartlepool ... who purport to support this club [ but ] would rather back fat professional players than people who really care about Hartlepool United " . As his replacement he signed Stephen Pears from Liverpool , as well as young defenders Glen Davies and Chris McDonald , teenage winger David Clegg , Exeter City midfielder Mark Cooper , and Blackpool midfielder Chris Beech . Hartlepool started the 1996 – 97 campaign with wins over Colchester United and Fulham , but his playing career came to an end after the fifth game of the season , against Wigan Athletic , when he retired due to a persistent knee injury . He continued to bemoan referring decisions which seemed to consistently go against Hartlepool . This in turn led to continued punishments from the FA over his use of foul language towards officials . With his team on a poor run of results at the foot of the table , he left the club by mutual consent on 4 November 1996 . His assistant Mick Tait led the club to a 20th @-@ place finish , and organised a benefit match for Houchen against Middlesbrough , which raised £ 23 @,@ 000 . 
 " I had to walk away from all that nonsense . I didn 't deserve it . I 'd put too much into the club to be treated like that . I 'd put in so many hours . I 'd tried and tried to get it going . I thought , ' I just can 't stand it . ' ... The whole ground was singing ' Houchen Out ' . I was standing behind the dug @-@ out and thinking , ' I don 't need this ' ... I felt very , very let down by the supporters of Hartlepool United Football Club ... There are a lot of shit people following every club . They are everywhere , that type , with brains the size of a pea . I wouldn 't keep the players they wanted , players who were patently not good enough and were really , really bad professionals ... the majority of them [ supporters ] are nasty people . There are more of them at Hartlepool than elsewhere – without a shadow of doubt . " 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Houchen was a big 6 ft 1 in ( 1 @.@ 85 m ) centre @-@ forward who had strength and power . Early in his career he broke his ribs and backbone , but learned the tricks of the trade , such as interlinking arms with opposition players to prevent them from jumping . Billy Horner compared him with Malcolm <unk> , and stated the only quality missing in Houchen 's game was aggression . Horner and his coaching team of George Smith and Willie Maddren taught Houchen how to protect himself from the highly physical centre @-@ halves that dominated the division , and the youngster learned how to hold the ball up and bring other players into the attack . 
 = = Personal life and post @-@ retirement = = 
 He married wife Yvonne on 17 July 1982 ; the couple had two children : Cara and Ross ( born 19 April 1987 ) . They now live in Thirsk , North Yorkshire . After retiring as a player , Houchen spent his time coaching at schools and at the Middlesbrough Academy , collecting football statistics for the Press Association , and renting out properties . 
 He was a supporter of Margaret Thatcher . He appeared as one of the players selected for the new Wembley Stadium 's ' Walk of Fame ' prior to the venue 's first FA Cup final in May 2007 . A 256 @-@ page biography of his footballing career entitled A Tenner and a Box of <unk> , written by Jonathan Strange , was published in 2006 . After reading the book , Houchen admitted that his comments about Hartlepool United came across as " a bit harsh " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Source : 
 = = Managerial statistics = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 York City 
 Football League Fourth Division champion : 1983 – 84 
 Coventry City 
 FA Cup winner : 1987 
 FA Charity Shield runner @-@ up : 1987 
 Port Vale 
 TNT Tournament winner : 1992 
 Individual 
 Match of the Day 's Goal of the Season Award : 1986 – 87 
 Hartlepool United F.C. Player of the Year : 1994 – 95 
 = Bad Elk v. United States = 
 John Bad Elk v. United States , 177 U.S. 529 ( 1900 ) , was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that an individual had the right to use force to resist an unlawful arrest and was entitled to a jury instruction to that effect . In 1889 , a tribal police officer , John Bad Elk , shot and killed another tribal police officer who was attempting to arrest Bad Elk without a warrant , on a misdemeanor charge , for a crime allegedly committed outside of the presence of the arresting officer . The Supreme Court reversed his conviction , noting that a person had the right to resist an unlawful arrest , and in the case of a death , murder may be reduced to manslaughter . The Supreme Court held the arrest to be unlawful due , in part , to the lack of a valid warrant . This case has been widely cited on the internet , but is no longer considered good law in a growing number of jurisdictions . Most states have , either by statute or by case law , removed the unlawful arrest defense for resisting arrest . The case also received negative treatment in 532 U.S. 318 ( 2001 ) holding that an arrest without a warrant , even for a misdemeanor , is lawful . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Common law history = = = 
 The English common law has long recognized the right of an individual to resist with reasonable force an attempt of a police officer to make an unlawful arrest . This offered a complete defense if nonlethal force was used , and would reduce a murder charge to manslaughter if a death ensued . In Hopkin Huggett 's case , English officials illegally seized a man to serve in the King 's army . Huggett and others observed this and fought to free the man . In the course of the fight one of the King 's men , John Barry , was killed and Huggett was put on trial for murder . The English court ruled that since the officer was making an unlawful arrest , the most that could be charged was manslaughter . In 1709 , in Queen v. Tooley , the English court again found that when resisting an unlawful arrest , the death of an individual would result in a manslaughter charge instead of a murder charge . When the United States separated from England , the common law was adopted by the new American courts and the right to resist unlawful arrest was clearly recognized . 
 = = = Death of John Kills Back = = = 
 On March 8 , 1899 , John Bad Elk fired several shots from his pistol from or near his home on the Pine Ridge Reservation . At the time Bad Elk was employed as a tribal police officer for the Oglala Lakota Sioux tribe . Captain Gleason , who was in charge of that part of the reservation , heard the shots and asked Bad Elk to stop by his office to discuss the matter , but Bad Elk did not show up . Gleason then ordered several other tribal police officers to arrest Bad Elk and to take him to the Pine Ridge Agency , about 25 miles away . Three officers contacted Bad Elk , who refused to go with them , telling them that he would go in the morning . The officers then tried to arrest Bad Elk , who shot and killed John Kills Back . Bad Elk claimed that Kills Back had reached for his pistol and that Bad Elk fired in self @-@ defense . Kills Back and the other officers did not have an arrest warrant , nor was the offense one that they could arrest for without a warrant . 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 In April 1899 at Sioux Falls , Bad Elk was tried in the United States Circuit Court for the District of South Dakota for murder . At trial , Bad Elk requested a jury instruction allowing the jury to consider that he had a right to resist an unlawful arrest . Instead , the court gave a jury instruction that stated that Bad Elk did not have the right to resist an arrest and that Bad Elk only had the right to resist if the arresting officers used excessive force in making the arrest . The jury convicted Bad Elk and sentenced him to death . His execution date was set at June 16 , 1899 . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 Justice Rufus Wheeler Peckham delivered the opinion of a unanimous court . Peckham noted that the prosecution 's case and the defendant 's case varied in their presentation of the facts . First he noted that the prosecution did not show and the court could not find a legal basis for the arrest , that at most the firing of the pistol was a misdemeanor if it were a crime at all . An officer could arrest for a felony without a warrant , but to arrest for a misdemeanor , the crime had to have occurred in the officer 's presence . They ruled that the captain also did not have the authority to order the arrest . The court noted that at common law , an individual had a right to use reasonable force to resist an unlawful arrest . Peckham said that the requested jury instruction was therefore material and that it was error for the trial court not to allow it . The court stated : 
 At common law , if a party resisted arrest by an officer without warrant and who had no right to arrest him , and if in the course of that resistance the officer was killed , the offense of the party resisting arrest would be reduced from what would have been murder if the officer had had the right to arrest , to manslaughter . What would be murder if the officer had the right to arrest might be reduced to manslaughter by the very fact that he had no such right . So an officer , at common law , was not authorized to make an arrest without a warrant , for a mere misdemeanor not committed in his presence . 
 The decision of the lower court was reversed and the case remanded for either a new trial or dismissal . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 = = = Scholarly response = = = 
 The first response to the common law rule appeared in 1924 , when it was questioned in a law review note which advocated abrogating the rule . In 1942 , Harvard Law professor Sam Bass Warner , in his support of the Uniform Arrest Act , proposed that a citizen had a duty to submit to arrest , legal or not , if he reasonably believed that the arresting individual was a peace officer . Warner 's explanations and reasoning appear to have been " accepted without question by subsequent courts ... " In 1969 , during the height of the Civil Rights Movement , Paul Chevigny of the New York branch of the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) responded that an unlawful arrest was a trespass against the person and was not consistent with Warner 's explanations . 
 = = = Common and statutory law = = = 
 In the 1960s , courts began to limit the right to resist an unlawful arrest , apparently influenced by Warner and by the Model Penal Code , which had eliminated the right . In 1965 , the first court struck down the right in New Jersey . 
 Although a few states adopted the Uniform Arrest Act , a majority of the states did not . The Model Penal Code in 1962 eliminated the right to resist an unlawful arrest on two grounds . First , there were better alternative means of resolving the issue ; second , resistance would likely result in greater injury to the citizen without preventing the arrest . By 2012 , only fourteen states allowed a citizen to resist an unlawful arrest . 
 = = = Internet meme and myths = = = 
 The case has also been cited on various internet sites as giving citizens the authority to resist unlawful arrest . This claim is normally put forth in connection with a misquoted version of Plummer v. State . The most commonly quoted version is : 
 " Citizens may resist unlawful arrest to the point of taking an arresting officer 's life if necessary . ” Plummer v. State , 136 Ind . 306 [ sic ] . This premise was upheld by the Supreme Court of the United States in the case : John Bad Elk v. U.S. , 177 U.S. 529 . The Court stated : “ Where the officer is killed in the course of the disorder which naturally accompanies an attempted arrest that is resisted , the law looks with very different eyes upon the transaction , when the officer had the right to make the arrest , from what it does if the officer had no right . What may be murder in the first case might be nothing more than manslaughter in the other , or the facts might show that no offense had been committed . " 
 Modern sources citing Plummer and Bad Elk have tended to discuss the issue as defense against unlawful force ; under contemporary law in most jurisdictions , a person may not use force to resist an unlawful arrest . The Plummer quote has been noted to be a fabrication , not appearing in the text of the opinion . 
 = Ctenophora = 
 Ctenophora ( / <unk> / ; singular ctenophore , / <unk> / or / <unk> / ; from the Greek <unk> <unk> ' comb ' and <unk> <unk> ' carry ' ; commonly known as comb jellies ) is a phylum of invertebrate animals that live in marine waters worldwide . Their most distinctive feature is the ‘ combs ’ – groups of cilia which they use for swimming – they are the largest animals that swim by means of cilia . Adults of various species range from a few millimeters to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) in size . Like cnidarians , their bodies consist of a mass of jelly , with one layer of cells on the outside and another lining the internal cavity . In ctenophores , these layers are two cells deep , while those in cnidarians are only one cell deep . Some authors combined ctenophores and cnidarians in one phylum , Coelenterata , as both groups rely on water flow through the body cavity for both digestion and respiration . Increasing awareness of the differences persuaded more recent authors to classify them as separate phyla . 
 Ctenophores also resemble cnidarians in having a decentralized nerve net rather than a brain . Genomic studies have suggested that the neurons of Ctenophora , which differ in many ways from other animal neurons , evolved independently from those of the other animals . 
 Almost all ctenophores are predators , taking prey ranging from microscopic larvae and rotifers to the adults of small crustaceans ; the exceptions are juveniles of two species , which live as parasites on the salps on which adults of their species feed . In favorable circumstances , ctenophores can eat ten times their own weight in a day . Only 100 – 150 species have been validated , and possibly another 25 have not been fully described and named . The textbook examples are cydippids with egg @-@ shaped bodies and a pair of retractable tentacles fringed with tentilla ( " little tentacles " ) that are covered with colloblasts , sticky cells that capture prey . The phylum has a wide range of body forms , including the flattened , deep @-@ sea platyctenids , in which the adults of most species lack combs , and the coastal beroids , which lack tentacles and prey on other ctenophores by using huge mouths armed with groups of large , stiffened cilia that act as teeth . These variations enable different species to build huge populations in the same area , because they specialize in different types of prey , which they capture by as wide a range of methods as spiders use . 
 Most species are hermaphrodites — a single animal can produce both eggs and sperm , meaning it can fertilize its own egg , not needing a mate . Some are simultaneous hermaphrodites , which can produce both eggs and sperm at the same time . Others are sequential hermaphrodites , in which the eggs and sperm mature at different times . Fertilization is generally external , although platyctenids ' eggs are fertilized inside their parents ' bodies and kept there until they hatch . The young are generally planktonic and in most species look like miniature cydippids , gradually changing into their adult shapes as they grow . The exceptions are the beroids , whose young are miniature beroids with large mouths and no tentacles , and the platyctenids , whose young live as cydippid @-@ like plankton until they reach near @-@ adult size , but then sink to the bottom and rapidly metamorphose into the adult form . In at least some species , juveniles are capable of reproduction before reaching the adult size and shape . The combination of hermaphroditism and early reproduction enables small populations to grow at an explosive rate . 
 Ctenophores may be abundant during the summer months in some coastal locations , but in other places they are uncommon and difficult to find . In bays where they occur in very high numbers , predation by ctenophores may control the populations of small <unk> organisms such as copepods , which might otherwise wipe out the phytoplankton ( planktonic plants ) , which are a vital part of marine food chains . One ctenophore , Mnemiopsis , has accidentally been introduced into the Black Sea , where it is blamed for causing fish stocks to collapse by eating both fish larvae and organisms that would otherwise have fed the fish . The situation was aggravated by other factors , such as over @-@ fishing and long @-@ term environmental changes that promoted the growth of the Mnemiopsis population . The later accidental introduction of Beroe helped to mitigate the problem , as Beroe preys on other ctenophores . 
 Despite their soft , gelatinous bodies , fossils thought to represent ctenophores , apparently with no tentacles but many more comb @-@ rows than modern forms , have been found in lagerstätten as far back as the early Cambrian , about 515 million years ago . The position of the ctenophores in the evolutionary family tree of animals has long been debated , and the majority view at present , based on molecular phylogenetics , is that cnidarians and bilaterians are more closely related to each other than either is to ctenophores . A recent molecular phylogenetics analysis concluded that the common ancestor of all modern ctenophores was cydippid @-@ like , and that all the modern groups appeared relatively recently , probably after the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event 66 million years ago . Evidence accumulating since the 1980s indicates that the " cydippids " are not monophyletic , in other words do not include all and only the descendants of a single common ancestor , because all the other traditional ctenophore groups are descendants of various cydippids . 
 = = Distinguishing features = = 
 Ctenophores form an animal phylum that is more complex than sponges , about as complex as cnidarians ( jellyfish , sea anemones , etc . ) , and less complex than bilaterians ( which include almost all other animals ) . Unlike sponges , both ctenophores and cnidarians have : cells bound by inter @-@ cell connections and carpet @-@ like basement membranes ; muscles ; nervous systems ; and some have sensory organs . Ctenophores are distinguished from all other animals by having colloblasts , which are sticky and adhere to prey , although a few ctenophore species lack them . 
 Like sponges and cnidarians , ctenophores have two main layers of cells that sandwich a middle layer of jelly @-@ like material , which is called the mesoglea in cnidarians and ctenophores ; more complex animals have three main cell layers and no intermediate jelly @-@ like layer . Hence ctenophores and cnidarians have traditionally been labelled diploblastic , along with sponges . Both ctenophores and cnidarians have a type of muscle that , in more complex animals , arises from the middle cell layer , and as a result some recent text books classify ctenophores as triploblastic , while others still regard them as diploblastic . 
 Ranging from about 1 millimeter ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) to 1 @.@ 5 meters ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in size , ctenophores are the largest non @-@ colonial animals that use cilia ( " hairs " ) as their main method of locomotion . Most species have eight strips , called comb rows , that run the length of their bodies and bear comb @-@ like bands of cilia , called " <unk> , " stacked along the comb rows so that when the cilia beat , those of each comb touch the comb below . The name " <unk> " means " comb @-@ bearing " , from the Greek <unk> ( stem @-@ form <unk> ) meaning " comb " and the Greek suffix <unk> meaning " carrying " . 
 = = Description = = 
 For a phylum with relatively few species , ctenophores have a wide range of body plans . Coastal species need to be tough enough to withstand waves and swirling sediment particles , while some oceanic species are so fragile that it is very difficult to capture them intact for study . In addition oceanic species do not preserve well , and are known mainly from photographs and from observers ' notes . Hence most attention has until recently concentrated on three coastal genera – Pleurobrachia , Beroe and Mnemiopsis . At least two textbooks base their descriptions of ctenophores on the cydippid Pleurobrachia . 
 Since the body of many species is almost radially symmetrical , the main axis is oral to aboral ( from the mouth to the opposite end ) . However , since only two of the canals near the statocyst terminate in anal pores , ctenophores have no mirror @-@ symmetry , although many have rotational symmetry , in other words if the animal rotates in a half @-@ circle it looks the same as when it started . 
 = = = Common features = = = 
 = = = = Body layers = = = = 
 Like those of cnidarians , ( jellyfish , sea anemones , etc . ) , ctenophores ' bodies consist of a relatively thick , jelly @-@ like mesoglea sandwiched between two epithelia , layers of cells bound by inter @-@ cell connections and by a fibrous basement membrane that they secrete . The epithelia of ctenophores have two layers of cells rather than one , and some of the cells in the upper layer have several cilia per cell . 
 The outer layer of the epidermis ( outer skin ) consists of : sensory cells ; cells that secrete mucus , which protects the body ; and interstitial cells , which can transform into other types of cell . In specialized parts of the body the outer layer also contains colloblasts , found along the surface of tentacles and used in capturing prey , or cells bearing multiple large cilia , for locomotion . The inner layer of the epidermis contains a nerve net , and myoepithelial cells that act as muscles . 
 The internal cavity forms : a mouth that can usually be closed by muscles ; a pharynx ( " throat " ) ; a wider area in the center that acts as a stomach ; and a system of internal canals . These branch through the mesoglea to the most active parts of the animal : the mouth and pharynx ; the roots of the tentacles , if present ; all along the underside of each comb row ; and four branches round the sensory complex at the far end from the mouth – two of these four branches terminate in anal pores . The inner surface of the cavity is lined with an epithelium , the gastrodermis . The mouth and pharynx have both cilia and well @-@ developed muscles . In other parts of the canal system , the gastrodermis is different on the sides nearest to and furthest from the organ that it supplies . The nearer side is composed of tall nutritive cells that store nutrients in vacuoles ( internal compartments ) , germ cells that produce eggs or sperm , and photocytes that produce bioluminescence . The side furthest from the organ is covered with ciliated cells that circulate water through the canals , punctuated by ciliary rosettes , pores that are surrounded by double whorls of cilia and connect to the mesoglea . 
 = = = = Feeding , excretion and respiration = = = = 
 When prey is swallowed , it is liquefied in the pharynx by enzymes and by muscular contractions of the pharynx . The resulting slurry is wafted through the canal system by the beating of the cilia , and digested by the nutritive cells . The ciliary rosettes in the canals may help to transport nutrients to muscles in the mesoglea . The anal pores may eject unwanted small particles , but most unwanted matter is regurgitated via the mouth . 
 Little is known about how ctenophores get rid of waste products produced by the cells . The ciliary rosettes in the gastrodermis may help to remove wastes from the mesoglea , and may also help to adjust the animal 's buoyancy by pumping water into or out of the mesoglea . 
 = = = = Locomotion = = = = 
 The outer surface bears usually eight comb rows , called swimming @-@ plates , which are used for swimming . The rows are oriented to run from near the mouth ( the " oral pole " ) to the opposite end ( the " aboral pole " ) , and are spaced more or less evenly around the body , although spacing patterns vary by species and in most species the comb rows extend only part of the distance from the aboral pole towards the mouth . The " combs " ( also called " <unk> " or " comb plates " ) run across each row , and each consists of thousands of unusually long cilia , up to 2 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 079 in ) . Unlike conventional cilia and flagella , which has a filament structure arranged in a 9 + 2 pattern , these cilia are arranged in a 9 + 3 pattern , where the extra compact filament is suspected to have a supporting function . These normally beat so that the propulsion stroke is away from the mouth , although they can also reverse direction . Hence ctenophores usually swim in the direction in which the mouth is eating , unlike jellyfish . When trying to escape predators , one species can accelerate to six times its normal speed ; some other species reverse direction as part of their escape behavior , by reversing the power stroke of the comb plate cilia . 
 It is uncertain how ctenophores control their buoyancy , but experiments have shown that some species rely on osmotic pressure to adapt to water of different densities . Their body fluids are normally as concentrated as seawater . If they enter less dense brackish water , the ciliary rosettes in the body cavity may pump this into the mesoglea to increase its bulk and decrease its density , to avoid sinking . Conversely if they move from brackish to full @-@ strength seawater , the rosettes may pump water out of the mesoglea to reduce its volume and increase its density . 
 = = = = Nervous system and senses = = = = 
 Ctenophores have no brain or central nervous system , but instead have a nerve net ( rather like a cobweb ) that forms a ring round the mouth and is densest near structures such as the comb rows , pharynx , tentacles ( if present ) and the sensory complex furthest from the mouth . 
 The largest single sensory feature is the aboral organ ( at the opposite end from the mouth ) . Its main component is a statocyst , a balance sensor consisting of a statolith , a tiny grain of calcium carbonate , supported on four bundles of cilia , called " balancers " , that sense its orientation . The statocyst is protected by a transparent dome made of long , immobile cilia . A ctenophore does not automatically try to keep the statolith resting equally on all the balancers . Instead its response is determined by the animal 's " mood " , in other words the overall state of the nervous system . For example , if a ctenophore with trailing tentacles captures prey , it will often put some comb rows into reverse , spinning the mouth towards the prey . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> ctenophores have bodies that are more or less rounded , sometimes nearly spherical and other times more cylindrical or egg @-@ shaped ; the common coastal " sea gooseberry , " Pleurobrachia , sometimes has an egg @-@ shaped body with the mouth at the narrow end , although some individuals are more uniformly round . From opposite sides of the body extends a pair of long , slender tentacles , each housed in a sheath into which it can be withdrawn . Some species of cydippids have bodies that are flattened to various extents , so that they are wider in the plane of the tentacles . 
 The tentacles of cydippid ctenophores are typically fringed with tentilla ( " little tentacles " ) , although a few genera have simple tentacles without these <unk> . The tentacles and tentilla are densely covered with microscopic colloblasts that capture prey by sticking to it . <unk> are specialized mushroom @-@ shaped cells in the outer layer of the epidermis , and have three main components : a domed head with vesicles ( chambers ) that contain adhesive ; a stalk that anchors the cell in the lower layer of the epidermis or in the mesoglea ; and a spiral thread that coils round the stalk and is attached to the head and to the root of the stalk . The function of the spiral thread is uncertain , but it may absorb stress when prey tries to escape , and thus prevent the <unk> from being torn apart . In addition to colloblasts , members of the genus <unk> , which feed mainly on jellyfish , incorporate their victims ' stinging <unk> into their own tentacles – some cnidaria @-@ eating nudibranchs similarly incorporate <unk> into their bodies for defense . The tentilla of Euplokamis differ significantly from those of other cydippids : they contain striated muscle , a cell type otherwise unknown in the phylum Ctenophora ; and they are coiled when relaxed , while the tentilla of all other known ctenophores elongate when relaxed . Euplokamis ' tentilla have three types of movement that are used in capturing prey : they may flick out very quickly ( in 40 to 60 milliseconds ) ; they can wriggle , which may lure prey by behaving like small planktonic worms ; and they coil round prey . The unique flicking is an uncoiling movement powered by contraction of the striated muscle . The wriggling motion is produced by smooth muscles , but of a highly specialized type . <unk> around prey is accomplished largely by the return of the tentilla to their inactive state , but the coils may be tightened by smooth muscle . 
 There are eight rows of combs that run from near the mouth to the opposite end , and are spaced evenly round the body . The " combs " beat in a <unk> rhythm rather like that of a Mexican wave . From each balancer in the statocyst a ciliary groove runs out under the dome and then splits to connect with two adjacent comb rows , and in some species runs all the way along the comb rows . This forms a mechanical system for transmitting the beat rhythm from the combs to the balancers , via water disturbances created by the cilia . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Lobata have a pair of lobes , which are muscular , cuplike extensions of the body that project beyond the mouth . Their inconspicuous tentacles originate from the corners of the mouth , running in convoluted grooves and spreading out over the inner surface of the lobes ( rather than trailing far behind , as in the <unk> ) . Between the lobes on either side of the mouth , many species of lobates have four auricles , gelatinous projections edged with cilia that produce water currents that help direct microscopic prey toward the mouth . This combination of structures enables lobates to feed continuously on suspended planktonic prey . 
