 incidence of tuberculosis has dropped from 101 to 69 per 100 @,@ 000 people . 
 The country 's progress in healthcare has been cited by the international media and charities . The Atlantic devoted an article to " Rwanda 's Historic Health Recovery " , . Partners In Health described the health gains " among the most dramatic the world has seen in the last 50 years " . 
 Despite these improvements , however , the country 's health profile remains dominated by communicable diseases , and the United States Agency for International Development has described " significant health challenges " , including the rate of maternal mortality , which it describes as " unacceptably high " , as well as the ongoing HIV / AIDS epidemic . According to the American Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , travelers to Rwanda are highly recommended to take preventive malaria medication as well as make sure they are up to date with vaccines such as yellow fever . 
 Rwanda also has a shortage of medical professionals , with only 0 @.@ 84 physicians , nurses , and midwives per 1 @,@ 000 residents . The United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) is monitoring the country 's health progress towards Millennium Development Goals 4 – 6 , which relate to healthcare . A mid @-@ 2015 UNDP report noted that the country was not on target to meet goal 4 on infant mortality , despite it having " fallen dramatically " ; the country is " making good progress " towards goal 5 , which is to reduce by three quarters the maternal mortality ratio , while goal 6 is not yet met as HIV prevalence has not started falling . 
 = German cruiser Königsberg = 
 Königsberg was a German light cruiser that was operated between 1929 and April 1940 , including service in World War II . She was the lead vessel of her class and was operated by two German navies , the Reichsmarine and the Kriegsmarine . She had two sister ships , Karlsruhe and Köln . Königsberg was built by the Kriegsmarinewerft in Wilhelmshaven ; she was laid down in April 1926 , launched in March 1927 , and commissioned into the Reichsmarine in April 1929 . She was armed with a main battery of nine 15 cm SK C / 25 guns in three triple turrets and had a top speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) . 
 Königsberg served as a training ship for naval cadets throughout the 1930s , and joined the non @-@ intervention patrols during the Spanish Civil War in the late 1930s . After the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , she laid defensive minefields in the North Sea and then participated in Operation Weserübung , the invasion of Norway in April 1940 . While attacking Bergen , she was badly damaged by Norwegian coastal artillery , and sunk by British bombers the following day in the harbor . The wreck was eventually raised in 1942 and broken up for scrap the following year . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Königsberg was 174 meters ( 571 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 15 @.@ 2 m ( 50 ft ) and a maximum draft of 6 @.@ 28 m ( 20 @.@ 6 ft ) . She displaced 7 @,@ 700 long tons ( 7 @,@ 800 t ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of four steam turbines and a pair of 10 @-@ cylinder four @-@ stroke diesel engines . Steam for the turbines was provided by six Marine @-@ type double @-@ ended oil @-@ fired boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) and a range of approximately 5 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 600 km ; 6 @,@ 600 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Königsberg had a crew of 21 officers and 493 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with nine 15 cm SK C / 25 guns mounted in three triple gun turrets . One was located forward , and two were placed in a superfiring pair aft . The rear gun turrets were offset to increase their arc of fire . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 080 rounds of ammunition , for 120 shells per gun . The ship was also equipped with two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns in single mounts ; they had 400 rounds of ammunition each . Königsberg also carried four triple torpedo tube mounts located amidships ; they were supplied with twenty @-@ four 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedoes . She was also capable of carrying 120 naval mines . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick amidships and an armored belt that was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Königsberg was ordered as " Cruiser B " and given the temporary name Ersatz Thetis , since she was intended to replace the old cruiser Thetis . She was laid down at the Kriegsmarinewerft in Wilhelmshaven on 12 April 1926 and launched on 26 March 1927 . She was commissioned into the Reichsmarine on 17 April 1929 . After her commissioning , the ship was assigned as the flagship of the reconnaissance force for the German fleet . She thereafter conducted a series of training cruises for naval cadets and made numerous goodwill visits throughout the Mediterranean Sea . In 1931 , the ship 's first major modification took place ; her foremast was shortened and her rear superstructure was slightly lengthened . Otto von Schrader commanded the ship from September 1931 to September 1934 . Hubert <unk> relieved him and served as the ship 's captain for the following year . In 1934 , a pair of 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns in individual mounts were installed on her aft superstructure just forward of her main battery turrets . That same year , she and the cruiser Leipzig made the first goodwill visit to the United Kingdom since the end of World War I sixteen years earlier . 
 In 1935 , the ship had an aircraft catapult installed , along with a crane to handle floatplanes . The following year , the single 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were replaced with a new triaxially stabilized twin @-@ mount ; two other twin mounts were added on the rear superstructure . Fire control directors for the anti @-@ aircraft guns were also installed . After emerging from this refit , Königsberg was employed as a gunnery training ship . During the Spanish Civil War in the late 1930s , the ship participated in non @-@ intervention patrols , during which she forced Republicans to surrender a German freighter they had seized . 
 After returning to Germany , Königsberg resumed her gunnery training duties , and also served as a testbed for radar prototypes . She was scheduled to be transferred to the U @-@ boat School , where she would be used as a target ship for U @-@ boat crews . This duty was interrupted by the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 . One day before the German invasion of Poland , on 31 August , Königsberg spotted the Polish destroyers Burza and <unk> in the Baltic . At the start of hostilities , she and several other German cruisers laid a defensive minefield in the North Sea . She then went into the Baltic Sea for training maneuvers . Kurt @-@ Caesar Hoffmann served as the ship 's captain from June to September 1939 . In late 1939 , a degaussing coil was installed on the ship 's hull . Königsberg returned to active duty in March 1940 , when she was assigned to the invasion force for the attack on Norway . 
 = = = Operation Weserübung = = = 
 The invasion of Norway took place in early April 1940 . Königsberg was assigned to Gruppe 3 , and was tasked with transporting 600 troops from the Wehrmacht 's 69th Infantry Division from Wilhelmshaven to Bergen , Norway . Gruppe 3 also included her sister ship Köln , the artillery training ship Bremse , and the torpedo boats Wolf and Leopard . The Germans left Wilhelmshaven on 8 April , and had reached their target the following day , where Königsberg transferred part of the landing party to several smaller vessels . She then made a high @-@ speed run into the port in an attempt to land the remainder of the infantry in the town directly . A 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) coastal battery at the <unk> Fort took the ship under fire , and scored three hits , all forward . The hits caused severe flooding and fires in her boiler rooms that cut the ship 's power . Adrift , and unable to maneuver , Königsberg had to drop anchor , while she and Köln , Luftwaffe bombers , and the infantry neutralized the Norwegian guns . 
 Königsberg required major repairs before she would be able to return to Germany , so she was temporarily moored in the harbor with her broadside facing the harbor entrance . This would allow her to bring all of her main battery guns to bear against any British naval attack . The rest of Gruppe 3 returned to Germany . On the evening of 9 April , she was attacked by British bombers , but to no effect . The following morning , the British launched another air raid on the ship . The raid consisted of sixteen Blackburn Skua dive bombers of the British Fleet Air Arm ( seven of 800 Naval Air Squadron and nine of 803 Naval Air Squadron ) , launched from RNAS Hatston , Orkney . Königsberg 's thin deck armor rendered her quite vulnerable to dive bomber attack . The Skuas attacked in three groups : the nine of 803 NAS , six of 800 NAS , and one aircraft of 800 NAS which lost contact during the outward flight but found Königsberg independently . The dive bombers attacked at 7 : 20 , catching the ship 's crew off guard . Half of the dive bombers had completed their dives before the crew realized they were under attack . Only one large anti @-@ aircraft gun was reported as being manned with shells being fired once every five seconds from the aft of the ship with lighter anti @-@ air weapons firing from the shore and adjacent ships firing even later in the attack . 
 Königsberg was hit by at least five 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) bombs , which caused serious damage to the ship . One penetrated her thin deck armor , went through the ship , and exploded in the water , causing significant structural damage . Another hit destroyed the auxiliary boiler room . Two more bombs exploded in the water next to the ship ; the concussion from the blasts tore large holes in the hull . She took on a heavy list almost immediately , and the captain ordered the crew to abandon the ship . It took slightly less than three hours from the start of the attack for the ship to completely capsize and sink , which gave the crew enough time to evacuate many of the dead and wounded . They also had time to remove a significant amount of ammunition and equipment from the stricken cruiser . Only eighteen men were killed in the attack . The wreck was raised on 17 July 1942 , and slowly broken up for scrap thereafter . By 1943 , the wreck had been completely dismantled in situ . 
 = Lufthansa Flight 615 = 
 The hijacking of Lufthansa Flight 615 was an act of terrorism committed by a Palestinian group that occurred on 29 October 1972 and aimed at the liberation of the three surviving perpetrators of the Munich massacre from a West German prison . 
 When the Lufthansa airplane was seized by sympathisers of Black September during the Beirut @-@ Ankara part of a multi @-@ stopover flight from Damascus to Frankfurt , the West German authorities complied with the demand of having the prisoners released . They were handed over at Zagreb Airport , and the hijacked aircraft was flown to Tripoli , where all hostages were released . The liberated Munich attackers were granted asylum by Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
 For its actions , the West German government was criticised by Israel and other parties , in some cases combined with allegations that the hijacking had been staged or at least tolerated . 
 = = Background : The Olympic hostage crisis and its aftermath = = 
 On 5 September 1972 , during the Munich Summer Olympics , eight fighters of the Palestinian group Black September took hostage eleven members of the Israeli Olympic team . Eventually , all hostages were killed , either in the initial assault or during a shoot @-@ out following a failed police rescue attempt at Fürstenfeldbruck Air Base . Three perpetrators ( Adnan Al @-@ Gashey , Jamal Al @-@ Gashey , and Mohammed Safady ) survived and were subsequently arrested and held in pre @-@ trial custody . 
 In the immediate aftermath of the Munich massacre , West German authorities were concerned over being drawn into the Arab – Israeli conflict . As foreign minister Walter Scheel put it in October 1972 , one had to " defend against actions by both sides of the conflict " . In Israel , the ensuing German appeasement politics led to comparisons with the 1938 Munich Agreement . 
 Indeed , since Willy Brandt had become chancellor in 1969 , there had been a change of the West German attitude towards the Arab – Israeli conflict . The earlier conservative governments had been considered pointedly pro @-@ Israel ( especially during the mid @-@ 1960s with the Six @-@ Day War ) , which had resulted in a number of Arab states breaking off diplomatic relations to West Germany . With Egypt and Tunisia , these had only been restored shortly before the 1972 Olympics . 
 The West German authorities were aware of the high profile of the prisoners and the fact that the group had numerous sympathisers , so that terrorist acts aiming at the liberation of the Munich attackers were feared . Aircraft of ( then ) national airline Lufthansa or its Israeli counterpart El Al were identified as likely targets . On 9 September , an anonymous letter was received claiming that such a hijacking was indeed imminent , which prompted the Federal Ministry of the Interior ( then led by Hans @-@ Dietrich Genscher ) to consider whether citizens of Arab states should be denied boarding of Lufthansa flights . 
 Already during the Munich hostage crisis , it had become evident that the attackers were aware of possible liberation attempts in case of their arrest . Asked if he was afraid of being caught and put into a German prison , their leader <unk> Afif ( who was later killed in the Fürstenfeldbruck shoot @-@ out ) had responded that there was nothing to fear , because " there is no death penalty in Germany , and our brothers would liberate us . " 
 = = The hijacking = = 
 Note : For consistency reasons , all times have been converted to Central European Time . 
 On 29 October 1972 ( a Sunday ) , a Lufthansa Boeing 727 @-@ 100 was hijacked : Flight 615 on the Damascus @-@ Beirut @-@ Ankara @-@ Munich @-@ Frankfurt route . The aircraft ( registered D @-@ <unk> ) had originated at Damascus International Airport in the early morning , with seven crew members but initially without any passengers . At the first stopover at Beirut International Airport , 13 people boarded the flight : nine citizens of unknown Arab countries , two Americans , one German , and one Frenchman . 
 Departure from Beirut was delayed by about one hour . Originally scheduled to depart at 05 : 45 , take @-@ off took place only at 07 : 01 . Less than 15 minutes later , two Arab passengers threatened to blow up the aircraft using explosives that had been hidden in the first class cabin ( and which likely had been smuggled there in Damascus ) if the members of Black September would not be released from the German prison . 
 Following a fuel stop at Nicosia International Airport , the pilots were forced to fly towards Munich @-@ Riem Airport , where the hijackers initially had intended the exchange to take place . When the aircraft had arrived in Austrian airspace at around noon and it became evident that their demands could not be fulfilled in time , this plan was changed , and the Lufthansa crew had to divert instead to Zagreb in what was then the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , circling over Zagreb Airport until the Black September members would have been brought there . This put the Germans under a pressure of time , as the aircraft would eventually run out of fuel . 
 Once word of the hijacking was received at the Lufthansa headquarters in Cologne , chairman Herbert Culmann boarded a corporate Hawker Siddeley <unk> owned by then subsidiary Condor ( registered D @-@ CFCF ) and flew to Munich , where he joined mayor Georg <unk> and police chief Manfred Schreiber ( de ) as well as the Bavarian interior minister Bruno <unk> ( de ) at the local crisis committee . The West German governmental response was coordinated by a crisis council in Bonn , which comprised vice chancellor and foreign minister Walter Scheel and the ministers of the interior and of transportation , Hans @-@ Dietrich Genscher and Lauritz <unk> . 
 Recalling the failed rescue attempt during the Olympic hostage crisis and the ( then ) lack of a special operations police unit , the West German authorities quickly decided to comply with the demands of the hijackers . By 14 : 00 , the three Black September members had been transported to Riem Airport . Philipp Held ( de ) , the Bavarian minister for justice , ordered for the revocation of the arrest warrant and had them issued official emigration papers . The three were brought on board the airplane Culmann had used to get to Munich , where they were joined by two plain clothes police officers . Culmann himself offhandedly decided to also head to Zagreb in order to directly assist the negotiations there . 
 The airplane with the released prisoners left Munich , but the pilot had been ordered to stay inside West German airspace until further notice . The German negotiators hoped for the concession that the hijacked Lufthansa jet would be allowed to first land at Zagreb , which turned out to be futile . The situation tensed when the hijacked Lufthansa aircraft came dangerously close to the point of fuel starvation . In what he later called a " state of emergency " due to an alleged loss of communications with Munich , Lufthansa chairman Culmann personally ordered the pilot of the aircraft carrying the released Munich attackers to head towards and land at Zagreb Airport , thus acting against orders by higher authorities . As a consequence , a legal investigation against Culmann was initiated , but abandoned shortly thereafter . 
 Twenty minutes after the three Black September members had arrived at Zagreb Airport , the hijacked Lufthansa jet also landed there and some time later , at 18 : 05 , the handing @-@ over took place . This happened without any reciprocal measures : The 18 hostages were not released yet . 
 Another critical situation unfolded when the Yugoslav authorities in charge of the airport complied with the demands of their counterparts in Bonn and prevented the Lufthansa jet from taking off again . Realizing that the plane would not be refueled , the hijackers again threatened to kill everyone on board . The standoff was broken by Kurt Laqueur ( de ) , the West German consul in Zagreb , who signed the refueling order without having been authorized to do so , thus allowing the Lufthansa jet to depart at 18 : 50 , this time heading for Tripoli . At 21 : 03 , it arrived at Tripoli International Airport , where the hostages were finally set free . 
 In Libya and other countries of the region , mass celebrations erupted , with the Lufthansa hijackers and the liberated Munich perpetrators being treated as heroes . Right after their arrival at the airport , a press conference was held , which was broadcast live around the world . The Libyan government led by Muammar Gaddafi allowed the Munich attackers to take refuge and go into hiding , ignoring the demands of West German foreign minister Scheel to put them on trial . In a large scale covert operation dubbed Wrath of God , Israel would subsequently aim at them being tracked down and killed . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 German politicians of the then government parties ( Social Democrats and Liberals ) as well as the opposition ( the conservative Union parties ) generally acclaimed the non @-@ violent outcome of the hijacking . This reflected the public opinion that with the Munich attackers having left the country , the risk of further terrorist acts against German targets had diminished . Criticism evolved around the lack of sufficient airport security to prevent explosives being smuggled into passenger airliners , and Lufthansa not employing sky marshals , which at that time were already common on certain flights by El Al , Pan Am , Swissair , and others . 
 Israel sharply condemned the release of the Munich perpetrators and accused West Germany of having " capitulated to terrorism " . Prime Minister Golda Meir stated on the following day : " We have been depressed since yesterday , aggrieved and I would say insulted , that the human spirit , so weak and helpless , has surrendered to brutal force . " Foreign Minister Abba Eban filed an official protest note with the West German government , and the Israeli ambassador in Bonn was temporarily called back , officially due to consultations . 
 = = Allegations of a West German government involvement = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the hijacking of Flight 615 as well as on a number of later occasions , concerns were voiced that the event might have been staged or at least tolerated by the West German government in order to " get rid of three murderers , which had become a security burden " ( as Amnon Rubinstein wrote in Israeli newspaper Haaretz under the headline " Bonn 's Disgrace " shortly after the prisoner release ) . Arguments frequently brought forth to back such allegations are the " suspiciously " low passenger number ( there were only 13 male passengers on board the hijacked Boeing 727 @-@ 100 , an aircraft type with a seating capacity of 130 – 150 ) , the " surprisingly " quick decision of having the prisoners released , as well as purported contacts of the West German Federal Intelligence Service to the Palestine Liberation Organization . 
 The West German trade interests in the Arab countries as well as the desire to be spared from future acts of terror were alleged as motives for a government involvement . Shortly after the events surrounding Flight 615 , Haim Yosef Zadok accused West Germany in a Knesset speech of having " used the opportunity to improve its relations to the Arab world . " In his 1999 autobiography , Abu Daoud ( the mastermind behind the Munich massacre ) claims that he had been offered $ 9 million by " the Germans " for faking the prisoner release . In later years , he refused to repeat or elaborate this allegation , though . In a 2006 interview with Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , Zvi Zamir , the head of Mossad from 1968 to 1974 , states that he was certain that there had been some kind of an agreement between West Germany and Black September . 
 The Oscar @-@ winning documentary film One Day in September ( which was released in 1999 and deals with the Munich massacre ) supports the thesis that the hijacking of Lufthansa Flight 615 was " a set @-@ up , organized by the German government in collusion with the terrorists , " which corresponds to remarks by Jamal Al @-@ Gashey about the aftermath of his liberation . The film features an interview with Ulrich Wegener , a German counter @-@ terrorism expert and founding commander of GSG 9 , who calls such allegations " probably true " . Wegener is also quoted with the opinion that considerations of the West German authorities on how to deal with the hostage situation had likely been mainly driven by the desire to prevent the country from becoming the focus for further acts of terror . 
 In 2013 , investigative journalists of German television programme Report München ( de ) cited from a letter by the Munich police chief , which had been sent to the Bavarian interior ministry eleven days prior to the hijacking of Flight 615 . It describes measures that had been taken in order to " accelerate the deportation " of the Munich attackers , rather than preparing for them to be put on trial . 
 As a counter @-@ argument to accusations of a pre @-@ arranged prisoner release , deficits in planning and communications that the German negotiators had encountered during the hostage crisis have been cited . The situation had been chaotic and confusing at times , which lets it seem unlikely that it was scripted . LH 615 – Operation München ( de ) , a 1975 documentary feature produced by Bayerischer Rundfunk , attributes the non @-@ violent outcome of the hijacking to Lufthansa chairman Culmann and consul Laqueur : They had acted on their own terms rather than obeying to orders by governmental officials . 
 = If It 's Over = 
 " If It 's Over " is a song written by American singer @-@ songwriters Mariah Carey and Carole King , with the former and Walter Afanasieff helming its production . It was originally released on September 17 , 1991 on Carey 's second studio effort , Emotions . Lyrically , the song tells of a romance that has withered , and finds the protagonist asking her lover " if it 's over , let me go . " Several months after the release of Emotions , Carey performed the song during her appearance on the television show MTV Unplugged , as the second number on her setlist . 
 Following the release of the extended play ( EP ) MTV Unplugged , the song 's live version was used as the second single for the EP in the third quarter of 1992 . The live single version omits the second verse and chorus , as the songs were shortened for the show . It received a very limited release , being featured as an airplay only single in certain territories . Its only peak was in the Netherlands , where it reached number eighty . Carey performed " If It 's Over " live during the 34th annual Grammy Awards and on Saturday Night Live . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 During promotion for Carey 's self @-@ titled debut album ( 1990 ) , she appeared on The Arsenio Hall Show to perform her first single , " Vision of Love " . During the very much talked about performance , singer @-@ songwriter Carole King had been watching Carey perform , taking interest in her and her material . One year later , during the recording sessions for Carey 's second studio album , Emotions ( 1991 ) , King contacted Carey , asking if she would be interested in covering " ( You Make Me Feel Like ) A Natural Woman " , a song she had written alongside Gerry Goffin for Aretha Franklin . Carey declined , feeling uneasy about covering a song one of her musical influences executed so perfectly . Still determined to work with Carey , King flew out to New York City for one day , in hopes of writing and composing a ballad of some sort . Throughout the day , the two songwriters exchanged musical ideas and melodies on the piano until " If It 's Over " came into conception . In an interview following the collaboration , King said the following regarding Carey : " I love her voice . She 's very expressive . She gives a lot of meaning to what she sings . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " If It 's Over " is a downtempo ballad , which incorporates several genres and influences into its sound and instrumentation . Of them are R & B , soul and jazz , as well as drawing inspiration from 1950s and 1960s music and style . The song was written by Carey and Carole King , with both helming the song 's production as well . Instrumentally , " If It 's Over " features several musical melodies including baritone , tenor , alto and soprano saxophone notes , as well as the piano , trumpet , horn and bass . In the song , Carey makes brief use of the whistle register , prior to the last belted crescendo . According to author Chris Nickson , the song 's instrumentation and basis was crucial to Carey 's performance throughout the song . Additionally , he described its content and instrumentation : 
 " As a song full of gospel and soulful influences , it allowed Mariah to really tear loose and show what she could do – which in reality was far more than the vocal gymnastics that seemed to comprise her reputation so far . From a deep rumble to a high wail , she covered five octaves wonderfully , as the power of the tune built . The backing vocals – which once again had those churchy harmonies – filled out the spare melody , as did the stately horns , which entered towards the end . The song was truly a vocal showcase for Mariah . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Carey performed " If It 's Over " on the 17th season of Saturday Night Live , alongside " Can 't Let Go " . During the performance , Carey appeared on stage wearing a black leather sports jacket , as well as matching black pants and boots . Walter Afanasieff played the piano , while Trey Lorenz , Patrique McMillan and Melonie Daniels provided the live background vocals . Additionally , five additional musicians were provided ; Lew Delgado , baritone saxophone ; Lenny Pickett , tenor saxophone ; George Young , alto saxophone ; Earl Gardner , trumpet ; and Steve <unk> , trombone . Additionally , Carey performed " If It 's Over " at the 34th annual Grammy Awards , held on February 26 , 1992 . As the curtain was drawn , Carey walked on stage wearing a red and black evening gown , while sporting a golden @-@ curly hairstyle . Behind a large red curtain held behind her , several back up singers were placed standing on a concealed elevated platform . On March 16 , 1992 , Carey performed the song live as part of a seven piece set @-@ list for MTV Unplugged . The show aired on MTV several times , and was eventually released as an EP titled , MTV Unplugged . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Following the release of " I 'll Be There " as the lead single from MTV Unplugged a month prior to the EP 's public arrival , Carey 's live version of " If It 's Over " from MTV Unplugged was released as an airplay @-@ only single in a few countries . Following its release , promotion for Carey 's second studio effort Emotions was halted . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , " If It 's Over " garnered generally positive critical appreciation from contemporary music critics . Bill Lamb from About.com commented that the song " stands with Carey 's best , " and complimented its gospel infusion . Allmusic 's Ashley S. Battel wrote " it will take you on a musical journey , " while describing the song 's vocals and instrumentation . Jan DeKnock from The Chicago Tribune compared it to " the style of the great soul ballads of the <unk> . " Rob Tannenbaum from Rolling Stone gave " If It 's Over " a mixed review , comparing it to the work of Aretha Franklin , but called it " translates into such excesses as the falsetto whoops . " " If It 's Over " only managed to chart at number 80 in the Netherlands , lasting five weeks in the chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded and mixed at Right Track Recording , NYC . 
 Personnel 
 Lyrics – Mariah Carey 
 Music – Mariah Carey , Carole King 
 Production – Mariah Carey , Walter Afanasieff 
 Keyboards and Synthesizers , Hammond B @-@ 6 Organ , Synclavier Strings and Tambourine – Walter Afanasieff 
 Guitar – Cornell Dupree 
 Bass – Will Lee 
 Trumpet – Earl Gardner 
 Trombone – Keith O 'Quinn 
 Tenor <unk> – George Young , Larry Feldman 
 Baritone Saxophone – Lewis <unk> 
 Drums – Steve Smith 
 Akai Programming – Ren Klyce 
 Macintosh programming – Gary <unk> 
 Recording and mixing – Dana Jon Chapelle 
 Assistant engineer – Bruce Calder 
 Vocal arrangement – Mariah Carey 
 Background vocals – Mariah Carey , Trey Lorenz , Patrique McMillan , Cindy Mizelle 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Emotions . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = <unk> = 
 In graph theory , a pseudoforest is an undirected graph in which every connected component has at most one cycle . That is , it is a system of vertices and edges connecting pairs of vertices , such that no two cycles of consecutive edges share any vertex with each other , nor can any two cycles be connected to each other by a path of consecutive edges . A pseudotree is a connected pseudoforest . 
 The names are justified by analogy to the more commonly studied trees and forests . ( A tree is a connected graph with no cycles ; a forest is a disjoint union of trees . ) <unk> and <unk> attribute the study of pseudoforests to Dantzig 's 1963 book on linear programming , in which pseudoforests arise in the solution of certain network flow problems . Pseudoforests also form graph @-@ theoretic models of functions and occur in several algorithmic problems . Pseudoforests are sparse graphs – they have very few edges relative to their number of vertices – and their matroid structure allows several other families of sparse graphs to be decomposed as unions of forests and pseudoforests . The name " pseudoforest " comes from Picard & <unk> ( 1982 ) . 
 = = Definitions and structure = = 
 We define an undirected graph to be a set of vertices and edges such that each edge has two vertices ( which may coincide ) as endpoints . That is , we allow multiple edges ( edges with the same pair of endpoints ) and loops ( edges whose two endpoints are the same vertex ) . A subgraph of a graph is the graph formed by any subsets of its vertices and edges such that each edge in the edge subset has both endpoints in the vertex subset . A connected component of an undirected graph is the subgraph consisting of the vertices and edges that can be reached by following edges from a single given starting vertex . A graph is connected if every vertex or edge is reachable from every other vertex or edge . A cycle in an undirected graph is a connected subgraph in which each vertex is incident to exactly two edges , or is a loop . 
 A pseudoforest is an undirected graph in which each connected component contains at most one cycle . Equivalently , it is an undirected graph in which each connected component has no more edges than vertices . The components that have no cycles are just trees , while the components that have a single cycle within them are called 1 @-@ trees or unicyclic graphs . That is , a 1 @-@ tree is a connected graph containing exactly one cycle . A pseudoforest with a single connected component ( usually called a pseudotree , although some authors define a pseudotree to be a 1 @-@ tree ) is either a tree or a 1 @-@ tree ; in general a pseudoforest may have multiple connected components as long as all of them are trees or 1 @-@ trees . 
 If one removes from a 1 @-@ tree one of the edges in its cycle , the result is a tree . Reversing this process , if one augments a tree by connecting any two of its vertices by a new edge , the result is a 1 @-@ tree ; the path in the tree connecting the two endpoints of the added edge , together with the added edge itself , form the 1 @-@ tree 's unique cycle . If one augments a 1 @-@ tree by adding an edge that connects one of its vertices to a newly added vertex , the result is again a 1 @-@ tree , with one more vertex ; an alternative method for constructing 1 @-@ trees is to start with a single cycle and then repeat this augmentation operation any number of times . The edges of any 1 @-@ tree can be partitioned in a unique way into two subgraphs , one of which is a cycle and the other of which is a forest , such that each tree of the forest contains exactly one vertex of the cycle . 
 Certain more specific types of pseudoforests have also been studied . 
 A 1 @-@ forest , sometimes called a maximal pseudoforest , is a pseudoforest to which no more edges can be added without causing some component of the graph to contain multiple cycles . If a pseudoforest contains a tree as one of its components , it cannot be a 1 @-@ forest , for one can add either an edge connecting two vertices within that tree , forming a single cycle , or an edge connecting that tree to some other component . Thus , the 1 @-@ forests are exactly the pseudoforests in which every component is a 1 @-@ tree . 
 The spanning pseudoforests of an undirected graph G are the pseudoforest subgraphs of G that have all the vertices of G. Such a pseudoforest need not have any edges , since for example the subgraph that has all the vertices of G and no edges is a pseudoforest ( whose components are trees consisting of a single vertex ) . 
 The maximal pseudoforests of G are the pseudoforest subgraphs of G that are not contained within any larger pseudoforest of G. A maximal pseudoforest of G is always a spanning pseudoforest , but not conversely . If G has no connected components that are trees , then its maximal pseudoforests are 1 @-@ forests , but if G does have a tree component , its maximal pseudoforests are not 1 @-@ forests . Stated precisely , in any graph G its maximal pseudoforests consist of every tree component of G , together with one or more disjoint 1 @-@ trees covering the remaining vertices of G. 
 = = Directed pseudoforests = = 
 Versions of these definitions are also used for directed graphs . Like an undirected graph , a directed graph consists of vertices and edges , but each edge is directed from one of its endpoints to the other endpoint . A directed pseudoforest is a directed graph in which each vertex has at most one outgoing edge ; that is , it has outdegree at most one . A directed 1 @-@ forest – most commonly called a functional graph ( see below ) , sometimes maximal directed pseudoforest – is a directed graph in which each vertex has outdegree exactly one . If D is a directed pseudoforest , the undirected graph formed by removing the direction from each edge of D is an undirected pseudoforest . 
 = = Number of edges = = 
 Every pseudoforest on a set of n vertices has at most n edges , and every maximal pseudoforest on a set of n vertices has exactly n edges . Conversely , if a graph G has the property that , for every subset S of its vertices , the number of edges in the induced subgraph of S is at most the number of vertices in S , then G is a pseudoforest . 1 @-@ trees can be defined as connected graphs with equally many vertices and edges . 
 Moving from individual graphs to graph families , if a family of graphs has the property that every subgraph of a graph in the family is also in the family , and every graph in the family has at most as many edges as vertices , then the family contains only pseudoforests . For instance , every subgraph of a thrackle ( a graph drawn so that every pair of edges has one point of intersection ) is also a thrackle , so Conway 's conjecture that every thrackle has at most as many edges as vertices can be restated as saying that every thrackle is a pseudoforest . A more precise characterization is that , if the conjecture is true , then the <unk> are exactly the pseudoforests with no four @-@ vertex cycle and at most one odd cycle . 
 Streinu and Theran generalize the sparsity conditions defining pseudoforests : they define a graph as being ( k , l ) -sparse if every nonempty subgraph with n vertices has at most kn − l edges , and ( k , l ) <unk> if it is ( k , l ) -sparse and has exactly kn − l edges . Thus , the pseudoforests are the ( 1 @,@ 0 ) -sparse graphs , and the maximal pseudoforests are the ( 1 @,@ 0 ) <unk> graphs . Several other important families of graphs may be defined from other values of k and l , and when l ≤ k the ( k , l ) -sparse graphs may be characterized as the graphs formed as the edge @-@ disjoint union of l forests and k − l pseudoforests . 
 Almost every sufficiently sparse random graph is pseudoforest . That is , if c is a constant with 0 < c < 1 / 2 , and <unk> ( n ) is the probability that choosing uniformly at random among the n @-@ vertex graphs with cn edges results in a pseudoforest , then <unk> ( n ) tends to one in the limit for large n . However , for c > 1 / 2 , almost every random graph with cn edges has a large component that is not unicyclic . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 A graph is simple if it has no self @-@ loops and no multiple edges with the same endpoints . The number of simple 1 @-@ trees with n labelled vertices is 
 <formula> 
 The values for n up to 18 can be found in sequence <unk> of the On @-@ Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences . 
 The number of maximal directed pseudoforests on n vertices , allowing self @-@ loops , is nn , because for each vertex there are n possible endpoints for the outgoing edge . André Joyal used this fact to provide a bijective proof of Cayley 's formula , that the number of undirected trees on n nodes is nn − 2 , by finding a bijection between maximal directed pseudoforests and undirected trees with two distinguished nodes . If self @-@ loops are not allowed , the number of maximal directed pseudoforests is instead ( n − 1 ) n . 
 = = Graphs of functions = = 
 Directed pseudoforests and <unk> are in some sense mathematically equivalent . Any function ƒ from a set X to itself ( that is , an endomorphism of X ) can be interpreted as defining a directed pseudoforest which has an edge from x to y whenever ƒ ( x ) 
 = y . The resulting directed pseudoforest is maximal , and may include self @-@ loops whenever some value x has ƒ ( x ) = 
 x . Alternatively , omitting the self @-@ loops produces a non @-@ maximal pseudoforest . In the other direction , any maximal directed pseudoforest determines a function ƒ such that ƒ ( x ) is the target of the edge that goes out from x , and any non @-@ maximal directed pseudoforest can be made maximal by adding self @-@ loops and then converted into a function in the same way . For this reason , maximal directed pseudoforests are sometimes called functional graphs . Viewing a function as a functional graph provides a convenient language for describing properties that are not as easily described from the function @-@ theoretic point of view ; this technique is especially applicable to problems involving iterated functions , which correspond to paths in functional graphs . 
 Cycle detection , the problem of following a path in a functional graph to find a cycle in it , has applications in cryptography and computational number theory , as part of Pollard 's rho algorithm for integer factorization and as a method for finding collisions in cryptographic hash functions . In these applications , ƒ is expected to behave randomly ; <unk> and <unk> study the graph @-@ theoretic properties of the functional graphs arising from randomly chosen mappings . In particular , a form of the birthday paradox implies that , in a random functional graph with n vertices , the path starting from a randomly selected vertex will typically loop back on itself to form a cycle within O ( √ n ) steps . <unk> et. al. have made analytical and computational progress on graph statistics . 
 Martin , <unk> , and Wolfram investigate pseudoforests that model the dynamics of cellular automata . These functional graphs , which they call state transition diagrams , have one vertex for each possible configuration that the ensemble of cells of the automaton can be in , and an edge connecting each configuration to the configuration that follows it according to the automaton 's rule . One can infer properties of the automaton from the structure of these diagrams , such as the number of components , length of limiting cycles , depth of the trees connecting non @-@ limiting states to these cycles , or symmetries of the diagram . For instance , any vertex with no incoming edge corresponds to a Garden of Eden pattern and a vertex with a self @-@ loop corresponds to a still life pattern . 
 Another early application of functional graphs is in the trains used to study Steiner triple systems . The train of a triple system is a functional graph having a vertex for each possible triple of symbols ; each triple <unk> is mapped by ƒ to <unk> , where <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> are the triples that belong to the triple system and contain the pairs pq , pr , and qr respectively . Trains have been shown to be a powerful invariant of triple systems although somewhat cumbersome to compute . 
 = = <unk> matroid = = 
 A matroid is a mathematical structure in which certain sets of elements are defined to be independent , in such a way that the independent sets satisfy properties modeled after the properties of linear independence in a vector space . One of the standard examples of a matroid is the graphic matroid in which the independent sets are the sets of edges in forests of a graph ; the matroid structure of forests is important in algorithms for computing the minimum spanning tree of the graph . Analogously , we may define <unk> from pseudoforests . 
 For any graph G = ( V , E ) , we may define a matroid on the edges of G , in which a set of edges is independent if and only if it forms a pseudoforest ; this matroid is known as the <unk> matroid ( or bicycle matroid ) of G. The smallest dependent sets for this matroid are the minimal connected subgraphs of G that have more than one cycle , and these subgraphs are sometimes called bicycles . There are three possible types of bicycle : a theta graph has two vertices that are connected by three internally disjoint paths , a figure 8 graph consists of two cycles sharing a single vertex , and a handcuff graph is formed by two disjoint cycles connected by a path . A graph is a pseudoforest if and only if it does not contain a bicycle as a subgraph . 
 = = Forbidden minors = = 
 Forming a minor of a pseudoforest by contracting some of its edges and deleting others produces another pseudoforest . Therefore , the family of pseudoforests is closed under minors , and the Robertson – Seymour theorem implies that pseudoforests can be characterized in terms of a finite set of forbidden minors , analogously to Wagner 's theorem characterizing the planar graphs as the graphs having neither the complete graph K5 nor the complete bipartite graph <unk> as minors . As discussed above , any non @-@ pseudoforest graph contains as a subgraph a handcuff , figure 8 , or theta graph ; any handcuff or figure 8 graph may be contracted to form a butterfly graph ( five @-@ vertex figure 8 ) , and any theta graph may be contracted to form a diamond graph ( four @-@ vertex theta graph ) , so any non @-@ pseudoforest contains either a butterfly or a diamond as a minor , and these are the only minor @-@ minimal non @-@ pseudoforest graphs . Thus , a graph is a pseudoforest if and only if it does not have the butterfly or the diamond as a minor . If one forbids only the diamond but not the butterfly , the resulting larger graph family consists of the cactus graphs and disjoint unions of multiple cactus graphs . 
 More simply , if <unk> with self @-@ loops are considered , there is only one forbidden minor , a vertex with two loops . 
 = = Algorithms = = 
 An early algorithmic use of pseudoforests involves the network simplex algorithm and its application to generalized flow problems modeling the conversion between commodities of different types . In these problems , one is given as input a flow network in which the vertices model each commodity and the edges model allowable conversions between one commodity and another . Each edge is marked with a capacity ( how much of a commodity can be converted per unit time ) , a flow multiplier ( the conversion rate between commodities ) , and a cost ( how much loss or , if negative , profit is incurred per unit of conversion ) . The task is to determine how much of each commodity to convert via each edge of the flow network , in order to minimize cost or maximize profit , while obeying the capacity constraints and not allowing commodities of any type to accumulate unused . This type of problem can be formulated as a linear program , and solved using the simplex algorithm . The intermediate solutions arising from this algorithm , as well as the eventual optimal solution , have a special structure : each edge in the input network is either unused or used to its full capacity , except for a subset of the edges , forming a spanning pseudoforest of the input network , for which the flow amounts may lie between zero and the full capacity . In this application , unicyclic graphs are also sometimes called augmented trees and maximal pseudoforests are also sometimes called augmented forests . 
 The minimum spanning pseudoforest problem involves finding a spanning pseudoforest of minimum weight in a larger edge @-@ weighted graph G. Due to the matroid structure of pseudoforests , minimum @-@ weight maximal pseudoforests may be found by greedy algorithms similar to those for the minimum spanning tree problem . However , <unk> and <unk> found a more efficient linear @-@ time approach in this case . 
 The <unk> of a graph G is defined by analogy to the <unk> as the minimum number of pseudoforests into which its edges can be partitioned ; equivalently , it is the minimum k such that G is ( k , 0 ) -sparse , or the minimum k such that the edges of G can be oriented to form a directed graph with outdegree at most k . Due to the matroid structure of pseudoforests , the <unk> may be computed in polynomial time . 
 A random bipartite graph with n vertices on each side of its bipartition , and with cn edges chosen independently at random from each of the n2 possible pairs of vertices , is a pseudoforest with high probability whenever c is a constant strictly less than one . This fact plays a key role in the analysis of cuckoo hashing , a data structure for looking up key @-@ value pairs by looking in one of two hash tables at locations determined from the key : one can form a graph , the " cuckoo graph " , whose vertices correspond to hash table locations and whose edges link the two locations at which one of the keys might be found , and the cuckoo hashing algorithm succeeds in finding locations for all of its keys if and only if the cuckoo graph is a pseudoforest . 
 Pseudoforests also play a key role in parallel algorithms for graph coloring and related problems . 
 = Don 't Forget the Bacon ! = 
 Don 't Forget the Bacon ! is a children 's book written and illustrated by Pat Hutchins . It was published by Bodley Head in 1976 . The story is about a little boy who tries to memorise a list of groceries his mother has asked him to buy . The book has been used as a teaching tool to instruct children about early learning concepts . 
 In an analysis of teaching tools for remedial readers , Maurice Saxby notes in the book Books in the Life of a Child : Bridges to Literature & Learning , " Hutchins 's Don 't Forget the Bacon has been one of my most successful texts . " Andrea <unk> 's Tuning in with Task Cards includes a teaching lesson structured around the boy 's shopping list from the story . The book Foundation Blocks suggests Don 't Forget the Bacon ! be used to teach children about the concept of miscommunication , and <unk> and Literacy lists the story among those used to help assist a bilingual child develop fluency in English . 
 Don 't Forget the Bacon ! was a success in England and the United States , and received positive reception from the American Library Association , and The Washington Post . The story was recommended in 2005 as part of a children 's reading challenge announced by the Education Minister for New South Wales , Australia , and included in suggested reading by The Times as part of the 2008 recognition of World Book Day . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story is about a little boy who leaves his home with his dog to shop for food items for his mother , and attempts to remember the list of things she wanted him to buy . The original request from his mother is for " six farm eggs , a cake for tea , a pound of pears , and don 't forget the bacon . " Along with the dog , he is accompanied on his trip by a butterfly . In order to avoid forgetting items , the boy recites his mother 's list to himself . Throughout his trip to the store , the boy sees items along the way that play tricks with his memory , and items on his list one @-@ by @-@ one become substituted with other goods – " six farm eggs " initially becomes " six fat legs " , then " six clothes pegs " . By the end of his trip , the boy has forgotten the initial items requested , and supplants them in his mind with " six clothes pegs , a rake for leaves , a pile of chairs , and don 't forget the bacon . " A merchant in a junk shop assists the boy in compiling this odd list . While travelling back to his home , he remembers the original items and corrects his mistakes . However , he still forgets to acquire bacon . The final panel depicts the child carrying a basket and a coin purse , taking his dog attached to a leash , en route , probably to purchase the bacon . [ A ] 
 = = Themes = = 
 In his work Best Books for Beginning Readers , Thomas G. Gunning places Don 't Forget the Bacon ! within the themes of utilising humor in the learning process with children . Don 't Forget the Bacon ! has been used as a learning tool for children in education , in order to teach them about various themes including miscommunication , responsibility , and the reliability of spoken language . In an analysis of teaching tools for remedial readers , Maurice Saxby notes in the book Books in the Life of a Child : Bridges to Literature & Learning , " Hutchins 's Don 't Forget the Bacon has been one of my most successful texts . " The book is utilised in author Andrea <unk> 's Tuning in with Task Cards as a teaching lesson : children are assigned to collect items from the initial and final versions of the shopping list from the boy in the story , and subsequently total the prices of the tabulated items . It is listed by Manjula Datta in the book <unk> and Literacy : Principles and Practice among stories to help assist a bilingual child develop fluency in the English language . Joy Palmer and Joanna C. Birch list the book in their work Geography in the Early Years as a recommendation for children among " Story Books Suitable as Starting Points in Geography " . In her book Foundation Blocks : Personal , Social and Emotional Development , Mavis Brown suggests the story be used to teach children about the theme of miscommunication . The story is used in a case study in education , which is cited in the book Improving Teaching and Learning in the Core Curriculum by Kate Ashcroft and John Lee . Children were read the story , and then asked " about how and why spoken language is sometimes unreliable – and its consequences . " 
 Books including Belair Early Years : Stories , Books as Bridges : Using Text to Connect Home and School Literacy and Learning , Funny Photo Alphabet : Teaching Guide , and What Is It About Me You Can 't Teach ? suggest the story be used to teach children about rhyming , repetition , and prediction . The story is suggested for use in curriculum to teach children about food , in books Humanics National Preschool Assessment Handbook , and The Complete Daily Curriculum for Early Childhood . Mildred R. Donoghue writes in Language Arts : Integrating Skills for Classroom Teaching that the story should be utilised in the course of primary education . In their work Success in Reading and Writing , authors Barbara J. Blackford , Helen Cappleman and Betty Cramer suggest the book be read aloud to children in kindergarten , and the teacher should subsequently quiz members of the class to see if they can recall items from the boy 's shopping list . Authors Diane Stirling , Linda McKay , Georgia Archibald and Shelley Berg recommend the story in their book Character Education Connections : For School , Home and Community , in order to teach children the character trait of responsibility : " A willingness to be accountable for your own actions without blaming others . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Pat Hutchins was born 18 June 1942 . A native of Yorkshire , she attended a local art school for three years on scholarship before studying illustration at the Leeds College of Art . Hutchins 's first children 's work , Rosie 's Walk , was named a 1968 ALA Notable Book , and her book The Wind Blew received the 1974 Kate Greenaway Medal . She lives in London and has written twenty @-@ five books and five novels . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Don 't Forget the Bacon ! was published by Bodley Head in 1976 . It was published again in New York by <unk> Books in 1976 , and Puffin Books in 1976 and 1978 . An edition by imprint Picture Puffin was published in London in 1978 . Imperial Educational Resources produced a version of the story in 1980 , as a filmstrip geared for children in primary school . It was published by Live Oak Media in 2004 , and by Paw Prints in 2009 . Gallaudet University produced a DVD video edition aimed at youth versed in sign language . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Don 't Forget the Bacon ! became a successful book in both England and the United States ; Hutchins has become known for the work . <unk> L. <unk> wrote in An Author a Month ( for Nickels ) , " This is an example of Hutchins 's more realistic drawings and of a reversible text . " A reversible text refers to a story which proceeds in the forward direction , and concludes with the protagonist returning to a development introduced at the story 's inception . The American Library Association gave Don 't Forget the Bacon ! favourable mention in its review of the book , " The picture book crowd ( kindergarten through second grade ) will adore Pat <unk> 's story of a grocery list and a bad memory . " In an article for The Washington Post , associate professor and director of the reading clinic at Western Maryland College , Joan Coley , observed that the repetitive nature of the story is appealing to children . 
 Michele Landsberg , author of Reading for the Love of It : Best Books for Young Readers noted in an article for The Washington Post that Pat Hutchins is " best known " for her " witty picture books " , including Don 't Forget the Bacon ! . In 2005 , New South Wales , Australia Education Minister Carmel <unk> announced Don 't Forget the Bacon ! had been included as part of " Premier 's Reading Challenge " , under the section , " The 2006 Challenge Book Lists : Years K @-@ 2 Challenge " . In 2008 , Elizabeth McFarlane of The Times included the book in a list of works recommended to encourage children 's reading skills for World Book Day . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 ^ [ A ] Secondary source references consulted to assist in summarising information for Plot section include <unk> 1987 , <unk> 1976 , and <unk> 1990 . 
 = 2014 Orkney earthquake = 
 The 2014 Orkney earthquake occurred at 12 : 22 : 33 SAST on 5 August , with the epicentre near Orkney , a gold mining town in the Klerksdorp district in the North West province of South Africa . The shock was assigned a magnitude of 5 @.@ 5 on the Richter scale by the Council for Geoscience ( CGS ) in South Africa , making it the biggest earthquake in South Africa since the 1969 Tulbagh earthquake , which had a magnitude of 6 @.@ 3 on the Richter scale . The United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) estimated a focal depth of 5 @.@ 0 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) . According to the USGS , the earthquake was " severely dangerous " as the epicentre was located near Orkney and Klerksdorp . The CGS reported 84 aftershocks on 5 August and 31 aftershocks on 6 August , with a magnitude of 1 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 8 on the Richter scale . According to the CGS , the earthquake is the biggest mining @-@ related earthquake in South African history . 
 = = Cause = = 
 = = = Historical seismicity = = = 
 While earthquakes are uncommon in South Africa in general , the earthquake occurred in a mining belt where earthquakes are relatively common . The CGS had described a 2005 earthquake with a magnitude of 5 @.@ 3 on the Richter scale in the same area as Orkney as " the largest mining @-@ related earthquake in South Africa " . The earthquake occurred on 9 March 2005 at <unk> 's <unk> mine in <unk> , killing two miners underground and resulting in the closure of the mine . An investigation by the mining regulator following the incident found that it was caused by mining and further seismic events would occur while mining continued . The report on the investigation recommended improvements in seismic monitoring among other things , and some of the recommendations had been implemented before the 2014 earthquake . The USGS recorded a 4 @.@ 9 moment magnitude earthquake on 15 June 2014 in the same area , which earth science consultant Dr Chris Hartnady believes may have been a foreshock . 
 = = = Expert opinions = = = 
 While both mining activity and natural faults could be causative factors , it is difficult to establish a precise cause . According to Professor Andrzej <unk> from the University of Pretoria 's Natural Hazard Centre , mining can activate natural faults . He believes that more than 90 % of South Africa 's earthquakes are caused by mining , especially around the areas of Klerksdorp , Carletonville and <unk> . According to Hartnady , " This part of Africa is in the vicinity of the East African Rift system , which is being pulled apart by a few millimetres annually . " He says " earthquakes are caused by a slip on a fault line and the release of stored elastic energy " and mining activity could have triggered the earthquake . <unk> and Hartnady believe that – unlike the 1969 Tulbagh earthquake – this event was a mining @-@ related earthquake which is a relatively more common occurrence than a natural earthquake in South Africa . Professor Ray <unk> , a seismologist at Wits University , said seismic events will continue while there is mining activity in the area , and even long afterwards . He said the flooding of inactive mines could also compound pressure on geological faults , triggering further seismic events . According to <unk> , the link between mining and earthquakes lies " on a continuum , from where it 's purely induced by mining activities to where you are triggering a natural earthquake " . 
 = = = Council for Geoscience = = = 
 According to Michelle Grobbelaar from the CGS , " There 's a rule of thumb that if you experience an earthquake with a certain magnitude in the past , you can always expect an earthquake of a similar magnitude in that same area . " Grobbelaar and Denver Birch , also from the CGS , said that the cause of the earthquake was difficult to determine given that it occurred in a mining area and the lack of historical seismic data for the area . Ian Saunders from the CGS confirmed that a team would be sent to the area for further investigation , and Eldridge <unk> from the CGS said they should be able to determine the cause within a month . According to <unk> , " The fact that the deepest mine shafts are shallower than the epicentre doesn 't mean mining can be ruled out as a cause . Blasting in the vicinity of a big fault could have activated seismic activity . " On 18 August 2014 at a Council for Scientific and Industrial Research ( CSIR ) seminar in Pretoria , the CGS confirmed that the earthquake was caused by mining @-@ related activity , making it the biggest ever mining @-@ related earthquake recorded in South Africa . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The earthquake occurred at 12 : 22 : 33 SAST on 5 August 2014 , with the epicentre near Orkney , a gold mining town in the Klerksdorp district in the North West province of South Africa . The shock was assigned a magnitude of 5 @.@ 5 on the Richter scale by the Council for Geoscience ( CGS ) in South Africa , making it the biggest earthquake in South Africa since the 1969 Tulbagh earthquake , which had a magnitude of 6 @.@ 3 on the Richter scale . The United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) estimated a focal depth of 5 @.@ 0 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) . According to the USGS , the earthquake was " severely dangerous " as the epicentre was located near Orkney and Klerksdorp . The CGS reported 84 aftershocks on 5 August and 31 aftershocks on 6 August , with a magnitude of 1 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 8 on the Richter scale . 
 = = = Areas affected = = = 
 The earthquake was felt as far as 600 km ( 370 mi ) from Orkney . It was felt in neighbouring countries Botswana , Swaziland , Lesotho and Mozambique . The two tallest buildings in Bloemfontein , the former CR Swart Building and the <unk> building , as well as tall buildings and University of Pretoria halls in Pretoria and offices of the South African Revenue Service in Durban were evacuated . According to Michelle Grobbelaar , manager of the CGS 's seismology unit , the earthquake was felt in Durban because " the beach sand tends to amplify the ground motion " . Buildings in Maputo in Mozambique were also evacuated . The Meteorological Services of Zimbabwe confirmed that Zimbabwe was not affected by the earthquake . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 There was a single fatality , 31 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> man <unk> <unk> , who died when a wall of an old mining house collapsed on him in <unk> , North West . An <unk> spokesperson said that miners had reportedly been trapped in 11 mine shafts at a mine in Orkney ; however , subsequent inspections revealed that the miners at that location were safe . All 3 @,@ 300 AngloGold Ashanti miners underground at its Great <unk> and Moab <unk> mines near Orkney had been brought to the surface by 19 : 30 SAST on 5 August , including 34 who had been injured . All 34 miners were treated for minor injuries , including lacerations , contusions and a broken leg , and discharged from hospital on 6 August . AngloGold Ashanti management had proceeded with the evacuation after their temporarily interrupted power supply was mostly restored , mine management had contacted the mine crew underground by telephone and mine engineers had ensured that the shaft infrastructure was in working order . AngloGold Ashanti emergency medical staff had treated injured miners , and counsellors had treated some employees for shock . Mining operations at their Great <unk> and Moab <unk> mines were subsequently suspended pending safety checks . 
 = = = Damage = = = 
 There was extensive damage to buildings in Orkney and the surrounding areas , partly due to inadequate building construction vulnerable to earthquake damage . The Khuma township near <unk> was one of the worst affected areas , with more than 600 homes damaged by the earthquake . An aftershock occurred in Khuma in the afternoon of 5 August while residents were assessing the damage to their homes . Three clinics in the North West province were damaged , leading to the closure of two of them . Two schools were damaged and some pupils were unable to attend classes as the classrooms were too badly damaged . 
 In the days following the earthquake , most of South Africa 's major banks and insurance companies had begun receiving insurance claims . By 6 August 2014 , <unk> had received 200 claims , Standard Bank had received 129 claims and Mutual & Federal had received 11 claims . A survey of 17 insurance companies done by finance website <unk> showed that 5 out of the 17 companies surveyed would reject insurance claims related to the earthquake if it was proven to be mining @-@ related . In a response to the Survey , <unk> , who was on the list of 5 , affirmed that they have received approximately 1100 claims and were in the process of finalising them . 
 = = Response = = 
 The CGS warned that aftershocks were expected in the days following the earthquake and they could possibly continue for months . They recommended that buildings be evacuated in the event of an aftershock . The mining regulator 's chief inspector of mines David <unk> asked mining companies in affected areas , including Klerksdorp , Carletonville and Rustenburg , to undertake underground inspections to ensure no miners were trapped and the working conditions were safe for miners . AngloGold Ashanti denied responsibility for the earthquake , saying it occurred away from its mining infrastructure . 
 Premier of North West Supra <unk> promised residents that all who were affected by the earthquake would receive help . <unk> said that counselling , social relief and temporary accommodation were being provided , and that the buildings and infrastructure damaged in the earthquake might take years to repair . The North West provincial government started the North West Disaster Relief Fund to help residents affected by the earthquake . Teams were sent to investigate damage to parts of the Dr Kenneth Kaunda District Municipality by the municipality . The Cabinet of South Africa sent its condolences to the family of the man who was killed by the earthquake . 
 On 30 September 2014 , the Inkatha Freedom Party expressed its concern for the residents of Khuma as repairs to their homes were delayed and had not yet commenced . Provincial government spokesperson , <unk> <unk> said that construction was delayed partly due to a lack of structural engineers , which were needed to assess the structural damage caused to the houses . Several families affected by the earthquake moved to a community centre while waiting for their houses to be repaired after affected families were instructed to move to safer locations . 
 = Chinese Rites controversy = 
 The Chinese Rites controversy was a dispute among Roman Catholic missionaries over the religiosity of Confucianism and Chinese rituals during the 17th and 18th centuries . The debated centered over whether Chinese ritual practices of honoring family ancestors and other formal Confucian and Chinese imperial rites qualified as religious rites and thus incompatible with Catholic belief . The Jesuits argued that these Chinese rites were secular rituals that were compatible with Christianity , within certain limits , and should thus be tolerated . The Dominicans and Franciscans , however , disagreed and reported the issue to Rome . 
 Rome 's Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith sided with the Dominicans in 1645 by condemning the Chinese rites based on their brief . However , the same congregation sided with the Jesuits in 1656 , thereby lifting the ban . It was one of the many disputes between the Jesuits and the Dominicans in China and elsewhere in Asia , including Japan and India . 
 The controversy embroiled leading European universities ; the Qing dynasty 's Kangxi Emperor and several popes ( including Clement XI and Clement XIV ) considered the case ; the offices of the Holy See also intervened . Near the end of the 17th century , many Dominicans and Franciscans had shifted their positions in agreeing with the Jesuits ' opinion , but Rome disagreed . Clement XI banned the rites in 1704 . In 1742 , Benedict XIV reaffirmed the ban and forbade debate . 
 In 1939 , after two centuries the Holy See re @-@ assessed the issue . Pope Pius XII issued a decree on December 8 , 1939 , authorizing Christians to observe the ancestral rites and participate in Confucius @-@ honouring ceremonies . The general principle of sometimes admitting native traditions even into the liturgy of the church , provided that such traditions harmonize with the true and authentic spirit of the liturgy , was proclaimed by the Second Vatican Council ( 1962 – 65 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Early adaptation to local customs = = = 
 Unlike the American landmass , which had been conquered by military force by Spain and Portugal , European missionaries encountered in Asia united , literate societies that were as yet untouched by European influence or national endeavour . 
 Alessandro <unk> , Visitor of the Society of Jesus in Asia , was one of the first Jesuits to argue , in the case of Japan , for an adaptation of Christian customs to the societies of Asia , through his <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Matteo Ricci ’ s policy of accommodation = = = 
 In China , Matteo Ricci reused the <unk> and adapted it to the Chinese context . At one point the Jesuits even started to wear the gown of Buddhist monks , before adopting the more prestigious silk gown of Chinese literati . In particular , Matteo Ricci 's Christian views on Confucianism and Chinese rituals , often called as " the Directives of Matteo Ricci （ Chinese ： - { <unk> } - ） " ( Chinese : <unk> ) , was followed by Jesuit missionaries in China and Japan . 
 In a decree signed on 23 March 1656 , Pope Alexander VII accepted practices " favorable to Chinese customs " , reinforcing 1615 decrees which accepted the usage of the Chinese language in liturgy , a notable exception to the contemporary Latin Catholic discipline which had generally forbidden the use of local languages . 
 In the 1659 instructions given by the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith ( known as the Propaganda Fide ) to new missionaries to Asia , provisions were clearly made to the effect that adapting to local customs and respecting the habits of the countries to be evangelised was paramount : 
 Do not act with zeal , do not put forward any arguments to convince these peoples to change their rites , their customs or their usages , except if they are evidently contrary to the religion [ i.e. , Catholic Christianity ] and morality . What would be more absurd than to bring France , Spain , Italy or any other European country to the Chinese ? Do not bring to them our countries , but instead bring to them the Faith , a Faith that does not reject or hurt the rites , nor the usages of any people , provided that these are not distasteful , but that instead keeps and protects them . 
 = = = Reception in China = = = 
 The Kangxi Emperor was at first friendly to the Jesuit Missionaries working in China . He was grateful for the services they provided to him , in the areas of astronomy , diplomacy and artillery manufacture . The Jesuits also made an important contribution to the Empire 's military , with the diffusion of European artillery technology , and they directed the castings of cannons of various calibres . Jesuit translators Jean @-@ François <unk> and Thomas Pereira took part in the negotiations of the Treaty of Nerchinsk in 1689 , where they helped translating . By the end of the seventeenth century , the Jesuits also had made many converts . 
 In 1692 , Kangxi issued an edict of toleration of Christianity ( Chinese : <unk> or Chinese : <unk> ) : 
 The Europeans are very quiet ; they do not excite any disturbances in the provinces , they do no harm to anyone , they commit no crimes , and their doctrine has nothing in common with that of the false sects in the empire , nor has it any tendency to excite sedition ... We decide therefore that all temples dedicated to the Lord of heaven , in whatever place they may be found , ought to be preserved , and that it may be permitted to all who wish to worship this God to enter these temples , offer him incense , and perform the ceremonies practised according to ancient custom by the Christians . Therefore let no one henceforth offer them any opposition . 
 This edict elevates Christianity on equal status with Confucianism in China . The Kangxi Emperor also hired several Jesuits in his court as scientists and artists . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The Society of Jesus ( the Jesuit order ) was successful in penetrating China and serving at the Imperial court . They impressed the Chinese with their knowledge of European astronomy and mechanics , and in fact ran the Imperial Observatory . Their accurate methods allowed the Kangxi Emperor to successfully predict eclipses , one of his ritual duties . Other Jesuits functioned as court painters . The Jesuits in turn were impressed by the Chinese Confucian elite , and adapted to that lifestyle . 
 The Jesuits encountered a problem with their missionary work in China , and gradually developed and adopted a policy of accommodation on the issue of Chinese rites . The Chinese elite were attached to Confucianism , while Buddhism and Daoism were mostly practiced by the common people and lower aristocracy of this period . Despite this , all three provided the framework of both state and home life . Part of Confucian and Taoist practices involved veneration of one 's ancestors . 
 Besides the Jesuits , other religious orders such as the Dominicans , Franciscans , and Augustinians started missionary work in China during the 17th century , often coming from the Spanish colony of the Philippines . Contrary to the Jesuits , they refused any adaptation to local customs and wished to apply in China the same tabula rasa principle they had applied in other places , and were horrified by the practices of the Jesuits . 
 They ignited a heated controversy and brought it to Rome . They raised three main points of contention : 
 Determination of the Chinese word for " God " , which was generally accepted as <unk> Tiānzhǔ ( Lord of Heaven ) , while Jesuits were willing to allow Chinese Christians to use <unk> Tiān ( Heaven ) or <unk> Shàngdì ( Lord Above / Supreme Emperor ) 
 Prohibition for Christians to participate in the season rites for Confucius . 
 Prohibition for Christians of the use of tablets with the forbidden inscription " site of the soul " , and to follow the Chinese rites for the ancestor worship . 
 In Rome , the Jesuits tried to argue that these " Chinese Rites " were social ( rather than religious ) ceremonies , and that converts should be allowed to continue to participate . 
 The Jesuits argued that Chinese folk religion and offerings to the Emperor and departed ancestors were civil in nature and therefore not incompatible with Catholicism , while their opponents argued that these kinds of worship were an expression of native religion and thus incompatible with Catholic beliefs . 
 = = Pope Clement XI 's decree = = 
 Pope Clement XI condemned the Chinese rites and Confucian rituals , and outlawed any further discussion in 1704 , with the anti @-@ rites decree Cum Deus <unk> of November 20 , 1704 . It forbade the use of " Tiān " and " Shàngdì " , while approving Tiānzhǔ ( ‘ Lord of Heaven ’ ) . 
 In 1705 , the Pope sent a Papal Legate to the Kangxi Emperor , to communicate to him the interdiction of Chinese rites . The mission , led by Charles @-@ Thomas Maillard De Tournon , communicated the prohibition of Chinese rites in January 1707 , but as a result was banished to Macao . 
 Further , the Pope issued the 19 March 1715 Papal bull Ex illa die which officially condemned the Chinese rites : 
 Pope Clement XI wishes to make the following facts permanently known to all the people in the world ... 
 I. The West calls Deus [ God ] the creator of Heaven , Earth , and everything in the universe . Since the word Deus does not sound right in the Chinese language , the Westerners in China and Chinese converts to Catholicism have used the term " Heavenly Lord " ( Tiānzhǔ ) for many years . From now on such terms as " Heaven " [ Tiān ] and " Shàngdì " should not be used : Deus should be addressed as the Lord of Heaven , Earth , and everything in the universe . The tablet that bears the Chinese words " Reverence for Heaven " should not be allowed to hang inside a Catholic church and should be immediately taken down if already there . 
 II . The spring and autumn worship of Confucius , together with the worship of ancestors , is not allowed among Catholic converts . It is not allowed even though the converts appear in the ritual as bystanders , because to be a bystander in this ritual is as pagan as to participate in it actively . 
 III . Chinese officials and successful candidates in the metropolitan , provincial , or prefectural examinations , if they have been converted to Roman Catholicism , are not allowed to worship in Confucian temples on the first and fifteenth days of each month . The same prohibition is applicable to all the Chinese Catholics who , as officials , have recently arrived at their posts or who , as students , have recently passed the metropolitan , provincial , or prefectural examinations . 
 IV . No Chinese Catholics are allowed to worship ancestors in their familial temples . 
 V. Whether at home , in the cemetery , or during the time of a funeral , a Chinese Catholic is not allowed to perform the ritual of ancestor worship . He is not allowed to do so even if he is in company with non @-@ Christians . Such a ritual is heathen in nature regardless of the circumstances . 
 Despite the above decisions , I have made it clear that other Chinese customs and traditions that can in no way be interpreted as heathen in nature should be allowed to continue among Chinese converts . The way the Chinese manage their households or govern their country should by no means be interfered with . As to exactly what customs should or should not be allowed to continue , the papal legate in China will make the necessary decisions . In the absence of the papal legate , the responsibility of making such decisions should rest with the head of the China mission and the Bishop of China . In short , customs and traditions that are not contradictory to Roman Catholicism will be allowed , while those that are clearly contradictory to it will not be tolerated under any circumstances . 
 In 1742 Benedict XIV reiterated in his papal bull Ex quo <unk> Clement XI 's decree . Benedict demanded that missionaries in China take an oath forbidding them to discuss the issue again . 
 = = Kangxi 's ban = = 
 In the early 18th century , Rome 's ensuing challenge to the Chinese Rites led to the expulsion of Catholic missionaries from China . 
 In July 1706 , the Papal Legate led by Charles @-@ Thomas Maillard De Tournon irritated the Kangxi Emperor , and the emperor issued an order that all missionaries , in order to obtain an imperial permit ( <unk> ) to stay in China , would have to declare that they would follow ‘ the rules of Matteo Ricci ’ . 
 In 1721 , the Kangxi Emperor disagreed with Clement 's decree and banned Christian missions in China . In the Decree of Kangxi , he stated , 
 Reading this proclamation , I have concluded that the Westerners are petty indeed . It is impossible to reason with them because they do not understand larger issues as we understand them in China . There is not a single Westerner versed in Chinese works , and their remarks are often incredible and ridiculous . To judge from this proclamation , their religion is no different from other small , bigoted sects of Buddhism or Taoism . I have never seen a document which contains so much nonsense . From now on , Westerners should not be allowed to preach in China , to avoid further trouble . 
 Chinese converts were also involved in the controversy through letters of protest , books , pamphlets , etc . The Controversy debate was most intense between a group of Christian literati and a Catholic Bishop ( named Charles <unk> de <unk> ) in Fujian province , with the Chinese group of converts support the Jesuits and the bishop supported by less accommodating Iberian mendicants ( Dominicans and Franciscans ) . 
 = = The Qianlong Emperor 's reinforcement = = 
 Although the Jesuits ' defense of Christianity in China was still grounded in the accommodation policy first practiced by Matteo Ricci , it ended in failure in the eighteenth century : The persecution of Chinese Christians that began with his father 's , the Yongzheng Emperor 's 1724 proscription of the Heavenly Lord sect ( <unk> , the name given Catholicism in China in that period ) steadily increased during the reign of Qianlong Emperor . While the Qianlong Emperor appreciated and admired the Jesuit Giuseppe Castiglione 's artwork and western technologies , the emperor reinforced anti @-@ Christian policies in 1737 . 
 = = Dissolution of Jesuits = = 
 Pope Clement XIV dissolved the Society of Jesuits in 1773 , on the issue over Jesuit accommodation policy ; in particular , the 1773 decree did not accept that Chinese Rites can be placed on equal footing with Europe and Christianity . 
 = = Pope Pius XII 's decision = = 
 The Rites controversy continued to hamper Church efforts to gain converts in China . In 1939 , a few weeks after his election to the papacy , Pope Pius XII ordered the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples to relax certain aspects of Clement XI 's and Benedict XIV 's decrees . After the Apostolic Vicars had received guarantees from the Manchukuo Government that confirmed the mere " civil " characteristics of the so @-@ called " Chinese rites " , the Holy See released , on December 8 , 1939 , a new decree , known as Plane <unk> , stating that : 
 Catholics are permitted to be present at ceremonies in honor of Confucius in Confucian temples or in schools ; 
 Erection of an image of Confucius or tablet with his name on is permitted in Catholic schools . 
 Catholic magistrates and students are permitted to passively attend public ceremonies which have the appearance of superstition . 
 It is licit and unobjectionable for head inclinations and other manifestations of civil observance before the deceased or their images . 
 The oath on the Chinese rites , which was prescribed by Benedict XIV , is not fully in accord with recent regulations and is superfluous . 
 This meant that Chinese customs were no longer considered superstitious , but were an honourable way of esteeming one 's relatives and therefore permitted by Catholic Christians . Confucianism was also thus recognized as a philosophy and an integral part of Chinese culture rather than as a heathen religion in conflict with Catholicism . Shortly afterwards , in 1943 , the Government of China established diplomatic relations with the Vatican . The Papal decree changed the ecclesiastical situation in China in an almost revolutionary way . As the Church began to flourish , Pius XII established a local ecclesiastical hierarchy , and , in 1946 , named Thomas Tien Ken @-@ sin ( Chinese : <unk> ) SVD , then Apostolic Vicar of Qingdao , as the first Chinese national in the Sacred College of Cardinals and later that year appointed him to the Archdiocese of Beiping . 
 = USS New York ( BB @-@ 34 ) = 
 USS New York ( BB @-@ 34 ) was a United States Navy battleship , the lead ship of her class . Named for New York State , she was designed as the first ship to carry the 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) / 45 @-@ caliber gun . 
 Entering service in 1914 , she was part of the U.S. Navy force which was sent to reinforce the British Grand Fleet in the North Sea near the end of World War I. During that time , she was involved in at least two incidents with German U @-@ boats , and is believed to have been the only US ship to have sunk one in the war , during an accidental collision in October 1918 . Following the war , she was sent on a litany of training exercises and cruises in both the Atlantic and the Pacific , and saw several overhauls to increase her armament , aircraft handling and armor . 
 She entered the Neutrality Patrol at the beginning of World War II , and served as a convoy escort for ships to Iceland and Great Britain in the early phase of the war . She saw her first combat against coastal artillery during Operation Torch around Casablanca in North Africa , and later became a training ship . Late in the war , she moved to the Pacific , and provided naval gunfire support for the invasion of Iwo Jima and later the invasion of Okinawa . Returning to Pearl Harbor for repairs until the end of the war , she was determined to be obsolete and was chosen to take part in the Operation Crossroads nuclear weapon tests at Bikini Atoll in 1946 . She survived both explosions and the effects of radiation on the ship were studied for several years . She was eventually sunk as a target in 1948 . She received three battle stars for her service . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 New York was the first of two planned New York @-@ class battleships , though construction on her began after her sister , Texas . She was ordered in fiscal year 1911 as the first class of battleship in the United States Navy to carry the 14 @-@ inch / 45 @-@ caliber gun . 
 She had a standard displacement of 27 @,@ 000 long tons ( 27 @,@ 000 t ) and a full @-@ load displacement of 28 @,@ 367 long tons ( 28 @,@ 822 t ) . She was 573 ft ( 175 m ) in length overall , 565 ft ( 172 m ) at the waterline , and had a beam of 95 ft 6 in ( 29 @.@ 11 m ) and a draft of 28 ft 6 in ( 8 @.@ 69 m ) . 
 She was powered by 14 Babcock & Wilcox boilers driving two dual @-@ acting vertical triple expansion reciprocating steam engines , with 28 @,@ 000 shp ( 21 @,@ 000 kW ) , with a maximum speed of 21 kn ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . She had a range of 7 @,@ 060 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 080 km ; 8 @,@ 120 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Armor on New York consisted of a belt from 10 to 12 in ( 250 to 300 mm ) thick . Her lower casemate had between 9 and 11 in ( 230 and 280 mm ) of armor , and her upper casemate had 6 in ( 150 mm ) of armor . Deck armor was 2 in ( 51 mm ) thick , and turret armor was 14 in ( 360 mm ) on the face , 4 in ( 100 mm ) on the top , 2 inches on the sides , and 8 in ( 200 mm ) on the rear . Armor on her barbettes was between 10 and 12 inches . Her conning tower was protected by 12 inches of armor , with 4 inches of armor on its top . 
 Her armament consisted of ten 14 @-@ inch / 45 @-@ caliber guns , arrayed in five double mounts designated 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 . As constructed , these turrets had an elevation of 15 degrees , but this was increased to 30 degrees during an overhaul in 1940 – 41 . The class was the last to feature a turret mounted amidships . As built , she also carried twenty @-@ one 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 51 @-@ caliber guns , primarily for defense against destroyers and torpedo boats . The 5 @-@ inch guns were poor in accuracy in rough seas due to the open casemates mounted in the hull , so the 5 @-@ inch armament was reduced to 16 guns in 1918 by removal of the least useful positions near the ends of the ship . The ship was not designed with anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defense in mind , but two 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 50 caliber AA guns were added in 1918 . She also had four 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes , 1 each on the port side bow and stern and starboard bow and stern , for the Bliss @-@ Leavitt Mark 3 torpedo . The torpedo rooms held 12 torpedoes total , plus 12 naval defense <unk> . Her crew consisted of 1 @,@ 042 officers and enlisted men . 
 New York was laid down on 11 September 1911 in New York Navy Yard in Brooklyn . The New York class was constructed under new labor laws that limited the working hours of her construction crews . It was also stipulated that each ship cost less than $ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , excluding cost of armor and armament . She was launched on 30 October 1912 and commissioned on 15 May 1914 . The fifth ship to be named for New York State , she was sponsored by Elsie Calder , the daughter of New York politician William M. Calder . The fourth New York , an armored cruiser , was renamed Rochester , and was later scuttled in Subic Bay in 1941 . However , the wreck site for that ship , which has become a popular recreational dive site , is still commonly referred to as USS New York . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Under the command of Captain Thomas S. Rodgers , New York headed straight for Veracruz following its commissioning . She was designated flagship for Rear Admiral Frank Friday Fletcher in July 1914 , commanding the fleet occupying and blockading Veracruz to prevent arms shipments from arriving there to support the government of Victoriano Huerta . The United States occupation of Veracruz ultimately ended and New York resumed her shakedown cruise along the East Coast of the United States . She also undertook several goodwill duties , and in December 1915 she held a high @-@ profile Christmas party and dinner for several hundred orphans from New York City , at the suggestion of her crew . It later became a tradition on the ship to help the underprivileged when possible , earning it the nickname " Christmas Ship . " Following this duty , she undertook a number of training exercises off the Atlantic coast . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Following the United States ' entry into World War I , New York , under the command of Captain Edward L. Beach , Sr. , became flagship of Battleship Division 9 ( BatDiv 9 ) , commanded by Rear Admiral Hugh Rodman . She was sent to reinforce the British Grand Fleet in the North Sea , arriving at Scapa Flow on 7 December 1917 . The ships of the U.S. fleet were assigned to the 6th Battle Squadron in the Grand Fleet , the American ships joined in blockade and escort . In December 1917 , New York and the other U.S. battleships took part in several gunnery exercises . New York scored the highest score of the ships for her main battery , with an accuracy of 93 @.@ 3 percent . Ultimately the New York was the best performer in these exercises , the only ship rated as " excellent " while many of her sisters received mediocre performance reviews . 
 She did not fire any shots during the war , but during at least two occasions , the convoy she was escorting came under attack by German U @-@ boats . On the evening of 14 October 1918 , as New York led a group of battleships into the Pentland Firth , she was rocked by a violent underwater collision on her starboard side , followed shortly after by another to the stern that broke off two blades on one of her propellers , reducing the ship to one engine and a speed of 12 kn ( 14 mph ; 22 km / h ) . It was immediately clear to the men on board that she had struck an underwater object , but the depth of the channel meant it could not have been a shipwreck . Commanders concluded that New York must have accidentally collided with a submerged U @-@ boat . They agreed that the submarine had rammed its bow into the ship 's side , then been struck moments later by the ship 's propeller . In their opinion , the damage would have been fatal to the German craft . Postwar examination of German records revealed that the submarine lost may have been UB @-@ 113 or UB @-@ 123 . This strange — and accidental — encounter marked the only time in all of Battleship Division Nine 's service with the Grand Fleet that one of its ships sank a German vessel . 
 Badly damaged by the loss of a propeller , the ship sailed to Rosyth under heavy escort for repairs on 15 October . At 01 : 00 the next morning , a U @-@ boat launched three torpedoes at the damaged vessel , all of which passed ahead of her . Unlike in previous cases , sufficient evidence existed to suppose that this torpedo attack was not a false alarm — a number of officers and men aboard New York clearly saw the wakes of the torpedoes in the full moonlight , and a submarine was spotted in the immediate vicinity by a patrol shortly after the attack . Ironically , the battleship 's wounded condition is possibly what saved her : although standard procedure was to steam at 16 kn ( 18 mph ; 30 km / h ) , New York could make only 12 kn ( 14 mph ; 22 km / h ) on her one operable propeller . Due to this , historian Jerry Jones believes that the U @-@ boat captain misjudged the ship 's speed . With no further damage , however , the battleship was able to safely arrive at a drydock in Rosyth . As she was lifted clear of the water , a large dent commensurate with a submarine bow was found in her hull . 
 New York was also frequently host to foreign dignitaries , including King George V and Edward VIII of the United Kingdom , as well as prince Hirohito of the Empire of Japan . The ship was of great interest to other European powers , as it was in many cases a first chance to see an American dreadnought up close . She was on hand for the surrender of the German High Seas Fleet on 21 November 1918 in the Firth of Forth , several days after the signing of the Armistice , after which she returned to the United States briefly . She then served as an escort for George Washington , carrying President Woodrow Wilson , on his trip from the United States to Brest , France en route to the Versailles Peace Conference . 
 = = = Interwar period = = = 
 Arriving back in the United States in 1919 , she began to undertake training and patrol duties , including at one point to the Caribbean with a number of other U.S. ships . During this year , she also saw a refit in Norfolk Navy Yard where five 5 @-@ inch guns were removed and three additional 3 @-@ inch / 50 caliber AA guns were added , bringing the total to five . The secondary battery was reduced to sixteen 5 @-@ inch / 51 caliber guns . In late 1919 , she sailed to the Pacific Ocean and joined the newly formed United States Pacific Fleet . She continued to conduct training and patrol duties in the Pacific until the mid @-@ 1930s when she was transferred again to the Atlantic , and began operating out of the North Atlantic , with the exception of several occasional trips to the West Coast of the United States . 
 In 1926 New York was considered obsolete compared with other battleships in service , so she steamed to Norfolk Navy Yard for a complete refit . While several other battleships in service , including Utah and Florida were converted to training ships or scrapped , New York and Texas were chosen to be overhauled to increase their speed , armor , armament , and propulsion systems as allowed by the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 . An additional 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 000 t ) were added to her for defense against aerial targets and submarines . The number of 3 @-@ inch AA guns was increased to 8 , and six of the 5 @-@ inch guns were relocated to new casemates on the main deck . The torpedo tubes were removed at this time . Her 14 Babcock & Wilcox coal @-@ fired boilers were replaced with six Bureau Express oil @-@ fired boilers and the twin funnels were trunked into one , aft of the forward superstructure . Tripods were fitted in place of lattice masts , and atop the forward tripod a control tower was installed . A tower was built amidships that contained additional fire control to backup the system on the foremast . A new aircraft catapult was installed atop turret Number 3 and cranes were installed on either side of the funnel for boat and aircraft handling . Additional deck protection was added , and her beam was widened to 106 ft ( 32 m ) . She was fitted with anti @-@ torpedo bulges . However , these bulges made maneuvering harder at low speeds , she rolled badly , and her gunfire accuracy was reduced in rough seas . On 4 September 1928 , she left for short @-@ range battle drills with Arizona , and from 7 to 10 November the ships traveled to San Francisco together with Pennsylvania . On 3 April 1929 she undertook anti @-@ aircraft practice with Arizona , and then the two ships and Pennsylvania steamed for Cuba , where they stayed until steaming for Hampton Roads on 1 May . 
 She remained with the Pacific Fleet training as part of the series of Fleet Problems until 1937 . That year she was selected to carry Admiral Hugh Rodman , the President 's personal representative for the coronation of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth , and New York took part in the Grand Naval Review of 20 May 1937 as sole U.S. Navy representative . In 1937 , eight 1 @.@ 1 @-@ inch ( 28 mm ) / 75 caliber AA guns in two quadruple mounts were added to improve the light AA armament . New York was fitted with <unk> radar in February 1938 , including the first United States duplexer so a single antenna could both send and receive . This made her the second ship to be outfitted with radar after the destroyer Leary . The tests conducted on New York led to similar radars being installed on the Brooklyn @-@ class and St. Louis @-@ class cruisers as well as newer battleship West Virginia . For several years , she served primarily as a training ship for midshipmen and newly enlisted sailors . 
 In September 1939 , New York joined the Neutrality Patrol , safeguarding sea lanes in the North Atlantic , and served with the Atlantic Squadron , later redesignated the United States Atlantic Fleet , for the next 27 months . In July 1941 , she protected a convoy of U.S. troops moving to garrison Iceland . She saw another modernization in 1940 – 41 where her main battery elevation was increased from 15 to 30 degrees . She was in the midst of this refit on 7 December 1941 , when the Imperial Japanese Navy attacked Pearl Harbor , sinking many of the battleships in the U.S. Pacific Fleet and bringing the United States into World War II . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 With the outbreak of war , New York 's overhaul was sped up and completed four weeks after the attack on Pearl Harbor . She returned to duty escorting cargo and troop ships to Iceland and Scotland . She continued on patrol duty for the next year . In her first series of escorts , she left Norfolk 15 February , arrived in New York 16 February , Nova Scotia 21 February , and Iceland 2 March , returning to Norfolk on 27 March . She left there on her second patrol 24 April and arrived at New York the next day , Nova Scotia 2 May , Newfoundland 5 May , and Iceland 10 May , returning to New York on 20 May . The next day she left for a third escort , arriving again at Nova Scotia on 2 June and Scotland on 10 June , returning to Norfolk on 30 June . Following these three escort missions , she put in for overhaul in Norfolk . The secondary battery was reduced to six 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) guns and the anti @-@ aircraft armament was increased to ten 3 @-@ inch / 50 caliber guns , 24 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) Bofors guns in quadruple mounts , and 42 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Oerlikon cannons . She departed Norfolk on 12 August and arrived the next day at New York . From there , she escorted a convoy to Nova Scotia where she remained until 22 August , then departed for Scotland where she was from 31 August to 5 September . She returned to Norfolk on 15 September . 
 New York saw her first major action during Operation Torch , the Allied invasion of North Africa in November 1942 . She left Norfolk on 23 October in order to join the Allied fleet . Attached to the Southern Attack Group , on 8 November , New York and the cruiser Philadelphia , screened by six destroyers , attacked Safi harbor in Morocco , supporting landings by the U.S. 9th Infantry Division 's 47th Infantry Regiment , and defended the transports Cole and <unk> which came under attack by 130 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) shore batteries at Point De La Tour . New York fired several salvoes with her 14 @-@ inch ( 360 mm ) guns , with one of them striking the base of the battery and ricocheting into a bunker , destroying the range finder and killing the battery commander and neutralizing the battery . Other shore batteries were destroyed by Philadelphia 's guns and aircraft from escort carrier Santee . New York remained on station until the port was secure , then steamed north to support the Center Group off <unk> and Casablanca , specifically to deal with the threat of the Vichy French battleship Jean Bart , but by the time she arrived , that battleship had been disabled by Massachusetts and other Vichy French ships had been driven off by Brooklyn and Augusta . New York remained on off the coast of North Africa until the beaches were secure , then retired on 14 November . She had expended a total of sixty 14 @-@ inch ( 360 mm ) rounds . She returned to Norfolk on 23 November . 
 New York next returned to convoy patrol . She escorted two convoys to Casablanca from the United States during late 1942 , leaving Norfolk on 24 November and in New York from 25 November to 12 December , Casablanca from 24 to 29 December , and back in Norfolk on 12 January 1943 . She left Norfolk on the second escort on 26 February , in New York from 27 February to 5 March , in Casablanca from 18 to 25 March , and back to New York from 5 April to 1 May . In 1943 she was selected for a refit to become a main battery and escort training center . She arrived in Portland , Maine on 2 May , where she remained until 27 July . During her fourth and final refit in early 1943 her anti @-@ aircraft battery was increased to ten 3 @-@ inch / 50 caliber guns , forty 40mm and thirty @-@ six 20mm guns . Improved fire control was added as well , and this ultimately increased her displacement to 29 @,@ 340 long tons ( 29 @,@ 810 t ) standard and 34 @,@ 000 long tons ( 35 @,@ 000 t ) full @-@ load . She returned to Norfolk on 2 August 1943 . She was used to train crews from the US Navy , US Coast Guard , and Allied navies on the 14 @-@ inch / 45 caliber gun , the 3 @-@ inch / 50 caliber gun , and the 20mm and 40mm guns , primarily because many newer ships used these weapons . Between July 1943 and June 1944 about 11 @,@ 000 enlisted men and 750 officers trained on her in this capacity . However , the duty lowered morale among the crew and a large number of requests for transfer were put in . Following this duty , she was sent to the US Naval Academy and undertook three consecutive midshipmen cruises ferrying a total of 1 @,@ 800 cadets from Annapolis to Trinidad between June and August 1944 . 
 = = = = Pacific theater = = = = 
 Selected to return to action in the Pacific Theater in late 1944 , she transited the Panama Canal on 27 November , and arrived in Long Beach , California on 9 December , breaking down at least once along the way and losing an observation plane in bad weather . She conducted refresher training off Southern California in December 1944 and January 1945 . New York departed 12 January and rendezvoused with Idaho , Tennessee , Nevada , Texas , and Arkansas , forming a support force for the invasion of Iwo Jima . New York lost a blade off her port screw just before the invasion began and briefly put in for temporary repairs at Eniwetok from 5 to 7 February . She returned to the group , which was near Saipan , on 11 February . Together , they arrived at Iwo Jima on 16 February and began the pre @-@ invasion bombardment . During the three days of shore bombardment that followed , New York expended 6 @,@ 417 rounds , including 1 @,@ 037 14 @-@ inch rounds . One of her salvoes struck the primary ammunition dump on the island , causing " the most spectacular secondary explosion in the campaign . " She retired from the area on 19 February and arrived at Ulithi on 21 February . 
 After a permanent repair to her port propeller at Manus from 28 February to 19 March , she rejoined Task Force 54 at Ulithi on 22 March in preparation for the invasion of Okinawa . Joined by Maryland , Colorado , and West Virginia , the fleet of battleships began its bombardment of Okinawa on 27 March . Providing shore bombardment , and later naval artillery support for ground forces , New York was on station for 76 consecutive days , during which she expended 4 @,@ 159 rounds of 14 @-@ inch ammunition and 7 @,@ 001 rounds of 5 @-@ inch ammunition . She was subjected to a kamikaze attack on 14 April which destroyed one spotting plane on its catapult , but the Japanese aircraft crashed 50 yd ( 46 m ) from the ship and New York received only superficial damage , suffering two men injured . She was detached on 11 June , her gun barrels having been worn out by fire , and proceeded to Pearl Harbor to have her guns relined in preparation for the invasion of mainland Japan . She stopped by Leyte on 14 June and arrived at Pearl Harbor on 1 July . She was in the harbor on 15 August , the end of the war . 
 During World War II , New York spent 1 @,@ 088 days with the Atlantic Fleet from December 1941 to November 1944 , and 276 days with the Pacific Fleet . She expended a total of 53 @,@ 094 rounds of all types totaling 3 @,@ 548 @.@ 9 short tons ( 3 @,@ 219 @.@ 5 t ) , traveled 123 @,@ 867 mi ( 199 @,@ 345 km ) , spent 414 days underway , and consumed 22 @,@ 367 @,@ 996 US gal ( 84 @,@ 672 @,@ 080 l ; 18 @,@ 625 @,@ 253 imp gal ) of fuel oil . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 Following the end of the war , New York entered the Operation Magic Carpet fleet , leaving Pearl Harbor on 2 September and arriving at San Pedro on 9 September with a load of veterans embarked . She then proceeded to New York City to take part in Navy Day celebrations . 
 Selected as a test ship for Operation Crossroads , she was used in bomb tests at Bikini Atoll in July 1946 with about 70 other ships , surviving both the Able and Baker nuclear tests . Following these tests , she was towed to Pearl Harbor to study the effects of the bomb blasts on her . On 6 July 1948 , she was towed out to sea and used as target practice , and was sunk by several naval aircraft and ships . She had received three battle stars for her wartime service . 
 = = = In fiction = = = 
 In the Isaac Bell Adventure , The Spy by Clive Cussler & Justin Scott , the year is 1908 and there is a spy sabotaging American Battleship development . New York , known as " Hull 44 , " is a secret advanced design dreadnought that is being built during the novel . 
 = The Boat Race 1907 = 
 The 64th Boat Race took place on 16 March 1907 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Cambridge were reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race , and more than half their crew had already participated in the event . In a race umpired by Frederick I. Pitman , Cambridge won by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 20 minutes 26 seconds . It was their second consecutive victory and their fifth win in six races , taking the overall record in the event to 34 – 29 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2015 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1906 race by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , while Oxford led overall with 34 victories to Cambridge 's 28 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by Francis Escombe ( for the fourth consecutive year ) , Stanley Muttlebury , five @-@ time Blue between 1886 and 1890 , and David Alexander Wauchope ( who had rowed in the 1895 race ) . Oxford 's coaches were Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) and H. W. Willis . The umpire for the fifth year was old Etonian and former Cambridge rower Frederick I. Pitman who rowed in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 2 @.@ 875 lb ( 77 @.@ 3 kg ) , 1 @.@ 875 pounds ( 0 @.@ 9 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained three rowers with Boat Race experience , including Henry Bucknall who was rowing in his third consecutive event . Cambridge saw five participants return to their boat , including Banner Johnstone who had rowed in both 1904 and 1906 . All of those taking part in the race were registered as British . 
 Late in the previous summer , and following the Henley Royal Regatta , Cambridge were challenged to a race along the Championship Course by Harvard University : Cambridge won by two lengths . The Light Blues made only two changes to personnel for this year 's Boat Race , and as noted by author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater , " had a crew almost ready @-@ made " . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . Although the bend of the river provided the Dark Blues with an early advantage , Cambridge were ahead and clear within a minute and a half . Rating slightly slower than the Dark Blues , they passed the Mile Post two lengths up and held a three @-@ length lead as they passed below Hammersmith Bridge . Oxford 's stroke Albert Gladstone spurted in an attempt to draw his boat back into the contest , and stroke by stroke the gap was reduced , eventually to a few feet . 
 Encountering rough water , Oxford had to work hard to remain in contention but at Chiswick , began to fall back rapidly . Even after reducing their stroke rate , Cambridge pulled further away to lead by four lengths at Barnes Bridge . They eased up to win by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 20 minutes 26 seconds , their second consecutive victory and their fifth win in six races . It was the largest winning margin since the 1904 race and took the overall record in the event to 34 – 29 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Justified ( album ) = 
 Justified is the debut studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter Justin Timberlake . It was released on November 4 , 2002 , by Jive Records . The album was written and recorded in a six @-@ week period , during the hiatus of the singer 's band NSYNC . For the album , Timberlake began to adopt a more mature image as an R & B artist opposed to the previous pop music recorded by the group . Most of the album was produced by The Neptunes ( credited as " Williams and Hugo " on the album ) , with additional collaborators including Brian McKnight , Scott Storch , Timbaland , The Underdogs , and Carvin & Ivan . The album features guest appearances by Janet Jackson and rap duo Clipse . Primarily an R & B album , Justified also contains influences of dance @-@ pop , funk and soul music . 
 Justified received generally positive reviews from music critics ; most of them complimented the mature progression of the singer 's material , while some criticized its lyrical content . The album earned Timberlake four Grammy Award nominations , including Album of the Year , and won the award for Best Pop Vocal Album . Justified debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart and sold 439 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It was certified three @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) denoting shipments of three million copies in the US . As of 2012 , the album has sold over ten million copies worldwide . 
 Four singles were released from Justified . The album 's lead single , " Like I Love You " , peaked at number 11 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , while two follow @-@ up singles " Cry Me a River " , and " Rock Your Body " peaked within the top @-@ five on the chart . " Like I Love You " , " Cry Me a River " and " Rock Your Body " peaked at number two in the United Kingdom and in the top ten in Australia ( with " Rock Your Body " topping the Australian chart ) , Ireland , Netherlands and Belgium . To further promote the album , Timberlake performed on several television shows and embarked on The Justified World Tour and the Justified and Stripped Tour ; on the latter he was accompanied by American singer Christina Aguilera . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release of boy band NSYNC 's album Celebrity in 2001 , lead singer Justin Timberlake started working on his debut studio album during the hiatus . With the album , he wanted to portray a more mature image as an R & B performer , rather than a boy band pop artist . He revealed minimal information regarding the producers and artists involved with Justified during its early recording stage , with his management and record label also reluctant to share any information . However , MTV News reported that production duo The Neptunes were working on multiple tracks , while rapper P. Diddy and singer Mario Winans contributed to one track . Other known producers involved included Mike City , Raphael Saadiq and Rodney Jerkins , though between June and July , none of the aforementioned producers had attended any studio sessions . Explaining his involvement with the project , Jerkins said at the 2002 BET Awards that he " just got a call about working on the project " and that whenever Timberlake wanted his assistance , it would " be done " . 
 Brian McKnight 's manager stated that his client had already recorded tracks with the singer , while rapper Nelly explained to the reporters that both him and Timberlake had discussed a collaboration effort . Early in 2002 , Angie Stone revealed that Timberlake " loves the Mahogany Soul album " with him further saying to her " your CD 's in my car right now , you have to work on my solo project " . These assertions were later partially denied by a Jive spokesperson who announced that the material produced from the collaboration would not appear on the finalized record . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Justified was written and recorded in a six @-@ week period . According to Timberlake , the " creative spurt " was reminiscent of " that period of time back in the 1960s and ' 70s when musicians got together and just jammed and worked out of inspiration . There was no heavy calculation or <unk> songs and mixes . Everything flowed pretty easily and naturally . " Recording sessions took place at various studios in the United States , including the Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , Manhattan Center Studios in New York City and Master Sound Recording Studios and Windmark Recording in Virginia Beach . 
 The Neptunes told MTV News that the duo and Timberlake drove in a car listening to Earth , Wind & Fire albums for inspiration , with the background of the band 's music what the production duo wanted to implement into Justified 's musical content . The production duo commented that despite not being content with sampling music , for inspiration , they also listened to both Off the Wall ( 1979 ) and Thriller ( 1982 ) , albums by Michael Jackson . Their intentions were to create music that was similar to Jackson 's work without " recycling them " . One of the two members of The Neptunes , Chad Hugo , commented that they just wanted to re @-@ create " that sense of those timeless , classic songs , without any of the ' bling , bling , hit me on my two @-@ way ' style of the new R & B. It has elements of the old and the new . " The producer further went on to say that people wanted Timberlake to be conformed to being part of boy band NSYNC , with the former insisting that the singer is an immaculate vocalist . Hugo acknowledged Timberlake 's break @-@ up with singer Britney Spears , saying that some of the album 's music could be directed towards it . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The opening track on Justified , " Señorita " is a Spanish oriented song that features R & B influences ; in it Timberlake sings about a girl with brown eyes . " Like I Love You " is a funk influenced song consisted of live drums , tiny guitar strum accompanied with the singer 's breathy tenor . According to Ben Ratliff of Rolling Stone , " it 's minimalism influenced by Michael Jackson " . The third track on the album , " ( Oh No ) What You Got " was described by Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine as a bit racy for the audience who expected a more boy @-@ band @-@ oriented record . Regarding the fourth song , Russell Bailie of New Zealand Herald wrote that although the album " manages to skirt teen @-@ pop <unk> for the most part , though it does offer quality mush on numbers such as ' Take It From Here ' . " " Cry Me a River " is a funk and R & B song with an instrumentation that features beatboxing , synthesizers , Arabian @-@ inspired riffs and Gregorian chants . Lyrically , the song is about a brokenhearted man who moves on from his past . 
 The sixth track , " Rock Your Body " , incorporates tinny , " keyboard @-@ set @-@ to @-@ emulate @-@ clavichord " synthesizers of The Neptunes ' late 90s productions , overlaid with " keys and a propulsive drum vamp " . The seventh track of the album is " Nothin ' Else " ; which according to David Merryweather of Drowned in Sound is a " slinky " and " smooth " song that is similar to the works of American musician Stevie Wonder . Influenced by Jackson 's musical style and Van McCoy 's 1975 single " The Hustle " , " Last Night " is played with a xylophone . " Still On My Brain " , the ninth track on the album , is a slow jam , similar to the songs performed by Timberlake 's former band ' NSYNC . " ( And She Said ) Take Me Now " which features singer Janet Jackson , is a disco , ' 80s funk and dub song that contains racy lyrics . Similar to the previous song , the eleventh track of the album has racy lyrics ; on it Timberlake " <unk> " sings the line , " I could think of a couple positions for you " . " Let 's Take a Ride " is the twelfth song on the album , on which , according to Uncut magazine , Timberlake " offers to deliver you from your humdrum existence " . The record concludes with " Never Again " , a ballad , on which Timberlake becomes " downright maudlin and snippy " . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Like I Love You " featuring Clipse was released as the album 's lead single . It was released as a CD single on October 14 , 2002 in Germany and the US . The song was written by Justin Timberlake and The Neptunes , who also produced the track . It received positive reviews from critics , who praised its production and use of instrumentals . " Like I Love You " charted at number eleven on the US Billboard Hot 100 , and in the top five in the UK , Denmark , Netherlands and Ireland . The song was nominated for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 45th Grammy Awards . 
 Justified 's second single is " Cry Me a River " , and was released through contemporary and rhythmic radio on November 24 , 2002 , and as a 12 " vinyl on December 23 in the US . The song was written by Timberlake , Scott Storch and Timbaland and produced by the latter . " Cry Me a River " debuted at number 44 on the Billboard Hot 100 on the issue dated December 21 , 2002 , and eventually peaked at number three . In other countries , the song achieved similar success , reaching number two in Australia and the UK , and the top five in several other territories . " Cry Me a River " has been certified gold in Australia by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 70 @,@ 000 units , and certified silver in France . It won a Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance at the 2004 ceremony , while the accompanying music video won two MTV Video Music Awards : Best Male Video and Best Pop Video . The song is listed on Rolling Stone 's The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . 
 " Rock Your Body " was released as the album 's third single , and was released on May 6 , 2003 as a CD single in the US . It was written by Timberlake and The Neptunes , and produced by the latter . The song topped the charts in Australia for one week , became Timberlake 's third single to reach number two in the UK , and reached the top five in Denmark , Ireland , New Zealand and the US . " Rock Your Body " was certified platinum in Australia by the ARIA . It received a gold certification in the US by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of 500 @,@ 000 units . 
 " Señorita " is Justified 's fourth single , released through rhythmic radio on July 8 , 2003 . It was written by Timberlake and The Neptunes , while being produced by the latter . The song did not perform as well as Timberlake 's previous three single did on charts , reaching number 27 on the Hot 100 , and achieving its highest peak in Australia and New Zealand , where it reached number six and four , respectively . However the song has become somewhat of a fan favorite , receiving a lot more attention on <unk> and <unk> than Like I love you , and Senorita still remains on his top 10 most popular songs on Spotify to this day . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Timberlake performed " Cry Me a River " for the first time at the 13th annual Billboard Music Awards , held on December 9 , 2002 , at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas . He was accompanied by a string section and a 20 @-@ member choir . He performed " Cry Me a River " on a promotional concert held at House of Blues in West Hollywood , California on June 17 , 2003 . On February 1 , 2004 , the singer performed " Rock Your Body " at the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show with R & B singer Janet Jackson . At the moment Timberlake sang the lyric " Bet I 'll have you naked by the end of this song , " he ripped off part of Jackson 's costume , momentarily exposing her right breast on live television . Timberlake distanced himself from the controversy while Jackson faced much criticism . He later commented that " America 's harsher on women ... [ and ] unfairly harsh on ethnic people . " He performed " Señorita " live on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live in October 2003 , where he served as host and musical guest . 
 Timberlake did a joint tour in North America with Christina Aguilera entitled the Justified and Stripped Tour , to support both Justified and Aguilera 's 2002 album , Stripped . Timberlake 's and Aguilera 's managers suggested to both singers to go on a conjoint tour . Timberlake agreed with the suggestion , saying that " It would be fun to be on tour with somebody who 's that talented " . Timberlake 's further reasoning for touring with Aguilera was due to both singers wanting to " break the mold of what people look at as teen pop and move into a different direction " . For the tour , Timberlake wanted to transform arenas into clubs , stating that he wants people " to feel like they 're a part of the show and it 's a party " , remarking that anybody caught sitting down would get booted . For the tour , Timberlake performed with eight dancers , a 14 @-@ piece band which included four backup singers , three horn players and a DJ . The tour commenced on June 4 , 2003 in Phoenix , Arizona and concluded on September 2 , 2003 in Saint Paul , Minnesota . The tour grossed approximately $ 45 million . 
 On September 2003 , McDonald 's announced Timberlake as a new spokesmen for their " I 'm Lovin ' It " campaign . Timberlake recorded " I 'm Lovin ' It " , to be featured in adverts for the franchise , later expanded and released as a single in December 2003 . McDonald 's later announced they will sponsor a tour for Timberlake , following his successful North American tour with Christina Aguilera , entitled the Justified World Tour . Timberlake stated " I love what McDonald 's is doing with the new ' i 'm lovin ' it ' campaign and it 's cool to be part of it [ ... ] We share the same crowd -- people who like to have fun -- and that 's what this new partnership and my European concert tour is all about . " The tour began with Timberlake playing intimate gigs at clubs and theatres in the United States and Australia before expanding to arenas in Europe . The tour commenced on May 7 , 2003 in Sheffield , England and concluded on June 19 , 2004 in Brisbane , Australia . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Justified received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album has received an average score of 68 , based on 14 reviews . Ben Ratliff of Rolling Stone awarded the album four out of five stars , commending The Neptunes 's production , and noted both " Like I Love You " and " Cry Me a River " as standout tracks . Ratliff also commented that Justin Timberlake has successfully " vaulted over the canyon " to adulthood . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani gave Justified three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , writing that Timberlake meshes with The Neptunes " so well he virtually relinquishes his personality to the super @-@ duo — he could very well be the third member of N.E.R.D. " Cinquemani noted the similarities between Justified 's tracks to the work of musician Michael Jackson , saying that the album should have been Jackson 's tenth and final studio album , Invincible ( 2001 ) . In a favorable review by BBC Music 's Denise Boyd , similar to previous reviewers , Boyd praises " Like I Love You " , while also commending " Cry Me a River " for its lyrical content and " Rock Your Body " , which he notes contains Michael Jackson and Stevie Wonder influences . Entertainment Weekly writer David Browne awarded Justified with a B rating . Similar to Sal Cinquemani , Browne wrote how the album should have been the outcome of Jackson 's tenth studio album , as " the ultramodern R & B @-@ pop hybrid " . Browne described Justified as " cohesive " , favoring the album to NSYNC 's previous two efforts : Celebrity ( 2001 ) and No Strings Attached ( 2000 ) . 
 The Village Voice 's Christopher O 'Connor commended The Neptunes ' production , while praising " Like I Love You " and the Janet Jackson collaboration " ( And She Said ) Take Me Now " , saying how the songs show that Timberlake " has the balls to pursue the A @-@ plus list . " O 'Connor showed ambivalence towards " Right for Me " and " Cry Me a River " , noting the former as " awkward " and the latter as " a lousy Aaliyah impression . " Tyler Martin of Stylus Magazine gave the album a B + , commending the two opening tracks , " Señorita " and " Like I Love You " , noting the two as standouts . Despite this , Martin goes onto to praise " Take It from Here " and " Cry Me a River " , closing the review with saying that the album doesn 't maintain Timberlake 's masculine persona , but still " paints a picture of a complicated young man , growing into adulthood " . NME 's Alex Needham wrote that Timberlake 's lyrics are " soppy platitudes that may or may not be about Britney " . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian gave Justified two stars out of five , saying that the only noticeable tracks are " Cry Me a River " and " Rock Your Body " , noting the latter as " predictable " , while criticising the album 's lyrics as being " suggestive mumbling " . AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine commented that Timberlake " shamelessly borrows from Jacko , from the Thriller @-@ era " , going on to criticize his vocals as to lack substance , with his falsetto lacking character . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Justified earned Justin Timberlake three American Music Award nominations , including Favorite Pop / Rock Album , Favorite Pop / Rock Male Artist and Fan Choice Award . Timberlake won the award for Favorite Pop / Rock Album . At the 45th Grammy Awards , Timberlake had one nomination for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration for " Like I Love You " . The following year , Justified earned Timberlake nominations for Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album , while " Cry Me a River " was nominated for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance . Timberlake won the latter two awards . Justified won the International Album award at the 2004 Brit Awards . At the 2003 BET Awards , he received two nominations for Best R & B Male Artist and Best New Artist . Justified was listed at number 37 on The A.V. Club 's Best music of the decade list . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Justified debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 , selling 439 @,@ 000 copies in its opening week . The album was expected to top the chart , replacing the 8 Mile soundtrack ( 2002 ) . Instead the soundtrack sold 507 @,@ 000 copies , due to being propelled by Eminem 's " Lose Yourself " . The following week , Justified sold 188 @,@ 770 copies and fell two positions to number four . In its third week , the album sold 110 @,@ 000 copies and remained within the top ten on the chart . The album appeared on the Billboard 200 chart for seventy @-@ two weeks , and eventually went on to sell 3 @.@ 5 million copies in the US . It has been certified four times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipments of four million copies . Justified debuted and peaked at number two on the US Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . The album charted on the Billboard 200 and Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums 2003 year @-@ end charts , reaching number eleven and twenty @-@ six , respectively . 
 Internationally , Justified received a similar response . In the United Kingdom , Justified debuted at number six , and eventually peaked at number one on the week of November 16 , 2002 , remaining atop for seven non @-@ consecutive weeks . The album has appeared on the chart for eighty @-@ four weeks ; it has been certified five times platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipments of 1 @.@ 5 million copies . As of March 2015 , Justified is the 41st best @-@ selling album of the millennium in the United Kingdom . In Canada , the album peaked at number three and has been certified two times platinum by Music Canada . Justified debuted and peaked at number four in Denmark and the Netherlands , remaining on the charts for forty and seventy @-@ two weeks , respectively . The album peaked at number five in New Zealand for one week , appearing on the chart for thirty @-@ six weeks , and receiving a two times platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipping 15 @,@ 000 units . Justified peaked in the top ten in Belgium , Australia and Norway . The album charted within the top thirty and forty in several other countries . As of June 2012 , the album has sold over 10 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer . 
 " Señorita " contains additional vocals performed by Pharrell Williams . 
 " ( Oh No ) What You Got " contains additional vocals performed by Timbaland . 
 " Rock Your Body " contains additional vocals performed by Vanessa Marquez . 
 " Right for Me " contains additional vocals performed by Bubba Sparxxx and Timbaland . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Justified adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Baryonyx = 
 Baryonyx ( / <unk> / ) is a genus of theropod dinosaur which lived in the Barremian stage of the early Cretaceous Period , about 130 – 125 million years ago . The holotype specimen was discovered in 1983 in Surrey , England , and the animal was named Baryonyx walkeri in 1986 . The genus name , Baryonyx , means " heavy claw " and alludes to the animal 's very large claw on the first finger ; the specific name ( walkeri ) refers to its discoverer , amateur fossil hunter William J. Walker . Fragmentary specimens were later discovered in other parts of the United Kingdom and Iberia . The holotype specimen is one of the most complete theropod skeletons from the UK , and its discovery attracted media attention . 
 Baryonyx was about 7 @.@ 5 m ( 25 ft ) long and weighed 1 @.@ 2 t ( 1 @.@ 3 short tons ) , but the holotype specimen may not have been fully grown . It had a long , low snout and narrow jaws , which have been compared to those of a gharial . The tip of the snout expanded to the sides in the shape of a rosette . Behind this , the upper jaw had a notch which fit into the lower jaw ( which curved upwards in the same area ) . It had a triangular crest on the top of its nasal bones . Baryonyx had many finely serrated , conical teeth , with the largest teeth in front . The neck was less curved than that of other theropods , and the neural spines of its dorsal vertebrae increased in height from front to back . It had robust forelimbs , with the eponymous first @-@ finger claw measuring about 31 cm ( 12 in ) long . 
 Now recognised as a member of the family Spinosauridae , Baryonyx 's affinities were obscure when it was discovered . Apart from the type species ( B. walkeri ) , some researchers have suggested that Suchomimus tenerensis belongs in the same genus and that Suchosaurus cultridens is a senior synonym ; however , subsequent authors have kept them separate . Baryonyx was the first theropod dinosaur demonstrated to have been piscivorous ( fish @-@ eating ) , as evidenced by fish scales in the stomach region of the holotype specimen . It may also have been an active predator of larger prey and a scavenger , since it also contained bones of a juvenile Iguanodon . The creature would have caught and processed its prey primarily with its forelimbs and large claws . Baryonyx lived near water bodies , in areas where other theropod , ornithopod , and sauropod dinosaurs have also been found . 
 = = Description = = 
 In 2010 , Baryonyx was estimated to have been 7 @.@ 5 m ( 25 ft ) long and to have weighed 1 @.@ 2 t ( 1 @.@ 3 short tons ) . It was estimated at 10 m ( 33 ft ) in 1997 , and 9 @.@ 5 m ( 31 ft ) long , 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) in hip height , and 1 @.@ 7 t ( 1 @.@ 9 short tons ) in weight in 1988 . The fact that elements of the skull and vertebral column of the B. walkeri holotype specimen ( <unk> R9951 ) do not appear to have co @-@ ossified ( fused ) suggests that the individual was not fully grown , and the mature animal may have been much larger ( as attested by the size of the related Spinosaurus , which reached about 14 m ( 46 ft ) and 10 t ( 11 short tons ) . However , the specimen 's fused sternum indicates that it may have been fairly mature . The second @-@ best @-@ preserved specimen ( ML1190 ) was about the same size as the holotype skeleton . 
 The skull of Baryonyx is incompletely known , and much of the middle and hind portions are not preserved . The full length of the skull has been estimated to be 950 mm ( 37 @.@ 4 in ) , based on comparison with that of the related genus Suchomimus ( which is 20 % larger ) . It was elongated , and the front 170 mm ( 6 @.@ 6 in ) of the premaxillae formed a long , low snout ( rostrum ) with a rounded upper surface . The nostrils , far back from the tip , passed horizontally from one side of the skull to the other . The front 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) of the snout expanded into a spatulate ( flared outwards to the sides ) , " terminal rosette " shape similar to the modern gharial , and the front 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 7 in ) of the lower margin was downturned . The snout was very narrow just behind the rosette . The creature 's maxilla and premaxilla fit together in a complex articulation , resulting in a strongly curved tooth row . The gap in the row is comparable to that of Dilophosaurus . The front 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) of the dentary in the mandible curved upwards towards this area , and the gap between the upper and lower jaw is known as the <unk> notch . The snout had extensive pits ( which would have been exits for blood vessels and nerves ) , and the maxilla appears to have housed sinuses . 
 Baryonyx had a rudimentary secondary palate , similar to crocodiles but unlike most theropod dinosaurs . A rugose surface suggests the presence of a horny pad in the roof of the mouth . The upper midline of the nasal bones had a triangular sagittal crest , which was narrow and sharp in front . The lacrimal bone appears to have formed a horn core similar to those seen , for example , on Allosaurus . The dentary was very long and shallow , with a prominent <unk> groove . The rest of the lower jaw was fragile ; the hind third was much thinner than the front , with a blade @-@ like appearance . The front part of the dentary curved outwards to accommodate the large front teeth , and this area formed the mandibular part of the rosette . The dentary had many foramina ( openings ) , which were passages for nerves and blood vessels . It has been suggested that some of Baryonyx 's cranial bones had been misidentified ( resulting in the occiput 's too @-@ deep reconstruction ) , and the skull was probably as low , long and narrow as that of the closely related Suchomimus . 
 Most of the teeth found with the holotype specimen were not attached to the skull ; a few remained in the upper jaw , and only small replacement teeth were in the lower jaw . The teeth had the shape of recurved cones , flattened somewhat sideways . Although the larger teeth were less recurved than the smaller ones , they were otherwise uniform . The roots were very long , and the teeth slender . The carinae ( edges ) of the teeth were finely serrated with denticles on the front and back . There were seven narrow , uniform denticles per millimetre ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) , more than in most theropods . Some of the teeth were fluted , with six to eight ridges along the length of their inner sides and fine @-@ grained enamel . The inner side of each tooth row had a bony wall . The number of teeth was large , with seven teeth in the right premaxilla ( other theropods have three to five ) and thirty @-@ two in the dentary , where sixteen is typical . The lower jaw would have had sixty @-@ four teeth , and the difference between the number of teeth in the upper and lower jaws is more pronounced than in other theropods . The teeth in the dentary were more densely packed than those in the maxilla , and probably smaller . The terminal rosette in the upper jaw had thirteen dental alveoli ( tooth sockets ) , six on the left and seven on the right side ; the first four were large ( with the second and third the largest ) , while the fourth and fifth progressively decreased in size . The diameter of the largest was twice that of the smallest . The first four alveoli of the dentary ( corresponding to the tip of the upper jaw ) were the largest , with the rest more regular in size . <unk> plates were between the alveoli . 
 The neck formed a straighter S shape ( a sigmoid curve typical of theropods ) than that seen in other theropods ; in fact , the neck was initially thought to lack the S curve . The shape of the cervical vertebrae indicate that they tapered towards the head and were progressively longer front to back . The neural spines of the cervical vertebrae were low , thin , and were not always sutured to the centra ( the bodies of the vertebrae ) . The axis vertebra , small relative to the size of the skull , had a well @-@ developed hyposphene . The centra of the dorsal vertebrae were similar in size . Like other dinosaurs , Baryonyx reduced its weight ( skeletal pneumaticity ) with fenestrae ( openings ) in the neural arches and with pleurocoels ( hollow depressions ) in the centra ( primarily near the transverse processes ) . From front to back , the neural spines of the dorsal vertebrae changed from short and stout to tall and broad . 
 The scapulae ( shoulder blades ) were robust ; the bones of the forelimb were short in relation to the animal 's size , but broad and sturdy . The humerus was short and stout , with its ends broadly expanded and flattened — the upper side for the deltopectoral crest and muscle attachment and the lower for articulation with the radius and ulna . The radius was short , stout and straight , and the olecranon of the ulna apparently very powerful . The lower part of the ulna had a broad expansion . The first finger had a large claw ( ungual bone ) measuring about 31 cm ( 12 in ) along its curve , which would have been lengthened by a keratin sheath in life . Apart from its size , the claw 's proportions were fairly typical of a theropod ; it was bilaterally symmetric , slightly compressed , smoothly rounded , and sharply pointed . A groove for the sheath ran along the length of the claw . The pubic foot of the pelvis was not expanded . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 On 7 January 1983 amateur fossil hunter William John Walker discovered a large claw , a phalanx bone , and part of a rib in <unk> Pit , a clay pit near Ockley in Surrey , England . The tip of the claw was missing , but Walker found it a week later . British palaeontologists Alan J. Charig and Angela C. Milner examined the finds at the Natural History Museum of London and found more bones at the site on 7 February , but the entire skeleton could not be collected until May and June due to conditions at the pit . A team of eight museum staff members and a number of volunteers excavated two tonnes of matrix . Walker donated the claw to the museum , and the Ockley Brick Company ( owners of the pit ) donated the rest of the skeleton and provided equipment . Although the area had been explored for 200 years , no similar remains had been found before . 
 Most of the bones collected were encased in siltstone nodules surrounded by fine sand and silt , with the rest lying in clay . The bones were disarticulated and scattered over a 5 x 2 m ( 17 x 8 ft ) area , but most were not far from their natural positions . The position of some bones was disturbed by a bulldozer , and some were broken by mechanical equipment before they were collected . Preparing the specimen was difficult , due to the hardness of the siltstone matrix and the presence of siderite ; although acid preparation was attempted , most of the matrix was removed mechanically . The skeleton consisted of partial skull bones ; teeth ; cervical , dorsal and caudal vertebrae ; ribs ; a sternum ; coracoids ; arm and hand bones ; claws ; hip bones , and leg bones . The original specimen number was BMNH R9951 , but it was later renumbered NHMUK VP R9951 . 
 In 1986 Charig and Milner made the skeleton the holotype specimen of a new genus and species : Baryonyx walkeri . The genus name derives from ancient Greek ; <unk> ( <unk> ) means " heavy " or " strong " , and <unk> ( onyx ) means " claw " or " talon " . The specific name honours Walker , for discovering the specimen . At that time , the authors did not know if the large claw belonged to the hand or the foot ( as in dromaeosaurs , which it was then assumed to be ) . Due to ongoing work on the bones ( 70 percent had been prepared at the time ) , they called their article preliminary ( a " Letter to Nature " ) and promised a more @-@ detailed description at a later date . Baryonyx was the first large Early Cretaceous theropod found anywhere in the world until that time . Before the discovery of Baryonyx the last significant theropod find in the United Kingdom was Eustreptospondylus in 1871 , and in a 1986 interview Charig called Baryonyx " the best find of the century " in Europe . It was widely featured in international media , and its discovery was the subject of a 1987 BBC documentary . Baryonyx was nicknamed " Claws " by journalists punning on the title of the film Jaws . The skeleton is mounted at the Natural History Museum in London , and in 1997 Charig and Milner published a monograph describing the holotype skeleton in detail . 
 Fossils from other parts of the UK and Iberia , mostly isolated teeth , have subsequently been attributed to Baryonyx or similar animals . Isolated teeth and bones from the Isle of Wight , including hand bones and a vertebra , have been attributed to this genus . A maxilla fragment from La Rioja , Spain was attributed in 1995 . In 1999 a postorbital bone , a squamosal bone , a tooth , vertebra remains , metacarpals , and a phalanx from the Sala de los <unk> deposit in Burgos Province , Spain , were attributed to an immature Baryonyx ( though some of these elements are unknown in the holotype ) , and dinosaur tracks near Burgos have been identified as those of Baryonyx or a similar theropod . In 2011 a specimen ( ML1190 ) from the Papo Seco Formation in Boca do <unk> , Portugal , with a fragmentary dentary , teeth , vertebrae , ribs , hip bones , a scapula , and a phalanx bone , was attributed to Baryonyx , the most @-@ complete Iberian remains of the animal . The skeletal elements of this specimen are also represented in the more @-@ complete holotype <unk> R9951 , except for the mid @-@ neck vertebrae . 
 = = Classification = = 
 In their original description , Charig and Milner found Baryonyx unique enough to warrant a new family of theropod dinosaurs : <unk> . Although they found Baryonyx to be unlike any other theropod group ( and considered the possibility that it was a <unk> , due to apparently primitive features ) , they noted that the articulation of the maxilla and premaxilla was similar to that in Dilophosaurus . They also noted that two fragmentary snouts from Niger , assigned to the family Spinosauridae by French palaeontologist Philippe Taquet in 1984 , appeared almost identical to those of Baryonyx and they referred them to <unk> instead . In 1988 , American palaeontologist Gregory S. Paul agreed with Taquet that Spinosaurus , described in 1915 based on fragmentary remains from Egypt which were destroyed in World War II , and Baryonyx were similar and ( due to their kinked snouts ) possibly late @-@ surviving <unk> . French palaeontologist Eric Buffetaut also supported this relationship in 1989 . In 1990 Charig and Milner dismissed the spinosaurid affinities of Baryonyx , since they did not find their remains similar enough . 
 Discoveries in the 1990s shed more light on the relationships of Baryonyx and its relatives . A snout from Morocco was referred to Spinosaurus and Irritator from Brazil was named in 1996 . Two years later the snout fragments from Niger were named <unk> , and Suchomimus was named from a partial skeleton from the country . In their description of Suchomimus , Sereno and colleagues placed it and Baryonyx in the new subfamily Baryonychinae within Spinosauridae ; other members of the group were placed in the subfamily Spinosaurinae . Although they also united the spinosaurids and their closest relatives in the superfamily <unk> , in 2010 Roger Benson considered this a junior synonym of <unk> ( an older name ) . The following cladogram shows the position of Baryonyx within Spinosauridae , after Allain et al . ( 2012 ) : 
 The authors of a 2002 article about Irritator proposed that Suchomimus tenerensis was similar enough to B. walkeri to be considered a species within the same genus ( B. tenerensis ) , suggesting that Suchomimus was identical to <unk> ; both are from the Elrhaz Formation . At about 9 @.@ 5 m ( 30 ft ) and 2 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 5 @,@ 511 lb ) , Suchomimus was larger than Baryonyx . In a 2004 conference abstract , palaeontologists Steve Hutt and Penny Newbery supported this view based on a large theropod vertebra from the Isle of Wight which they attributed to Baryonyx ; this indicated that the vertebrae of the two genera were more similar than previously thought . Later studies have kept the genera separate . 
 In a 2003 article , Milner noted that the teeth of Baryonyx were very similar to those of the genus Suchosaurus and suggested that their remains represented the same animal . The type species of the genus , S. cultridens , was named in 1841 based on teeth from Tilgate Forest in Sussex ; a second species , S. <unk> , was named in 1897 based on jaw fragments and a tooth from Boca do <unk> . In 2007 Buffetaut considered the teeth of S. <unk> very similar to those of Baryonyx ( and S. cultridens ) except for the stronger development of the crown ribs , suggesting that the remains belonged to the same genus . Buffetaut agreed with Milner that the teeth of S. cultridens were almost identical to those of B. walkeri , but with a <unk> surface . The former taxon might be a senior synonym of the latter ( since it was published first ) , depending on whether the differences were within a taxon or between different ones . According to Buffetaut , since the holotype specimen of S. cultridens is one worn tooth and that of B. walkeri is a skeleton it would be more practical to retain the newer name . In 2011 Portuguese palaeontologist Octávio Mateus and colleagues agreed that Suchosaurus was closely related to Baryonyx , but considered both species in the former genus nomina dubia ( dubious names ) since their holotype specimens were not considered diagnostic ( lacking distinguishing features ) and could not be definitely equated with other taxa . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Spinosaurids appear to have been widespread from the Barremian to the Cenomanian ages of the Cretaceous , about 130 to 95 million years ago . They shared features such as long , narrow , crocodile @-@ like skulls ; sub @-@ circular teeth , with fine to no serrations ; the snout rosette , and a secondary palate which made them more resistant to torsion . In contrast , the primitive and typical condition for theropods was a tall , narrow snout with blade @-@ like teeth serrated front and back . The skull adaptations of spinosaurids converged with those of crocodilians ; early members of the latter group had skulls similar to typical theropods , later developing elongated snouts , conical teeth , and secondary palates . These adaptations may have been the result of a dietary change from terrestrial prey to fish . Unlike crocodiles , the post @-@ cranial skeletons of most spinosaurids ( except Spinosaurus ) do not appear to have aquatic adaptations . Sereno and colleagues proposed that the large thumb @-@ claw and robust forelimbs of spinosaurids evolved in the Middle Jurassic , before the elongation of the skull and other adaptations related to fish @-@ eating , since the former features are shared with their <unk> relatives . They also suggested that the <unk> and baryonychines diverged before the Barremian age of the Early Cretaceous . 
 Several theories have been proposed about the biogeography of the spinosaurids . Since Suchomimus was more closely related to Baryonyx ( from Europe ) than to Spinosaurus — although that genus also lived in Africa — the distribution of spinosaurids cannot be explained as vicariance resulting from continental rifting . Sereno et al. proposed that spinosaurids were initially distributed across the supercontinent Pangea , but split with the opening of the Tethys Sea . <unk> would then have evolved in the south ( Africa and South America : in Gondwanaland ) and baryonychines in the north ( Europe : in Laurasia ) , with Suchomimus the result of a single north @-@ to @-@ south dispersal event . It has also been suggested that baryonychines could be the ancestors of <unk> , which appear to have replaced the former in Africa . In 2006 , it was demonstrated that Iberia was near northern Africa during the Early Cretaceous ; some researchers have argued that the Iberian region was a stepping stone between Europe and Africa , which is supported by the presence of baryonychines in Iberia . The direction of the dispersal between Europe and Africa is still unknown , and subsequent discoveries of spinosaurid remains in Asia and Australia indicate that it may have been complex . 
 = = Palaeobiology = = 
 In 1986 Charig and Milner first suggested that its elongated snout with many finely serrated teeth indicated that Baryonyx was piscivorous ( a fish @-@ eater ) , speculating that it crouched on a riverbank and used its claw to gaff fish out of the water ( similar to the modern grizzly bear ) . In 1984 , Taquet pointed out that the spinosaurid snouts from Niger were similar to those of the modern gharial and suggested a behaviour similar to herons or storks . Although Charig and Milner did not consider Baryonyx to be aquatic ( due to its nostrils being on the sides of its snout — far from the tip — and the form of the post @-@ cranial skeleton ) , they thought it was capable of swimming like most land vertebrates . They later rejected their initial proposal that the articulation between the premaxilla and maxilla was mobile . 
 In 1987 Andrew Kitchener disputed the piscivorous behaviour of Baryonyx and suggested that it would have been a scavenger , using its long neck to feed on the ground , its claws to break into a carcass , and its long snout ( with nostrils far back for breathing ) for investigating the body cavity . Kitchener argued that Baryonyx 's jaws and teeth were too weak to kill other dinosaurs and too heavy to catch fish , with too many adaptations for piscivory . According to R. E. H. Reid , a scavenged carcass would have been broken up by its predator and large animals capable of doing so — such as grizzly bears — are also capable of catching fish ( at least in shallow water ) . 
 In 1997 , Charig and Milner demonstrated direct dietary evidence in the stomach region of the B. walkeri holotype . It contained the first evidence of piscivory in a theropod dinosaur , acid @-@ etched scales and teeth of the common fish <unk> mantelli ( then classified in the genus Lepidotes ) , and abraded bones of a young Iguanodon . An apparent gastrolith ( gizzard stone ) was also found . They also presented circumstantial evidence for piscivory , such as crocodile @-@ like adaptations for catching and swallowing prey : long , narrow jaws with their " terminal rosette " , similar to those of a gharial , and the downturned tip and notch of the snout . In their view , these adaptations suggested that Baryonyx would have caught small to medium @-@ sized fish in the manner of a crocodilian : gripping them with the notch of the snout ( giving the teeth a " stabbing function " ) , tilting the head backwards , and swallowing them headfirst . Larger fish would be broken up with the claws . That the teeth in the lower jaw were smaller , more crowded and numerous than those in the upper jaw may have helped the animal grip food . Charig and Milner maintained that Baryonyx would primarily have eaten fish ( although it would also have been an active predator and opportunistic scavenger ) , but it was not equipped to be a macro @-@ predator like Allosaurus . They suggested that Baryonyx mainly used its forelimbs and large claws to catch , kill and tear apart larger prey . In 2004 , a pterosaur neck vertebra from Brazil with a spinosaurid tooth embedded in it confirmed that the latter were not exclusively piscivorous . 
 A 2007 finite element analysis of CT scanned snouts indicated that the biomechanics of Baryonyx were most similar to those of the gharial and unlike those of the American alligator and more @-@ conventional theropods , supporting a piscivorous diet for spinosaurids . Their secondary palate helped them resist bending and torsion of their tubular snouts . A 2013 beam @-@ theory study compared the biomechanics of CT @-@ scanned spinosaurid snouts with those of extant crocodilians , and found the snouts of Baryonyx and Spinosaurus similar in their resistance to bending and torsion . Baryonyx was found to have relatively high resistance in the snout to dorsoventral bending compared with Spinosaurus and the gharial . The authors concluded ( in contrast to the 2007 study ) that Baryonyx performed differently than the gharial ; spinosaurids were not exclusive piscivores , and their diet was determined by their individual size . 
 A 2010 study proposed that spinosaurids were semi @-@ aquatic , based on the oxygen isotope composition of spinosaurid teeth from around the world compared with that of other theropods and extant animals . Spinosaurids probably spent much of the day in water , like crocodiles and hippopotamuses , and had a diet similar to the former ; both were opportunistic predators . Since most spinosaurids do not appear to have anatomical adaptations for an aquatic lifestyle , the authors proposed that submersion in water was a means of thermoregulation similar to that of crocodiles and hippopotamuses . Spinosaurids may also have turned to aquatic habitats and piscivory to avoid competition with large , more @-@ terrestrial theropods . 
 In their original description Charig and Milner speculated that the elongated skull , long neck , and strong humerus of Baryonyx indicated that the animal was a facultative quadruped , unique among theropods . In their 1997 article they found no skeletal support for this , but maintained thar the forelimbs would have been strong enough for a quadrupedal posture and it would probably have caught aquatic prey while crouching — or on all fours — near ( or in ) water . A 2014 re @-@ description of Spinosaurus based on new remains suggested that it was a quadruped , based on its anterior centre of body mass . The authors found quadrupedality unlikely for Baryonyx , since the better @-@ known legs of the closely related Suchomimus did not support this posture . 
 = = Palaeoecology = = 
 The Weald Clay formation consists of sediments of Hauterivian ( Lower Weald Clay ) to Barremian ( Upper Weald Clay ) in age , about 130 @-@ 125 million years old . The B. walkeri holotype was found in the latter , in clay representing non @-@ marine still water , which has been interpreted as a fluvial or mudflat environment with shallow water , lagoons , and marsh . During the Early Cretaceous , the Weald area of Surrey , Sussex , and Kent was partly covered by the large , fresh @-@ to @-@ brackish water Wealden Lake . Two large rivers drained the northern area ( where London now stands ) , flowing into the lake through a river delta ; the Anglo @-@ Paris Basin was in the south . Its climate was sub @-@ tropical , similar to the present Mediterranean region . Since the <unk> Pit consists of different stratigraphic levels , fossil taxa found there are not necessarily contemporaneous . Dinosaurs from the locality include the ornithopods Mantellisaurus , Iguanodon , and small sauropods . Other vertebrates include sharks ( such as <unk> ) , bony fishes ( including <unk> ) , crocodiles , and pterosaurs . Members of ten orders of insects have been identified , including <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Other invertebrates include ostracods , isopods , <unk> , and bivalves . The plants <unk> and the aquatic , herbaceous <unk> were common . Other plants found include ferns , horsetails , club mosses , and conifers . 
 Charig and Milner presented a possible scenario explaining the taphonomy ( changes during fossilisation ) of the B. walkeri holotype specimen . The fine @-@ grained sediments around the skeleton , and the fact that the bones were found close together ( skull and forelimb elements at one end of the excavation area and the pelvis and hind @-@ limb elements at the other ) , indicates that the environment was quiet at the time of fossilisation and water currents did not carry the carcass far — possibly because the water was shallow . The area where the specimen died seems to have been suitable for a piscivorous animal . It may have caught fish and scavenged on the mud plain , becoming mired before it died and was buried . Since the bones are well @-@ preserved and had no gnaw marks , the carcass appears to have been undisturbed by scavengers ( suggesting that it was quickly covered by sediment ) . The disarticulation of the bones may have been the result of soft @-@ tissue decomposition . Parts of the skeleton seem to have weathered to different degrees , perhaps because water levels changed or the sediments shifted ( exposing parts of the skeleton ) . The girdle and limb bones , the dentary , and a rib were broken before fossilisation , perhaps from trampling by large animals while buried . The orientation of the bones indicates that the carcass lay on its back , which may explain why all the lower teeth had fallen out of their sockets and some upper teeth were still in place . 
 Other dinosaurs from the Wessex Formation of the Isle of Wight include the theropods Neovenator , Aristosuchus , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ; the ornithopods Iguanodon , Hypsilophodon , and Valdosaurus ; the sauropods <unk> and <unk> , and the ankylosaur Polacanthus . The Papo Seco Formation of Portugal where Baryonyx has been identified is composed of marl , representing a lagoon environment . Other dinosaur remains from the area include fragments tentatively assigned to Mantellisaurus , a <unk> sauropod , and Megalosaurus . Most of the bones of Portuguese specimen ML1190 were damaged , and some scratches may be marks from small scavengers . The specimen 's disarticulation indicates it was transported from a more @-@ terrestrial environment ( since many bones are missing ) , but those found were close together . 
 = Hastati = 
 Hastati ( singular : <unk> ) were a class of infantry in the armies of the early Roman Republic who originally fought as spearmen , and later as swordsmen . These soldiers were the staple unit after Rome threw off the Etruscan rule . They were originally some of the poorest men in the legion , and could afford only modest equipment — light chainmail and miscellaneous equipment . The Senate supplied their soldiers with only a short stabbing sword , the gladius and their distinctive squared shields . The Hastati soldier was typically equipped with these , and several soft iron tipped throwing spears called pila . This doubled their effectiveness , not only as a strong leading edge to their maniple , but also as a stand @-@ alone missile troop . Later , the hastati contained the younger men rather than just the poorer , though most men of their age were relatively poor . Their usual position was the first battle line . They fought in a quincunx formation , supported by light troops . The enemy was allowed to penetrate the first battle line consisting of hastati , then the enemy would deal with the more hardened , seasoned soldiers , the principes . They were eventually done away with after the Marian reforms of 107 BC . 
 = = History and deployment = = 
 Hastati appear to have been remnants of the old third class of the army under the Etruscan kings when it was reformed by Marcus Furius Camillus . The third class stood in some of the last few ranks of a very large phalanx were equipped in a similar manner to hastati , but more often than not were relegated to providing missile support to the higher classes rather than fighting themselves . It is probable that engagements with the Samnites and a crushing defeat at the hands of the Gallic warlord Brennus , who both used lots of smaller military units rather than a few very large ones , taught the Romans the importance of flexibility and the inadequacy of the phalanx on the rough , hilly ground of central Italy . 
 = = = Camillan system = = = 
 By the 4th century BC the military the Romans had inherited from the Etruscans was still in use . Though its efficiency was doubtful , it proved effective against Rome 's largely local adversaries . When Gauls invaded Etruria in 390 BC , the inhabitants requested help from Rome . The small contingent Rome sent to repel the Gallic invaders provoked a full @-@ scale attack on Rome . The entire Roman army was destroyed at the Battle of the Allia in a crushing defeat that prompted reforms by Marcus Furius Camillus . Under the new system , men were sorted into classes based on wealth ; the hastati were the third poorest , with the rorarii being slightly poorer and the principes slightly wealthier . Hastati were armed with short spears , or hastae , up to 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 6 ft ) long , from which the soldiers acquired their name . They fought in quincunx formation , usually carrying scuta , large rectangular shields , and bronze helmets , often with a number of feathers fixed onto the top to increase stature . They wore light armour , the most common form being small breastplates , called " heart protectors " . 
 In this type of legion , the 900 hastati formed 15 maniples , military units of 60 men each . Attached to each maniple were about 20 leves , javelin @-@ armed light infantry . The hastati stood in the first battle line , in front of the principes of the second line and the triarii of the third . In a pitched battle , the leves would form up at the front of the legion and harass the enemy with javelin fire to cover the advance of the hastati . If the hastati failed to break the enemy during their engagement , they would fall back and let the heavier principes take over . If the principes could not break them , they would retire behind the triarii spearmen , who would then engage the enemy in turn . The equites , cavalrymen , were used as flankers and to pursue routing enemies . The rorarii and accensi in the final battle line were some of the least dependable troops , and were used in a support role , providing mass and reinforcing wavering areas of the line . 
 = = = Polybian system = = = 
 By the time of the Punic wars of the 3rd century BC , the Camillan system of organisation was found to be inefficient . In a new Polybian system , infantry were sorted into classes according to age and experience rather than wealth , the hastati being the youngest and least experienced . Their equipment and role was very similar to the previous system , except they now carried swords , or gladii , instead of spears . Each <unk> also carried two pila , heavy javelins that , " contrary to deeply entrenched myth " ( Goldsworthy ) , did not bend on impact to make any struck shield useless or prevent the weapon from being thrown back . The weight and barb alone sufficiently hampered any struck shield ( often penetrating the shield to hit the man behind it ) , and the iron was sufficiently hard that pila were often used as hand @-@ held spears against both infantry and cavalry . By the time the volley of pila had reached the enemy line ( usually only fifteen yards distant for best effect ) , the legionaries were charging and very quickly at work with their swords . There was rarely any time for the foe to find a <unk> , pull it out of whatever it had hit and throw it back . 
 The hastati had been increased in number to 1 @,@ 200 per legion , and formed 10 maniples of 120 men each . The rorarii and accensi had been done away with . Leves had been replaced with velites , who had a similar role but were now also attached to principes and triarii . Pitched battles were conducted in a similar fashion ; the velites would gather at the front and fling javelins to cover the advance of the hastati . If the hastati failed to break the enemy , they would fall back on the principes , who had also been re @-@ armed with swords . If the principes could not break them , they would retire behind the triarii , who would then engage the enemy . 
 This order of battle was almost always followed , the battle of the Great Plains and the battle of Zama being among the few notable exceptions . At the Great Plains , Scipio , the Roman general , formed his men up in the usual manner , but once the hastati had begun to engage the enemy , he used his principes and triarii as a flanking force , routing the opposing Carthaginian troops . 
 At Zama , Scipio arranged his men into columns , side by side , with large lanes in between . The opposing Carthaginian elephants were drawn into these lanes where many were killed by velites without inflicting many casualties on the Romans . Once the surviving elephants had been routed , he formed his men into a long line with his triarii and principes in the centre and hastati on the flanks , ready to engage the Carthaginian infantry . 
 = = = Marian reforms = = = 
 With the formal military reforms of Gaius Marius in 107 BC , intended to combat a shortage of manpower from wars against Jugurtha in Africa and Germanic tribes to the north , the different classes of units were done away with entirely . The wealth and age requirements were scrapped . Soldiers would join as a career , rather than as service to the city , and would all be equipped as medium infantry with the same state @-@ purchased equipment . Auxiliaries , local irregular troops , would fulfill other roles , serving as archers , skirmishers and cavalry . 
 = Avro Vulcan = 
 The Avro Vulcan ( later Hawker Siddeley Vulcan from July 1963 ) is a jet @-@ powered tailless delta wing high @-@ altitude strategic bomber , which was operated by the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) from 1956 until 1984 . Aircraft manufacturer A.V. Roe and Company ( Avro ) designed the Vulcan in response to Specification B.35 / 46 . Of the three V bombers produced , the Vulcan was considered the most technically advanced and hence the riskiest option . Several scale aircraft , designated Avro 707 , were produced to test and refine the delta wing design principles . 
 The Vulcan B.1 was first delivered to the RAF in 1956 ; deliveries of the improved Vulcan B.2 started in 1960 . The B.2 featured more powerful engines , a larger wing , an improved electrical system and electronic countermeasures ( ECM ) ; many were modified to accept the Blue Steel missile . As a part of the V @-@ force , the Vulcan was the backbone of the United Kingdom ’ s airborne nuclear deterrent during much of the Cold War . Although the Vulcan was typically armed with nuclear weapons , it was capable of conventional bombing missions , a capability which was used in Operation Black Buck during the Falklands War between the United Kingdom and Argentina in 1982 . 
 The Vulcan had no defensive weaponry , initially relying upon high @-@ speed high @-@ altitude flight to evade interception . Electronic countermeasures were employed by the B.1 ( designated B.1A ) and B.2 from circa 1960 . A change to low @-@ level tactics was made in the mid @-@ 1960s . In the mid @-@ 1970s nine Vulcans were adapted for maritime radar reconnaissance operations , redesignated as B.2 ( MRR ) . In the final years of service six Vulcans were converted to the K.2 tanker configuration for aerial refuelling . 
 Since retirement by the RAF one example , B.2 XH558 , named " The Spirit of Great Britain " was restored for use in display flights and air shows , whilst two other B.2s , XL426 and <unk> , are kept in taxiable condition for ground runs and demonstrations at London Southend Airport and Wellesbourne Mountford Airfield respectively . B.2 XH558 flew for the last time in October 2015 , before also being kept in taxiable condition at Robin Hood Airport , Doncaster . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The origin of the Vulcan and the other V bombers is linked with early British atomic weapon programme and nuclear deterrent policies . Britain 's atom bomb programme began with Air Staff Operational Requirement OR.1001 issued in August 1946 . This anticipated a government decision in January 1947 to authorise research and development work on atomic weapons , the U.S. Atomic Energy Act of 1946 ( McMahon Act ) having prohibited exporting atomic knowledge , even to countries that had collaborated on the Manhattan Project . OR.1001 envisaged a weapon not to exceed 24 ft 2 in ( 7 @.@ 37 m ) in length , 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) in diameter and 10 @,@ 000 lb ( 4 @,@ 500 kg ) in weight . The weapon had to be suitable for release from 20 @,@ 000 ft ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) to 50 @,@ 000 ft ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) . 
 In January 1947 , the Ministry of Supply distributed Specification B.35 / 46 to UK aviation companies to satisfy Air Staff Operational Requirement <unk> for " a medium range bomber landplane capable of carrying one 10 @,@ 000 lb ( 4 @,@ 500 kg ) bomb to a target 1 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 700 mi ; 2 @,@ 800 km ) from a base which may be anywhere in the world . " A cruising speed of 500 knots ( 580 mph ; 930 km / h ) at heights between 35 @,@ 000 ft ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) and 50 @,@ 000 ft ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) was specified . The maximum weight when fully loaded ought not to exceed 100 @,@ 000 lb ( 45 @,@ 000 kg ) . In addition to a " Special " ( i.e. , atomic ) bomb , the aircraft was to be capable of alternatively carrying a conventional bomb load of 20 @,@ 000 lb ( 9 @,@ 100 kg ) . The similar OR.230 required a " long range bomber " with a 2 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 300 mi ; 3 @,@ 700 km ) radius of action with a maximum weight of 200 @,@ 000 lb ( 91 @,@ 000 kg ) when fully loaded ; this requirement was considered too exacting . A total of six companies would submit technical brochures to this specification , including Avro . 
 Required to tender by the end of April 1947 , work began on receipt of Specification B.35 / 46 at Avro , led by technical director Roy Chadwick and chief designer Stuart Davies ; the type designation was Avro 698 . It was obvious to the design team that conventional aircraft could not satisfy the Specification ; knowing little about high @-@ speed flight and unable to glean much from the Royal Aircraft Establishment or the US , they investigated German Second World War swept wing research . The team estimated that an otherwise conventional aircraft , with a swept wing of 45 ° , would have doubled the weight requirement . Realising that swept wings increase longitudinal stability , the team deleted the tail ( empennage ) and the supporting fuselage , it thus became a swept @-@ back flying wing with only a rudimentary forward fuselage and a fin ( vertical stabilizer ) at each wingtip . The estimated weight was now only 50 % over the requirement ; a delta shape resulted from reducing the wingspan and maintaining the wing area by filling in the space between the wingtips , which enabled the specification to be met . Though Dr Alexander <unk> is generally credited as the pioneer of the delta wing , Chadwick ’ s team had followed its own logical design process . The initial design submission had four large turbojets stacked in pairs buried in the wing either side of the centreline . Outboard of the engines were two bomb @-@ bays . 
 In August 1947 , Roy Chadwick was killed in the crash of the Avro Tudor 2 prototype and was succeeded by Sir William Farren . Reductions in wing thickness made it impossible to incorporate the split bomb bays and stacked engines , thus the engines were placed side @-@ by @-@ side in pairs either side of a single bomb @-@ bay , the fuselage growing somewhat . The wingtip fins gave way to a single fin on the aircraft 's centreline . Rival manufacturer Handley Page received a prototype contract for its crescent @-@ winged HP.80 B.35 / 46 tender in November 1947 . Though considered the best option , contract placement for Avro 's design was delayed whilst its technical strength was established . Instructions to proceed with the construction of two Avro 698 prototypes was received in January 1948 . As an insurance measure against both radical designs failing , Short Brothers received a contract for the prototype <unk> to the less @-@ stringent Specification <unk> / 46 ; the <unk> , later named <unk> , was not required . In April 1948 , Vickers also received authority to proceed with their Type 660 which , although falling short of the B.35 / 46 Specification , being of a more conventional design would be available sooner ; this plane entered service as the Valiant . 
 = = = Avro 707 and Avro 710 = = = 
 As Avro had no flight experience of the delta wing , the company planned two smaller experimental aircraft based on the 698 , the one @-@ third scale model 707 for low @-@ speed handling and the one @-@ half scale model 710 for high @-@ speed handling . Two of each were ordered . However , the 710 was cancelled when it was considered too time @-@ consuming to develop ; a high @-@ speed variant of the 707 was designed in its place , the 707A . The first 707 , <unk> , flew in September 1949 but crashed later that month killing Avro test pilot Flt Lt Eric <unk> . The second low @-@ speed 707 , <unk> , built with the still uncompleted 707A ’ s nose section ( containing an ejection seat ) and redesignated 707B , flew in September 1950 piloted by Avro test pilot <unk> Cdr Roland " Roly " Falk . The high speed 707A , <unk> , followed in July 1951 . 
 Due to the delay of the 707 programme , the contribution of the 707B and 707A towards the basic design of the 698 was not considered significant , though it did highlight a need to increase the length of the nosewheel to give a ground incidence of 3 @.@ 5 degrees , the optimum take @-@ off attitude . The 707B and 707A proved the design 's validity and gave confidence in the delta planform . A second 707A , <unk> and a two @-@ seat <unk> , <unk> were also constructed but they played no part in the 698 's development . 
 = = = Vulcan B.1 and B.2 = = = 
 = = = = Prototypes and type certification = = = = 
 More influential than the 707 in the 698 's design was wind @-@ tunnel testing performed by the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough , which indicated the need for a wing redesign to avoid the onset of compressibility drag which would have restricted the maximum speed . Painted gloss white , the 698 prototype VX770 flew for the first time on 30 August 1952 piloted by Roly Falk flying solo . The prototype 698 , then fitted with only the first @-@ pilot 's ejection seat and a conventional control wheel , was powered by four Rolls @-@ Royce <unk> Avon engines of 6 @,@ 500 lbf ( 29 kN ) thrust ; there were no wing fuel tanks , temporary tankage was carried in the bomb bay . VX770 made an appearance at the 1952 Society of British Aircraft Constructors ' ( SBAC ) Farnborough Air Show the next month when Falk demonstrated an " almost vertical bank " . After its Farnborough appearance , the future name of the Avro 698 was a subject of speculation ; Avro had strongly recommended the name Ottawa , in honour of the company 's connection with Avro Canada . Weekly magazine Flight suggested Albion after rejecting Avenger , Apollo and <unk> . The Chief of the Air Staff preferred a V @-@ class of bombers , the Air Council announced the following month that the 698 would be called Vulcan after the Roman god of fire and destruction . In January 1953 , VX770 was grounded for the installation of wing fuel tanks , Armstrong Siddeley <unk> Sapphire engines of 7 @,@ 500 lbf ( 33 kN ) thrust and other systems ; it flew again in July 1953 . 
 The second prototype , VX777 , flew in September 1953 . More representative of production aircraft , it was lengthened to accommodate a longer nose undercarriage leg , featured a visual bomb @-@ aiming blister under the cabin and was fitted with Bristol Olympus 100 engines of 9 @,@ 750 lbf ( 43 @.@ 4 kN ) thrust . At Falk ’ s suggestion , a fighter @-@ style control stick replaced the control wheel . Both prototypes had almost pure delta wings with straight leading edges . During trials in July 1954 , VX777 was substantially damaged in a heavy landing at Farnborough . It was repaired and fitted with Olympus 101 engines of 11 @,@ 000 lbf ( 49 kN ) thrust before resuming trials in October 1955 . While exploring the high speed and high altitude flight envelope , mild buffeting and other undesirable flight characteristics were experienced while approaching the speed of sound , including an alarming tendency to enter an uncontrollable dive , unacceptable to the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment ( A & AEE ) at Boscombe Down . The solution included the " Phase 2 " wing , featuring a kinked and drooped leading edge and vortex generators on the upper surface , first tested on 707A <unk> . An auto @-@ mach trimmer introduced a nose @-@ up attitude when at high speeds , the control column had to be pushed rather than pulled to maintain level flight . 
 Meanwhile , the first production B.1 , XA889 , had flown in February 1955 with the original wing . In September 1955 , Falk , flying the second production B.1 <unk> amazed crowds at the Farnborough Air Show by executing a barrel roll on his second flypast in front of the SBAC president ’ s tent . After two days flying , he was called in front of service and civil aviation authorities and ordered to refrain from carrying out this " dangerous " manoeuvre . Now fitted with a Phase 2 wing , XA889 was delivered in March 1956 to the A & AEE for trials for the type ’ s initial Certificate of Airworthiness which it received the following month . 
 = = = = Further developments = = = = 
 The first 15 B.1s were powered by the Olympus 101 of 11 @,@ 000 lbf ( 49 kN ) thrust . Many of these early examples in a metallic finish remained the property of the Ministry of Supply being retained for trials and development purposes . Those entering RAF service were delivered to No 230 Operational Conversion Unit ( OCU ) , the first in July 1956 . Later aircraft , painted in anti @-@ flash white and powered by the Olympus 102 of 12 @,@ 000 lbf ( 53 kN ) thrust , began to enter squadron service in July 1957 . The Olympus 102s were quickly modified to Olympus 104 standard , ultimately rated at 13 @,@ 500 lbf ( 60 kN ) thrust . As far back as 1952 , Bristol Aero Engines had begun development of the <unk> ( Olympus 6 ) rated at 16 @,@ 000 lbf ( 71 kN ) thrust but if fitted to the B.1 , this would have re @-@ introduced the buffet requiring further redesign of the wing . 
 The decision to proceed with the B.2 versions of the Vulcan was made in May 1956 . It was anticipated that the first B.2 would be around the 45th aircraft of the 99 then on order . As well as being able to achieve greater heights over targets , it was believed that operational flexibility could be extended by the provision of in @-@ flight refuelling equipment and tanker aircraft . The increasing sophistication of Soviet air defences required the fitting of electronic countermeasure ( ECM ) equipment and vulnerability could be reduced by the introduction of the Avro Blue Steel stand @-@ off missile , then in development . In order to develop these proposals , the second Vulcan prototype VX777 was rebuilt with the larger and thinner Phase 2C wing , improved flying control surfaces and Olympus 102 engines , first flying in this configuration in August 1957 . Plans were in hand to equip all Vulcans from the 16th aircraft onwards with in @-@ flight refuelling receiving equipment . A B.1 , XA903 , was allocated for Blue Steel development work . Other B.1s were used for the development of the <unk> ( later Olympus 200 ) , XA891 ; a new AC electrical system , <unk> ; and ECM including jammers within a bulged tail @-@ cone and a tail warning radar , <unk> . 
 The 46th production aircraft and first B.2 , <unk> , first flew in September 1958 fitted with Olympus 200 engines of 16 @,@ 000 lbf ( 71 kN ) thrust , six months before the last B.1 <unk> was delivered in March 1959 . Rebuilding B.1s as B.2s was considered but rejected over cost . Nevertheless , to extend the B.1 's service life , 28 were upgraded by Armstrong Whitworth between 1959 and 1963 to the B.1A standard , including features of the B.2 such as ECM equipment , in @-@ flight refuelling receiving equipment , and UHF radio . The second B.2 , <unk> , flew in January 1959 . Powered by production Olympus 201 of 17 @,@ 000 lbf ( 76 kN ) thrust , it was more representative of a production aircraft , being fitted with an in @-@ flight refuelling probe and a bulged ECM tail cone . Some subsequent B.2s were initially lacking probes and ECM tail cones , but these were fitted retrospectively . The first 10 B.2s outwardly showed their B.1 ancestry , retaining narrow engine air intakes . Anticipating even more powerful engines , the air intakes were deepened on the 11th ( XH557 ) and subsequent aircraft . Many of the early aircraft were retained for trials and it was the 12th B.2 , XH558 , that was the first to be delivered to the RAF in July 1960 . Coincidentally , XH558 would also be the last Vulcan in service with the RAF , before being retired in 1992 . 
 The 26th B.2 , <unk> , the first of a production batch ordered in February 1956 , was the first Vulcan , apart from development aircraft , capable of carrying the Blue Steel missile ; 33 aircraft were delivered to the RAF with these modifications . When the Mk.2 version of Blue Steel was cancelled in favour of the Douglas GAM @-@ 87 Skybolt air @-@ launched ballistic missile in December 1959 , fittings were changed in anticipation of the new missile , one under each wing . Though Skybolt was cancelled in November 1962 , many aircraft were delivered or retrofitted with " Skybolt " blisters . Later aircraft ( <unk> and <unk> onwards ) were delivered with Olympus 301 engines of 20 @,@ 000 lbf ( 89 kN ) thrust . Two earlier aircraft were re @-@ engined ( XH557 and <unk> ) for trials and development work ; another seven aircraft ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) were converted circa 1963 . 
 The last B.2 <unk> was delivered in 1965 and the type served till 1984 . Whilst in service the B.2 was continuously updated with modifications including rapid engine starting , bomb @-@ bay fuel tanks , wing strengthening to give the fatigue life to enable the aircraft to fly at low level ( a tactic introduced in the mid @-@ 60s ) , upgraded navigation equipment , terrain following radar ( TFR ) , standardisation on a common nuclear weapon ( <unk> ) and improved ECM equipment . The B.1As were not strengthened , thus all were withdrawn by 1968 . Nine B.2s were modified for the maritime radar reconnaissance ( MRR ) role and six for the airborne tanker role . 
 = = = Proposed developments and cancelled projects = = = 
 Avro Type 718 
 The Avro 718 was a 1951 proposal for a delta @-@ winged military transport based on the Type 698 to carry 80 troops or 110 passengers . It would have been powered by four Bristol Olympus <unk> engines . 
 Avro Atlantic 
 The Avro Type 722 Atlantic was a 1952 proposal ( announced in June 1953 ) for a 120 @-@ passenger delta @-@ winged airliner based on the Type 698 . 
 Avro Type 732 
 The Avro 732 was a 1956 proposal for a supersonic development of the Vulcan and would have been powered by 8 de Havilland <unk> Junior engines . Unlike the proposed Avro 721 low @-@ level bomber of 1952 or the Avro 730 supersonic stainless steel canard bomber dating from 1954 ( cancelled in 1957 before completion of the prototype ) , the Type 732 showed its Vulcan heritage . 
 Vulcan Phase 6 ( Vulcan B.3 ) 
 In 1960 , the Air Staff approached Avro with a request into a study for a patrol missile <unk> armed with up to six Skybolt missiles capable of a mission length of 12 hours . Avro 's submission in May 1960 was the Phase 6 Vulcan , which if built would have been the Vulcan <unk> The aircraft was fitted with an enlarged wing of 121 ft ( 37 m ) span with increased fuel capacity ; additional fuel tanks in a dorsal spine ; a new main undercarriage to carry an all @-@ up @-@ weight of 339 @,@ 000 lb ( 154 @,@ 000 kg ) ; and reheated Olympus <unk> of 30 @,@ 000 lbf ( 130 kN ) thrust . An amended proposal of October 1960 inserted a 10 ft 9 in ( 3 @.@ 28 m ) plug into the forward fuselage with capacity for six crew members including a relief pilot , all facing forwards on ejection seats , and aft @-@ fan versions of the Olympus 301 . 
 = = = Export proposals = = = 
 Other countries expressed interest in purchasing Vulcans but , as with the other V @-@ bombers , no foreign sales materialised . 
 Australia 
 As early as 1954 , Australia recognised that the English Electric Canberra was becoming outdated and evaluated aircraft such as the Avro Vulcan and Handley @-@ Page Victor as potential replacements . Political pressure for a Canberra replacement only rose to a head in 1962 ; at which point more modern types such as the BAC TSR @-@ 2 , General Dynamics F @-@ 111C , and North American A @-@ 5 Vigilante had become available . The RAF would have transferred several V @-@ bombers , including Vulcans , for interim use by the RAAF if they had purchased the TSR @-@ 2 , but the RAAF selected the F @-@ 111C . 
 Argentina 
 In the early 1980s , Argentina approached the UK with a proposal to buy a number of Vulcans . An application , made in September 1981 , requested the ' early availability ' of a ' suitable aircraft ' . With some reluctance , ministers approved the export of a single aircraft but emphasised that clearance had not been given for the sale of a larger number . A letter from the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office to the Ministry of Defence in January 1982 stated that little prospect was seen of this happening without ascertaining the Argentine interest and whether such interest was genuine : ' On the face of it , a strike aircraft would be entirely suitable for an attack on the Falklands . ' Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands less than three months later . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Despite its radical and unusual shape , the airframe was built along traditional lines . Except for the most highly stressed parts , the whole structure was manufactured from standard grades of light alloy . The airframe was broken down into a number of major assemblies : the centre section , a rectangular box containing the bomb @-@ bay and engine bays bounded by the front and rear spars and the wing transport joints ; the intakes and centre fuselage ; the front fuselage , incorporating the pressure cabin ; the nose ; the outer wings ; the leading edges ; the wing trailing edge and tail end of the fuselage ; the wings were not sealed and used directly as fuel tankage , but carried bladders for fuel in the void spaces of the wings ; and there was a single swept tail fin with a single rudder on the trailing edge . 
 A five @-@ man crew , the first pilot , co @-@ pilot , navigator radar , navigator plotter and air electronics officer ( AEO ) was accommodated within the pressure cabin on two levels ; the pilots sitting on Martin @-@ Baker <unk> ( <unk> on the B.2 ) ejection seats whilst on the lower level , the other crew sat facing rearwards and would abandon the aircraft via the entrance door . The original <unk> / 46 specification sought a jettisonable crew compartment , this requirement was removed in a subsequent amendment , the rear crew 's escape system was often an issue of controversy , such as when a practical refit scheme was rejected . A rudimentary sixth seat forward of the navigator radar was provided for an additional crew member ; the B.2 had an additional seventh seat opposite the sixth seat and forward of the AEO . These seats were no more than cushions , a full harness and an oxygen and intercom facility . The visual bomb @-@ aimer ’ s compartment could be fitted with a T4 ( Blue Devil ) bombsight , in many B.2s this space housed a vertically mounted <unk> <unk> <unk> camera for assessing simulated low @-@ level bombing runs . 
 Fuel was carried in 14 bag tanks , four in the centre fuselage above and to the rear of the nosewheel bay and five in each outer wing . The tanks were split into four groups of almost equal capacity , each normally feeding its respective engine though cross @-@ feeding was possible . The centre of gravity was automatically maintained by electric timers which sequenced the booster pumps on the tanks . B.2 aircraft could be fitted with one or two additional fuel tanks in the bomb @-@ bay . 
 Despite being designed before a low radar cross @-@ section ( RCS ) and other stealth factors were ever a consideration , a Royal Aircraft Establishment technical note of 1957 stated that of all the aircraft so far studied , the Vulcan appeared by far the simplest radar echoing object , due to its shape : only one or two components contributed significantly to the echo at any aspect , compared with three or more on most other types . 
 = = = Colour schemes = = = 
 The two prototype Vulcans were finished in gloss white . Early Vulcan B.1s left the factory in a natural metal finish ; the front half of the nose radome was painted black , the rear half painted silver . Front @-@ line Vulcan B.1s had a finish of anti @-@ flash white and RAF " type D " roundels . Front @-@ line Vulcan B.1As and B.2s were similar but with ' type D pale ' roundels . 
 With the adoption of low @-@ level attack profiles in the mid @-@ 1960s , B.1As and B.2s were given a glossy sea grey medium and dark green disruptive pattern camouflage on the upper surfaces , white undersurfaces and " type D " roundels . ( The last 13 Vulcan B.2s , <unk> onwards , were delivered thus from the factory ) . In the mid @-@ 1970s : Vulcan B.2s received a similar scheme with matte camouflage , light aircraft grey undersides , and " low @-@ visibility " roundels ; B.2 ( MRR ) s received a similar scheme in gloss ; and the front half of the radomes were no longer painted black . Beginning in 1979 , 10 Vulcans received a wrap @-@ around camouflage of dark sea grey and dark green because , during Red Flag exercises in the US , defending SAM forces had found that the grey @-@ painted undersides of the Vulcan became much more visible against the ground at high angles of bank . 
 = = = Avionics = = = 
 The original Vulcan B.1 radio fit was : two 10 @-@ channel VHF transmitter / receivers ( TR @-@ 1985 / TR @-@ 1986 ) and a 24 @-@ channel HF transmitter / receiver ( STR @-@ 18 ) . The Vulcan B.1A also featured an UHF transmitter / receiver ( ARC @-@ 52 ) . The initial B.2 radio fit was similar to the B.1A though it was ultimately fitted with the ARC @-@ 52 , a V / UHF transmitter / receiver ( <unk> @-@ 175 ) , and a SSB HF transmitter / receiver ( Collins <unk> ) . 
 The navigation and bombing system ( NBS ) comprised an H2S <unk> radar and a navigation bombing computer ( NBC ) Mk1 . Other navigation aids included a Marconi radio compass ( ADF ) , GEE Mk3 , Green Satin Doppler radar to determine the <unk> and drift angle , radio and radar altimeters , and ILS . TACAN replaced GEE in the B.1A and B.2 in 1964 . Decca Doppler 72 replaced Green Satin in the B.2 around 1969 A continuous display of the aircraft 's position was maintained by a ground position indicator ( GPI ) . 
 Vulcan B.2s were eventually fitted with the twin @-@ gyro free @-@ running gyroscopic heading reference system ( HRS ) Mk.2 , based upon the inertial platform of the Blue Steel missile , which had been integrated into the system when the missile had been carried . With the HRS a navigator 's heading unit ( <unk> ) was provided which enabled the navigator plotter to adjust the aircraft heading , through the autopilot , by as little as 0 @.@ 1 degrees . The B.2 ( MRR ) was additionally fitted with the LORAN C navigation system . 
 The original ECM fit as fitted to the B.1A and B.2 was : one Green Palm voice communications ' jammer ; two Blue Diver metric jammers ; three red shrimp S @-@ band jammers ; ; a Blue Saga passive warning receiver with four aerials ( PWR ) ; a Red Steer tail warning radar ; and window ( chaff ) dispensers . The bulk of the equipment was carried in a large extended tail cone , and a flat ECM aerial counterpoise plate mounted between the starboard tailpipes . Later equipment on the B.2 included : an L band jammer ( replacing a Red Shrimp ) ; the ARI <unk> X @-@ band jammer ; replacing the Green Palm ; the improved Red Steer Mk.2 ; infra @-@ red decoys ( flares ) ; and the ARI <unk> PWR with its aerials that gave a squared top to the fin . 
 = = = Controls = = = 
 The aircraft was controlled by a fighter @-@ type control stick and rudder bar which operated the powered flying controls ( <unk> ) . Each PFC had a single electro @-@ hydraulic powered flying control unit ( <unk> ) except the rudder which had two , one running as a back @-@ up . Artificial feel and <unk> in the form of pitch and yaw dampers were provided , as well as an auto mach trimmer . 
 The flight instruments in the B.1 were traditional and included <unk> compasses ; <unk> artificial horizons ; and zero reader flight display instruments . The B.1 had a Smiths <unk> autopilot . In the B.2 , these features were incorporated into the Smiths Military Flight System ( MFS ) , the pilots ' components being : two beam compasses ; two director @-@ horizons ; and a <unk> or <unk> autopilot . From 1966 , B.2s were fitted with the ARI <unk> Terrain @-@ following radar ( TFR ) , built by General Dynamics , its commands being fed into the director @-@ horizons . 
 The B.1 had four elevators ( inboard ) and four ailerons ( outboard ) . In the B.2 , these were replaced by eight elevons . The Vulcan was also fitted with six electrically @-@ operated three @-@ position ( in , medium drag , high drag ) airbrakes , four in the upper centre section and two in the lower . There were originally four lower airbrakes but the outboard two were deleted before the aircraft entered service . A brake parachute was installed inside the tail cone . 
 = = = Electrical and hydraulic systems = = = 
 The main electrical system on the B.1 / B.1A was <unk> DC supplied by four <unk> engine @-@ driven generators . Backup power was provided by four 24V <unk> batteries connected in series providing <unk> . Secondary electrical systems were 28V DC , single @-@ phase 115V AC at <unk> , and three @-@ phase 115V AC at 400 Hz , driven by transformers and inverters from the main system . The 28V DC system was backed up by a single 24V battery . 
 For greater efficiency and higher reliability , the main system on the B.2 was changed to three @-@ phase <unk> AC at 400 Hz supplied by four <unk> engine @-@ driven constant speed alternators . Standby supplies in the event of a main AC failure were provided by a Ram air turbine ( RAT ) driving a <unk> alternator that could operate at high altitude down to 20 @,@ 000 ft ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) , and an airborne auxiliary power plant ( AAPP ) , a Rover gas turbine driving a <unk> alternator , which could be started once the aircraft was below an altitude of 30 @,@ 000 ft ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) . Secondary electrical supplies were similar to the B.1. 
 The change to an AC system was a significant improvement . The Vulcan 's powered flying controls were hydraulically actuated but each powered flying control unit ( <unk> ) had a hydraulic pump which was driven by an electric motor . Because there was no manual reversion , a total electrical failure would result in a loss of control . The standby batteries on the B.1 were designed to give enough power for 20 minutes of flying time but this proved to be optimistic and two aircraft , XA891 and XA908 , crashed as a result . 
 The main hydraulic system provided pressure for : undercarriage raising and lowering and bogie trim ; nosewheel centring and steering ; <unk> ( fitted with <unk> ) ; bomb doors opening and closing ; and ( B.2 only ) AAPP air scoop lowering . Hydraulic pressure was provided by three hydraulic pumps fitted to Nos. 1 , 2 and 3 engines . An electrically operated hydraulic power pack ( <unk> ) could be used to operate the bomb doors and recharge the brake accumulators . A compressed air ( later nitrogen ) system was provided for emergency undercarriage lowering . 
 = = = Engine = = = 
 The Rolls @-@ Royce Olympus , originally known as the " Bristol <unk> Olympus " , is a two @-@ spool axial @-@ flow turbojet that powered the Vulcan . Each Vulcan had four engines buried in the wings , positioned in pairs close to the centre of the fuselage . The engine 's design began in 1947 , intended to power the Bristol Aeroplane Company 's own rival design to the Vulcan . A serendipitous arrangement in air intakes could cause the Vulcan to emit a distinctive " howl " when the engines were at approximately 90 % power , which can be heard as the aircraft performs a flypast , such as at public airshows . 
 As the prototype Vulcan VX770 was ready for flight prior to the Olympus being available , it first flew using Rolls @-@ Royce Avon <unk> engines of 6 @,@ 500 lbf ( 29 kN ) thrust . These were quickly replaced by Armstrong Siddeley Sapphire <unk> engines of 7 @,@ 500 lbf ( 33 kN ) thrust . VX770 later became a flying test bed for the Rolls @-@ Royce Conway . The second prototype VX777 first flew with Olympus 100s of 10 @,@ 000 lbf ( 44 kN ) thrust . It was subsequently re @-@ engined with Olympus 101 engines of 11 @,@ 000 lbf ( 49 kN ) thrust . When VX777 flew with a Phase 2C ( B.2 ) wing in 1957 , it was fitted with Olympus 102 engines of 12 @,@ 000 lbf ( 53 kN ) thrust . 
 Early B.1s were engined with the Olympus 101 . Later aircraft were delivered with Olympus 102s . All Olympus 102s became the Olympus 104 of 13 @,@ 000 lbf ( 58 kN ) thrust on overhaul and ultimately 13 @,@ 500 lbf ( 60 kN ) thrust on uprating . The first B.2 flew with the second @-@ generation Olympus 200 of 16 @,@ 000 lbf ( 71 kN ) thrust , design of which began in 1952 . Subsequent B.2s were engined with either the uprated Olympus 201 of 17 @,@ 000 lbf ( 76 kN ) thrust or the Olympus 301 of 20 @,@ 000 lbf ( 89 kN ) thrust . The Olympus 201 was designated 202 on being fitted with a rapid air starter . The engine would later be developed into a reheated ( afterburning ) powerplant for the cancelled supersonic BAC TSR @-@ 2 strike bomber and the supersonic passenger transport Concorde . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Introduction = = = 
 In September 1956 , the RAF received its first Vulcan B.1 , XA897 , which immediately embarked upon a round @-@ the @-@ world tour . The tour was to be an important demonstration of the range and capabilities of the aircraft , but it also had other benefits in the form of conducting goodwill visits in various countries ; in later life Vulcans routinely visited various nations and distant parts of the former British Empire as a show of support and military protection . This first tour , however , was struck by misfortune ; on 1 October 1956 , while landing in bad weather at London Heathrow Airport at the completion of the world tour , XA897 was destroyed in a fatal accident . 
 The first two aircraft were delivered to 230 OCU in January 1957 and the training of crews started on 21 February 1957 ; in the following months more aircraft were delivered to the OCU . The first OCU course to qualify was No. 1 Course , on 21 May 1957 , and they went on to form the first flight of No. 83 Squadron . No. 83 Squadron was the first operational squadron to use the bomber , at first using borrowed Vulcans from the OCU , and on 11 July 1956 it received the first aircraft of its own . By September 1957 , several Vulcans had been handed over to No. 83 Squadron . The second OCU course also formed a Flight of 83 Squadron , but subsequent trained crews were also used to form the second bomber squadron , 101 Squadron . The last aircraft from the first batch of 25 aircraft had been delivered by the end of 1957 to 101 Squadron . 
 In order to increase the mission range and flight time for Vulcan operations , in @-@ flight refuelling capabilities were added in 1959 onwards ; several Valiant bombers were refurbished as tankers to refuel the Vulcans . Continuous airborne patrols proved untenable , however , and the refuelling mechanisms across the Vulcan fleet fell into disuse in the 1960s . Both Vulcans and the other V @-@ force aircraft routinely visited the Far East , in particular Singapore , where a fully equipped nuclear weapons storage facility had been constructed in 1959 . During the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation Britain planned to deploy three squadrons of V @-@ bomber aircraft and 48 Red Beard tactical nuclear weapons to the region ; although this was ultimately decided against , Vulcans trained in the region for both conventional and nuclear missions . Britain regularly deployed Vulcans to the Far East as a part of their contribution to SEATO operations , often to test the defenses of friendly nations in joint exercises . In the early 1970s , the RAF decided to permanently deploy two squadrons of Vulcans overseas in the Near East Air Force Bomber Wing , based at RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus ; the Vulcans were withdrawn as Cypriot intercommunal violence intensified in the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 Vulcans did some very long range missions . In June 1961 , one of them took off from RAF Scampton to Sydney , with an 18 @,@ 507 km long journey , flown in only a bit more than 20 hours and three air <unk> . Vulcans frequently visited the United States during the 1960s and 1970s to participate in air shows and static displays , as well as to participate in the Strategic Air Command 's Annual Bombing and Navigation Competition at such locations as Barksdale AFB , Louisiana and the former McCoy AFB , Florida , with the RAF crews representing Bomber Command and later Strike Command . Vulcans also took part in the 1960 , 1961 , and 1962 Operation <unk> exercises , in which NORAD defences were tested against possible Soviet air attack , the Vulcans simulating Soviet fighter / bomber attacks against New York , Chicago and Washington . The results of the tests were classified until 1997 . The Vulcan proved quite successful during the 1974 " Giant Voice " exercise , in which it managed to avoid USAF interceptors . 
 = = = Nuclear deterrent = = = 
 As part of Britain 's independent nuclear deterrent , the Vulcan initially carried Britain 's first nuclear weapon , the Blue Danube gravity bomb . Blue Danube was a low @-@ kiloton yield fission bomb designed before the United States detonated the first hydrogen bomb . These were supplemented by U.S.-owned Mk 5 bombs ( made available under the Project E programme ) and later by the British Red Beard tactical nuclear weapon . The UK had previously embarked on its own hydrogen bomb programme , and to bridge the gap until these were ready the V @-@ bombers were equipped with an Interim Megaton Weapon based on the Blue Danube casing containing Green Grass , a large pure @-@ fission warhead of 400 kt ( 1 @.@ 7 PJ ) yield . This bomb was known as Violet Club . Only five were deployed before the Green Grass warhead was incorporated into a developed weapon as Yellow Sun <unk> 
 The later Yellow Sun Mk 2 , was fitted with Red Snow , a British @-@ built variant of the U.S. <unk> warhead . Yellow Sun Mk 2 was the first British thermonuclear weapon to be deployed , and was carried on both the Vulcan and Handley Page Victor . The Valiant retained U.S. nuclear weapons assigned to SACEUR under the dual @-@ key arrangements . Red Beard was pre @-@ positioned in Singapore for use by Vulcan and Victor bombers . From 1962 , three squadrons of Vulcan B.2s and two squadrons of Victor B.2s were armed with the Blue Steel missile , a rocket @-@ powered stand @-@ off bomb , which was also fitted with the 1 @.@ 1 Mt ( 4 @.@ 6 PJ ) yield Red Snow warhead . 
 Operationally , RAF Bomber Command and the U.S. Strategic Air Command cooperated in the Single Integrated Operational Plan ( SIOP ) to ensure coverage of all major Soviet targets from 1958 , 108 aircraft of the RAF 's V @-@ Bombers were assigned targets under SIOP by the end of 1959 . From 1962 onwards , two jets in every major RAF base were armed with nuclear weapons and on standby permanently under the principle of Quick Reaction Alert ( QRA ) . Vulcans on QRA standby were to be airborne within four minutes of receiving an alert , as this was identified as the amount of time between warning of a USSR nuclear strike being launched and it arriving in Britain . The closest the Vulcan came to taking part in potential nuclear conflict was during the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962 , where Bomber Command was moved to Alert Condition 3 , an increased state of preparedness from normal operations ; however , it stood down in early November . 
 The Vulcans were intended to be equipped with the American Skybolt Air Launched Ballistic Missile to replace the Blue Steel , with Vulcan B.2s carrying two Skybolts under the wings ; the last 28 B.2s were modified on the production line to fit pylons to carry the Skybolt . A B.3 variant with increased wingspan to carry up to six Skybolts was proposed in 1960 . When the Skybolt missile system was cancelled by U.S. President John F. Kennedy on the recommendation of his Secretary of Defense , Robert McNamara in 1962 , Blue Steel was retained . To supplement it until the Royal Navy took on the deterrent role with Polaris ICBM @-@ equipped submarines , the Vulcan bombers adopted a new mission profile of flying high during clear transit , dropping down low to avoid enemy defences on approach , and deploying a parachute @-@ retarded bomb , the <unk> However , since the aircraft had been designed for high @-@ altitude flight , at low altitudes it could not exceed 350 knots . RAF Air Vice Marshal Ron Dick , a former Vulcan pilot , said " it is [ thus ] questionable whether it could have been effective flying at low level in a war against ... the Soviet Union . ” 
 After the British Polaris submarines became operational and Blue Steel was taken out of service in 1970 , the Vulcan continued to carry WE.177B in a tactical nuclear strike role as part of the British contribution to Europe 's standing NATO forces , although they no longer held aircraft at 15 minutes ' readiness in peacetime . Two squadrons were also stationed in Cyprus as part of the Near East Air Force and assigned to Central Treaty Organization in a strategic strike role . With the eventual demise of the WE.177B and the Vulcan bombers , the Blackburn Buccaneer , SEPECAT Jaguar , and Panavia Tornado continued with the <unk> until its retirement in 1998 . While not a like @-@ for @-@ like replacement , the multi @-@ role Tornado interdictor / strike bomber is the successor for the roles previously filled by the Vulcan . 
 = = = Conventional role = = = 
 Although in operational usage the Vulcan typically carried various nuclear armaments , the type also had a secondary conventional role . While performing conventional combat missions , the Vulcan can carry up to 21 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 454 kg ) bombs inside its bomb bay . Since the 1960s , the various Vulcan squadrons were routinely conducting conventional training missions ; the aircrews were expected to be able to perform conventional bombing missions in addition to the critical nuclear strike mission the Vulcan normally performed . 
 The Vulcan 's only combat missions took place towards the end of the type 's service in 1982 . During the Falklands War , the Vulcan was deployed against Argentinian forces which had occupied the Falkland Islands . This conflict was the only occasion in which any of the V @-@ bombers would participate in conventional warfare . The missions performed by the Vulcan became known as the Black Buck raids , each aircraft had to fly 3 @,@ 889 mi ( 6 @,@ 259 km ) from Ascension Island to reach Stanley on the Falklands . Victor tankers conducted the necessary air @-@ to @-@ air refuelling for the Vulcan to cover the distance involved ; approximately 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 imp gal ( 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 l ) of fuel was used in each mission . 
 Five Vulcans were selected to participate in the operation . In order to do so , each aircraft had to receive various last @-@ minute adaptations ; including modifications to the bomb bay , the reinstatement of the long out @-@ of @-@ use in @-@ flight refuelling system , the installation of a new navigational system derived from the Vickers VC @-@ 10 , and the updating of several onboard electronics . Underneath the wings , new pylons were fitted to carry an ECM pod and Shrike anti @-@ radar missiles at wing hardpoint locations ; these hardpoints had originally been installed for the purpose of carrying the cancelled Skybolt nuclear missile . Engineering work to retrofit these Vulcans had begun on 9 April . 
 On 1 May , the first mission was conducted by a single Vulcan that flew over Port Stanley and dropped its bombs on the airfield concentrating on the single runway , with one direct hit , making it unsuitable for fighter aircraft . The Vulcan 's mission was quickly followed up by strikes against anti @-@ air installations , flown by British Aerospace Sea Harriers from nearby Royal Navy carriers . Three Vulcan missions were flown against the airfield , a further two missions in which missiles were launched against radar installations ; an additional two missions were cancelled . At the time , these missions held the record for the world 's longest @-@ distance raids . The ECM systems on board the Vulcans proved to be effective at jamming Argentine radars ; while a Vulcan was within the theatre , other British aircraft in the vicinity had a greatly reduced chance of coming under effective fire . 
 On 3 June 1982 , Vulcan B.2 XM597 of No. 50 Squadron took part in the " Black Buck 6 " mission against Argentinian radar sites at Stanley airfield on the Falkland Islands . While attempting to refuel for its return journey to Ascension Island , the probe broke , leaving the Vulcan with insufficient fuel , forcing a diversion to Galeão Air Force Base , Rio de Janeiro in neutral Brazil . En route , secret papers were dumped along with the two remaining AGM @-@ 45 Shrike missiles , although one failed to launch . After a mayday call , the Vulcan , escorted by Brazilian Air Force Northrop F @-@ 5 fighters , was permitted an emergency landing at Rio with very little fuel left on board . The Vulcan and her crew were detained until the end of hostilities nine days later . 
 = = = Reconnaissance = = = 
 In November 1973 , as a result of the planned closure of the Victor SR.2 equipped No. 543 Squadron , No. 27 Squadron reformed at RAF Scampton equipped with the Vulcan as a replacement in the maritime radar reconnaissance role . The squadron carried out patrols of the seas around the British Isles , including the strategically important <unk> gap between Iceland and the United Kingdom , flying at high level and using the Vulcan 's H2S radar to monitor shipping . In peacetime , this could be followed up by visual identification and photography of targets of interest at low level . In wartime , a Vulcan would leave visual identification of potential targets to Buccaneers or Canberras , and could coordinate attacks by Buccaneers against hostile shipping . Though initially equipped with a number of B.2 aircraft , the Squadron eventually operated nine B.2 ( MRR ) aircraft ( also known by the unofficial designation SR.2 ) . The aircraft were modified for the role by removing the Terrain Following Radar ( and its thimble radome ) and adding the LORAN C radio navigation aid . The main external visual difference was the presence of a gloss paint finish , with a light grey undersurface , to protect against sea spray . 
 The squadron also inherited its secondary role of air sampling from No. 543 Squadron . This involved flying through plumes of airborne contamination and using onboard equipment to collect fallout released from both above ground and underground nuclear tests for later analysis at the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment at Aldermaston . Five aircraft had small pylons fitted to the redundant Skybolt hardpoints , which could be used to carry sampling pods modified from drop tanks . These pods would collect the needed samples on a filter , while an additional smaller " localiser " pod was fitted to the port wing , inboard of the main pylons . 
 The squadron disbanded at Scampton in March 1982 , passing on its radar reconnaissance duties to the RAF 's Nimrods . 
 = = = Aerial refuelling role = = = 
 After the end of the Falklands War in 1982 , the Vulcan B.2 was due to be withdrawn from RAF service that year . However , the Falklands campaign had consumed much of the airframe fatigue life of the RAF 's Victor tankers . While Vickers VC10 tanker conversions had been ordered in 1979 and Lockheed TriStar tankers would be ordered subsequent to the conflict , as a stopgap measure six Vulcans were converted into single point tankers . The Vulcan tanker conversion was accomplished by removing the jammers from the ECM bay in the tail of the aircraft , and replacing them with a single Hose Drum Unit ( HDU ) . An additional cylindrical bomb @-@ bay tank was fitted , making a total of three , giving a fuel capacity of almost 100 @,@ 000 lb ( 45 @,@ 000 kg ) . 
 The go @-@ ahead for converting the six aircraft was given on 4 May 1982 . Just 50 days after being ordered , the first Vulcan tanker , <unk> , was delivered to RAF Waddington . The Vulcan K.2s were operated by No. 50 Squadron , along with three Vulcan B.2s , in support of UK air defence activities until it was disbanded in March 1984 . 
 = = = Vulcan Display Flight = = = 
 After the disbandment of No. 50 Squadron , two Vulcans continued flying with the RAF in air displays as part of the Vulcan Display Flight , based at Waddington but administered through No. 55 Squadron , based at RAF Marham . Initially displaying using XL426 , in 1986 that aircraft was sold , having been replaced by XH558 , which began displays in 1985 . The <unk> continued with XH558 until 1992 , finishing operations after the Ministry of Defence determined it was too costly to run in light of budget cuts . Both aircraft subsequently entered preservation and survived , although a third , <unk> , kept in reserve in the first years , was later scrapped . 
 = = = Engine test beds = = = 
 The first prototype VX770 had its Sapphire engines replaced with four 15 @,@ 000 lbf ( 67 kN ) Rolls @-@ Royce Conway <unk> turbofans in 1957 . It was transferred to Rolls @-@ Royce as the Conway test bed . It flew with the Conways , the first turbofans in the world , until its fatal crash in September 1958 . 
 The first Vulcan B.1 XA889 was used for the flight clearances of the Olympus 102 and 104 . 
 Vulcan B.1 XA891 was fitted with four Olympus 200 engines in the spring of 1958 for intensive flying trials . The aircraft crashed in July 1958 during a routine test flight . 
 Vulcan B.1 <unk> flew with five Olympus engines , the standard four <unk> , plus a reheated Olympus 320 destined for the BAC TSR @-@ 2 in an underslung nacelle . This aircraft was destroyed in a ground fire at Filton on 3 December 1962 . 
 Vulcan B.1 <unk> was withdrawn from RAF service in June 1964 and transferred to be converted to the test bed for the Bristol Siddeley <unk> vectored thrust turbofan for the Hawker Siddeley P.1154. The P.1154 was cancelled in February 1965 and <unk> was scrapped before being converted . 
 Vulcan B.1 <unk> was withdrawn from RAF service after a landing accident in 1958 . After rebuilding , it replaced VX770 as the Conway test bed , fitted with four <unk> The two inner Conways were replaced with Rolls @-@ Royce <unk> , flying for the first time in this configuration on 12 October 1961 . 
 Vulcan B.1 XA903 , surplus to Blue Steel trials , was converted to a similar layout to <unk> to flight test the Olympus 593 Concorde installation . The first flight was on 1 October 1966 and testing continued through to June 1971 . In April 1973 , XA903 flew with an underslung Rolls @-@ Royce RB.199 turbofan destined for the Panavia Tornado . The RB.199 engine included both the reheat and thrust reverser functions . XA903 was the last B.1 to fly , being retired in February 1979 . 
 Vulcan B.2 XH557 was used by <unk> for developing the Olympus 301 and first flew with the larger engine in May 1961 . It was returned to Woodford in 1964 to be refurbished for the RAF . 
 = = Variants = = 
 B.1 
 The initial production aircraft . First few with straight leading edge , later retrofitted with Phase 2 ( kinked ) wing . Early examples finished in silver , later changed to " anti @-@ flash " white . Many converted to B.1A standard 1959 @-@ 1963 . Last few unmodified B.1s in RAF service with No. 230 OCU retired by 1966 . Last flight by any B.1 , an engine testbed XA903 , March 1979 . 
 B.1A 
 The B.1 with an Electronic Countermeasures ( ECM ) system in a new larger tail cone ( as in B.2 ) . Unlike the B.2 , the B.1As did not undergo extensive wing strengthening for low @-@ level flying and were withdrawn from service 1966 @-@ 67 . 
 B.2 
 Developed version of the B.1. Larger , thinner wing than the B.1 ( Phase 2C wing ) and fitted with Olympus 201 @-@ 202 engines of 17 @,@ 000 lbf ( 76 kN ) each , or Olympus 301 engines of 20 @,@ 000 lbf ( 89 kN ) each . <unk> electrics with Auxiliary Airborne Power Plant ( AAPP ) ( Auxiliary power unit ) and Ram Air Turbine ( RAT ) . ECM similar to <unk> Terrain @-@ Following Radar ( TFR ) in nose thimble radome fitted to most aircraft in mid @-@ 60s . New Radar warning receiver aerials on tail fin giving it a square top from the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 B.2 ( MRR ) 
 Nine B.2s converted to Maritime Radar Reconnaissance ( MRR ) . TFR deleted . Five aircraft further modified for Air Sampling Role . Distinctive gloss finish with light grey underside . 
 K.2 
 Six B.2s converted for air @-@ to @-@ air refuelling with Mark 17 Hose Drum Unit ( HDU ) mounted semi @-@ recessed in tail cone . TFR deleted . Fitted with three bomb @-@ bay drum tanks , it was the only mark of Vulcan that could jettison fuel in an emergency . 
 B.3 
 Proposed version intended as a long endurance missile carrier capable of carrying up to six Skybolt <unk> on flights of up to 12 hours duration . Never built . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 A total of 134 production Vulcans were assembled at Woodford Aerodrome , 45 to the B.1 design and 89 were B.2 models , the last being delivered to the RAF in January 1965 . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United Kingdom 
 Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment aircraft used for trials and evaluation 
 Royal Air Force 
 No. 9 Squadron RAF ( Operated the B.2 from 1962 to 1982 ) 
 No. 12 Squadron RAF ( Operated the B.2 from 1962 to 1967 ) 
 No. 27 Squadron RAF ( Operated the B.2 from 1961 to 1972 and the B.2 ( MRR ) from 1973 to 1982 ) 
 No. 35 Squadron RAF ( Operated the B.2 from 1962 to 1982 ) 
 No. 44 Squadron RAF ( Operated the B.1 / B.1A from 1960 to 1967 and the B.2 from 1966 to 1982 ) 
 No. 50 Squadron RAF ( Operated the B.1 / B.1A from 1961 to 1966 , the B.2 from 1966 to 1984 and the K.2 from 1982 to 1984 ) 
 No. 83 Squadron RAF ( the first Vulcan squadron operated the B.1 / B.1A from 1957 to 1960 and the B.2 from 1960 to 1969 ) 
 No. 101 Squadron RAF ( Operated the B.1 / B1A from 1957 to 1967 and the B.2 from 1967 to 1982 ) 
 No. 617 Squadron RAF ( Operated the B.1 / B1A from 1958 to 1961 and the B.2 from 1961 to 1981 ) 
 No. 230 Operational Conversion Unit RAF from 1956 to 1981 . The first unit to operate the Vulcan , it provided conversion to type and operational training for Vulcan aircrew 
 Bomber Command Development Unit 
 Vulcan To The Sky Trust ( flying G @-@ <unk> ( formerly XH558 ) currently based at Robin Hood Airport Doncaster Sheffield ) 
 Aircraft were also operated at various times under the direction of the Ministry of Supply / Aviation for trials and evaluation by Avro , Bristol Siddeley Engines , Rolls @-@ Royce and the Blind Landing Experimental Unit ( BLEU ) . 
 = = = Bases = = = 
 RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus was the base for two operational B.2 squadrons from 1969 to 1975 
 9 Squadron 1969 @-@ 1975 , moved from Cottesmore in 1969 it returned to the UK in 1975 to Waddington . 
 35 Squadron 1969 @-@ 1975 , moved from Cottesmore in 1969 it returned to the UK in 1975 to Scampton . 
 RAF Coningsby was the base for three operational squadrons from 1962 to 1964 
 9 Squadron 1962 @-@ 1964 , formed in 1962 to operate the B.2 it moved to Cottesmore in 1964 . 
 12 Squadron 1962 @-@ 1964 , formed in 1962 to operate the B.2 it moved to Cottesmore in 1964 . 
 35 Squadron 1962 @-@ 1964 , formed in 1962 to operate the B.2 it moved to Cottesmore in 1964 . 
 RAF Cottesmore was the base for three operational squadrons from 1964 to 1969 
 9 Squadron 1964 @-@ 1969 , moved in from Coningsby in 1964 , it moved to Akrotiri in 1969 . 
 12 Squadron 1964 @-@ 1967 , moved in from Coningsby in 1964 until it disbanded in 1967 . 
 35 Squadron 1964 @-@ 1969 , moved in from Coningsby in 1964 , it moved to Akrotiri 1969 . 
 RAF Finningley 
 101 Squadron 1957 @-@ 1961 , formed in 1957 to be the second operational B.1 squadron , moved to Waddington in 1961 . 
 230 OCU 1961 @-@ 1969 , moved from Waddington in 1961 , moved to Scampton in 1969 . 
 RAF Scampton was the base for three operational squadrons at different times between 1961 and 1981 
 27 Squadron 1961 @-@ 1972 , formed in 1961 to operate the B.2 until it disbanded in 1972 . Reformed in 1973 to operate the B.2 ( MRR ) variant until 1982 . 
 83 Squadron 1960 @-@ 1969 , a former B.1 / B.1A squadron at Waddington , reformed in 1960 to operate the B.2 until disbanded in 1969 . 
 617 Squadron 1958 @-@ 1981 , formed in 1958 to operate the B.1 , reformed to operate the B.2 in 1961 until disbanded in 1981 . 
 230 OCU 1969 @-@ 1981 , moved from Finningley in 1969 until disbanded in 1981 . 
 RAF Waddington was the base for a number of operational squadrons at different times between 1957 and 1984 , it was the first and last operational Vulcan base 
 9 Squadron 1975 @-@ 1982 , moved in from Akrotiri in 1975 until it was disbanded 1982 . 
 44 Squadron 1960 @-@ 1982 , formed in 1960 to operate the B.1 / B.1A , it converted to the B.2 in 1966 and disbanded in 1982 . 
 50 Squadron 1961 @-@ 1984 , formed in 1961 to operate the B.1 / B.1A , it converted to the B.2 in 1966 , from 1982 it also flew the tanker version until disbanding in 1984 . 
 83 Squadron 1957 @-@ 1960 , formed in 1957 to be the first operational squadron to operate the B.1 until 1960 , it reformed at Scampton later in the year as a B.2 unit . 
 101 Squadron 1961 @-@ 1982 , moved from Finningley in 1961 with the B.1 / B.1A , converted to B.2 in 1967 and disbanded in 1982 . 
 230 OCU 1956 @-@ 1961 , formed in 1956 to train Vulcan crews it moved to Finningley in 1961 . 
 = = = V @-@ Bomber dispersal airfields = = = 
 In the event of transition to war , the V Bomber squadrons were to deploy four aircraft at short notice to each of 26 pre @-@ prepared dispersal airfields around the United Kingdom . In the early 1960s the RAF ordered 20 Beagle Basset communication aircraft to move the crews to dispersal airfields ; the importance of these aircraft was only brief , diminishing when the primary nuclear deterrent switched to the Royal Navy 's Polaris Missile . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 1 October 1956 , Vulcan B.1 XA897 , the first to be delivered , crashed at London Heathrow Airport during Operation Tasman Flight , a flag @-@ waving trip to Australia and New Zealand . After a GCA approach in bad weather , it struck the ground 700 yd ( 640 m ) short of the runway just as engine power was applied . The impact probably broke the drag links on the main undercarriage , allowing the undercarriage to be forced backwards and damaged the wing 's trailing edge . After the initial impact , XA897 rose back in the air . The pilot , Squadron Leader D. R. Howard , and co @-@ pilot Air Marshal Sir Harry Broadhurst , AOC @-@ in @-@ C Bomber Command , both ejected and survived , the other four occupants ( including a spare pilot and an Avro representative ) were killed when the aircraft hit the ground again and broke up . 
 In 1957 , a Vulcan B.1 XA892 attached to the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment ( A & AEE ) at Boscombe Down for acceptance testing was unintentionally flown to an Indicated Mach Number ( IMN ) above 1 @.@ 04 , alarming the crew that it had reached supersonic speed . XA892 's commander , Flt Lt Milt Cottee ( RAAF ) , and co @-@ pilot , Flt Lt Ray Bray ( RAF ) , were tasked to fly at 478 mph ( 769 km / h ) and 0 @.@ 98 IMN , taking the aircraft to a load factor of 3 g . It climbed to 35 @,@ 000 ft ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) and then dived , intending to reach the target speed at 27 @,@ 000 ft ( 8 @,@ 200 m ) . Approaching the target altitude , the throttles were closed and full up @-@ elevator applied , but XA892 continued to pitch nose @-@ down . Cottee contemplated pushing forward to go inverted and then rolling upright ; instead , he opened the speed brakes . Although the airspeed was above their maximum operating speed , the speed brakes were undamaged and did slow the aircraft , which came back past the vertical at about 18 @,@ 000 ft ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) and leveled off at 8 @,@ 000 ft ( 2 @,@ 400 m ) . There were no reports of a sonic boom , it is unlikely a true Mach Number of 1 @.@ 0 was reached . Afterwards , a rear bulkhead was found to be deformed . 
 On 20 September 1958 , Vulcan VX770 was flown by a Rolls @-@ Royce test pilot on an engine performance sortie with a fly past at RAF <unk> Battle of Britain At Home display . It flew along the main runway then started a roll to starboard and climbed slightly , during which the starboard wing disintegrated and the main spar collapsed . VX770 went into a dive with the starboard wing on fire and struck the ground , killing three occupants of a controllers ' caravan and all four crew on board . Proposed causes of the structural failure have included pilot error , metal fatigue due to air intake vibration , and inadequate maintenance . 
 On 24 October 1958 , Vulcan B.1 XA908 of No. 83 Squadron crashed east of Detroit , Michigan , USA . A complete electrical failure occurred at around 30 @,@ 000 ft ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) , the backup system should have provided 20 minutes of emergency power , allowing XA908 to reach one of several airports in the area , however backup power only lasted three minutes due to a short circuit in the service busbar , locking the controls . XA908 went into a steep dive before crashing , leaving a 40 @-@ ft ( 13 m ) crater in the ground , which was later excavated while retrieving wreckage . Despite extensive property damage , there were no ground fatalities , only one person on the ground was hospitalized . All six crew members were killed , including the co @-@ pilot , who had ejected . The co @-@ pilot 's ejector seat was found in Lake St Clair , but his body was not recovered until the following spring . They were buried at Oak Ridge Cemetery in Trenton , Michigan , alongside 11 RAF student pilots killed during the Second World War in accidents at nearby Naval Air Station Grosse Ile . 
 On 24 July 1959 , Vulcan B.1 XA891 crashed due to an electrical failure during an engine test . Shortly after take @-@ off , the crew observed generator warning lights and loss of busbar voltage . The aircraft commander , Avro Chief Test Pilot Jimmy Harrison , climbed XA891 to 14 @,@ 000 ft ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) , steering away from the airfield and populated areas while the AEO attempted to solve the problem . When it became clear that control would not be regained , Harrison instructed the rear compartment crew to exit the aircraft and the co @-@ pilot to eject , before ejecting himself . All the crew survived , making them the first complete Vulcan crew to successfully escape . The aircraft crashed near Kingston upon Hull . 
 On 26 October 1959 , Vulcan B.1 XH498 participated in an airshow marking the opening of Wellington International Airport , formerly <unk> Airport . After a ' touch @-@ and @-@ go landing ' on Runway 34 , it came around for a full stop landing . Turbulence and wind shear caused XH498 to land short of the runway threshold , the port undercarriage leg clipped the embankment at the Moa Point or southern end , damaging wing attachments , engine fuel lines and the main landing gear drag link , which was ruptured and unable to support the aircraft . The port wing tip nearly scraped the runway surface before it was able to lift off again , spilling fuel over the crowd . Pilot actions prevented a possible disaster as spectators were present on the western apron . XH498 flew to RNZAF <unk> for a safe emergency landing on just the nose and starboard landing gear with little further damage . A UK repair team returned it to airworthiness ; on 4 January 1960 , XH498 departed , remaining in service until 19 October 1967 . 
 On 16 September 1960 , Vulcan B.2 XH557 damaged the " Runway Garage " at Filton . XH557 had been allocated to Bristol Siddeley Engines to test the Olympus 301 engine and was being delivered to Filton . Approaching in poor weather conditions , the aircraft touched down halfway along the runway . The braking parachute was streamed but realising the aircraft would not stop in time , the captain opened the throttles to go round . The Runway Garage took the full force of the jet blast and property damage was sustained : four petrol pumps were blown flat , a street light on the A38 was knocked down , railings were blown over , and multiple cars had their windscreens shattered . The aircraft diverted to St. Mawgan , flying into Filton days later . 
 On 12 December 1963 , Vulcan B.1A <unk> of No. 50 Squadron crashed during an exercise in Scotland . Flying no less than 1 @,@ 000 ft ( 300 m ) above ground , <unk> struck the ground while climbing slightly , the cause was likely poor visibility . 
 On 11 May 1964 , Vulcan B.2 <unk> crashed during a demonstration . The aircraft entered a spin while a very low speed and high rate of descent was being demonstrated . The landing parachute was deployed , stopping the spin briefly before it began to spin again . At around 2 @,@ 500 ft ( 760 m ) the aircraft commander instructed the crew to abandon the aircraft . The commander and co @-@ pilot ejected successfully , but none of the rear compartment crew did so , presumably due to the g forces in the spin . 
 On 16 July 1964 , Vulcan B.1A <unk> crashed in Anglesey after a midair explosion caused both No. 3 and No. 4 engines to be shut down . The explosion was caused by failure of a bearing in No. 4 engine . The starboard wing was extensively damaged , the pilot had insufficient aileron power , and both airspeed indications were highly inaccurate . The whole crew successfully abandoned <unk> and were found within a few minutes and rescued . 
 On 7 October 1964 , Vulcan B.2 <unk> crashed during overshoot from an asymmetric power practice approach at Coningsby . The copilot had executed the asymmetric power approach with two engines producing thrust and two at idle . He was being checked by the Squadron Commander , who was unfamiliar with the aircraft . When he commenced the overshoot the copilot moved all the throttles to full power . The engines that had been producing power reached full power more quickly than the engines at idle and the resultant asymmetric thrust exceeded the available rudder authority , causing the aircraft to spin and crash . All the crew perished . 
 On 25 May 1965 , Vulcan B.2 <unk> crash @-@ landed at Scampton , causing it be written off within a year of delivery . 
 On 11 February 1966 , Vulcan B.2 <unk> of the Cottesmore Wing crashed in the Brecon Beacons during a low level exercise . The aircraft struck the ground at 1 @,@ 910 ft ( 580 m ) near the summit of Fan Bwlch <unk> 1 @,@ 978 ft ( 603 m ) , 20 mi ( 32 km ) northeast of Swansea . All crew members died . <unk> at the time were snow @-@ covered and cloud extended down to 1 @,@ 400 ft ( 430 m ) . 
 On 6 April 1967 , Vulcan B.2 <unk> burnt out on the runway at RAF Scampton at the beginning of its take @-@ off run . The aircraft was carrying a Blue Steel missile training round . All the crew , including an Air Training Corps cadet , escaped unhurt . The aircraft was engulfed in flames and totally destroyed . The accident was caused by failure of an Olympus 301 HP turbine disc as the engine reached full power . 
 On 30 January 1968 , Vulcan B.2 <unk> crashed following a loss of control during an overshoot at RAF Cottesmore . The rear crew members were killed though both pilots ejected . The captain ejected at a very late stage and only survived because his deploying parachute was snagged by some power cables . The accident was caused by failure of an Olympus 301 LP turbine disc after the aircraft had returned to the airfield following indications of a bomb @-@ bay overheat . 
 On 7 January 1971 , Vulcan B.2 <unk> of <unk> Squadron crashed due to a blade fatigue failure in the No. 1 engine , damaging the fuel system and causing a fire . The crew abandoned the aircraft safely , after which it crashed harmlessly in Wingate . 
 On 14 October 1975 , Vulcan B.2 <unk> of No.9 Squadron lost its left undercarriage and damaged the airframe when it undershot the runway at RAF Luqa in Malta . The aircraft broke up over the village of Żabbar while turning inbound for an emergency landing . The pilot and co @-@ pilot escaped using their ejection seats , the other five crew members were killed . Large aircraft pieces fell on the village ; one woman , <unk> Zammit , was killed by an electric cable , some 20 others were injured . 
 On 17 January 1977 , Vulcan B.2 <unk> of No. 101 Squadron crashed near <unk> , Lincolnshire . During a practice emergency descent , the bomb bay fire warning light flashed on followed by No.2 engine fire warning light . The captain shut the engine down and the AEO reported flames coming from the area of No.2 engine , just behind the deployed Ram air turbine ( RAT ) . As the fire intensified , the captain ordered the aircraft to be abandoned . The three rear crew members escaped at around 6 @,@ 000 ft ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) . After ordering the co @-@ pilot to eject , the captain ejected at around 3 @,@ 000 ft ( 910 m ) , as control was lost . The cause was due to arcing on the RAT 's electrical terminals , burning a hole in an adjacent fuel pipe and setting the fuel on fire . 
 On 12 August 1978 , Vulcan B.2 <unk> of No. 617 Squadron crashed during an air display at Naval Air Station Glenview , Illinois in the United States . The crew had been authorised to carry out a display at Chicago Lakeside airport , the captain had elected to carry out an unauthorised display at Glenview beforehand . After a low @-@ level run , probably below 100 ft ( 30 m ) , the aircraft pulled up for an improperly @-@ executed wingover , resulting in a low @-@ level stall and crash , killing all on board . 
 On 3 June 1982 , Vulcan XM597 broke its probe while attempting to refuel in flight , while returning from a mission over the Falkland Islands . With insufficient fuel to reach its base on Ascension Island , the pilot discarded classified information over the Atlantic Ocean and diverted to Rio de Janeiro . Shortly after entering Brazilian airspace , the Brazilian Air Force sent two Northrop F @-@ 5s to escort the British plane until it landed on Galeão Air Force Base . This led to high @-@ level diplomatic talks between the UK and Brazil , which remained neutral during the Falklands War . After seven days of detainment , the Vulcan and its crew were allowed to return home on the condition that XM597 played no further part in the conflict . 
 On 28 May 2012 , Vulcan B.2 XH558 suffered failure of the two port engines while starting a take @-@ off roll from Robin Hood airport , Doncaster , UK . Bags of silica gel desiccant were inadvertently left in the air intake after maintenance . Less than a second after increasing power from 80 % to 100 % these were ingested by one of the port engines , immediately destroying it . The remaining port engine ingested debris from the first engine , destroying this one as well . The fire prevention systems proved effective , neither the airframe nor control systems suffered damage . The pilot had no difficulty bringing the aircraft to a safe stop , having remained on the ground throughout . On 3 July 2012 , XH558 returned to flight . 
 = = Surviving aircraft = = 
 Several Vulcans survive , housed in museums in both the United Kingdom and North America ( USA & Canada ) . One Vulcan , XH558 ( G @-@ <unk> ) Spirit of Great Britain , was used as a display aircraft by the RAF as part of the Vulcan Display Flight until 1993 . After being grounded it was later restored to flight by the Vulcan To The Sky Trust and displayed as a civilian aircraft from 2008 until 2015 , before being retired a second time for engineering reasons . In retirement , XH558 is to be retained at its base at Robin Hood Airport as a taxi @-@ able aircraft , a role already performed by two other survivors , XL426 ( G @-@ <unk> ) based at Southend Airport , and <unk> ( G @-@ <unk> ) , based at Wellesbourne Mountford Airfield . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 = = = Vulcan B.1 = = = 
 Data from Polmar , Laming 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 5 ( pilot , co @-@ pilot , AEO , Navigator Radar , Navigator Plotter ) 
 Length : 97 ft 1 in ( 29 @.@ 59 m ) 
 Wingspan : 99 ft 5 in ( 30 @.@ 3 m ) 
 Height : 26 ft 6 in ( 8 @.@ 0 m ) 
 Wing area : 3 @,@ 554 ft ² ( 330 @.@ 2 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 83 @,@ 573 lb ( including crew ) ( 37 @,@ 144 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 170 @,@ 000 lb ( 77 @,@ 111 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 4 × Bristol Olympus 101 , or 102 or 104 turbojet , 11 @,@ 000 lbf ( 49 kN ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : Mach 0 @.@ 96 ( 645 mph ( <unk> / h ) ) at altitude - Mach 1 + in a shallow dive 
 Cruise speed : Mach 0 @.@ 86 ( 567 miles per hour ( 912 km / h ) ) at 45 @,@ 000 ft 
 Range : 2 @,@ 607 mi ( 4 @,@ 171 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 55 @,@ 000 ft ( 17 @,@ 000 m ) 
 Thrust / weight : 0 @.@ 31 
 Armament 
 21 × 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 454 kg ) of conventional bombs 
 1 x Blue Danube nuclear gravity bomb 
 1 x Violet Club 400 kt nuclear gravity bomb 
 1 x U.S. Mark 5 nuclear gravity bomb supplied under Project E 
 1 x Yellow Sun Mk.1 400 kt nuclear gravity bomb 
 1 x Yellow Sun Mk 2 1 @.@ 1 Mt thermonuclear gravity bomb 
 1 x Red Beard nuclear gravity bomb 
 1 x WE.177B parachute @-@ retarded nuclear gravity bomb 
 = = = Comparison of variants = = = 
 Notes 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 = A Dainty Politician = 
 A Dainty Politician is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on corruption political activity during a political convention in which a corrupt politician is running for re @-@ election to the United States Congress . The votes are tallied and the challenger ties with the corrupt Congressman Casey , but a third candidate holds the balance of power . Casey bribes the third candidate to retire in his favor , but the plot is uncovered and the two are ejected from the convention by a reporter who falls in love with challenger 's daughter . The film was released on August 23 , 1910 , and saw a wide national release . Little is known of the actual production , but it received mixed reaction for the plausibility of its plot . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from August 27 , 1910 . It states : " Congressman Casey is a type of the ward politician who is now , fortunately , being rapidly eliminated from politics . He is planning his re @-@ election to Congress . The decent movement in the community has been aroused and a movement is on foot to nominate Professor Blake , a citizen of high standing and character . John <unk> , a reporter for the Daily Globe , calls on Professor Blake to inform him that he will be requested to run for the nomination and shows an article on the subject that has appeared in the Daily Globe . Professor Blake receives him cordially and he meets Professor Blake 's daughter , Marie ; the young people proceed to fall in love . The time for the convention arrives . As the convention is assembling and before they proceed to business , a band of suffragettes headed by Miss Croup gain admission and attempt to get a plank introduced in the platform favoring ' votes for women . ' The convention turns them down and they are ejected from the floor . " 
 " Nominations are then made for candidates , and after a vote has been taken it is found that ballots for Casey and Professor Blake are very evenly divided in that a candidate named Jennings , who is receiving the fewest votes , holds the balance of power . The convention takes a recess and Casey endeavors to bribe Jennings to retire in his favor and throw all his votes to Casey . Willett overhears enough of the bargain to make him suspicious , and communicates his beliefs to Marie . Between them they contrive to so fix the connection of the telephone in Casey 's room that they can overhear the completion of the bribery plot . They succeed in this , and hear Jennings agree to the bargain for the consideration of a large @-@ size check which Casey hands to him . The convention reconvenes , and John <unk> appears and makes the charge publicly that Casey has bribed Jennings to throw his votes . Casey and Jennings indignantly deny this , and Marie comes forward as a witness ; whereupon Jennings and Casey try to leave the convention . Delegates grab Jennings ; search him and find the check given him by Casey . The two are ejected from the convention , which at once nominates Professor Blake and acclaims the two lovers who made the nomination possible . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . One advertisement claimed , likely in error , that this film was based on the play The Man of the Hour . Written by George Broadhurst , the play focused on political corruption in the form of graft , but the play itself was apparently inspired by politicians of New York . The plot of the film includes a nod to the Women 's suffrage movement , but it would be a decade before the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibited any United States citizen from being denied the right to vote on the basis of sex . The character , Congressman Casey , would later be seen again in Orator , Knight and Cow Charmer . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . There are no known credits for the cast , but Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane are two possible actors that were prominent players in 1910 . Credits may have included Anna Rosemond , one of two leading ladies of the Thanhouser company in this era . Frank H. Crane was a leading male actor of the company and also involved since the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company . Bowers states that most of the credits are fragmentary for 1910 Thanhouser productions . A surviving film still leaves open the possibility of identifying two characters . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The one reel drama , approximately 960 feet long , was released on August 23 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release , theater advertisements are known in Kansas , Missouri , Pennsylvania , Washington , Indiana , New Hampshire , Arizona , Texas , Ohio , and Illinois . One of the last known advertisements for the film was in Bryan , Texas on March 6 , 1912 . 
 The film was reviewed positively in The Moving Picture World which stated , " Apparently someone connected with the Thanhouser Company has learned something of ward politics , and the methods of controlling a convention are very clearly and bluntly stated . It isn 't always possible to expose plots such as this one was exposed , but it would have been a good thing if it could be done .... The situations are dramatically worked out and the interest never flags from the beginning to the end . A love story adds a certain degree of interest to the picture , and the development of the plot is strengthened by the young people 's lovemaking . " The New York Dramatic Mirror disagreed with the plausibility of the depicted political manipulation , but found the picture to be interesting and the acting to be adequate . Later publications would also reference the film for its content , like the The Columbia Companion to American History on Film which cites it as an example of a political machine based on graft and deceit . Neither graft nor deceit is actually in play with the production , for pure bribery is the method upon which the politician uses to gain political power . Kay Sloan , author of The Loud Silents : Origins of the Social Problem Film , states that the film explored the problem of political corruption and critics approved because they saw was a realistic portrayal . Another release dealing with political corruption was The Girl Reporter , released by Thanhouser on August 16 , 1910 . 
 = Bridget Parker = 
 Bridget Louise " Didge " Parker is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours , played by Eloise Mignon . In 2007 the show was revamped to boost falling ratings in Australia . As part of this , the show 's focus returned to family dynamics and the character of Bridget and her family were created and introduced . Bridget made her first on @-@ screen appearance on 23 July 2007 . She arrived in Erinsborough from Sydney with her father and mother , Steve and Miranda . During her time in Neighbours , Bridget 's storylines included being run over by Susan Kennedy , falling in love with Declan Napier , finding her birth mother and falling pregnant at seventeen . In March 2009 , the decision was taken to write the Parker family out of the show after both Mignon and Steve Bastoni quit . Mignon wanted to return to her studies and she had had enough of Neighbours . Bridget died on @-@ screen on 21 July 2009 after suffering internal injuries , which she sustained in a car crash . The character was popular with viewers and her pregnancy storyline was voted the best of 2008 during a poll on the official website . 
 = = Character creation and casting = = 
 In 2007 , Neighbours suffered one of its worst decline in viewers and several key changes took place to boost the ratings . Network Ten drama executive , Dan Bennett revealed that the show would return to its focus on relationships and family dynamics . Writers created and introduced a new family , the Parkers , who already had a link to Ramsay Street in the form of Ned Parker ( Daniel O 'Connor ) . The family made their first on @-@ screen appearance in July 2007 , marking the start of the show 's renovation . 
 Former <unk> actress Eloise Mignon was cast in the role of school girl Bridget Parker , despite being five years older than the character she would portray . Steve Bastoni and Nikki Coghill were cast as Bridget 's adoptive parents Steve and Miranda Parker respectively and Sweeney Young was cast as Bridget 's biological brother Riley . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Bridget has been portrayed out of conjunction with the stereotypical ' girly image ' , she is sporty and athletic . Mignon has described her as open , honest , outdoor kind of girl . Stating that like herself Bridget had grown up with keen interests for climbing trees , cycling and swimming in rivers , non typical female interests . She also branded Bridget as a ' sporty tomboy ' . During an interview , Mignon said that Bridget 's relationship with Declan changes her and she feels more independent from her family . She also becomes more determined as a person . 
 = = = Disability = = = 
 One of Bridget 's first high @-@ profile storylines was coping with a disability , after Susan Kennedy ( Jackie Woodburne ) hit Bridget with her car . She had been paralysed on one side of her body , the storyline saw her trying to regain the complete use of her body . Mignon explained during an interview with media reporting website Last Broadcast , the research that had been carried out and the effects on the character stating : " Bridget suffers extreme physical difficulties as a result , because she 's such a sporty tomboy , to be incapacitated suddenly poses emotional problems for her . To make sure that I could understand better what Bridget 's going through , I studied medical notes on paralysis and disability on the internet . " The storyline also explored self @-@ image issues that come with disabilities , in one episode Bridget was doing physiotherapy exercises and became in danger of drowning until Declan Napier ( James Sorensen ) saved her . He tried to kiss her but she fended off his advances , of this Mignon said : " Bridget pushes him off , she fears he 'll see her differently due to her disability . " 
 = = = Teen pregnancy = = = 
 One of the most important storylines for the character of Bridget was when she discovered that she was pregnant with Declan 's child . As the storyline progressed , Bridget was seen considering abortion or adoption , before ultimately deciding to have the child with Declan 's support . This caused controversy among conservative family groups in Australia who accused the Neighbours of using their characters to normalise teenage pregnancy . Pro @-@ Family Perspectives director Angela Conway said : " [ Teenage pregnancy ] is not something that should be considered the norm , programmes like Neighbours can make the behaviours that lead to teenage pregnancy seem normal and acceptable . A lot of kids just aren 't ready to get their head around details of explicit sexuality . " Neighbours executive producer Susan Bower defended her character 's storyline stating : " I am quite sure a lot of people are not happy with this storyline . We decided we would show the ramifications on the teenagers ' lives . " Mignon said that the storyline between Declan and Bridget was not shallow , trite or vulgar , further adding she would not have liked to film the storyline if it was and branded it as showing emotional spectrum of pregnancy justice . Critics also slammed the show , noting that Neighbours has a G @-@ rating and the storyline could lead to more promiscuity and teenage pregnancies among young viewers . The storyline continued despite the controversy it caused and Declan and Bridget became parents to a daughter , India . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 In March 2009 , it was announced that the Parker family were to be written out of the show after Mignon and Bastoni decided to leave to concentrate on other commitments . Mignon , Bastoni and Coghill filmed their final scenes in April 2009 . Mignon announced that her reason for leaving the show was so that she could return to studying an Arts degree at Melbourne university . Mignon said " I didn 't want to defer uni forever and , to be honest , I 'd had enough of the Neighbours experience " . The Neighbours writers took the decision to kill the character off . Viewers saw Bridget being injured in a car accident while travelling to Oakey . Bridget underwent surgery and she then had a premonition of her death . Her vision comes true and she dies from internal injuries . The Metro newspaper called the scenes " tear @-@ jerking " . 
 When Mignon heard how Bridget was going to leave the show , she said " I was quite honoured . I feel I 've been given good scope in terms of drama – Bridget had a baby , got married and died . I got the soap opera trifecta ! " On Bridget and the Parker 's exit , Bower said " It 's the story that keeps on giving for another three or four weeks . It 's very well storylined , beautifully acted and shot . It 's a tremendous amount of work for which we 're all very proud " . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 Steve and Miranda Parker adopted Bridget when she was 6 years old , along with her older brother Riley . Being adopted never worried Bridget and it was irrelevant to her day @-@ to @-@ day life as Steve and Miranda were the only parents she had ever known . 
 = = = 2007 – 09 = = = 
 Upon her arrival to Ramsay Street , Bridget makes friends with Zeke Kinski ( Matthew Werkmeister ) and she joins his football team , despite opposition from bully Justin Hunter ( Chris Toohey ) . Bridget joins Declan Napier when he begins joyriding . During a race with Justin , they are pursued by the police . They return home thinking they escaped , only to find the police waiting for them . Bridget is banned from seeing Declan , but she sneaks out to meet him at the park , where they argue . On her way home , Bridget trips and falls into the road in front of a car being driven by Susan Kennedy . Susan blacks out , a result of suffering from multiple sclerosis , and hits Bridget . She drives off , unaware of what she has done . Bridget is found and rushed to the hospital , where she undergoes emergency surgery for a bleed on her brain . She remains unconscious , until Rachel Kinski ( Caitlin Stasey ) visits and pleads with her to wake up . Bridget 's hand moves and she awakes the next day . However , she cannot feel anything down the left side of her body and she is told that she could be permanently disabled . Susan realises that she caused the accident and comes forward . She is arrested and put on trial . Bridget remembers that she fell into the road and that the accident was not Susan 's fault , and she tells the court . During a rehabilitation class at the swimming pool , Bridget meets Josh Taylor ( Liam Hemsworth ) . Following a disastrous date with Declan , where Bridget is given the impression that Declan cannot handle her disability , Bridget begins dating Josh . Following a roof collapse at an illegal dance party , Bridget and Josh are both trapped in rubble . Declan carries Josh out before coming back for Bridget . Another collapse traps Declan and Bridget together and Declan tells her that he does not have a problem with her disability . Shortly after , Bridget begins to walk without her walking aid and her mobility returns . 
 Bridget bonds with Chris Knight ( Luke Mitchell ) and she asks him to the school formal . She joins him in a hotel room , where Chris tries to pressure her into having sex with him . He turns aggressive and Bridget pushes him away and flees the hotel , not knowing that Chris hit his head . Chris later dies in hospital and Bridget 's father confesses to the police that he attacked Chris to protect Bridget . Steve is charged with murder , but Bridget goes to his trial and tells the court that she pushed Chris in self @-@ defense . Throughout the ordeal , Declan is a big support to Bridget and they begin a relationship . 
 Bridget tells Declan that she wants to have a physical relationship with him . Not long after , Bridget discovers that she is pregnant . Declan runs away scared of becoming a father and Bridget plans to have an abortion . Declan returns and commits himself to Bridget and the baby . Declan proposes to Bridget and though she is hesitant , they get engaged . Bridget decides to look for her birth mother and Joanna Hale ( Laura <unk> ) turns up in Erinsborough . After meeting Joanna , Bridget decides to give up her own baby against Declan 's wishes . However , when Libby Kennedy ( Kym Valentine ) miscarries her own baby , Bridget realises that she wants hers . Declan and Bridget marry in a church in the country witnessed by their friends . Bridget gives birth to a daughter at a music festival and the couple name her India . Bridget and Declan struggle to cope with their new lifestyle . On a road trip to Oakey to visit relatives , Steve crashes the car . Bridget rescues India and they are found by a search team and are taken to the hospital . Bridget suffers a premonition that she is going to die and makes Declan promise that he will look after India . Shortly after , Bridget dies from a blood clot . Bridget 's death leaves Steve and Miranda devastated and they move away from Ramsay Street not long after her funeral . Declan is left to raise India by himself . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Parker family 's entrance to the show was watched by an average 1 @.@ 05 million viewers in Australia . Following their arrival , Network Ten 's head of drama Dan Bennett praised the new cast members saying " It 's probably the strongest cast we 've ever had " . 
 The character received negative criticism from Ruth Deller of television website Lowculture . Shortly after her arrival , Deller said " ' Didge ' either needs to get over herself , fast , or die in a freak accident " . Deller later called her " a whiny , self @-@ absorbed pain in the arse " . However , following Bridget 's death in 2009 , Deller wrote that she had grown fond of Bridget and Declan as a couple . 
 Bridget 's pregnancy was nominated for " Best Storyline " at the 2009 Inside Soap Awards and fans of the show also voted the storyline the most popular of 2008 in a poll conducted by the official Neighbours website . The website announced that they had received over 5 @,@ 500 votes and they added " We all love a bit of drama , and who would argue that Bridget falling pregnant at the age of 16 and Declan 's rebellion against the constraints of fatherhood wasn 't the juiciest story of 2008 ! " Sarah Megginson of website SheKnows included Bridget 's death in her " 8 Most Memorable Neighbours Moments " feature in October 2009 . She said " When our beloved teen mum Bridget ' Didge ' Napier died in a car crash – just weeks after giving birth to her baby girl ! – we couldn 't help but shed a tear or twelve for new dad Declan and baby India . " 
 Susan Bower revealed in a 2010 interview that she thought the storyline between Bridget and Chris Knight was " brilliant " . She also added that the storyline featuring Bridget 's pregnancy and her relationship with Declan was " extraordinary – something we were terribly proud of . " 
 = The Mansion Family = 
 " The Mansion Family " is the twelfth episode of the eleventh season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 23 , 2000 , and was watched in around 11 @.@ 3 million homes during the broadcast . In the episode , Mr. Burns goes to the Mayo Clinic for a check @-@ up after being declared the oldest man in Springfield at an awards ceremony . He leaves the Simpson family to house @-@ sit his mansion for him . When Homer throws a party on Burns ' private yacht in international waters , the party goers are captured by Chinese pirates . 
 American pop singer Britney Spears guest starred in " The Mansion Family " as herself . She appears as the host of the awards ceremony . The episode , which was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Michael Polcino , features several cultural references . Many parts of the story were inspired by real @-@ life events experienced by some of the staff members of the series . Since airing , the episode has received generally mixed reviews from critics . It was released on the DVD collection The Simpsons Gone Wild in 2004 , and The Simpsons – The Complete Eleventh Season in 2008 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the annual Springfield Pride Awards hosted by Kent Brockman and Britney Spears , awards are given to prominent Springfield citizens for their achievements . They present the award for the oldest man in Springfield to Cornelius Chapman , who is 108 years old . Chapman comes up to accept his award , but when Spears gives him a congratulatory kiss on the cheek , he dies of a heart attack . The award is therefore given to the now oldest <unk> in the crowd , Mr. Burns . After Burns wins , he realizes he is not a young man anymore , so he and his assistant Smithers go to the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota for a check @-@ up . Burns decides to give the Simpson family an opportunity to house sit his private mansion while he is being tested for various diseases . 
 After enjoying life as a billionaire for a few days , Homer decides to throw a party before Burns returns . He heads to Moe 's Tavern to buy some beer and invite his friends to the party . However , Moe informs Homer that he can not sell him alcohol on account of it being Sunday before 2 : 00 PM . After Homer is told the only way he could buy alcohol would be to sail out to international waters where there are no laws , he and his friends ( including his son Bart ) set sail in Burns ' private yacht to throw the party there . Back at the Mayo Clinic , Burns discovers that he not only has all previously discovered diseases , but numerous new diseases the doctors have just discovered in him . However , the sheer number of diseases prevents any one disease from actually doing harm to him . This leads Burns to ( incorrectly ) conclude that he is indestructible , even though the doctors protest that even a slight breeze could disrupt the balance in his body . 
 Meanwhile , the party continues and the party goers force Burns ' monkeys into having a knife fight . The yacht is eventually boarded by Chinese pirates who take the ship hostage . The pirates rob everyone on board and tie them up in a net which they then toss overboard . But to the luck of Homer and some of the other guests who happen to be above ocean surface level , it floats and they avoid drowning . Eventually Homer and Bart make it back to the mansion where the family returns the house to Burns after Marge and Lisa have scrubbed all the rooms clean . Back at the Simpsons home , everyone is glad to live a normal life again — with the exception of Homer , who is upset that he does not live the lifestyle of rich people . The episode ends with Homer wailing about how rich all the persons in the closing credits are ( except Richard K. Chung , whom he dismisses as poor ) and threatening to report them to the Internal Revenue Service and telling the Gracie Films woman not to shush him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Mansion Family " was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Michael Polcino as part of the eleventh season of The Simpsons ( 1999 – 2000 ) . It was the first of many episodes of the series that Polcino directed . Executive producer Mike Scully was the one who received the idea for the first part of the story . He explained on a DVD audio commentary for the episode that his grandmother was the oldest citizen of his hometown West Springfield , Massachusetts , and " they had a ceremony where she was awarded a cane that had a golden head on it . And the weird thing of the ceremony is her name wasn 't on the cane , and the mayor of the town stood up and he says : ' And now , of course as soon as Hazel passes away , her name will be engraved on the cane . ' So she would never live to see it happen . But nonetheless , she was given the cane . " 
 The subplot of " The Mansion Family " , where Mr. Burns gets a medical examination , was inspired by Swartzwelder 's own visit to a Mayo Clinic . George Meyer , an executive producer on the series , has said that " John , I don 't think is a guy who goes to the doctor very often . And every 20 or 30 years , he decides he needs to get a tune up . So he went to the Mayo Clinic , had them give him an entire battery of tests . And as John [ jokingly ] tells it , they said that his constant smoking had done no harm to him whatsoever . Might even be benefiting him . " While writing the parts of the episode that involve international waters , the writers did research and found that the actual laws of international waters are more complex and ambiguous compared to what they had already written in the story , but they decided to ignore that . 
 American pop singer Britney Spears guest starred in the episode as herself . According to Scully , she was seventeen to eighteen years old when she recorded her lines , and " She was a lot of fun to work with . She was a fan of the show , and she was willing to do all the lines . It was all the people around her that were crazy , the management and all that . We originally had her introduce herself [ in the episode ] as ' I 'm teenage songbird Britney Spears . ' And she recorded a few takes and they were fine . And suddenly , all these guys come rushing in [ saying ] ' She can 't say songbird . ' [ We asked ] what 's wrong with songbird ? And they were somehow convinced that it was some sort of slam or an insult . " The staff members were therefore forced to change her opening line to " I 'm teen sensation Britney Spears . " 
 Many scenes in " The Mansion Family " were inspired by popular culture . For example , there is a painting hanging on one of the walls in Burns ' mansion that depicts Burns playing poker with dogs , referencing the oil paintings series Dogs Playing Poker . Another painting , showing a nude Burns , is a callback to a previous episode of the series , " Brush with Greatness " ( 1991 ) , in which Marge produced the painting for Burns . Featured in the episode is also a joke that makes fun of the Grammy Awards . During the awards ceremony , Homer complains , " Why won 't anyone give me an award ? " When Lisa points out that " You won a Grammy , " Homer says " I mean an award that 's worth winning . " At this point the screen freezes and a message scrolls across the bottom of the screen reading " LEGAL <unk> : Mr. Simpson 's opinions do not reflect those of the producers , who don 't consider the Grammy an award at all . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 23 , 2000 . It was viewed in approximately 11 @.@ 3 million households that night . With a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 2 , the episode tied Becker ( CBS ) for the 14th place ( compared the season average of 37 ) in the ratings for the week of January 17 – 23 , 2000 . The episode was the third highest @-@ rated broadcast on Fox that week , following a NFC Championship post @-@ game show and Malcolm in the Middle . On September 14 , 2004 , the episode was released in the United States on a DVD collection titled The Simpsons Gone Wild , along with the season one episode " Homer 's Night Out " , the season ten episode " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " , and the season thirteen episode " Homer the Moe " . On October 7 , 2008 , " The Mansion Family " was released on DVD again as part of the box set The Simpsons – The Complete Eleventh Season . Staff members Mike Scully , George Meyer , Ron Hauge , Matt Selman , Tim Long , Michael Polcino , Donick Cary , and Pete Michels participated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode . Deleted scenes from the episode were also included on the box set . 
 " The Mansion Family " has received generally mixed reception from critics . Susan Dunne of The Hartford Courant described it as " debauched but hilarious . " While reviewing the eleventh season of The Simpsons , DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented on " The Mansion Family " , writing that " Although The Simpsons started out as moderately reality based , pretty much any grounding was gone by [ the point this episode aired ] . That doesn ’ t mean the show fails to depict funny bits , especially during the dark humor of Burns ’ hospital visit . Nonetheless , [ the episode ] occasionally goes too far to the side of silliness ; those gags are hit or miss . " 
 In a review of the episodes featured on The Simpsons Gone Wild , PopMatters critic Stephen Haag wrote that " none of these episodes will end up in the Simpsons Hall of Fame " , and that " The Mansion Family " is " hardly a classic episode , but Lord knows there are plenty worse from season 11 ( paging ' Bart to the Future ' ) . " He further commented that " if anything , this episode should be included in the ' batshit @-@ crazy endings ' DVD , " referring to the ending scenes with the Chinese pirates . David Packard of DVD Verdict was more positive in his review of The Simpsons Gone Wild , writing that " The Mansion Family " is " another all @-@ around hilarious episode , with a nice swipe at the Grammy Awards , the Simpsons family running amok in the mansion and enjoying all it has to offer , and Burns ' various tests at the Mayo Clinic ( my favorite gag is when Burns is slid into an MRI machine , only to hear the thing grind to a halt with an error message reading ' Clear body jam in Area 1 . ' ) " 
 = Argus ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Argus " is the nineteenth episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 77th overall episode of the series . It was written by 30 Rock producers Dylan Morgan , Paula Pell , and Josh Siegal . The episode was directed by co @-@ executive producer and show composer Jeff Richmond . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on April 29 , 2010 . Guest stars in this episode include Will Forte , Marceline Hugot , and Burke Moses . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) receives a peculiar gift from the late Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) . Meanwhile , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) and Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) get suspicious of Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) new boyfriend ( Forte ) . At the same time , Liz tries to sort out Grizz Griswold 's ( Grizz Chapman ) problem when both Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) and " Dot Com " Slattery ( Kevin Brown ) want to be Grizz 's best man . 
 " Argus " has received generally positive reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 93 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 7 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) announces to The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) staff that Grizz Griswold ( Grizz Chapman ) will be getting married at the end of the month . A problem immediately ensues after Grizz cannot decide between Tracy and " Dot Com " Slattery ( Kevin Brown ) to be his best man . Grizz then asks Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) to help him convince Tracy that Dot Com should be his best man . The two suggest another task Tracy can do at the wedding , but Tracy insists on being the best man . Later , Liz learns that Dot Com is in love with Grizz 's fiancée , Feyoncé , Grizz is not aware of this , and that the only reason Tracy wanted to be the best man was to protect Dot Com . Finally , after changing Grizz 's mind about Dot Com as his best man , Grizz appoints Liz as his woman of honor at his wedding instead . 
 Meanwhile , Liz and Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) are suspicious that Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) new boyfriend Paul ( Will Forte ) is using her . Pete and Liz follow Paul to a bar and find out that he is a Jenna Maroney impersonator , performing as her in a drag show . The next day , Liz asks Jenna if she knows what Paul does , but Jenna is aware of his work , having met Paul at a Jenna Maroney impersonator contest in which he won and Jenna herself placed fourth . Liz does not approve of the relationship and confronts Paul , asking what his intentions are with Jenna . Paul tells her that he is not using Jenna to further his career , but that he is with her because she accepts him for who he is . Liz is convinced by their touching ( although weird ) display of care for each other , ultimately approving of their relationship . 
 At the same time , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) is informed by Don Geiss 's ( Rip Torn ) estate lawyer Thomas ( Burke Moses ) that he is in Don Geiss 's will . Jack is excited at the idea of owning a piece of Geiss 's legacy as Jack considered Geiss his mentor . At the will reading , Jack inherits Geiss 's beloved pet peacock named Argus . When Argus begins acting peculiar , Jack enlists the help of NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) . Kenneth — who knows all the peafowl calls — tells Jack that Argus muttered <unk> and kōhai — master and pupil — nicknames that Geiss and Jack had for each other ( a ruse conceived by Liz , who knew of the nicknames ) . Immediately , Jack is convinced that Geiss 's soul has inhabited Argus , prompting Jack to release his grief to Argus and finally accepting Geiss 's death . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Argus " was written by show producers Dylan Morgan , Paula Pell , and Josh Siegal . The director of this episode was co @-@ executive producer and show composer Jeff Richmond . Richmond is married to series creator Tina Fey . This was Morgan , Pell and Siegal 's second writing credit , after Morgan and Siegal penned " Sun Tea " , and Pell who developed the " Floyd " script . Richmond made his directorial debut in the show with " Argus " . This episode of 30 Rock originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 29 , 2010 , as the nineteenth episode of the show 's fourth season and the 77th overall episode of the series . " Argus " was filmed on March 1 , 2010 . 
 Comedian actor Will Forte made a second appearance on the show , having guest starred as a different character in the February 1 , 2007 , episode " Black Tie " from the show 's first season . In this episode , Forte played Jenna Maroney 's boyfriend and Jenna impersonator . At the end of this episode , Paul , dressed as Jenna , and Jenna sing the song " All by Myself " . Forte has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Tina Fey was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . Forte would appear in the season finale episode " I Do Do " that aired on May 20 , 2010 . Actress Marceline Hugot guest starred as Kathy Geiss , the daughter of former General Electric CEO Don Geiss , played by Rip Torn , for the tenth time . During the reading of her father 's will here , Kathy receives a pocket watch with the instructions not to get it wet , though Kathy has already put the watch in her mouth . Actor Burke Moses guest starred as Don Geiss 's estate lawyer named Thomas . 
 During the episode Jack Donaghy inherits Argus , Don Geiss 's beloved pet peacock . Throughout the episode , Argus can be seen at Jack 's office in the 30 Rock building . An actual peacock was featured here . In one scene , Liz Lemon sees Argus and is frightened of him . While talking to Jack , Argus hits Liz across the face with his feathers , thus marking her as his mate . To accommodate this , puppeteers — Peter Linz , Noel <unk> , and Carmen Osbahr — were brought in to hit Liz in the face with feathers instead of using the peacock itself . 
 Throughout the episode , Grizz Griswold alludes that he and Liz had a romantic relationship in the past . In order to choose between Tracy Jordan and Dot Com Slattery as his best man , Grizz turns to Liz for help . After agreeing to help him out , Grizz wonders whether or not it was awkward for Liz that Tracy brought up his wedding , but she asks " Why would it be awkward ? " , he responds " Because of our sexual past . " Afterwards , Grizz says that he and Liz were the " Sam and Diane of this place [ TGS ] " , a reference to the Sam and Diane characters from the television show Cheers . In " Greenzo " , that aired in the second season of the series , Liz sexually harasses Grizz at Kenneth Parcell 's out of control party , and Kenneth tells Liz off the next day , stating that before that party , he had " never seen Grizz or Dot Com cry . " In addition , the Dot Com storyline of him being in love with Grizz 's fiancée , Feyoncé , began in the season three episode " St. Valentine 's Day " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , " Argus " was watched by 5 @.@ 439 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 2 @.@ 7 rating / 8 share in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that it was seen by 2 @.@ 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was an increase from the previous episode , " Khonani " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 182 million American viewers . " Argus " won its timeslot in the 18 – 34 male demographic winning with a 3 @.@ 2 rating beating the competition by a 1 @.@ 3 rating . 
 The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin enjoyed " Argus " , noting that it was " entertaining , funny and had some killer one @-@ liners " and that it featured " all kinds of silly but in a very winning way . " Rabin enjoyed all the plots featured here , and praised Will Forte 's role as Jenna 's boyfriend and impersonator . Emily Exton from Entertainment Weekly wrote that the peacock storyline " felt too silly " , and that Forte " was too underused as Paul " , nonetheless said that despite not being the greatest 30 Rock episode of all time " there were still some hilarious lines . " IGN contributor Robert Canning liked Grizz 's dilemma plot , commenting that Grizz not trying to hurt Tracy 's feelings while Tracy tried to keep Dot Com away from Grizz 's bride @-@ to @-@ be " offered up some inspired lunacy . " His only complaint about " Argus " was Jack 's plot as he deemed it disappointing . A review in TV Guide by Adam Mersel said " ... Fey and the gang live up to the challenge , and produce [ ' Argus ' ] a hilarious , quite snotty episode that holds up to any comedy around . " Meredith Blake , writing for the Los Angeles Times , was positive towards the episode , reasoning that the writing " is just so deliciously absurd that I can 't help but giggle the whole way through " , and that the plots featured here were " sublimely inconsequential . Not a whole lot happened , but it was all very funny . " Nick Catucci from New York magazine , who did not enjoy the two other stories , appreciated Jenna 's , explaining that by having the character date one of her own impersonator was " outrageous and funny without relying on any cheap insults to <unk> . " Sean Gandert from Paste magazine reported that " Argus " was an episode that " [ took ] us back to the show 's roots " , explaining that recapturing the " old tone " also worked to " recapture the old joke @-@ writing expertise . It wasn 't 100 % consistent , but there were so many good one @-@ liners to counterbalance the misfires that it didn 't even matter . This is 30 Rock the way it should be . " The Houston Press ' Daniel Carlson wrote that Grizz 's wedding story was " pure filler , but everything on the show 's kind of filler for the wackiness , so it mostly worked . " Carlson wrote that the best part from " Argus " came with Forte 's Paul as Jenna 's boyfriend and impersonator . 
 Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad did not respond well to the episode , observing that " Argus " would go down 30 Rock history as " one of the worst episodes of the series . " One of the problems he had was that the Jack character bonded with the peacock for the entire episode . " As I 've said before , I hate the episodes where Jack is out of control or acting goofy or involved in some lame pursuit , and this one of the more lame pursuits . " 
 = K @-@ 179 ( Kansas highway ) = 
 K @-@ 179 is an 11 @.@ 588 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 18 @.@ 649 km ) state highway in Harper County , Kansas . It runs from Oklahoma State Highway 132 ( SH @-@ 132 ) the Oklahoma state line north to the city of Anthony , where it ends at K @-@ 44 . The route was designated around 1956 , and is not part of the National Highway System . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Just north of Manchester , Oklahoma , K @-@ 179 begins running west along the Oklahoma state line as a continuation of SH @-@ 132 . The route then turns due north and continues through flat farm fields . A series of curves take the highway slightly to the northeast before it enters the city of Anthony , where it becomes known as Jennings Avenue . Just more than 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) north of the Anthony city limits , K @-@ 179 meets its northern terminus at an intersection with K @-@ 44 , also known as Main Street . 
 K @-@ 179 is maintained by the Kansas Department of Transportation ( KDOT ) . Every year , KDOT measures traffic on each of its state highways in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . In 2012 , K @-@ 179 was found to have AADT counts of 303 on the first five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of the route and 433 just south of Anthony , the route 's lowest and highest counts , respectively . The highway is not a part of the United States National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 The road that would become K @-@ 179 first appeared on the 1936 state highway map as a paved county road connection . This roadway was designated as K @-@ 179 around 1956 . The routing of the highway has not been modified since its designation . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Harper County . 
 = Bangerz = 
 Bangerz is the fourth studio album by American singer Miley Cyrus . It was released on October 4 , 2013 , by RCA Records . Opting to re @-@ establish her music career instead of focusing on her film career as originally planned , Cyrus began planning the project in 2012 . Work continued into 2013 , at which time she left her previous label Hollywood Records and subsequently joined RCA Records . Described by Cyrus as " dirty south hip @-@ hop " , Bangerz represents a musical departure from her earlier work , which she has grown to feel " disconnected " from . As executive producers , Cyrus and Mike Will Made It collaborated with hip hop producers including Cirkut , Pharrell Williams , and will.i.am to achieve Cyrus ' desired new sound . Their efforts resulted in a primarily pop record , with lyrical themes that revolve largely around romance . It features guest vocals from several new partners , including pop singer Britney Spears and rappers French Montana , Future , Ludacris , and Nelly . 
 Bangerz received mixed to positive reviews from contemporary music critics , who praised its overall production and originality , and complimented Cyrus ' public persona evolution . The record debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 with first @-@ week sales of 270 @,@ 000 copies . In doing so , it became Cyrus ' fifth non @-@ consecutive number @-@ one album , including earlier soundtracks in which she performed as her character Hannah Montana . It was the third @-@ highest opening week for a female artist in 2013 , and was later certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) after moving one million units . The album received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Vocal Album , giving Cyrus her first Grammy nomination . 
 " We Can 't Stop " was released as the lead single from Bangerz on June 3 , 2013 , and peaked at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 . The second single " Wrecking Ball " was released on August 25 , 2013 , and became Cyrus ' first single to peak in the top position in the United States . Its accompanying music video held the record for the fastest video to reach 100 million views on Vevo being beaten by Adele 's " Hello " music video in 2015 , it also earned Cyrus the award for " Video of The Year " at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards . " Adore You " was serviced as the third single from the record on December 17 , 2013 ; it has peaked at number 21 on the Billboard Hot 100 . A remix of the track produced by Cedric Gervais was released on March 3 , 2014 . Promotional efforts for Bangerz continued to associate Cyrus with an increasingly provocative image , an effort first begun with her third record , Can 't Be Tamed ( 2010 ) . She garnered widespread media attention through a controversial performance at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards , and was later the host and musical guest during an episode of Saturday Night Live . Furthermore , Cyrus promoted the album with her international Bangerz Tour . 
