 = = Background and production = = 
 In 2012 , Cyrus announced plans to focus on her film career , effectively putting her musical endeavors on hiatus . That year , she appeared in the films LOL and So Undercover . She was also confirmed as a primary voice actress in the feature film Hotel Transylvania , but dropped out of the project to coordinate a musical comeback . In January 2013 , Cyrus signed a recording contract with RCA Records . In March , she confirmed that her fourth studio album would be released by the end of 2013 . Cyrus stated that she " started over " as an artist after terminating the services of her previous professional connections , who she felt " would have [ been ] scared " by her evolving public image . In a later interview , she elaborated that she recognizes Bangerz to be her official debut record , deprecating her earlier projects released during the production of Hannah Montana . While recording the then @-@ untitled album , Cyrus intended to produce a " very adult and sexy and believable " final product , and was " having fun making music [ for ] the first time in her career . " She said the album was influenced by Motown Sound . Musical acts which inspired the album included Miguel and Frank Ocean . 
 She described the music as " dirty south hip @-@ hop " and combining the genres of hip @-@ hop and country , which she felt was a " good hybrid " . To achieve this sound , Cyrus worked with various hip hop producers including Mike Will Made It , Mac Miller , Pharrell Williams , and Tyler , the Creator in cities including Atlanta , Georgia . They helped her to incorporate hip hop music elements into the project , which Cyrus acknowledged resulted in a " really different sound " . Cyrus further commented that her project would " shut everyone up " , and later compared the record to Bad ( 1987 ) by Michael Jackson , in that " people still are listening to [ it ] because it 's so fucking dope " and " [ wants ] people to listen to [ her ] album like that . " She also expressed her desire to " set a new standard for pop music " . Producer Sean Garrett called the record " fun [ and ] exciting " , and stated that a collaboration that Cyrus recorded with Britney Spears would appear on the final track listing . Mike Will Made It explained that the title for the album was decided upon after realizing that " whole album was bangers " . 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 On August 6 , 2013 , after reaching 13 million followers on Twitter , Cyrus tweeted that the record would be titled Bangerz . Its cover sleeve and images were shot by British photographer Tyrone <unk> ; several unused pictures from the photo shoot surfaced online on June 5 , 2014 . On August 24 , 2013 , Cyrus unveiled the album artworks for the standard and deluxe versions of the album ; both depict a blonde Cyrus wearing a short black coat with the title " Bangerz " stylized in fluorescent neon lighting in front of palm trees . It was described as being reminiscent of the 1980s television series Miami Vice and an unexpected choice given her recent influence by hip hop culture . Later on August 25 , Bangerz was made available for pre @-@ order through the iTunes Store . She later confirmed that it would be released on October 8 , 2013 in the United States . After her music video for the track " Wrecking Ball " broke the Vevo record for the most views in the first twenty @-@ four hours of its release , Cyrus revealed the track listing for Bangerz through Twitter on September 10 . 
 On September 18 , 2013 , Cyrus unveiled four additional covers for the physical version of the deluxe record , which were sporadically distributed across international retailers and voted on by fans to determine the official cover to be printed for future pressings . Two of the covers display Cyrus dressed in alternate outfits , one with a black jacket and another with a white bra and checkered black pants . A third depicts a close @-@ up of Cyrus surrounded by roses , while a fourth highlights a topless Cyrus covering her chest . The topless cover is featured for an online @-@ exclusive edition of the record and is also the primary visual for the vinyl pressings , released on November 26 through Cyrus ' online store . It was compared to her music video for " Wrecking Ball " , which also showcased an unclothed Cyrus , while the others were deemed conservative by comparison . A page of stickers is packaged with the deluxe version of the album . On October 15 , it was announced through Cyrus ' Facebook profile that the original deluxe artwork would remain the official cover . The record is additionally marked with the Parental Advisory label , affixed by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) to identify explicit content . On September 29 , 30 @-@ second snippets of each track on Bangerz were made available through AllMusic . The following day , the full record was made available for streaming through the iTunes Store and iTunes Radio . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Bangerz is primarily a pop album , which also integrates elements of hip hop , synthpop , and country music . During an interview on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on October 10 , host Ellen DeGeneres asked Cyrus if the record was inspired by her relationship with Liam Hemsworth , to which she replied " the whole album is a story of that and I think it says that starting with " Adore You " and ending with " Someone Else " ..... I think I knew more intuitively where my life was going than I actually thought I did at the time . " 
 The record opens with " Adore You " , a pop and R & B , ballad , which lyrically addresses a lover through lyrics including " We were meant to be / In holy matrimony " . Nick Catucci from Entertainment Weekly opined that the track allowed Cyrus to showcase her vocal abilities . " We Can 't Stop " is a midtempo pop , R & B , and dance song that lyrically discusses the events of a house party . Mikael Wood of the Los Angeles Times calling the song " the calmest , most clear @-@ eyed rebel yell since Janet Jackson 's ' Control ' . " Catucci described " SMS ( Bangerz ) " as a " merry rap @-@ off " with pop singer Britney Spears , who appears as a guest vocalist in the second verse . " 4x4 " features hip hop recording artist Nelly , and lyrically discusses the story of a " female rebel " looking to find bail for her romantic partner . Subtle country music elements are present throughout the song . " My Darlin ' " features Future ; Cyrus ' vocal abilities were complimented , though were deemed to be overpowered by a " sea of blinking synths and <unk> crooning " . " Wrecking Ball " is a synthpop ballad speaking of a failed relationship . 
 The seventh track " Love Money Party " features Big Sean , and incorporates a " grimy , haunted @-@ house beat " . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard noted that Cyrus appeared more comfortable with rapping in the recording , compared to an earlier performance on the Mike Will Made It single " 23 " . " # GetItRight " is a " stylish breeze " that sees the inclusion of " whistling [ ... ] and a chopped guitar lick " . It was described as being reminiscent of " Twisted " by Usher and " Kickin ' In " by Adam Lambert , all three of which were produced by Pharrell Williams . Cyrus stated that " Drive " was inspired by " needing to leave someone but not really wanting to completely cut yourself off from the relationship . " Her comments were assumed to reference her engagement to Hemsworth by the media . The tenth track " FU " features French Montana , and according to Catucci , blends " starry Adele @-@ style sass and a French Montana verse into expertly inlaid dubstep wub @-@ wubs " . He went on to describe " Do My Thang " as a " ripping dance track " , while Lipshutz recognized influences from " gooey synthesizers and snapping percussion " . " Maybe You 're Right " incorporates drum instrumentation with " hints of gospel influence " , and was also questioned to be addressing Hemsworth . The thirteenth and final track " Someone Else " combines hip hop and synthpop styles , and lyrically discusses Cyrus ' evolving public image . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " We Can 't Stop " was released as the lead single from Bangerz on June 3 , 2013 . It received generally mixed reviews from music critics , who were ambivalent towards its production and lyrics . The song peaked at number 2 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , tying it with " Party in the U.S.A. " as Cyrus ' highest @-@ peaking single in the country at the time . Internationally , it enjoyed varying success across Europe and Oceania , and peaked at number one in New Zealand . The accompanying music video was released on June 19 , 2013 , and was noted for depicting an increasingly provocative Cyrus , an effort begun with her third record Can 't Be Tamed ( 2010 ) . With 10 @.@ 7 million views in its first day , the clip briefly held the Vevo record for the most views in 24 hours , before being surpassed by " Best Song Ever " by One Direction . It was also the fastest video to reach 100 million views , having done so in 37 days . 
 " Wrecking Ball " was released as the album 's second single on August 25 , 2013 . Critics welcomed the change of pace , it presented from " We Can 't Stop " , but were more critical of its overall production . The song peaked atop the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Cyrus ' first single to do so in the United States . It additionally peaked within the top @-@ twenty of several international singles charts , and reached at number 2 in Australia and New Zealand . The accompanying music video was released on September 9 , 2013 , and garnered significant media attention for showcasing a nude Cyrus . With 19 @.@ 3 million views , it broke the Vevo record for the most views in 24 hours , and additionally became the fastest video to reach 100 million views , having done so in 6 days . The first @-@ day viewing record was later surpassed by the visuals for " Anaconda " by Nicki Minaj in August 2014 , which received 19 @.@ 6 million views , upon its premiere . On December 4 , 2013 , " Wrecking Ball " returned to the peak position of the Billboard Hot 100 with assistance from online streaming of a viral Chatroulette parody video , and consequently became the largest gap between number @-@ one sittings in Billboard history . On the same month , the music videos for " Wrecking Ball " and " We Can 't Stop " were announced as the first and second most @-@ viewed videos on Vevo in 2013 , respectively . 
 " Adore You " was released as the third single from Bangerz ; it was serviced to contemporary hit radio stations on December 17 , 2013 . It received generally favorable reviews , with critics appreciating its mid @-@ tempo production , although they criticized the use of Auto @-@ Tune in its vocals . The accompanying music video was leaked on the evening of December 25 , and was officially premiered on the morning of December 26 . The clip depicts Cyrus suggestively posing in a bed and a bathtub , and is interspersed with night vision footage that appears to simulate a sex tape . Prior to being officially released as a single , the song debuted at number 42 on the Billboard Hot 100 ; it has since peaked at number 21 . The remix for " Adore You " , was produced by Cedric Gervais , and premiered online on February 13 , 2014 ; it was officially released on Beatport through his label Spinnin ' Records on March 3 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Cyrus first performed " We Can 't Stop " on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on June 26 , 2013 and on Good Morning America the following day . In August 2013 , she became the subject of widespread media attention and public scrutiny following a controversial performance and duet with Robin Thicke at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards at Barclays Center in New York City . The performance began with Cyrus performing " We Can 't Stop " in bear @-@ themed attire . Following this , Thicke entered the stage and Cyrus stripped down to a skin @-@ colored two @-@ piece outfit . Cyrus subsequently touched Thicke 's crotch area with a giant foam finger and twerked against his crotch . An article published in The Hollywood Reporter described the performance as " crass " and " reminiscent of a bad acid trip " . Media attention of the performance largely overshadowed the attention that was given to other major events of the night , such as the reunion of ' N Sync and performances by Lady Gaga and Katy Perry . The performance was described by XXL critic B. J. Steiner as a " trainwreck in the classic sense of the word as the audience reaction seemed to be a mix of confusion , dismay and horror in a cocktail of embarrassment " , while the BBC said Cyrus stole the show with a " raunchy performance " . The performance generated 306 @,@ 100 tweets per minute on Twitter , breaking the record for the most tweeted @-@ about event in the history of the social network ; the previous record , held by the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show featuring Beyoncé , generated 268 @,@ 000 tweets per minute . According to Forbes , Cyrus ' performance resulted in a gain of over 213 @,@ 000 Twitter followers , 226 @,@ 000 likes on Facebook , and 90 @,@ 000 downloads of her new promotional single , " Wrecking Ball " , within days of the controversial performance . This amounted to a total 112 % increase in Cyrus ' social media activity . 
 In September 2013 , Cyrus sang " We Can 't Stop " on Schlag den Raab in Germany ( September 7 ) , Le Grand Journal in France ( September 9 ) , and Alan Carr : Chatty Man in England ( September 13 ) . On September 21 , she performed twice at iHeartRadio Music Festival in Las Vegas , in the afternoon at festival village and in the evening at MGM Grand Garden Arena . During both shows she sang " We Can 't Stop " and , for the first time , " Wrecking Ball " . Despite generating media attention for a provocative wardrobe , the performance was considered to be " fairly tame considering the VMAs . " On October 5 , Cyrus served as the host and musical guest during an episode of Saturday Night Live . She appeared in several sketches , including a parody of " We Can 't Stop " titled " We Did Stop ( The Government ) " , referencing the federal government shutdown , and performed an acoustic version of " We Can 't Stop " and " Wrecking Ball " . The following Monday , Cyrus performed both singles on Today as part of their Toyota Concert Series . She held an album signing on October 8 at Planet Hollywood in Times Square , and also appeared on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon and The Ellen DeGeneres Show later that month , also singing both singles there . 
 Bangerz was additionally promoted through the documentary Miley : The Movement , which premiered through MTV on October 2 ; it covered the production of the project and the lead @-@ up to its release . In November , Cyrus traveled to Europe again to sing both " We Can 't Stop " and " Wrecking Ball " at the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards in Amsterdam on November 10 ; she garnered media attention for smoking a joint of marijuana on @-@ stage while accepting the Best Video Award for the latter single . On November 17 , she performed " Wrecking Ball " on The X Factor in London . After being criticized for delivering a lackluster vocal performance , Cyrus was placed under " vocal rest " by her doctors in preparation of the Bangerz Tour . During her trip , she also performed " Wrecking Ball " on Wetten , dass .. ? in Germany ( November 9 ) , BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge in London ( November 12 ) , and the 2013 Bambi Awards in Germany ( November 14 ) . On November 24 , Cyrus performed " Wrecking Ball " at the 2013 American Music Awards ; a digitally animated cat projected on the screen behind her lip @-@ synced the lyrics alongside Cyrus . In December , she performed at Jingle Ball concerts in Los Angeles ( KIIS @-@ FM Jingle Ball ) , Saint Paul , Atlanta , New York City , Washington , D.C. , Tampa and Sunrise . She was expected to perform in Boston during the series , although her flight from New York City was cancelled due to Winter Storm Electra and was therefore unable to attend . 
 Cyrus also performed " # GetItRight " and " Wrecking Ball " on Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest in Times Square on December 31 ; she had previously been expected to perform at the Fontainebleau Miami Beach with Pharrell Williams . On January 25 , 2014 , Cyrus sang " # GetItRight " during Clive Davis ' party the evening before the 56th Annual Grammy Awards ; after an unenthusiastic response from the audience , she performed a cover version of " Jolene " by Dolly Parton which received a more favorable reception . An episode of MTV Unplugged starring Cyrus premiered through MTV on January 29 . She performed acoustic versions of " Adore You " , " SMS ( Bangerz ) " , " 4x4 " , " Wrecking Ball " , " # GetItRight " , " Drive " , " Do My Thang " , and " Rooting for My Baby " . Cyrus also performed a cover version of " Jolene " , while Madonna appeared as a surprise guest that evening to sing a medley of Cyrus " We Can 't Stop " and her own " Don 't Tell Me " . An uncensored version of the special was released online on February 6 , and included an additional cover version of " Why 'd You Only Call Me When You 're High ? " by the Arctic Monkeys . Cyrus and The Flaming Lips sang a cover version of The Beatles ' " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " for the 2014 Billboard Music Awards on May 18 , while Cyrus alone performed " Wrecking Ball " during the 2014 World Music Awards in Monte @-@ Carlo on May 27 . Cyrus participated in the Summertime Ball at Wembley Stadium in London on June 21 , where she sang " SMS ( Bangerz ) " , " 4x4 " , " Love Money Party " , " Wrecking Ball " , " We Can 't Stop " and " Party In The USA " . 
 = = Tour = = 
 During her appearance on Today on October 7 , Cyrus first mentioned her intentions to tour in 2014 . On October 26 , she made a surprise appearance on another episode of Saturday Night Live to officially announce the Bangerz Tour . It was promoted by the American entertainment company Live Nation Entertainment , which was reported to be paying Cyrus $ 500 @,@ 000 per presentation . The first leg of the tour visited North America and was originally scheduled to include thirty @-@ eight shows , for which Swedish duo Icona Pop and American recording artist Sky Ferreira were announced as its opening acts . 
 Tickets for the North American leg became available for purchase on November 16 ; it began at the Rogers Arena in Vancouver on February 14 , 2014 , and was originally planned conclude on April 24 at the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale , New York . However , several showings were postponed after Cyrus experienced an allergic reaction to medication on April 15 . The rescheduled North American dates saw the inclusion of two additional performances ; they began on August 1 at the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale , and concluded on August 14 at the United Center in Chicago . The second leg of the tour visited Europe and included eighteen shows , for which tickets became available for purchase on December 13 . It began on May 6 at The O2 Arena in London , and concluded on June 22 at the <unk> Dome in Amsterdam . The two @-@ hour television special " Miley Cyrus : Bangerz Tour " was filmed during Cyrus ' performances in Spain and Portugal , and was broadcast on July 6 on NBC in the United States . The tour resumed on August 1 at Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale and concluded on October 23 at the Perth Arena in Perth , Australia . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Bangerz received mixed to positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 61 , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " , based on 21 reviews . Writing for AllMusic , Heather Phares provided a favorable review , opining that it " accomplishes [ the ] mission " of " [ selling ] Cyrus as an independent woman " , further commenting that the incorporation of several genres within the project " introduces Miley as an A @-@ list pop star . " Jason Lipshutz of Billboard complimented the album for being " fiercely individual " , but stated that the " dramatic breakup songs " became repetitive . Lipshutz stated that the album is " neither the best nor worst pop album " released in 2013 , and stated power ballad songs like " Wrecking Ball " would increase her career longevity . Nick Catucci of Entertainment Weekly described Bangerz as being " utterly fresh " and a " pop blitz from a hip hop blue print " , and stated that Cyrus had visibly transitioned from her former persona established by the Disney Channel . 
 Mikael Wood from the Los Angeles Times noted that the album favored a " grittier , hip @-@ hop @-@ inspired vibe " instead of the " glossy electro @-@ pop " from her previous material , and further opined that " We Can 't Stop " " still astounds ; it might be the calmest , most clear @-@ eyed rebel yell since Janet Jackson 's ' Control . ' An album beyond its years . " Rolling Stone 's Jon Dolan complimented the album 's the " wide @-@ ranging production " , labeling it a " Rihanna @-@ meets @-@ Gaga @-@ meets @-@ Pink @-@ meets @-@ Britney party grenade of a record " . Writing for Fact , Tom Lea provided a more mixed review of Bangerz , calling it a " hot mess of country , Southern hip @-@ hop and more " , but concluded that the record contained " more — ahem — bangers than <unk> . " Caroline Sullivan from The Guardian shared a similar sentiment , but also opined that the overall record held " more hits than misses " . John Murphy of musicOMH described the tracks as being " rather run of the mill material " , but nonetheless complimented Cyrus ' promotional efforts for making the record " one of the most anticipated pop albums of the year " . 
 Kitty Empire from The Observer was more negative of Bangerz , opining that the project " feels stitched together in the dark , and the attention @-@ seeking begins to grate . " Elysa Gardner for USA Today described the record 's composition as " mediocre " and consisting of " competent , mostly generic tunes " . Jessica Hopper from Spin was also more negative of the record , opining that it is a " precise album that flits between bombastic and turgid " and " is very fun . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 On his list of the ten best albums of 2013 , Nick Catucci from Entertainment Weekly placed Bangerz third , complimenting Cyrus ' ability for " cutting @-@ edge rap [ ... ] , a soulful voice capable of showstoppers [ ... ] , and an underappreciated emotional directness " . The Guardian ranked Bangerz thirty @-@ fourth on their list of the forty best albums , commenting that it " [ winds ] people up for commercial , rather than transgressive , ends " despite initially opining that " the attention @-@ seeking begins to grate " . Rolling Stone placed Bangerz at number twenty @-@ seven on their list of the fifty best albums , writing that Cyrus " [ brought ] depth and vulnerability to one hell of a party [ ... ] amid all the foam @-@ finger hub @-@ hub " . Ann Powers from NPR ranked the record tenth on her list of ten records , suggesting that it " should earn her entry into every celebration of pop this year " , while the Associated Press ranked it ninth for being " banging " . Joey Guerra from Houston Chronicle listed Bangerz as the fourth @-@ best record of the year , calling it a " fun , feisty pop album that produced two of the year 's biggest , best singles " and summarizing that " with one flick of her tongue , Cyrus easily outdoes recent fare from Gaga , Katy and Britney . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On October 9 , Billboard reported that Bangerz would sell an estimated 250 – 275 @,@ 000 copies in first @-@ week United States sales . On October 16 , the record officially debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 , having moved 270 @,@ 000 units . In doing so , Cyrus attained her fifth non @-@ consecutive number @-@ one album in the country . The figure includes her first and second studio albums Meet Miley Cyrus ( 2007 ) and Breakout ( 2008 ) , in addition to the soundtracks Hannah Montana ( 2006 ) and Hannah Montana : The Movie ( 2009 ) , in which Cyrus was credited as her former titular character Hannah Montana . Furthermore , the record sold 168 @,@ 000 more copies than her previous effort Can 't Be Tamed ( 2010 ) , and became the best @-@ selling debut week for a female artist in 2013 . Three weeks later , this feat was surpassed by Katy Perry after her fourth studio album Prism ( 2013 ) debuted at number one with first @-@ week sales of 286 @,@ 000 copies . In December , both women were surpassed by Beyoncé after her fifth studio album Beyoncé ( 2013 ) was unexpectedly released on the iTunes Store and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 with three @-@ day sales of 617 @,@ 000 copies . During its second week of release , Bangerz dropped to number two with sales of 92 @,@ 000 copies , and dropped to number four in its third week after moving 53 @,@ 000 units . As of February 2014 , Bangerz has sold one million copies in the United States , and has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . It also debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart , where it was eventually certified platinum , and entered the Top 100 Mexico chart at number three . 
 Bangerz charted moderately throughout Europe . In the United Kingdom , the record and her track " Wrecking Ball " both debuted at number one on their respective charts in the same week , making Cyrus the first artist of 2013 to achieve a " chart double " in the country . The album was later recognized with a silver certification . It also reached the peak position in Ireland , Norway , and Scotland . Furthermore , it respectively debuted at numbers two and three in Spain and Italy . The album peaked at number four on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 and the Swedish Sverigetopplistan . It also debuted at number four on the Portuguese Albums Chart , and was further recognized with a double @-@ platinum certification by the Associação Fonográfica Portuguesa for sales of 40 @,@ 000 copies . The album also reached number six on the Dutch MegaCharts , number seven on the Swiss Music Charts , number eight on the Hungarian MAHASZ , and number three on the Danish <unk> and number nine on both the French Albums Chart and the German Media Control Charts . In Belgian , the record respectively peaked at numbers eight and nineteen in Flanders and Wallonia . The album reached number 23 on The Official Finnish Charts , and debuted at number 45 on the Polish ZPAV . In South America , Bangerz charted at number one on the Argentinian CAPIF chart and the Brazilian ABPD chart . The record experienced similar success in Oceania , where it debuted in the peak position of the Australian ARIA Charts and reached number two in New Zealand . In the latter country , it was certified gold . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Bangerz and its promotional events have been largely credited with establishing a sexually provocative image for Cyrus . Zack O 'Malley Greenburg from Forbes noted that her performances , music videos , and public behavior received " plenty of condemnation along with all the attention " in the lead @-@ up to the record ; he suggested that this was intentionally done so " [ parents will ] never again buy any products related to Cyrus – or her former alter @-@ ego , tween sensation Hannah Montana . " John Murphy from MusicOMH stated that Cyrus ' performance at the MTV Video Music Awards became " the seismic event that ensured we 'd never recall 2013 without thinking of her " , further opining that the anticipation it built for Bangerz made it " impossible not to admire her PR operation . " 
 Andrew Unterberger of Billboard felt that Bangerz developed the maturing image for Cyrus that her third album Can 't Be Tamed ( 2010 ) failed to accomplish . He suggested that she had " no true backup plan " for creating a new public persona in 2010 , and stated that she " now feels firmly in control of her music and her image " in 2013 . Marlow Stern from The Daily Beast shared a similar sentiment , stating that Cyrus " is completely in control of what she ’ s doing " after her recent controversies , which he described as " pure artistic calculation born out of mild desperation " , and has successfully done " just about anything to gain our attention " . Zack O 'Malley Greenburg of Forbes commented that despite widespread criticism of " chasing YouTube views and record sales at the expense of her image " , the " new Cyrus " appears " marketable as ever . " Writing for Glamour , Mickey Woods compared the promotional " era " for Bangerz to those of Britney Spears ' and Christina Aguilera 's third and fourth studio albums Britney ( 2001 ) and Stripped ( 2002 ) , respectively , in that " both albums by these legends were wildly experimental " , adding that Cyrus ' project " will probably be retrospectively deemed iconic , maybe even classic . " Mark Jacobs of V likened the album to Control ( 1986 ) by Janet Jackson , in that Cyrus was " an artist coming into her own " in a fashion similar to Jackson . 
 Patrick Ryan of USA Today commented that Cyrus ' collaborations with Mike Will Made It contributed to his new @-@ found prominence , stating that Mike Will Made It 's position as an executive producer has helped him " [ jump ] to the forefront as an interesting character [ ... ] in an era where a lot of producers have fallen behind the scenes again " . From a commercial standpoint , however , Suzanne Cowie of Babble suggested that Cyrus ' opening @-@ week sales figures and subsequent decline supported the idea that the studio album format is reaching its end , having used her example to exemplify that " consumers are only interested in the single " . She further opined that they do not " [ have ] the time to sit and listen through to an album in its entirety " , and credited the rise of digital downloads with promoting a less engaging listening process , where consumers " [ have not ] connected in any way with the band / singer and their hopes for the record . " 
 In December 2013 MTV named Cyrus as their Best Artist of 2013 , for which criteria including Bangerz 's sales were taken into consideration . James Montgomery from MTV News elaborated on the network 's decision that Cyrus " [ declared ] her independence and [ dominated ] the pop @-@ culture landscape " , adding that " she schooled — and shocked — us all in 2013 , and did so on her own terms . " In early December 2013 , Cyrus was listed in the top ten finalists for Time Person of the Year , the only <unk> in the list , though she lost to Pope Francis ; she was also listed on Barbara Walters ' " Most Fascinating People of the Year " . Billboard staff called Cyrus the " Most <unk> About Pop Star " of 2013 , and also recognized the controversial evolution of her career as the " Top Music Moment " of the year , elaborating that she was a " maelstrom that expanded and grazed nearly every aspect of pop culture in 2013 . " Cyrus was also the most @-@ searched person of the year on Google , with Leah <unk> of Elle writing that " most folks , even famous ones , only strike Internet gold like that once in a lifetime ( or maybe once a year ) , but Cyrus hit it again — and again — in 2013 . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Bangerz . 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ [ b ] signifies a vocal producer 
 ^ [ c ] signifies an additional producer 
 Sampling credits 
 " We Can 't Stop " contains a portion of the composition " La Di Da Di " , written by Douglas Davis and Ricky Walters . 
 " My Darlin ' " contains a portion of the composition " Stand by Me " , written by Jerry Leiber , Mike Stoller , and Ben E. King . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Julian Carroll = 
 Julian Morton Carroll ( born April 16 , 1931 ) is an American politician from the state of Kentucky . A Democrat , he is a member of the Kentucky Senate , representing Anderson , Franklin , Woodford , Gallatin and Owen counties . From 1974 to 1979 , he served as the 54th Governor of Kentucky , succeeding Wendell H. Ford , who resigned to accept a seat in the U.S. Senate . He was the first Kentucky governor from the state 's far @-@ western Jackson Purchase region , and his running mate Thelma Stovall was the first woman to be elected Lieutenant Governor of Kentucky . 
 After graduating from the University of Kentucky and spending three years as an Air Force lawyer , Carroll returned to McCracken County , Kentucky where he gained acclaim for leading a campaign to allow the Tennessee Valley Authority to provide low @-@ cost electricity to the county . He was elected to the first of five terms in the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1962 and served as Speaker of that body from 1968 to 1970 . He ran for Lieutenant Governor in 1971 on an informal ticket with former Governor Bert T. Combs . Combs lost in the Democratic primary to Wendell Ford , but Carroll defeated his primary opponents and went on to win the general election . He was elevated to the governorship in 1974 due to Ford 's election to the Senate , and won a full term in his own right in 1975 . 
 As Governor , Carroll increased funding for public education and promoted the use of coal as a means of alleviating the 1973 energy crisis . He also oversaw a major reorganization of the state 's judicial system . Many natural and man @-@ made disasters occurred during his term in office , including the Great Blizzard of 1978 and the Beverly Hills Supper Club fire , leading to better safety practices and stricter law enforcement in the state . When Carroll left office , both he and his predecessor were under the cloud of an investigation for an alleged insurance kickback scheme , but Carroll was not convicted of any wrongdoing . In 2004 , he was elected to the Kentucky Senate . Re @-@ elected in 2008 and 2012 , his current term will expire in 2017 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Julian Carroll was born in West Paducah , McCracken County , Kentucky on April 16 , 1931 . He was the third of eleven children born to Elvie B. " Buster " and Eva ( Heady ) Carroll . His father was a tenant farmer , but shortly after the Ohio River flood of 1937 , the family moved to Heath , Kentucky where Buster Carroll sold tractor implements and opened an automobile repair shop in 1940 . Through his early teenage years , Carroll lived with his grandparents to help care for an ailing grandfather . 
 In 1949 , Carroll was selected to represent Heath High School at Kentucky Boys State , a week @-@ long a civic affairs summer camp for high school seniors @-@ to @-@ be . Participants in the camp create a miniature state government based on their state 's actual government . At the camp , Carroll was elected governor of the miniature government . The following year , he graduated as salutatorian and student body president of Heath High School . 
 Carroll began dating <unk> Harting near the end of 1950 . In mid @-@ 1951 , they parted ways to attend college – Harting , whose family was better off financially , at the University of Kentucky and Carroll at nearby Paducah Junior College . After their first year , Carroll and Harting decided to get married . The ceremony took place on July 22 , 1951 , and the couple eventually had four children – Kenneth , Patrice , Bradley , and Ellyn . Ellyn , born June 27 , 1975 , was the first child born to a Kentucky First Family while they were residing in the Governor 's Mansion . 
 Carroll earned an Associate in Arts degree from Paducah Junior College in 1952 . That summer , the family moved to Lexington where Carroll matriculated to the University of Kentucky . He funded his further education working for the Fayette County Agriculture Stabilization and Conservation Office . In 1954 , he earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science , and in 1956 , he earned a Bachelor of Laws degree . 
 While in college , Carroll had received training through the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps . By graduation , he had risen to the rank of Commandant of Cadets , the highest rank of any student at the university . After graduation , he enlisted in the Air Force and was stationed at Carswell Air Force Base in Fort Worth , Texas . For three years , he served as an Air Force attorney , then returned to Paducah and joined the law firm of Reed , Scent , Reed , and Walton . He was active in civic affairs , including membership in the Jaycees and serving as charter president of the Paducah Optimists Club in 1962 . He was a frequent lay speaker in the Cumberland Presbyterian Church , and from 1966 to 1967 , served as moderator for the Kentucky Synod . 
 In January 1960 , a group of local businessmen approached Carroll about leading a campaign to allow the Tennessee Valley Authority ( TVA ) to provide electricity to McCracken County . TVA could provide electricity at a much lower cost , but voters would first have to hold a public referendum on buying out Kentucky Utilities , the private power provider in the area . Carroll agreed to lead the campaign , and nine months later , voters approved the buyout by a three @-@ to @-@ one margin . 
 = = Political career = = 
 The TVA campaign had put Carroll squarely in the public eye in McCracken County , and in 1962 , he was elected to the first of five consecutive terms representing the county in the Kentucky House of Representatives . He was chosen Speaker of the House from 1968 through 1970 . In the 100 @-@ member House of Representatives , it was not uncommon for lobbyists to roam the floor freely , for members to bring their lunches to their desks , or for them to bring their friends and family members onto the floor during debate . Determined to bring a higher degree of decorum to the chamber 's proceedings , Carroll opened the 1968 legislative session with a single , powerful whack of his gavel . The gavel shattered , stunning the legislators . Carroll subsequently barred outsiders from the floor during debate and forbade eating in the chamber . Carroll shattered three more <unk> during the legislative session – he was finally given a sturdier one made of solid oak and formica – but he brought order to the chamber 's proceedings . At the end of the session , a member of the opposing party declared from the floor " The decorum of this House has improved 100 percent ... I must compliment the present Speaker of this House for ... eliminating the abominable practices . Today every member has a right to speak ... without fear of interruption and catcalls or being shouted down . " The legislator 's compliment was followed by a standing ovation for Carroll . 
 Carroll had considered running for the U.S. Senate in 1968 , but dropped out of the race after just two weeks when he discovered that it would take well over $ 100 @,@ 000 to run a competitive primary campaign . In 1971 , former governor Bert T. Combs sought a second term as governor and chose Carroll as his informal running mate . ( The governor and lieutenant governor were elected separately at the time . ) Combs , an Eastern Kentucky native , sought geographic balance for the ticket by selecting Carroll , from the far @-@ west Jackson Purchase . Combs said he would provide the needed financing , and Carroll agreed to enter the race . 
 Seven other Democratic candidates for lieutenant governor entered the race , the most formidable being sitting attorney general John B. Breckinridge . While Combs lost to Ford in the gubernatorial primary , Carroll won the separate primary for lieutenant governor , partly on the strength of the eastern Kentucky votes he gained from his association with Combs . Carroll went on to defeat Republican Jim Host in the general election for lieutenant governor . As lieutenant governor , Carroll chaired the Legislative Research Commission and the National Conference of Lieutenant Governors . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 Governor Ford 's allies encouraged Carroll to run for the U.S. Senate in 1974 , but Carroll had already set his sights on the governorship . Instead , Ford ran for and won the Senate seat , and Carroll succeeded him as governor . In 1975 , he sought a full term in office and won the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in a four @-@ way primary against Todd Hollenbach , Mary Louise Foust , and Robert McCreary Johnson . 
 In the general election , Carroll faced Republican Robert E. Gable , a coal company owner from central Kentucky . The main issue of the campaign was the imposition of desegregation busing on the city of Louisville . Both candidates opposed the busing , but Gable did so more vehemently and criticized the sitting governor for not " doing something about it " . In a televised debate with Carroll , Gable insisted on using what he called a " truth bell " . Gable rang the bell every time that he perceived that Carroll was not telling the truth . Eventually , the moderator of the debate ordered Gable to put the bell away , and Gable 's credibility suffered in the eyes of voters . Carroll won the general election by a vote of 470 @,@ 159 to 277 @,@ 998 , representing a record margin of victory in the Kentucky governor 's race . He carried every congressional district including Jefferson County , where a Democrat had not won a race in twenty years . His running mate , Thelma Stovall , became the first woman elected lieutenant governor of Kentucky . 
 With considerable experience in the General Assembly – first as Speaker of the House , and later presiding over the Kentucky Senate as lieutenant governor – Carroll exercised a great deal of control over the proceedings of the legislature . One observer quipped " A cockroach couldn 't crawl across the Senate floor without an OK from the governor stamped on his back . " His reaction to criticism was often severe , prompting his political enemies to derisively refer to him as Emperor Julian . During the final year of Carroll 's term , Lieutenant Governor Stovall , who was left as acting governor when Carroll had left the state on business , called a special session of the legislature to enact a tax cut that Carroll opposed . The General Assembly passed the tax cut , partly in retaliation for the governor 's tight control of previous sessions . 
 Carroll was charged with implementing an amendment to the state constitution approved by voters in 1975 to drastically reorganize the state 's judicial system . The Kentucky Court of Appeals , the state 's court of last resort , was renamed the Kentucky Supreme Court , and a new Court of Appeals was created and interposed between the Supreme Court and the state 's circuit and district courts . The position of county judge was made a purely administrative position , and the office was renamed county judge / executive . Historian Lowell H. Harrison opined that the amendment made Kentucky 's legal system " a model for the nation . " 
 Improvements in public schools were the hallmark of Carroll 's term . Using money from a coal severance tax enacted by Ford 's administration and increased revenue from an improving economy , Carroll increased teacher salaries and eliminated fees for required classes . He strengthened the state 's Minimum Foundation Program and provided free textbooks . A School Building Authority was also created to help poor school districts construct new buildings . Vocational and special education were expanded under the Carroll administration , and a program for gifted and talented students was piloted . Consequently , Kentucky improved in most national educational benchmarks , including moving from forty @-@ sixth to thirty @-@ eighth nationally in teacher salaries . 
 Higher education did not fare as well under Carroll . He cut the proposed budget for the state 's Council on Higher Education by 40 percent . Because of the considerable political clout of the Golden Triangle ( Lexington , Louisville and Covington ) , the University of Kentucky , University of Louisville , and Northern Kentucky University were spared the more severe budget cuts imposed on the state 's regional universities . 
 As governor of the leading coal @-@ producing state in the nation , Carroll advocated the use of coal to alleviate the 1973 energy crisis . He was called to testify before several congressional committees and served as an energy adviser to President Jimmy Carter . At the state level , he created a department of energy and constructed " resource recovery roads " in the state 's coalfield regions . Among Carroll 's other accomplishments were the initiation of a grant program to support the arts and the expansion of the state park system . He was one of many who opposed the damming of the Red River , which would have flooded Red River Gorge . Carroll was a supporter of a lemon law ( that sought to provide a remedy for purchasers of cars that failed to meet quality standards ) that was defeated in the 1976 legislative session . 
 Carroll served as chairman of the National Governors Association in 1978 . He chaired the Association 's Natural Resources and Environmental Management Committee and served on its Technology Committee . He also served as the state 's co @-@ chairman of the Appalachian Regional Commission . He received honorary degrees from the University of Kentucky , Morehead State University , Murray State University , and Eastern Kentucky University in Kentucky , and from Lincoln Memorial University in Harrogate , Tennessee . He was named to the University of Kentucky Alumni Association 's Hall of Distinguished Alumni in 1975 . 
 Carroll 's tenure was plagued by disasters , both natural and man @-@ made . Flooding struck in the eastern part of the state and in the state capitol of Frankfort . Extreme cold gripped the entire state in 1977 and 1978 , including the Great Blizzard of 1978 . Two mine explosions in Letcher County killed 26 people , and the Beverly Hills Supper Club fire claimed 165 lives . Many of these disasters led to stricter enforcement of safety laws . Carroll formed the Department of Housing , Buildings , and Construction and strengthened the state fire marshal 's office . 
 Carroll 's credibility took a severe hit as a result of an investigation into an alleged insurance kickback scheme during the Ford administration and carrying on into his administration . When called before a grand jury in 1980 , Carroll invoked the Fifth Amendment . He was not convicted of any wrongdoing , but his first state Democratic Party chairman , Howard P. " Sonny " Hunt , was . The investigation also hurt commerce commissioner Terry McBrayer , Carroll 's choice for governor in 1979 . McBrayer finished third out of five candidates in the Democratic primary that year . 
 = = = Later political career = = = 
 After concluding his service as governor , Carroll resumed his law practice in Frankfort , Kentucky . Governor John Y. Brown , Jr. made him chairman of a non @-@ profit organization to fight drugs in 1983 . In 1987 , he unsuccessfully sought another term as governor , finishing fifth in the Democratic primary behind Lieutenant Governor Steve Beshear , former governor John Y. Brown , Jr . , Grady Stumbo , and the winner , Wallace G. Wilkinson . Carroll again returned to his Frankfort law practice . In 2001 , Kentucky 's Purchase Parkway was renamed the Julian M. Carroll Purchase Parkway . In 2003 , Carroll actively lobbied the General Assembly to legalize casino @-@ style gambling at the state 's horse racetracks . 
 = = = State Senate = = = 
 In 2004 , Carroll was elected to the Kentucky Senate from District 7 , defeating Harold Fletcher – the older brother of then @-@ governor Ernie Fletcher – by a wide margin . The district includes all or portions of Anderson , Fayette , Franklin , and Woodford counties . He made headlines in 2007 when he called on Fletcher 's lieutenant governor , Steve Pence , to resign for his disloyalty after Pence endorsed Anne Northup in the Republican gubernatorial primary rather than backing Fletcher 's re @-@ election bid . Pence refused to resign , citing an investigation of the administration 's hiring practices as his reason for refusing to endorse Fletcher . Fletcher won the Republican primary , but lost in the general election to Democrat Steve Beshear . 
 Carroll was re @-@ elected unopposed in 2008 . In advance of the 2011 legislative session , Carroll unsuccessfully sought to replace retired Senator Ed <unk> as Democratic floor leader in the State Senate , losing to Senator R. J. Palmer . Carroll blamed his contentious relationship with Senate President David L. Williams as the reason his colleagues were hesitant to choose him for the post . On November 6 , 2012 , he defeated Republican Frank Haynes to retain his seat for another four years . 
 = Sierk Coolsma = 
 Sierk Coolsma ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 26 January 1840 – 20 March 1926 ) was a Dutch Protestant missionary who wrote extensively on the Sundanese language . Born in the Netherlands , he became a missionary in his early twenties and arrived in the Dutch East Indies in 1865 . First tasked to Cianjur , he studied Sundanese in more detail than his contemporaries , gaining an appreciation for the language . Further missionary activities in Bogor , begun in 1869 , were a failure , and in 1873 he was tasked with translating the New Testament into Sundanese . Although the Sundanese people highly valued poetry , he did the translation in prose hoping that it would help readers entertain new ideas . 
 In 1876 , Coolsma returned to the Netherlands and became the leader of the Netherlands Missionary Union , promoting further missionary activity in the predominantly Muslim western portion of the East Indies . He also wrote extensively on Sundanese , including a grammar and two dictionaries . Although his Bible translation had little lasting impact , these later works have remained in use . 
 = = Early life and missionary work = = 
 Sierk Coolsma was born in Leeuwarden in the Netherlands , on 26 January 1840 , as son of worker <unk> Coolsma and <unk> <unk> . 
 Coolsma first worked in a printer 's office , but began training to be a missionary in Rotterdam in 1861 , after having studied several months under Rev. <unk> in <unk> in the previous year . He finished his training on 5 May 1864 ; that December he left for Batavia ( now Jakarta ) , the capital of the Dutch colony in the East Indies . 
 Upon arrival in April 1865 , Coolsma was sent by the Netherlands Missionary Union ( <unk> <unk> , NZV ) to the town of Cianjur . There , on 5 April 1866 , he married Maria Johanna <unk> , six years his younger . He also baptised the NZV 's first Sundanese Christians , a husband and wife named Ismael and <unk> . Ismael continued to treat Coolsma as his teacher and help the missionaries spread Christianity until his death in 1872 . 
 While in Cianjur , Coolsma began to study the language used by the Sundanese people who inhabited the area . Eventually , according to <unk> Moriyama of Nanzan University , he " had a sharper insight and deeper knowledge " than contemporary missionaries and government workers . Later missionaries would not study the language in such detail . 
 Coolsma left Cianjur in 1869 and went to Bogor , also a majority @-@ Sundanese city . He found little success in preaching to the European citizens of the city or converting the Sundanese . On 31 May 1869 , he opened a school at his home , which provided a free education in both secular and religious studies . The first class had ten students , a total which grew quickly ; at its peak , the school had 111 students . After a government @-@ funded school was opened in 1872 , most of the Sundanese students moved there to avoid the Christian teachings . The remaining students were mostly ethnic Chinese , few of whom converted . 
 = = Bible translation = = 
 In 1873 , Coolsma published a grammar of the Sundanese language , titled <unk> bij de <unk> der <unk> taal ( Manual for the Writing of the Sundanese Language ) . He reluctantly used a transcription method developed by <unk> Holle and proscribed by the colonial government . That year he was tasked with translating the New Testament into Sundanese . He left his school in the hands of fellow missionary D. J. van der Linden and went to <unk> ; there he worked on his translation over a period of three years . 
 Coolsma found that Sundanese literature consisted predominantly of poetry , including the narrative wawacan , and thought that prose needed to be developed as well so that the people would embrace modernity . He considered that they rarely read , instead preferring to listen to more educated persons sing in verse . As such , the contents of written prose would not be conveyed . This is not to say that he disliked Sundanese poetry ; he was appreciative of the dangding verse forms – derived from Javanese literary tradition – which were used to write wawacan , and considered an existing translation of the Gospel of Matthew in dangding to be the best Sundanese @-@ language book in print . 
 Ultimately , Coolsma chose to translate the Gospel of John and Acts of the Apostles using prose , believing that dangding was " too traditional to convey new ideas " and hoping to promote a " new spirit " . However , for accessibility 's sake he published using the Jawi script ; most literate Sundanese could read it , unlike the Javanese or Latin scripts also used in the area . The translation grew to include much of the New Testament , and by the 1890s the whole Bible . It was , however , little read . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Coolsma returned to the Netherlands with his wife in 1876 and became the leader of the NZV , holding the office until 1908 . He disputed the idea that missionary work should be focused on the non @-@ <unk> eastern portion of the colony . He believed instead that missionary work should be <unk> in the western portion , where Islam had already become entrenched . 
 Coolsma continued to write about both missionary work and the Sundanese language . In 1881 , he wrote a series of condemnatory reviews of Sundanese @-@ language schoolbooks offered by the colonial government , arguing that the content had little value and the language was mostly artificial . He published a Sundanese @-@ Dutch dictionary in 1884 , consulting various works of Sundanese literature for his <unk> . In 1901 , he published a history of the mission in the East Indies , titled De <unk> voor Nederlandsche Oost @-@ <unk> ( The Century of the Mission in the Dutch East Indies ) . It described the 19th century as time of extensive growth . 
 In 1904 , Coolsma published a revised version of his grammar . Working with fellow missionary Christiaan Albers , who had also preached in Cianjur , Coolsma published a Dutch @-@ Sundanese dictionary in 1911 ; this was followed by a revised version of his Sundanese @-@ Dutch dictionary in 1913 . Coolsma 's wife died on 27 September 1917 . Her death led him to reduce his workload , although he found time to publish his memoirs , <unk> op <unk> <unk> , 1840 – 1924 ( Looking Back on my Life , 1840 – 1924 ) , in 1924 . He died two years later , on 20 March 1926 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Coolsma was recognised as a Knight of the Order of Orange @-@ Nassau before his death . Moriyama writes that Coolsma 's " unrivaled " dictionary and grammar had a much greater impact than his Bible translations , serving as a basis for the standardisation of written Sundanese . The grammar remains an authoritative source on Sundanese syntax , and despite the colonial government limiting its distribution – afraid the publication of a work by Christian missionaries would provoke the majority @-@ Muslim Sundanese – it was used in various Sundanese educational institutions . In 1985 , the grammar was translated into Indonesian and republished by <unk> . 
 = Pure ( Miller novel ) = 
 Pure is a 2011 novel by English author Andrew Miller . The book is the sixth novel by Miller and was released on 9 June 2011 in the United Kingdom through Sceptre , an imprint of Hodder & Stoughton . The novel is set in pre @-@ revolutionary France and the upcoming turmoil is a consistent theme throughout . It follows an engineer named Jean @-@ Baptiste Baratte and chronicles his efforts in clearing an overfilled graveyard which is polluting the surrounding area . Baratte makes friends and enemies as the cemetery is both loved and hated by the people of the district . 
 Miller was inspired to write about the Les Innocents Cemetery after reading historian Philippe Ariès 's brief description of its clearing and imagining the theatrics that must have been involved . The novel received positive reviews , particularly noting the quality of writing . The novel was awarded the Costa Book Award 2011 for " Best Novel " and " Book of the Year " , and was nominated for the Walter Scott Prize and South Bank award . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The novel centres around a young engineer named Jean @-@ Baptiste Baratte , who is tasked with the removal of the Les Innocents cemetery from Les Halles , Paris in 1786 ( the Place Joachim @-@ du @-@ Bellay now occupies the area ) and the removal of its church . Baratte is an engineer with a single decorative bridge , built in his small home @-@ town , comprising his entire career and , as such , is somewhat surprised by his appointment ; he does , however , endeavour to complete his task . 
 The cemetery has been in use for many years but , given the number of people buried in such a small area , the bodies are no longer decomposing properly . They have begun to overflow and fall into the neighbouring houses as greater excavations take place and basement walls are weakened . The entire area is also permeated with a foul smell , turning fresh produce rotten in far shorter times than natural and tainting the breath of those who live there . Baratte finds that he has both friends and enemies in the area – the cemetery is both loved and hated by the people of the district . He finds resistance from all sides , notably <unk> who strikes Baratte during his sleep in opposition to his work . He befriends the church 's flamboyant organist named Armand , recruits his old colleague <unk> to assist with the excavation , is monitored by the infamous Guillotin and falls in love with <unk> , widely known in the area as a whore . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Jean @-@ Baptiste Baratte – the protagonist of the novel ; engineering graduate of the École des Ponts et <unk> and overseer of the project ; originally from Normandy . The name is a reference to the biblical John the Baptist . <unk> nickname is " Bêche " , which is French for " Spade " , a reference to his career . 
 Armand – the church 's flamboyant and alcoholic organist ; and close friend to Baratte ; with links to " the party of the future " . 
 Héloïse Goddard – a prostitute , also known as " The Austrian " because of her resemblance to Queen Marie Antoinette , who specialises in indulging the peculiar perversions of her clients ; also Baratte 's love interest . 
 <unk> – Baratte 's old friend brought in as the foreman to the miners undertaking the excavation . English translation of the name is " The Heart " . 
 <unk> <unk> – <unk> 's landlord 's daughter who attacks Baratte in the middle of the night , in opposition to his work . 
 Marie – maid to the <unk> who spies on Baratte sleeping during the night . 
 Jeanne – 14 @-@ year @-@ old granddaughter to the church 's sexton . 
 Dr Guillotin – a doctor who is observing the progress of the excavation for research purposes . 
 Père Colbert – the church 's mad priest . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The novel takes place immediately before the French Revolution and , while not discussed in the novel , a number of sights and incidents foreshadow the impending events . Clare Clark , in The Guardian , stated " as Baratte 's story unfolds , the impending revolution hangs over the narrative like the blade of the guillotine to come " , identifying a number of <unk> of the future turmoil ; including " an organist play [ ing ] to an empty church " , the local theatre putting on a production of Beaumarchais ' The Marriage of Figaro ; and a cart displaying the phrase " M Hulot et Fils : <unk> à la Noblesse " on its side ( English : M Hulot and Son : Movers to the Nobility ) . In The Week , Michael Bywater stated he felt that the novel has " a sense in the air that something decisive is going to happen , and happen soon " . 
 Thomas Quinn for The Big Issue opined that the removal of the cemetery as a whole could be construed as Miller asking " whether we should sweep away the past in the name of progress " or if we should be " confronting set ideas about what makes us human in the first place " . 
 Miller also aimed to imbue the novel with a sense of anxiety , especially concerning the decisions Jean @-@ Baptiste must take . Commenting on fiction in general in an interview with Lorna Bradbury for The Daily Telegraph , Miller stated that " a novel is a collection of anxieties held together , more or less well , more or less interestingly , by the chicken wire of plot " . Bradbury goes on to state " that is absolutely the case with Pure , which details multiple counts of insanity as the panic @-@ inducing business of razing the cemetery takes hold " . Of Pure specifically , Miller stated that " I 'm interested in what anxiety does to people " , " in what happens when they can 't respond the way the world expects them to . What happens when our sense of ourselves falls away under the pressure of circumstances ? What 's left ? That 's a very interesting place to be . " 
 Another theme prevalent in the novel is death , influenced in part by the death of Miller 's father , to whom the book is dedicated . Miller stated that " after the age of <unk> , death is a taste in your mouth , and never goes away again " . The reviewer for The Australian called the novel " a meditation on death and the frailty of the body and spirit " . 
 = = Development = = 
 Miller first heard about the clearing of the Les Innocents cemetery ten years before writing the novel , when reading a book by French medievalist and historian , Philippe Ariès ; specifically his 1977 work entitled L 'Homme devant la mort , or The Hour of Our Death . Ariès ' book did not go into a great deal of detail concerning this actual event , however Miller was " taken by the theatricality " of it and decided to write a novel based around the exhumation . In an interview with Kira Cochrane he stated the novel " appealed to [ him ] as being interesting , visually interesting " , stating " it was when it all happened that made it stand out . It 's the 1780s , a few years before the French revolution " . Miller further stated that his father 's occupation as a doctor also had some bearing in his interest in the human body , stating " I grew up looking at these things – my Beano and Dandy were the BMJ and The Lancet " . Miller decided not to include any French dialogue in the novel as " it is so pretentious " in an English @-@ language novel , stating " I was afraid that my editor would strike it out " . 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 2011 , UK , Sceptre ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4447 @-@ 2425 @-@ 7 , pub date 9 Jun 2011 , Hardback 
 2012 , UK , Sceptre ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4447 @-@ 2428 @-@ 8 , pub date 5 Jan 2012 , Paperback 
 2012 , UK , Dreamscape Media , pub date 29 May 2012 , Audiobook 
 2012 , USA , Europa Editions ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 067 @-@ 0 , pub date 29 May 2012 , Paperback 
 = = = Novel 's title = = = 
 The novel 's title can be attributed to a number of aspects of the work . The purification of the cemetery and the recent change in social mores ( in relation to dirt and decay ) being the most immediately apparent . James Kidd , writing for The Independent , stated " if this suggests one definition of purity , others are suggested by political undercurrents . Namely , the ideals that helped shape the French Revolution : Voltaire 's call to reason , Rousseau 's call to equality , and Robespierre 's call to arms . " 
 = = = Cover = = = 
 The cover , created by Royston Knipe , was based on Francisco Goya 's etching The Sleep of Reason <unk> Monsters . It features Baratte in his pistachio green silk <unk> suit replacing the recumbent Goya in his self @-@ portrait . Instead of the owls and bats which assail Goya in The Sleep of Reason , Knipe used ravens . The cover was noted by The Guardian writer John Dugdale , in an article about the marketing aspect of book cover design , as being unique in the current market . He stated that ; along with the covers for The Sense of an Ending and The Tiger 's Wife ; " None of the three looks like anything else in bookshops " . 
 = = = Audio adaptations = = = 
 A Sweet Talk production of Pure was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 as part of the Book at Bedtime programme from 20 – 31 August 2012 ; it was read by John Sessions , abridged by Jeremy Osborne and produced by <unk> Ward . 
 The novel was also the inspiration for two songs written by Bath based musicians , The Bookshop Band , namely " The downfall of Les Innocents " and " The Engineer 's Paris " from their album Into The Farthest Reaches . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The novel received almost universal praise , with reviewers praising Miller 's approach to the subject , his vividly rendered characters and setting and his eloquent prose . 
 In a review for The Independent , James Urquhart found the novel to be " richly textured " and that it had " energetic , acutely observed characters " ; stating " Miller populates Baratte 's quest for equanimity with these lush and tart characters , seductively fleshed out , who collectively help to deliver the bittersweet resolution of Baratte 's professional and personal travails . " Clare Clark , writing for The Guardian , found that " Miller is a writer of subtlety and skill " and stated that she found the novel to be much like a parable , stating that " Unlike many parables , however , Pure is neither laboured nor leaden . Miller writes like a poet , with a deceptive simplicity – his sentences and images are intense distillations , conjuring the fleeting details of existence with clarity . " Clark goes on to say that " Pure defies the ordinary conventions of storytelling , slipping dream @-@ like between lucidity and a kind of abstracted elusiveness . The characters are often opaque . The narrative lacks dramatic structure , unfolding in the present tense much as life does , without clear shape or climax " and found that " The result is a book that is unsettling and , ultimately , optimistic . " The Australian 's Jennifer Levasseur found Pure to be " Well @-@ executed and inventive " , stating that she found the plot " Historically convincing , immediately engaging and intellectually stimulating " . She went on to state , of Miller himself : " Miller is the calibre of writer who deserves to be followed regardless of topic , time period or setting because of his astonishing dexterity with language , his piercing observations and his ability to combine rollicking storytelling with depth of character . " 
 Novelist Brian Lynch , writing for the Irish Independent found " The story in Pure is simple , almost dreamlike , a realistic fantasy , a violent fairy tale for adults " , stating " At its best Pure shimmers " . The novel received two reviews from The Daily Telegraph . Freya Johnston found that " Miller lingers up close on details : sour breath , decaying objects , pretty clothes , flames , smells , eyelashes . He is a close observer of cats " and stated , of Baratte 's project as a whole , " Miller intimately imagines how it might have felt to witness it . " Holly Kyte found Pure to be " irresistibly compelling " and " Exquisite inside and out " . She stated that " Every so often a historical novel comes along that is so natural , so far from pastiche , so modern , that it thrills and expands the mind " and that she found that " Pure is a near @-@ faultless thing : detailed , symbolic and richly evocative of a time , place and man in dangerous flux . It is brilliance distilled , with very few impurities . " Suzi <unk> , for the Financial Times , stated " Quietly powerful , consistently surprising , Pure is a fine addition to a substantial body of work " and also noted that " Miller 's portraits of women and the poor are thoughtful and subtle . " Writing for the Daily Express Vanessa Berridge found the novel to be " very atmospheric , if not to say positively creepy at times " and stated that " Miller 's eloquent novel overflows with vitality and colour . It is packed with personal and physical details that evoke 18th @-@ century Paris with startling immediacy . " Reviewing for the Daily Mail Clare Colvin stated that the novel " draws you in with hallucinatory power " and that she found that " Miller evokes the underside of Parisian society with assured , vivid detail so that images remain in your mind long after you reach the last page . This is historical fiction with imaginative style . " 
 In a review for The Observer , Leo Robson found the novel to be somewhat underwhelming , stating that " It is disappointing , given the vitality of the novel 's setting and set @-@ up , that Miller fails to achieve corresponding dynamism in the development of plot and character " , adding that " as a prose writer , Miller appears averse to taking risks , which means no pratfalls – but no glory either " . He found the " engineer 's progress and his setbacks are narrated in a patient , tight @-@ lipped present tense , and just as the novel rarely concerns itself with anything that doesn 't impinge on the destruction of Les Innocents , so it rarely deviates from its obsessive regime of description and dialogue " . He did somewhat temper this , however , stating that " It is one of the historical novel 's advantages over the topical or journalistic novel that the benchmark is plausibility rather than verifiable authenticity . Success in this effort requires a capacity for immersion and a degree of imagination , and whatever his shortcomings as a prose writer and a storyteller , Andrew Miller is endowed with both . " 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 The novel was not longlisted for the Man Booker Prize , to the surprise of a number of reviewers . The novel did , however , win the Costa Book Award in 2011 for the " Best Novel " and " Book of the Year " . 
 Novelist Rose Tremain , writing for The Guardian , identified the novel as one of her two " Books of the year 2011 " . In 2012 , The Observer named it as one of " The 10 best historical novels " . It was shortlisted for the 2012 Walter Scott Prize for historical fiction , with judges praising the novel as " a wholly unexpected story , richly imagined and beautifully structured " ; and the South Bank Award in the " Literature " category . The novel was also short @-@ listed for the " Independent Booksellers ' Week " Book Awards , which are voted for by the public through independent book @-@ shops . The marketing campaign for the novel was short @-@ listed in the " Best Overall Package " award by the Book Marketing Society in their Best Marketing Campaign of the Year awards . 
 Pure was identified as an " Editors ' Choice " by The New York Times in June 2012 . The novel was also listed on the Belfast Telegraph " Your Top Choice " listing for the best book of the week . Pure has , as of 5 September 2012 , been listed twelve times ; with the first seven being in position 1 . NPR listed it as one of their " Critics ' Lists " for summer 2012 in the " Rich Reads : Historical Fiction Fit For A Queen " section , nominated by historical fiction author Madeline Miller who stated that " this is historical fiction at its best . " 
 = = = Costa " Book of the Year " = = = 
 Speaking about the novel at the awards ceremony in Piccadilly , London , Miller stated that he " had no special sense of this one being the one " and mentioned that " it 's a strange journey , you spend three years in a room on your own and then this : a little unsettling but deeply pleasurable " ; " It 's a very happy occasion " . Chair of the judging , editor of the Evening Standard newspaper Geordie Greig , said that the panel were basing their decision partially on the durability and memorability of the work , stating " we were looking for quality " . Speaking of the novel itself , Greig called it " a rich and evocative historical novel which engrosses with its vivid portrait of pre @-@ revolutionary France " , stating " The qualities of Pure stood out for its memorable gothic tale of morality and mortality . " 
 The judges were undecided over whether the prize should have gone to Matthew Hollis ' biography Now All Roads Lead to France instead . The judging panel was locked in a " fierce debate and quite bitter dissent " and eventually used a vote to decide on the winner . Geordie Greig said " it was not unpleasant , it was forthright " , stating " it 's not like comparing apples and oranges – it 's like comparing bananas and curry . " Chair for the selection in 2010 , web editor for Foyles bookshops Jonathan <unk> , supported the decision , stating " Like Hilary Mantel , who finally became a major name when she won the Man Booker , Miller should now gain the commercial success his stylish and absorbing novels have long deserved . " He goes on to say " Pure perfectly captures the mood of a downtrodden and angry nation , on the verge of overthrowing a self @-@ serving and out @-@ of @-@ touch ruling class – it 's very much a book for our time . " 
 The 2011 awards were subject to some attention from bookmakers , who offered odds of 2 / 1 for favourite Matthew Hollis ' biography Now All Roads Lead To France and odds of 3 / 1 for Miller 's Pure . 
 = Bacon Explosion = 
 A Bacon Explosion is a pork dish that consists of bacon wrapped around a filling of spiced sausage and crumbled bacon . The American @-@ football @-@ sized dish is smoked or baked . It became widely known after being posted on the BBQ Addicts blog , and quickly spread to the mainstream press with numerous stories discussing the dish . In time , the articles began to discuss the Internet " buzz " itself . 
 The Bacon Explosion is made of bacon , sausage , barbecue sauce and barbecue seasoning or rub . The bacon is assembled in a weave to hold the sausage , sauce and crumbled bacon . Once rolled , the Bacon Explosion is cooked , basted , cut and served . The Bacon Explosion 's creators produced a cookbook featuring the recipes which ultimately won the 2010 Gourmand World Cookbook Awards for " Best Barbecue Book in the World " . The Bacon Explosion also won at the 2013 Blue Ribbon Bacon Festival . 
 = = History and origin = = 
 Jason Day and Aaron Chronister posted the dish in December 2008 on their " BBQ Addicts " blog . It quickly became an Internet phenomenon , generating more than 500 @,@ 000 hits and 16 @,@ 000 links to the blog , and was even included on political blogs because " Republicans like meat . " There are fan clubs and follow @-@ up videos of various attempts to create the dish . 
 The inventors are experienced barbecue competition participants from Kansas City , and compete in cook @-@ offs as the Burnt Finger BBQ team . According to the Telegraph , " They came up with the delicacy after being challenged on Twitter to create the ultimate bacon recipe . " They christened their innovation the " Bacon Explosion : The BBQ Sausage Recipe of all Recipes . " The Bacon Explosion is similar to a number of previously published recipes . Day and Chronister do not claim to have invented the concept , but assert the term " Bacon Explosion " as a trademark . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Preparing a Bacon Explosion " requires the minimum of culinary talent " and the ingredient list is short . It is made from 2 pounds ( 910 g ) of thick cut bacon , 2 pounds of Italian sausage , one jar of barbecue sauce , and one jar of barbecue rub / seasoning . The Bacon Explosion is constructed by weaving the bacon together to serve as a base . The base is seasoned and followed by the layering of sausage meat and crumbled bacon . Barbecue sauce and more seasoning is added before rolling it into a giant " sausage @-@ shaped monster " inside aluminum foil . It takes about an hour per inch of thickness to cook and is then basted with more barbecue sauce , sliced into rounds , and served . A prepared Bacon Explosion contains at least 5 @,@ 000 calories ( 21 @,@ 000 J ) and 18 ounces ( 500 g ) of fat , though a smaller 8 @-@ ounce portion contains 878 calories ( 3 @,@ 670 J ) and 2 ounces ( 60 g ) of fat . 
 Preparation and result 
 = = Recognition = = 
 The popularity of the recipe has led to international coverage ; including the US and the UK , German and Dutch media . The Daily Telegraph assessed that the " recipe is most popular on the web " and that the " 5 @,@ 000 calorie barbeque dish has become one of the most popular meal ideas in the world . " Commentary in major publications about the health / obesity of Americans quickly suggested dishes like Bacon Explosion as the reason for " Why Americans are fat " , while another asserted that it isn 't something a doctor would recommend . It has also been cited as an example of the use of Web 2 @.@ 0 technology ( Chronister is an Internet marketer ) . 
 Day and Chronister were reported to have " landed a six @-@ figure book deal " for their book BBQ Makes Everything Better . The book , containing the recipe , became the US winner in the 2010 Gourmand World Cookbook Awards in the " Best Barbecue Book " category . The 2010 US winner The Essential New York Times Cookbook : Classic Recipes for a New Century by Amanda <unk> also contained the recipe for the Bacon Explosion . BBQ Makes Everything Better went on to win the " Best Barbecue Book in the World " category by the judges of the 2010 Gourmand World Cookbook Awards , and remained as the sole entry from an American . The Bacon Explosion won " Savory Dish " at the 2013 Blue Ribbon Bacon Festival which secured an entry in the Bacon World Championships . 
 = Patrick Omameh = 
 Patrick <unk> Omameh Jr . ( born December 29 , 1989 ) is an American football offensive guard for the Jacksonville Jaguars of the National Football League ( NFL ) . After going undrafted in 2013 , he signed with the San Francisco 49ers as a free agent . He started all 16 games for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 2014 and appeared in 14 games , nine as a starter , for the Chicago Bears in 2015 . He played college football for the University of Michigan Wolverines from 2009 to 2012 . 
 = = High school = = 
 When Omameh was in sixth grade , he did not know what American football was and when he asked his father about it , his father brought out a soccer ball . On the first day of football practice , he wore sandals and a wristwatch . As a senior at St. Francis <unk> High School in Columbus , Ohio , Omameh was selected as a 2007 Division II All @-@ Ohio first team offensive lineman and member of The Columbus Dispatch All @-@ metro team . He was a straight @-@ A student recruited by the likes of Princeton University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Omameh matriculated at Michigan as the lowest rated prospect in the 24 @-@ man entering class of 2008 according to Rivals.com. He also earned three varsity letters in track & field and one in basketball . 
 = = College = = 
 Omameh redshirted as a freshman for the 2008 Michigan Wolverines . He made his first career start on November 7 , 2009 when Perry Dorrestein was sidelined with a back injury against Purdue , and Omameh stayed in the starting lineup for the final two games of the season for the 2009 team . Despite being Michigan 's lowest rated prospect in the entering class of 2008 , he went on to start for the team for three and a half seasons . By the end of the 2012 Michigan – Ohio State game , Omameh had started 41 consecutive games . 
 Omameh has been known for eating prowess since high school , once eating 30 White Castle hamburgers . Even other offensive linemen , such as teammate Taylor Lewan , marveled at his appetite . This helped Omameh bulk up from about 240 pounds ( 110 kg ) as a freshman to over 300 pounds ( 140 kg ) two years later when he became a regular starting offensive lineman . 
 At Michigan , he had difficulty understanding quarterback Denard Robinson 's <unk> in the huddle because of Robinson 's rapid speech pattern . In 2010 , Omameh was a nominee to be the University of Michigan homecoming king . Omameh was an Academic All @-@ Big Ten in both 2010 and 2011 . 
 On September 18 , 2012 , Omameh was named to the 11 @-@ man Allstate American Football Coaches Association ( AFCA ) Good Works Team . His Good Works team recognition was for his weekly appearances at the C.S. Mott Children 's Hospital . He joins Zoltan Mesko as the only two Michigan players to ever receive the AFCA Good Works Team recognition . On November 13 , Omameh was named a finalist for the 2012 Pop Warner National College Football Award . Omameh was a first team All @-@ Big Ten selection by the coaches and an honorable mention selection by the media . He earned his third consecutive Academic All @-@ Big Ten recognition in 2012 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = San Francisco 49ers = = = 
 Omameh signed an undrafted free agent contract with the San Francisco 49ers following the 2013 NFL Draft . Omameh was cut during the final preseason roster moves on August 31 , 2013 and signed to the practice squad two days later . 
 = = = Tampa Bay Buccaneers = = = 
 On October 11 , 2013 , the Tampa Bay Buccaneers signed Omameh off of the 49ers ' practice squad . He started all 16 games for the Buccaneers at the right guard position during the 2014 season . The Buccaneers cut Omameh before the 2015 season on September 5 , 2015 . 
 = = = Chicago Bears = = = 
 On September 6 , 2015 , Omameh was signed the following day to the Chicago Bears after he cleared waivers . After playing 679 snaps for the Bears , he became an unrestricted free agent , but was expected to return to the team . 
 = = = Jacksonville Jaguars = = = 
 Omameh signed with the Jacksonville Jaguars on June 2 , 2016 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Omameh 's parents , Phyllis and Patrick Sr. , moved to Columbus , Ohio from Nigeria in the early 1980s . His father is 5 foot 10 inches ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) and his mother is 5 foot 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) . 
 = Jefferson Davis = 
 Jefferson Finis Davis ( June 3 , 1808 – December 6 , 1889 ) was an American politician who was a U.S. Representative and Senator from Mississippi , the 23rd U.S. Secretary of War , and the President of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War . He took personal charge of the Confederate war plans but was unable to find a strategy to defeat the more populous and industrialized Union . His diplomatic efforts failed to gain recognition from any foreign country , and at home , the collapsing Confederate economy forced his government to print more and more paper money to cover the war 's expenses , leading to runaway inflation and devaluation of the Confederate dollar . 
 Davis was born in Kentucky to a moderately prosperous farmer , and grew up on his older brother Joseph 's large cotton plantations in Mississippi and Louisiana . Joseph Davis also secured his appointment to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point . After graduating , Jefferson Davis served six years as a lieutenant in the U.S. Army . He fought in the Mexican – American War ( 1846 – 1848 ) , as the colonel of a volunteer regiment . He served as the U.S. Secretary of War from 1853 to 1857 under President Franklin Pierce , and as a Democratic U.S. senator from Mississippi . Before the war , he operated a large cotton plantation in Mississippi and owned more than 100 slaves . After the war had ended , he remained a proud apologist for the cause of slavery for which he and the Confederacy had fought . Although Davis argued against secession in 1858 , he believed that each state was sovereign and had an unquestionable right to secede from the Union . 
 Davis 's first wife , Sarah Knox Taylor , died of malaria after three months of marriage , and he also struggled with recurring bouts of the disease . He was unhealthy for much of his life . At the age of 36 Davis married again , to 18 @-@ year @-@ old Varina Howell , a native of Natchez who had been educated in Philadelphia and had some family ties in the North . They had six children . Only two survived him , and only one married and had children . 
 Many historians attribute the Confederacy 's weaknesses to the poor leadership of President Davis . His preoccupation with detail , reluctance to delegate responsibility , lack of popular appeal , feuds with powerful state governors and generals , favoritism toward old friends , inability to get along with people who disagreed with him , neglect of civil matters in favor of military ones , and resistance to public opinion all worked against him . Historians agree he was a much less effective war leader than his Union counterpart Abraham Lincoln . After Davis was captured in 1865 , he was accused of treason . He was never tried and was released after two years . While not disgraced , Davis had been displaced in ex @-@ Confederate affection after the war by his leading general , Robert E. Lee . Davis wrote a memoir entitled The Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government , which he completed in 1881 . By the late 1880s , he began to encourage reconciliation , telling Southerners to be loyal to the Union . Ex @-@ Confederates came to appreciate his role in the war , seeing him as a Southern patriot , and he became a hero of the Lost Cause in the post @-@ Reconstruction South . 
 = = Early life and first military career = = 
 Davis 's paternal grandparents each immigrated separately to North America from the region of Snowdonia in North Wales in the early 18th century . The rest of his ancestry was English . After arriving in Philadelphia , Davis 's paternal grandfather Evan settled in the colony of Georgia , which was developed chiefly along the coast . He married the widow Lydia Emory Williams , who had two sons from a previous marriage . 
 Their son Samuel Emory Davis was born in 1756 . He served in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War , along with his two older half @-@ brothers . In 1783 , after the war , he married Jane Cook . She was born in 1759 to William Cook and his wife Sarah Simpson in what is now Christian County , Kentucky . In 1793 , the Samuel Davis family relocated to Kentucky , establishing what is now the community of Fairview on the border of Christian and Todd counties . Samuel and Jane Davis had ten children ; Joseph was the oldest son , born in 1784 ; Jefferson was the last and was born on June 3 , 1807 or 1808 , on the Davis homestead in Fairview . The year of his birth is uncertain ; Davis gave both 1807 and 1808 , at different points in his life . Samuel had been a young man when Thomas Jefferson wrote the Declaration of Independence in 1776 . Jefferson was the third President of the United States , and Samuel , admiring him greatly , named his last son after the president . Coincidentally , Abraham Lincoln was born eight months later , less than 100 miles ( 160 km ) to the northeast in Hodgenville , Kentucky . In the early 20th century , the Jefferson Davis State Historic Site was established near the site of Davis 's birth . 
 During Davis 's youth , his family moved twice : in 1811 to St. Mary Parish , Louisiana , and less than a year later to Wilkinson County , Mississippi . The international slave trade was prohibited in 1808 , and planters used the domestic slave trade to procure laborers for developing cotton culture in the Deep South . Three of Davis 's older brothers served in the War of 1812 . In 1813 , Davis began his education at the Wilkinson Academy in the small town of Woodville , near the family cotton plantation . 
 His brother Joseph , who was 24 years older , acted as a surrogate father and encouraged Jefferson in his education . Two years later , Davis entered the Catholic school of Saint Thomas at St. Rose Priory , a school operated by the Dominican Order in Washington County , Kentucky . At the time , he was the only Protestant student at the school . In 1818 Davis returned to Mississippi , studying at Jefferson College at Washington . Three years later in 1821 , he returned to Kentucky , where he studied at Transylvania University in Lexington . ( At the time , these colleges were like academies , roughly equivalent to high schools . ) His father Samuel died on July 4 , 1824 , when Jefferson was 16 years old . 
 Joseph arranged for Davis to get an appointment and attend the United States Military Academy ( West Point ) starting in late 1824 . While there , he was placed under house arrest for his role in the Eggnog Riot during Christmas 1826 . Cadets smuggled whiskey into the academy to make eggnog , and more than one @-@ third of the cadets were involved in the incident . In June 1828 , Davis graduated 23rd in a class of 33 . 
 Following graduation , Second Lieutenant Davis was assigned to the 1st Infantry Regiment and was stationed at Fort Crawford , Prairie du Chien , Michigan Territory . Zachary Taylor , a future president of the United States , had assumed command shortly before Davis arrived in early 1829 . In March 1832 , Davis returned to Mississippi on furlough , having had no leave since he first arrived at Fort Crawford . He was still in Mississippi during the Black Hawk War but returned to the fort in August . At the conclusion of the war , Colonel Taylor assigned him to escort Black Hawk to prison . Davis made an effort to shield Black Hawk from curiosity seekers , and the chief noted in his autobiography that Davis treated him " with much kindness " and showed empathy for the leader 's situation as a prisoner . 
 = = First marriage and early career = = 
 Davis fell in love with Sarah Knox Taylor , daughter of his commanding officer ; future president Zachary Taylor . Both Sarah and Davis sought Taylor 's permission to marry . Taylor refused , as he did not wish his daughter to have the difficult life of a military wife on frontier army posts . Davis 's own experience led him to appreciate Taylor 's objection . He consulted with his older brother Joseph , and they both began to question the value of an Army career . Davis hesitated to leave , but his desire for Sarah overcame this , and he resigned his commission in a letter dated April 20 , 1835 . He had arranged for the letter to be sent to the War Department for him on May 12 when he did not return from leave ; he had made no mention to Taylor of his intention to resign . Against his former commander 's wishes , on June 17 , he married Sarah in Louisville , Kentucky . His resignation became effective June 30 . 
 Davis 's older brother Joseph had been very successful and owned Hurricane Plantation and 1 @,@ 800 acres ( 730 ha ) of adjoining land along the Mississippi River on a peninsula 20 miles south of Vicksburg , Mississippi . The adjoining land was known as Brierfield since it was largely covered with brush and <unk> . Wanting to have his youngest brother and his wife nearby , Joseph gave use of Brierfield to Jefferson , who eventually developed Brierfield Plantation there . Joseph retained the title . 
 In August 1835 , Jefferson and Sarah traveled south to his sister Anna 's home in West Feliciana Parish , Louisiana ; the plantation was known as Locust Grove . Their goal was to spend the hot summer months in the countryside away from the river floodplain , for their health , but both of them contracted either malaria or yellow fever . Sarah died at the age of 21 on September 15 , 1835 , after just three months of marriage . Davis was also severely ill , and his family feared for his life . In the month following Sarah 's death , he slowly improved , although he remained weak . 
 In late 1835 , Davis sailed from New Orleans to Havana , Cuba , to help restore his health . He was accompanied by James Pemberton , his only slave at that time . Davis observed the Spanish military and sketched fortifications . Although no evidence points to his having any motive beyond general interest , the authorities knew that Davis was a former army officer and warned him to stop his observations . Bored and feeling somewhat better , Davis booked passage on a ship to New York , then continued to Washington , D.C. , where he visited his old schoolmate George Wallace Jones . He soon returned with Pemberton to Mississippi . 
 For several years following Sarah 's death , Davis was reclusive and honored her memory . He spent time clearing Brierfield and developing his plantation , studied government and history , and had private political discussions with his brother Joseph . By early 1836 , Davis had purchased 16 slaves ; he held 40 slaves by 1840 , and 74 by 1845 . Davis promoted Pemberton to be overseer of the field teams . In 1860 , he owned 113 slaves . 
 In 1840 , Davis first became involved in politics when he attended a Democratic Party meeting in Vicksburg and , to his surprise , was chosen as a delegate to the party 's state convention in Jackson . In 1842 , he attended the Democratic convention , and , in 1843 , became a Democratic candidate for the state House of Representatives from the Warren County @-@ Vicksburg district ; he lost his first election . In 1844 , Davis was sent to the party convention for a third time , and his interest in politics deepened . He was selected as one of six presidential electors for the 1844 presidential election and campaigned effectively throughout Mississippi for the Democratic candidate James K. Polk . 
 = = Second marriage and family = = 
 In 1844 , Davis met Varina Banks Howell , then 17 years old , whom his brother Joseph had invited for the Christmas season at Hurricane Plantation . She was a granddaughter of New Jersey Governor Richard Howell ; her mother 's family was from the South and included successful Scots @-@ Irish planters . Within a month of their meeting , the 35 @-@ year @-@ old widower Davis had asked Varina to marry him , and they became engaged despite her parents ' initial concerns about his age and politics . They were married on February 26 , 1845 . 
 During this time , Davis was persuaded to become a candidate for the United States House of Representatives and began canvassing for the election . In early October 1845 he traveled to Woodville to give a speech . He arrived a day early to visit his mother there , only to find that she had died the day before . After the funeral , he rode the 40 miles ( 64 km ) back to Natchez to deliver the news , then returned to Woodville again to deliver his speech . He won the election . 
 Jefferson and Varina had six children ; three died before reaching adulthood . Samuel Emory , born July 30 , 1852 , was named after his grandfather ; he died June 30 , 1854 , of an undiagnosed disease . Margaret Howell was born February 25 , 1855 , and was the only child to marry and raise a family . She married Joel Addison Hayes , Jr . ( 1848 – 1919 ) , and they had five children . They were married in St. Lazarus Church , nicknamed " The Confederate Officers ' Church " , in Memphis , Tennessee . In the late 19th century , they moved from Memphis to Colorado Springs , Colorado . She died on July 18 , 1909 , at the age of 54 . 
 Jefferson Davis , Jr . , was born January 16 , 1857 . He died of yellow fever at age 21 on October 16 , 1878 , during an epidemic in the Mississippi River Valley that caused 20 @,@ 000 deaths . Joseph Evan , born on April 18 , 1859 , died at the age of five due to an accidental fall on April 30 , 1864 . William Howell , born on December 6 , 1861 , was named for Varina 's father ; he died of diphtheria at age 10 on October 16 , 1872 . Varina Anne , known as " Winnie " , was born on June 27 , 1864 , several months after her brother Joseph 's death . She was known as the Daughter of the Confederacy as she was born during the war . After her parents refused to let her marry into a northern abolitionist family , she never married . She died nine years after her father , on September 18 , 1898 , at age 34 . 
 Davis had poor health for most of his life , including repeated bouts of malaria , battle wounds from fighting in the Mexican – American War and a chronic eye infection that made bright light painful . He also had trigeminal neuralgia , a nerve disorder that causes severe pain in the face ; it has been called one of the most painful known ailments . 
 = = Wartime colonel = = 
 In 1846 the Mexican – American War began . Davis resigned his House seat in early June and raised a volunteer regiment , the 155th Infantry Regiment , becoming its colonel under the command of his former father @-@ in @-@ law , General Zachary Taylor . On July 21 the regiment sailed from New Orleans for Texas . Colonel Davis sought to arm his regiment with the <unk> Mississippi rifle . At this time , smoothbore muskets were still the primary infantry weapon , and any unit with rifles was considered special and designated as such . President James K. Polk had promised Davis the weapons if he would remain in Congress long enough for an important vote on the Walker tariff . General Winfield Scott objected on the basis that the weapons were insufficiently tested . Davis insisted and called in his promise from Polk , and his regiment was armed with the rifles , making it particularly effective in combat . The regiment became known as the Mississippi Rifles because it was the first to be fully armed with these new weapons . The incident was the start of a lifelong feud between Davis and Scott . 
 In September , Davis participated in the Battle of Monterrey , during which he led a successful charge on the La <unk> fort . On February 22 , 1847 , Davis fought bravely at the Battle of Buena Vista and was shot in the foot , being carried to safety by Robert H. Chilton . In recognition of Davis 's bravery and initiative , Taylor is reputed to have said , " My daughter , sir , was a better judge of men than I was . " On May 17 , President Polk offered Davis a federal commission as a brigadier general and command of a brigade of militia . Davis declined the appointment , arguing that the Constitution gives the power of appointing militia officers to the states , not the federal government . 
 = = Return to politics = = 
 = = = Senator = = = 
 Honoring Davis 's war service , Governor Brown of Mississippi appointed him to the vacant position of United States Senator Jesse Speight , who had died on May 1 , 1847 . Davis took his temporary seat on December 5 , and in January 1848 he was elected by the state legislature to serve the remaining two years of the term . In December , during the 30th United States Congress , Davis was made a regent of the Smithsonian Institution and began serving on the Committee on Military Affairs and the Library Committee . 
 In 1848 , Senator Davis proposed and introduced an amendment ( the first of several ) to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo that would have annexed most of northeastern Mexico , but it failed on a vote of 11 to 44 . Southerners wanted to increase territory held in Mexico as an area for the expansion of slavery . Regarding Cuba , Davis declared that it " must be ours " to " increase the number of slaveholding constituencies . " He also was concerned about the security implications of a Spanish holding lying relatively close to the coast of Florida . 
 A group of Cuban revolutionaries led by Venezuelan adventurer Narciso López intended to forcibly liberate Cuba from Spanish rule . Searching for a military leader for a filibuster expedition , they first offered command of the Cuban forces to General William J. Worth , but he died before making his decision . In the summer of 1849 , López visited Davis and asked him to lead the expedition . He offered an immediate payment of $ 100 @,@ 000 ( worth more than $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2013 ) , plus the same amount when Cuba was liberated . Davis turned down the offer , stating that it was inconsistent with his duty as a senator . When asked to recommend someone else , Davis suggested Robert E. Lee , then an army major in Baltimore ; López approached Lee , who also declined on the grounds of his duty . 
 The Senate made Davis chairman of the Committee on Military Affairs on December 3 , 1849 , during the first session of the 31st United States Congress . On December 29 he was elected to a full six @-@ year term ( by the Mississippi legislature , as the constitution mandated at the time ) . Davis had not served a year when he resigned ( in September 1851 ) to run for the governorship of Mississippi on the issue of the Compromise of 1850 , which he opposed . He was defeated by fellow Senator Henry Stuart Foote by 999 votes . Left without political office , Davis continued his political activity . He took part in a convention on states ' rights , held at Jackson , Mississippi , in January 1852 . In the weeks leading up to the presidential election of 1852 , he campaigned in numerous Southern states for Democratic candidates Franklin Pierce and William R. King . 
 = = = Secretary of War = = = 
 Franklin Pierce won the presidential election , and in 1853 made Davis his Secretary of War . In this capacity , Davis began the Pacific Railroad Surveys in order to determine various possible routes for the proposed Transcontinental Railroad . He promoted the Gadsden Purchase of today 's southern Arizona from Mexico , partly because it would provide an easier southern route for the new railroad ; the Pierce administration agreed , and the land was purchased in December 1853 . He saw the size of the regular army as insufficient to fulfill its mission , and maintained that salaries would have to be increased , something which had not occurred for 25 years . Congress agreed and increased the pay scale , and added four regiments which increased the army 's size from about 11 @,@ 000 to about 15 @,@ 000 . Davis also introduced general usage of the rifles that he had used successfully during the Mexican – American War . As a result , both the morale and capability of the army was improved . He became involved in public works when Pierce gave him responsibility for construction of the Washington Aqueduct and an expansion of the U.S. Capitol , both of which he managed closely . The Pierce administration ended in 1857 after Pierce 's loss of the Democratic nomination to James Buchanan . Davis 's term was to end with Pierce 's , so he ran for the Senate , was elected , and re @-@ entered it on March 4 , 1857 . 
 = = = Return to Senate = = = 
 In the 1840s , tensions were growing between the North and South over various issues including slavery . The Wilmot Proviso , introduced in 1846 , contributed to these tensions ; if passed , it would have banned slavery in any land acquired from Mexico . The Compromise of 1850 brought a temporary respite , but the Dred Scott case , decided by the United States Supreme Court in 1857 , spurred public debate . Justice Taney ruled that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional and that African Americans had no standing as citizens under the constitution . Northerners were outraged and there was increasing talk in the South of secession from the Union . 
 Davis 's renewed service in the Senate was interrupted in early 1858 by an illness that began as a severe cold and which threatened him with the loss of his left eye . He was forced to remain in a darkened room for four weeks . He spent the summer of 1858 in Portland , Maine . On the Fourth of July , Davis delivered an anti @-@ secessionist speech on board a ship near Boston . He again urged the preservation of the Union on October 11 in Faneuil Hall , Boston , and returned to the Senate soon after . 
 As he explained in his memoir The Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government , Davis believed that each state was sovereign and had an unquestionable right to secede from the Union . At the same time , he counseled delay among his fellow Southerners , because he did not think that the North would permit the peaceable exercise of the right to secession . Having served as secretary of war under President Pierce , he also knew that the South lacked the military and naval resources necessary for defense in a war . Following the election of Abraham Lincoln in 1860 , however , events accelerated . South Carolina adopted an ordinance of secession on December 20 , 1860 , and Mississippi did so on January 9 , 1861 . Davis had expected this but waited until he received official notification . On January 21 , the day Davis called " the saddest day of my life " , he delivered a farewell address to the United States Senate , resigned and returned to Mississippi . 
 = = President of the Confederate States of America = = 
 Anticipating a call for his services since Mississippi had seceded , Davis had sent a telegraph message to Governor John J. Pettus saying , " Judge what Mississippi requires of me and place me accordingly . " On January 23 , 1861 , Pettus made Davis a major general of the Army of Mississippi . On February 9 , a constitutional convention met at Montgomery , Alabama and considered Davis and Robert Toombs of Georgia as a possible president . Davis , who had widespread support from six of the seven states , easily won . He was seen as the " champion of a slave society and embodied the values of the planter class , " and was elected provisional Confederate President by acclamation . He was inaugurated on February 18 , 1861 . Alexander Stephens was chosen as Vice President , but he and Davis feuded constantly . 
 Davis was the first choice because of his strong political and military credentials . He wanted to serve as commander in chief of the Confederate armies but said he would serve wherever directed . His wife Varina Davis later wrote that when he received word that he had been chosen as president , " Reading that telegram he looked so grieved that I feared some evil had befallen our family . " 
 Several forts in Confederate territory remained in Union hands . Davis sent a commission to Washington with an offer to pay for any federal property on Southern soil , as well as the Southern portion of the national debt , but Lincoln refused to meet with the commissioners . Brief informal discussions did take place with Secretary of State William Seward through Supreme Court Justice John A. Campbell . From Alabama , he later resigned from the federal government . Seward hinted that Fort Sumter would be evacuated , but gave no assurance . 
 On March 1 , 1861 , Davis appointed General P. G. T. Beauregard to command all Confederate troops in the vicinity of Charleston , South Carolina , where state officials prepared to take possession of Fort Sumter . Beauregard was to prepare his forces but avoid an attack on the fort . Lincoln dispatched a small fleet of warships , troops , and transports from the navy yard in New York to resupply and re @-@ enforce Fort Pickens and Fort Sumter , although he told Davis they would not fire unless fired upon . They did arrive but were unable to help and just watched the action from 10 miles out . 
 Davis faced the most important decision of his career : to prevent reinforcement at Fort Sumter or to let it take place . He and his cabinet decided to demand that the Federal garrison surrender and , if this was refused , to use military force to prevent reinforcement before the fleet arrived . Major Anderson did not surrender . Beauregard bombarded the fort on April 12 . The Confederates launched an artillery attack on Fort Sumter until it surrendered . No one was killed in the artillery duel , but the attack on the U.S. fortress meant the fighting had started . President Lincoln called up state militia to march south to recapture Federal property . In the North and South , massive rallies were held to demand immediate war . The Civil War had begun . 
 At the start of the war , nearly 21 million people lived in the North compared to 9 million in the South . The North had vastly greater industrial capacity , built nearly all of the locomotives , steamships , and industrial machinery , and had a much larger and more integrated railroad system . Nearly all of the munitions facilities were in the North , while critical ingredients for gunpowder were in very short supply in the South . The Union had a large navy , whereas the new Confederacy had only a few captured warships — the handful it built were failures . The Union blockade made imports via blockade runners difficult and expensive . 
 When Virginia joined the Confederacy , Davis moved his government to Richmond in May 1861 . He and his family took up his residence there at the White House of the Confederacy later that month . Having served since February as the provisional president , Davis was elected to a full six @-@ year term on November 6 , 1861 and was inaugurated on February 22 , 1862 . 
 In June 1862 , in his most successful action , Davis assigned General Robert E. Lee to replace the wounded Joseph E. Johnston in command of the Army of Northern Virginia , the main Confederate army in the Eastern Theater . That December he made a tour of Confederate armies in the west of the country . Davis had a very small circle of military advisers . He largely made the main strategic decisions on his own , though he had special respect for Lee 's views . Given the Confederacy 's limited resources compared with the Union , Davis decided that the Confederacy would have to fight mostly on the strategic defensive . He maintained a mostly defensive outlook throughout the war , paying special attention to the defense of his national capital at Richmond . He attempted strategic offensives when he felt that military success would both shake Northern self @-@ confidence and strengthen the peace movements there . The campaigns met defeat at Antietam in Maryland ( 1862 ) and Gettysburg in Pennsylvania ( 1863 ) , as well as in Kentucky during the Confederate Heartland Offensive ( 1862 ) . 
 = = = Administration and cabinet = = = 
 As provisional president in 1861 , Davis formed his first cabinet . Robert Toombs of Georgia was the first Secretary of State and Christopher Memminger of South Carolina became Secretary of the Treasury . LeRoy Pope Walker of Alabama was made Secretary of War , after being recommended for this post by Clement Clay and William Yancey ( both of whom declined to accept cabinet positions themselves ) . John Reagan of Texas became Postmaster General . Judah P. Benjamin of Louisiana became Attorney General . Although Stephen Mallory was not put forward by the delegation from his state of Florida , Davis insisted that he was the best man for the job of Secretary of the Navy , and he was eventually confirmed . 
 Since the Confederacy was founded , among other things , on states ' rights , one important factor in Davis 's choice of cabinet members was representation from the various states . He depended partly upon recommendations from congressmen and other prominent people . This helped maintain good relations between the executive and legislative branches . This also led to complaints as more states joined the Confederacy , however , because there were more states than cabinet positions . 
 As the war progressed , this dissatisfaction increased and there were frequent changes to the cabinet . Toombs , who had wished to be president himself , was frustrated as an advisor and resigned within a few months of his appointment to join the army . Robert Hunter of Virginia replaced him as Secretary of State on July 25 , 1861 . On September 17 , Walker resigned as Secretary of War due to a conflict with Davis , who had questioned his management of the War Department and had suggested he consider a different position . Walker requested , and was given , command of the troops in Alabama . Benjamin left the Attorney General position to replace him , and Thomas Bragg of North Carolina ( brother of General Braxton Bragg ) took Benjamin 's place as Attorney General . 
 Following the November 1861 election , Davis announced the permanent cabinet in March 1862 . Benjamin moved again , to Secretary of State . George W. Randolph of Virginia had been made the Secretary of War . Mallory continued as Secretary of the Navy and Reagan as Postmaster General . Both kept their positions throughout the war . Memminger remained Secretary of the Treasury , while Thomas Hill Watts of Alabama was made Attorney General . 
 In 1862 Randolph resigned from the War Department , and James Seddon of Virginia was appointed to replace him . In late 1863 , Watts resigned as Attorney General to take office as the Governor of Alabama , and George Davis of North Carolina took his place . In 1864 , Memminger withdrew from the Treasury post due to congressional opposition , and was replaced by George <unk> of South Carolina . In 1865 , congressional opposition likewise caused Seddon to withdraw , and he was replaced by John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky . 
 Cotton was the South 's primary export and the basis of its economy , and the system of production the South used was dependent upon slave labor . At the outset of the Civil War , Davis realized that intervention from European powers would be vital if the Confederacy was to stand against the Union . The administration sent repeated delegations to European nations , but several factors prevented Southern success in terms of foreign diplomacy . The Union blockade of the Confederacy led European powers to remain neutral , contrary to the Southern belief that a blockade would cut off the supply of cotton to Britain and other European nations and prompt them to intervene on behalf of the South . Many European countries objected to slavery . Britain had abolished it in the 1830s , and Lincoln 's Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 made support for the South even less appealing in Europe . Finally , as the war progressed and the South 's military prospects dwindled , foreign powers were not convinced that the Confederacy had the strength to become independent . In the end , not a single foreign nation recognized the Confederate States of America . 
 = = Strategic failures = = 
 Most historians sharply criticize Davis for his flawed military strategy , his selection of friends for military commands , and his neglect of <unk> crises . Until late in the war , he resisted efforts to appoint a general @-@ in @-@ chief , essentially handling those duties himself . On January 31 , 1865 , Lee assumed this role , but it was far too late . Davis insisted on a strategy of trying to defend all Southern territory with ostensibly equal effort . This diluted the limited resources of the South and made it vulnerable to coordinated strategic thrusts by the Union into the vital Western Theater ( e.g. , the capture of New Orleans in early 1862 ) . He made other controversial strategic choices , such as allowing Lee to invade the North in 1862 and 1863 while the Western armies were under very heavy pressure . When Lee lost at Gettysburg , Vicksburg simultaneously fell , and the Union took control of the Mississippi River , splitting the Confederacy . At Vicksburg , the failure to coordinate multiple forces on both sides of the Mississippi River rested primarily on Davis 's inability to create a harmonious departmental arrangement or to force such generals as Edmund Kirby Smith , Earl Van Dorn , and Theophilus H. Holmes to work together . 
 Davis has been faulted for poor coordination and management of his generals . This includes his reluctance to resolve a dispute between Leonidas Polk , a personal friend , and Braxton Bragg , who was defeated in important battles and distrusted by his subordinates . He was similarly reluctant to relieve the capable but overcautious Joseph E. Johnston until , after numerous frustrations which he detailed in a March 1 , 1865 letter to Col. James Phelan of Mississippi , he replaced him with John Bell Hood . 
 Davis gave speeches to soldiers and politicians but largely ignored the common people , who came to resent the favoritism shown the rich and powerful ; Davis thus failed to harness Confederate nationalism . One historian speaks of " the heavy @-@ handed intervention of the Confederate government . " Economic intervention , regulation , and state control of manpower , production and transport were much greater in the Confederacy than in the Union . Davis did not use his presidential pulpit to rally the people with stirring rhetoric ; he called instead for people to be fatalistic and to die for their new country . Apart from two month @-@ long trips across the country where he met a few hundred people , Davis stayed in Richmond where few people saw him ; newspapers had limited circulation , and most Confederates had little favorable information about him . 
 To finance the war , the Confederate government initially issued bonds , but investment from the public never met the demands . Taxes were lower than in the Union and collected with less efficiency ; European investment was also insufficient . As the war proceeded , both the Confederate government and the individual states printed more and more paper money . Inflation increased from 60 % in 1861 to 300 % in 1863 and 600 % in 1864 . Davis did not seem to grasp the enormity of the problem . 
 In April 1863 , food shortages led to rioting in Richmond , as poor people robbed and looted numerous stores for food until Davis cracked down and restored order . Davis feuded bitterly with his vice president . Perhaps even more seriously , he clashed with powerful state governors who used states ' rights arguments to withhold their militia units from national service and otherwise blocked mobilization plans . 
 Davis is widely evaluated as a less effective war leader than Lincoln , even though Davis had extensive military experience and Lincoln had little . Davis would have preferred to be an army general and tended to manage military matters himself . Lincoln and Davis led in very different ways . According to one historian , 
 Lincoln was flexible ; Davis was rigid . Lincoln wanted to win ; Davis wanted to be right . Lincoln had a broad strategic vision of Union goals ; Davis could never enlarge his narrow view . Lincoln searched for the right general , then let him fight the war ; Davis continuously played favorites and interfered unduly with his generals , even with Robert E. Lee . Lincoln led his nation ; Davis failed to rally the South . 
 There were many factors that led to Union victory over the Confederacy , and Davis recognized from the start that the South was at a distinct disadvantage ; but in the end , Lincoln helped to achieve victory , whereas Davis contributed to defeat . 
 = = = Final days of the Confederacy = = = 
 In March 1865 , General Order 14 provided for enlisting slaves into the army , with a promise of freedom for service . The idea had been suggested years earlier , but Davis did not act upon it until late in the war , and very few slaves were enlisted . 
 On April 3 , with Union troops under Ulysses S. Grant poised to capture Richmond , Davis escaped to Danville , Virginia , together with the Confederate Cabinet , leaving on the Richmond and Danville Railroad . Lincoln sat in Davis 's Richmond office just 40 hours later . William T. <unk> turned over his mansion , which served as Davis 's temporary residence from April 3 to April 10 , 1865 . On about April 12 , Davis received Robert E. Lee 's letter announcing surrender . He issued his last official proclamation as president of the Confederacy , and then went south to Greensboro , North Carolina . 
 After Lee 's surrender , a public meeting was held in Shreveport , Louisiana , at which many speakers supported continuation of the war . Plans were developed for the Davis government to flee to Havana , Cuba . There , the leaders would regroup and head to the Confederate @-@ controlled Trans @-@ Mississippi area by way of the Rio Grande . None of these plans was put into practice . 
 On April 14 , Lincoln was shot , dying the next day . Davis expressed regret at his death . He later said that he believed Lincoln would have been less harsh with the South than his successor , Andrew Johnson . In the aftermath , Johnson issued a $ 100 @,@ 000 reward for the capture of Davis and accused him of helping to plan the assassination . As the Confederate military structure fell into disarray , the search for Davis by Union forces intensified . 
 President Davis met with his Confederate Cabinet for the last time on May 5 , 1865 , in Washington , Georgia , and officially dissolved the Confederate government . The meeting took place at the Heard house , the Georgia Branch Bank Building , with 14 officials present . Along with their hand @-@ picked escort led by Given Campbell , Davis and his wife Varina Davis were captured by Union forces on May 10 at <unk> in Irwin County , Georgia . 
 Mrs. Davis recounted the circumstances of her husband 's capture as described below : " Just before day the enemy charged our camp yelling like demons ... I pleaded with him to let me throw over him a large waterproof wrap which had often served him in sickness during the summer season for a dressing gown and which I hoped might so cover his person that in the grey of the morning he would not be recognized . As he strode off I threw over his head a little black shawl which was around my own shoulders , saying that he could not find his hat and after he started sent my colored woman after him with a bucket for water hoping that he would pass unobserved . " 
 It was reported in the media that Davis put his wife 's overcoat over his shoulders while fleeing . This led to the persistent rumor that he attempted to flee in women 's clothes , inspiring caricatures that portrayed him as such . Over 40 years later , an article in the Washington Herald claimed that Mrs. Davis 's heavy shawl had been placed on him to protect him from the " chilly atmosphere of the early hour of the morning " by the slave James H. Johnson , Davis 's valet who served Davis during the Civil War . Meanwhile , Davis 's belongings continued on the train bound for Cedar Key , Florida . They were first hidden at Senator David Levy Yulee 's plantation in Florida , then placed in the care of a railroad agent in Waldo . On June 15 , 1865 , Union soldiers seized Davis 's personal baggage from the agent , together with some of the Confederate government 's records . A historical marker was erected at this site . In 1939 , Jefferson Davis Memorial Historic Site was opened to mark the place where Confederate President Jefferson Davis was captured . 
 = = Imprisonment = = 
 On May 19 , 1865 , Davis was imprisoned in a casemate at Fortress Monroe on the coast of Virginia . Irons were riveted to his ankles at the order of General Nelson Miles who was in charge of the fort . Davis was allowed no visitors , and no books except the Bible . He became sicker , and the attending physician warned that his life was in danger , but this treatment continued for some months until late autumn when he was finally given better quarters . General Miles was transferred in mid @-@ 1866 , and Davis 's treatment continued to improve . 
 Pope Pius IX ( see Pope Pius IX and the United States ) , seeing himself a prisoner in the Vatican , after learning that Davis was a prisoner , sent him a portrait inscribed with the Latin words " Venite ad me omnes qui <unk> , et ego <unk> vos , <unk> Dominus " , which correspond to Matthew 11 : 28 , " Come to me , all you that labor , and are burdened , and I will refresh you , sayeth the Lord " . A hand @-@ woven crown of thorns associated with the portrait is often said to have been made by the Pope but may have been woven by Davis 's wife Varina . 
 Varina and their young daughter Winnie were allowed to join Davis , and the family was eventually given an apartment in the officers ' quarters . Davis was indicted for treason while imprisoned ; one of his attorneys was ex @-@ Governor Thomas Pratt of Maryland . There was a great deal of discussion in 1865 about bringing treason trials , especially against Jefferson Davis , and there was no consensus in President Johnson 's cabinet to do so . There were no treason trials against anyone , as it was felt they would probably not succeed and would impede reconciliation . After two years of imprisonment , Davis was released on bail of $ 100 @,@ 000 , which was posted by prominent citizens including Horace Greeley , Cornelius Vanderbilt and Gerrit Smith . ( Smith was a former member of the Secret Six who had supported abolitionist John Brown . ) Davis went to Montreal , Canada to join his family which had fled there earlier , and lived in <unk> , Quebec until 1868 also visiting Cuba , and Europe in search of work . Davis remained under indictment until he was released from all liability by the presidential amnesty issued by Johnson on December 25 , 1868 . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1869 , Davis became president of the Carolina Life Insurance Company in Memphis , Tennessee , where he resided at the Peabody Hotel . Upon General Lee 's death in 1870 , Davis presided over the memorial meeting in Richmond . Elected to the U.S. Senate again , he was refused the office in 1875 , having been barred from Federal office by Section Three of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution . He turned down the opportunity to become the first president of the Agriculture and Mechanical College of Texas ( now Texas A & M University ) . 
 During Reconstruction , Davis publicly remained silent on his opinions ; but privately he expressed opinions that federal military rule and Republican authority over former Confederate states was unjustified . He considered " Yankee and <unk> " rule in the South oppressive . Like most of his white contemporaries , Davis held the belief that blacks were inferior to whites . The historian William J. Cooper has stated that Davis believed in a Southern social order that included " a democratic white polity based firmly on dominance of a controlled and excluded black caste . " 
 Ownership of the Brierfield plantation was embroiled in court cases , with the politics of the state judges playing a key role . Only after the Democrats took control of the state supreme court in 1881 did Davis , for the first time in his life , gain legal title . 
 In 1876 , Davis promoted a society for the stimulation of US trade with South America . He visited England the next year . In 1877 , Sarah Anne Ellis Dorsey , a wealthy widow who had heard of his difficulties , invited him to stay at her estate and plantation house of " Beauvoir " on the Gulf Coast ( facing the Gulf of Mexico ) in Biloxi , Mississippi . She provided him with a cabin for his own use and helped him with his writing through organization , dictation , editing , and encouragement . Knowing she was severely ill , in 1878 Dorsey made over her will , leaving Beauvoir and her financial assets of $ 50 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 227 @,@ 000 in 2014 ) to Jefferson Davis and , in the case of his death , to his only surviving child , Winnie Davis . Dorsey died in 1879 , by which time both the Davises and Winnie were living at Beauvoir . Over the next two years , Davis completed The Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government ( 1881 ) . 
 Davis 's reputation among ex @-@ Confederates was restored by the book and by his warm reception on his tour of the region in 1886 and 1887 . In numerous stops , he attended Lost Cause ceremonies , where large crowds showered him with affection and local leaders presented emotional speeches honoring his sacrifices to the would @-@ be nation . Such events helped the South come to terms with their defeat and continued for decades after the war . The Meriden Daily Journal stated that Davis , at a reception held in New Orleans in May 1887 , urged southerners to be loyal to the nation . He said , " United you are now , and if the Union is ever to be broken , let the other side break it . " Davis stated that men in the Confederacy had successfully fought for their own rights with inferior numbers during the Civil War and that the northern historians ignored this view . Davis firmly believed that Confederate secession was constitutional . The former Confederate president was optimistic concerning American prosperity and the next generation . 
 Davis completed A Short History of the Confederate States of America in October 1889 . On November 6 , he left Beauvoir to visit his plantation at Brierfield . While in New Orleans , he was caught in a <unk> rain , and on the steamboat trip upriver , he had a severe cold ; on November 13 he left Brierfield to return to New Orleans . Varina Davis , who had taken another boat to Brierfield , met him on the river , and he finally received some medical care ; two doctors came aboard further south and found he had acute bronchitis complicated by malaria . They arrived in New Orleans three days later , and he was taken to the home of Charles Erasmus Fenner , an Associate Justice of the Louisiana Supreme Court . Davis remained in bed but was stable for the next two weeks ; however , he took a turn for the worse in early December . Just when he appeared to be improving , he lost consciousness on the evening of December 5 and died at 12 : 45 a.m. on Friday , December 6 , 1889 , in the presence of several friends and with his hand in Varina 's . 
 His funeral was one of the largest in the South . Davis was first entombed at the Army of Northern Virginia tomb at Metairie Cemetery in New Orleans . In 1893 , Mrs. Davis decided to have his remains reinterred at Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond . After the remains were exhumed in New Orleans , they lay for a day at Memorial Hall of the newly organized Louisiana Historical Association , with many mourners passing by the casket , including Governor Murphy J. Foster , Sr. The body was placed on a Louisville and Nashville Railroad car and transported to Richmond , Virginia . A continuous cortège , day and night , accompanied his body from New Orleans to Richmond . He is interred at Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Jefferson Davis served in many roles . As a soldier , he was brave and resourceful . As a politician , he served as a United States senator and a Mississippi congressman and was active and accomplished , although he never completed a full term in any elected position . As a plantation owner , he employed slave labor as did most of his peers in the South , and supported slavery . As president of the Confederate States of America , he is widely viewed as an ineffective wartime leader ; although the task of defending the Confederacy against the much stronger Union would have been a great challenge for any leader , Davis 's performance in this role is considered poor . After the war , he contributed to reconciliation of the South with the North , but remained a symbol for Southern pride . 
 Some portions of his legacy were created not as memorials , but as contemporary recognition of his service at the time . Fort Davis National Historic Site began as a frontier military post in October 1854 , in the mountains of western Texas . It was named after then @-@ United States Secretary of War Jefferson Davis . That fort gave its name to the surrounding Davis Mountains range , and the town of Fort Davis . The surrounding area was designated Jeff Davis County in 1887 , with the town of Fort Davis as the county seat . Other states containing a Jeff Davis County or Parish include Louisiana , Georgia and Mississippi . 
 Numerous memorials to Jefferson Davis were created . The largest is the 351 @-@ foot ( 107 m ) concrete obelisk located at the Jefferson Davis State Historic Site in Fairview , marking his birthplace . Construction of the monument began in 1917 and finished in 1924 at a cost of about $ 200 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1913 , the United Daughters of the Confederacy conceived the Jefferson Davis Memorial Highway , a transcontinental highway to be built through the South . Portions of the highway 's route in Virginia , Alabama and other states still bear the name of Jefferson Davis . 
 Davis appeared on several postage stamps issued by the Confederacy , including its first postage stamp ( issued in 1861 ) . In 1995 , his portrait appeared on a United States postage stamp , part of a series of 20 stamps commemorating the 130th anniversary of end of the Civil War . Davis was also celebrated on the 6 @-@ cent Stone Mountain Memorial Carving commemorative on September 19 , 1970 , at Stone Mountain , Georgia . The stamp portrayed Jefferson Davis , Robert E. Lee and Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson on horseback . It depicts a replica of the actual memorial , carved into the side of Stone Mountain at 400 feet ( 120 m ) above ground level , the largest high relief sculpture in the world . 
 The Jefferson Davis Presidential Library was established at Beauvoir in 1998 . For some years , the white @-@ columned Biloxi mansion that was Davis 's final home had served as a Confederate Veterans Home . The house and library were damaged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 ; the house reopened in 2008 . Bertram Hayes @-@ Davis , Davis 's great @-@ great grandson , is the executive director of Beauvoir , which is owned by the Mississippi Division of the Sons of Confederate Veterans . 
 Based at Rice University in Houston , Texas , The Papers of Jefferson Davis is an editing project to publish documents related to Davis . Since the early 1960s , it has published 13 volumes , the first in 1971 and the most recent in 2012 ; two more volumes are planned . The project has roughly 100 @,@ 000 documents in its archives . 
 The birthday of Jefferson Davis is commemorated in several states . His actual birthday , June 3 , is celebrated in Florida , Kentucky , Louisiana and Tennessee ; in Alabama , it is celebrated on the first Monday in June . In Mississippi , the last Monday of May ( Memorial Day ) is celebrated as " National Memorial Day and Jefferson Davis 's Birthday " . In Texas , " Confederate Heroes Day " is celebrated on January 19 , the birthday of Robert E. Lee ; Jefferson Davis 's birthday had been officially celebrated on June 3 but was combined with Lee 's birthday in 1973 . 
 Some memorials to Davis have become controversial . Washington State Route 99 bears the name of Jefferson Davis Highway . In 2002 , the state 's House of Representatives unanimously approved a bill that would have removed Davis 's name from the road . However , a committee of the state 's Senate subsequently killed the proposal . 
 In the former Confederate capital of Richmond , Virginia , the Museum of the Confederacy was involved in a controversy regarding a statue of Davis donated by the Sons of Confederate Veterans in 2008 . Likewise , a statue of Abraham Lincoln , donated to the Civil War Visitor Center in Richmond in 2003 , resulted in protests . 
 In 2011 , the County Board of Arlington County , Virginia , voted to change the name of Old Jefferson Davis Highway , the original route of Jefferson Davis Highway in the county , after the Board 's chairman made disparaging remarks about Davis . However , the name of Jefferson Davis Highway itself , a portion of U.S. 1 that only the Virginia General Assembly could rename , remained unchanged . 
 In its 2016 legislative package , the Arlington County Board asked the Virginia General Assembly to rename the portion of Jefferson Davis Highway ( U.S. 1 ) that was within the County . However , no member of Arlington 's legislative delegation offered any such legislation during the 2016 session of the General Assembly . 
 In May 2015 , the student government at the University of Texas at Austin voted almost unanimously to remove a statue of Jefferson Davis that had been erected on the campus South Mall . Beginning shortly after the Charleston church shooting of 2015 " black lives matter " had been written repeatedly in bold red letters on the base of the Davis statue . Previous messages had included " Davis must fall " and " Liberate <unk> " 
 The University of Texas officials convened a task force to determine whether to honor the students ' petition for removal of the statue . Acting on the strong recommendation of the task force , UT 's President Gregory <unk> announced on August 13 , 2015 that the statue would be relocated to serve as an educational exhibit in the university 's Dolph Briscoe Center for American History museum . The statue was removed on August 30 , 2015 . 
 Robert E. Lee 's United States citizenship was posthumously restored in 1975 . Jefferson Davis had been specifically excluded from earlier resolutions restoring rights to other Confederate officials , and a movement arose to restore Davis 's citizenship as well . This was accomplished with the passing of Senate Joint Resolution 16 on October 17 , 1978 . In signing the law , President Jimmy Carter referred to this as the last act of reconciliation in the Civil War . 
 = Cyathus helenae = 
 Cyathus helenae is a species of fungus in the genus Cyathus , family Nidulariaceae . Like other members of the Nidulariaceae , C. helenae resembles a tiny bird 's nest filled with ' eggs ' — spore @-@ containing structures known as peridioles . It was initially described by mycologist Harold Brodie in 1965 , who found it growing on mountain scree in Alberta , Canada . C. helenae 's life cycle allows it to reproduce both sexually and asexually . One of the smaller species of Cyathus , C. helenae produces a number of chemically unique diterpenoid molecules known as cyathins . The specific epithet of this species was given by Brodie in tribute to his late wife Helen . 
 = = Description = = 
 The resemblance that Cyathus helenae bears to a miniature bird 's nest with eggs is the source for its common name , bird 's nest fungi . The fruit body , or peridium , of C. helenae is obconic , that is , shaped roughly like an inverted cone . The upper third of the peridium is flared outwards sharply , and the opening is normally 5 – 6 mm wide , while the height of the fruit body is 7 mm . The outer surface of the peridium , the ectoperidium , is pale brown to grey in color , and covered with clusters of fungal hyphae that resemble hairs . These hairs appear to be aggregated into clusters ( " nodular " ) , and generally point downward . The inner surface of the peridium , the endoperidium , is smooth with a grey to silver and somewhat shiny surface . This inner surface also has faint but distinct vertical ridges , known as plications . Like many other Cyathus species , the cup is attached to its growing surface by a clump of mycelium called an emplacement ; in C. helenae the diameter of the emplacement is typically wider than that of the peridium , and it often incorporates bits of " organic trash " . 
 The ' eggs ' of the bird 's nest – the peridioles – are 2 mm in diameter , and covered with a silvery tunica ( the outermost covering layer of the <unk> ) . Peridioles are attached to the fruit body by a funiculus , a structure of hyphae that is differentiated into three regions : the basal piece , which attaches it to the inner wall of the peridium , the middle piece , and an upper sheath , called the purse , connected to the lower surface of the peridiole . In the purse and middle piece is a coiled thread of interwoven hyphae called the funicular cord , attached at one end to the peridiole and at the other end to an entangled mass of hyphae called the hapteron . The spores of C. helenae have a spherical or ovoid shape , with dimensions of 12 – 14 µm long by 15 – 19 µm wide . They tend to be slightly narrower at one end , and commonly have a spore wall thickness of 1 @.@ 5 µm . 
 Cyathus helenae is distinguished from the more common C. striatus by its faint inner @-@ surface <unk> ( C. striatus has a more pronounced <unk> ) , the nodular arrangement of the hairs on the outer surface , and microscopically by the spore shape – ellipsoid in C. striatus , ovoid or spheroidal in C. helenae . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The species was initially described by mycologist Harold J. Brodie in 1965 , who collected it from Rocky Mountain Park in Alberta , Canada at an altitude of 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) . It was found growing among the small flat stones of the scree , often attached to rotted or dried remains of alpine plants . Brodie derived the species name as a tribute to his late wife Helen . This species is known to live in alpine and boreal habitats , as well as dry areas in Idaho . In 1988 C. helenae was first reported in Mexico ; in 2005 it was reported growing in tropical forest in the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve ( Calakmul , Mexico ) , and in Costa Rica . In 2014 , it was recorded in Brazil , the first report of this species from South America . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 The life cycle of Cyathus helenae contains both haploid and diploid stages , typical of taxa in the basidiomycetes that can reproduce both asexually ( via vegetative spores ) , or sexually ( with meiosis ) . Basidiospores produced in the peridioles each contain a single haploid nucleus . After dispersal , the spores germinate and grow into homokaryotic hyphae , with a single nucleus in each compartment . When two homokaryotic hyphae of different mating compatibility groups fuse with one another , they form a dikaryotic mycelia in a process called plasmogamy . After a period of time and under the appropriate environmental conditions , fruit bodies may be formed from the dikaryotic mycelia . These fruit bodies produce peridioles containing the basidia upon which new basidiospores are made . Young basidia contain a pair of haploid sexually compatible nuclei which fuse , and the resulting diploid fusion nucleus undergoes meiosis to produce haploid basidiospores . 
 = = Spore dispersal = = 
 When a drop of falling water hits the interior of the cup with the appropriate angle and velocity , the peridioles are ejected into the air by the force of the drop . The force of ejection tears open the purse , and results in the expansion of the funicular cord , formerly coiled under pressure in the lower part of the purse . The peridioles , followed by the highly adhesive funicular cord and basal hapteron , may hit a nearby plant stem or stick . The hapteron sticks to it , and the funicular cord wraps around the stem or stick powered by the force of the still @-@ moving peridiole . After drying out , the peridiole remains attached to the vegetation , where it may be eaten by a grazing herbivorous animal , and later deposited in that animal 's dung to continue the life cycle . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 Cyathus helenae produces a series of diterpenoid chemical compounds known as cyathins , which have antibiotic properties against the bacteria Staphylococcus aureus . The capacity to produce cyathins — similar to C. striatus and C. africanus — is limited to haploid strains . The basic chemical structure of the cyathins , known as the cyathane skeleton , is chemically unique and has been investigated using carbon @-@ 13 nuclear magnetic resonance ( 13C NMR ) ; molecules with this structure have also been created synthetically . 
 = 1984 Rajneeshee bioterror attack = 
 The 1984 Rajneeshee bioterror attack was the food poisoning of 751 individuals in The Dalles , Oregon , through the deliberate contamination of salad bars at ten local restaurants with salmonella . A leading group of followers of Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh ( later known as Osho ) had hoped to incapacitate the voting population of the city so that their own candidates would win the 1984 Wasco County elections . The incident was the first and single largest bioterrorist attack in United States history . The attack is one of only two confirmed terrorist uses of biological weapons to harm humans since 1945 , the other being the 2001 anthrax attacks across the USA . 
 Having previously gained political control of Antelope , Oregon , Rajneesh 's followers , who were based in nearby Rajneeshpuram , sought election to two of the three seats on the Wasco County Circuit Court that were up for election in November 1984 . Fearing they would not gain enough votes , Rajneeshpuram officials decided to incapacitate voters in The Dalles , the largest population center in Wasco County . The chosen biological agent was Salmonella enterica Typhimurium , which was first delivered through glasses of water to two County Commissioners and then , on a larger scale , at salad bars and in salad dressing . 
 As a result of the attack , 751 people contracted salmonellosis , 45 of whom were hospitalized . There were no fatalities . Although an initial investigation by the Oregon Public Health Division and the Centers for Disease Control did not rule out deliberate contamination , the agents and fact of contamination were only discovered a year later . On February 28 , 1985 , Congressman James H. Weaver gave a speech in the United States House of Representatives in which he " accused the Rajneeshees of sprinkling salmonella culture on salad bar ingredients in eight restaurants " . 
 At a press conference in September 1985 , Rajneesh accused several of his followers of participation in this and other crimes , including an aborted plan in 1985 to assassinate a United States Attorney , and he asked State and Federal authorities to investigate . Oregon Attorney General David B. Frohnmayer set up an Interagency Task Force , composed of Oregon State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation , and executed search warrants in Rajneeshpuram . A sample of bacteria matching the contaminant that had sickened the town residents was found in a Rajneeshpuram medical laboratory . Two leading Rajneeshpuram officials were convicted on charges of attempted murder and served 29 months of 20 @-@ year sentences in a minimum @-@ security federal prison . 
 = = Planning = = 
 Several thousand of Rajneesh 's followers had moved onto the " Big Muddy Ranch " in rural Wasco County in 1981 , where they later incorporated as a city called Rajneeshpuram . They had taken political control of the small nearby town of Antelope , Oregon ( population 75 ) , the name of which they changed to " Rajneesh " . The group had started on friendly terms with the local population , but relations soon turned negative because of land use conflicts and the commune 's dramatic expansion . 
 After being denied building permits for Rajneeshpuram , the commune leadership sought to gain political control over the rest of the county by influencing the November 1984 county election . Their goal was to win two of three seats on the Wasco County Circuit Court , as well as the sheriff 's office . Their attempts to influence the election included the " Share @-@ a @-@ Home " program , in which they had thousands of homeless people transported to Rajneeshpuram and attempted to register them to vote to inflate the constituency of voters for the group 's candidates . The Wasco county clerk countered this attempt by enforcing a regulation that required all new voters to submit their qualifications when registering to vote . 
 The commune leadership planned to sicken and incapacitate voters in The Dalles , where most of the voters resided , to sway the election . Approximately twelve people were involved in the plots to employ biological agents , and at least eleven were involved in the planning process . No more than four appear to have been involved in development at the Rajneeshpuram medical laboratory ; not all of those were necessarily aware of the objectives their work served . At least eight individuals were involved with the distribution of the bacteria . 
 The main planners of the attack included Sheela Silverman ( Ma Anand Sheela ) , Rajneesh 's chief lieutenant , and Diane Yvonne <unk> ( Ma Anand Puja ) , a nurse practitioner and secretary @-@ treasurer of the Rajneesh Medical Corporation . They purchased salmonella bacteria from a medical supply company in Seattle , Washington , and staff cultured it in labs located inside the commune . They contaminated the produce at the salad bars as a " trial run " . The group also tried to introduce pathogens into The Dalles ' water system . If successful , they planned to use the same techniques closer to Election Day . This second part of the plan was never implemented . The commune decided to boycott the election when it became clear that those brought in through the " Share @-@ a @-@ Home " program would not be allowed to vote . 
 Two visiting Wasco County commissioners were poisoned with glasses of water containing salmonella bacteria during a visit to Rajneeshpuram on August 29 , 1984 . Both men fell ill and one was hospitalized . Afterward , members of Sheela 's team spread salmonella on produce in grocery stores and on doorknobs and urinal handles in the county courthouse , but this did not produce the desired effects . In September and October 1984 , they contaminated the salad bars of 10 local restaurants with salmonella , infecting 751 people . Forty @-@ five people received hospital treatment ; all survived . 
 The primary delivery tactic involved one member concealing a plastic bag containing a light brown liquid with the salmonella bacteria ( referred to by the perpetrators as " salsa " ) , and either spreading it over the food at a salad bar , or pouring its contents into salad dressing . By September 24 , 1984 , more than 150 people were violently ill . By the end of September , 751 cases of acute gastroenteritis were documented ; lab results showed that all of the victims were infected with Salmonella enterica Typhimurium . Symptoms included diarrhea , fever , chills , nausea , vomiting , headaches , abdominal pain , and bloody stools . Victims ranged in age from an infant , born two days after his mother 's infection and initially given a five @-@ percent chance of survival , to an 87 @-@ year @-@ old . 
 Local residents suspected that Rajneesh 's followers were behind the poisonings . They turned out in droves on election day to prevent the organization from winning any county positions , thus rendering the terrorist plot unsuccessful . The Rajneeshees eventually withdrew their candidate from the November 1984 ballot . Only 239 of the commune 's 7 @,@ 000 residents voted ; most were not US citizens and could not vote . The outbreak cost local restaurants hundreds of thousands of dollars and health officials shut down the salad bars of the affected establishments . Some residents feared further attacks and stayed at home . One resident said : " People were so horrified and scared . People wouldn 't go out , they wouldn 't go out alone . People were becoming prisoners . " 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Officials and investigators from a number of different state and federal agencies investigated the cause of the outbreak . Dr. Michael Skeels , Director of the Oregon State Public Health Laboratory at the time , said that the incident provoked such a large public health investigation because " it was the largest food @-@ related outbreak in the U.S. in 1984 " . The investigation identified the bacteria as Salmonella enterica Typhimurium and initially concluded that the outbreak had been due to food handlers ' poor personal hygiene . Workers preparing food at the affected restaurants had fallen ill before most patrons had . 
 Oregon Democratic Congressman James H. Weaver continued to investigate because he believed that the officials ' conclusion did not adequately explain the facts . He contacted physicians at the CDC and other agencies and urged them to investigate Rajneeshpuram . According to Lewis F. Carter 's book Charisma and Control in Rajneeshpuram , " many treated his concern " as paranoid or as an example of " Rajneeshee bashing " . On February 28 , 1985 , Weaver gave a speech at the United States House of Representatives in which he accused the Rajneeshees of contaminating salad bar ingredients in eight restaurants . As events later showed , Weaver had presented a well @-@ reasoned , if only circumstantial , case ; these circumstantial elements were confirmed by evidence found after investigators gained access to Rajneeshpuram several months later . 
 Months later , starting on September 16 , 1985 , Rajneesh , who had recently emerged from a four @-@ year period of public silence and self @-@ imposed isolation ( although he had continued to meet with his assistant ) at the commune , convened press conferences : he stated that Sheela and 19 other commune leaders , including Puja , had left Rajneeshpuram over the weekend and gone to Europe . He said that he had received information from commune residents that Sheela and her team had committed a number of serious crimes . Calling them a " gang of fascists " , he said they had tried to poison his doctor and Rajneesh 's female companion , as well as the Jefferson County district attorney and the water system in The Dalles . He said that he believed they had poisoned a county commissioner and Judge William Hulse , and that they may have been responsible for the salmonella outbreak in The Dalles . He invited state and federal law enforcement officials to the Ranch to investigate . His allegations were initially greeted with skepticism by outside observers . 
 Oregon Attorney General Dave Frohnmayer established a task force among the Wasco County Sheriff 's office , the Oregon State Police , the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , the Immigration and Naturalization Service ( INS ) and the National Guard that set up headquarters on the Ranch to investigate the allegations . They obtained search warrants and subpoenas ; 50 investigators entered the Ranch on October 2 , 1985 . Dr. Skeels found glass vials containing salmonella " <unk> disks " in the laboratory of a Rajneeshpuram medical clinic . Analysis by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lab in Atlanta confirmed that the bacteria at the Rajneesh laboratory were an exact match to those that sickened individuals who had eaten at local restaurants . 
 The investigation also revealed prior experimentation at Rajneeshpuram with poisons , chemicals and bacteria , in 1984 and 1985 . Dr. Skeels described the scene at the Rajneesh laboratory as " a bacteriological freezer @-@ dryer for large @-@ scale production " of microbes . Investigators found a copy of The Anarchist Cookbook , and literature on the manufacture and usage of explosives and military bio @-@ warfare . Investigators believed that the commune had previously carried out similar attacks in Salem , Portland , and other cities in Oregon . According to court testimony , the plotters boasted that they had attacked a nursing home and a salad bar at the Mid @-@ Columbia Medical Center , but no such attempts were ever proven in court . As a result of the bioterrorism investigation , law enforcement officials discovered that there had been an aborted plot by Rajneeshees to murder Charles Turner , a former United States Attorney for Oregon . 
 = = Prosecution = = 
 The mayor of Rajneeshpuram , David Berry Knapp ( known as Swami Krishna Deva or KD ) , turned state 's evidence and gave an account of his knowledge of the salmonella attack to the FBI . He claimed that Sheela said " she had talked with [ Rajneesh ] about the plot to decrease voter turnout in The Dalles by making people sick . Sheela said that [ Rajneesh ] commented that it was best not to hurt people , but if a few died not to worry . " In Miller 's Germs : Biological Weapons and America 's Secret War , this statement is attributed to Sheela : According to KD 's testimony , she played doubters a tape of Rajneesh 's muffled voice saying , " if it was necessary to do things to preserve [ his ] vision , then do it , " and interpreted this to mean that murder in his name was fine , telling doubters " not to worry " if a few people had to die . The investigation uncovered a September 25 , 1984 , invoice from the American Type Culture Collection of microbes , showing an order received by the Rajneeshpuram laboratory for Salmonella typhi , the bacterium that causes the life @-@ threatening illness typhoid fever . 
 According to a 1994 study published in the journal Sociology of Religion , " [ m ] ost sannyasins indicated that they believed that [ Rajneesh ] knew about Ma Anand Sheela 's illegal activities . " Frances FitzGerald writes in Cities on a Hill that most of Rajneesh 's followers " believed [ him ] incapable of doing , or willing , violence against another person " , and that almost all thought the responsibility for the criminality was Sheela 's – according to FitzGerald , the followers believed the guru had not known anything about it . Carus writes in Toxic Terror that , " There is no way to know to what extent [ Rajneesh ] participated in actual decision @-@ making . His followers believed he was involved in every important decision that Sheela made , but those allegations were never proven . " Rajneesh insisted that Sheela , who he said was his only source of information during his period of isolation , used her position to impose " a fascist state " on the commune . He acknowledged that the key to her actions was his silence . 
 Rajneesh left Oregon by plane on October 27 , 1985 , and was arrested when he landed in Charlotte , North Carolina , and charged with 35 counts of deliberate violations of immigration laws . As part of a plea bargain arrangement , he pleaded guilty to two counts of making false statements to immigration officials . He received a ten @-@ year suspended sentence and a fine of US $ 400 @,@ 000 , and was deported and barred from reentering the United States for a period of five years . He was never prosecuted for crimes related to the salmonella poisoning . 
 Sheela and Puja were arrested in West Germany on October 28 , 1985 . After protracted negotiations between the two governments , they were extradited to the United States , reaching Portland on February 6 , 1986 . They were charged with attempting to murder Rajneesh 's personal physician , first @-@ degree assault for poisoning Judge William Hulse , second @-@ degree assault for poisoning The Dalles Commissioner Raymond Matthews , and product tampering for the poisonings in The Dalles , as well as wiretapping and immigration offenses . The U.S. Attorney 's office handled the prosecution of the poisoning cases related to the 10 restaurants , and the Oregon Attorney General 's office prosecuted the poisoning cases of Commissioner Matthews and Judge Hulse . 
 On July 22 , 1986 , both women entered Alford pleas for the salmonella poisoning and the other charges , and received sentences ranging from three to twenty years , to be served concurrently . Sheela received 20 years for the attempted murder of Rajneesh 's physician , twenty years for first @-@ degree assault in the poisoning of Judge Hulse , ten years for second @-@ degree assault in the poisoning of Commissioner Matthews , four and a half years for her role in the salmonella poisoning , four and a half years for the wiretapping conspiracy , and five years ' probation for immigration fraud ; Puja received fifteen , fifteen , seven and a half , and four and a half years , respectively , for her role in the first four of these crimes , as well as three years ' probation for the wiretapping conspiracy . Both Sheela and Puja were released on parole early for good behavior , after serving twenty @-@ nine months of their sentences in a minimum @-@ security federal prison . Sheela 's Green Card was revoked ; she moved to Switzerland . She remarried there and went on to run two nursing homes in Switzerland . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Oregonian ran a 20 @-@ part series on Rajneesh 's movement , beginning in June 1985 , which included an investigation into the salmonella incident . As a result of a follow @-@ up investigation , The Oregonian learned that Leslie L. <unk> , one of their investigative journalists , had been placed as number three on a top @-@ ten hit list by Sheela 's group . Then @-@ Oregon Attorney General Dave Frohnmayer commented on the poisoning incident and other acts perpetrated by the group , stating : " The Rajneeshees committed the most significant crimes of their kind in the history of the United States ... The largest single incident of fraudulent marriages , the most massive scheme of wiretapping and bugging , and the largest mass poisoning . " Looking back on the incident , Skeels stated , " We lost our innocence over this ... We really learned to be more suspicious ... The first significant biological attack on a U.S. community was not carried out by foreign terrorists smuggled into New York , but by legal residents of a U.S. community . The next time it happens it could be with more lethal agents ... We in public health are really not ready to deal with that . " 
 Milton <unk> noted in the 2005 work Assessing the Biological Weapons and Bioterrorism Threat , " there is apparently no other ' terrorist ' group that is known to have successfully cultured any pathogen . " Federal and state investigators requested that details of the incident not be published in the Journal of the American Medical Association ( JAMA ) for 12 years , for they feared a description of the events could spark copycat crimes , and JAMA complied . No repeat attacks or hoaxes subsequently occurred , and a detailed account of the incident and investigation was published in JAMA in 1997 . A 1999 empirical analysis in the journal Emerging Infectious Diseases published by the CDC described six motivational factors associated with bioterrorism , including : charismatic leadership , no outside constituency , apocalyptic ideology , loner or splinter group , sense of paranoia and grandiosity , and defensive aggression . According to the article , the " Rajneesh Cult " satisfied all motivational factors except for an " apocalyptic ideology " . An analysis in the book Cults , Religion and Violence disputes the link to charismatic leadership , pointing out that in this and other cases , it was organizational lieutenants who played a pivotal role in the initiation of violence . Arguing for a contextual rather than decisive view of charisma , the authors state that the attribution of outcomes to the personality of a single individual , even a charismatic leader , usually camouflages a far more complex field of social relationships . 
 The media revisited the incident during the 2001 anthrax attacks in the United States . The 2001 publication of Judith Miller 's Germs : Biological Weapons and America 's Secret War , which contained an analysis and detailed description of the events , also brought discussion of the incident back into the news . Residents of The Dalles commented that they have an understanding of how bioterrorism can occur in the United States . The incident had spread fear in the community , and drained the local economy . All but one of the restaurants affected went out of business . In 2005 , the Oregon State Land Board agreed to sell 480 acres ( 1 @.@ 9 km2 ) of Wasco County , including Rajneeshpuram , to the Colorado @-@ based youth ministry Young Life . On February 18 , 2005 , Court TV aired an episode of Forensic Files about the incident , entitled : " ' Bio @-@ Attack ' – Oregon Cult Poisonings " . The salmonellosis outbreak was also discussed in the media within the context of the 2006 North American E. coli outbreak . 
 The book Emerging Infectious Diseases : Trends and Issues cites the 1984 Rajneeshee bioterror attack , along with the Aum Shinrikyo group 's attempts to use anthrax and other agents , as exceptions to the belief " that only foreign @-@ state supported groups have the resources to execute a credible bioterrorism event " . According to Deadly Cultures : Biological Weapons Since 1945 , these are the only two confirmed uses of biological weapons for terrorist purposes to harm humans . The incident was the single largest bioterrorist attack in United States history . In the chapter titled : " Influencing An Election : America 's First Modern <unk> Attack " in his 2006 book Terrorism on American Soil : A Concise History of Plots and Perpetrators from the Famous to the Forgotten , author Joseph T. McCann concludes : " In every respect , the salmonella poisoning carried out by the cult members was a major bioterrorist attack that fortunately failed to achieve its ultimate goal and resulted in no fatalities . " 
 = Doc Blanchard = 
 Felix Anthony " Doc " Blanchard ( December 11 , 1924 – April 19 , 2009 ) is best known as the college football player who became the first ever junior to win the Heisman Trophy , Maxwell Award and was the first ever football player to win the James E. Sullivan Award , all in 1945 . He played football for the United States Military Academy at West Point , where he was known as " Mr. Inside . " Because his father was a doctor , Felix Blanchard was nicknamed " Little Doc " as a boy . After football , he served in the United States Air Force from 1947 until 1971 when he retired with the rank of Colonel . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Blanchard was born on December 11 , 1924 in McColl , South Carolina His father was a doctor and had played college football at Tulane University and Wake Forest University . The <unk> moved from McColl , South Carolina to Dexter , Iowa in 1929 . The <unk> then moved to Bishopville , South Carolina two years later . Blanchard , nicknamed " Little Doc " due to his father 's occupation , attended high school at Saint Stanislaus College in Bay St. Louis , Mississippi . He led the school 's football team , the <unk> , to an undefeated season during his senior year in 1941 . Blanchard was recruited to play college football by Army , Fordham University and the University of Notre Dame , among others . Blanchard said in 1985 that he had been contacted about going to West Point when he was in high school . He said , " At that point in time , I really wasn ’ t interested . Academically , I never was too hot , so I never had any idea I would pass the entrance examination and go to West Point . " 
 Instead , Blanchard chose to play for the University of North Carolina Tar Heels , in part because its coach , Jim Tatum , was his mother 's cousin . Because NCAA rules at the time did not allow freshmen to play varsity , Blanchard played with the freshman team . 
 Blanchard decided to enlist in the United States Army in 1943 . He was stationed in New Mexico with a chemical @-@ warfare unit until enrolling at West Point in July 1944 in an appointment his father secured . 
 = = West Point years = = 
 During his three years of playing football at West Point , his team under coach Earl " Red " Blaik compiled an undefeated 27 – 0 – 1 record - the tie being a famous 0 – 0 game against Notre Dame . 
 Notre Dame coach Edward McKeever was amazed by Blanchard . After his 1944 team lost to Army by a score of 59 – 0 , McKeever said , " I 've just seen Superman in the flesh . He wears number 35 and goes by the name of Blanchard . " 
 An all @-@ around athlete , Blanchard served as the placekicker and punter in addition to his primary roles as an offensive fullback and a linebacker on defense . He soon teamed with Glenn Davis on the 1944 @-@ 45 @-@ 46 teams ( Davis won the Heisman in 1946 , the year after Blanchard won it ) . They formed one of the most lethal rushing combinations in football history . In his three seasons at West Point Blanchard scored 38 touchdowns , gained 1 @,@ 908 yards and earned the nickname " Mr. Inside . " Teammate Davis earned the nickname " Mr. Outside " and in November 1945 , they both shared the cover of Time magazine . 
 In 1945 , Blanchard played against Leon Bramlett of the Naval Academy . Army won the match , 32 @-@ 13 . Both Blanchard and Bramlett , later a farmer and politician from Clarksdale , were inducted into the Mississippi Sports Hall of Fame . 
 In 1984 , at the awards ceremony marking the 50th Heisman Trophy presentation , Blanchard took the occasion to recall , in comparison to the big glitzy shows for the ceremony today , how he learned of his Heisman selection in 1945 . He said , " I got a telegram . It said , ' You ’ ve been selected to win the Heisman Trophy . Please wire collect . ' " 
 In 1946 , Blanchard missed the first two games of the season due to an injury to his knee . In June 1946 his class was divided into two classes ( 1947 and 1948 ) to transition back to a peacetime four @-@ year curriculum from the wartime three @-@ year curriculum instituted in October 1942 . Both Blanchard and Davis were placed in the final three @-@ year group , the Class of 1947 ( Davis had entered West Point in July 1943 but was turned back a year in 1944 for a deficiency in mathematics ) . 
 In 1947 , Blanchard played himself in the movie The Spirit of West Point . His West Point team @-@ mate Glenn Davis also played himself in the film . Other cast members include Robert Shayne as Coach Colonel Earl " Red " Blaik , Anne Nagel as Mrs. Blaik , George O 'Hanlon as Joe Wilson , Michael Browne as Roger " <unk> " McCarty , Tanis Chandler as Mildred , Mary Newton as Mrs. Mary Blanchard and William Forrest as Doc Blanchard 's father , Dr. Felix Blanchard . Also appearing as themselves are 1940 Heisman Trophy winner Tom Harmon and sportscasters Bill Stern and Harry Wismer . The screenplay was written by Tom Reed based on a story by Mary Howard . Ralph Murphy directed . 
 In addition to football , Blanchard was also a member of the Army track and field team , with a shot put championship and a 10 @-@ second 100 yard dash in 1945 . 
 In 1947 , Blanchard graduated from West Point , 296th in order of merit among 310 graduates , and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the United States Air Force . He coached Army ’ s freshman team in the 1950s , but he never played professional football , choosing a military career instead . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Blanchard had the opportunity to play professional football after being selected third overall in the 1946 NFL Draft by the Pittsburgh Steelers . After he was turned down in 1947 for a furlough to play with the NFL , Blanchard then chose to embark upon a career in the United States Air Force and became a fighter pilot . In 1959 , while with the 77th Tactical Fighter Squadron and flying back to his base at RAF Wethersfield near London , an oil line in Major Blanchard 's F @-@ 100 Super Sabre broke and a fire broke out . He could have parachuted to safety , but the plane might have crashed into a village . He instead stayed with the plane and made a perfect landing . The event garnered him an Air Force commendation for bravery . 
 In the Vietnam War , Blanchard flew 113 missions from Thailand , 84 of them over North Vietnam . He piloted a fighter @-@ bomber during a one @-@ year tour of duty that ended in January 1969 . He retired from the Air Force in 1971 as a colonel . After retiring from the Air Force , he spent several more years as the commandant of cadets at the New Mexico Military Institute , a junior college that prepares students to enter the service academies . 
 = = Death = = 
 Blanchard died of pneumonia on April 19 , 2009 in Bulverde , Texas . He had been living with his daughter Mary and her husband Aaron for the last 20 years of his life . At the time of his death , he was the oldest living Heisman Trophy winner . He is interred at Fort Sam Houston National Cemetery in San Antonio , Texas . 
 = = Honors and memorials = = 
 Blanchard was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1959 . 
 At a 1991 ceremony , he presented his Heisman Trophy , Maxwell Award and James E. Sullivan Award to his — and his father 's — former high school alma mater , Saint Stanislaus College prep school , in Bay St. Louis , Mississippi . He also presented his jersey to the school . The trophy , awards and jersey were enshrined in the Brother Alexis Memorial Resource Center on the Saint Stanislaus campus until they were briefly lost to flooding during Hurricane Katrina . The items have since been recovered . 
 In Blanchard 's honor , the Interstate 20 / U.S. Route 15 interchange near his hometown of Bishopville , South Carolina has been named the Felix " Doc " Blanchard Interchange . 
 Beginning in 2004 the Rotary presents the Doc Blanchard Award as well as the Glenn Davis Award to the two high school football players participating in the U.S. Army All American Bowl who best exemplify the U.S. Army ’ s high standard of excellence in community service , education and athletic distinction . The Doc Blanchard Award is given to a player from the Bowl ’ s East team , while the Davis Award is given to a player from the Bowl ’ s West team . The first recipient of the Doc Blanchard Award was Ryan Baker . 
 West Point announced in April 2009 , before Blanchard 's death , that Blanchard 's number 35 would be retired , and it was on October 10 during a home game against Vanderbilt . 
 = Panait Cerna = 
 Panait Cerna ( Bulgarian : <unk> <unk> , Panayot <unk> , born Panayot <unk> or Panait <unk> ; August 26 or September 25 , 1881 – March 26 , 1913 ) was a Romanian poet , philosopher , literary critic and translator . A native speaker of Bulgarian , Cerna nonetheless wrote in Romanian , and developed a traditionalist style which was connected with Classicism and Neoclassicism . Praised by the conservative literary society Junimea , he was promoted by its leader Titu Maiorescu , as well as by Maiorescu 's disciples Mihail Dragomirescu and Simion Mehedinţi . Cerna became the group 's main representative during its decline , contributing to both major Junimist magazines , Convorbiri Literare and Convorbiri Critice . He also contributed pieces to the traditionalist magazine Sămănătorul , and was briefly affiliated with other literary journals . 
 A graduate of the University of Bucharest , Cerna completed his studies in the German Empire . There , he attended the University of Berlin and the University of Leipzig , befriending the self @-@ exiled Romanian dramatist Ion Luca Caragiale and the literary critic Paul Zarifopol . Cerna died in Leipzig at the age of thirty @-@ one , after a long battle with tuberculosis . 
 Along with various love poems , Panait Cerna 's writings also evince his intellectual pursuits . This intellectual characteristic earned him a dedicated following , but was criticized by many of his peers , who found it artificial and outdated . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Cerna 's early name , rendered in Bulgarian as <unk> <unk> , was commonly transliterated into Romanian as Panait Stanciov , <unk> , <unk> or <unk> . The poet 's preferred name alluded to Cerna , his birthplace in Tulcea County , Northern Dobruja . 
 Panait Cerna 's father was an ethnic Bulgarian schoolteacher , also named Panayot <unk> ( Panait Stanciov ) . He settled in Cerna and married Maria <unk> . The daughter of local peasants , she was of Aromanian or of Bulgarian origin . Shortly before Maria gave birth to their son , Romanian administration began taking over in previously Ottoman @-@ ruled Northern Dobruja . <unk> , who was a Bulgarian nationalist , refused to accept this change and left for the Principality of Bulgaria , leaving his family behind . Consequently , Cerna never met his father . By Cerna 's own account , his childhood was marked by acute poverty and social isolation : " [ I was ] told to tutor and learn in cold , unfriendly rooms . For a long time , we lived in a house on the outskirts , which was avoided by other men , since a rumor had spread that ghosts haunted its rooms . Can you imagine living in the middle of winter , without a fire on , with doors that barely close , with windows that are glued with paper ? A person made of iron would still feel cold down to the bone . " 
 Although his links to Bulgarian culture were weakened by his father 's departure , Cerna , who was baptized in the Bulgarian Greek Catholic Church , became fluent in Bulgarian . According to literary critic George Călinescu , he always had some difficulties conversing in Romanian , but could write it with ease . 
 After completing primary school in his native village , he graduated from a high school in the Danube port of Brăila , then enrolled at the Faculty of Letters and Philosophy in Bucharest . He was also attending lectures at the Faculty of Chemistry and Physics . Cerna debuted as a poet in 1897 , at the age of sixteen , when his <unk> ( " The Past " ) — an adaptation of a piece by Nikolaus Lenau — was published in George <unk> 's <unk> <unk> magazine . His first original poem , Orientale ( " Orientals " ) , saw print two years later in the magazine Carmen . 
 = = = Junimea years = = = 
 Soon after reaching the capital , Cerna became involved in political debates and the literary environment . These early activities are recorded in a 1904 series of articles in the student paper <unk> şi <unk> , where a P. Stanciov is the object of satire . By that time , he was discovered by Junimea , and began collaborating with Convorbiri Literare , a magazine led by Simion Mehedinţi . After 1903 , Cerna contributed to Sămănătorul , and his poems also appeared sporadically in other publications , including <unk> <unk> and Revista <unk> . 
 Despite ongoing financial difficulties , Cerna graduated from university in 1906 . His thesis was passed with a Magna cum laude qualifier . He was by then seriously ill with tuberculosis , and sought a change in climate . Cerna spent much of this period traveling through the Old Kingdom , and several times visited regions of the Southern Carpathians , in particular the area of Rucăr , the <unk> Mountains , and the Jiu Valley . As Călinescu notes , he had bought himself a horse from a Rucăr local on credit , and failed to deliver the promised sum on time . 
 Cerna 's love of rural life , together with what Călinescu describes as a " social preoccupation " , made him an outspoken opponent of the way in which the authorities handled the peasant uprising of 1907 . That year , as Mihail Dragomirescu parted with Mehedinţi to establish Convorbiri Critice , which advertised a Junimist agenda while standing against Convorbiri Literare , Cerna became one of his main collaborators . The group of Convorbiri Critice writers also included D. <unk> , Corneliu <unk> , Emil <unk> , I. Dragoslav and Gheorghe <unk> . In 1908 , he decided to continue his studies in the German Empire . The decision was influenced and encouraged by Junimea and its leader Titu Maiorescu , who , as Minister of Education granted him a scholarship . Călinescu describes this as a sign of late Junimist elitism , a view which implied that all literary men should be academics . This , he argues , was one of the few areas in which Junimea still differed from Sămănătorul , which was more open to less elitist environments . 
 Cerna visited the University of Heidelberg , but , following the advice of Maiorescu , decided in favor of the University of Berlin , where he studied Philosophy , English and German language literature ( 1908 – 1910 ) . Around 1909 , he first came into contact with the <unk> , and , according to the dramatist 's own testimony , tutored his son , the future poet Luca Caragiale , providing his " scientific education " . Ion Luca Caragiale described Cerna as " a distinguished scientist and a great lover of music " . The two writers met a second time in Leipzig , in 1910 , when Cerna declared himself captivated by Caragiale , whom he described as " one of the richest intelligent minds to have ever been produced by our nation . " Two years later , Cerna enthusiastically welcomed the literary debut of Caragiale 's other son , Mateiu . 
 = = = Studies abroad and death = = = 
 From late 1910 to early 1912 , Cerna was at the University of Leipzig , where he attended courses held by the philosophers and psychologists Wilhelm Wundt , Eduard Spranger and Hans <unk> . Wundt left an enduring impression on his Romanian student . In a letter home , Cerna described his modest appearance , which he claimed recalled that of " decrepit " Orthodox members of the Romanian Jewish community , adding : " But I do love this decrepit exterior beyond measure ... " <unk> guided Cerna 's research in the scientific field , and coordinated his PhD thesis of 1913 , Die <unk> ( German for " <unk> Poetry " ) . According to Călinescu , Cerna 's work stated the primacy of " natural ideas " over reasoning , and concluded that " ideas have the purpose of signaling the problematic tensions of the soul . " Zarifopol wrote that Cerna was upset over having himself parted with writing poetry , and came to be preoccupied by Maiorescu 's German @-@ language dictum : In der Poesie ist der <unk> ein <unk> Ding ( " An idea is a damned thing when it comes to poetry " ) . Panait Cerna 's first volume of collected poetry was published at home in 1910 , and , two years later , resulted in the author being made a co @-@ recipient of the Romanian Academy 's Vasile <unk> Award . Some of his new poems were still being published by Convorbiri Literare in 1911 . 
 Panait Cerna died in Leipzig , shortly after receiving his diploma . Zarifopol was present when Cerna succumbed , and recorded that Maiorescu 's views on poetry where preoccupied his friend even on his deathbed . The poet was buried in the German city , and later exhumed for burial in Bucharest 's <unk> Cemetery . 
 = = Literary contribution = = 
 Cerna was a traditionalist poet , listed by Călinescu among the contributors to Romanian literature whose work " steers toward Classicism " , as do those of Dragomirescu , Mehedinţi , Henri <unk> , D. <unk> , Ion <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Corneliu <unk> , Mihail Codreanu , Alexandru Davila and George <unk> . In this account , Cerna is one in a group of " conceptual " poets , all of whom were connected with Dragomirescu . For part of his life , Cerna was also formally committed to Symbolism and the local Symbolist movement , whose aesthetic ideals he merged with his lyrical style , and sought to recover part of the Romantic legacy . He was thus known as the translator of works by Romantic poets , as well as for adopting a Messianic and Humanist perspective on life ( notably present in his poems <unk> şi <unk> , " Flower and Chasm " ; Zile de <unk> , " Days of Sorrow " ; and Plânsetul lui Adam , " Adam 's Sobbing " ) . 
 Literary historian Tudor Vianu notes the influence exercised on Cerna and other traditionalists by Mihai Eminescu , Romania 's major mid @-@ 19th century Classicist and Junimist <unk> modernist theorist Eugen Lovinescu also believes that the " matter in which [ Cerna ] worked " was largely " dominated by Eminescu . " He also cautions that there is a major difference between the two : Cerna is an optimist , while Eminescu most often projected a pessimistic attitude . According to Zarifopol , the poet considered himself an " improved follower " of Eminescu . Cerna was also a late admirer of Lord Byron , a main figure of English Romanticism , and translated from his Childe Harold . One of Cerna 's poems was an epic piece inspired by the Book of Genesis , where Adam confronts God . Titled Plânsetul lui Adam , it builds on themes which recalled Byron 's 1821 play Cain , and constituted an interrogation of divine laws . 
 In Plânsetul lui Adam and various other pieces , Panait Cerna ( called a " reflexive poet " by contemporary critic Ilarie Chendi ) sought to reconcile poetry and philosophy , thus creating a hybrid form of conceptual poetry . Eugen Lovinescu proposed that , although praised by Cerna 's contemporaries , this goal was " mediocre " , and that the literature it produced " does not express and does not suggest profound spiritual states , but , on the contrary , it expresses by means of rhetorical dialectic not only that which can be expressed , but also that which can be proven . " Paul Zarifopol , who notes that Cerna particularly treasured the Classicist poets Friedrich Schiller , Louise @-@ Victorine Ackermann and Jean @-@ Marie <unk> , as well as the Parnassian Sully Prudhomme , recounted their disagreement when it came to Caragiale , whom Cerna enjoyed only for his power of " observation " , but whom he argued lacked " concepts " . For Zarifopol , this statement , made with " a fanatical and dogmatic pathos " , evidenced a moment of " academic foolishness " in Cerna 's career . 
 Călinescu , who criticizes the poet for his difficulties with the language , describes him as " not accomplished " . Elaborating on this , he states : " [ Cerna is ] declamatory , banal and dry in his use of metaphors , although he displays a touch of the sublime here and there . " Lovinescu thought many of the expressions Cerna used in his poetry to be " unacceptable " , and argued that they were characterized by banality . This assessment was itself contested by Călinescu , who argued that the lyrics in questions are " actually the acceptable ones " , and that the awkward wordings " are entirely lost in lyrical fluency . " Among the writings forming the subject of this disagreement was Cerna 's Din <unk> ( " From Far Away " ) , which Lovinescu believed was marked by the use of repetitive and banal poetic images : 
 The subject of unrequited love was one of the major ones in Cerna 's lyric poems and , Călinescu argues , it evoked his actual experience with women , as " the regret of not having lived through the great mystery of love . " These pieces , the critic notes , point to the influence of Classicist authors such as Eminescu , Dante <unk> , and Giacomo Leopardi ( the latter poet had also been quoted in Cerna 's Die <unk> ) . One of the pieces , written from the perspective of a man who has once failed to gain the object of his affection , features the lyrics : 
 While rejecting Cerna 's conceptual approach , Lovinescu admired his style , for " the amplitude through which [ the sentiment ] is laid out in vast chimes and compact constructions of rhetorical stanzas . " Such features , he concluded , surpassed " everything ever written in our country " . For George Călinescu , Cerna 's " euphoric thirst for life " recalled the work of Parnassian and Symbolist author Alexandru Macedonski , but was tempered by " the mellow anemia of the <unk> . " One of his better @-@ known pieces from the series of love poems read : 
 Cerna 's protest over the violent repression of the 1907 revolt was <unk> in several contexts . In one such indignant piece , Cerna called on Peace not to arrive until the social issue would be solved . In Zile de <unk> , he appeals to the Sun to wash out the blood of peasant victims : 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Panait Cerna 's lifetime success and literary fame made him the target of adulation among his fellow traditionalists , a camp which united various Junimea affiliates and Sămănătorul contributors . According to Călinescu , this group saw him as Romania 's answer to Schiller and Percy Bysshe Shelley . Junimea saw in him one of its most important members of the early 20th century , while several historians note that he was so only because , at that stage , the literary society was declining . Mehedinţi 's 1914 account of the Junimist promotion of the " original manifestations of Romanian culture " listed Cerna alongside Alexandru G. Florescu and other minor writers . Literary historian Z. Ornea argues that this evidenced not just a decline in standards , but also Mehedinţi 's " tastelessness " . Also according to Ornea , the association with Dragomirescu was also characteristic for the Junimist twilight , given that this circle had failed to impose " a new literary direction " , and was tributary to the legacy of various traditionalist groups . At the same time , both Dragomirescu and his disciple Ion <unk> upheld him as a model to follow , equating him with the mid @-@ 19th century Classicist Grigore Alexandrescu . Zarifopol deplores Cerna 's submission to traditionalist and Classicist goals , arguing that it eventually ruined Cerna as a poet and made him unhappy . 
 The poet 's adoption of a mainstream approach to poetry also pleased his public , and , Călinescu notes , schoolbooks of the day celebrated him as a Romanian classic while completely ignoring more controversial Symbolists such as Macedonski and Dimitrie Anghel . His contributions have helped shaped the style of 20th @-@ century poets with traditionalist tendencies from different schools . Among them are the socialist Alexandru Toma , later known as an official poet of Communist Romania , and Sămănătorul ' s Ion <unk> @-@ <unk> , whose career later took him through an Expressionist stage and eventually to fascist politics . <unk> <unk> , another author to have been influenced by Cerna 's style , dedicated his mentor a poem which read : 
 In his essay Din <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " From the Register of Gentle Ideas " ) , where he satirizes the Romanian public 's reception of literature , Zarifopol looks into the problems faced by Cerna in satisfying his readers . Using one of Cerna 's own accounts as the basis for this analysis , he notes that a group of his young " female admirers " where unpleasantly surprised to find out that their idol was " short , pudgy , wide @-@ necked and ruddy @-@ faced . " He writes : " the girls ... were thus in full agreement with the philosophical tradition which , since the old days , has set as a supreme ideal a mosaic of perfections that is naive and unlikely . " 
 Like Lovinescu , other advocates of modernist literature rejected most of Cerna 's contributions . One of the first to have done so is Ovid Densusianu , who stated his belief that an artist 's work should be separated from his life . Lovinescu , who commented on Densusianu and his thoughts on Cerna , opined that Densusianu had a tendency to reject all poets who registered popular success , and that he treated Dimitrie Anghel 's work in much the same way . 
 The poet 's house in Cerna is presently a museum , dedicated in part to his memory , and also housing a permanent exhibit dedicated to the traditional arts and crafts of Tulcea County . It also features a bust of the poet . The county library in Tulcea city is named after him , as are a high school in Brăila and streets in Bucharest , Brăila , Bistriţa , Hunedoara , <unk> and <unk> . The local authorities in Tulcea County organize an annual Panait Cerna National Poetry and Essay Contest . 
 = USS Ericsson ( DD @-@ 56 ) = 
 USS Ericsson ( Destroyer No. 56 / DD @-@ 56 ) was an O 'Brien @-@ class destroyer built for the United States Navy prior to the American entry into World War I. The ship was the second U.S. Navy vessel named in honor of John Ericsson , the Swedish @-@ born builder of the ironclad warship USS Monitor during the American Civil War . 
 Ericsson was laid down by the New York Shipbuilding of Camden , New Jersey , in November 1913 and launched in August of the following year . The ship was a little more than 305 feet ( 93 m ) in length , just over 31 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) abeam , and had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 090 long tons ( 1 @,@ 110 t ) . She was armed with four 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) guns and had eight 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes . Ericsson was powered by a pair of steam turbines that propelled her at up to 29 knots ( 54 km / h ) . 
 After her May 1916 commissioning , Ericsson sailed off the east coast and in the Caribbean . She was one of seventeen destroyers sent out to rescue survivors from five victims of German submarine U @-@ 53 off the Lightship Nantucket in October 1916 , and carried 81 passengers from a sunken British ocean liner to Newport , Rhode Island . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Ericsson was part of the first U.S. destroyer squadron sent overseas . Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland , Ericsson made several unsuccessful attacks on U @-@ boats , and rescued survivors of several ships sunk by the German craft . 
 Upon returning to the United State after the war , Ericsson conducted operations with the destroyers of the Atlantic Fleet until August 1919 , when she was placed in reserve , still in commission . After a brief stint of operations in mid 1921 , she was placed in reserve until she was decommissioned at Philadelphia in June 1922 . In June 1924 , Ericsson was transferred to the United States Coast Guard to help enforce Prohibition as a part of the " Rum Patrol " . She operated under the name USCGC Ericsson ( CG @-@ 5 ) until May 1932 , when she was returned to the Navy . She was sold for scrap in August 1934 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Ericsson was authorized in March 1913 as the sixth and final ship of the O 'Brien class which was an improved version of the Cassin @-@ class destroyers authorized in 1911 . Construction of the vessel was awarded to New York Shipbuilding of Camden , New Jersey , which laid down her keel on 10 November 1913 . Just over nine months later , on 22 August 1914 , Ericsson was launched by sponsor Mrs. J. Washington Logue , wife of the Pennsylvania Congressman . The ship was named in honor of John Ericsson , the builder of the ironclad warship USS Monitor during the American Civil War , and was the second U.S. Navy ship named for the Swedish native . As built , the destroyer was 305 feet 3 inches ( 93 @.@ 04 m ) in length , 31 feet 1 inch ( 9 @.@ 47 m ) abeam , and drew 9 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 90 m ) . The ship had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 090 long tons ( 1 @,@ 110 t ) and displaced 1 @,@ 171 long tons ( 1 @,@ 190 t ) when fully loaded . 
 Ericsson had two Zoelly steam turbines that drove her two screw propellers , and an additional triple @-@ expansion steam engine connected to one of the propeller shafts for cruising purposes . Four oil @-@ burning White @-@ Forster boilers powered the engines , which could generate 17 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) , moving the ship at up to 29 knots ( 54 km / h ) . 
 Ericsson 's main battery consisted of four 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) / 50 Mark 9 guns , with each gun weighing in excess of 6 @,@ 100 pounds ( 2 @,@ 800 kg ) . The guns fired 33 @-@ pound ( 15 kg ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at 2 @,@ 900 feet per second ( 880 m / s ) . At an elevation of 20 ° , the guns had a range of 15 @,@ 920 yards ( 14 @,@ 560 m ) . 
 Ericsson was also equipped with eight 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes . The General Board of the United States Navy had called for two anti @-@ aircraft guns for the O 'Brien @-@ class ships , as well as provisions for laying up to 36 floating mines . From sources , it is unclear if these recommendations were followed for Ericsson or any of the other ships of the class . 
 = = Early career = = 
 USS Ericsson was commissioned into the United States Navy on 14 August 1915 under the command of Lieutenant Commander W. L. Pryor . From October through December 1915 , Ericsson operated out of New York and Newport , Rhode Island , on drills , in training , and on the Neutrality Patrol . With the Torpedo Flotilla of the Atlantic Fleet she sailed on 7 January 1916 for maneuvers in the Caribbean , using Key West and Guantanamo Bay as bases . She returned to Newport on 23 May . 
 At 05 : 30 on Sunday , 8 October 1916 , wireless reports came in of a German submarine stopping ships near the Lightship Nantucket , off the eastern end of Long Island . After an SOS from the British steamer West Point was received at about 12 : 30 , Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves ordered Ericsson and other destroyers at Newport to attend to survivors ; Ericsson was the fourth of seventeen destroyers to get underway . The destroyers arrived on the scene at about 17 : 00 when the U @-@ boat , U @-@ 53 under the command of Kapitänleutnant Hans Rose , fired shots across the bow of the Holland @-@ America Line cargo ship Blommersdijk , signaling her to stop . Shortly after , U @-@ 53 stopped the British passenger ship Stephano . As Rose had done with three other ships U @-@ 53 had sunk earlier in the day , he gave passengers and crew aboard Blommersdijk and Stephano adequate time to abandon the ships . Ericsson was one of six destroyers taking on passengers from Stephano that witnessed her sinking . In total , 226 survivors from U @-@ 53 's five victims were rescued by the destroyer flotilla . Ericsson transported 81 — including 35 women and children — back to Newport , where she arrived at 01 : 30 on 9 October . 
 After finishing out the rest of 1916 at Newport , Ericsson again joined in exercises in the Caribbean for the first three months of 1917 , and then returned to New York City and Newport to prepare for distant service . 
 = = World War I = = 
 After the United States declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917 entering World War I , Ericsson was prepared for overseas duty . On 7 May , Ericsson sailed from Boston with Tucker , Rowan , Cassin , Winslow and Jacob Jones for Queenstown , Ireland , where they arrived on 17 May . Ericsson began patrol duty in the war zone , and almost at once came upon a surfaced U @-@ boat shelling two sailing ships . She opened fire , forcing the submarine down and preventing further attack , then picked up 37 survivors of the sailing ships . She continued on patrol and escort duty , and on 28 September , at night , sighted a surfaced submarine , at which she fired . Ericsson dropped depth charges , but before she could carry out her plan to ram the German U @-@ boat , she lost contact in the darkness . 
 Ericsson continued to sail out of Queenstown on patrol and escorting convoys , many times attacking submarines , standing by damaged ships , and rescuing survivors . After June 1918 , she was based at Brest , France ; and during that summer , usually sailed about 3 nautical miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) ahead of convoys , towing aloft a kite balloon used for observation . At the close of the war , Ericsson was overhauled at Liverpool , but returned to Brest in time to take part on 13 December in the welcoming honors rendered for President Woodrow Wilson , arriving in France on the transport George Washington . On 21 December , Ericsson departed for the United States , arriving at New York on 8 January 1919 . 
 = = Postwar = = 
 In May 1919 , Ericsson sailed to the Azores to observe and support the historic first aerial crossing of the Atlantic , made by Navy seaplanes . After exercises along the east coast and in the Caribbean , she entered New York Navy Yard for repairs , and there was placed in reserve , still in commission , on 7 August . She was laid up in reduced commission at Philadelphia and Charleston , South Carolina , in the years that followed , and put to sea only during the summer of 1921 , when drills and exercises took her to Newport . She was decommissioned at Philadelphia on 16 June 1922 . 
 = = United States Coast Guard career = = 
 On 17 January 1920 , Prohibition was instituted by law in the United States . Soon , the smuggling of alcoholic beverages along the coastlines of the United States became widespread and blatant . The Treasury Department eventually determined that the United States Coast Guard simply did not have the ships to constitute a successful patrol . To cope with the problem , President Calvin Coolidge in 1924 authorized the transfer from the Navy to the Coast Guard of twenty old destroyers that were in reserve and out of commission . Ericsson was activated and acquired by the Coast Guard on 7 June 1924 . 
 Designated CG @-@ 5 , Ericsson was commissioned on 28 May 1925 , and joined the " Rum Patrol " to aid in the attempt to enforce prohibition laws . On 11 April 1926 , she captured the rum @-@ runner Atalanta . During her time in the Coast Guard , Ericsson 's gunners were awarded the USCG Gunnery Trophy for Destroyers for 1925 – 26 and 1926 – 27 . Ericsson was decommissioned at the Philadelphia Navy Yard on 30 April 1930 , and returned to the U.S. Navy on 23 May 1932 . She was scrapped and her salvaged material sold on 22 August 1934 in accordance with the London Naval Treaty . 
 = Is This It = 
 Is This It is the debut studio album by the American rock band the Strokes . Recorded at Transporterraum in New York City with producer Gordon Raphael , the album was first released on July 30 , 2001 , in Australia , with RCA Records as the primary label . The record entered the UK Albums Chart at number two and peaked at number 33 on the U.S. Billboard 200 , going on to achieve platinum status in several markets . " Hard to Explain " , " Last Nite " , and " Someday " were released as singles . 
 For the album , the Strokes strived to capture a simple rock sound that was not significantly enhanced in the studio . Building on the work of their 2001 debut EP , The Modern Age , the band members molded compositions largely through live takes during the recording sessions , while songwriter Julian Casablancas continued to detail the lives and relationships of urban youth . Following the completion of Is This It , the Strokes embarked on a promotional world tour before its release . The album 's cover photograph courted controversy for being too sexually explicit and was replaced for the U.S. market . The American track listing was also amended in light of the September 11 terrorist attacks . 
 Promoted by the music press for a melodic pop @-@ influenced sound , the Strokes garnered critical acclaim and commercial attention . Is This It was praised for its charisma and rhythm , which often referenced the works of 1970s garage rock bands . The record is considered crucial in the development of other alternative bands and of the post @-@ millennial music industry . It has featured in several publications ' lists of the best albums of the 2000s and of all time . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In 1997 , the Strokes consisted of singer Julian Casablancas , guitarist Nick Valensi , bassist Nikolai <unk> , and drummer Fabrizio Moretti . Casablancas 's stepfather and Moretti 's and <unk> 's older brothers introduced the quartet to the music of reggae artist Bob Marley , protopunk group the Velvet Underground , and alternative rock band Jane 's Addiction . Discussing the formative stages of the group , Moretti noted , " Our music was , like , [ the Doors ' ] , but trying to be classical . We all took music classes and tried writing songs , and when we put them together they were this crazy amalgam of insane ideas that we thought was really cool . " In 1998 , Albert Hammond , Jr . , who Casablancas knew from his time at a Swiss boarding school , moved to New York City to attend film school and joined The Strokes as a second guitarist . His arrival provided the catalyst for the band 's musical and emotional evolution . 
 By 2000 , all band members had part @-@ time jobs and were practicing new material several nights a week in a small hired recording space . In the fall of that year , their demo caught the attention of Ryan Gentles , a talent booker at New York City 's Mercury Lounge . He scheduled the Strokes for four December gigs . With support from personal mentor JP Bowersock and producer Gordon Raphael , the band recorded three tracks which later appeared on Is This It : " The Modern Age " , " Last Nite " , and " Barely Legal " . British label Rough Trade Records was impressed by the songs and released them as a January 2001 EP titled The Modern Age . Music press reaction was very positive and the Strokes embarked on a sold @-@ out UK tour , followed by U.S. support slots for alternative rock groups Doves and Guided by Voices . Gentles quit his job to manage the band full @-@ time and , in March 2001 , the Strokes signed to RCA Records after a protracted bidding war . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After the deal with RCA , the Strokes started working with Gil Norton , who had produced recordings for alternative rock group Pixies . Although a rapport developed between the two parties , the band remained unhappy at the results of preliminary sessions which sounded " too clean " and " too pretentious " ; the three songs recorded with Norton were scrapped . Like The Modern Age , Is This It was eventually recorded with Gordon Raphael at Transporterraum in Manhattan 's East Village in New York City . The studio is located in a basement with poor lighting , but despite its poor infrastructure , it includes modern Pro Tools Digital Audio Workstation hardware . The Strokes liked Raphael 's lack of ego and formed a good collaborative relationship with the producer . 
 Before recording started , both parties organized a listening session with the musical material Hammond and Casablancas had brought to show the tone and energy they liked . One of the prerequisites mentioned at the meeting was to take what was happening in music at the time , and go in a completely different direction . Casablancas wanted Is This It to sound like " a band from the past that took a time trip into the future to make their record " . The approach for the album became more studied than that of The Modern Age . The group wanted the majority of songs to sound like them playing live , while they requested a few others to be like " a weird , in @-@ studio production with a drum machine , even though no drum machine was used " . The songs of the latter type were done track @-@ by @-@ track and were crafted into non @-@ standard rock arrangements . Raphael 's background in industrial music played a large part in the album 's conception . 
 During six weeks in the studio , the Strokes ' gritty sound became the emphasis of the sessions . The band usually recorded songs only once , based on Casablancas 's preference for " raw efficiency " . RAT effects pedals and overdriving amplifiers were used at times , " taking sounds , disintegrating them and then bringing them back " . The band wanted things to be only slightly stressed , with no heavy @-@ handedness in terms of studio effects ; only distortion and reverse echo were widely used . Throughout the process , Raphael improvised according to the reactions that he got from the group . At one point , he had to cope with the threat of eviction from his Transporterraum studio , but once the Strokes received backing from RCA , time and money were no longer pressing concerns . The label 's A & R delegate initially did not like what had been recorded and felt that the album was not going to be professional enough . The producer and the band were given complete control only when Casablancas persuaded the delegate by playing him some of the new material on a boom box . 
 Inspired by the Velvet Underground 's production and the direct approach of punk rock band Ramones , the miking scheme for the drum kit included only three microphones : one above it , one for the bass drum , and one in the corner of the studio . It was crafted to capture " a compressed , explosive sound " . On Moretti 's advice , the transfer from the two loud guitars and the rumble of the bass picked up by the drum @-@ kit microphones was not eliminated . The guitars were recorded more simply ; Hammond and Valensi both used Fender DeVille amps on opposite sides of the room , while Raphael positioned a mic on each . The sound was then fed directly into a preamp with no equalization . Valensi commented that guitar teacher and mentor Bowersock was invaluable because he was articulating things to the producer that the group could not . While the rest of the Strokes played to a click track , Casablancas sang through a small Peavey practice amp to retain a sense of low fidelity on the album . Raphael mixed as he went along to maintain control of the record until the final mastering stage ; the producer aimed to show the Strokes a final product as soon as the band finished performing a track . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Casablancas 's writing observes life in New York City and the relationships formed in such a metropolis . Exemplifying this theme , " The Modern Age " is a rant about the oddness of modern life . " Barely Legal " concerns the subject matter of a girl who has just arrived at the age of consent . Discussing its risqué nature , Moretti has stated , " It should be taken the way you interpret it . The lyrics mean different things to different people . " " Alone , Together " continues the sexual theme by dropping hints about cunnilingus , while the yelp at the start of " New York City Cops " was created as a pastiche of rock band Aerosmith . " Soma " takes influence from Aldous Huxley 's 1932 novel Brave New World and its featured imaginary drug , soma . Here Casablancas is discussing drug use in order to fit in with the cool crowd . During the studio sessions , Casablancas introduced tracks with comic lines and some quips were used when the album was mixed . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 All songs on Is This It were mixed using 11 audio tracks or less . According to Valensi , the album contains " no gimmicks , no tricks " to try to get the listener to like the compositions . It opens with the title track , which features a simple , metronomic drum line , a recurring feature in the rest of the record . Containing one of the slowest tempos , " Is This It " is the Strokes ' attempt at a ballad . " The Modern Age " follows and includes a guitar riff accompanied by a complementary drum line . Its staccato verse is followed by an upbeat , singalong chorus and a guitar solo . Discussing the album 's simplicity and measured approach , Valensi has commented , " We don 't put in a guitar solo just to have one . " " Soma " incorporates jerky rhythms and starts and ends with the same guitar and drum chimes , while " Barely Legal " contains some of the album 's softer guitar melodies inspired by Britpop as well as drumming patterns that evoke the sound of primitive 1980s drum machines . 
 The fifth track on the record , " Someday " , is infused with rockabilly elements and interlocking guitar lines , the latter a recurring element of Is This It . " Alone , Together " is driven by a staccato rhythm , and climaxes first with a guitar solo , then a repeat of the central guitar hook . " Last Nite " is also a guitar @-@ driven song , but leans towards pop music influences . At its core , there are reggae @-@ inspired rhythm guitar lines played by Hammond , and studio noise effects . The rhythm section plays simple interlocking notes and beats . Like " Soma " , " Hard to Explain " contains processed drum tracks using dynamic range compression and equalization studio techniques to make them sound like a drum machine . The song incorporates spliced ad @-@ libbing extras from Casablancas , a feature also used on " New York City Cops " . " Trying Your Luck " , the album 's mellowest point , follows and shows more melancholic vocals . The last track on Is This It , " Take It or Leave It " , is the only song in which Hammond used the bridge pickup of his Fender Stratocaster guitar . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Following the album 's completion , the Strokes performed at Philadelphia music venues every Wednesday of May 2001 . The band revealed the track listing of Is This It on May 15 . A June headlining tour of the UK and Ireland was also confirmed , and almost immediately after the announcement , some venues sold out . " Hard to Explain " was named as the album 's first single with a release date of June 25 to coincide with the tour . At the time , Moretti stated , " In Britain , people are much more responsive ... I 'm so psyched to be going back , every show we played people were enjoying it . There 's a lot of people here in America who think we 've had it too easy , but they have never really heard the music . " 
 Following the Strokes ' June 20 show in Glasgow , Moretti suffered a fall and was hospitalized with a broken hand . Two of the last five UK gigs were canceled and a friend of the group , Matt Romano , flew to England to replace the injured drummer in the remaining concerts . In a press release , Gentles explained , " They will only carry on if they feel that they are 100 % after rehearsing with Matt , as they wouldn 't offer anything less to their fans . " With Romano as a substitute , the band managed to satisfy the outstanding commitments . Live recorded versions of " Hard to Explain " , its B @-@ side " New York City Cops " , and " Last Nite " from The Modern Age EP aired on UK music show Top of the Pops on July 6 , 2001 . The Strokes headlined the T in the Park festival in Scotland on July 7 after alternative rock group Weezer pulled out . A large part of the month of July was spent performing in cities in the West Coasts of America and Canada . 
 Is This It was released in Australia on July 30 , 2001 to capitalize on the Strokes ' recent tour of the country . The record was streamed on Australian websites by the band 's distributor BMG and remained available for listening even after the CD release . Geoff Travis , head of the Strokes ' UK label Rough Trade , commented that the Australian continent had " special dispensation " and that an export ban was put in place to ensure no interferences with release plans in the rest of the world . The Japanese release date of August 22 was timed to occur after two one @-@ off shows by the band at the Summer Sonic Festival , while the UK release of August 27 coincided with the Reading and Leeds Festivals . The September 11 terrorist attacks in New York City postponed the group 's CMJ Music Marathon performance , and shifted RCA 's U.S. release of Is This It from September 25 to October 9 . A newly recorded song , " When It Started " , replaced " New York City Cops " on the CD version of the album after the Strokes witnessed the " valiant response " of the city 's police department during the tragedy . The vinyl release retained the original track list . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The July and August 2001 cover art of Is This It is by Colin Lane and features a photograph of a woman 's nude bottom and hip , with a leather @-@ gloved hand suggestively resting on it . The model was later revealed to be Lane 's then @-@ girlfriend , who explained that the photoshoot was spontaneous and happened after she came out of the shower naked . Lane recalled that a stylist had left the glove in his apartment and noted , " We did about 10 shots . There was no real inspiration , I was just trying to take a sexy picture . " The result was included in the book The Greatest Album Covers of All Time , in which Grant Scott , one of the editors , noted influences from the daring works of Helmut Newton and Guy Bourdin in its design . Scott concluded , " It ’ s either a stylish or graphically strong cover or a sexist Smell the Glove travesty . " Although British retail chains HMV and Woolworths objected to the photograph 's controversial nature , they stocked the album without amendment . 
 The group deliberately left out the grammatically correct question mark from the album title because aesthetically , " it did not look right " . The booklet insert contains stylized separate portraits of the Strokes , Raphael , Gentles , and Bowersock , all photographed by Lane . For the American market and the October 2001 release , the cover art of Is This It was changed to a psychedelic photograph of subatomic particle tracks in a bubble chamber . RCA product manager Dave Gottlieb commented that " it was straight up a band decision " , while Gentles indicated that Casablancas had wanted it to appear globally . According to the band 's manager , the frontman phoned him before the Japan and Europe release and said , " I found something even cooler than the ass picture . " At the time , the Lane photograph was already at the presses and was included in the July and August 2001 versions . The Strokes ' 2003 biography mentions the fear of objections from America 's conservative retail industry and right @-@ wing lobby as reasons for the artwork 's alteration . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Is This It was a commercial success and entered the UK Albums Chart at number two after first week sales of 48 @,@ 393 copies . The record was listed at number 71 on the UK Albums Chart for 2001 and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry after charting continuously from its release in August to the end of the year . In the U.S. , Is This It entered the Billboard 200 at number 74 after selling 16 @,@ 000 units in the first week . 20 @,@ 000 copies were shipped in America per week from October 2001 to January 2002 , when a performance by the Strokes on nationwide TV show Saturday Night Live caused a temporary rise in sales . A 60 % increase allowed the album to reach a peak of number 33 on the Billboard 200 from its previous high of 63 . 
 Is This It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in February 2002 for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. , and by the Canadian Recording Industry Association in April for 50 @,@ 000 units in Canada . In 2002 , the album attained platinum status in the UK and in Australia for sales of 300 @,@ 000 and 70 @,@ 000 copies respectively . The average U.S. weekly sales were 7 @,@ 000 by October 2002 , when the reissue of the album with a bonus DVD caused an increase . By October 2003 , the record had spent 58 weeks on the Billboard 200 since its release two years earlier , selling 900 @,@ 000 copies in America ; two million copies were sold worldwide . Is This It was certified platinum in Canada in 2004 after 100 @,@ 000 units were shipped there . By the start of 2006 , the album had sold over 600 @,@ 000 copies in UK and over one million units in the U.S. 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Is This It received widespread critical acclaim ; aggregating website Metacritic reports a normalized rating of 91 , based on 26 critical reviews . Joe Levy of Rolling Stone explained that the record is " the stuff of which legends are made " , and summed it up as " more joyful and intense than anything else I 've heard this year " . Robert Christgau , writing in The Village Voice , described the Strokes as " a great groove band " , and noted that " the beats implode , clashing / resolving with punky brevity and gnarly faux simplicity " . In a perfect 10 review , NME reviewer John Robinson indicated that Is This It was one of the best debut LPs by a guitar band during the past 20 years . In contrast , Jon Monks of Stylus commented that its shallowness prevents it from ever being called a " classic " . In his favorable A – review , David Browne of Entertainment Weekly conceded that he did not know whether the Strokes would have a long @-@ term impact , but noted that , at the time , the record " just feels right , and sometimes that 's enough " . 
 Mark Lepage of Blender claimed that Is This It is similar to the works of 1970s bands the Velvet Underground , Television and the Feelies . Pitchfork Media 's Ryan Schreiber suggested that , while the work of the Velvet Underground is an obvious inspiration for the Strokes , the band 's only similarity to the other groups is the confidence with which they perform . AllMusic 's Heather Phares concluded , " Granted , their high @-@ fashion appeal and faultless influences ... have ' critics ' darlings ' written all over them . But like the similarly lauded Elastica and Supergrass before them , the Strokes don 't rehash the sounds that inspire them — they remake them in their own image . " 
 Is This It was named the best album of 2001 by Billboard , CMJ , Entertainment Weekly , NME , Playlouder , and Time . Magnet , Q , and The New Yorker included it in their respective unnumbered <unk> of the best records issued that year . It figured highly in other end @-@ of @-@ year best album lists : at number two by The Herald , at number three by Mojo , at number five by The New York Times , at number eight by Rolling Stone and by USA Today , at number nine by The Boston Phoenix , and at number ten by Kludge . The record featured at number two behind Bob Dylan 's Love and Theft in The Village Voice 's 2001 Pazz & Jop critics ' poll , which aggregated the votes of 621 prominent reviewers . In 2002 , Is This It was named Best Album at the NME Awards and Best International Album at the Meteor Music Awards . It was nominated in the latter category at the Brit Awards , where the Strokes won Best International Newcomer and received a nomination in the Best International Group category . The same year , the quintet won Band Of The Year and Best New Act at the NME Awards and was nominated in the latter category at the MTV Europe Music Awards . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Gary Mulholland of The Observer considers the release of Is This It a " world @-@ changing moment " and notes that its impact was " immediate and dramatic " on both music and attire . BBC Radio 1 's Zane Lowe suggests that the album moved popular opinion from DJs and pop music to " skinny jeans and guitars " , " the template for rock ' n ' roll in the modern day " . Tam Gunn of FACT agrees and explains that it " caused a sea change " in mainstream music in the U.S. and the UK , while Anthony Miccio of Stylus points out that the Strokes ' success created the commercial context for " other new @-@ wavers " to flourish . Rolling Stone writes that Is This It inspired " a ragged revolt " in Britain , led by the Libertines and Arctic Monkeys , and continued its influence in the U.S. on the success of bands like Kings of Leon . The Observer shares a similar view and concludes that " a fine brood of heirs " , like the Libertines and Franz Ferdinand , would not have existed and been successful if the Strokes had not reinvigorated " rock 's obsession with having a good time " . Jared <unk> of Kings of Leon notes that the album was one of the main reasons that he wanted to get into a band ; he states , " The title track was one of the first basslines I learned ... I was just 15 at the time . " 
 Jed Gottlieb of the Boston Herald argues that , although Is This It provided substantial musical influence , its biggest success was in revamping the music industry and making A & R delegates scout and promote alternative bands . Gunn links the success of alternative music in British charts throughout the 2000s to the album , but notes that " the copyists " could never match the attention to detail and heartfelt emotion of the Strokes . Mulholland adds that even the pop stars of that decade who rediscovered disco , electro , and synthpop owe a debt to the record , because its commercial success " made every forgotten art @-@ pop experiment of the late 70s and early 80s instantly hip and ripe for reinvention " . Hamish MacBain of NME writes that " the western world has moved on , and is now swinging to the tune of Is This It " , while Pitchfork Media 's Joe Colly suggests that " you only capture this kind of a lightning in a bottle once " . Gunn concludes that , while the status of the album as the 2000s ' most influential guitar record may be " a double @-@ edged sword " because of poor quality copyists , its status as the decade 's best pop album should not be in doubt . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 2003 , Is This It was ranked at number seven in NME 's editorial staff list of the 100 Best Albums , while Rolling Stone included it at number 199 in its special updated issue of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . In 2005 , Spin placed it at number 100 in its list of the 100 Greatest Albums , 1985 – 2005 , while Stylus included it at number four in its list of the Top 50 Albums of 2000 – 2005 . In 2006 , Is This It was ranked at number 48 by The Observer in the publication 's list of The 50 Albums That Changed Music , while Mojo featured it at number 33 in its list of 100 Modern Classics , 1993 – 2006 . In 2007 , Q included the record at number 21 in its editorial staff list of the 21 Albums That Changed Music . In 2008 , Entertainment Weekly ranked it at number 34 in its list of the 100 Best Albums , 1983 – 2008 . 
 In 2009 , Is This It was ranked as the best record of the 2000s by NME , ahead of the Libertines ' Up the Bracket , and at number two by Rolling Stone , behind Radiohead 's Kid A , in their respective lists decided by the publications ' staff and music industry members . FACT placed it at number two behind Burial 's Untrue in its editorial list of the 100 Best : Albums of the Decade , while Billboard featured it at number three in its critics ' picks of the 20 Best Albums of the 2000s . The same year , The Observer included Is This It at number four in its Albums of the Decade list , while Uncut ranked it at number five in its list of The 150 Greatest Albums Of The 21st Century . The Times placed it at number six in its list of The 100 Best Pop Albums of the Noughties , while Pitchfork Media featured it at number seven in its staff list of The Top 200 Albums of the 2000s . In 2010 , Stylus ranked Is This It at number six in its list of the Top Albums of the previous decade . The record is included in both The Guardian 's " 1000 Albums To Hear Before You Die " and the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Julian Casablancas . 
 The U.S. CD version has " When It Started " ( 2 : 57 ) as track 9 instead of " New York City Cops . " 
 The bonus DVD portion of the reissue contains the music videos for the album 's three singles and two previously unreleased live performances of the Strokes on MTV2 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Auguste Rodin = 
 François Auguste René Rodin ( 12 November 1840 – 17 November 1917 ) , known as Auguste Rodin ( / <unk> <unk> / ; French : [ <unk> <unk> ̃ ] ) , was a French sculptor . Although Rodin is generally considered the progenitor of modern sculpture , he did not set out to rebel against the past . He was schooled traditionally , took a craftsman @-@ like approach to his work , and desired academic recognition , although he was never accepted into Paris 's foremost school of art . 
 <unk> , Rodin possessed a unique ability to model a complex , turbulent , deeply pocketed surface in clay . Many of his most notable sculptures were roundly criticized during his lifetime . They clashed with predominant figurative sculpture traditions , in which works were decorative , formulaic , or highly thematic . Rodin 's most original work departed from traditional themes of mythology and allegory , modeled the human body with realism , and celebrated individual character and physicality . Rodin was sensitive to the controversy surrounding his work , but refused to change his style . Successive works brought increasing favor from the government and the artistic community . 
 From the unexpected realism of his first major figure – inspired by his 1875 trip to Italy – to the unconventional memorials whose commissions he later sought , Rodin 's reputation grew , such that he became the preeminent French sculptor of his time . By 1900 , he was a world @-@ renowned artist . Wealthy private clients sought Rodin 's work after his World 's Fair exhibit , and he kept company with a variety of high @-@ profile intellectuals and artists . He married his lifelong companion , Rose Beuret , in the last year of both their lives . His sculptures suffered a decline in popularity after his death in 1917 , but within a few decades , his legacy solidified . Rodin remains one of the few sculptors widely known outside the visual arts community . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Formative years = = = 
 Rodin was born in 1840 into a working @-@ class family in Paris , the second child of Marie <unk> and Jean @-@ Baptiste Rodin , who was a police department clerk . He was largely self @-@ educated , and began to draw at age ten . Between ages 14 and 17 , Rodin attended the Petite École , a school specializing in art and mathematics , where he studied drawing and painting . His drawing teacher , Horace Lecoq de Boisbaudran , believed in first developing the personality of his students so that they observed with their own eyes and drew from their recollections . Rodin still expressed appreciation for his teacher much later in life . It was at Petite École that he first met Jules Dalou and Alphonse Legros . 
 In 1857 , Rodin submitted a clay model of a companion to the École des Beaux @-@ Arts in an attempt to win entrance ; he did not succeed , and two further applications were also denied . Given that entrance requirements at the Grande École were not particularly high , the rejections were considerable setbacks . Rodin 's inability to gain entrance may have been due to the judges ' Neoclassical tastes , while Rodin had been schooled in light , 18th @-@ century sculpture . Leaving the Petite École in 1857 , Rodin earned a living as a craftsman and <unk> for most of the next two decades , producing decorative objects and architectural embellishments . 
 Rodin 's sister Maria , two years his senior , died of peritonitis in a convent in 1862 . Rodin was anguished and felt guilty because he had introduced Maria to an unfaithful suitor . Turning away from art , he briefly joined a Catholic order , the Congregation of the Blessed Sacrament . Saint Peter Julian <unk> , founder and head of the congregation , recognized Rodin 's talent and , sensing his lack of suitability for the order , encouraged Rodin to continue with his sculpture . He returned to work as a decorator , while taking classes with animal sculptor Antoine @-@ Louis Barye . The teacher 's attention to detail – his finely rendered musculature of animals in motion – significantly influenced Rodin . 
 In 1864 , Rodin began to live with a young seamstress named Rose Beuret , with whom he would stay – with ranging commitment – for the rest of his life . The couple had a son , Auguste @-@ Eugène Beuret ( 1866 – 1934 ) . That year , Rodin offered his first sculpture for exhibition , and entered the studio of Albert @-@ Ernest Carrier @-@ Belleuse , a successful mass producer of objets d 'art . Rodin worked as Carrier @-@ Belleuse ' chief assistant until 1870 , designing roof decorations and staircase and doorway embellishments . With the arrival of the Franco @-@ Prussian War , Rodin was called to serve in the National Guard , but his service was brief due to his near @-@ sightedness . <unk> ' work had dwindled because of the war , yet Rodin needed to support his family ; poverty was a continual difficulty for Rodin until about the age of 30 . Carrier @-@ Belleuse soon asked Rodin to join him in Belgium , where they would work on ornamentation for Brussels ' bourse . 
 Rodin planned to stay in Belgium a few months , but he spent the next six years out of France . It was a pivotal time in his life . He had acquired skill and experience as a craftsman , but no one had yet seen his art , which sat in his workshop , since he could not afford castings . Though his relationship with Carrier @-@ Belleuse deteriorated , Rodin found other employment in Brussels , displaying some works at salons , and his companion Rose soon joined him there . Having saved enough money to travel , Rodin visited Italy for two months in 1875 , where he was drawn to the work of Donatello and Michelangelo . Their work had a profound effect on his artistic direction . Rodin said , " It is Michelangelo who has freed me from academic sculpture . " Returning to Belgium , he began work on The Age of Bronze , a life @-@ size male figure whose realism brought Rodin attention but led to accusations of sculptural cheating . 
 = = = Artistic independence = = = 
 Rose Beuret and Rodin returned to Paris in 1877 , moving into a small flat on the Left Bank . Misfortune surrounded Rodin : his mother , who had wanted to see her son marry , was dead , and his father was blind and senile , cared for by Rodin 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , Aunt Thérèse . Rodin 's eleven @-@ year @-@ old son Auguste , possibly developmentally delayed , was also in the ever @-@ helpful Thérèse 's care . Rodin had essentially abandoned his son for six years , and would have a very limited relationship with him throughout his life . Father and son now joined the couple in their flat , with Rose as caretaker . The charges of fakery surrounding The Age of Bronze continued . Rodin increasingly sought more soothing female companionship in Paris , and Rose stayed in the background . 
 Rodin earned his living collaborating with more established sculptors on public commissions , primarily memorials and neo @-@ baroque architectural pieces in the style of Carpeaux . In competitions for commissions he submitted models of Denis Diderot , Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , and Lazare Carnot , all to no avail . On his own time , he worked on studies leading to the creation of his next important work , St. John the Baptist Preaching . 
 In 1880 , Carrier @-@ Belleuse – now art director of the Sèvres national porcelain factory – offered Rodin a part @-@ time position as a designer . The offer was in part a gesture of reconciliation , and Rodin accepted . That part of Rodin which appreciated 18th @-@ century tastes was aroused , and he immersed himself in designs for vases and table ornaments that brought the factory renown across Europe . 
 The artistic community appreciated his work in this vein , and Rodin was invited to Paris Salons by such friends as writer Léon <unk> . During his early appearances at these social events , Rodin seemed shy ; in his later years , as his fame grew , he displayed the loquaciousness and temperament for which he is better known . French statesman Leon Gambetta expressed a desire to meet Rodin , and the sculptor impressed him when they met at a salon . Gambetta spoke of Rodin in turn to several government ministers , likely including Edmund Turquet , the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Fine Arts , whom Rodin eventually met . 
 Rodin 's relationship with Turquet was rewarding : through him , he won the 1880 commission to create a portal for a planned museum of decorative arts . Rodin dedicated much of the next four decades to his elaborate Gates of Hell , an unfinished portal for a museum that was never built . Many of the portal 's figures became sculptures in themselves , including Rodin 's most famous , The Thinker and The Kiss . With the museum commission came a free studio , granting Rodin a new level of artistic freedom . Soon , he stopped working at the porcelain factory ; his income came from private commissions . 
 In 1883 , Rodin agreed to supervise a course for sculptor Alfred Boucher in his absence , where he met the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Camille Claudel . The two formed a passionate but stormy relationship and influenced each other artistically . Claudel inspired Rodin as a model for many of his figures , and she was a talented sculptor , assisting him on commissions . 
 Although busy with The Gates of Hell , Rodin won other commissions . He pursued an opportunity to create a historical monument for the town of Calais . For a monument to French author Honoré de Balzac , Rodin was chosen in 1891 . His execution of both sculptures clashed with traditional tastes , and met with varying degrees of disapproval from the organizations that sponsored the commissions . Still , Rodin was gaining support from diverse sources that propelled him toward fame . 
 In 1889 , the Paris Salon invited Rodin to be a judge on its artistic jury . Though Rodin 's career was on the rise , Claudel and Beuret were becoming increasingly impatient with Rodin 's " double life " . Claudel and Rodin shared an atelier at a small old castle , but Rodin refused to relinquish his ties to Beuret , his loyal companion during the lean years , and mother of his son . During one absence , Rodin wrote to Beuret , " I think of how much you must have loved me to put up with my caprices ... I remain , in all tenderness , your Rodin . " Claudel and Rodin parted in 1898 . Claudel suffered a nervous breakdown several years later and was confined to an institution by her family until her death . 
 = = Works = = 
 In 1864 , Rodin submitted his first sculpture for exhibition , The Man with the Broken Nose , to the Paris Salon . The subject was an elderly neighbourhood street porter . The unconventional bronze piece was not a traditional bust , but instead the head was " broken off " at the neck , the nose was flattened and crooked , and the back of the head was absent , having fallen off the clay model in an accident . The work emphasized texture and the emotional state of the subject ; it illustrated the " <unk> " that would characterize many of Rodin 's later sculptures . The Salon rejected the piece . 
 = = = Early figures : the inspiration of Italy = = = 
 In Brussels , Rodin created his first full @-@ scale work , The Age of Bronze , having returned from Italy . Modeled by a Belgian soldier , the figure drew inspiration from Michelangelo 's Dying Slave , which Rodin had observed at the Louvre . Attempting to combine Michelangelo 's mastery of the human form with his own sense of human nature , Rodin studied his model from all angles , at rest and in motion ; he mounted a ladder for additional perspective , and made clay models , which he studied by candlelight . The result was a life @-@ size , well @-@ proportioned nude figure , posed unconventionally with his right hand atop his head , and his left arm held out at his side , forearm parallel to the body . 
 In 1877 , the work debuted in Brussels and then was shown at the Paris Salon . The statue 's apparent lack of a theme was troubling to critics – commemorating neither mythology nor a noble historical event – and it is not clear whether Rodin intended a theme . He first titled the work The Vanquished , in which form the left hand held a spear , but he removed the spear because it obstructed the torso from certain angles . After two more intermediary titles , Rodin settled on The Age of Bronze , suggesting the Bronze Age , and in Rodin 's words , " man arising from nature " . Later , however , Rodin said that he had had in mind " just a simple piece of sculpture without reference to subject " . 
 Its mastery of form , light , and shadow made the work look so realistic that Rodin was accused of surmoulage – having taken a cast from a living model . Rodin vigorously denied the charges , writing to newspapers and having photographs taken of the model to prove how the sculpture differed . He demanded an inquiry and was eventually exonerated by a committee of sculptors . Leaving aside the false charges , the piece polarized critics . It had barely won acceptance for display at the Paris Salon , and criticism likened it to " a statue of a <unk> " and called it " an astonishingly accurate copy of a low type " . Others rallied to defend the piece and Rodin 's integrity . The government minister Turquet admired the piece , and The Age of Bronze was purchased by the state for 2 @,@ 200 francs – what it had cost Rodin to have it cast in bronze . 
 A second male nude , St. John the Baptist Preaching , was completed in 1878 . Rodin sought to avoid another charge of surmoulage by making the statue larger than life : St. John stands almost 6 ' 7 " ' ' ( 2 m ) . While The Age of Bronze is statically posed , St. John gestures and seems to move toward the viewer . The effect of walking is achieved despite the figure having both feet firmly on the ground – a physical impossibility , and a technical achievement that was lost on most contemporary critics . Rodin chose this contradictory position to , in his words , " display simultaneously ... views of an object which in fact can be seen only successively " . 
 Despite the title , St. John the Baptist Preaching did not have an obviously religious theme . The model , an Italian peasant who presented himself at Rodin 's studio , possessed an idiosyncratic sense of movement that Rodin felt compelled to capture . Rodin thought of John the Baptist , and carried that association into the title of the work . In 1880 , Rodin submitted the sculpture to the Paris Salon . Critics were still mostly dismissive of his work , but the piece finished third in the Salon 's sculpture category . 
 Regardless of the immediate receptions of St. John and The Age of Bronze , Rodin had achieved a new degree of fame . Students sought him at his studio , praising his work and scorning the charges of surmoulage . The artistic community knew his name . 
 = = = The Gates of Hell = = = 
 A commission to create a portal for Paris ' planned Museum of Decorative Arts was awarded to Rodin in 1880 . Although the museum was never built , Rodin worked throughout his life on The Gates of Hell , a monumental sculptural group depicting scenes from Dante 's Inferno in high relief . Often lacking a clear conception of his major works , Rodin compensated with hard work and a striving for perfection . 
 He conceived The Gates with the surmoulage controversy still in mind : " ... I had made the St. John to refute [ the charges of casting from a model ] , but it only partially succeeded . To prove completely that I could model from life as well as other sculptors , I determined ... to make the sculpture on the door of figures smaller than life . " Laws of composition gave way to the Gates ' disordered and untamed depiction of Hell . The figures and groups in this , Rodin 's meditation on the condition of man , are physically and morally isolated in their torment . 
 The Gates of Hell comprised 186 figures in its final form . Many of Rodin 's best @-@ known sculptures started as designs of figures for this composition , such as The Thinker , The Three Shades , and The Kiss , and were only later presented as separate and independent works . Other well @-@ known works derived from The Gates are Ugolino , Fugit Amor , The Falling Man , and The Prodigal Son . 
 The Thinker ( originally titled The Poet , after Dante ) was to become one of the most well @-@ known sculptures in the world . The original was a 27 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 700 mm ) high bronze piece created between 1879 and 1889 , designed for the Gates ' lintel , from which the figure would gaze down upon Hell . While The Thinker most obviously characterizes Dante , aspects of the Biblical Adam , the mythological Prometheus , and Rodin himself have been ascribed to him . Other observers de @-@ emphasize the apparent intellectual theme of The Thinker , stressing the figure 's rough physicality and the emotional tension emanating from it . 
 = = = The Burghers of Calais = = = 
 The town of Calais had contemplated a historical monument for decades when Rodin learned of the project . He pursued the commission , interested in the medieval motif and patriotic theme . The mayor of Calais was tempted to hire Rodin on the spot upon visiting his studio , and soon the memorial was approved , with Rodin as its architect . It would commemorate the six townspeople of Calais who offered their lives to save their fellow citizens . 
 During the Hundred Years ' War , the army of King Edward III besieged Calais , and Edward ordered that the town 's population be killed en masse . He agreed to spare them if six of the principal citizens would come to him prepared to die , bareheaded and barefooted and with ropes around their necks . When they came , he ordered that they be executed , but pardoned them when his queen , Philippa of Hainault , begged him to spare their lives . The Burghers of Calais depicts the men as they are leaving for the king 's camp , carrying keys to the town 's gates and citadel . 
 Rodin began the project in 1884 , inspired by the chronicles of the siege by Jean Froissart . Though the town envisioned an allegorical , heroic piece centered on Eustache de Saint @-@ Pierre , the eldest of the six men , Rodin conceived the sculpture as a study in the varied and complex emotions under which all six men were laboring . One year into the commission , the Calais committee was not impressed with Rodin 's progress . Rodin indicated his willingness to end the project rather than change his design to meet the committee 's conservative expectations , but Calais said to continue . 
 In 1889 , The Burghers of Calais was first displayed to general acclaim . It is a bronze sculpture weighing two tons ( 1 @,@ 814 kg ) , and its figures are 6 @.@ 6 ft ( 2 m ) tall . The six men portrayed do not display a united , heroic front ; rather , each is isolated from his brothers , individually deliberating and struggling with his expected fate . Rodin soon proposed that the monument 's high pedestal be eliminated , wanting to move the sculpture to ground level so that viewers could " penetrate to the heart of the subject " . At ground level , the figures ' positions lead the viewer around the work , and subtly suggest their common movement forward . 
 The committee was incensed by the untraditional proposal , but Rodin would not yield . In 1895 , Calais succeeded in having Burghers displayed in their preferred form : the work was placed in front of a public garden on a high platform , surrounded by a cast @-@ iron railing . Rodin had wanted it located near the town hall , where it would engage the public . Only after damage during the First World War , subsequent storage , and Rodin 's death was the sculpture displayed as he had intended . It is one of Rodin 's best @-@ known and most acclaimed works . 
 = = = Commissions and controversy = = = 
 Commissioned to create a monument to French writer Victor Hugo in 1889 , Rodin dealt extensively with the subject of artist and muse . Like many of Rodin 's public commissions , Monument to Victor Hugo was met with resistance because it did not fit conventional expectations . Commenting on Rodin 's monument to Victor Hugo , The Times in 1909 expressed that " there is some show of reason in the complaint that [ Rodin 's ] conceptions are sometimes unsuited to his medium , and that in such cases they overstrain his vast technical powers " . The 1897 plaster model was not cast in bronze until 1964 . 
 The Société des Gens des Lettres , a Parisian organization of writers , planned a monument to French novelist Honoré de Balzac immediately after his death in 1850 . The society commissioned Rodin to create the memorial in 1891 , and Rodin spent years developing the concept for his sculpture . Challenged in finding an appropriate representation of Balzac given the author 's rotund physique , Rodin produced many studies : portraits , full @-@ length figures in the nude , wearing a frock coat , or in a robe – a replica of which Rodin had requested . The realized sculpture displays Balzac cloaked in the drapery , looking forcefully into the distance with deeply gouged features . Rodin 's intent had been to show Balzac at the moment of conceiving a work – to express courage , labor , and struggle . 
 When Balzac was exhibited in 1898 , the negative reaction was not surprising . The Société rejected the work , and the press ran parodies . Criticizing the work , Morey ( 1918 ) reflected , " there may come a time , and doubtless will come a time , when it will not seem <unk> to represent a great novelist as a huge comic mask crowning a bathrobe , but even at the present day this statue impresses one as slang . " A modern critic , indeed , indicates that Balzac is one of Rodin 's masterpieces . 
 The monument had its supporters in Rodin 's day ; a manifesto defending him was signed by Monet , Debussy , and future Premier Georges Clemenceau , among many others . In the BBC series Civilisation , art historian Kenneth Clark praised the monument as " the greatest piece of sculpture of the 19th Century , perhaps , indeed , the greatest since Michelangelo . " Rather than try to convince skeptics of the merit of the monument , Rodin repaid the Société his commission and moved the figure to his garden . After this experience , Rodin did not complete another public commission . Only in 1939 was Monument to Balzac cast in bronze and placed on the Boulevard du Montparnasse at the intersection with Boulevard Raspail . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 The popularity of Rodin 's most famous sculptures tends to obscure his total creative output . A prolific artist , he created thousands of busts , figures , and sculptural fragments over more than five decades . He painted in oils ( especially in his thirties ) and in watercolors . The Musée Rodin holds 7 @,@ 000 of his drawings and prints , in chalk and charcoal , and thirteen vigorous <unk> . He also produced a single lithograph . 
 Portraiture was an important component of Rodin 's oeuvre , helping him to win acceptance and financial independence . His first sculpture was a bust of his father in 1860 , and he produced at least 56 portraits between 1877 and his death in 1917 . Early subjects included fellow sculptor Jules Dalou ( 1883 ) and companion Camille Claudel ( 1884 ) . 
 Later , with his reputation established , Rodin made busts of prominent contemporaries such as English politician George Wyndham ( 1905 ) , Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw ( 1906 ) , Austrian composer Gustav Mahler ( 1909 ) , former Argentinian president Domingo Faustino Sarmiento and French statesman Georges Clemenceau ( 1911 ) . 
 His undated drawing Study of a Woman Nude , Standing , Arms Raised , Hands Crossed Above Head is one of the works seized in 2012 from Cornelius <unk> . 
 = = Aesthetic = = 
 Rodin was a naturalist , less concerned with monumental expression than with character and emotion . Departing with centuries of tradition , he turned away from the idealism of the Greeks , and the decorative beauty of the Baroque and neo @-@ Baroque movements . His sculpture emphasized the individual and the concreteness of flesh , and suggested emotion through detailed , textured surfaces , and the interplay of light and shadow . To a greater degree than his contemporaries , Rodin believed that an individual 's character was revealed by his physical features . 
 Rodin 's talent for surface modeling allowed him to let every part of the body speak for the whole . The male 's passion in The Thinker is suggested by the grip of his toes on the rock , the <unk> of his back , and the differentiation of his hands . Speaking of The Thinker , Rodin illuminated his aesthetic : " What makes my Thinker think is that he thinks not only with his brain , with his knitted brow , his distended nostrils and compressed lips , but with every muscle of his arms , back , and legs , with his clenched fist and gripping toes . " 
 Sculptural fragments to Rodin were autonomous works , and he considered them the essence of his artistic statement . His fragments – perhaps lacking arms , legs , or a head – took sculpture further from its traditional role of portraying likenesses , and into a realm where forms existed for their own sake . Notable examples are The Walking Man , Meditation without Arms , and Iris , Messenger of the Gods . 
 Rodin saw suffering and conflict as hallmarks of modern art . " Nothing , really , is more moving than the maddened beast , dying from unfulfilled desire and asking in vain for grace to quell its passion . " Charles Baudelaire echoed those themes , and was among Rodin 's favorite poets . Rodin enjoyed music , especially the opera composer Gluck , and wrote a book about French cathedrals . He owned a work by the as @-@ yet @-@ unrecognized Van Gogh , and admired the forgotten El Greco . 
 = = = Method = = = 
 Instead of copying traditional academic postures , Rodin preferred his models to move naturally around his studio ( despite their nakedness ) . The sculptor often made quick sketches in clay that were later fine @-@ tuned , cast in plaster , and forged into bronze or carved in marble . Rodin 's focus was on the handling of clay . 
 George Bernard Shaw sat for a portrait and gave an idea of Rodin 's technique : " While he worked , he achieved a number of miracles . At the end of the first fifteen minutes , after having given a simple idea of the human form to the block of clay , he produced by the action of his thumb a bust so living that I would have taken it away with me to relieve the sculptor of any further work . " 
 He described the evolution of his bust over a month , passing through " all the stages of art 's evolution " : first , a " Byzantine masterpiece " , then " Bernini intermingled " , then an elegant Houdon . " The hand of Rodin worked not as the hand of a sculptor works , but as the work of Elan Vital . The Hand of God is his own hand . " 
 After he completed his work in clay , he employed highly skilled assistants to re @-@ sculpt his compositions at larger sizes ( including any of his large @-@ scale monuments such as The Thinker ) , to cast the clay compositions into plaster or bronze , and to carve his marbles . Rodin 's major innovation was to capitalize on such multi @-@ staged processes of 19th century sculpture and their reliance on plaster casting . 
 Since clay deteriorates rapidly if not kept wet or fired into a terra @-@ cotta , sculptors used plaster casts as a means of securing the composition they would make out of the fugitive material that is clay . This was common practice amongst Rodin 's contemporaries , and sculptors would exhibit plaster casts with the hopes that they would be commissioned to have the works made in a more permanent material . Rodin , however , would have multiple plasters made and treat them as the raw material of sculpture , recombining their parts and figures into new compositions , and new names . 
 As Rodin 's practice developed into the 1890s , he became more and more radical in his pursuit of fragmentation , the combination of figures at different scales , and the making of new compositions from his earlier work . A prime example of this is the bold The Walking Man ( 1899 – 1900 ) , which was exhibited as his major one @-@ person show in 1900 . This is composed of two sculptures from the 1870s that Rodin found in his studio – a broken and damaged torso that had fallen into neglect and the lower extremities of a statuette version of his 1878 St. John the Baptist Preaching he was having re @-@ sculpted at a reduced scale . 
 Without <unk> the join between upper and lower , between torso and legs , Rodin created a work that many sculptors at the time and subsequently have seen as one of his strongest and most singular works . This is despite the fact that the object conveys two different styles , exhibits two different attitudes toward finish , and lacks any attempt to hide the arbitrary fusion of these two components . It was the freedom and creativity with which Rodin used these practices – along with his activation surfaces of sculptures through traces of his own touch and with his more open attitude toward bodily pose , sensual subject matter , and non @-@ realistic surface – that marked Rodin 's re @-@ making of traditional 19th century sculptural techniques into the prototype for modern sculpture . 
 = = Later years ( 1900 – 1917 ) = = 
 By 1900 , Rodin 's artistic reputation was entrenched . Gaining exposure from a pavilion of his artwork set up near the 1900 World 's Fair ( Exposition Universelle ) in Paris , he received requests to make busts of prominent people internationally , while his assistants at the atelier produced duplicates of his works . His income from portrait commissions alone totalled probably 200 @,@ 000 francs a year . As Rodin 's fame grew , he attracted many followers , including the German poet Rainer Maria Rilke , and authors Octave Mirbeau , Joris @-@ Karl Huysmans , and Oscar Wilde . 
 Rilke stayed with Rodin in 1905 and 1906 , and did administrative work for him ; he would later write a laudatory monograph on the sculptor . Rodin and Beuret 's modest country estate in Meudon , purchased in 1897 , was a host to such visitors as King Edward , dancer Isadora Duncan , and harpsichordist Wanda Landowska . Rodin moved to the city in 1908 , renting the main floor of the Hôtel Biron , an 18th @-@ century townhouse . He left Beuret in Meudon , and began an affair with the American @-@ born Duchesse de Choiseul . 
 = = = America = = = 
 While Rodin was beginning to be accepted in France by the time of The Burghers of Calais , he had not yet conquered the American market and because of his technique and the frankness of some of his work , he did not have an easy time selling his work to American industrialists . Fortunately , he came to know Sarah Tyson Hallowell ( 1846 – 1924 ) , a curator from Chicago who visited Paris to arrange exhibitions at the large Interstate Expositions of the 1870s and 1880s . Hallowell was not only a curator but an adviser and a facilitator who was trusted by a number of prominent American collectors to suggest works for their collections , the most prominent of these being the Chicago hotelier Potter Palmer and his wife , Bertha Palmer ( 1849 – 1918 ) . 
 The next opportunity for Rodin in America was the 1893 Chicago World 's Fair . Hallowell wanted to help promote Rodin 's work and he suggested a solo exhibition , which she wrote him was <unk> moins beau que l <unk> but impossible , outside the rules . Instead , she suggested he send a number of works for her loan exhibition of French art from American collections and she told him she would list them as being part of an American collection . Rodin sent Hallowell three works , Cupid and Psyche , Sphinx and Andromeda . All nudes , these works provoked great controversy and were ultimately hidden behind a drape with special permission given for viewers to see them . 
 Fortunately , Bust of Dalou and Burgher of Calais were on display in the official French pavilion at the fair and so between the works that were on display and those that were not , he was noticed . However , the works he gave Hallowell to sell found no takers , but she soon brought the controversial Quaker @-@ born financier Charles Yerkes ( 1837 – 1905 ) into the fold and he purchased two large marbles for his Chicago manse ; Yerkes was likely the first American to own a Rodin sculpture . 
 Other collectors soon followed including the <unk> Potter Palmers of Chicago and Isabella Stewart Gardner ( 1840 – 1924 ) of Boston , all arranged by Sarah Hallowell . In appreciation for her efforts at unlocking the American market , Rodin eventually presented Hallowell with a bronze , a marble and a terra cotta . When Hallowell moved to Paris in 1893 , she and Rodin continued their warm friendship and correspondence , which lasted to the end of the sculptor 's life . After Hallowell 's death , her niece , the painter Harriet Hallowell , inherited the <unk> and after her death , the American heirs could not manage to match their value in order to export them , so they became the property of the French state . 
 = = = Great Britain = = = 
 After the start of the 20th century , Rodin was a regular visitor to Great Britain , where he developed a loyal following by the beginning of the First World War . He first visited England in 1881 , where his friend , the artist Alphonse Legros , had introduced him to the poet William Ernest Henley . With his personal connections and enthusiasm for Rodin 's art , Henley was most responsible for Rodin 's reception in Britain . ( Rodin later returned the favor by sculpting a bust of Henley that was used as the frontispiece to Henley 's collected works and , after his death , on his monument in London . 
 Through Henley , Rodin met Robert Louis Stevenson and Robert Browning , in whom he found further support . Encouraged by the enthusiasm of British artists , students , and high society for his art , Rodin donated a significant selection of his works to the nation in 1914 . 
 After the revitalization of the Société Nationale des Beaux @-@ Arts in 1890 , Rodin served as the body 's vice @-@ president . In 1903 , Rodin was elected president of the International Society of Painters , Sculptors , and Engravers . He replaced its former president , James Abbott McNeill Whistler , upon Whistler 's death . His election to the prestigious position was largely due to the efforts of Albert <unk> , father of English philosopher Anthony <unk> , who was private secretary to Rodin for several months in 1906 , but the two men parted company after Christmas , " to their mutual relief . " 
 During his later creative years , Rodin 's work turned increasingly toward the female form , and themes of more overt masculinity and femininity . He concentrated on small dance studies , and produced numerous erotic drawings , sketched in a loose way , without taking his pencil from the paper or his eyes from the model . Rodin met American dancer Isadora Duncan in 1900 , attempted to seduce her , and the next year sketched studies of her and her students . In July 1906 , Rodin was also enchanted by dancers from the Royal Ballet of Cambodia , and produced some of his most famous drawings from the experience . 
 Fifty @-@ three years into their relationship , Rodin married Rose Beuret . The wedding was 29 January 1917 , and Beuret died two weeks later , on 16 February . Rodin was ill that year ; in January , he suffered weakness from influenza , and on 16 November his physician announced that " congestion of the lungs has caused great weakness . The patient 's condition is grave . " Rodin died the next day , age 77 , at his villa in Meudon , Île @-@ de @-@ France , on the outskirts of Paris . 
 A cast of The Thinker was placed next to his tomb in Meudon ; it was Rodin 's wish that the figure serve as his headstone and epitaph . In 1923 , Marcell Tirel , Rodin 's secretary , published a book alleging that Rodin 's death was largely due to cold , and the fact that he had no heat at Meudon . Rodin requested permission to stay in the Hotel Biron , a museum of his works , but the director of the museum refused to let him stay there . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Rodin willed to the French state his studio and the right to make casts from his plasters . Because he encouraged the edition of his sculpted work , Rodin 's sculptures are represented in many public and private collections . The Musée Rodin was founded in 1916 and opened in 1919 at the Hôtel Biron , where Rodin had lived , and it holds the largest Rodin collection , with more than 6 @,@ 000 sculptures and 7 @,@ 000 works on paper . The French order Légion d 'honneur made him a Commander , and he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Oxford . 
 During his lifetime , Rodin was compared to Michelangelo , and was widely recognized as the greatest artist of the era . In the three decades following his death , his popularity waned with changing aesthetic values . Since the 1950s , Rodin 's reputation has re @-@ ascended ; he is recognized as the most important sculptor of the modern era , and has been the subject of much scholarly work . The sense of incompletion offered by some of his sculpture , such as The Walking Man , influenced the increasingly abstract sculptural forms of the 20th century . 
 Rodin restored an ancient role of sculpture – to capture the physical and intellectual force of the human subject – and he freed sculpture from the repetition of traditional patterns , providing the foundation for greater experimentation in the 20th century . His popularity is ascribed to his emotion @-@ laden representations of ordinary men and women – to his ability to find the beauty and pathos in the human animal . His most popular works , such as The Kiss and The Thinker , are widely used outside the fine arts as symbols of human emotion and character . To honour Rodin 's artistic legacy , the Google search engine homepage displayed a Google Doodle featuring The Thinker to celebrate his 172nd birthday on 12 November 2012 . 
 Rodin had enormous artistic influence . A whole generation of sculptors studied in his workshop . These include Gutzon Borglum , Antoine Bourdelle , Constantin <unk> , Camille Claudel , Charles <unk> , Malvina Hoffman , Carl Milles , François <unk> , and Clara Westhoff , even though <unk> later rejected his legacy . Rodin also promoted the work of other sculptors , including Aristide Maillol and Ivan Meštrović whom Rodin once called " the greatest phenomenon amongst sculptors . " Other sculptors whose work has been described as owing to Rodin include Joseph <unk> , Alexander <unk> , Joseph Bernard , Henri Gaudier @-@ Brzeska , Georg Kolbe , Wilhelm <unk> , Jacques Lipchitz , Pablo Picasso , Adolfo Wildt , and Ossip Zadkine . Henry Moore acknowledged Rodin 's seminal influence on his work . 
 In 2011 the world premiere of Boris <unk> 's new ballet Rodin took place in Saint @-@ Petersburg , Russia . The ballet is dedicated to the life and work of Auguste Rodin and Camille Claudel . 
 = = = Forgeries = = = 
 The relative ease of making reproductions has also encouraged many forgeries : a survey of expert opinion placed Rodin in the top ten most @-@ faked artists . Rodin fought against forgeries of his works as early as 1901 , and since his death , many cases of organized , large @-@ scale forgeries have been revealed . A massive forgery was discovered by French authorities in the early 1990s and led to the conviction of art dealer Guy Hain . 
 To deal with the complexity of bronze reproduction , France has promulgated several laws since 1956 which limit reproduction to twelve casts – the maximum number that can be made from an artist 's plasters and still be considered his work . As a result of this limit , The Burghers of Calais , for example , is found in fourteen cities . 
 In the market for sculpture , plagued by fakes , the value of a piece increases significantly when its provenance can be established . A Rodin work with a verified history sold for US $ 4 @.@ 8 million in 1999 , and Rodin 's bronze Eve , grand <unk> – version sans <unk> sold for $ 18 @.@ 9 million at a 2008 Christie 's auction in New York . Art critics concerned about authenticity have argued that taking a cast does not equal reproducing a Rodin sculpture – especially given the importance of surface treatment in Rodin 's work . 
 = I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret = 
 I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret is a 2005 American documentary film that follows singer @-@ songwriter Madonna on her 2004 Re @-@ Invention World Tour . Directed by Jonas Åkerlund , the film premiered on MTV on October 21 , 2005 , and was released on DVD on June 20 , 2006 , by Warner Bros. Records . The documentary was originally called The Re @-@ Invented Process , referencing the tour and the Steven Klein exhibition titled X @-@ STaTIC Pro = CeSS . It starts with imagery from the exhibition and Madonna auditioning dancers for the tour , continues with her entourage travelling through different cities and performing , the singer 's introspection on her life , her marriage , her religion , and her children , and ends with Madonna 's visit to Israel in the midst of protests . 
 The documentary was inspired by Madonna 's need to show her artistic side on the tour and her devotion towards the Jewish mysticism Kabbalah . Unlike her 1991 documentary Truth or Dare , which portrayed Hollywood glamour , I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret clarified from its beginning that it was about the singer 's personal views on life and spirituality . Like Truth or Dare , the performance scenes were shot in color , while the rest of the film was in black @-@ and @-@ white . Besides Madonna , her dancers and her tour entourage , Åkerlund also shot her family , her working process and her day @-@ to @-@ day life . Madonna and her then @-@ husband Guy Ritchie 's local pub in Mayfair , London was used for some sequences . The film features appearances from Madonna 's father , stepmother and filmmaker Michael Moore . 
 Before releasing the documentary , Madonna invited a select group of friends and co @-@ workers to watch a rough three @-@ hour cut of the film at a local theater in Notting Hill . The film was trimmed after negative feedback regarding excessive details about Kabbalah . For the promotion and premiere of the film , Madonna appeared at Q & A sessions with the press and also gave a speech to film students at New York 's Hunter College . Critical response to I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret was mixed , with reviewers complimenting the live performances and the scenes involving her children and family , but criticizing the self @-@ indulgent and preachy nature . I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret was released in a two @-@ disc format , a CD with 14 songs from the show and a DVD with the documentary film . It received a positive response from critics but was a moderate success commercially . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The documentary begins with scenes from the X @-@ STaTIC Pro = CeSS , with Madonna featured as a queen sitting beside a coyote . The intro is followed by the singer recording vocals with music director Stuart Price and auditioning dancers for the Re @-@ Invention World Tour . 
 After the first show of the tour at The Forum in Inglewood , California , Madonna attends a party with her dancers celebrating the success of the opening night . The tour moves to New York City with more rehearsal footage and Madonna asking her dancers to register for voting in the upcoming elections . Guy Ritchie jokes around with Madonna as she gets ready for the performance at Madison Square Garden , while Michael Moore appears in an interview segment , recalling how Madonna thanked him during the concert for his documentary . 
 In Chicago , Madonna 's father Tony Ciccone is interviewed in his vineyard ; he recalls Madonna 's childhood . Ciccone and his wife Joan come to visit the singer at her concert in United Center . The entourage moves to Miami where Ritchie is shown angling with their son Rocco , plays with her daughter Lourdes , and Madonna reflects on relationships and her husband . By the time the tour reaches London , Madonna gets irritated with the journeys . Kabbalah comes into the picture with explanations of the mystical practice from Madonna and her teacher Eitan . At Slane Castle , Dublin , Madonna and her dancers were in danger of being electrocuted due to constant rain , but she nevertheless continued the performances . 
 At Paris , Madonna takes her dancers for a classical piano recital by Katia and Marielle <unk> . After the performance at Palais Omnisports de Paris @-@ Bercy , the tour reaches its final stop at Lisbon . The dancers are shown enjoying on the beach and they also talk about their future plans . With a final performance of " Holiday " , the Re @-@ Invention World Tour ends . At an after party , Madonna recites a poem for her assistant Angie . 
 The final segment of the documentary shows Madonna arriving at Tel Aviv , Israel , amidst protests of her visit . She gives a speech at a benefit for her charity foundation , Spirituality For Kids . She speaks of compassion , peace and giving children all the benefits that they deserve . Then Madonna visits Rachel 's Tomb on the outskirts of Bethlehem and offers her prayers . The documentary ends then , with a parting shot of an Israeli child and a Palestinian child walking down a road together as Madonna 's voice over tells that the audience has learnt her " secret " . 
 = = Background of tour = = 
 The Re @-@ Invention World Tour was the sixth concert tour by Madonna . It supported her ninth studio album American Life , and visited North America and Europe . Madonna was inspired to create the tour , after taking part in an art installation called X @-@ STaTIC PRo = CeSS , directed by photographer Steven Klein . A number of songs were rehearsed for the tour , with twenty @-@ four of them making the final setlist . The tour was divided into five segments : French Baroque @-@ Marie Antionette Revival , Military @-@ Army , Circus @-@ Cabaret , Acoustic and Scottish @-@ Tribal . The costumes were developed by designer Arianne Phillips based on the concept of re @-@ invention . The opening segment displayed performances with dance in general . Military segment displayed performances with the theme of warfare . Circus displayed light @-@ hearted performances while the Acoustic segment performances were melancholy . The final Scottish segment had Madonna and her performers display energetic dance routines . 
 The tour garnered positive reception from contemporary critics . However , fellow singer Elton John accused Madonna of lip @-@ synching on the tour . Madonna 's representatives denied the allegations and John later apologized . The Re @-@ Invention World Tour was a commercial success . Tickets were completely sold as soon as dates and venues for the tour were announced , prompting the organizers to add more dates . After conclusion , it was named the highest grossing concert tour of 2004 , earning $ 125 million ( $ 156 @.@ 6 million in 2016 dollars ) from 56 shows with an audience 900 @,@ 000 . It won the honor of Top Tour at the 2004 Billboard Touring Awards . 
 = = Concept and development = = 
 The tour was chronicled in the documentary titled I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret . Originally called The Re @-@ Invented Process in reference to the tour and the exhibition X @-@ STaTIC Pro = CeSS , the documentary was filmed during Madonna 's visit to North America and Europe from May 24 to September 14 , 2004 . It was directed by Jonas Åkerlund , whose previous endeavors included music videos , commercials and the cult film , Spun ( 2003 ) . The documentary emerged from Madonna 's urge to show her artistic side on the tour and her devotion towards the Jewish mysticism Kabbalah . Unlike her 1991 documentary , Truth or Dare , which portrayed Hollywood glamour , I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret clarified from its beginning that it was about the singer 's views on life and spirituality . " It 's a different me , I have a husband , I have a family , my whole life has changed . It would be pretty strange if I was behaving the same way I did 12 years ago — that would be a little freaky . No more Evian bottles ! " , Madonna told MTV , with the last bit referring to a scene of her performing fellatio on an Evian bottle in Truth or Dare . 
 Like Truth or Dare , the performance scenes were shot in color , while the rest of the documentary was in black @-@ and @-@ white . Besides Madonna , her dancers and her tour entourage , Åkerlund also shot her family , her working process and her day @-@ to @-@ day life . Locations shot included Madonna and her husband Guy Ritchie 's local pub in Mayfair , London . There was also an appearance from filmmaker Michael Moore , her father Tony Ciccone and stepmother Joan Ciccone . In some scenes , Ritchie was shown missing some of Madonna 's concerts and going out for drinks , which drove the singer to tears . In December 2005 , Madonna told Rolling Stone : 
 [ My relationship with Guy ] came off as peculiar [ in the documentary ] . Not a typical relationship . A lot of macho men see the movie and like Guy 's character , because he doesn 't give me any special treatment . I think we come off as a couple that has that has a genuine and deep connection . He is always there for me , but he 's not impressed . I feel like we are sort of The Honeymooners , only I 'm the Jackie Gleason character . Obviously , he irritates me on a significant basis , as everyone 's significant other does . 
 Referring to the incidents in the pub , Madonna explained her view on relationships where a man has to travel with his wife , while giving an example of her friend , actress Gwyneth Paltrow . She said that it was easier for Paltrow to tour with her then @-@ husband Chris Martin , who is the lead singer of alternative rock band , Coldplay . Madonna also recalled her troubled relationship with her father and how he had e @-@ mailed the singer with his approval , after watching the documentary . Kabbalah featured prominently towards the end and the singer wanted to embark on a spiritual pilgrimage to Israel . However , ultra @-@ orthodox Jews protested her trip , saying that Madonna disgraced Judaism with her portrayal of wearing phylacteries over her arm — a Jewish custom usually reserved for men — in the music video of her 2002 single " Die Another Day " , before escaping from an electric chair on which Hebrew letters spell out one of the 72 sacred names of God . Although Israeli securities had advised the singer against the trip , she nevertheless visited graves of Jewish sages in northern Israel as well as shrines such as Rachel 's Tomb on the edge of Bethlehem , traditional burial place of the biblical matriarch Rachel . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 Moore had initially offered to direct the documentary , though Madonna enlisted Åkerlund as director since Moore was busy with his own project , Fahrenheit 9 / 11 . Moore later said that he could help around with the editing and advised Madonna to shoot " as much content as possible " . I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret was an important film for Madonna , who was determined to show her matured persona through the documentary . She had a meagre budget of one million ( $ 1 @.@ 25 million in 2016 dollars ) for production . The singer had to spend time in the editing room with Åkerlund , analyzing all the shots and creating the final version . Side @-@ by @-@ side Madonna had also started working on her tenth studio album , Confessions on a Dance Floor , juggling time between editing the film and recording . Madonna had to fly to Stockholm for the editing and described pruning the 350 @-@ hour footage into a two @-@ hour documentary as " exhaustive " . She recalled her thoughts during that time : 
 I was sitting there in the theater at the back , showing it to people for the first time . I mean , it was like a puddle of sweat around my feet . It was like , ' Oh my God , oh my God , I hope I did the right thing . Oh , that scene is too long . Oh , that 's too short . Are they going to get this part ? Are they going to like this ? Oh , they 're going to think it 's boring ! ' Just worrying the whole way , biting my fingernails off . 
 Before releasing the film , Madonna invited a group of friends and co @-@ workers to watch a rough three @-@ hour cut of the film at a local theater in Notting Hill , and noted their feedback . General consensus was that there was too much of Kabbalah in the film , hence she decided to prune those segments considerably . The documentary premiered on MTV in the United States , on October 21 , 2005 , at 10 : 00 PM . She also showed it to the film students at New York 's Hunter College and appeared for a Q & A session . This promotion was a part of mtvU 's Stand In series , in which celebrities filled in for college professors . 
 In the United Kingdom , the documentary premiered on Channel 4 on December 14 , 2005 . I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret was not released commercially and was only viewed on MTV and Channel 4 . Åkerlund told BlackBook that he wished more people had the chance to see the documentary because according to him , it is " a really strong piece of art , if you ask me ..... it had a lot of my blood , sweat and tears in it . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret received mixed reviews from critics . O 'Brien noted how the film revealed a " strange isolation at the cost of stardom " from Madonna . She complimented the scenes featuring her father , and the scenes where Madonna was not self @-@ conscious , like when she interacts with her children , talks about her " fat Italian thighs " and also the performance in rain at Dublin . O 'Brien criticized other portions of the film , which she said was " affected " by conscious behavior in front of the camera , like backstage parties , poem and piano recitals . Author J. Randy Taraborrelli wrote in his book Madonna : An Intimate Biography that the film allowed a much closer look at the singer 's family . He was particularly impressed by the scenes featuring Lourdes , believing that she " revealed herself to be sophisticated beyond her years " . Kathryn Flett from The Observer newspaper described it as " Fascinating , [ it has ] tiny flashes of insight into her relationship with [ Ritchie ] , which occasionally involve her being just as girlie and ever so slightly insecure as the rest of us . " Rupert Smith from The Guardian reported that the director " squeezed every last drop of spectacle from a highly stage @-@ managed performance " , but commented that " she gave away far more in 1991 's In Bed with Madonna ; this time she gave only the illusion of candour " . However , he complimented saying " Even the easy @-@ to @-@ mock pre @-@ show prayers brought a tear to the eye . We don 't need to be told that ' there 's more to life than fame and fortune – something deeper , more profound ' , or that ' the material world ' is a bad thing . But it 's good to see an entertainer who , 20 years into her career , is still trying to change the world " . 
 Barry Walters from Rolling Stone mentioned that I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret " lacks the dishy delights of the diva 's 1991 Truth or Dare doc . Instead , a more worldly Madge struggles to become a less sound @-@ bite @-@ reliant , more sincere person . " Darryl Sterdan from Jam ! gave it three out of five stars , saying that " it still sucks to sit through all that video and see almost as much of her limo as her show ... For a start , how about giving us a [ movie ] that isn 't derivative and self @-@ indulgent ? " Colin Jacobson from the DVD Movie Guide website opined that I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret would find a divided audience and how one reacted to the documentary was a reflection of how one viewed Madonna . " Fans like me will be able to essentially ignore the self @-@ serving moments and enjoy the tour elements . We 'll also like the glimpse behind the curtain at Madonna on the road , " he added . This view was shared by a reviewer from Lexington Herald @-@ Leader who confessed that he did not enjoy the documentary except the live performances , since he saw Madonna only as an " entertainer " and not as a " preacher " . 
 While reviewing Madonna : The Confessions Tour Live TV debut in 2007 , Ginia Bellafante from The New York Times recalled the scenes of Madonna hugging her assistants and dancers and her wishing to be nicer to people she had met . She said that probably Madonna knew that many in her audience missed the " Madonna of so many Madonnas ago , the one who refused refinement and probably thought Oxford was just an insurance company . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic believed that the documentary served its purpose well . " It will convince anybody who is on the fence about going out to see the 2006 tour to go ahead and buy those expensive tickets already , " he added . 
 Stephen M. Deusner from Pitchfork Media panned the release , saying that " [ Madonna 's ] life as portrayed in this documentary is cloistered and withdrawn , marked by hours of quiet Kabbalah study but very little self @-@ reflection . Whether intentionally or not , Åkerlund reveals Madonna 's supreme lack of self @-@ awareness , from her embarrassing attempts at poetry to the condescending tone she takes with her dancers to her incredibly irresponsible visit to Rachel 's Tomb despite the warnings of her host country and her security team . " He ended the review noting that Madonna did not need to prove anything further , since her songs " have become a shared language among people who have very little common ground . Her music has been changing the world for more than two decades now , but sadly she seems unaware of this , her one true ' secret ' to pop cultural unity . " 
 = = Album = = 
 I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret was released in a two @-@ disc format , a CD with 14 songs from the show and a DVD with the documentary film . The documentary and the album were also released as digital download to the iTunes Store . The live CD consisted of two pre @-@ recorded tracks , " The Beast Within " and " Hollywood " while extras on the DVD included 12 deleted scenes from the documentary . The release received positive response from critics and was nominated for a Grammy Award at the 2007 show in the category of Best Long Form Music Video , but ended up losing the award to Wings for Wheels : The Making of Born to Run by Bruce Springsteen . It was a moderate success commercially , reaching the top @-@ ten of the music charts in Belgium , Canada , France , Germany , Italy and Switzerland , while the DVD topped the video charts in Australia , Spain and the United States . 
 = Biuro Szyfrów = 
 The Biuro Szyfrów ( [ <unk> <unk> ] , Polish for " Cipher Bureau " ) was the interwar Polish General Staff 's Second Department 's organizational unit charged with SIGINT and both cryptography ( the use of ciphers and codes ) and cryptanalysis ( the study of ciphers and codes , particularly for the purpose of " breaking " them ) . 
 The precursor of the agency that would become the Cipher Bureau was created in May 1919 , during the Polish @-@ Soviet War ( 1919 – 21 ) , and played a vital role in securing Poland 's survival in that war . 
 In mid @-@ 1931 , the Cipher Bureau was formed by the merger of pre @-@ existing agencies . In December 1932 , the Bureau began breaking Germany 's Enigma ciphers . Over the next seven years , Polish cryptologists overcame the growing structural and operating complexities of the plugboard @-@ equipped Enigma . The Bureau also broke Soviet cryptography . 
 Five weeks before the outbreak of World War II , on 25 July 1939 , in Warsaw , the Polish Cipher Bureau revealed its Enigma @-@ decryption techniques and equipment to representatives of French and British military intelligence , which had been unable to make any headway against Enigma . This Polish intelligence @-@ and @-@ technology transfer would give the Allies an unprecedented advantage ( Ultra ) in their ultimately victorious prosecution of World War II . 
 = = Precursor = = 
 On 8 May 1919 , a Polish Army " Cipher Section " ( <unk> Szyfrów ) , precursor to the " Cipher Bureau " ( Biuro Szyfrów ) , was created by Lt. Józef Serafin <unk> . The Cipher Section reported to the Polish General Staff and contributed substantially to Poland 's defense by Józef Piłsudski 's forces during the Polish @-@ Soviet War of 1919 – 21 , thereby helping preserve Poland 's independence , recently regained in the wake of World War I. The Cipher Section 's purview included both ciphers and codes . In loose Polish parlance , the term " cipher " ( " <unk> " ) refers to both these two principal categories of cryptography . ( The opposite is the practice in English , which loosely refers to both codes and ciphers as " codes . " ) 
 During the Polish – Soviet War ( 1919 – 1921 ) , some one hundred Russian ciphers were broken by a sizable cadre of Polish cryptologists who included army Lieutenant Jan Kowalewski and three world @-@ famous professors of mathematics — Stefan Mazurkiewicz , Wacław Sierpiński and Stanisław Leśniewski . Russian army staffs were still following the same disastrously ill @-@ disciplined signals @-@ security procedures as had Tsarist army staffs during World War I , to the decisive advantage of their German enemy . As a result , during the Polish @-@ Soviet War the Polish military were regularly kept informed by Russian signals stations about the movements of Russian armies and their intentions and operational orders . 
 The Russian staffs , according to Polish Colonel Mieczysław Ścieżyński , " had not the slightest hesitation about sending any and all messages of an operational nature by means of radiotelegraphy ; there were periods during the war when , for purposes of operational communications and for purposes of command by higher staffs , no other means of communication whatever were used , messages being transmitted either entirely ( " in clear , " or plaintext ) or encrypted by means of such an incredibly uncomplicated system that for our trained specialists reading the messages was child 's play . The same held for the chitchat of personnel at <unk> stations , where discipline was disastrously lax . " 
 In the crucial month of August 1920 alone , Polish cryptologists decrypted 410 signals : from Soviet General Mikhail Tukhachevsky , commander of the northern front ; from Leon Trotsky , Soviet commissar of war ; from commanders of armies , e.g. the commander of the IV Army , <unk> ; the commander of the Horse Army , Semyon Budionny ; the commander of the 3 Cavalry Corps , Gaya ; from the staffs of the XII , XV and XVI Armies ; from the staffs of the Mozyr Group ( named after the Belarusian city ) ; the <unk> Group ( after the Ukrainian town ) ; the Yakir Group [ after General Iona <unk> Yakir ] ; from the 2 , 4 , 7 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 24 , 27 , 41 , 44 , 45 , 53 , 54 , 58 and 60 Infantry Divisions ; from the 8 Cavalry Division , etc . 
 The intercepts were as a rule decrypted the same day , or at latest the next day , and were immediately sent to the Polish General Staff 's Section II ( Intelligence ) and operational section . The more important signals were read in their entirety by the Chief of the General Staff , and even by the Commander in Chief , Marshal Józef Piłsudski . Interception and reading of the signals provided Polish intelligence with entire Russian operational orders . The Poles were able to follow the whole operation of Budionny 's Horse Army in the second half of August 1920 with incredible precision , just by monitoring his <unk> correspondence with Tukhachevsky , including the famous and historic conflict between the two Russian commanders . 
 The intercepts even included an order from Trotsky to the revolutionary council of war of the Western Front , confirming Tukhachevsky 's operational orders , thus giving them the authority of the supreme chief of the Soviet armed forces . An entire operational order from Tukhachevsky to Budionny was intercepted on 19 August and read on 20 August , stating the tasks of all of Tukhachevsky 's armies , of which only the essence had previously been known . 
 Ścieżyński surmises that the Soviets must likewise have intercepted Polish operational signals ; but he doubts that this would have availed them much since Polish cryptography " stood abreast of modern cryptography " and since only a small number of Polish higher headquarters were equipped with radio stations , of which there was a great shortage ; and finally , Polish headquarters were more cautious than the Russians and almost every Polish division had the use of a land line . 
 Polish cryptologists enjoyed generous support under the command of Col. Tadeusz <unk> , chief of the Polish General Staff 's Section II ( Intelligence ) . They worked at Warsaw 's radio station WAR , one of two Polish long @-@ range radio transmitters at the time . The Polish cryptologists ' work led , among many other things , to discovery of a large gap on the Red Army 's left flank , which enabled Poland 's Marshal Józef Piłsudski to drive a war @-@ winning wedge into that gap during the August 1920 Battle of Warsaw . 
 The discovery of the Cipher Bureau 's archives , decades after the Polish @-@ Soviet War , has borne out Ścieżyński 's assertion 
 that ... radio intelligence ... furnished [ the Polish Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Józef Piłsudski ] , in the years 1919 – 1920 ... the most complete and ... current intelligence on all aspects of the functioning of the Red Army , especially of units operating on the anti @-@ Polish front , that it was radio intelligence that to a large degree determined the course of all ... military operations conducted by Poland in 1920 — from the January fighting at <unk> , through the March operation against Mozyr and Kiev , the April operation in Ukraine , the battles with Tukhachevsky 's first and second offensives in Belarus , the battles with Budionny 's Cavalry Army , the Battle of Brody , to the Battles of Warsaw , Lwów and the Niemen . 
 = = Cipher Bureau = = 
 In mid @-@ 1931 , at the Polish General Staff , a Cipher Bureau was formed by merging the Radio @-@ Intelligence Office ( Referat <unk> ) and the Polish @-@ Cryptography Office ( Referat Szyfrów <unk> ) . The Bureau was charged with both cryptography — the generation , and supervision of the use , of ciphers and codes — and cryptology , the study of ciphers and codes , particularly for the purpose of " breaking " them . 
 Between 1932 and 1936 , the Cipher Bureau took on additional responsibilities , including radio communications between military @-@ intelligence posts in Poland and abroad , as well as radio counterintelligence — mobile direction @-@ finding and intercept stations for the locating and traffic @-@ analysis of spy and fifth @-@ column transmitters operating in Poland . 
 = = Stalking Enigma = = 
 In late 1927 or early 1928 , there arrived at the Warsaw Customs Office from Germany a package that , according to the accompanying declaration , was supposed to contain radio equipment . The German firm 's representative strenuously demanded that the package be returned to Germany even before going through customs , as it had been shipped with other equipment by mistake . His insistent demands alerted the customs officials , who notified the Polish General Staff 's Cipher Bureau , which took a keen interest in new developments in radio technology . And since it happened to be a Saturday afternoon , the Bureau 's experts had ample time to look into the matter . They carefully opened the box and found that it did not , in fact , contain radio equipment but a cipher machine . They examined the machine minutely , then put it back into the box . 
 The Bureau 's leading Enigma cryptanalyst Marian Rejewski commented that the cipher machine may be surmised to have been a commercial @-@ model Enigma , since at that time the military model had not yet been devised . " Hence this trivial episode was of no practical importance , though it does fix the date at which the Cipher Bureau 's interest in the Enigma machine began " – manifested , initially , in the entirely legal acquisition of a single commercial @-@ model Enigma . 
 On 15 July 1928 the first German machine @-@ enciphered messages were broadcast by German military radio stations . Polish monitoring stations began intercepting them , and cryptologists in the Polish Cipher Bureau 's German section were instructed to try to read them . The effort was fruitless , however , and was eventually abandoned . There remained very slight evidence of the effort , in the form of a few densely written @-@ over sheets of paper and the commercial @-@ model Enigma machine . On 15 January 1929 Major Gwido Langer , after a tour of duty as chief of staff of the 1st Legion Infantry Division , became chief of the Radio @-@ Intelligence Office , and subsequently of the Cipher Bureau . The Bureau 's deputy chief , and the chief of its German section ( BS @-@ 4 ) , was Captain Maksymilian Ciężki . 
 In 1929 , while the Cipher Bureau 's predecessor agency was still headed by Major Franciszek Pokorny ( a relative of the outstanding World War I Austro @-@ Hungarian Army cryptologist , Captain Herman Pokorny ) , Ciężki , Franciszek Pokorny and a civilian Bureau employee , Antoni Palluth , taught a secret cryptology course at Poznań University for selected mathematics students . Over ten years later , during World War II while in France , one of the students , Marian Rejewski , would discover that the entire course had been taught from French General Marcel <unk> 's book , Cours de <unk> ( Course of Cryptography ) , published in 1925 . 
 In September 1932 , Maksymilian Ciężki hired three young graduates of the Poznań course to be Bureau staff members : Marian Rejewski , Jerzy Różycki and Henryk Zygalski . 
 = = Successes and setbacks = = 
 In 1926 the German Navy adopted , as its top cryptographic device , a modified civilian Enigma machine ; in 1928 the German Army followed suit . The complexity of the system was much increased in 1930 by the introduction of a plugboard ( <unk> ) , albeit with only six connecting leads in use . In December 1932 , Marian Rejewski made what historian David Kahn describes as one of the greatest advances in cryptologic history , by applying pure mathematics – the theory of permutations and groups – to breaking the German armed forces ' Enigma machine ciphers . Rejewski had worked out the precise interconnections of the Enigma rotors and reflector , after the Bureau had received , from French Military Intelligence Captain Gustave Bertrand , two German documents and two pages of Enigma daily keys ( for September and October of that year ) . These had been obtained by a French military intelligence agent , a German codenamed Rex , from an agent who worked at Germany 's Cipher Office in Berlin , Hans @-@ Thilo Schmidt , whom the French codenamed <unk> . 
 After Rejewski had worked out the military Enigma 's logical structure , the Polish Cipher Bureau commissioned the AVA Radio Company , co @-@ owned by Antoni Palluth , to build replicas ( " doubles " ) of the Enigma to Rejewski 's specifications . His method of decrypting Enigma messages exploited two weaknesses of the German operating procedures . It used what Rejewski called " characteristics " that were independent of the plugboard connections . This involved compiling a card catalog of certain features of the set of indicator settings . 
 The Germans increased the difficulty of decrypting Enigma messages by decreasing the interval between changes in the order of the rotors from quarterly , initially , to monthly in February 1936 , then daily in October of that year , when they also increased the number of plugboard leads from six to a number that varied between five and eight . This made the Biuro 's grill method much less easy , as it relied on <unk> letter pairs . The German navy was more security @-@ conscious than the army and air force , and in May 1937 it introduced a new , much more secure , indicator procedure that remained unbroken for several years . 
 The next setback occurred in November 1937 , when the scrambler 's reflector was changed to one with different interconnections ( known as <unk> @-@ B ) . Rejewski worked out the wiring in the new reflector , but the catalog of characteristics had to be compiled anew , again using Rejewski 's " cyclometer " , which had been built to his specifications by the AVA Radio Company . 
 In January 1938 , Colonel Stefan Mayer directed that statistics be compiled for a two @-@ week period , comparing the numbers of Enigma messages solved , to Enigma intercepts . The ratio came to 75 percent . " Nor , " Marian Rejewski has commented , " were those 75 percent ... the limit of our possibilities . With slightly augmented personnel , we might have attained about 90 percent ... read . But a certain amount of cipher material ... due to faulty transmission or ... reception , or to various other causes , always remains unread ... " Information obtained from Enigma decryption seems to have been directed from <unk> principally to the German Office of the General Staff 's Section II ( Intelligence ) . There , from fall 1935 to mid @-@ April 1939 , it was worked up by Major Jan Leśniak , who in April 1939 would turn the German Office over to another officer and himself form a Situation Office intended for wartime service . He would head the Situation Office to and through the September 1939 Campaign . 
 The system of pre @-@ defining the indicator setting for the day for all Enigma operators on a given network , on which the method of characteristics depended , was changed on 15 September 1938 . The one exception to this was the network used by the Sicherheitsdienst ( SD ) — the intelligence agency of the SS and the Nazi Party — who did not make the change until 1 July 1939 . Operators now chose their own indicator setting . However , the insecure procedure of sending the enciphered message key twice , remained in use , and it was quickly exploited . Henryk Zygalski devised a manual method that used 26 perforated sheets , and Marian Rejewski commissioned the AVA company to produce the bomba <unk> ( cryptologic bomb ) . 
 Both the Zygalski @-@ sheet method and each bomba worked for only a single scrambler rotor order , so six sets of Zygalski sheets and six <unk> were produced . However , the Germans introduced two new rotors on 15 December 1938 , giving a choice of three out of five to assemble in the machines on a given day . This increased the number of possible rotor orders from 6 to 60 . The Biuro could then only read the small minority of messages that used neither of the two new rotors . They did not have the resources to produce 54 more <unk> or 54 sets of Zygalski sheets . Fortunately , however , the fact that the SD network was still using the old method of the same indicator setting for all messages , allowed Rejewski to re @-@ use his previous method of working out the wiring within these rotors . This information was essential for the production of a full set Zygalski sheets which allowed resumption of large @-@ scale decryption in January 1940 . On 1 January 1939 , the Germans made military Enigma even more difficult to break by increasing the number of plugboard connections from between five and eight , to between seven and ten . 
 When World War II broke out on 1 September 1939 , Leśniak and his colleagues had been working intensively for two or three years to establish the German order of battle and had succeeded in working out nearly 95 percent of it . The German attack on Poland came as no surprise to the Polish General Staff . The results that had been obtained by Polish intelligence , according to Leśniak , " absolutely exceeded what would normally have been possible . " 
 = = Kabaty Woods = = 
 Until 1937 the Cipher Bureau 's German section , BS @-@ 4 , had been housed in the Polish General Staff building — the stately 18th @-@ century " Saxon Palace " — in Warsaw . That year BS @-@ 4 moved into specially constructed new facilities in the Kabaty Woods near Pyry , south of Warsaw . There , working conditions were incomparably better than in the cramped quarters at the General Staff building . 
 The move was dictated as well by requirements of security . Germany 's Abwehr was always looking for potential traitors among the military and civilian workers at the General Staff building . Strolling agents , even if lacking access to the Staff building , could observe personnel entering and leaving , and photograph them with concealed miniature cameras . Annual Abwehr intelligence assignments for German agents in Warsaw placed a priority on securing informants at the Polish General Staff . 
 = = Gift to allies = = 
 It was at Pyry , on 25 and 26 July 1939 with war looming that , on instructions from the Polish General Staff , the Cipher Bureau 's chiefs , Lt. Col. Gwido Langer and Major Maksymilian Ciężki , the three civilian mathematician @-@ cryptologists , and Col. Stefan Mayer , chief of intelligence , revealed Poland 's achievements to <unk> representatives of France and Britain , explaining how they had broken Enigma . They undertook to give each country a Polish @-@ reconstructed Enigma , along with details of their equipment , including Zygalski sheets and Rejewski 's cryptologic bomb . In return , the British pledged to prepare two full sets of Zygalski sheets for all 60 possible wheel orders . The French contingent consisted of Major Gustave Bertrand , the French radio @-@ intelligence and cryptology chief , and Capt. Henri Braquenié of the French Air Force staff . The British sent Commander Alastair Denniston , head of Britain 's Government Code and Cypher School , Dilly Knox , chief British cryptanalyst and Commander Humphrey <unk> , head of the Royal Navy 's intercept and direction @-@ finding stations . 
 When Rejewski had been working on reconstructing the German military Enigma machine in late 1932 , he had ultimately solved a crucial element , the wiring of the letters of the alphabet into the entry drum , with the inspired guess that they might be wired in simple alphabetical order . Now , at the trilateral meeting – Rejewski was later to recount – " the first question that ... Dillwyn Knox asked was : ' What are the connections in the entry drum ? ' " Knox was mortified to learn how simple the answer was . 
 The Poles ' gift , to their western Allies , of Enigma decryption , five weeks before the outbreak of World War II , came not a moment too soon . Former Bletchley Park mathematician @-@ cryptologist Gordon Welchman has written : " Ultra would never have gotten off the ground if we had not learned from the Poles , in the nick of time , the details both of the German military ... Enigma machine , and of the operating procedures that were in use . " Allied Supreme Commander Dwight D. Eisenhower , at war 's end , described intelligence from Bletchley Park as having been " of priceless value to me . It has simplified my task as a commander enormously . " Eisenhower expressed his thanks for this " decisive contribution to the Allied war effort . " 
 Churchill 's greatest wartime fear , even after Hitler had suspended Operation Sea Lion and invaded the Soviet Union , was that the German submarine wolfpacks would succeed in strangling sea @-@ locked Britain . A major factor that averted Britain 's defeat in the Battle of the Atlantic was her regained mastery of Naval Enigma decryption ; and while the latter benefited crucially from British seizure of German Enigma @-@ equipped naval vessels , the breaking of German naval signals ultimately relied on techniques that had been pioneered by the Polish Cipher Bureau . Had Britain capitulated to Hitler , the United States would have been deprived of an essential forward base for its subsequent involvement in the European and North African theaters . 
 A week after the Pyry meeting , Dillwyn Knox , in a letter dated 1 August 1939 , thanked the Poles , in Polish , " for your cooperation and patience . " He enclosed little paper batons and a scarf picturing a Derby horse race – evidently emblematic of the cryptological race that Knox had hoped to win using the batons , and whose loss he was gallantly acknowledging . 
 On 5 September 1939 , as it became clear that Poland was unlikely to halt the ongoing German invasion , BS @-@ 4 received orders to destroy part of its files and evacuate essential personnel . 
 = = Bureau abroad = = 
 During the German Invasion of Poland in September 1939 , key Cipher Bureau personnel were evacuated southeast and — after the Soviets invaded eastern Poland on 17 September — into Romania , on the way destroying their cryptological equipment and documentation . Eventually , crossing Yugoslavia and still @-@ neutral Italy , they reached France . Some personnel of the Cipher Bureau 's German section who had worked with Enigma , and most of the workers at the AVA Radio Company that had built Enigma doubles and cryptologic equipment for the German section , remained in Poland . Some were interrogated by the Gestapo , but no one gave away the secret of Polish mastery of Enigma decryption . At PC Bruno , outside Paris , on 20 October 1939 the Poles resumed work on German Enigma ciphers in close collaboration with Britain 's Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park . 
 In the interest of security , the allied cryptological services , before sending their messages over a teleprinter line , encrypted them using Enigma doubles . Henri Braquenié often closed messages with an ironic " Heil Hitler ! " 
 As late as December 1939 , when Lt. Col. Gwido Langer , accompanied by Captain Braquenié , visited London and Bletchley Park , the British asked that the Polish cryptologists be turned over to them . Langer , however , took the position that the Polish team must remain where the Polish Armed Forces were being formed – on French soil . The mathematicians might actually have reached Britain much earlier – and much more comfortably – than they eventually did ; but in September 1939 , when they went to the British embassy in Bucharest , Romania , they were brushed off by a preoccupied British diplomat . 
 In January 1940 , the British cryptanalyst Alan Turing spent several days at PC Bruno conferring with his Polish colleagues . He had brought the Poles a full set of Zygalski sheets that had been produced at Bletchley Park by John Jeffreys using Polish @-@ supplied information . On 17 January 1940 , the Poles made the first break into wartime Enigma traffic — that from 28 October 1939 . 
 During this period , until the collapse of France in June 1940 , ultimately 83 percent of the Enigma keys that were found , were solved at Bletchley Park , the remaining 17 percent at PC Bruno . Rejewski commented : 
 How could it be otherwise , when there were three of us [ Polish cryptologists ] and [ there were ] at least several hundred British cryptologists , since about 10 @,@ 000 people worked in Bletchley ... Besides , recovery of keys also depended on the amount of intercepted cipher material , and that amount was far greater on the British side than on the French side . Finally , in France ( by contrast with the work in Poland ) we ourselves not only sought for the daily keys , but after finding the key also read the messages .... One can only be surprised that the Poles had as many as 17 percent of the keys to their credit . 
 The inter @-@ Allied cryptologic collaboration prevented duplication of effort and facilitated discoveries . Before fighting had started in Norway in April 1940 , the Polish @-@ French team solved an uncommonly hard three @-@ letter code used by the Germans to communicate with fighter and bomber squadrons and for exchange of meteorological data between aircraft and land . The code had first appeared in December 1939 , but the Polish cryptologists had been too preoccupied with Enigma to give the code much attention . With the German assault on the west impending , however , the breaking of the Luftwaffe code took on mounting urgency . The trail of the elusive code ( whose system of letters changed every 24 hours ) led back to Enigma . The first clue came from the British , who had noticed that the code 's letters did not change randomly . If A changed to P , then elsewhere P was replaced by A. The British made no further headway , but the Poles realized that what was manifesting was Enigma 's exclusivity principle that they had discovered in 1932 . The Germans ' carelessness meant that now the Poles , having after midnight solved Enigma 's daily setting , could with no further effort also read the Luftwaffe signals . 
 The Germans , just before opening their 10 May 1940 offensive in the west that would trample Belgium , Luxembourg and the Netherlands in order to reach the borders of France , once again changed their procedure for enciphering message keys , rendering the Zygalski sheets " completely useless " and temporarily defeating the joint British @-@ Polish cryptologic attacks on Enigma . According to Gustave Bertrand , " It took superhuman day @-@ and @-@ night effort to overcome this new difficulty : on May 20 , decryption resumed . " 
 Following the capitulation of France in June 1940 , the Poles were evacuated to Algeria . On October 1 , 1940 , they resumed work at " Cadix " , near Uzès in unoccupied southern , Vichy France , under the sponsorship of Gustave Bertrand . 
 A little over two years later , on 8 November 1942 , Bertrand learned from the BBC that the Allies had landed in French North Africa ( " Operation Torch " ) . Knowing that in such an eventuality the Germans planned to occupy Vichy France , on 9 November he evacuated Cadix . Two days later , on 11 November , the Germans indeed marched into southern France . On the morning of 12 November they occupied Cadix . 
 Over the two years since its establishment in October 1940 , Cadix had decrypted thousands of Wehrmacht , SS and Gestapo messages , originating not only from French territory but from across Europe , which provided invaluable intelligence to Allied commands and resistance movements . Cadix had also decrypted thousands of Soviet messages . 
 Having departed Cadix , the Polish personnel evaded the occupying Italian security police and German Gestapo and sought to escape France via Spain . Jerzy Różycki , Jan <unk> and Piotr <unk> had died in the January 1942 sinking , in the Mediterranean Sea , of a French passenger ship , the <unk> , in which they had been returning to southern France from a tour of duty in Algeria . 
 Marian Rejewski and Henryk Zygalski hiked over the Pyrenees with a guide ( who robbed them at gunpoint ) to the Spanish border , where they were arrested on January 30 , 1943 . They were incarcerated by the Spaniards for three months before being released , upon Red Cross intervention , on 4 May 1943 . They then managed , by a circuitous land – sea – air route , to join the Polish Armed Forces in Britain , Rejewski and Zygalski were inducted into the Polish Army as privates ( they would eventually be promoted to lieutenant ) and put to work breaking German SS and SD hand ciphers at a Polish signals facility in Boxmoor . Because of their having been in occupied France , the British considered it too risky to invite them to work at Bletchley Park . 
 Finally , with the end of the two mathematicians ' cryptologic work at the close of World War II , the Cipher Bureau ceased to exist . From nearly its inception in 1931 until war 's end in 1945 , the Bureau , sometimes incorporated into aggregates under <unk> ( PC Bruno and Cadix ) , had been essentially the same agency , with most of the same core personnel , carrying out much the same tasks ; now it was extinguished . Neither Rejewski nor Zygalski would work again as cryptologists . In late 1946 Rejewski returned to his family in a devastated and politically altered Poland , to live there another 33 years until his death in February 1980 . Zygalski would remain in England until his death in August 1978 . 
 = = Secret preserved = = 
 Despite their travails , Rejewski and Zygalski had fared better than some of their colleagues . Cadix 's Polish military chiefs , Langer and Ciężki , had also been captured — by the Germans , as they tried to escape from France into Spain on the night of March 10 – 11 , 1943 — along with three other Poles : Antoni Palluth , Edward <unk> and Kazimierz <unk> . The first two became prisoners of war ; the other three were sent as slave labourers to Germany , where Palluth and <unk> perished . Despite the varyingly dire circumstances in which they were held , none of them — Stefan Mayer emphasizes — betrayed the secret of Enigma 's decryption , thus making it possible for the Allies to continue exploiting this vital intelligence resource . 
 Before the war , Palluth , a lecturer in the 1929 secret Poznań University cryptology course , had been co @-@ owner of AVA , which produced equipment for the Cipher Bureau , and knew many details of the decryption technology . In Warsaw , under German occupation , other Cipher Bureau workers were interrogated by German intelligence commissions , and some AVA workers were approached by German agents , but all kept silent about compromises to Enigma . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In 1967 the Polish military historian Władysław Kozaczuk , in his book Bitwa o <unk> ( The Battle for Secrets ) , first revealed that the German Enigma had been broken by Polish cryptologists before World War II . Kozaczuk 's disclosure came seven years before F.W. Winterbotham 's The Ultra Secret ( 1974 ) changed conventional views of the history of the war . 
 The 1979 Polish film <unk> Enigmy ( The Enigma Secret ) is a generally fair , if superficial , account of the Cipher Bureau 's story . Twenty @-@ two years later , the 2001 Hollywood film Enigma was criticized for its many historical inaccuracies , including omission of Poland 's fundamental work in Enigma decryption . 
 = I Should Coco = 
 I Should Coco is the debut studio album by English alternative rock band Supergrass , released through Parlophone in May 1995 . Supergrass were formed in 1993 by Gaz Coombes , Mick Quinn and Danny Goffey and they released their debut single from the album , " Caught by the Fuzz " , in May 1995 on the small independent local label Backbeat Records and was re @-@ released with Parlophone . The title of the album is cockney rhyming slang for " I should think so " . 
 I Should Coco was recorded in Cornwall and produced by Sam Williams , who had been impressed by the band while scouting in Oxford . At the height of the Britpop era , the album became the band 's most successful release when it reached number one on the UK Albums Chart , and subsequently gained platinum status , selling over a million copies worldwide and 500 @,@ 000 in the UK . The most successful single released from I Should Coco is " Alright " , it peaked at number @-@ two in the UK Singles Chart , and gained silver status . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Supergrass formed in 1993 after the break @-@ up of The <unk> and consists of Gaz Coombes ( lead vocals ) , Danny Goffey ( drums ) , Mick Quinn ( bass ) , and Rob Coombes ( keyboards ) . Gaz Coombes , Goffey , and Quinn had been playing gigs around Oxford when they were spotted by producer Sam Williams , who said he wanted to work with them . Between the months of May and August , the band recorded a six track demo at Sawmills Studio and , having signed a deal with Backbeat Records , a limited number of copies of " Caught by the Fuzz " and " Mansize Rooster " were released . The demo had also quickly reached EMI , however , and that led to the group being signed by the Parlophone label , which would re @-@ release the two songs . Quinn said " it took about three and a half months total recording time and cost less to make than the video for Alright . " 
 A recording made at Carfax Tower in Oxford provided the bell chimes heard at the end of " Strange Ones " . These chimes were only heard on the I Should Coco version , not on Supergrass is 10 , because on the I Should Coco album the chimes are used as a transition to the next track , " Sitting Up Straight " , which was not included in Supergrass is 10 . " Strange Ones " was written about Cowley Road , Oxford , a place where the band once lived . It was originally intended to be the " throwaway song " on the B @-@ side to " Caught by the Fuzz " . Another song on the album with the same theme , " I 'd Like To Know " , was inspired by listening to " Strange Ones " played backwards on tape cassette . Supergrass took this sound , wrote new lyrics for it , and had another song for their album . Gaz Coombes says , " One of the highlights of this album was recording ' Sofa ( Of My Lethargy ) ' . ... I remember everybody got in the live room and had an instrument , including Sam [ Williams ] on bass , a friend of his on hammond organ and we played the rest , all live , one take . ... We made I Should Coco so fast because we wanted to catch the energy and excitement of the songs on tape , and do it before the money ran out ! " In a 2005 interview with BBC Radio London Quinn remembered " writing that song [ ' Time ' ] in my living room on a rainy day and Gaz sort of turned up with this chord sequence and we just went straight through it and just did it on 4 track " . 
 = = Cover art and title = = 
 The album title is Cockney rhyming slang for " I should think so " . The front cover of the album is a painting based on three separate photos of Coombes , Goffey , and Quinn . The portraits of Coombes and Goffey were taken by Quinn in the summer of 1994 when he was experimenting with a macro lens . The photo of Quinn was taken that same year by a friend , while they were on tour in Wolverhampton . The painting was then created by the Moody Painters who were based on Oxford 's Cowley Road . The white band at the top was inspired by an old Donovan record that Quinn owned and is an homage to old 1950s and 1960s records , with the stereo @-@ mono signs . The photo on the back of the album was taken at a club in London about five minutes after they came off stage . The photo consists of two separate shots grafted together because Quinn was " pulling a disgusting face in the original " . All of these elements were then put together by Nick Bax of The Designers Republic to create the finished sleeve . The Bonus 7 " featured a more kaleidoscope @-@ style front cover . 
 = = Music = = 
 The group 's primary musical influences came from bands such as Buzzcocks , The Jam , Madness and The Kinks . Supergrass took this contemporary music and mixed it with pop punk 's characteristic fast , three @-@ chord , guitar @-@ based , catchy tunes to produce a sound uniquely their own ; " we were just the three of us in my bedroom or someone 's house , just making ... we played really hard and just made loads of noise . Most of our early songs were just three chord grooves and stuff that was fun to play . So that 's why the first album sounded so ' punky ' , I think ... it 's just ' cause we were all used to playing in this small room and it being really loud , so we just made the album sound like that . " Songs for Beginners by Graham Nash was another possible influence on I Should Coco . Gaz Coombes told The Guardian in 2003 , " We used to listen to it a lot when we lived in Cowley Road in Oxford in 1994 , just when the band were getting big . " 
 The musical styles and their particular inspirations for the songs on this album were extremely diverse . For example , there is the cheerful , fast , keyboard @-@ augmented " I 'd Like To Know " , the guitar @-@ driven punk narrative " Caught by the Fuzz " , the mainly piano @-@ based rhythm of the teen anthem " Alright " , and the country music @-@ influenced acoustic guitar in " Time to Go " . Even in the varied genre of Britpop , I Should Coco was seen as eclectic . Overall , the album has been described as Britpop , influenced in equal parts by Buzzcocks and The Kinks , with strong hints of Supertramp in " She 's So Loose " , " Lose It " and the intro of " Strange Ones " . 
 In a 1995 interview with the Metro , Mick Quinn said , " We listen to a lot of different kinds of music . We 're not a ' 60s @-@ revival band ! We like things from the ' 70s and beyond as well ; everything from Sly and the Family Stone and Motown to Frank Black and Tricky . " 
 " Strange Ones " and " I 'd Like To Know " are both songs about the strange people on Cowley Road , Oxford . Mick Quinn tried to describe the concept : " There 's a few people who are just really out there . There 's a lot of people around Oxford who are real <unk> and that , who go and lie down in Port Meadow , but I 'm not really sure about them . I 'm not really sure that they 're individuals : they 're part of a much larger thing . " Danny Goffey added , " They 're the sort of people who don 't fit in anywhere , who don 't link up with everyday life at all . " 
 " Caught by the Fuzz " was based on a real @-@ life event : lead singer Gaz Coombes ' arrest and caution for possession of cannabis at age fifteen . In a 2004 interview , Coombes said " It wasn 't trying to be a real statement , but at the time we knew that it was a big deal . Kids all around England were getting nicked for having a bit of hash on them . In Oxford that kind of thing happened quite a lot . It 's all true so it was easy to write . It was a funny experience – not too funny at the time ' cause I was only 15 and shitting myself . The song has that disturbing energy . It 's comparable to your heart racing . The adrenaline rush you get when your mum walks into the police station is similar to the energy of the song . " 
 " Mansize Rooster " is said to be about a young boy with a large penis , although this is not obvious from the lyrics . Gaz Coombes once stated in an interview that " the most embarrassing moment in pop is on our album where it goes : ' Oi Mum ! Got any <unk> ? ' " This was one of the many exclamations made between tracks on I Should Coco in the sped @-@ up voices of the band members . It was said before the song " We 're Not Supposed To " began . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 I Should Coco reached number one on the UK Albums Chart , stayed there for three weeks , and still remains the only number @-@ one album Supergrass has ever achieved . It sold 500 @,@ 000 copies domestically , earning Platinum status in the UK , and has sold over a million copies worldwide . NME writer Steve Sutherland gave the album a nine @-@ out @-@ of @-@ ten rating . He wrote , " They play with the skill and assurance of a band who 've been going for decades yet they still burn off the buzz of being new to the game . " He added , " There 's nothing contrived about I Should Coco , nothing added for effect . " 
 Culturally , the album 's glorification of teenage freedom made a very big impact on the overall Britpop music scene . The whole genre was seen as the voice of youth , but Supergrass , still teens themselves when the album was made , addressed the subject with more insight than most . The most well @-@ known song from the album , " Alright " , is still played regularly in Britain and Ireland , and held up as a musical example of teenage rebellion . Though it is one of their most popular songs , the band rarely play " Alright " in their live sets any more . In a 1999 interview , Gaz Coombes joked , " We don 't play ' Alright ' anymore . We should play it in a minor key , and in the past tense . " Around the time of its release Coombes said that " it wasn 't written as an anthem . It isn 't supposed to be a rally cry for our generation . The stuff about ' We are young / We run green ... ' isn 't about being 19 but really 13 or 14 and just discovering girls and drinking . It 's meant to be light @-@ hearted and a bit of a laugh , not at all a rebellious call to arms . " Danny Goffey noted , " It certainly wasn 't written in a very summery vibe . It was written in a cottage where the heating had packed up and we were trying to build fires to keep warm . " 
 All five singles released in the UK from I Should Coco were well received by the British public . The first single from the album , " Caught by the Fuzz " , peaked at number 43 on the UK Singles Chart . The second single from the album , " Mansize Rooster " , was played as Supergrass ' first live television performance on The Word in 1995 , and reached number 20 on the UK Singles Chart . " Lose It " , officially the third single taken from the album , was a vinyl @-@ only US release from Sub Pop records . " Lenny " was the fourth single from I Should Coco ; it reached number 10 on the UK Singles Chart , and remained there for three weeks . The final release from the album , " Alright / Time " , proved to be their breakthrough single , largely due to the popularity of the song " Alright " . Supergrass ' highest ranked single to date , along with " Richard III " , " Alright " reached number 2 on the UK Singles Chart , remained in the top three for a month , and still receives airplay in the UK . I Should Coco was nominated for Best Album at the 1995 Mercury Prize awards , and the single " Alright " from the album won an Ivor Novello Award for Best Contemporary Song . 
 In a 2005 interview with The Times , Coombes said , " It 's insane that people think we would ever sound like that again ... We ’ re proud of ' Alright ' and how well it did , but we never wanted to find a formula and stick to it . Our aim was always to progress and keep the music interesting , for us and for the fans . So the people who see us in the street and still shout ' We are young ' may not like the new album , but fans who have grown up with us and know to expect change probably will . " 
 I Should Coco was included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . In a 2007 retrospective review of the album , Al Fox of BBC Music hailed it as " an iconic 90s masterpiece " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Supergrass . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = The Dykeenies = 
 The Dykeenies are a Scottish indie rock band from Cumbernauld , formed in 2005 . The group consists of brothers Brian Henderson ( vocals , synthesizers ) and Andrew Henderson ( bass guitar , backing vocals ) , along with Steven Ramsay ( lead guitar , backing vocals ) and John Kerr ( drums , backing vocals ) . Since their formation , they have released one studio album , Nothing Means Everything , accompanied by three singles . After a worldwide tour , the band began work on their second album , which was released in October 2011 . On 31 January 2012 , The Dykeenies announced that they have parted ways . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings and King Tut 's ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = 
 The band played their first headline gig at the 350 @-@ capacity ABC2 , a small venue in Glasgow in late 2005 . The gig was a sell @-@ out show . In November 2005 , they were named as the inaugural " Artist of the Month " in the Your Sound competition ; a scheme run by Glasgow music venue King Tut 's Wah Wah Hut along with DF Concerts to project local unsigned talent . They would go on to play a sold @-@ out show at King Tut 's , despite only ever having appeared at the venue once before . As well as this , a demo version of the song " New Ideas " was included in Have Yourself a Filthy Little Christmas , a compilation album released as a free download by independent record label Filthy Little Angels on 12 December 2005 . They progressed to play an even bigger venue in Glasgow when they supported Mystery Jets at Glasgow 's Queen Margaret Union ( one of two Student unions of Glasgow University ) on 3 May 2006 , despite at this point never having released a single . 
 After winning the Your Sound competition , the band signed to King Tut 's Recordings . Again , despite having released little or no material at the time , the band were asked to play the " T Break " stage at T in the Park in Kinross , Scotland , on 9 July 2006 . A week later , The Dykeenies released their first single , a double a @-@ side " New Ideas / Will It Happen Tonight ? " . A video was recorded for the former track , featuring the band playing inside King Tut 's Wah Wah Hut . In September 2006 , the band signed to independent record label <unk> Records . 
