 Two months later , the band released their first EP through <unk> , titled Waiting for Go . The release featured the title track , as well as tracks " Things You Cannot See " , " Feels Like Sleep " and " Dark Time " . It was produced by Jim Abbiss , who had previously worked with Arctic Monkeys , Kasabian and Bombay Bicycle Club ; and mixed by previous New Order and Kaiser Chiefs collaborator Cenzo Townshend . Following the release of the EP , the band were invited by NME to play on the first ever four band O2 Rock N Roll Riot Tour , alongside The Horrors , The Fratellis and The Maccabees . 
 = = = Nothing Means Everything ( 2007 – 2010 ) = = = 
 The band were given another boost into the musical limelight with the help from Xfm Scotland ( now Galaxy Scotland ) . The radio station began by asking them to be a part of Xfm Scotland 's first ever " Winter Wonderland " gig , one of three one @-@ day winter music festivals taking place in venues across the United Kingdom . They were then called up again to support <unk> Park at Edinburgh 's Liquid Room as part of " Xfm Live Sessions " on 31 March 2007 . 
 Following numerous headline and support gigs in and around Glasgow between November 2006 and March 2007 , The Dykeenies released a new recording of " New Ideas " on 9 April 2007 , with previously unreleased tracks " Safe " , " <unk> " and " Layers " featuring alongside various remixes as b @-@ sides . The band marked the release with an extensive UK tour , including playing their first headline gig at Glasgow 's <unk> , a venue they had previously only played supporting Mystery Jets . This single was the band 's first entry into the UK Singles Chart , reaching number 54 . The band would release further singles " Clean Up Your Eyes " and " Stitches " between July and September 2007 , reaching number 53 and 61 , respectively . 
 The band released their debut album , Nothing Means Everything , on 17 September 2007 . They would again play the <unk> in support of the album , a concert which was originally booked for Glasgow 's ABC , but was moved due to scheduling problems . During the concert , the band covered " Starman " by David Bowie , an artist they have stated as a major musical influence . 
 On 9 December 2008 , The Daily Record announced that guitarist Alan Henderson had left the band , leaving over " musical differences " . Vocalist Brian Henderson said that Alan was not seeing eye to eye on musical terms with the rest of the band . On 11 December 2008 , the band announced a one @-@ off date at King Tut 's on 18 February 2009 , their first gig since playing London 's Underage Festival on 8 August 2008 . The event sold out . A full tour was later announced , playing sixteen dates across the UK . Brian Henderson stated in an interview with The Daily Record that the band are currently experimenting with a number of new instruments , including bongo drums , acoustic guitars , and gospel choirs . Henderson added that the band are seven songs from finishing the album . 
 During the band 's March tour , they included new songs " Awake " , " Square Balloons " , " Minus One " , " Traps " and " Are You With Me Now ? " . The latter has been released as a free download through the band 's website and MySpace . The band 's new single " Sounds of the City " was released on 27 April 2009 , with an instrumental version of the song as a B @-@ side . As well as this , the band played a number of summer music festivals in 2009 , including T in the Park , Summer Sundae , and the <unk> festival in Ullapool . 
 = = = Canyon of Echoes and split ( 2011 @-@ 12 ) = = = 
 The band announced on 18 July 2011 via their Myspace and Facebook accounts that their new album Canyon of Echoes will be released on 3 October 2011 . They will undertake a short UK tour to support the release . On 29 August 2011 they premiered the video for new single ' Awake ' on their official Facebook and YouTube channel . 
 In January 2012 , the Dykeenies announced their split . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 The Dykeenies ' musical style has been noted primarily as indie rock , with influences including The Cribs , Bloc Party and The Futureheads . Their musical style has also been compared to art rock and , more prominently , art pop . God Is in the TV Zine described " New Ideas " as sounding " like the first few tracks of Silent Alarm " , as well as comparing " Will It Happen Tonight ? " to We Are Scientists . Dykeenies have also stated that David Bowie is a major influence of the band , releasing a cover version of Starman as part of their Live at the Apple Store , Glasgow EP . One particular live review even linked the band to the short @-@ lived " New Rave " genre , as well as comparing lead singer Brian Henderson 's vocals to that of Brian <unk> . Nothing Means Everything has been noted as being a more mature pop album , with " The Panic " in particular noted as having dark lyrical content . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Nothing Means Everything ( 2007 ) 
 Canyon of Echoes ( 2011 ) 
 = = = Extended plays = = = 
 Waiting for Go ( 2006 ) 
 Live at the Apple Store , Glasgow ( 2007 ) 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " — " denotes releases that did not chart . 
 = Final Fantasy ( video game ) = 
 Final Fantasy ( ファイナルファンタジー , Fainaru Fantajī ) is a fantasy role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square in 1987 . It is the first game in Square 's Final Fantasy series , created by Hironobu Sakaguchi . Originally released for the NES , Final Fantasy was remade for several video game consoles and is frequently packaged with Final Fantasy II in video game collections . The story follows four youths called the Light Warriors , who each carry one of their world 's four elemental orbs which have been darkened by the four Elemental Fiends . Together , they quest to defeat these evil forces , restore light to the orbs , and save their world . 
 The game was originally going to be called Fighting Fantasy , but the name was changed to Final Fantasy when the development team discovered Fighting Fantasy was the title of a series of single @-@ player roleplay gamebooks . 
 Square believed the game would be the last title they ever released , as the company faced bankruptcy . Instead , the game was a great commercial success , received generally positive reviews , and spawned many successful sequels and supplementary titles in the form of the Final Fantasy series . The original is now regarded as one of the most influential and successful role @-@ playing games on the Nintendo Entertainment System , playing a major role in popularizing the genre . Critical praise focused on the game 's graphics , while criticism targeted the time spent wandering in search of random battle encounters to raise the player 's experience level . By March 2003 , all versions of Final Fantasy had sold a combined total of two million copies worldwide . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Final Fantasy has four basic game modes : an overworld map , town and dungeon maps , a battle screen , and a menu screen . The overworld map is a scaled @-@ down version of the game 's fictional world , which the player uses to direct characters to various locations . The primary means of travel across the overworld is by foot , but a canoe , a ship , and an airship become available as the player progresses . With the exception of some battles in preset locations or with bosses , enemies are randomly encountered on field maps and on the overworld map when traveling by foot , canoe , or ship , and must either be fought or fled from . 
 The game 's plot develops as the player progresses through towns and dungeons . Some town citizens offer helpful information , while others own shops that sell items or equipment . Dungeons appear in areas that include forests , caves , mountains , swamps , underwater caverns and buildings . Dungeons often have treasure chests containing rare items that are not available in most stores . The game 's menu screen allows the player to keep track of their experience points and levels , to choose which equipment their characters wield , and to use items and magic . A character 's most basic attribute is their level , which can range from one to fifty , and is determined by the character 's amount of experience . Gaining a level increases the character 's attributes , such as their maximum hit points ( HP ) , which represents a character 's remaining health ; a character dies when they reach zero HP . Characters gain experience points by winning battles . 
 Combat in Final Fantasy is menu @-@ based : the player selects an action from a list of options such as Attack , Magic , and Item . Battles are turn @-@ based and continue until either side flees or is defeated . If the player 's party wins , each character will gain experience and Gil ; if it flees , it will be returned to the map screen ; and if every character in the party dies , the game will be over and all <unk> progress will be lost . Final Fantasy was the first game to show the player 's characters on the right side of the screen and the enemies on the left side of the screen , as opposed to a first @-@ person view . 
 The player begins the game by choosing four characters to form a party , and is locked into that choice for the duration of the game . Each character has an " occupation " , or character class , with different attributes and abilities that are either innate or can be acquired . There are six classes : Fighter , Thief , Black Belt , Red Mage , White Mage , and Black Mage . Later in the game , the player has the option to have each character undergo a " class upgrade " ; whereby their sprite portraits mature , and some classes gain the ability to use weapons and magic that they previously could not use . The game contains a variety of weapons , armor , and items that can be bought or found to make the characters more powerful in combat . Each character has eight inventory slots , with four to hold weapons and four to hold armor . Each character class has restrictions on what weapons and armor it may use . Some weapons and armor are magical ; if used during combat , they will cast spells . Other magical artifacts provide protection , such as from certain spells . At shops , the characters can buy items to help themselves recover while they are traveling . Items available include potions , which heal the characters or remove ailments like poison or petrification ; Tents and Cabins , which can be used on the world map to heal the player and optionally save the game ; and Houses , which also recovers the party 's magic after saving . Special items may be gained by doing quests . 
 Magic is a common ability in the game , and several character classes use it . Spells are divided into two groups : White , which is defensive and healing , and Black , which is debilitating and destructive . Magic can be bought from White and Black magic shops and assigned to characters whose occupation allows them to use it . Spells are classified by a level between one and eight , with four White and four Black spells per level . Each character may learn only three spells per level . White and Black Mages can potentially learn any of their respective spells , while Red Mages , the Ninja and the Knight cannot use most high @-@ level magic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Final Fantasy takes place in a fantasy world with three large continents . The elemental powers on this world are determined by the state of four orbs , each governing one of the four classical elements : earth , fire , water , and wind . The world of Final Fantasy is inhabited by numerous races , including Humans , Elves , Dwarves , Mermaids , Dragons , and Robots . Most non @-@ Human races have only one " town " in the game , although individuals are sometimes found in Human towns or other areas as well . Four hundred years prior to the start of the game , the Lefeinish people , who used the Power of Wind to craft airships and a giant space station ( called the Floating Castle in the game ) , watched their country decline as the Wind Orb went dark . Two hundred years later , violent storms sank a massive shrine that served as the center of an ocean @-@ based civilization , and the Water Orb went dark . The Earth Orb and the Fire Orb followed , plaguing the earth with raging wildfires , and devastating the agricultural town of <unk> as the plains and vegetation decayed . Some time later , the sage <unk> tells of a prophecy that four Light Warriors will come to save the world in a time of darkness . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins with the appearance of the four youthful Light Warriors , the heroes of the story , who each carry one of the darkened Orbs . Initially , the Light Warriors have access to the Kingdom of Coneria and the ruined Temple of Fiends . After the Warriors rescue Princess Sara from the evil knight Garland , the King of Coneria builds a bridge that enables the Light Warriors ' passage east to the town of <unk> . There the Light Warriors liberate the town from <unk> and his band of pirates , and acquire the pirates ' ship for their own use . The Warriors now embark on a chain of delivery quests on the shores of the Aldi Sea . First they retrieve a stolen crown from the Marsh Cave for a king in a ruined castle , who turns out to be the dark elf <unk> . Defeating him gains them the Crystal Eye , which they return to the blind witch Matoya in exchange for a herb needed to awaken the Elf Prince cursed by <unk> . The Elf Prince gives the Light Warriors the Mystic Key , which is capable of unlocking any door . The key unlocks a storage room in Coneria Castle which holds TNT . <unk> , one of the Dwarves of the Cave of Dwarf / Dwarf Village , destroys a small isthmus using the TNT , connecting the Aldi Sea to the outside world . 
 After visiting the near @-@ ruined town of <unk> , the Light Warriors go to the Earth Cave to defeat a vampire and retrieve the Star Ruby , which gains passage to Sage Sarda 's cave . With Sarda 's Rod , the Warriors venture deeper into the Earth Cave and destroy the Earth Fiend , Lich . The Light Warriors then obtain a canoe and enter <unk> Volcano and defeat the Fire Fiend , Kary . The <unk> from the nearby Ice Cave allows them to raise an airship to reach the northern continents . After they prove their courage by retrieving the Rat 's Tail from the Castle of Ordeal , the King of the Dragons , Bahamut , promotes each Light Warrior . A kind gesture is repaid by a fairy , receiving special liquid that produces oxygen , and the Warriors use it to help defeat the Water Fiend , Kraken , in the Sunken Shrine . They also recover a Slab , which allows a linguist named Dr. <unk> to teach them the Lefeinish language . The Lefeinish give the Light Warriors access to the Floating Castle that Tiamat , the Wind Fiend , has taken over . With the Four Fiends defeated and the Orbs restored , a portal opens in the Temple of Fiends which takes them 2000 years into the past . There the Warriors discover that the Four Fiends sent Garland ( now the archdemon Chaos ) back in time and he sent the Fiends to the future to do so , creating a time loop by which he could live forever . The Light Warriors defeat Chaos , thus ending the paradox , and return home . By ending the paradox , however , the Light Warriors have changed the future to one where their heroic deeds remain unknown outside of legend . 
 = = Development = = 
 Hironobu Sakaguchi had intended to make a role @-@ playing game ( RPG ) for a long time , but his employer Square refused to give him permission as it expected low sales of such a product . Moreover , only three of his colleagues volunteered to join this project headed by him because he was thought of as a " rough boss " in spite of his unsuccessful creations . However , when the RPG Dragon Quest was released and proved to be a hit in Japan , the company reconsidered its stance on the genre and approved Sakaguchi 's vision of Fighting Fantasy , an RPG inspired by Ultima and Wizardry . According to the game 's composer , the title was later changed to Final Fantasy as the game was thought to be the company 's final project under the threat of bankruptcy . Sakaguchi also explained that the new title stemmed from his personal situation : had the game not sold well , he would have quit the games industry and gone back to university . In 2015 , Sakaguchi revealed the name 's real origin : the team wanted a title that would abbreviate to " FF " , which would sound good in Japanese . The name was originally going to be Fighting Fantasy , but due to concerns over trademark conflicts with the roleplaying gamebook series of the same name , they needed to settle for something else . They eventually chose Final Fantasy . According to Sakaguchi , any title that created the " FF " abbreviation would have done . Commenting on the original story , Sakaguchi said that " Those days definitely seemed like end times , but honestly , any word that started with ' F ' would ’ ve been fine . " 
 Final Fantasy was developed by a team of seven core staff members within Square referred to as the " A @-@ Team " . Sakaguchi convinced fellow game designers Koichi Ishii and Akitoshi Kawazu to join the project . Kawazu was mainly responsible for the battle system and sequences , which he based heavily on the tabletop game Dungeons & Dragons and the RPG Wizardry . For example , enemies ' weaknesses to elements such as fire and ice had not been included in Japanese RPGs up until that point . Kawazu had grown fond of such aspects of Western RPGs and decided to incorporate them into Final Fantasy . He also advocated the player 's option to freely choose their own party member classes at the beginning of the game as he feels " the fun in an RPG begins when you create a character " . The scenario was written by freelance writer Kenji Terada , based on a story by Sakaguchi . Ishii heavily influenced the game 's setting with his idea of the crystals . He also suggested illustrator Yoshitaka Amano as character designer , but Sakaguchi declined at first as he had never heard the artist 's name before . When Sakaguchi showed Ishii some drawings on magazine clippings and told him that this was the art style he was looking for , Ishii revealed to him that these were actually created by Amano , hence leading to his involvement in the game . The music for Final Fantasy was composed by Nobuo Uematsu and marked his 16th video game music composition . Iranian @-@ American programmer Nasir Gebelli was hired to code the game . He initially tried to understand all aspects of the gameplay but was soon advised by Sakaguchi to just program the design concepts so he did not have to explain everything to Gebelli in detail . Among the other developers were graphic designer Kazuko Shibuya , programmers Kiyoshi Yoshii and Ken Narita , as well as debugger Hiroyuki Ito . When the project started to show promise , designer Hiromichi Tanaka and his " B @-@ Team " joined to aid development . The lack of faith in Sakaguchi 's team as well as its unpopularity within the company motivated the staff members to give their best . 
 Sakaguchi took an in @-@ development ROM of the game to Japanese magazine Famicom Tsushin , but it would not review it . However , Famitsu gave the game extensive coverage . Only 200 @,@ 000 copies were to be shipped , but Sakaguchi pleaded with the company to make 400 @,@ 000 to help spawn a sequel , and the management agreed . Following the successful North American localization of Dragon Quest , Nintendo of America translated Final Fantasy into English and published it in North America in 1990 . The North American version of Final Fantasy met with modest success , partly due to Nintendo 's then @-@ aggressive marketing tactics . No version of the game was marketed in the PAL region until Final Fantasy Origins in 2003 . 
 = = Versions and re @-@ releases = = 
 Final Fantasy has been remade several times for different platforms , and has frequently been packaged with Final Fantasy II in various collections . While all of these remakes retain the same basic story and battle mechanics , various tweaks have been made in different areas , including graphics , sound , and specific game elements . 
 Final Fantasy was first re @-@ released for the MSX2 system and was published by <unk> in Japan in June 1989 . It had access to almost three times as much storage space as the Famicom version , but suffered from problems not present in Nintendo 's cartridge media , including noticeable loading times . There were also minor graphical upgrades , much improved music tracks and sound effects . 
 In 1994 , Final Fantasy I ・ II , a compilation of Final Fantasy and Final Fantasy II , was launched for the Famicom . This version was only released in Japan and had very few graphical updates . 
 The WonderSwan Color remake was released in Japan on December 9 , 2000 , and featured many new graphical changes . The 8 @-@ bit graphics of the original Famicom game were updated , battle scenes incorporated full background images , and character and enemy sprites were re @-@ drawn to look more like the ones from the Super Famicom Final Fantasy games . 
 In Japan , Final Fantasy and Final Fantasy II were re @-@ released both separately and as a combined game for the PlayStation . The collection was released in Japan in 2002 as Final Fantasy I & II Premium Package and in Europe and North America in 2003 as Final Fantasy Origins . This version was similar to the WonderSwan Color remake and featured several changes such as more detailed graphics , a remixed soundtrack , added full motion video sequences , art galleries of Yoshitaka Amano 's illustrations and a memo save function . On December 18 , 2012 the port was re @-@ released as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box release . 
 Final Fantasy I & II : Dawn of Souls is , like Final Fantasy Origins , a port of the first two games in the series and was released for the Game Boy Advance in 2004 . The Dawn of Souls version incorporates various new elements , including four additional dungeons , an updated bestiary , and a few tweaks . 
 Square Enix released a version of Final Fantasy for two Japanese mobile phone networks in 2004 ; a version for NTT DoCoMo FOMA <unk> series was launched in March under the title Final Fantasy i and a subsequent release for CDMA 1X WIN @-@ compatible phones was launched in August . Another titular version was released for SoftBank Yahoo ! Keitai phones on July 3 , 2006 . Graphically , the games are superior to the original 8 @-@ bit game , but not as advanced as many of the more recent console and handheld ports . 
 Square Enix planned to release this version for North American mobile phones in 2006 , however , it was 2010 before it was released , in collaboration with Namco . It retains the game difficulty and MP System from the original Famicom version . Other elements such as updated graphics , spell names , monster names , bosses , items and areas are borrowed from the Game Boy Advance / Wonderswan Color versions ( however this version does not feature additional areas and monsters present in the GBA version ) . Game data is saved as in the original Famicom version ( by using Tent , Sleeping Bag and Cottage or by going into an inn ) . However , there are now three save game slots and a " Temporary Save " option available in the game . 
 For the 20th anniversary of Final Fantasy , Square Enix remade Final Fantasy and Final Fantasy II for the PlayStation Portable . The games were released in Japan and North America in 2007 , and in European territories in 2008 . The PSP version features higher @-@ resolution 2D graphics , full motion video sequences , a remixed soundtrack , and a new dungeon as well as the bonus dungeons from Dawn of Souls . The script is the same as in the Dawn of Souls version , aside from the new dungeon . 
 Square Enix released the original NES version of the game on the Wii 's Virtual Console service in Japan on May 26 , 2009 , in North America on October 5 , 2009 and in the PAL region as an import on May 7 , 2010 . 
 On February 25 , 2010 , Square Enix released the iOS version of Final Fantasy , based on the PSP port with touch controls , worldwide . On June 13 , 2012 , Square Enix released the Windows Phone version , which is based on the iOS version . On July 27 , 2012 , Square Enix released an Android port , largely based on the iOS version though lacking the new dungeons of the 20th anniversary edition . 
 On November 11 , 2016 , the game ( alongside 29 other games ) will be included in the NES Classic Edition / Nintendo Classic Mini : Nintendo Entertainment System released by Nintendo . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Final Fantasy has been well received by critics and commercially successful ; the original release sold 400 @,@ 000 copies . According to Square 's publicity department , the Japanese Famicom and MSX releases sold a combined 600 @,@ 000 copies , and the North American NES release sold 700 @,@ 000 copies . As of March 31 , 2003 , the game , including all re @-@ releases at the time , had shipped 1 @.@ 99 million copies worldwide , with 1 @.@ 21 million of those copies being shipped in Japan and 780 @,@ 000 abroad . As of November 19 , 2007 , the PlayStation Portable version has shipped 140 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Editors at IGN ranked Final Fantasy the 11th best game on the NES , calling the game 's class system diverse , and praising its convenient use of vehicles as a means of traveling across the world map . GamesRadar ranked it the eighth best NES game ever made . The staff felt that while Dragon Warrior introduced gamers to the genre , Final Fantasy popularized it . In 2004 , readers of Retro Gamer voted Final Fantasy 93rd top retro game , with the staff noting that " despite poor visuals and a relatively simple quest , many still consider the original to be the best ( with the exception of FFVII ) . " In 2006 , Final Fantasy appeared in the Japanese magazine Famitsu 's Top 100 games list , where readers voted it the 63rd best game of all time . GameFAQs users made a similar list in 2005 , which ranked Final Fantasy at 76th . It was rated the 49th best game made on a Nintendo system in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list . In 2008 , Nintendo Power ranked it the 19th best Nintendo Entertainment System video game , praising it for setting up the basics of console role @-@ playing games , along with Dragon Warrior , and citing examples such as epic stories , leveling up , random battles , and character classes . 
 Final Fantasy was one of the most influential early console role @-@ playing games , and played a major role in legitimizing and popularizing the genre . According to IGN 's Matt Casamassina , Final Fantasy 's storyline had a deeper and more engaging story than the original Dragon Quest ( known as Dragon Warrior in North America ) . Modern critics have pointed out that the game is poorly paced by contemporary standards , and involves much more time wandering in search of random battle encounters to raise their experience levels and money than it does exploring and solving puzzles . Other reviewers find the level @-@ building and exploration portions of the game as the most amusing ones . In 1987 , Famitsu initially described the original Final Fantasy as " one of many " that imitated the Dragon Quest formula . The game is considered by some to be the weakest and most difficult installment of the series . 
 The subsequent versions of Final Fantasy have garnered mostly favorable reviews from the media . Peer Schneider of IGN enjoyed the WonderSwan Color version , praising its graphical improvements , especially the environments , characters , and monsters . Famitsu scored this version a 30 out of 40 . Final Fantasy Origins was generally well @-@ received ; GamePro said the music was " fantastic " , and that the graphics had a " suitably retro cuteness to them . " Reviews for Final Fantasy I & II : Dawn of Souls were generally positive , with Jeremy Dunham of IGN giving particular praise to the improved English translation , saying it was better than any previous version of the game . The PlayStation Portable version was not as critically successful as the previous releases ; GameSpot 's Kevin VanOrd cited the visuals as its strongest enhancement , but stated that the additional random enemy encounters and updated graphics did not add much value . The Dawn of Souls package was rated 76th in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A soundtrack album was released together with the score of Final Fantasy II in 1989 . Some of the game 's tracks became mainstays to the Final Fantasy series : the " Prelude " , the arpeggio played on the title screen ; the " Opening Theme " , which is played when the party crosses the bridge early in the game and later referred to as the Final Fantasy theme ; and the " Victory Fanfare " , which is played after every victorious battle . The opening motif of the battle theme has also been reused a number of times in the series . The theme song that plays when the player characters first cross the bridge from Coneria has become the recurring theme music of the series , and has been featured in most numbered Final Fantasy titles . Final Fantasy was also the basis for the series finale of a video game @-@ themed cartoon series Captain N : The Game Master entitled " The Fractured Fantasy of Captain N " . 8 @-@ Bit Theater , a sprite @-@ based webcomic created by Brian <unk> , parodies the game , and has become very popular in the gaming community since it started in March 2001 . 
 The video game has spawned two direct cross @-@ over prequels on the PlayStation Portable : Dissidia Final Fantasy and Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy . Warrior of Light , based on Yoshitaka Amano 's design of the lead character , and Garland are the respective hero and villain representing Final Fantasy . Warrior of Light is voiced by Toshihiko Seki in the Japanese version and Grant George in the English version , while Garland is voiced by Kenji Utsumi in the Japanese version and Christopher Sabat in the English version . Both games add background information to the world of Final Fantasy . For instance , Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy names the world of Final Fantasy " World A " in order to distinguish it from World B , the world of Dissidia . 
 = Ronald Stuart = 
 Ronald Niel Stuart VC DSO RD RNR ( 26 August 1886 – 8 February 1954 ) was a British Merchant Navy commodore and Royal Navy captain who was highly commended following extensive and distinguished service at sea over a period of more than thirty @-@ five years . During World War I he received the Victoria Cross , the Distinguished Service Order , the French Croix de Guerre avec Palmes and the United States ' Navy Cross for a series of daring operations he conducted while serving in the Royal Navy during the War at Sea . 
 Stuart 's Victoria Cross was awarded following a ballot by the men under his command . This unusual method of selection was used after the Admiralty board was unable to choose which members of the crew deserved the honour after a desperate engagement between a Q @-@ ship and a German submarine off the Irish coast . His later career included command of the liner RMS Empress of Britain and the management of the London office of a major transatlantic shipping company . Following his retirement in 1951 , Stuart moved into his sister 's cottage in Kent and died three years later . A sometimes irascible man , he was reportedly embarrassed by any fuss surrounding his celebrity and was known to exclaim " Mush ! " at any demonstration of strong emotion . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ronald Niel Stuart was born in 1886 in Liverpool to Neil Stuart and Mary Harrison , both from experienced seafaring families . Neil Sr. had been born on Prince Edward Island in Canada and had met and married Mary in Montreal . She was the daughter of a master mariner from Australia . In the 1880s the family moved to Liverpool , where Stuart was born as the youngest of six children . Neil worked in the city as a dock superintendent and owner of a wholesale tea shop before dying suddenly while preparing for a return to the Merchant Navy . 
 Stuart was by this time a stocky , blonde , blue @-@ eyed man described as " powerful " but " very bleak and penetrating " . He was initially educated at Shaw Street College , but following his father 's death was forced to leave and take a job as a clerk in an office . Stuart 's son commented that " He hated it [ the job ] . He hated Liverpool " . In 1902 , Stuart decided to leave the city and find work in a different environment . He took an apprenticeship with the shipping company Steele & Co and was sent to learn his trade on the sailing barque <unk> . 
 In 1905 the <unk> was wrecked on a rock near the Falkland Islands . Stuart survived the sinking and returned to England to continue his training . He was posted to a new ship upon his return but she too was wrecked by a cyclone off the Florida coast . Eventually , after several years service he achieved his mariner 's qualifications and gained a job with the Allan Line as a junior officer . He then served in a variety of sailing and steam ships traveling across most of the world . In 1910 , the Allan Line was taken over by the Canadian Pacific Line and he continued working with the company 's new owners as a junior ship 's officer . 
 = = First World War = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I Stuart was called up to service , as an officer in the Royal Naval Reserve . He was originally posted as a junior officer on board the old and obsolete destroyer HMS <unk> in Plymouth . This ship was used for harbour patrols and intercepting neutral merchant ships and other work Stuart considered tedious . He became increasingly impatient with the life and repeatedly applied to his senior officers with requests for transfer ; at one point he even requested that he be commissioned into the army . All of these were turned down , with increasing levels of hostility from his commanders , one of whom was reported to have told him to " Go to hell ! And shut the door behind you ! " 
 = = = HMS Farnborough = = = 
 In the spring of 1916 he was transferred as first lieutenant to a Q @-@ ship under Gordon Campbell . A Q @-@ ship was a merchant ship with hidden weaponry , commanded secretly by the navy and manned by a Royal Navy crew . When attacked by a submarine , the Q @-@ ship would feign damage until the enemy was close enough to engage and then reveal its weapons to counter @-@ attack . Campbell , a major proponent of Q @-@ ship strategy , was impressed with Stuart 's stubborn refusal to accept the two years of rejection and brought him in to replace an officer whose nerves had cracked under the strain of Q @-@ ship operations . 
 Stuart 's experience in merchant shipping proved invaluable to his work and he soon had the crew of Q5 ( also known as HMS Farnborough ) disciplined and the ship well maintained and run . Campbell himself was very pleased with his executive officer , declaring him " on the top line " . Stuart and Campbell would later fall out over Stuart 's belief that Campbell was exaggerating the danger of Q @-@ ship service , Stuart comparing his own life favourably with service in the trenches . 
 His first year of Q @-@ ship service was frustrating for Stuart and the crew . Although , prior to his attachment to the ship , Farnborough had succeeded in sinking an enemy submarine ( the U @-@ 68 in March 1916 ) , there had been no successes since . In February 1917 , Campbell decided that in order to properly invite an attack , the Farnborough would have to actually be torpedoed before combat and then engage the submarine as she closed to finish the job with shellfire . On 17 February this theory was proven correct off Southern Ireland when the lone Farnborough was struck by a torpedo fired at extreme range . Campbell intentionally failed to evade the missile and the ship took the blow in the hold , causing some minor injuries to the crew but serious damage to the ship . The crew were well rehearsed and the " panic party " took to their boats with a great show of alarm and disorder while the gun crews manned positions on their hidden weapons . When four lifeboats had been released and the ship had settled in the water and was clearly sinking , the submarine U @-@ 83 pulled up just ten yards ( 9m ) from the wreck . A hail of shot was then unleashed by the Farnborough 's remaining crew from their six @-@ pounder gun and several machine guns into the stationary submarine . The very first shot decapitated the German captain Bruno Hoppe and the U @-@ boat was rapidly reduced to a battered wreck . Eight German sailors escaped the submarine before it sank but only two could be pulled from the water , one of whom subsequently died from his wounds . 
 The Farnborough too was sinking from her torpedo damage . Realising this , Campbell left the men in the boats , destroyed all confidential papers and radioed for help . His unorthodox message read : " Q5 slowly sinking respectfully wishes you goodbye " . This message reached nearby naval shipping , and within an hour the destroyers HMS Narwhal and HMS Buttercup arrived and began to tow the stricken ship back to land . During the night a depth charge accidentally exploded on board Farnborough and the tow was dropped . Campbell ordered the twelve men remaining aboard into a lifeboat and attempted to take a final survey of his vessel , only to be driven back by another exploding depth charge . On returning to the rail he discovered that Stuart had disobeyed his order and remained on board , to make sure his captain disembarked safely . The tow was later reattached and the battered Farnborough beached at Mill Cove , in no fit state to return to sea . Campbell was awarded the Victoria Cross in recognition of his service in the action and £ 1 @,@ 000 of prize money was shared among the crew . Stuart and Engineer @-@ Lieutenant Len Loveless were both presented with the Distinguished Service Order . 
 = = = HMS Pargust = = = 
 Following the action Stuart remained with Campbell and Loveless as Inspectors of Shipping , choosing those vessels they believed to be best suited to Q @-@ ship work for naval service . After some time ashore all three returned to sea in a vessel they had personally chosen , an old , battered tramp steamer named SS Vittoria . Renaming it HMS Pargust , they armed their vessel with a 4 " gun , two twelve pounders , two machine guns , torpedo tubes and depth charges . Thus armed the Pargust departed on her first patrol to the same grounds where U @-@ 83 had been sunk , in the waters south of Ireland . For the first few days her duties consisted only of rescuing survivors from sunken cargo ships but with increasing German activity , an attack was expected at any moment . On 7 June 1917 , Pargust was suddenly struck by a torpedo fired at very close range from an unseen German submarine . Unlike the Farnborough action , the damage done to the Pargust was immense . The ship was holed close to the waterline , and its cover was almost blown when one of the twelve pounder gun ports was blasted free from its mounting ; it was only the quick thinking of sailor William Williams , who took the full weight of the gun port on himself , that prevented the gun being exposed . One petty officer was killed and a number wounded . 
 By this stage in the war , the German submarine authorities had become aware of the existence of Q @-@ ships and Captain Ernst Rosenow of the UC @-@ 29 was taking no risks with his target , remaining at 400 yards ( 366 m ) distance watching the staged panicked evacuation of the ship . While the hidden gun crews watched the enemy approach the lifeboats , the officer in charge of the boats , Lieutenant Francis Hereford , realised that the submarine would follow his movements , as its commander assumed him to be the captain . Hereford therefore ordered his men to row back towards the ship , thus luring the enemy into range . This made the submarine commander believe that the ship ’ s crew were planning to regain their vessel and he immediately closed to just 50 yards ( <unk> ) , surfaced and began angrily <unk> to the " survivors " in the boats . This was exactly what the gun crews had been waiting for and a volley of fire was directed at the U @-@ boat . Numerous holes were blown in the conning tower and the submarine desperately attempted to flee on the surface before slowing down and heeling over , trailing oil . The gun crews then stopped firing only for the submarine to suddenly restart its engines and attempt to escape . In a final barrage of fire the submarine was hit fatally , a large explosion blowing the vessel in two . Rosenow and 22 of his crew were killed , while two survivors were rescued by the panic party . 
 The wrecked Pargust was taken in tow by HMS Crocus , USS Cushing and HMS Zinnia and reached Queenstown barely afloat nearly two days later . The port 's admiral congratulated the crew personally on their arrival . As before , the crew were awarded £ 1 @,@ 000 prize money and several awards were promised . Unusually , the Admiralty were unable to decide who among the ship 's crew should receive the Victoria Cross as all were deemed to have participated in the action with equal valour . It was thus decided for the first time , under article 13 of the Victoria Cross 's royal warrant , that one officer and one enlisted man would be granted the award following a ballot by the ship 's company . After the vote , from which Campbell abstained , the Victoria Crosses were awarded to Stuart and William Williams . Fourteen other crew members were awarded medals , including DSOs for Campbell and Hereford . In addition , every sailor had his participation in the action and subsequent ballot noted on his service records . 
 Due to the official secrecy surrounding the activities of the Q @-@ ships , Stuart 's and Williams 's Victoria Crosses were announced without fanfare or explanation of their actions ; even the Pargust 's name was omitted from the citation . The full account of the action was not published until after the armistice in November 1918 . Stuart was noted as the first Anglo @-@ Canadian to receive the Victoria Cross and his obituary later stated that in the action , " his gallantry stood out " . The medal was presented to him in a ceremony at Buckingham Palace by King George V on 23 July 1917 . 
 = = = Victoria Cross citations = = = 
 = = = HMS Tamarisk = = = 
 In addition to receiving the Victoria Cross , Stuart was promoted to lieutenant commander and given his own command , HMS Tamarisk . Tamarisk was a small sloop built in 1916 that was capable of being disguised as a merchant vessel and used as a Q @-@ ship , designated <unk> . 
 A few months after assuming command , on 15 October 1917 , Stuart was on hand to rescue the United States Navy destroyer USS Cassin after she was torpedoed by U @-@ 61 in heavy weather . Along with one crewmember killed and nine wounded , the Cassin had lost her entire stern including the rudder and was in danger of sinking . The dead crew member was Osmond Ingram , who had died throwing burning munitions overboard and was later posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor . Twenty miles from the Irish coast and in total darkness , the Tamarisk not only found the crippled ship but was able to come alongside in high seas and a strong gale and pass across a tow line . Twice during the night the tow broke and twice it was reconnected as the battle to save the ship continued . The next morning several trawlers came to the aid of the Q @-@ ship and together they enabled the Cassin to make port , saving the ship and her crew . Ten years after the Cassin 's rescue the US Navy awarded Stuart the Navy Cross in recognition of his part in the operation ; it was a rare presentation to a sailor of a foreign navy and the only occasion in which the recipient also possessed the Victoria Cross . 
 The remainder of the war was quiet for Stuart , achieving no further successes against submarines . Upon the armistice the full details of his Victoria Cross action were revealed and , in 1919 , he was mentioned in despatches in recognition of the service he had performed during the Q @-@ ship operations . As further recognition of his overall efforts against the German submarine campaign , the French government presented him with the Croix de Guerre . 
 In 1919 , Stuart returned to Canadian Pacific , his maritime reputation on both sides of the Atlantic greatly enhanced by his war record . In the same year he met and married his wife Evelyn , with whom he would have three sons and two daughters . 
 = = Return to the Merchant Navy = = 
 After post @-@ war service on a succession of merchant ships , Stuart was provided with his first merchant command , the steam freighter SS Brandon , in 1927 . After a short period in charge , he was again promoted and transferred , taking up the role of staff captain on the liner RMS Empress of Australia . 
 = = = Ships ' captain = = = 
 Just a year later he again moved , becoming full captain on the 15 @,@ 000 @-@ ton liner SS <unk> – an older ship that transported immigrants to Canada . Stuart was one of a number of Royal Naval Reserve officers employed by Canadian Pacific , part of a deliberate recruitment policy by the company . In 1929 , he was given his biggest command yet as he took over the newly completed 20 @,@ 000 @-@ ton ocean liner SS Duchess of York . He commanded her for five years along her route from Liverpool to Saint John , New Brunswick stopping at Belfast and Greenock . He also briefly commanded her on the New York to Bermuda route . It was during this period , in 1929 , that he was awarded the Decoration for Officers of the Royal Naval Reserve ( RD ) in honour of his long service and in 1935 he was made a full Naval Reserve Captain . He maintained his connection with the RNR throughout his life , becoming Honorary President of the RNR Officer 's Club and a part @-@ time naval aide @-@ de @-@ camp to King George VI in 1941 – a position he held part @-@ time throughout World War II . A special warrant was written in 1927 that allowed him to fly the Blue Ensign from any ship , mercantile or military , which he commanded . 
 In 1931 , while he was in command of the Duchess of York , his wife suddenly died in Toxteth . This event is said to have changed Stuart 's demeanour and plunged him into a depression . He never again took time off work and left his children to the sole care and maintenance of his four maiden sisters in England . In 1934 he took over his last and most important seagoing role as Commodore of the CPS fleet and was placed in command of the 42 @,@ 000 @-@ ton liner RMS Empress of Britain on her transatlantic route . 
 After three years in command of this giant ship on her England to Quebec route , Stuart was given a desk job managing the company 's assets in Montreal . In 1937 , he was promoted to company superintendent , a role followed by the job of general manager at Canadian Pacific 's London office . He retained this job for 13 years , including through the difficult experiences of World War II when London 's dockyards were badly damaged by the London Blitz . Two of his sons served in the war ; one in the Royal Navy and the other in the Royal Canadian Navy . Both were decorated for bravery while fighting in the Battle of the Atlantic against the resurgent German submarine fleet . One was presented with the Distinguished Service Cross , while the other was Mentioned in Despatches . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Retiring in 1951 , Stuart retreated to his sisters ' cottage in Charing , Kent , and spent his days reading , walking , observing nature and visiting the cinema , where he was reportedly notorious for " jeering embarrassingly loudly at falsely heroic , sentimental or emotional passages " and shouting " Mush ! " at parts of movies he did not approve . He died aged 67 at the cottage on 8 February 1954 and was buried in local Charing Cemetery . For many years his gravestone was in a poor state of repair , but successful attempts have been made by memorial organisations to replace it with a standard white Commonwealth War Grave headstone . Following his death , ' Stuart Close ' in Lee @-@ on @-@ Solent was named for him and his medals were collected and donated on permanent loan to the National Maritime Museum , where they are on display . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 His granddaughter 's are Elizabeth Stuart . Veronica Stuart , Kate Quill , Harriet Clarke , Fiona Stuart 
 = Jack L. Warner = 
 Jack Leonard " J. L. " Warner ( August 2 , 1892 – September 9 , 1978 ) , born Jacob Warner in London , Ontario , was a Canadian @-@ American film executive who was the president and driving force behind the Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank , California . Warner 's career spanned some forty @-@ five years , its duration surpassing that of any other of the seminal Hollywood studio moguls . 
 As co @-@ head of production at Warner Bros. Studios , he worked with his brother , Sam Warner , to procure the technology for the film industry 's first talking picture . After Sam 's death , Jack clashed with his surviving older brothers , Harry and Albert Warner . He assumed exclusive control of the film production company in the 1950s , when he secretly purchased his brothers ' shares in the business after convincing them to participate in a joint sale of stocks . 
 Although Warner was feared by many of his employees and inspired ridicule with his uneven attempts at humor , he earned respect for his shrewd instincts and tough @-@ mindedness . He recruited many of Warner Bros. ' top stars and promoted the hard @-@ edged social dramas for which the studio became known . Given to decisiveness , Warner once commented , " If I 'm right fifty @-@ one percent of the time , I 'm ahead of the game . " 
 Throughout his career , he was viewed as a contradictory and enigmatic figure . Although he was a staunch Republican , Warner encouraged film projects that promoted the agenda of Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal . He opposed European fascism and criticized Nazi Germany well before America 's involvement in World War II . An opponent of Communism , after the war Warner appeared as a friendly witness before the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee , voluntarily naming screenwriters who had been fired as suspected Communists or sympathizers . Despite his controversial public image , Warner remained a force in the motion picture industry until his retirement in the early 1970s . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Jack Warner was born in London , Ontario , in 1892 . His parents were Jewish immigrants from Poland who spoke mainly Yiddish . Jack was the fifth surviving son of Benjamin Warner a cobbler from <unk> , Poland ( then located in the Congress Kingdom ) , and his wife , the former Pearl Leah <unk> . Following their marriage in 1876 , the couple had three children in Poland , one of whom died at a young age . One of the surviving children was Jack 's eldest brother , Hirsch ( later Harry ) . The Warner family had occupied a " hostile world " , where the " night @-@ riding of cossacks , the burning of houses , and the raping of women were part of life 's burden for the Jews of the ' shtetl ' " . In 1888 , in search of a better future for his family and himself , Benjamin made his way to Hamburg , Germany , and then took a ship to America . The Warner surname was perhaps originally " <unk> " or " <unk> " Upon arriving in New York City , Benjamin introduced himself as " Benjamin Warner " , and the surname " Warner " remained with him for the rest of his life . Pearl Warner and the couple 's two children joined him in Baltimore , Maryland , less than a year later . In Baltimore , the couple had five more children , including Abraham ( later known as Albert ) and Sam Warner . 
 Benjamin Warner 's decision to move to Canada in the early 1890s was inspired by a friend 's advice that he could make an excellent living bartering tin wares with trappers in exchange for furs . Their sons Jack and David were born in Ontario . After two arduous years in Canada , Benjamin and Pearl Warner returned to Baltimore , bringing along their growing family . Two more children , Sadie and Milton , were added to the household there . In 1896 , the family relocated to Youngstown , Ohio , following the lead of Harry Warner , who established a shoe repair shop in the heart of the emerging industrial town . Benjamin worked with his son Harry in the shoe repair shop until he secured a loan to open a meat counter and grocery store in the city 's downtown area . 
 Jack spent much of his youth in Youngstown . He observed in his autobiography that his experiences there molded his sensibilities . Warner wrote : " J. Edgar Hoover told me that Youngstown in those days was one of the toughest cities in America , and a gathering place for Sicilian thugs active in the Mafia . There was a murder or two almost every Saturday night in our neighborhood , and knives and brass knuckles were standard equipment for the young <unk> on the prowl . " Warner claimed that he briefly belonged to a street gang based at Westlake 's Crossing , a notorious neighborhood located just west of the city 's downtown area . Meanwhile , he received his first taste of show business in the burgeoning steel town , singing at local theaters and forming a brief business partnership with another aspiring " song @-@ and @-@ dance man " . During his brief career in vaudeville , he officially changed his name to Jack Leonard Warner . Jack 's older brother Sam disapproved of these youthful pursuits . " Get out front where they pay the actors , " Sam Warner advised Jack . " That 's where the money is . " 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Early business ventures = = = 
 In Youngstown , the Warner brothers took their first tentative steps into the entertainment industry . In the early 20th century , Sam Warner formed a business partnership with another local resident and " took over " the city 's Old Grand Opera House , which he used as a venue for " cheap vaudeville and photoplays " . The venture failed after one summer . Sam Warner then secured a job as a projectionist at <unk> Park , a local amusement park . He convinced the family of the new medium 's possibilities and negotiated the purchase of a Model B Kinetoscope from a projectionist who was " down on his luck " . The purchase price was $ 1 @,@ 000 , and Jack Warner contributed $ 150 to the venture by pawning a horse , according to his obituary . 
 The enterprising brothers screened a well @-@ used copy of The Great Train Robbery throughout Ohio and Pennsylvania before renting a vacant store in New Castle , Pennsylvania . This makeshift theatre , called the Bijou , was furnished with chairs borrowed from a local undertaker . Jack , who was still living in Youngstown at the time , arrived on weekends " to sing illustrated song @-@ slides during reel changes " . In 1906 , the brothers purchased a small theater in New Castle , which they called the Cascade Movie Palace . They maintained the theater until moving into film distribution in 1907 . That year , the Warner brothers established the Pittsburgh @-@ based Duquesne Amusement Company , a distribution firm that proved lucrative until the advent of Thomas Edison 's Motion Picture Patents Company ( also known as the Edison Trust ) , which charged distributors exorbitant fees . In 1909 , Harry agreed to bring Jack into the family business ; he sent his younger brother to Norfolk , Virginia , where Jack assisted Sam in the operation of a second film exchange company . Later that year , the Warners sold the family business to the General Film Company for " $ 10 @,@ 000 in cash , $ 12 @,@ 000 in preferred stock , and payments over a four @-@ year period for a total of $ 52 @,@ 000 " ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 369 @,@ 526 today ) . 
 = = = Formation of Warner Bros. = = = 
 The Warner brothers pooled their resources and moved into film production in 1910 . Then , in 1912 , they lent their support to filmmaker Carl Laemmle 's Independent Motion Picture Company , which challenged the monopolistic control of the Edison Trust . That same year , Jack Warner acquired a job as a film <unk> in New York , where he assisted brother Sam with the production of the film Dante 's Inferno . Despite the film 's success at the box office , Harry Warner remained concerned about the economic threat presented by the Edison Trust . He subsequently broke with Laemmle and sent Jack to establish a film exchange in San Francisco , while Sam did the same in Los Angeles . The brothers were soon poised to exploit the expanding California movie market . In 1917 , Jack was sent to Los Angeles to open another film exchange company . Their first opportunity to produce a major film came in 1918 , when they purchased the film rights for My Four Years in Germany , a bestselling novel that condemned German wartime atrocities . The film proved to be a commercial and critical success , and the four brothers were able to establish a studio in California . In the new studio , Jack became co @-@ head of production along with his older brother , Sam . In this capacity , the two brothers secured new scripts and story lines , managed film production , and looked for ways to reduce production costs . 
 Warner Bros. followed up the success of My Four Years in Germany with a popular serial titled The Tiger 's Claw in 1919 . That same year , the studio was less successful in its efforts to promote Open Your Eyes , a tract on the dangers of venereal disease that featured Jack Warner 's sole screen appearance . During this period , the studio earned few profits ; and in 1920 , the Warners secured a bank loan to settle outstanding debts . Shortly thereafter , the Warners relocated their production studio from Culver City , California , to Hollywood , where they purchased a lot on the corner of Sunset Boulevard and Bronson Avenue , known today as Sunset Bronson Studios . The new location and upgraded facilities did not significantly improve the studio 's image , which remained defined by its low @-@ budget comedies and racy films on declining morality . 
 The studio discovered a trained German Shepherd named Rin Tin Tin in 1923 . The canine made his debut in Where the North Begins , a film about an abandoned pup who is raised by wolves and befriends a fur trapper . According to one biographer , Jack Warner 's initial doubts about the project were quelled when he met Rin Tin Tin , " who seemed to display more intelligence than some of the Warner comics . " Rin Tin Tin proved to be the studio 's most important commercial asset until the introduction of sound . Screenwriter Darryl F. Zanuck produced several scripts for Rin Tin Tin vehicles and , during one year , wrote more than half of the studio 's features . Between 1928 and 1933 , Zanuck served as Jack Warner 's right @-@ hand man and executive producer , a position whose responsibilities included the day @-@ to @-@ day production of films . Despite the success of Rin Tin Tin and other projects , however , Warner Bros. was unable to compete with Hollywood 's " Big Three " – Paramount , Universal , and First National studios . 
 In 1925 , the studio expanded its operations and acquired the Brooklyn @-@ based theater company , Vitagraph . Later that year , Sam Warner urged his brother , Harry , to sign an agreement with Western Electric to develop a series of talking " shorts " using the newly developed Vitaphone technology . Sam died of pneumonia in 1927 ( just before the premiere of the first feature @-@ length talking picture , The Jazz Singer ) , and Jack became sole head of production . Sam 's death left Jack inconsolable . One biographer writes , " Throughout his life , Jack had been warmed by Sam 's <unk> optimism , his thirst for excitement , his inventive mind , his gambling nature . Sam had also served as a buffer between Jack and his stern eldest brother , Harry . In the years to come , Jack ran the Warner Bros. Burbank studio with an iron hand . Following his brother 's death , he became increasingly difficult to deal with and inspired the resentment of many of his employees . 
 As the family grieved over Sam 's sudden passing , the success of The Jazz Singer helped establish Warner Bros. as a major studio . While Warner Bros. invested only $ 500 @,@ 000 in the film , the studio reaped $ 3 million in profits . Hollywood 's five major studios , which controlled most of the nation 's movie theaters , initially attempted to block the growth of " talking pictures " . In the face of such organized opposition , Warner Bros. produced 12 " talkies " in 1928 alone . The following year , the newly formed Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences recognized Warner Bros. for " revolutionizing the industry with sound " . 
 Despite Warner Bros. ' new prosperity , Jack kept a tight rein on costs . He placed the studio 's directors on a quota system , and decreed a flat , low @-@ key lighting style to make the sets look cheaper than they were . 
 = = = Depression era = = = 
 The studio emerged relatively unscathed from the Wall Street Crash of 1929 and produced a broad range of films , including " backstage musicals , " " crusading biopics , " " <unk> , " and " women 's pictures . " As Thomas Schatz observed , this repertoire was " a means of stabilizing marketing and sales , of bringing efficiency and economy into the production of some fifty feature films per year , and of distinguishing Warners ' collective output from that of its competitors " . Warner Bros. became best known , however , for its hard @-@ hitting social dramas , whose production Jack Warner tended to support . These included gangster classics such as Little Caesar and The Public Enemy as well as the critically acclaimed I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang , starring Paul Muni . Some of these films reflected a surprising ( albeit temporary ) shift in Warner 's political outlook . By 1932 , despite his longstanding association with the Republican Party , he openly supported Democratic presidential candidate Franklin D. Roosevelt , staging a " Motion Picture and Electrical Parade Sports Pageant " at L.A. Stadium in Roosevelt 's honor . This development foreshadowed an " era in which Warner would recruit the most New Deal @-@ ish ( often simultaneously the most left @-@ wing ) writers " . 
 During this period , Warner took an active role in recruiting talent . To furnish Warner Bros. with much needed " star power " , he raided contract players from rival studios , in some cases offering to double their salaries . This strategy yielded three leading stars from Paramount Studios – William Powell , Kay Francis , and Ruth Chatterton . In 1929 , Warner persuaded British stage and screen actor George Arliss to play the title role in a remake of the 1921 United Artists film Disraeli , a project that turned out to be a box @-@ office hit . Then , in 1930 , he spotted future stars James Cagney , Joan Blondell , and Frank McHugh in the cast of a New York play called Penny Arcade . Although Cagney turned out to be Warner 's greatest prize , he was also the studio executive 's biggest professional challenge . During his frequent arguments with Warner , Cagney often resorted to screaming the Yiddish obscenities he learned during his upbringing in the Hell 's Kitchen district of New York City . According to a 1937 Fortune magazine article , Warner 's most intense contract disputes involved Cagney , " who got sick of being typed as a girl @-@ hitting <unk> and of making five pictures a year instead of four . " 
 The studio 's executive producer , Darryl F. Zanuck , resigned during a contract dispute with Harry Warner in 1933 . According to a 1933 letter that Jack wrote to Will H. Hays , then president of the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America , Zanuck requested a higher salary and " indicated his desire to raise the salaries of the actors and personnel in the motion pictures we were producing " . That year , Zanuck established Twentieth Century Pictures , which merged with Fox Film Corporation in 1935 . Longtime producer for the studio , Hal B. Wallis , took over as the studio 's executive producer . Warner , however , denied Wallis the sweeping powers enjoyed by Zanuck , and the result was a decentralization of creative and administrative control that often created confusion at the studio . Under the new system , each picture was assigned a supervisor who was usually plucked from the ranks of the studio 's screenwriters . Although Warner Bros. maintained a high rate of production throughout the 1930s , some pictures showed an uneven quality that reflected " not only the difficulty of shifting to a supervisory system but also the consequences of dispersing authority into the creative ranks " . 
 Meanwhile , Jack Warner 's role in production became somewhat limited . After acquiring a creative property , he often had little to do with a film 's production until it was ready for preview . Nevertheless , Warner could be heavy @-@ handed in his dealings with employees , and he was " merciless in his firings . " Film director Gottfried Reinhardt claimed that Warner " derived pleasure " from humiliating subordinates . " Harry Cohn was a <unk> , " Reinhardt said , " but he did it for business ; he was not a sadist . [ Louis B. ] Mayer could be a monster , but he was not mean for the sake of meanness . Jack was . " 
 Warner 's management style frustrated many studio employees . Comedian Jack Benny , who once worked at Warner Bros. , quipped , " Jack Warner would rather tell a bad joke than make a good movie " . Warner frequently clashed with actors and supposedly banned them from the studio 's executive dining room , with the explanation , " I don 't need to look at actors when I eat . " The studio executive did , however , win the affection of a few film personalities . 
 Among these was Bette Davis , one of the studio 's leading stars , who once fled to England to secure release from her contract . In later years , Davis defended Warner against rumors of sexual impropriety when she wrote : " No lecherous boss was he ! His sins lay elsewhere . He was the father . The power . The glory . And he was in business to make money . " Davis revealed that , after the birth of her child , Warner 's attitude toward her became warm and protective . " We became father and child , no question about it . " she said . " He told me I didn 't have to come back to work until I really felt like it . He was a thoughtful man . Not many nice things were said about him . " Warner also earned the gratitude and affection of Errol Flynn . In 1935 , the studio head personally selected Flynn for the title role of Captain Blood , even though Flynn was an unknown actor at the time . In 1936 , following the success of another costume epic , The Charge of the Light Brigade , Warner tore up Flynn 's contract and signed him to a long @-@ term deal that doubled his weekly salary . 
 = = = The prewar and war years = = = 
 As the 1930s came to an end , both Jack and Harry Warner became increasingly alarmed over the rise of Nazism . As Bernard F. Dick observed , the Warners , " as sons of Polish Jews who fled their homeland because of antisemitic pogroms ... had a personal interest in exposing Nazism . " Moreover , the attraction to films critical of German militarism had a long history with the Warners that predated their production of My Four Years in Germany in 1918 . In 1917 , while it was still in distribution , the Warners had secured the rights for War Brides , a movie that featured Alla Nazimova as " a woman who kills herself rather than breed children for an unidentified country whose army looks suspiciously Teutonic . " 
 Beyond this , Jack Warner was shaken by the 1936 murder of studio salesman Joe Kaufman , who was beaten to death by Nazi stormtroopers in Berlin . Warner later described the incident in the following terms : " Like many an outnumbered Jew he was trapped in an alley . They [ Nazi hoodlums ] hit him with fists and clubs and then kicked the life out of him with their boots and left him dying there . " Hence , while other Hollywood studios sidestepped the issue , fearing domestic criticism and the loss of European markets , Warner Brothers produced films that were openly critical of Nazi Germany . 
 In 1939 , the studio published Confessions of a Nazi Spy , starring Edward G. Robinson . The film project , which was recommended to Jack Warner by FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover , drew on the real @-@ life experiences of agent Leon G. <unk> , who had worked as an undercover agent . Despite legal ramifications preventing the use of actual names , the studio aimed for an " aura of authenticity " , and Hal Wallis initially recommended eliminating credits to give the film " the appearance of a newsreel . " 
 Confessions of a Nazi Spy was widely criticized . The critic Pare Lorentz wrote , " The Warner brothers have declared war on Germany with this one . " The German ambassador responded by issuing a protest to Secretary of State Cordell Hull , and the German dictator , Adolf Hitler , who watched the film at Berchtesgaden , was outraged . Meanwhile , the studio received stern warnings from U.S. Congressman Martin Dies , Jr . , about defaming a " friendly country . " 
 Initially , the studio bowed to pressure from the Roosevelt Administration , the Hays Office , and isolationist lawmakers to desist from similar projects . Jack Warner announced that the studio would release no more " propaganda pictures " and promptly ordered the shelving of several projects with an anti @-@ Nazi theme . In time , however , Warner Bros. produced more films with anti @-@ Nazi messages , including Underground and All Through the Night . In 1940 , the studio produced short films that dramatically documented the devastation wrought by the German bombing raids on London . Meanwhile , the studio celebrated the exploits of the Royal Canadian Air Force , with films such as Captains of the Clouds . In 1941 , Warner also produced the influential <unk> film Sergeant York . 
 Contemporary reports that Jack Warner had banned the use of the German language throughout the company 's studios were denied by studio representatives who indicated that this move would have prevented scores of studio employees from communicating with each other . 
 After the American declaration of war against the Axis Powers , Jack Warner , like some other studio heads , was commissioned as a lieutenant colonel in the U.S. Army . 
 In 1943 the studio 's film Casablanca won the Academy Award for Best Picture . When the award was announced , producer Hal B. Wallis got up to accept , only to find Jack Warner had rushed onstage " with a broad , flashing smile and a look of great self @-@ satisfaction " to take the trophy , Wallis later recalled . " I couldn 't believe it was happening . Casablanca had been my creation ; Jack had absolutely nothing to do with it . As the audience gasped , I tried to get out of the row of seats and into the aisle , but the entire Warner family sat blocking me . I had no alternative but to sit down again , humiliated and furious . ... Almost forty years later , I still haven 't recovered from the shock . " 
 In 1943 , Warner , at the advice of President Franklin D. Roosevelt , produced a film adaptation of the controversial book Mission to Moscow , a film intended to inspire public support of the uneasy military alliance that the United States had with the Soviet Union . Later , while testifying before the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee on October 27 , 1947 , Warner dismissed allegations during the Cold War that this film was subversive , and he argued that Mission to Moscow was produced " only to help a desperate war effort , and not for posterity . " After the film 's lackluster response under distribution , the Republican National Committee accused Warner of producing it as " New Deal propaganda . " 
 In line with the Warner brothers ' early opposition to Nazism , Warner Bros. produced more pictures about the war than any other studio , covering every branch of the armed services . In addition , the studio produced patriotic musicals such as This is the Army and Yankee Doodle Dandy . 
 = = = Postwar era = = = 
 Jack Warner responded grudgingly to the rising popularity of television in the late 1940s . Initially , he tried to compete with the new medium , introducing gimmicks such as 3 @-@ D films , which soon lost their appeal among moviegoers . In 1954 , Warner finally engaged the new medium , providing ABC with a weekly show , Warner Bros. Presents . The studio followed up with a series of Western dramas , such as Maverick , Bronco , and Colt .45 . Accustomed to dealing with actors in a high @-@ handed manner , within a few years Warner provoked hostility among emerging TV stars like James Garner , who filed a lawsuit against Warner Bros. over a contract dispute . He was angered by the perceived ingratitude of television actors , who evidently showed more independence than film actors , and this deepened his contempt for the new medium . Following his deal with ABC , Warner also made his son , Jack Jr . , head of the company 's new television department . 
 During this period , Warner showed little foresight in his treatment of the studio 's cartoon operation . Animated characters such as Bugs Bunny , Daffy Duck , and Porky Pig , while embraced by cartoon lovers , " were always stepchildren at Warner Bros. " As biographer Bob Thomas wrote , " Jack Warner ... considered cartoons no more than an extraneous service provided to exhibitors who wanted a full program for their customers . " In 1953 , during a rare meeting between the Warners and the studio 's cartoon makers , Jack confessed that he didn 't " even know where the hell the cartoon studio is " , and Harry added , " The only thing I know is that we make Mickey Mouse , " a reference to the flagship character of a competing company , Walt Disney Productions . Several years later , Jack sold all of the 400 cartoons Warner Bros. made before 1948 for $ 3 @,@ 000 apiece . As Thomas noted , " They have since earned millions , but not for Warner Bros. " 
 Jack Warner 's tumultuous relationship with his brother , Harry , worsened in February 1956 , when Harry learned of Jack 's decision to sell the Warner Bros. ' pre @-@ 1950 sound films to Associated Artists Productions ( soon to merge with United Artists Television ) for the modest sum of $ 21 million . ( The deal did not include the black @-@ and @-@ white Looney Tunes films , the first Merrie Melodie film , Lady , Play Your Mandolin ! , and the color cartoons released between August 1 , 1948 , and the close of 1949 . The black @-@ and @-@ white cartoons and the silent films were sold to the Guild Films company under license of Sunset Productions , which was established by Warners as its television subsidiary in the same manner as the Columbia Pictures subsidiary " Screen Gems " , and the aforementioned color cartoons of 1948 @-@ 49 remained with Warner Brothers ) . 
 " This is our heritage , what we worked all our lives to create , and now it is gone , " Harry exclaimed , upon hearing of the deal . The breach between Jack and Harry widened later that year . In July 1956 , Jack , Harry , and Albert announced that they were putting Warner Bros. on the market . Jack , however , secretly organized a syndicate that purchased control of the company . By the time Harry and Albert learned of their brother 's dealings , it was too late . 
 Jack Warner , as the company 's largest stockholder , appointed himself as the new company president . Shortly after the deal was closed , Jack Warner announced that the company and its subsidiaries would be " directed more vigorously to the acquisition of the most important story properties , talents , and to the production of the finest motion pictures possible " . 
 The two brothers had often argued , and earlier in the decade , studio employees claimed they saw Harry chase Jack through the studio with a lead pipe , shouting , " I 'll get you for this , you son of a bitch " and threatening to kill him . This subterfuge , however , proved too much for Harry . He never spoke to Jack again . When Harry Warner died on July 27 , 1958 , Jack did not attend the funeral , and he departed for his annual vacation at Cap d 'Antibes . Asked to respond to his brother 's death , Jack said , " I didn 't give a shit about Harry . " At the same time , Jack took pride in the fact that President Dwight D. Eisenhower sent him a letter of condolence . 
 = = = The Sixties = = = 
 In the 1960s , Warner kept pace with rapid changes in the industry and played a key role in developing films that were commercial and critical successes . In February 1962 , he purchased the film rights for the Broadway musical My Fair Lady , paying an unprecedented $ 6 @.@ 5 million . The previous owner , CBS director William S. Paley , set terms that included 50 percent of the distributor 's gross profits " plus ownership of the negative at the end of the contract . " Despite the " outrageous " purchase price , and the ungenerous terms of the contract , the deal proved lucrative for Warner Bros. , securing the studio $ 12 million in profits . Warner was criticized for choosing a non @-@ singing star , Audrey Hepburn , to play the leading role of Eliza Doolittle ; indeed , the 1964 Academy Award for Best Actress went to Julie Andrews , who had played Eliza on Broadway and in London , for Mary Poppins , while Audrey Hepburn was not even nominated . However , the film won the best @-@ picture Academy Award for 1964 . 
 In 1965 , Warner surprised many industry observers when he purchased the rights to Who 's Afraid of Virginia Woolf ? , Edward Albee 's searing play about a destructive marriage . From the beginning , the project was beset by controversy . Ernest Lehman 's script , which was extremely faithful to Albee 's play , stretched the U.S. film industry 's Production Code to the limit . Jack Valenti , who just assumed leadership of the Motion Picture Association of America , recalled that a meeting with Warner and studio aide Ben Kalmenson left him " uneasy " . " I was uncomfortable with the thought that this was just the beginning of an unsettling new era in film , in which we would lurch from crisis to crisis without any suitable solution in sight , " Valenti wrote . Meanwhile , Lehman and the film 's director , Mike Nichols , battled with studio executives and exhibitors who insisted that the film be shot in color rather than black and white . These controversies soon faded into the background while Jack Warner challenged the validity of the production code by publicly requiring theaters showing the film to post an " Adults only " label and restrict tickets sales accordingly , all as a marketing tease to entice audiences to see what warranted that restriction . At this , the MPAA — wary of a repeat of the embarrassment it had trying to censor the highly acclaimed film , The Pawnbroker — gave in and approved the film as a special exception because of its quality , which led to other filmmakers to challenge the code themselves even more aggressively . Upon its release , Who 's Afraid of Virginia Woolf ? was embraced by audiences and critics alike . It secured 13 nominations from the Academy including one for Best Picture of 1966 . 
 Despite these achievements , Jack grew weary of making films , and he sold a substantial amount of his studio stock to Seven Arts Productions on November 14 , 1966 . Some observers believed that Ben Kalmenson , Warner Bros. ' s executive vice president , persuaded Warner to sell his stock so that Kalmenson could assume leadership of the studio . Warner , however , had personal reasons for seeking retirement . His wife , Ann , continually pressured him to " slow down " , and the aging studio head felt a need to put his affairs in order . Warner sold his 1 @.@ 6 million shares of studio stock shortly after producing the film adaptation of Lerner & Loewe 's Camelot . The sale yielded , after capital gains taxes , about $ 24 million ( equivalent to $ 170 million today ) . Eight months after the sale , Warner quipped , " Who would ever have thought that a butcher boy from Youngstown , Ohio , would end up with twenty @-@ four million <unk> in his pocket ? " At the time of the sale , Warner had earned the distinction of being the second chief to also serve as company president , after Columbia Pictures ' Harry Cohn . 
 Warner 's decision to sell came at a time when he was losing the formidable power that he once took for granted . He had already survived the dislocations of the 1950s , when other studio heads – including Louis B. Mayer , David O. Selznick , and Samuel Goldwyn – were pushed out by stockholders who " sought scapegoats for dwindling profits " . Structural changes that occurred in the industry during this period ensured that studios would become " more important as backers of independent producers than as creators of their own films " , a situation that left little room for the traditional movie mogul . By the mid @-@ 1960s , most of the film moguls from the Golden Age of Hollywood had died , and Warner was regarded as one of the last of a dying breed . Evidence of Warner 's eroding control at Warner Bros. included his failure to block production of the controversial but highly influential film , Bonnie and Clyde , a film project he initially " hated " . Similarly , as producer of the film adaptation of Camelot , Warner was unable to persuade director Joshua Logan to cast Richard Burton and Julie Andrews in the leading roles . Instead , Logan selected Richard Harris and Vanessa Redgrave , a move that contributed to the project 's critical – and commercial – failure . Another factor was that Logan was able to manipulate Warner 's ego to persuade him from cutting the screenplay 's length , despite the fact that the studio executive had already agreed with the film 's unofficial producer , Joel Freeman , that it was overlong . Warner officially retired from his studio in 1969 . 
 = = = After Warner Bros. = = = 
 Warner remained active as an independent producer until the early <unk> to run some of the company 's distributions and exhibition division . Among his last productions was a film adaptation of a Broadway musical , 1776 , which was released through Columbia Pictures . Before the film 's release , Warner showed a preview cut to U.S. President Richard Nixon , who recommended substantial changes , including the removal of the song ' Cool , Cool , <unk> Men ' that struck him as veiled criticisms of the ongoing Vietnam War . Without consulting the film 's director , Peter H. Hunt , Warner ordered the film re @-@ edited . The cuts have since been restored in most television showings and in the film 's DVD release . 
 In November 1972 , the film opened to enthusiastic audiences at Radio City Music Hall , but it fared poorly in theaters . Faced with a polarized political climate , few Americans were drawn to " a cheery exercise in <unk> civics " . Warner 's efforts to promote the film were sometimes counterproductive . During an interview with talk show host Merv Griffin , the elderly producer engaged in a lengthy tirade against " pinko communists " . This was Warner 's first — and last — television interview . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On October 14 , 1914 , Warner married Irma Claire Salomon , the adolescent daughter of Sam <unk> and Bertha Franklin Salomon from one of San Francisco 's pioneer Jewish families . Irma Warner gave birth to the couple 's only child , Jack M. Warner on March 27 , 1916 . Jack Warner named the child after himself , disregarding an Ashkenazi Jewish custom that children should not be named after living relatives . Although his son bore a different middle initial , he " has been called Junior all his life " . The marriage ended in 1935 , when Warner left his wife for another woman , Ann Page . Warner and Ann had a daughter named Barbara . Irma Warner sued her husband for divorce ( a scandalous move at the time ) on the grounds of desertion . Jack 's older brother , Harry , reflected the Warner family feelings about the marriage when he exclaimed , " Thank God our mother didn 't live to see this " . Warner married Ann after the divorce . The Warners , who took Irma 's side in the affair , refused to accept Ann as a family member . In the wake of this falling out , Jack 's relationship with his son , Jack Warner Jr . , also became strained . 
 In the late 1950s , Warner was almost killed in a car accident that left him in a coma for several days . On August 5 , 1958 , after an evening of baccarat at the Palm Beach Casino in Cannes , Warner 's Alfa Romeo roadster swerved into the path of a coal truck on a stretch of road located near the seaside villa of Prince Aly Khan . Warner was thrown from the car , which burst into flames upon impact . Shortly after the accident , his son , Jack Jr . , joined other family members in France , where the unconscious studio head was hospitalized . In an interview with reporters , Jack Jr. suggested that his father was dying . Then , during a visit to his father 's hospital room , the young man offended Ann Warner , whom he largely blamed for his parents ' divorce . When Warner regained consciousness , he was enraged by reports of his son 's behavior , and their " tenuous " relationship came to an end . On December 30 , 1958 , Jack Jr. was informed , by Jack Sr. ' s lawyer Arnold Grant , that the elder Warner had released him from the company . When he attempted to report for work , studio guards denied him entry . The two men never achieved a reconciliation , and Jack Jr. is not mentioned in his father 's 1964 autobiography . 
 Warner made no pretense of faithfulness to his wife , Ann , and kept a series of mistresses throughout the 1950s and 1960s . The most enduring of these " girlfriends " was an aspiring actress named Jackie Park , who bore a " startling " resemblance to Warner 's second wife . The relationship was in its fourth year when Ann Warner pressed her husband to terminate the affair . Although Ann did once have an affair with studio actor Eddie Albert in 1941 , she was much more devoted to the marriage by contrast . In the 1960s , she insisted that , despite his reputation for ruthlessness , Jack Warner had a softer side . In a note to author Dean Jennings , who assisted Warner on his 1964 autobiography , My First Hundred Years in Hollywood , Ann Warner wrote : " He is extremely sensitive , but there are few who know that because he covers it with a cloak . " 
 = = Political views = = 
 An " ardent Republican " , Jack Warner nevertheless supported Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal in the early 1930s . Later in the decade , he made common cause with opponents of Nazi Germany , overlooking ideological differences with those who held leftist political views . In 1947 , however , Warner served as a " friendly witness " for the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee ( HUAC ) , thereby lending support to allegations of a " Red " infiltration of Hollywood . Warner felt that Communists were responsible for the studio 's month @-@ long strike that occurred in the fall of 1946 , and on his own initiative , he provided the names of a dozen screenwriters who were dismissed because of suspected Communist sympathies , a move that effectively destroyed their careers . Former studio employees named by Warner included Alvah Bessie , Howard Koch , Ring Lardner Jr . , John Howard Lawson , Albert Maltz , Robert Rossen , Dalton Trumbo , Clifford Odets , and Irwin Shaw . As one biographer observed , Warner " was furious when Humphrey Bogart , Lauren Bacall , Paul Henreid and John Huston joined other members of the stellar Committee for the First Amendment in a flight to Washington to preach against the threat to free expression " . Lester D. Friedman noted that Warner 's response to the HUAC hearings was similar to other Jewish studio heads who " feared that a blanket equation of Communists with Jews would destroy them and their industry " . 
 Warner publicly supported Richard Nixon during the 1960 presidential election and paid for full @-@ page ads in The New York Times " to proclaim why Nixon should be elected " . In the wake of Nixon 's loss to John F. Kennedy , however , the studio head made arrangements to attend a fundraiser at the Los Angeles Palladium in honor of the president @-@ elect . Several weeks later , Warner received a phone call from the new chief executive 's father , Joseph P. Kennedy , and within a short time , Warner Bros. purchased the film rights for Robert Donovan 's book , PT 109 , a bestseller concerning John Kennedy 's exploits during World War II . " I don 't think President Kennedy would object to my friendship with Dick Nixon , " Warner said later . " I would have voted for both of them if I could . You might think this is a form of fence @-@ straddling , but I love everybody . " In the late 1960s , he emerged as an outspoken proponent of the Vietnam War . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 By the end of 1973 , those closest to Warner became aware of signs that he was becoming disoriented . Shortly after losing his way in the building that housed his office , Warner retired . In 1974 , Warner suffered a stroke that left him blind and enfeebled . During the next several years , he gradually lost the ability to speak , and became unresponsive to friends and relatives . Finally , on August 13 , 1978 , Warner was admitted to Cedars @-@ Sinai Hospital , where he died of a heart inflammation ( edema ) on September 9 . He was 86 years old . A funeral service was held at the Wilshire Boulevard Temple , the synagogue to which many members of the Warner family belonged . He was interred at Home of Peace Cemetery in East Los Angeles , California . 
 Jack Warner left behind an estate estimated at $ 15 million . Much of the Warner estate , including property and memorabilia , was bequeathed to his widow , Ann . Warner , however , left $ 200 @,@ 000 to his estranged son , Jack Jr . , perhaps in an effort to discourage him from contesting the will . In the days following Warner 's death , newspaper obituaries recounted the familiar story of " the four brothers who left the family butcher shop for <unk> " and went on to revolutionize American cinema . A front @-@ page story in Warner 's adopted hometown of Youngstown featured accounts of the family 's pre @-@ Hollywood struggles in Ohio , describing how Jack Warner drove a wagon for his father 's business when he was only seven years old . The late movie [ mogul ] was widely eulogized for his role in " shaping Hollywood 's ' Golden Age ' " . 
 Several months after Warner 's death , a more personal tribute was organized by the Friends of the Libraries at the University of Southern California . The event , called " The Colonel : An Affectionate Remembrance of Jack L. Warner " , drew Hollywood notables such as entertainers Olivia de Havilland and Debbie Reynolds , and cartoon voice actor Mel Blanc . Blanc closed the event with a rendition of Porky Pig 's famous farewell , " A @-@ bee @-@ a @-@ bee @-@ a @-@ bee – that 's all , folks . " In recognition of his contributions to the motion picture industry , Jack Warner was accorded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame , located at 6541 Hollywood Boulevard . He is also represented on Canada 's Walk of Fame in Toronto , which honours outstanding Canadians from all fields . 
 In 2004 , he was inducted into Canada 's Walk of Fame . 
 Warner is portrayed by British actor Ben Kingsley in the 2015 drama film Life . 
 = Ramones ( album ) = 
 Ramones is the debut studio album by the American punk rock band the Ramones , released on April 23 , 1976 by Sire Records . After Hit Parader editor Lisa Robinson saw the band at a gig in New York City , she wrote about them in an article and contacted Danny Fields , insisting he be their manager . Fields agreed and convinced Craig Leon to produce Ramones , and the band recorded a demo for prospective record labels . Leon persuaded Sire president Seymour Stein to listen to the band perform , and he later offered the band a recording contract . The Ramones began recording in January 1976 , needing only seven days and $ 6 @,@ 400 to record the album . They used similar sound @-@ output techniques to those of the Beatles , and used advanced production methods by Leon . 
 The album cover , photographed by Punk magazine 's Roberta Bayley , features the four members leaning against a brick wall in New York City . The record company paid only $ 125 for the front photo , which has since become one of the most imitated album covers of all time . The back cover depicts an eagle belt buckle along with the album 's liner notes . After its release , Ramones was promoted with two singles which failed to chart . The Ramones also began touring to help sell records ; these tour dates were mostly based in the United States , though two were booked in Britain . 
 Violence , drug use , relationship issues , humor , and Nazism were prominent in the album 's lyrics . The album opens with " Blitzkrieg Bop " , which is among the band 's most recognized songs . Most of the album 's tracks are uptempo , with many songs measuring at well over 160 beats per minute . The songs are also rather short ; at two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes , " I Don 't Wanna Go Down to the Basement " is the album 's longest track . Ramones contains a cover of the Chris Montez song " Let 's Dance " . 
 Ramones peaked at No. 111 on the US Billboard 200 and was unsuccessful commercially ; initially it received mixed reviews from the few critics who wrote about it . However , many later deemed it a highly influential record , and it has since received many accolades , such as the top spot on Spin magazine 's list of the " 50 Most Essential Punk Records " . Ramones went on to inspire many bands like the Sex Pistols , the Buzzcocks , and the Clash , among others . Aside from sparking the punk @-@ rock scene in both the US and UK , it has had a significant impact on other genres of rock music , such as grunge and heavy metal . The album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in 2014 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Ramones began playing gigs in mid @-@ 1974 , with their first show at Performance Studios in New York City . The band , performing in a style similar to the one used on their debut album , typically performed at clubs in downtown Manhattan , specifically CBGB and Max 's Kansas City . In early 1975 , Lisa Robinson , an editor of Hit Parader and Rock Scene , saw the fledgling Ramones performing at CBGB and subsequently wrote about the band in several magazine issues . The group 's vocalist Joey Ramone related that " Lisa came down to see us , she was blown away by us . She said that we changed her life , She started writing about us in Rock Scene , and then Lenny Kaye would write about us and we started getting more press like The Village Voice . Word was getting out , and people starting coming down . " Convinced that the band needed a recording contract , Robinson contacted Danny Fields , former manager of the Stooges , and argued that he needed to manage the band . Fields agreed because the band " had everything [ he ] ever liked , " and became the manager in November 1975 . 
 On September 19 , 1975 , the Ramones recorded a demo at 914 Sound Studios , which was produced by Marty Thau . Featuring the songs " Judy Is a Punk " and " I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend , " the band used the demo to showcase their style to prospective labels . Producer Craig Leon , who had seen the Ramones perform in the summer of 1975 , brought the demo to the attention of Sire Records ' president Seymour Stein . After being persuaded by Craig Leon and his ex @-@ wife Linda Stein , the Ramones auditioned at Sire and were offered a contract , although the label had previously signed only European progressive rock bands . Drummer Tommy Ramone recalled : " Craig Leon is the one who got us signed , single handed . He brought down the vice president and all these people — he 's the only hip one in the company . He risked his career to get us on the label . " The label offered to release " You 're Gonna Kill That Girl " as a single , but the band declined , insisting on recording an entire album . Sire accepted their request and agreed to release a studio album instead . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 In January 1976 the band took a break from their live performances to prepare for recording at Plaza Sound studio . Sessions began in early February 1976 and were completed within a week for $ 6 @,@ 400 ; the instruments took three days and the vocal parts were recorded in four days . In 2004 , Leon admitted that they recorded Ramones quickly due to budget restrictions , but also that it was all the time they needed . 
 The band applied microphone @-@ placement techniques similar to those which many orchestras used . The recording process was a deliberate exaggeration of the techniques used by the Beatles in the early 1960s , with a four @-@ track representation of the devices . The guitars can be heard separately on the stereo channels — electric bass on the left channel , rhythm guitar on the right — drums and vocals are mixed in the middle of the stereo mix . The mixing of the production also used more modern techniques such as overdubbing , a technique used by studios to add a supplementary recorded sound to material . The band also used a technique known as doubling , where the vocal line used is sung twice . 
 Recording for the album was expanded by Mickey Leigh ( Joey 's brother ) and Leon with percussion effects , which went unmentioned in the liner notes to the album 's release . Author Nicholas Rombes said that the production 's quality sounded like " the ultimate do @-@ it @-@ yourself , amateur , reckless ethic that is associated with punk , " but concluded that they approached the recording process with a " high degree of preparedness and professionalism . " 
 = = Photography and packaging = = 
 Initially , the Ramones wanted an album cover similar to Meet the Beatles ! ( 1964 ) , and subsequently had pictures taken in that style by Danny Fields but Sire was dissatisfied with the results . The art direction was by Toni <unk> and , according to cartoonist John Holmstrom , the " Meet The Beatles " cover idea came out " horribly . " <unk> later chose a photo by Roberta Bayley , a photographer for Punk magazine for the <unk> black and white photograph on the front of the album was originally in an issue of Punk . 
 The cover photo features ( from left to right ) Johnny , Tommy , Joey and Dee Dee Ramone , staring at the camera with blank faces . They are all wearing ripped / faded blue jeans and leather jackets , standing upright against the brick wall of a private community garden called Albert 's Garden , located in the Bowery neighborhood of New York City between Bowery Street and Second Street . The stance of the group members in the photograph would influence their future cover designs as well , with the majority of their succeeding albums using a picture of the band on the front cover . Music historian Legs McNeil states that " Tommy [ is ] standing on his tip @-@ toes and Joey [ is ] hunched over a bit . " The back cover art , which depicts a belt buckle with a bald eagle and the band 's logo , was designed by Arturo Vega . Liner notes on the back cover fail to acknowledge backing vocalists and additional instrument players . Leigh , who performed backing vocals on several tracks , asked guitarist Johnny why he was not mentioned on the record 's credits . Johnny replied : " We didn 't want people to get confused with who 's in the band or who 's not . It 's our first album , you know , and we didn 't want people to get confused . " 
 The artwork became one of the most imitated album covers in music . The image of a band in front of a brick wall dressed in ripped jeans and leather jackets was copied by Alvin and the Chipmunks in Chipmunk Punk . Ramones 's artwork was ranked number 58 on Rolling Stone 's 1991 list of 100 Greatest Album Covers . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 There were two singles released from the album : " Blitzkrieg Bop " and " I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend . " The first was released in February 1976 , originally as a 7 " split single with " Havana Affair " as its B @-@ side . The release , along with the Ramones 2001 Expanded Edition , featured " Blitzkrieg Bop " remixed as a single version , although it maintains a time of two minutes and twelve seconds . On January 6 , 2004 , Rhino Entertainment re @-@ released " Blitzkrieg Bop " as a CD single , using " Sheena Is a Punk Rocker " as its B @-@ side . " I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend " was released in February 1976 as a 7 " single . It included " California Sun " and " I Don 't Wanna Walk Around with You " as B @-@ sides . " I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend " was also released in the UK , giving the band a presence in the European marketplace . Even though the song saw some success in the UK and Europe , it failed to chart in the top 50 . 
 = = = Touring = = = 
 In 1974 the band played 30 performances , nearly all at the New York @-@ based club CBGB . All but one of the band 's 1975 gigs , were booked for New York City , with Waterbury , Connecticut as the exception . After the album 's recording , the Ramones headlined for very few shows , usually opening for an identified cover band which played Aerosmith and Boston . When they opened at Brockton , Massachusetts , the audience appeared extremely uninterested in the Ramones so Johnny swore off playing as an introduction for other bands . Following this , Fields booked several headlining shows around the Tri @-@ state area , and they began playing frequently at gigs like CBGB and Max 's Kansas City . After performing with Blondie in New Jersey , they continued their tour to Boston , Massachusetts for three shows . 
 " Traveling was difficult . Most of the time , it was just Danny Fields , me , and the members of the band . We 'd get two rooms in the hotel , three of us in each . They couldn 't afford any more help at that point , so the band had to pitch in unloading the equipment . I 'd play the drums during sound checks , while Tommy went out to the board and mixed the sound — and instructed the soundman not to fuck with the settings . We would enlist aid of any fan willing to help us load out at the end of the night . " 
 At the time , Joey 's brother Leigh was road manager , stage manager , chauffeur , and head of security . Vega , who contributed to the album 's packaging , helped out with the road crew as much as possible . Tommy 's friend Monte Melnick occasionally helped with the audio output , but this was typically done by Leigh . 
 Following their debut album 's release , the band performed at over 60 concerts for its promotion . While most of the gigs were booked in North America , two dates — July 4 and 5 — were in London 's Roundhouse venue and Dingwalls , respectively . Linda Stein pushed to make these events happen , setting up the band performances in the UK during the United States Bicentennial . Fields relates : " On the two hundredth anniversary of our freedom , we were bringing Great Britain a gift that was forever going to disrupt their sensibilities . " The band sold out for their first London performance , with an audience of roughly 3 @,@ 000 . Leigh described the Dingwalls gig as very similar to performances at CBGB . Likewise , these venues would go on to be headlined by other punk bands like the Clash and Sex Pistols . The band performed over 100 concerts the following year . 
 = = Lyrics and compositions = = 
 The songs on Ramones addressed several lyrical themes including violence , male prostitution , drug use , and Nazism . While the moods displayed in the album were often dark , Johnny said that when writing the lyrics they were not " trying to be offensive . " Many songs from the album have backing vocals from different guests . Leigh sang backing vocals on " Judy Is a Punk , " " I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend , " and in the bridge of " Blitzkrieg Bop . " Tommy sang backing vocals on " I Don 't Wanna Walk Around With You , " " Judy Is a Punk , " and during the bridge of " Chainsaw . " The album 's engineer , Rob Freeman , sang backing vocals for the final refrain of " I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend . " The album 's length is 29 minutes and four seconds and it contains 14 tracks . 
 " Blitzkrieg Bop , " the album 's opening track , was written by Tommy , and originally named " Animal Hop . " Once Dee Dee reviewed the lyrics , the band changed the wording , the name , and partially the theme . According to Tommy , the song 's original concept was about " kids going to a show and having a good time , " but the theme became more Nazi @-@ related after its revise . The piece begins with an instrumental interval which lasts about 20 seconds . At the 20th second , the guitar and bass cease , marking Joey 's first line , " Hey ho , let 's go ! " The bass and guitar gradually rebuild and become " full – force " once all the instruments play together in ensemble . The piece resolves by repeating what is played from 0 : 22 – 0 : 33 . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic described " Blitzkrieg Bop " as a " three @-@ chord assault . " 
 " Beat on the Brat " was said by Joey to have origins relating to the upper class of New York City . Dee Dee , however , explained that the song was about how Joey saw a mother " going after a kid with a bat in his [ apartment building 's ] lobby and wrote a song about it . " " Judy Is a Punk " — written around the same time as " Beat on the Brat " — was written by Joey after he walked by Thorny Croft , an apartment building " where all the kids in the neighborhood hung out on the rooftop and drank . " The song 's lyrics are fictional and refer to two juvenile offenders in Berlin and San Francisco and their possible deaths at the conclusion of the song . " Judy Is a Punk " is the original album 's shortest track at 1 : 39 . 
 " I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend , " the slowest song on the album , was solely written by Tommy , and pays homage to love songs by pop music acts of the 1960s . The song used a 12 @-@ string guitar , glockenspiel , and tubular bells in its composition , and was said by author Scott Schinder to be an " unexpected romantic streak . " The next song , " Chain Saw , " opens with the sound of a running circular saw and was influenced by the 1974 horror film The Texas Chain Saw Massacre . At nearly 180 beats per minute , " Chain Saw " had the fastest tempo among the album 's songs , and according to Rombes , is the most " home @-@ made " sounding . 
 " Now I Want to Sniff Some Glue " contains four lines of minimalist lyrics which depict youthful boredom and inhaling solvent vapors found in glue . On the question of the authenticity of the text , Dee Dee said in an interview : " I hope no one thinks we really sniff glue . I stopped when I was eight [ years old ] . " Dee Dee also explained that its concept came from adolescent trauma . After several songs by the Ramones whose titles began with " I Don 't Want to ... , " Tommy said that " Now I Want to Sniff Some Glue " is the first positive piece on the album . The song served as an inspiration for one of the first punk fanzines , Mark Perry 's Sniffin ' Glue . " I Don 't Wanna Go Down to the Basement " is also a minimalist piece , and was inspired by horror movies . The entire text is composed of three lines , and the composition was based on three major chords . With a playing time of 2 : 35 , it is the longest piece on the album . 
 " Loudmouth " has six major chords and is a harmonically complex composition . The song 's lyrics are — depending on the reading and punctuation — just a single row or four very brief lines . The next track , " Havana Affair , " has a lyrical concept incorporating the comic strip Spy vs. Spy by the Cuban @-@ born illustrator Antonio <unk> . At roughly 170 beats per minute , " Loudmouth " and " Havana Affair " proceed at about the same tempo . " Havana Affair " segues into " Listen to My Heart , " which is the first of many songs in the Ramones repertoire that voice an ironic and pessimistic perspective on a failing or already failed relationship . 
 Written solely by Dee Dee , the lyrics of " 53rd and 3rd " concern a male prostitute ( " rent boy " ) who is waiting at the corner of 53rd Street and Third Avenue in Midtown Manhattan . When the prostitute gets a customer , he kills the customer with a razor to prove he is not a homosexual . In interviews , Dee Dee described the piece as autobiographical . " The song speaks for itself , " Dee Dee commented in an interview . " Everything I write is autobiographical and written in a very real way , I can 't even write . " Johnny insisted that the song is about " Dee Dee turning tricks . " The half @-@ sung and half @-@ shouted bridge in " 53rd and 3rd " is performed by Dee Dee , whose voice is described by author Cyrus <unk> as what " breaks the deliberate aural monotony of the song and emphasizes the violence of the lyric . " 
 The album 's next track is a version of the Chris Montez song " Let 's Dance . " The song features Leon playing Radio City 's large Wurlitzer pipe organ . The 13th track on the record , " I Don 't Want to Walk Around with You , " consists of two lyric lines and three major chords . It is one of the group 's earliest compositions . It is the first song on their first demo tape , written at the beginning of 1974 . " I Don 't Wanna Walk Around with You " fades into the album 's final track , " Today Your Love , Tomorrow the World , " a song that refers to a Hitler Youth member . Seymour Stein complained about the song 's original lyrics — " I 'm a Nazi , baby , I 'm a Nazi , yes I am . I 'm a Nazi <unk> , y 'know I fight for the Fatherland " — insisting that the track was offensive . When Stein threatened to completely remove the track from the album the band put together alternate lyrics : " I 'm a shock trooper in a stupor , yes I am . I 'm a Nazi <unk> , y 'know I fight for the Fatherland . " Stein accepted the revision and it was published in the album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ramones was released on April 23 , 1976 by Sire Records and initially received mixed reviews . It was reviewed by few critics upon its release , and many of those writers leaned towards a neutral rating . Music critic Adam Brown explained that early reviews of the album are hard to come by , calling initial reactions " basically , nonexistent . " Despite some early critics giving it a somewhat negative reviews , Paul Nelson of Rolling Stone wrote in 1976 that the album was similar to early rock and roll , and was constructed using rhythm tracks of great intensity . Jeff Tamarkin of AllMusic said that the album ignited the punk rock era , writing : " rock 's mainstream didn 't know what hit it . " Critic Joe S. Harrington declared that the album was a huge landmark for music history , proclaiming that " [ it ] split the history of rock ' n ' roll in half . " Theunis Bates , a writer for Time magazine , summed the album up with : " Ramones stripped rock back to its basic elements ... lyrics are very simple , boiled @-@ down declarations of teen lust and need . " Bates also said that it " is the ultimate punk statement . " Charles M. Young of Rolling Stone regarded Ramones as " one of the funniest rock records ever made and , if punk continues to gain momentum , a historic turning point . " Critic Robert Christgau gave the album a positive review , specifically writing about the album 's themes and sound quality . 
 Later reviews of Ramones tended to praise the album 's influence on rock music . In 2001 , April Long of NME rewarded the album with a perfect score , remarking that the Ramones were " arguably the most influential band ever , " despite their lack of mainstream acceptance . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic also deemed the album influential , saying " In comparison to some of the music the album inspired , The Ramones sounds a little tame — it 's a little too clean , and compared to their insanely fast live albums , it even sounds a little slow . " The album 's sound was considered by Erlewine to be " all about speed , hooks , stupidity , and simplicity . " 
 Regardless of this critical acclaim , Ramones was not successful commercially . It only reached No. 111 on the US Billboard 200 , and sold 6 @,@ 000 units in its first year . Outside the US , the album peaked at No. 48 on the Swedish Sverigetopplistan chart . 
 The album was included in Spin magazine 's List of Top Ten College Cult Classics ( 1995 ) , where it was noted that " everything good that 's happened to music in the last fourteen years can be directly traced to the Ramones . " Also in 1995 , the Spin Alternative Record Guide named it the No. 1 alternative rock album . In 2001 , the magazine also included the album in its special issue 25 Years of Punk with a list of The 50 Most Essential Punk Records , where it resided at the top spot . That same year , it was named the fourth best punk album by Mojo , who called it the " coolest , dumbest , simplest , greatest rock 'n'roll record ever to be cut by four sweet , dysfunctional screw @-@ ups . " 
 The band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame at the 2002 induction ceremony , with the website stating that their first album changed the rock genre from " bloated and narcissistic , " to " basic " rock and roll . In 2003 , Ramones was considered by Spin 's Chuck Klosterman , Greg Milner , and Alex Pappademas to be the sixth most influential album of all time . They noted that the album " saved rock from itself and punk rock from art @-@ gallery pretension . " Q Magazine included the album in their " 100 Greatest Albums Ever " ( 2003 ) list , where it was listed at No. 74 . Ramones was included in Chris Smith 's 2009 book 101 Albums that Changed Popular Music , who said the album " opened a whole new world of garage rock for those fed up with the excesses of existing rock gods . " It was also included in the 2005 book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . The album went gold in the US just after its 38th anniversary , certified by the RIAA on April 30 , 2014 . 
 In 2016 , Rhino Records announced the July 29 release of a 40th @-@ anniversary deluxe edition comprising three CDs and one LP , including stereo and mono mixes of the original album ; single mixes , outtakes and demos ; and a live 1976 performance . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Ramones is considered to have established the musical genre of punk rock , as well as popularizing it years afterward . Rombes wrote that it offered " alienated future rock , " and that it " disconnected from tradition . " The album was the start of the Ramones ' influence on popular music , with examples being genres such as heavy metal , thrash metal , indie pop , grunge , post @-@ punk , and most notably , punk rock . 
 " When the [ Ramones ] hit the street in 1976 with their self @-@ titled first album , the rock scene in general had become somewhat bloated and narcissistic . The Ramones got back to basics : simple , speedy , stripped @-@ down rock and roll songs . Voice , guitar , bass , drums . No makeup , no egos , no light shows , no nonsense . And though the subject matter was sometimes dark , emanating from a sullen adolescent basement of the mind , the group also brought cartoonish fun and high @-@ energy excitement back to rock and roll . " 
 Despite the lack of popularity in its era , the importance of the album for the development of punk rock music was incredible , influencing many of the most well known names in punk rock , including the Sex Pistols , Buzzcocks , the Clash , Black Flag , Misfits , and Green Day . Billie Joe Armstrong , singer for Green Day , explained his reasoning for listening to the band : " they had songs that just stuck in your head , just like a hammer they banged right into your brain . " The album also had a great impact on the English punk scene as well , with the bassist for Generation X , Tony James , saying that the album caused English bands to change their style . " When their album came out , " commented James , " all the English groups tripled speed overnight . Two @-@ minute @-@ long songs , very fast . " In another interview , James stated that " Everybody went up three gears the day they got that first Ramones album . Punk rock — that rama @-@ lama super fast stuff — is totally down to the Ramones . Bands were just playing in an MC5 groove until then . " In 1999 , Classic Albums by Collins GEM recognized Ramones as the start of English punk rock and called it the fastest and hardest music that could possibly be concocted , stating : " The songs within were a short , sharp exercise in vicious speed @-@ thrash , driven by ferocious guitars and yet halting in an instant . It was the simple pop dream taken to its minimalist extreme . " In 2012 the album was preserved by the National Recording Registry , deeming it " culturally , historically , and aesthetically significant . " 
 = = = Cover versions and tributes = = = 
 Each song on Ramones has been covered by various bands . Sonic Youth covered " Beat on the Brat " on their 1987 EP Master = Dik , and , in 1991 , German punk band Die Toten Hosen played " Blitzkrieg Bop " on their cover album Learning English , Lesson One . A tribute album titled Gabba Gabba Hey : A Tribute to the Ramones was released on August 30 , 1991 . It contained the songs " Now I Wanna Sniff Some Glue , " " 53rd & 3rd , " " I Do not Wanna Go Down To The Basement , " " Loudmouth , " and " Beat on the Brat . " Screeching Weasel released Ramones ( 1992 ) , which consisted of the band performing the entire album track list . 1998 's Blitzkrieg Over You ! : A Tribute to the Ramones featured a cover " Judy Is a Punk " in German , and in 2000 , both " Blitzkrieg Bop " and " Beat on the Brat " appeared on Dee Dee Ramone 's solo release Greatest & Latest . The compilation album Ramones Maniacs included Youth Gone Mad 's version of " Blitzkrieg Bop " ( featuring a guest appearance by Dee Dee Ramone ) and Yogurt 's rendition of " Beat on the Brat " . " Blitzkrieg Bop , " " Havana Affair , " " I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend , " and " Now I Wanna Sniff Some Glue " were all covered on The Song Ramones the Same . We 're a Happy Family : A Tribute to Ramones ( 2003 ) featured several of the album 's songs covered by bands like Red Hot Chili Peppers ( " Havana Affair " ) , Rob Zombie ( " Blitzkrieg Bop " ) , Metallica ( " 53rd & 3rd " ) , U2 ( " Beat on the Brat " ) , Pete Yorn ( " I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend " ) , and John Frusciante ( " Today Your Love , Tomorrow The World " ) . In 2006 , " Blitzkrieg Bop " was reworked into a children 's song on the album Brats on the Beat : Ramones for Kids . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 2001 Expanded Edition CD 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Joey Ramone – lead vocals 
 Johnny Ramone – lead guitar 
 Dee Dee Ramone – bass guitar , backing vocals , co @-@ lead vocals in " 53rd & 3rd " 
 Tommy Ramone – drums , associate producer 
 Production 
 Craig Leon – producer 
 Greg Calbi – mastering 
 Roberta Bayley – photography , cover photo 
 Don <unk> – assistant engineer 
 Rob Freeman – engineer 
 Arturo Vega – photography , back cover 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart positions = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Strobilomyces foveatus = 
 Strobilomyces foveatus is a little @-@ known species of fungus in the Boletaceae family . It was first reported by mycologist E.J.H. Corner in 1972 , from specimens he collected in Malaysia in 1959 , and has since been found in Australia . Fruit bodies are characterized by the small dark brown to black conical scales covering the cap , and the net @-@ like pattern of ridges on the upper stem . The roughly spherical spores measure about eight micrometres , and are densely covered with slender conical spines . The edibility of this species is unknown . 
 = = Taxonomy and classification = = 
 Strobilomyces foveatus was first described scientifically by mycologist E.J.H. Corner in 1972 , from specimens collected in Sarawak , Malaysia in 1959 . It was one of several new Strobilomyces species he described in his monograph of Malaysian Boletaceae — the others were S. annulatus , S. <unk> , and S. mollis . 
 The fungus is classified in the section Strobilomyces of the genus Strobilomyces . Species in this section are characterized by having spores that may be either smooth or with short spines or warts , ridges or reticulations . The ornamentation is reduced or absent in the suprahilar region ( a depressed area near the hilar appendage ) . The specific epithet foveatus is derived from the Latin adjective <unk> , referring to a surface with pits or depressions . 
 = = Description = = 
 The caps of the fruit bodies are between 7 to 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide , with a convex shape . The cap surface is covered with dark brown to black erect scales between 1 @.@ 5 – 3 by 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 mm . The stem is up to 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) long ; it is 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) thick at the top , and 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick at the bottom . The surface of the upper stem is strongly reticulate ( covered with a network @-@ like pattern ) with individual meshes about 2 – 4 mm wide and 1 – 2 mm deep . The pores on the underside of the cap are between 0 @.@ 5 – 1 mm wide , dirty white then gray , and they bruise a brownish @-@ black color . The tubes which make up the pores are up to 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) long . The flesh is thick and initially white , but will stain a brownish @-@ black after exposure to the air . 
 The spores are 8 – 10 by 6 @.@ 3 – 8 @.@ 3 μm , and densely covered with slender conical spines about 0 @.@ 5 μm tall . The abundant pleurocystidia ( large sterile cells found on gill faces ) are thin @-@ walled , measuring up to 90 μm long by 1 – 20 μm wide , and ventricose ( with a swelling on one side ) , with a narrow appendage up to 20 μm by 4 – 8 μm . The hyphae that make up the cap surface and the warts are branched , loosely interwoven , and sooty colored ; the unclamped cells typically measure 17 – 45 by 9 – 26 μm . The surface of the stem is made of a compact mat of hyphae roughly 120 μm thick , that reduces to a sterile hymenium in the upper part of the stem . 
 Corner notes that the species " may be identical " with Strobilomyces <unk> <unk> , an African species with spores that measure 9 @.@ 5 – 13 by 6 @.@ 3 – 8 @.@ 3 μm . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Corner collected specimens growing in humus on the forest floor , in Bako National Park ( 1 ° 43 ′ N 110 ° 28 ′ E ) in Sarawak , Malaysia , in northern Borneo . It has also been collected from southern Queensland in Australia . Although it is not known definitively for Strobilomyces foveatus , all Strobilomyces species are suspected to be mycorrhizal . 
 = Spencer W. Kimball = 
 Spencer Woolley Kimball ( March 28 , 1895 – November 5 , 1985 ) was an American business , civic , and religious leader , and was the twelfth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) . The grandson of early Latter Day Saint apostle Heber C. Kimball , Kimball was born in Salt Lake City , Utah Territory , but spent most of his early life in Thatcher , Arizona , where his father , Andrew Kimball , farmed and served as the area 's stake president . He served an LDS mission from 1914 to 1916 , then worked for various banks in Arizona 's Gila Valley as a clerk and bank teller . Kimball later co @-@ founded a business selling bonds and insurance which , after weathering the Great Depression , became highly successful . Kimball served as a stake president in his hometown from 1938 until 1943 , when he was called to serve as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles . 
 Like most LDS Church apostles , Kimball traveled extensively to fulfill a wide variety of administrative and ecclesiastical duties . Early in his time as an apostle , Kimball was directed by church president George Albert Smith to spend extra time in religious and humanitarian work with Native Americans , which Kimball did throughout his life . 
 In late 1973 , following the sudden death of church president Harold B. Lee , Kimball became the twelfth president of the LDS Church , a position he held until his death in 1985 . Kimball 's presidency was noted for the 1978 announcement ending the restriction on church members of black African descent being ordained to the priesthood or receiving temple ordinances . Kimball 's presidency saw large growth in the LDS Church , both in terms of membership and the number of temples . There was also a large increase in the number of full @-@ time LDS missionaries , as Kimball was the first church president to publicly state that the church expected all able @-@ bodied male members to serve missions in young adulthood . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 Kimball 's paternal grandfather , Heber C. Kimball , was one of the original Latter Day Saint apostles called when Joseph Smith first organized the Quorum of the Twelve in February 1835 , and later served as first counselor to Brigham Young in the church 's First Presidency from 1847 until his death in 1868 . Kimball 's maternal grandfather , Edwin D. Woolley , was a prominent LDS bishop in Salt Lake City for many years . Through his aunt , Helen Mar Kimball , Kimball was a nephew of Joseph Smith . 
 = = Early life ( 1895 – 1916 ) = = 
 Spencer Woolley Kimball was born on March 28 , 1895 , in Salt Lake City , Utah Territory , to Andrew Kimball and Olive Woolley , sister of Mormon pioneer and eventual Mormon fundamentalist John W. Woolley . In 1898 , when Kimball was three years old , his father was called as president of the St. Joseph Arizona Stake , and his family relocated to the town of Thatcher in southeastern Arizona 's Graham County . 
 During his childhood , Kimball experienced a number of medical problems , including typhoid fever and facial paralysis ( likely Bell 's palsy ) , and once nearly drowned . Four of his sisters died in childhood , and his mother died when he was eleven . Though short in stature — he stood only 5 ft 6 in ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) as an adult — Kimball was an avid basketball player , and was the star and leading scorer on most of his school and recreational teams . During summer holidays , he often worked at a dairy in Globe , Arizona , milking cows , cleaning stalls , and washing bottles for $ 50 to $ 60 per month , plus room and board . 
 Kimball graduated from high school in May 1914 , and one week later was called to serve as a missionary in the Swiss – German Mission . However , less than two months later his mission call was halted by the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand and the subsequent outbreak of World War I. Kimball was reassigned to the Central States Mission and spent most of his mission in the towns and rural settlements of Missouri , finishing in 1916 . 
 = = Marriage and early career ( 1917 – 25 ) = = 
 Hoping to become a schoolteacher , Kimball spent one semester at the University of Arizona in the spring of 1917 , but received an army draft notice later that year . During this time he courted Camilla Eyring ( 1894 – 1987 ) , a schoolteacher at Gila Academy ( modern Eastern Arizona College ) , where Kimball had attended high school . They began dating in August 1917 and exchanged letters regularly after Kimball left for a semester at Brigham Young University ( BYU ) the next month . After only one month at BYU , however , Kimball was notified that his call into the army was imminent , and that he was to leave university and return to his hometown . He returned home to Arizona , but after several such notices Kimball 's army group was never actually called up for duty before World War I ended with the signing of the Armistice of 11 November 1918 . He and Eyring 's relationship deepened quickly , and by late October they had decided to marry . Because of their employment commitments and lack of money , the couple could not afford to travel to the nearest LDS temple ( in Utah ) , and thus were married in a civil ceremony in Camilla 's home in Pima , Arizona on November 16 , 1917 . Seven months later , the couple made the two @-@ day journey by train to Salt Lake City where they were sealed in the Salt Lake Temple on June 7 , 1918 . They eventually had four children : Spencer L. " Spence " ( 1918 – 2003 ) , Olive Beth " Bobby " ( b . 1922 ) , Andrew E. ( b . 1927 ) , and Edward L. " Ed " ( b . 1930 ) . 
 In 1921 , Kimball began employment at the Thatcher branch of the Arizona Trust and Savings Bank , where he was eventually promoted to assistant cashier at $ 225 per month , a high salary at the time . The bank failed in 1923 in the aftermath of the Depression of 1920 – 21 , evaporating Kimball 's $ 3000 investments in bank stock and forcing him to take a lower @-@ paying job at another bank . In addition to regular employment , Kimball performed a variety of other local jobs to earn extra income for his wife and children , including playing the piano and singing at local events , stringing with Camilla for local newspapers , distributing for an herbal laxative company , and clerical work for local stores . Shortly after his marriage , Kimball 's father called him to serve as clerk for the St. Joseph Stake . In the 1920s , local stake clerks still performed the extensive record @-@ keeping and reporting duties that are now digitized and done centrally at the LDS Church 's headquarters in Salt Lake City ; consequently , the position of stake clerk was essentially a part @-@ time job , and those called to the position received a $ 50 per month salary . 
 Kimball 's father died in 1924 , having served as president of the St. Joseph Stake for 26 years . LDS Church president Heber J. Grant came to reorganize the stake , and the 29 @-@ year @-@ old Kimball was called as 2nd counselor in the stake presidency . 
 = = Career and stake presidency ( 1925 – 43 ) = = 
 In 1925 , Kimball and Joseph W. Greenhalgh , a Latter @-@ day Saint businessman who served as a bishop in one of the local wards , began a small securities business making and purchasing loans from local businesses and individuals . By 1927 , the business became independent , and after investing $ 150 of his own money in the business , Kimball began running it full @-@ time in Safford , Arizona as the Kimball – Greenhalgh Agency , dealing in local insurance , real estate , debt collection , and bonds . The business suffered greatly during the Great Depression , and lost much of its capital between 1930 and 1933 . Through continued work and re @-@ investment of profits , it survived the Great Depression and became increasingly successful during the late 1930s and early 1940s . By 1943 , Kimball 's initial $ 150 investment in the agency was worth nearly $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 Kimball was actively involved in many civic organizations , including the Parent @-@ Teacher Association , city council , Red Cross , Boy Scouts , and was elected leader of the Arizona Rotary Club in 1936 . Kimball had achieved record success in organizing new Rotary Club chapters , such that the Arizona membership voted to pay for him and his wife to travel to the club 's 1936 international convention in Nice , France . They went by train to Chicago , then to Montreal , where their oldest son , Spencer L. , was serving as an LDS missionary . They then made the week @-@ long passage on an ocean liner to Le Havre , and from there visited Paris , Monte Carlo , Genoa , Rome , Pompeii , Florence , Venice , Vienna , the Swiss Alps , Belgium , the Netherlands , and London . 
 In February 1938 , LDS apostle Melvin J. Ballard was sent to Thatcher to divide the growing St. Joseph Stake . The newly created Mount Graham Stake covered the eastern half of the old stake , and Kimball was called as its first stake president . Though smaller than the previous stake , the newly formed stake covered a large area that extended east as far as El Paso , Texas , and for Kimball and his two counselors to visit each ward ( LDS congregation ) in the stake required travelling a total of 1 @,@ 750 miles ( 2 @,@ 820 km ) . During the Mount Graham Stake 's semiannual stake conference in September 1941 , unusually heavy rains caused the Gila River to overflow its banks , flooding several of the towns in the stake and causing $ 100 @,@ 000 in damage to the farms and buildings of Latter @-@ day Saints in the area . As stake president , Kimball coordinated the LDS Church 's humanitarian response , which quickly mobilized funds , materials , and manpower to care for displaced residents and begin recovery . Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 , and the subsequent entry of the United States into World War II , a number of young men from the stake left to join the U.S. military . At one point , 250 men from the stake served in the war , and Kimball ensured that each received a copy of the monthly stake bulletin , and often wrote personal notes on each copy to the recipient . 
 Kimball was widely known and respected in the community , and was constantly stopped on the streets of Safford by acquaintances and friends asking for his advice . After he was called to serve as stake president , non @-@ Mormon residents and travelers in Safford often asked Kimball to perform marriages for them . Kimball 's demanding schedule of managing the Kimball – Greenhalgh Agency , serving in civic organizations , and serving in LDS Church leadership positions , all while making time for his wife and children , took mental and physical tolls on his body . His journals from the 1930s and early 1940s often mention his exhaustion from days spent working 16 hours or more : " Am on a tension from 7 a.m. till 11 p.m. every single minute every day . I know I 'm working too hard but there seems no place to stop . " 
 = = Called to Quorum of the Twelve ( 1943 ) = = 
 The deaths of Sylvester Q. Cannon and <unk> Clawson created two vacancies in the LDS Church 's Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in mid @-@ 1943 . On July 8 , 1943 , while having lunch at home , Kimball received a telephone call from J. Reuben Clark , then the first counselor to church president Heber J. Grant , notifying him that he had been called to fill one of the vacancies . Kimball was initially so shocked by the call that he asked Clark 's permission to ponder it for several days before coming to Salt Lake City to meet with him in person as part of a previously scheduled family trip . After the phone call , Kimball 's desire to accept the calling was overwhelmed by feelings of self @-@ doubt and incompetence . Camilla Kimball recounted that , although Kimball was not prone to tears , he afterward lay on the floor of their home and wept uncontrollably as she tried to comfort him . 
 The following week , Kimball and his wife went as planned to Boulder , Colorado , to visit their oldest son , Spencer L. , and his family . Unable to sleep and having begun to fast , around midnight Kimball began climbing a nearby mountain to seek solace from the intense emotional struggle with his feelings of inadequacy and doubt . He later wrote of the experience , " How I prayed ! How I suffered ! How I wept ! How I struggled ! " After falling asleep on the mountain shortly after sunrise , Kimball recorded dreaming of his grandfather , Heber C. Kimball , and his life , and found that it had brought peace to his worries . He later wrote : " My tears were dry , my soul was at peace . A calm feeling of assurance came over me , doubt and <unk> subdued ... and I felt nearer my Lord than ever at any time in my life . " 
 Kimball traveled to Salt Lake City , where he met with David O. McKay , then second counselor to Grant . McKay assured Kimball of his call to the <unk> , and Kimball formally accepted . The news was released immediately , and Kimball was sustained by the LDS Church membership at the October 1943 general conference . He was ordained an apostle by Grant and added to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the Salt Lake Temple on October 7 , 1943 . Grant had chosen Ezra Taft Benson to fill the other vacancy in the Quorum , and he and Kimball were ordained on the same day . Being four years older than Benson , Kimball was ordained first , which put him ahead of Benson in the Quorum 's seniority . 
 = = Apostolic ministry ( 1943 – 73 ) = = 
 In accordance with church requirements and tradition , the <unk> immediately began the transition from Arizona to Salt Lake City upon Kimball 's call to be an apostle . Kimball sold his share in the Kimball – Greenhalgh Agency for $ 65 @,@ 000 , then sold their home and all their other property in Arizona . Kimball was particularly saddened to leave his local Rotary Club chapter and the other professional associations he had worked with ; Camilla worried about leaving her elderly parents in Arizona and relocating their second son , Andrew , who had just been elected senior class president at Safford High School . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Kimball 's first years as an apostle were dominated by World War II . Kimball often encouraged American church members to purchase war bonds to support the war effort , which they would then be able to cash out after the war and use the accumulated interest to send the returned soldiers on their LDS missions . Kimball lamented the global destruction of World War II , once writing in his journal : " How outraged the Lord must feel to see His children fighting down here like wild beasts . " As the keynote speaker at BYU 's 1944 baccalaureate service , Kimball publicly criticized members of Allied nations for concentrating on " the tyranny and shackles of [ other ] nations and at the same time [ remaining ] in bondage individually to sin " . 
 As World War II neared its conclusion , Kimball and other LDS Church leaders constantly responded to the needs of the friends and families of LDS war casualties . Kimball 's eldest son Spence was nearly killed in 1945 while serving aboard the aircraft carrier USS Franklin when bombs dropped from Japanese airplanes damaged the ship and ignited its tanks of aviation fuel . In an attempt to give comfort to families of those killed in combat , Kimball drafted a well @-@ known letter in which he wrote that sin , not premature death , was the only true tragedy in life . Kimball compared the death of young servicemen to the early death of Jesus Christ , stating that although such death is heartbreaking , from an eternal perspective God 's all @-@ knowing purposes would be seen in their circumstances . 
 = = = Native Americans = = = 
 In May 1945 , shortly after becoming church president , George Albert Smith instructed Kimball : " I want you to look after the Indians — they are neglected . Take charge and watch after the Indians in all the world . " Kimball saw the assignment as fulfillment of a prophecy given in the patriarchal blessing he received as an eight @-@ year @-@ old in 1903 , which had stated that Kimball would " preach the Gospel to many people , but more especially to the <unk> " , a term which describes a people in the Book of Mormon whom Latter @-@ day Saints believe to be among the ancestors of modern Native Americans . 
 In October 1946 , Kimball and several other general authorities toured the Navajo Nation in an effort to improve relations between the LDS Church and the Navajo people . Kimball was dismayed at the abject poverty among the Navajo and empathized with their distrust of the U.S. government . At that time , the average Navajo person ate no more than 1 @,@ 200 calories ( 5 @,@ 000 kJ ) a day , and a single dentist served the entire population of 55 @,@ 000 . Though the government @-@ appointed Navajo Nation covered 175 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 710 @,@ 000 km2 ) , only 0 @.@ 01 percent of that area was arable . Kimball encouraged local LDS Church leaders to care for the Navajo people , and in 1947 made a breakthrough : Golden Buchanan , an LDS leader in Sevier County , Utah , heard of a 17 @-@ year @-@ old Navajo girl working on a sugar beet farm who was desperate to stay in Utah and attend school . Buchanan wrote Kimball with an idea for the children of Navajo families to live with local LDS families so they could receive proper nutrition and receive educations . Kimball supported the idea , and asked Buchanan if his family would be willing to take the Navajo girl , Helen John , as a foster daughter to begin the program . Buchanan 's family agreed , and the LDS Church 's Indian Placement Program began . By 1954 , the program had 68 students , and by 1969 had nearly 5 @,@ 000 students placed with LDS families throughout the western United States and Canada . 
 Kimball was particularly distressed by the racism against Native Americans still widespread among white church members in the 1940s and 1950s . At the LDS Church 's April 1954 general conference , Kimball openly denounced the prevalent prejudices against non @-@ whites , comparing such church members to the Pharisees who mistreated Jesus Christ and the priest and <unk> from the parable of the Good Samaritan . Kimball subsequently repeated his warning at a BYU campus devotional , stating that there were " too many Pharisees among the white [ students and faculty ] ... too many <unk> who pull their robes about them and pass by with disdain " . 
 = = = Individual counseling = = = 
 When not touring missions or presiding over weekend stake conferences , Kimball spent weekdays answering correspondence at his home or working in his office at LDS Church headquarters in Salt Lake City . Kimball was noted among the apostles for his willingness to meet with church members struggling with serious personal problems , particularly married couples considering divorce or individuals wishing to confess serious violations of the LDS Church 's law of chastity , which prohibits sexual relations outside of marriage . During his time as an apostle , Kimball met with thousands of church members and full @-@ time missionaries who for various reasons felt their own local church leaders could not help them . Kimball " had no patience for sin [ but ] almost infinite patience for sinners " , and often spent long hours with individuals in greatest distress . In 1959 , Kimball and fellow apostle Mark E. Petersen were assigned to counsel church members dealing with homosexuality , which Kimball believed could , " like all other problems " , be overcome through " consistent prayerful exercise of self @-@ restraint " . Kimball 's experiences impelled his writing of The Miracle of Forgiveness , first published in 1969 , which dealt frankly with the serious nature of church standards on sexual morality and counseled church members on avoidance , and repentance , of such problems . 
 = = Health challenges = = 
 Beginning in 1932 , Kimball began suffering from boils and infectious sores , which plagued him until the advent of antibacterial medicines such as <unk> drugs and penicillin during World War II . 
 In May 1948 , while holding church meetings throughout Navajo and Apache communities in Arizona , Kimball suffered severe chest pain from a myocardial infarction ( " heart attack " ) after spending an afternoon struggling to lift an automobile out of deep sand . Kimball was physically sluggish throughout the rest of the trip , and upon returning to Salt Lake City and undergoing an electrocardiogram , his physician prescribed one month of rest from his church duties . Kimball was only 53 years old and had considered himself to be generally healthy and fit , and persuaded his physician not to tell the other apostles or the First Presidency . However , on his next assignment in Rigby , Idaho , Kimball again experienced chest pains , which escalated into another heart attack several days after his return . During his early episodes , Kimball passed the time by discussing his wishes regarding the family 's finances and investments with Camilla in the event he did not survive the <unk> . After receiving a priesthood blessing from church president George Albert Smith , Kimball spent two months on bed rest followed by two weeks resting on the Navajo Nation , and at his physician 's urging spent several additional weeks recuperating with his wife near the seashore in Long Beach , California . A cardiologist Kimball visited in California believed that his heart had been weakened by an undiagnosed case of rheumatic fever during childhood , and instructed Kimball to avoid overwork and gaining unnecessary weight . Kimball 's chest pains recurred occasionally throughout the next several years , particularly in times of greatest stress or fatigue . 
 In early 1950 , Kimball , who had never smoked or used tobacco , began experiencing persistent hoarseness and , after a physical examination , underwent a biopsy of a white spot in his throat . The biopsy caused some brief voice impairment , and indicated that Kimball had a throat infection but not cancer . In late 1956 , Kimball 's hoarseness returned , coupled with occasional bleeding in the back of his throat . Kimball 's physician sent him to New York City to meet with Dr. Hayes Martin ( 1892 – 1977 ) , an expert on cancers of the head and neck . Martin performed another biopsy , which indicated " borderline malignancy " , and in early 1957 Martin recommended immediate surgery . Kimball had neglected to seek approval from church president David O. McKay regarding his 1957 biopsy , a procedure which in the 1950s could itself cause permanent vocal damage . He felt that as an apostle he should have sought McKay 's approval before undergoing surgical procedures which could render him incapable of fulfilling apostolic duties . McKay stated that he believed Kimball could still serve as an apostle even if he underwent a complete laryngectomy , and advised him to go forward with the procedure . Martin subsequently surgically removed one of Kimball 's vocal cords and half of the other , leaving him barely able to speak above a hoarse whisper . After several weeks of enforced silence , Kimball slowly recovered , and by November 1957 was allowed by his physician to resume speaking in public . Kimball 's voice remained raspy throughout the rest of his life , and he usually wore an ear @-@ mounted microphone to help magnify his voice , even when speaking at normal microphone @-@ equipped pulpits . 
 In 1972 , at age 76 , Kimball began experiencing difficulty breathing , excessive fatigue , and sleeplessness . Medical examinations discovered serious aortic calcification and some coronary artery disease . At the same time , Kimball had experienced a recurrence of his earlier throat cancer , and his heart surgery was postponed for him to undergo radiation therapy on his throat , which was successful . Immediately following the conclusion of the LDS Church 's April 1972 general conference , Kimball and Camilla each received a priesthood blessing in the Salt Lake Temple from the entire First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles . On April 12 , 1972 , Kimball underwent a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ hour open @-@ heart surgery performed by cardiothoracic surgeon ( and future LDS Church apostle ) Russell M. Nelson . The surgery was successful , and Kimball spent the next several months recovering . 
 = = Church presidency ( 1973 – 85 ) = = 
 Given Kimball 's history of health problems , few people — including Kimball himself — anticipated him living long enough to become president of the LDS Church . However , on December 23 , 1973 , Harold B. Lee , who was four years younger than Kimball and had historically been in much better health , unexpectedly died , leaving Kimball as the most senior apostle and thus the presumptive new church president . Kimball was ordained church president on December 30 , 1973 , the day after Lee 's funeral , choosing N. Eldon Tanner and Marion G. Romney as his first and second counselors . Boyd K. Packer recalled shortly afterward discovering Kimball sitting alone in the church president 's office quietly weeping , saying : " I am such a little man for such a big responsibility ! " 
 = = = Missionary work = = = 
 Prior to the church 's general conference in April 1974 , Kimball delivered a landmark address to the general authorities on his vision of missionary work growing globally into the 21st century . In the address , Kimball envisioned the LDS Church moving beyond sending American missionaries to other nations to where those nations would be able to furnish enough missionaries for their own countries with extras to send to India , China , and the Soviet Union , all large nations where the LDS Church was then unable to proselytize . Kimball challenged the attendees to " lengthen your stride " , a phrase which was later used to define Kimball 's presidency . Many in attendance recorded being spiritually awestruck by Kimball 's address . One wrote : " It was as if , spiritually speaking , our hair began to stand on end .... We realized that President Kimball was opening spiritual windows and beckoning us to come and gaze with him on the plans of eternity . " 
 Kimball was the earliest church president to clearly state that all able @-@ bodied LDS young men should serve a full @-@ time mission . When Kimball became president in 1974 , the LDS Church had 17 @,@ 000 full @-@ time missionaries , and within several years had 25 @,@ 000 . Between 1976 and 1978 , the church built and dedicated its Missionary Training Center in Provo , Utah , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of BYU , where new missionaries go to receiving training in scripture , teaching methods , and , if necessary , a new language . 
 = = = 1978 revelation on priesthood = = = 
 Beginning in the late 1840s , individuals of black African descent were prohibited from ordination to the LDS Church 's priesthood — normally held by all male members who meet church standards of spiritual " worthiness " — and from receiving temple ordinances such as the endowment and celestial marriage ( sealing ) . The origins of the policy are still unclear : during the 20th century , most church members and leaders believed the policy had originated during founding prophet Joseph Smith 's time , but church research in the 1960s and 1970s found no evidence of the prohibition before the presidency of Brigham Young . LDS Church presidents Heber J. Grant and David O. McKay are known to have privately stated that the restriction was a temporary one , and would be lifted at a future date by a divine revelation to a church president . 
 In the years prior to his presidency , Kimball kept a binder of notes and clippings related to the issue . In the first years of his presidency , he was recorded as frequently making the issue one of investigation and prayer . In June 1977 , Kimball asked at least three general authorities — apostles Bruce R. McConkie , Thomas S. Monson , and Boyd K. Packer — to submit memos " on the doctrinal basis of the prohibition and how a change might affect the Church " , to which McConkie wrote a long treatise concluding there were no scriptural impediments to a change . During 1977 , Kimball obtained a personal key to the Salt Lake Temple for entering in the evenings after the temple closed , and often spent hours alone in its upper rooms praying for divine guidance on a possible change . On May 30 , 1978 , Kimball presented his two counselors with a statement he had written in longhand removing all racial restrictions on ordination to the priesthood , stating that he " had a good , warm feeling about it . " 
 On June 1 , 1978 , following the monthly meeting of general authorities in the Salt Lake Temple , Kimball asked his counselors and the ten members of Quorum of the Twelve Apostles then present to remain behind for a special meeting . Kimball began by describing his studies , thoughts , and prayers on removing the restriction and on his growing assurance that the time had come for the change . Kimball asked each of the men present to share their views , and all spoke in favor of changing the policy . After all present had shared their views , Kimball led the gathered apostles in a prayer circle to seek final divine approval for the change . As Kimball prayed , many in the group recorded feeling a powerful spiritual confirmation . Bruce R. McConkie later said : " There are no words to describe the sensation , but simultaneously the Twelve and the three members of the First Presidency had the Holy Ghost descend upon them and they knew that God had manifested his will .... I had had some remarkable spiritual experiences before ... but nothing of this magnitude . " L. Tom Perry described : " I felt something like the rushing of wind . There was a feeling that came over the whole group . When President Kimball got up he was visibly relieved and overjoyed . " Gordon B. Hinckley later said : " For me , it felt as if a conduit opened between the heavenly throne and the kneeling , pleading prophet of God who was joined by his Brethren . " 
 The church formally announced the change on June 9 , 1978 . The story led many national news broadcasts and was on the front page of most American newspapers , and in most largely Latter @-@ day Saint communities in Utah and Idaho telephone networks were completely jammed with excited callers . The announcement was formally approved by the church at the October 1978 general conference , and is included in LDS Church 's edition of the Doctrine and Covenants as Official Declaration 2 . 
 = = = Equal Rights Amendment = = = 
 In 1972 , the U.S. Congress passed the Equal Rights Amendment ( ERA ) , which introduced an amendment to the U.S. Constitution guaranteeing that equal rights could not be denied by the federal government or any U.S. state on the basis of gender . Upon becoming church president in late 1973 , Kimball initially indicated to media outlets that the LDS Church had no official stand on the amendment and made no comment on it . In July 1974 , Belle S. Spafford , the general president of the Relief Society — the LDS Church 's women 's organization and one of the oldest and largest women 's organizations in the world — gave a public talk in New York City in which she expressed her view that the amendment 's objectives would be better achieved through legislation , not the constitutional amendment , which she feared was too broad and vague . Her successor , Barbara B. Smith , echoed these sentiments later that year in a talk at the church 's Institute of Religion at the University of Utah , which was followed by a supporting editorial in the LDS Church News . 
 The two women 's comments , combined with the Church News editorial , greatly increased opposition to the ERA among the Utah populace , and when the Utah State Legislature voted on its ratification in February 1975 it was defeated by a wide margin . Kimball and his counselors in the First Presidency did not release a formal statement on the ERA until October 1976 , when the amendment was only four states away from passing . The statement indicated that the First Presidency recognized and " deplore [ d ] " the legal injustices women had suffered throughout history , but warned that the amendment would not help women and " ... could indeed bring them far more restraints and repression . " In August 1978 , the First Presidency issued a second statement elaborating on the first , in which Kimball and his counselors stated that the ERA 's " deceptively simple language ... [ constitutes ] encouragement of those who seek a unisex society , [ and ] an increase in the practice of homosexual and lesbian activities . " 
 Contemporary media coverage of the church 's opposition to the ERA was frequently negative . At the October 1980 General Conference , about 30 picketers marched outside the Salt Lake Tabernacle , and when Kimball was presented to the congregation during the customary sustaining of church officers , three women stood and shouted " No ! ERA policy , no ! " At the dedication of the church 's new temple in Seattle , Washington , in November 1980 , several dozen protesters again demonstrated . Minor protests and pickets continued across the United States at major church events until June 1982 , when the ratification period expired without the amendment reaching the three @-@ fourths threshold needed for ratification . 
 = = = Physical decline and death = = = 
 On March 28 , 1975 , his 80th birthday , Kimball said : " I can 't believe that I am eighty years old .... I don 't feel eighty , and I don 't think in those terms . " However , Kimball suffered from a myriad of mostly minor health issues ranging from blurred vision to osteoarthritis in his spine . In July 1979 , Kimball suffered a series of three minor strokes , theorized to have been caused by small nylon fibers shed by his artificial heart valve , which briefly incapacitated him but had little lasting effect . In September 1979 , Kimball suddenly experienced loss of strength throughout his entire body without affecting his mental clarity . A CAT scan indicated Kimball had developed a subdural hematoma , though its cause was never pinpointed . A neurosurgeon quickly drilled a small hole in Kimball 's skull , just above his right ear , from which nearly one cup ( 235 mL ) of blood and fluid drained out . Kimball left the hospital 12 days after his operation , and insisted on participating in the October 1979 general conference . In November 1979 , Kimball underwent a similar operation on another less severe hematoma . 
 In the summer of 1981 , Kimball 's health began to decline rapidly . He began suffering from bouts of confusion and difficulty speaking . Realizing his deteriorating capacity and the poor health of his two counselors in the church 's First Presidency , Kimball called Gordon B. Hinckley as an additional counselor to assist in the church 's daily administration . Shortly following Hinckley 's selection , Kimball developed a third subdural hematoma of greater seriousness than the previous two . The subsequent surgery left Kimball with intermittent difficulty in speaking and activity , and further damaged his vision and hearing . By 1982 , Kimball was rarely well enough to appear in public , and his leadership as church president was largely limited to giving final approval or denial to more important church matters brought to him by Hinckley . At the Sunday afternoon session of the church 's April 1982 general conference , Kimball unexpectedly took the pulpit to deliver a short closing message , which proved to be his final public address . 
 My beloved brothers and sisters , this is a great experience for me . I have waited for this day and hoped for it and believed for it . I have a great love for the people of this Church , and gratitude for the love expressed by them and by all the people of these valleys . So as I express that love for you and for the memory of the great experiences I ’ ve had with you , I bear my testimony : this work is divine , the Lord is at the helm , the Church is true , and all is well . God bless you , brothers and sisters , I pray in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ , amen . 
 Over subsequent years , Kimball would occasionally attend meetings in the Salt Lake Temple and was able to give assent or direction on matters of significance , such as the calling of Russell M. Nelson and Dallin H. Oaks to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in 1984 , but was otherwise mostly incapacitated . 
 Kimball was mentally alert for his 90th birthday on March 28 , 1985 , and attended that week 's meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles in the Salt Lake Temple . In November 1985 , Kimball suffered a recurrence of a previous bleeding peptic ulcer , and his family decided not to take surgical action . Kimball died shortly after 10 : 00 pm on November 5 , 1985 , at age 90 . One of Kimball 's final utterances , which he repeated several times in the days before his death , was : " My life is at an end now . She 's so happy , oh so very happy . " When asked whom he meant by " she " , Kimball indicated he meant his mother , Olive Woolley Kimball , who had died in 1906 when Kimball was eleven years old . 
 Kimball 's teachings as an apostle were the 2007 course of study in the LDS Church 's Sunday Relief Society and Melchizedek priesthood classes . 
 = = Works = = 
 Kimball , Spencer W. ( 1969 ) . The Miracle of Forgiveness . Bookcraft , Inc . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 192 @-@ 7 . 
 — — — ( 1972 ) . Faith <unk> the Miracle : Based on Discourses of Spencer W. Kimball . Deseret Book Company . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 87747 @-@ 490 @-@ 6 . 
 — — — ( 1975 ) . One Silent Sleepless Night . 
 — — — ( 1981 ) . President Kimball Speaks Out . Deseret Book Company . 
 — — — ( 1987 ) . Proclaiming the Gospel : President Kimball Speaks on Missionary Work . Bookcraft , Inc . 
 — — — ( 1982 ) . Edward L. Kimball , ed . The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball . Bookcraft , Inc . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 938 @-@ 1 . 
 — — — ( 2006 ) . Teachings of Presidents of the Church : Spencer W. Kimball . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints . [ 1 ] 
 = Hurricane Gert ( 1993 ) = 
 Hurricane Gert was a large tropical cyclone that caused extensive flood damage throughout Central America and Mexico in September 1993 . The seventh named storm and third hurricane of the annual hurricane season , Gert originated as a tropical depression from a tropical wave over the southwestern Caribbean Sea on September 14 . The following day , the cyclone briefly attained tropical storm strength before moving ashore in Nicaragua and proceeding through Honduras . It reorganized into a tropical storm over the Gulf of Honduras on September 17 , but weakened back to a depression upon crossing the Yucatán Peninsula . Once over the warm waters of the Bay of Campeche , Gert quickly strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane on September 20 . The hurricane made a final landfall on the Gulf Coast of Mexico near Tuxpan , Veracruz , with peak winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . The rugged terrain quickly disrupted the cyclone 's structure , and Gert entered the Pacific Ocean as a depression near the state of Nayarit on September 21 . There , it briefly redeveloped a few strong thunderstorms before dissipating at sea five days later . 
 Gert 's broad wind circulation produced widespread heavy rainfall across Central America through September 15 – 17 . Combined with saturated soil from Tropical Storm Bret 's passage a month earlier , the rain triggered flooding and mudslides in numerous communities . In Costa Rica , the storm destroyed a national park and had a significant impact on the agricultural and tourism sectors . Much of the Mosquito Coast of Nicaragua and Honduras was affected , and many cities , villages , and crops in those countries were under water . Although Gert 's highest winds occurred upon landfall in Mexico , the worst effects in the country were due to extreme rainfall across the Huasteca region , where as many as 31 @.@ 41 inches ( 798 mm ) of rain were recorded . Following the overflow of several major rivers , catastrophic flooding submerged extensive areas surrounding the Pánuco basin . Tens of thousands were forced to evacuate , and scores of structures were demolished in what was described as the region 's worst disaster in 40 years . 
 In the wake of the hurricane , the road networks across the affected countries were severely disrupted , hampering relief efforts in many regions . Government and emergency officials opened shelters and distributed food for the thousands that had lost their homes or sources of income . Throughout Central America and Mexico , 116 people were killed and 16 were left missing , while private property , infrastructure , and farmland were left in ruins , leading to over $ 170 million ( 1993 USD ) in losses . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave — an area of low pressure oriented north to south — moved off the African coast well south of Dakar on September 5 , 1993 , and tracked rapidly westward across the tropical Atlantic . Positioned at a relatively low latitude , the wave interacted with the Intertropical Convergence Zone , allowing for the enhancement of convection in its vicinity . It developed a weak low @-@ pressure center at sea level , which passed directly over Trinidad on September 11 . The majority of the system subsequently moved inland along the northern coast of South America , although it maintained its identity and emerged over the southwestern Caribbean Sea on September 13 . Owing to favorable tropospheric conditions aloft , the system began showing signs of development as the deep convection organized into well @-@ defined curved rainbands . Based on the increase in organization and the presence of a surface circulation , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) classified it as a tropical depression at 1800 UTC on September 14 , about 105 miles ( 165 km ) north of the northern coast of Panama . 
 The depression retained a large circulation during its formative stages , indicated by both satellite observations and data from <unk> in the region . Its cloud pattern continued to coalesce , and the NHC upgraded it to Tropical Storm Gert at 0900 UTC on September 15 . After tracking west @-@ northwestward , the center of the storm moved ashore near Bluefields , Nicaragua , around 1800 UTC that day , with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . An interaction with land impeded further development , and Gert weakened back to a tropical depression six hours later . Despite the center being inland for nearly two days , a large part of the circulation stayed over the adjacent Caribbean and Pacific waters . This allowed Gert to remain a tropical cyclone while trekking northwestward through Nicaragua and Honduras , defying the NHC 's repeated forecasts of its dissipation over land . 
 The cyclone moved into the Gulf of Honduras on September 17 , restrengthening into a tropical storm soon thereafter . That same day , a mid- to upper @-@ level trough over the eastern Gulf of Mexico caused the storm to turn to the north @-@ northwest . Gert 's duration over water was short lived ; the storm moved back inland near Belize City the next day , granting it minimal opportunity for additional strengthening . Once inland , Gert began to feel the effects of a high @-@ pressure ridge to its northwest , causing the storm to again turn west @-@ northwest . After crossing the Yucatán Peninsula and decreasing in organization , it entered the Bay of Campeche offshore Champotón , Campeche , as a tropical depression late on September 18 . Gert restrengthened over open waters , as light wind shear allowed its deep convection to consolidate ; by 0600 UTC the next day , the cyclone once again became a tropical storm . On September 20 , data from a United States Air Force aircraft indicated that the storm had further strengthened into a hurricane with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Gert veered toward the west and slowed slightly owing to a shortwave trough to its north , giving it more time to organize over water . The cyclone attained its peak intensity as a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson scale , with winds of 100 mph ( 165 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 970 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 64 inHg ) . 
 Around 2100 UTC on September 20 , Gert made a final landfall at peak intensity on the coast of Mexico , just north of Tuxpan , Veracruz . Inland , the hurricane accelerated and weakened rapidly over the mountainous region of the Sierra Madre Oriental , diminishing to a tropical depression by September 21 . Despite the degeneration , the large circulation remained intact as it crossed the country . Gert exited the coast of Nayarit and entered the Pacific Ocean later that day , where the NHC reclassified it as Tropical Depression Fourteen @-@ E. The remaining deep convection waxed and waned in intensity ; satellite observations indicated the depression could have briefly been a tropical storm on September 22 . It continued a west to west @-@ northwestward motion for two days , though low @-@ level flow steered it toward the southwest after the convection diminished . There was no redevelopment due to cool sea temperatures , and the system dissipated at sea on September 26 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 After confirming the development of a tropical depression , authorities in Costa Rica issued a green alert for coastal regions on September 14 . The following day , a tropical storm warning was issued for the Atlantic coast of the country . National television and radio stations broadcast warning messages to the public , and emergency crews were dispatched in case conditions were to warrant intervention . This helped with the effective and timely clearing of hospitals , as well as the evacuation of residents in high @-@ risk zones . A tropical storm warning was posted for the Atlantic coast of Nicaragua on September 15 , extending south from Puerto Cabezas to the adjacent islands . In Honduras , early storm warnings allowed several hundred residents to evacuate well ahead of Gert 's arrival . Once it became evident that the storm would strike the Yucatán Peninsula , coastal areas from Belize northward to Cozumel , Mexico were placed under a tropical storm warning on September 17 until Gert 's landfall the next day . 
 While Gert was still located over the peninsula , the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch for the Gulf Coast from the city of Veracruz northward to Soto la Marina , Tamaulipas . By September 18 , it had been upgraded to a tropical storm warning and extended southward to Minatitlán , although the initial watch area was placed under a hurricane watch after Gert showed signs of strengthening . The next day , the tropical storm watch from Soto La Marina to Nautla was upgraded to a hurricane warning as it became clearer where Gert would make landfall . Prior to impact , several ports along the Gulf Coast halted their operations , and people living in risk zones were evacuated . All warnings and watches were discontinued after the hurricane moved inland . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Gert was a large tropical cyclone for most of its lifespan ; it always remained close enough to the coast to restrengthen and redevelop strong thunderstorms . In consequence , the storm produced heavy rainfall over a large area , causing extensive flooding and mudslides from Central America to Mexico . The disaster resulted in at least 116 deaths and 16 missing persons ; damage to roads , property , crops and vegetation surmounted $ 170 million . 
 = = = Costa Rica = = = 
 Although Gert 's center remained off the coast of Costa Rica , its large circulation produced brisk winds and heavy rainfall across the country . A local weather station recorded 13 @.@ 1 inches ( 332 mm ) of rain during the storm . Geologically , the hardest @-@ hit regions consisted of sedimentary layers with poor hydraulic conductivity and were therefore prone to soil saturation . The initial rainfall rose the levels of many rivers , exacerbating the flood threat . The imminent overflow of the <unk> River prompted wide @-@ scale evacuations , though the river crested gradually without major consequence . After hours of prolonged rainfall , many Pacific regions such as Quepos , Pérez Zeledón , and Osa experienced flooding and landslides , which inflicted moderate damage to roads and bridges . 
 The floods ruined about 500 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 km2 ) of banana crop and damaged oil palm plantations . Small @-@ scale farmers of reed , maize , beans , and rice were also affected . The storm disrupted local fishing and wrecked several small boats in Quepos . High winds brought great destruction to about 65 percent of the vegetation in the Manuel Antonio National Park , vastly impacting the tourism @-@ driven economy of Quepos . Gert left moderate property damage in its wake ; it destroyed 27 homes and otherwise damaged 659 , mostly because of flooding . Overall losses totaled $ 3 @.@ 1 million , of which $ 1 @.@ 7 million was due to the impaired infrastructure . Roughly 1 @,@ 000 people sought shelter during the storm . Owing to the timely preparations in the country , only one cardiac arrest fatality was attributable to Gert when a landslide buried a home . 
 = = = Nicaragua = = = 
 Moving ashore in Nicaragua a month after Tropical Storm Bret 's passage , Gert caused excessive rainfall over already saturated regions . Despite striking the Atlantic coast , the storm produced the largest amounts of precipitation over northern and Pacific coastal areas . A maximum of 17 @.@ 8 in ( 452 mm ) fell at Corinto ; other significant totals include 17 @.@ 6 in ( 447 mm ) at Chinandega and 17 @.@ 5 in ( 444 mm ) at León . The capital of Managua recorded 9 @.@ 8 in ( 249 mm ) of rain during the event . Sustained winds from the storm reached no more than 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) upon landfall near Bluefields , though they downed trees and power lines and generated high waves of up to 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) offshore . After weakening to a depression inland , Gert continued to produce moderate gales along its path through the country . 
 Off the coast near Big Corn Island , rough surf and winds destroyed nine fishing boats . Two canoes with an unknown number of occupants disappeared at sea . Gert produced significant coastal flooding on moving ashore near Bluefields and <unk> , prompting about 1 @,@ 000 residents and hundreds of indigenous Miskito villagers to evacuate . Farther inland , prolonged heavy rain caused numerous rivers to overflow , which in turn led to disastrous freshwater flooding . A river near Rama rose to 32 ft ( 10 m ) above its normal stage , displacing 3 @,@ 900 people and leaving about 80 percent of the town submerged . Several communities in the Rivas Department were inundated by discharge from a river near the city of Rivas , while Cárdenas , a coastal community along the border with Costa Rica , endured several days of heavy rain . Throughout the <unk> Department , similar flooding killed five people and affected 6 @,@ 000 others . Landslides moved onto bridges and roads , disrupting local transportation . Gert destroyed at least 252 houses and damaged another 293 across 14 of the country 's departments . Moreover , the storm was responsible for considerable infrastructural damage and economic losses . As many as 123 @,@ 000 people were affected throughout Nicaragua , and there were 37 confirmed fatalities . Since flooding from Tropical Storm Bret had occurred just one month earlier , an exclusive damage estimate for Gert is unavailable . The two storms inflicted a combined $ 10 @.@ 7 million in losses , primarily to private property . 
 = = = Honduras = = = 
 Although it had weakened to a depression , Gert continued to drop significant rainfall while crossing Honduras . In Tegucigalpa , at least 6 @.@ 77 in ( 172 mm ) of rain were recorded . Destructive floods swept through 13 of the country 's 18 departments , including much of northern Honduras and the Mosquitia Region , which had already suffered losses from Tropical Storm Bret in the previous month . The additional flooding from Gert affected 24 @,@ 000 people in the region and made communication with surrounding areas nearly impossible . Elsewhere , the rain filled several major rivers , including the Ulúa ; rivers across Sula Valley in particular had their banks destroyed , flooding much of San Pedro Sula — the country 's second @-@ largest city — and adjacent municipalities in the Cortés Department . The rising water prompted many residents to evacuate , and the Ramón <unk> Morales International Airport halted all of its operations . 
 The storm devastated Puerto Cortés , one of the most important port cities in Central America . Elsewhere in the Cortés Department , a river in <unk> overflowed and triggered widespread flooding ; landslides in that area claimed the lives of six people . The country 's agriculture was devastated , losing about 5 @,@ 700 acres ( 23 km2 ) of low @-@ lying farmland with banana , sugar , and citrus crops . In all , Gert wrought $ 10 million worth of damage to roads , bridges , and property . The disaster affected 67 @,@ 447 people , of which roughly 60 percent had to evacuate their homes . In its final public statement , the government of Honduras confirmed 27 deaths , though 12 missing persons remain unaccounted for . 
 = = = Elsewhere in Central America = = = 
 While passing through Central America , Gert generated an increase in cloudiness and showers across El Salvador , with a maximum 15 @.@ 35 in ( 390 mm ) of rain recorded . Strong winds uprooted trees or snapped their limbs , damaging power lines and knocking out power . In one community , mudslides destroyed a major highway . The Río Grande de San Miguel caused an excessive discharge of water just southwest of <unk> , washing out about 2 @,@ 500 acres ( 10 km2 ) of crops from adjacent plantations . Several other areas faced significant losses from the flooding , including San Marcos and San Vicente ; some property and road damage occurred in San Miguel . Although fishing operations were suspended at the height the storm , four <unk> fishermen disappeared at sea . Overall , Gert affected nearly 8 @,@ 000 residents and destroyed twelve homes in El Salvador ; officials there confirmed five drowning deaths related to the storm . 
 In Guatemala , torrential rains from Gert affected approximately 20 @,@ 000 people and killed one girl . The agricultural sector in the country suffered substantial losses from the flooding , though there were no specific reports of material damage . Gert moved ashore near Belize City as a minimal tropical storm , dropping rainfall in coastal areas . Just offshore , a weather station on Hunting Caye recorded 9 @.@ 5 in ( 241 mm ) during the event . Despite the rain , only minor flooding occurred in Belize City . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 While crossing the Yucatán Peninsula , Gert dropped considerable rainfall in Quintana Roo ; a 24 @-@ hour accumulation of 7 @.@ 4 in ( 188 mm ) was recorded at Chetumal , although higher localized totals of around 15 in ( 380 mm ) fell elsewhere in the state . Gusty winds briefly buffeted the coast during the storm 's landfall , with a maximum wind speed of 44 mph ( 70 km / h ) recorded in Chetumal . Its effects were limited to localized floods , however , which cut off one road to traffic and forced the inhabitants from low @-@ lying areas in Chetumal and Felipe Carrillo Puerto to evacuate to higher ground . Scattered showers also caused light flooding in parts of the state of Campeche , including Ciudad del Carmen . 
 Upon Gert 's final landfall , high gales and waves battered wide stretches of coastline in the states of Tamaulipas and Veracruz , though hurricane @-@ force winds were largely confined to areas within the cyclone 's southern eyewall . Tuxpan , just south of where the eye moved ashore , recorded wind velocities of more than 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , while 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) gusts occurred farther south in Poza Rica . To the north , winds reached 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) in Tampico , Tamaulipas . Despite the severity of the winds , the worst of Gert was due to orographic lift when its broad circulation interacted with the eastern side of the Sierra Madre Oriental , generating extreme precipitation over much of the Huasteca region . As many as 31 @.@ 41 in ( 798 mm ) of rain were recorded in <unk> , San Luis Potosí , while Tempoal in Veracruz observed a 24 @-@ hour total of 13 @.@ 35 in ( 339 mm ) from the storm . 
 The first signs of damage were from high winds on September 20 , which uprooted trees and tore off residential roofs in Tuxpan , Naranjos , Cerro Azul , and Poza Rica . Following Gert 's extreme rains , catastrophic flooding struck Mexico 's Huasteca region over a period of several days as many of its rivers rose to critical levels . Initially , in Veracruz , the imminent overflow of the Tempoal , Moctezuma , and <unk> rivers forced thousands of residents from the municipalities of Tempoal , El Higo , and <unk> Sánchez to leave their homes . The <unk> River eventually topped its banks , cutting the village of <unk> Sánchez off from the outside world . By far the most devastating , however , was the overflow of the Pánuco River on September 24 , which runs from the Valley of Mexico through the municipality of Pánuco and empties in the gulf . Rushing water swept through 30 of Veracruz 's 212 municipalities , completely submerging more than 5 @,@ 000 homes . El Higo bore the brunt of the flooding , with 90 percent of its residential area under water . 
 After days of continued downpours in Gert 's wake , the Pánuco River rose to 27 @.@ 60 ft ( 8 @.@ 72 m ) above normal by September 27 — its highest level in 40 years . Once again exceeding its banks , the river destroyed a major levee in city of Pánuco and forced 8 @,@ 000 residents to evacuate . Disastrous flooding reached as far north as southern Tamaulipas , where 5 @,@ 000 people had to seek refuge . Half of Tampico was coated in deep layers of mud , with scores of structures demolished . The urban areas of Madero and Altamira were also hard hit by the deluge . Roughly 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 km2 ) of land around the Pánuco basin and Tampico were under water , including vast amounts of citrus , coffee , corn , <unk> , bean , grain , and soy crops . Telephone , water , and electricity services throughout the region were severely disrupted , and numerous communities were isolated due to broken bridges and roads . 
 In San Luis Potosí , water damage to schools , bridges , and roads was particularly widespread . The agricultural sector suffered heavy losses when the flooding washed away large amounts of livestock and roughly 80 percent of its crops . Throughout the state , 55 @,@ 000 residents were affected by the storm , and 25 people lost their lives . Gert 's trail of destruction extended as far inland as Hidalgo , where 35 rivers overtopped their banks . Floods and mudslides destroyed 38 bridges and 86 roads , as well cutting off power , telephone , and water services , disrupting communication in 361 localities . Property damage in Hidalgo was significant ; 4 @,@ 425 homes , 121 schools , and 49 public buildings were compromised across 35 municipalities . About 167 @,@ 000 acres ( 680 km2 ) of farmland were destroyed in the storm . Fifteen deaths occurred in the state , and eight people sustained injuries . 
 Overall , Gert became the worst natural disaster to strike the region in 40 years ; it displaced 203 @,@ 500 people — many in need of shelter — and left 29 @,@ 075 houses damaged or destroyed across Mexico . More than 667 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 700 km2 ) of crops were in ruins . The associated losses totaled $ 156 million , and the death toll stood at 45 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Central America = = = 
 Because of the storm 's impact on the country , the government of Costa Rica declared a national emergency on September 16 , 1993 . Emergency crews were dispatched to assess the damage and distribute life supplies to the affected population , including 90 @,@ 940 lbs ( 41 @,@ 250 kg ) of food , 1 @,@ 422 mattresses , and 1 @,@ 350 blankets . With much of the road network left disrupted across the affected regions , the country 's agriculture , tourism , and commerce suffered considerable losses . In particular , the obstruction of the major Pan @-@ American Highway , which connects the central region to the south of the country , had a discernible impact on the local economy . Following the expansive flooding of farmland , many independent crop producers were unable to partake in subsequent <unk> . 
 Prior to Gert , a state of emergency was in effect for Nicaragua as a result of Tropical Storm Bret . National and regional aid agencies , including the Red Cross , accordingly extended their relief efforts with the passage of Gert . Although the government did not <unk> for international assistance , several monetary contributions were made by overseas organizations ; a transfer channel for cash donations was opened at the Swiss Bank Corporation . The United Nations Development Programme provided $ 50 @,@ 000 for the purchase of fuel , and UNICEF distributed $ 25 @,@ 000 worth of household supplies and medicine . The World Food Programme donated approximately 160 @,@ 000 lbs ( 72 tonnes ) of food supply and offered expert services in response to the disaster . The federal governments of Japan , Canada , Switzerland , Norway , Germany , and Spain donated a combined $ 300 @,@ 000 in aid . 
 On September 18 , the President of Honduras declared a state of emergency for several municipalities after surveying the affected regions by helicopter . The governments of Japan , Canada , Germany , and the United Kingdom provided a combined $ 310 @,@ 300 for the purchase of relief items . Although most storm victims received aid within a few days , the deteriorated road network caused a large delay in relief efforts to the hard @-@ hit Mosquitia region . Sewage systems and waterworks countrywide were in serious need of restoration . With the destruction of its sole water reservoir , much of Puerto Cortés endured potable water shortages for months in Gert 's wake . Public health concerns rose in the wake of Gert , with the cost of required medicines pinned at $ 208 @,@ 000 . A contamination of the water supplies in rural areas exacerbated a cholera outbreak . By September 28 , about 27 @,@ 000 residents unable to reenter their flooded homes remained in government shelters . Seven weeks later , a temporary housing project was implemented for the 120 families most in need . Approximately 5 @,@ 900 families across Honduras lost their source of income due to the storm . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 In response to the flood disaster , the Red Cross immediately began distributing aid to victims across the Huasteca region . After assessing the situation by helicopter , the President of Mexico declared the Pánuco river basin an emergency zone and ordered search and rescue missions . Many homes sustained irreparable damage to their roofs , leaving tens of thousands homeless . The government appealed for international aid , seeking clothes , food , and medical supplies . Five storage centers in Hidalgo provided more than 93 million lbs ( 42 @,@ 000 tonnes ) of food supplies . Throughout San Luis Potosí , 142 @,@ 000 lbs ( 64 tonnes ) of chicken , 45 @,@ 000 pantries , and 76 @,@ 000 disposable plates were distributed , as well as 50 @,@ 440 blankets and 6 @,@ 081 <unk> . Several schools served as shelters for the homeless ; the sheltered elderly , children , and pregnant or nursing women received $ 27 @,@ 000 worth of milk powder donations . 
 In the wake of Gert , the amount of respiratory disease and skin infection cases rose slightly , although the overall health situation for the country remained well under control . By two weeks after the hurricane , over 65 @,@ 000 people across the region had been accommodated in the shelters ; most of them remained there until the flood waters receded . A grant of $ 22 @,@ 000 was made available for the purchase of roofing sheets for those in urgent need of home repair . The president approved $ 37 @.@ 4 million for the reconstruction of roads and housing and the assistance of affected farmers . 
 = Ellie ( The Last of Us ) = 
 Ellie is a fictional character in the 2013 video game The Last of Us . In the game , the character Joel is tasked with escorting Ellie across a post @-@ apocalyptic United States in an attempt to create a potential cure against an infection to which Ellie is immune . While players briefly assume control of Ellie for a portion of the game , the computer 's artificial intelligence primarily controls her actions , often assisting in combat by attacking or identifying enemies . Ellie reappeared as the sole playable character in the downloadable content prequel campaign , The Last of Us : Left Behind , in which she spends time with her friend Riley . She was played by Ashley Johnson , who provided the voice and motion capture for the character . Ellie is also the main character in the comic book prequel , The Last of Us : American Dreams , wherein she befriends Riley and has her first encounter with the rebel group Fireflies . 
 Ellie was created by Neil Druckmann , the creative director and writer of The Last of Us . Inspired by a mute character proposed for Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves , Druckmann created Ellie as a strong female character with a close relationship with Joel ; throughout the game 's development , the relationship between Ellie and Joel was the central focus , with all other elements developed around it . Johnson inspired aspects of Ellie 's personality , prompting Druckmann to make her more active in fighting off hostile enemies . Naughty Dog also redesigned Ellie 's appearance during the development of the game to more closely resemble Johnson . However , comparisons have also been made with actress Ellen Page . 
 The character has been well received by critics , with Ellie 's relationship with Joel most frequently being the subject of praise . The strength and complexity of Ellie 's character and its subversion of the damsel in distress stereotype have also been commended . Ellie 's role in Left Behind 's plot has prompted some social commentary within the industry , with coverage focusing on a scene depicting LGBT themes . Both the character and Johnson 's performance received numerous awards and nominations , and have regularly been placed favorably in polls and lists . 
 = = Character design = = 
 Creative director Neil Druckmann designed Ellie as a counterpart to Joel , the game 's main playable character . She was also intended to demonstrate that a character bond could be created entirely through gameplay . Druckmann described the game as a coming of age story for Ellie , in which she adopts the qualities of a survivor . Ashley Johnson was chosen to portray Ellie in The Last of Us shortly after her auditions ; the development team felt that she suitably fit the role , particularly when acting alongside Troy Baker , who portrayed Joel . Johnson contributed greatly to the development of the character , convincing Druckmann to re @-@ write Ellie in a stronger manner , and able to fight off hostile enemies . The character 's performances were mostly recorded using motion capture technology ; approximately 85 % of the game 's animations were recorded using motion capture , with remaining audio elements recorded later in a studio . When portraying Ellie , Johnson faced challenges in performing " disturbing " scenes that made her feel uncomfortable . Johnson felt that video games rarely feature strong female characters such as Ellie , and expressed her excitement to portray the role for this reason . 
 The development team felt that establishing Ellie 's physical appearance was " critical " ; they figured that she needed to appear young enough to make her relationship with Joel — who is aged in his 40 's — believable , but old enough to be credible as a resourceful teenager capable of surviving . A redesign of Ellie 's physical appearance was publicized in May 2012 ; Druckmann stated that the change was to make her look more similar to Johnson . Prior to the redesign , comparisons were made between Ellie and actress Ellen Page ; in June 2013 , Page accused Naughty Dog of " ripping off [ her ] likeness " . The team felt that Ellie was important for the game 's marketing ; Druckmann said that , when asked to move the image of Ellie from the front of the game 's packaging to the back , " everyone at Naughty Dog just flat @-@ out refused " . 
 When questioned about the inspiration for Ellie as a gameplay feature , Druckmann recalled when he and game director Bruce Straley brainstormed ideas for Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves ( 2009 ) . One of their ideas was a sequence with a mute female character whose role was to summon Nathan Drake , Uncharted 's main character , and briefly accompany him throughout the sequence ; Druckmann felt this created a " beautiful " relationship through gameplay alone . Though this concept was scrapped for Uncharted 2 , the idea was raised when discussing a new project , ultimately inspiring the character of Ellie . The addition of Ellie as artificial intelligence was a major contributor to the game engine . The team intentionally added a feature in which Ellie remains close to Joel , to avoid being conceived by players as a " burden " . Programmer Max <unk> stated that , when working on Ellie as artificial intelligence , he imagined her experiences throughout the game 's events in an attempt to achieve realism . Druckmann also felt inspired by wars that took place in Syria and Afghanistan when creating Ellie ; he felt that conflict was a familiarity to the children in those countries , which is similar to Ellie 's view . During the Winter segment of the game , players assume control of Ellie . The developers assured that this change , as well as the knowledge of Ellie 's immunity , was kept secret prior to the game 's release , to surprise players . 
 = = Attributes = = 
 Ellie is characterized by her roughened , messy appearance and behavior , as well as her emotional trauma , which is accentuated after her encounter with David . Having lost many people in her life , she suffers from severe <unk> and survivor 's guilt . This resulted in her becoming a very hardened person ; she uses violence without hesitation and frequently swears . Ellie also feels worthless , to a suicidal extent in which she believes her life is a burden and her death would be beneficial for others . While she shows initiative , she is not as adept at survival as Joel , being somewhat impulsive and naïve , and unable to swim . Following the release of Left Behind , in which Ellie kisses her friend Riley , Druckmann stated that he wrote Ellie as a homosexual character , though preferred to leave her sexuality subjective to the player 's opinion . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 In the comic book series American Dreams , it is told that Ellie lost her mother at birth and grew up in an orphanage . She later went to a military boarding school in the Boston quarantine zone , where she befriended Riley Abel , a fellow rebel who protected her from bullies . During the events of Left Behind , which takes place several weeks before the beginning of The Last of Us , Riley returns to Ellie after a long absence and tells her that she had joined the Fireflies , a revolutionary militia group . While spending time together at an abandoned shopping mall near the quarantine zone , Riley reveals that she is about to be posted to another city , and Ellie hesitantly supports her decisions . When Ellie pleads for Riley to stay , the latter abandons her Firefly pendant . In response , Ellie impulsively kisses her , which Riley returns . Drawn by the noise of their activities , the Infected pursue Ellie and Riley ; the two attempt to escape , but are bitten . They consider suicide , but choose to spend their final hours together . However , Ellie survives the infection and seeks help from Marlene , the leader of the Fireflies , who agrees to escort Ellie in order to find a cure due to her immunity . Marlene is later wounded , and early in The Last of Us , tasks smugglers Joel and Tess to escort Ellie ; Tess dies early on during the journey . 
 Initially annoyed by Joel 's <unk> , Ellie begins to feel a strong attachment to him . However , upon learning that he intends to leave her with his brother Tommy and return to Boston , she runs away , and later confronts Joel , demanding that he not abandon her . This strengthens the bond between them , and they continue on their journey . After experiencing a traumatizing encounter in the Winter , in which Ellie is nearly raped and murdered by a band of cannibals and their leader David , she becomes withdrawn and introverted . When Joel finally gets her to the Fireflies , it is discovered that an operation on Ellie is required to remove the mutant strain of the Cordyceps fungus growing on her brain , which may be used to create a vaccine ; the operation will likely kill her . While she is being prepared for surgery , Joel kills Marlene and the Fireflies , makes his way to the operating room , and carries Ellie to safety . As she was unconscious during the battle , Ellie is unaware of what had transpired . As they leave the hospital , Joel lies about the events , telling her that the Fireflies had found many other subjects , and had stopped looking for a cure . Ellie later confronts him about it , admitting her survivor 's guilt and demanding to know the truth . When he reassures her that he is telling the truth , she replies with " Okay " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ellie 's character received generally positive feedback . Jason Killingsworth of Edge praised Ellie 's complexity and commended Naughty Dog for not having made her " a subordinate ... precocious teen girl that Joel must babysit " . Ashley Reed and Andy Hartup of GamesRadar named Ellie one of the " most inspirational female characters in games " , writing that she is " one of the most modern , realistic characters ever designed " . Eurogamer 's Ellie Gibson commended the character 's strength and vulnerability , praising the game 's subversion of the damsel in distress cliché . GamesRadar listed Ellie among the best characters of the video game generation , stating that her courage exceeds that of most male characters . IGN 's Greg Miller compared Ellie to Elizabeth from BioShock Infinite ( 2013 ) , and felt that the former was a " much more rounded out , full @-@ fledged " character . Conversely , Game Informer 's Kimberley Wallace felt that the game focused too much on Joel , " hardly capitalizing on Ellie 's importance " , and Chris Suellentrop of The New York Times judged that Ellie is cast " in a secondary , more subordinate role " . 
 Critics praised the relationship between Ellie and Joel . Matt Helgeson of Game Informer wrote that the relationship was " poignant " and " well @-@ drawn " , Joystiq 's Richard Mitchell found it " genuine " and emotional , and IGN 's Colin Moriarty identified it as a highlight of the game . Eurogamer 's Oli Welsh felt the characters were developed with " real patience and skill " . Philip Kollar of Polygon found the relationship was assisted by the game 's optional conversations . Wallace of Game Informer named Joel and Ellie one of the " best gaming duos of 2013 " , appreciating their interest in protecting each other . Game Informer 's Kyle Hilliard compared Joel and Ellie 's relationship to that of the Prince and <unk> from Prince of Persia ( 2008 ) , writing that both duos deeply care for one another , and praised the " emotional crescendo " in The Last of Us , which he judged had not been achieved in Prince of Persia . PlayStation Official Magazine 's David Meikleham named Joel and Ellie the best characters in a PlayStation 3 game . 
 Following the release of The Last of Us : Left Behind , Ellie 's relationship with Riley was commended by reviewers . GameSpot 's Tom Mc Shea felt new appreciation for Ellie by seeing her actions around Riley . The Daily Telegraph 's Tim Martin praised the characters ' interactions , and Eurogamer 's Stace Harman felt that Left Behind improves the understanding of Joel and Ellie 's relationship . Kotaku 's Kirk Hamilton described Ellie and Riley 's kiss as " video gaming 's latest breakthrough moment " , declaring it " a big deal " . Keza MacDonald of IGN wrote that the kiss was " so beautiful and natural and funny that [ she ] was left dumbstruck " . IGN 's Luke Karmali questioned Naughty Dog 's motivation behind the kiss , noting the " bait @-@ and @-@ switch " in which they made players care for the character before revealing her sexuality , but ultimately dismissed this and commended their handling of Ellie 's sexuality and the subtlety of the writing . 
 The character of Ellie won year @-@ end awards , including Best New Character from Hardcore Gamer and Most Valuable Character at the SXSW Gaming Awards for Left Behind ; she received a nomination for Best Character from Destructoid . Ashley Johnson 's performance also received various accolades : Performer at the 10th and 11th British Academy Video Games Awards , Outstanding Character Performance the 17th Annual DICE Awards , Best Voice Actress at the Spike VGX 2013 , and Best Performer from The Daily Telegraph . 
 = Jelena Balšić = 
 Jelena Balšić ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> ; 1365 / 1366 – 1443 ) , also known as Jelena Lazarević , was a medieval Serbian noblewoman and a member of the Lazarević dynasty . She had a very strong personality and significantly influenced the way her husbands , first Đurađ II Balšić and second Sandalj Hranić , and her son Balša III governed their realms . Jelena encouraged them to resist Venetian encroachment on territory belonging to Zeta , the medieval Serbian state ruled by Đurađ II and then by Balša III after Đurađ II 's death . She is also known as a writer in epistolary literature , particularly her correspondence with Nikon of Jerusalem , a monk in the Gorica monastery on Lake Skadar ( Montenegro ) . Her three epistles are part of the Gorički zbornik ( Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> ) , a medieval manuscript collection . 
 = = Name = = 
 Jelena 's nickname was " Lady Lena " ( <unk> <unk> ) or the " Learned one " ( <unk> ) . In some English sources she is referred to as Helen . She was referred to as Jelena Lazarević because of her father 's noble family . Based on her marriage to Đurađ II Balšić she was referred to as Jelena Balšić , while because of her marriage to Sandalj Hranić she was sometimes referred to as Jelena Balšić @-@ Hranić or Jelena Hranić . In a Venetian document from 1409 she is referred to as " <unk> Domina Elena " . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Jelena was born in 1365 or 1366 as the third daughter of Princess Milica of Serbia and Lazar of Serbia . Her mother belonged to the Nemanjić dynasty , while her father was the founder of the Lazarević dynasty . He created Moravian Serbia , the largest and most powerful state to emerge from the ruins of the Serbian Empire . Hence , Jelena was a member of the highest Serbian aristocracy . She was born in <unk> and spent her childhood in Kruševac , where she lived until she married her first husband , Đurađ II Balšić , in 1386 . She had one child with him , a son named Balša III who was born in 1387 . Balša III had three children , a son whose name is not known and two daughters , Jelena and Teodora . His son died at a very young age in 1415 . In 1424 , Balša 's daughter Jelena married Stjepan Vukčić Kosača and became the mother of Queen Catherine of Bosnia and Vladislav Hercegović . 
 = = = Marriage to Đurađ II Balšić = = = 
 Jelena married Đurađ II Balšić in 1386 or 1387 . After this marriage the suzerainty of Lazar of Serbia was accepted in most if not all of Zeta . When the Sultan sent an army to invade the lands of Đurađ II at the beginning of 1392 , Jelena travelled to the Republic of Ragusa ( nowadays Dubrovnik ) to get out of harm 's way . On 1 June 1392 , the senate of Dubrovnik decided to send a galley to take her to the city . Đurađ was captured by the Ottomans in October 1392 and was released only once he agreed to cede Scutari to them . He managed to recapture the town in 1395 but subsequently sold it to the Venetians , together with the surrounding fortresses . 
 Jelena was firmly opposed to the pro @-@ Venetian policy of Đurađ II and his sale of Scutari and other towns to the Venetians . She did not like the Venetians because they obstructed the contacts between the Zetan Orthodox Metropolitanate and the Patriarchate of Peć , cut off Orthodox monasteries around Lake Skadar from the incomes that they were legally entitled to , and engaged in an aggressive trading policy , which significantly reduced Zeta 's earnings . Even before the First Scutari War , she was in a dispute with the Venetians over the jurisdiction of the Zetan Orthodox Metropolitanate over the Orthodox churches around the river Bojana and the Church of St. Peter in Scutari . The reign of 16 @-@ year @-@ old Balša III began in April 1403 when Đurađ II died of the injuries suffered in November 1402 at the Battle of <unk> . In this battle Đurađ II supported Stefan Lazarević in an attempt to protect the throne of Serbian Despotate from Đurađ Branković . Jelena had a significant influence on the way Balša III governed Zeta . Because he was a minor when he inherited the throne , she actually governed Zeta as his regent . In a dispute between the Venetians and the Zetan Metropolitan bishop appointed by the Patriarchate of Peć , Balša III followed her instructions and protected the ancient rights of the Serbian church . 
 = = = First Scutari War = = = 
 In 1405 , Balša III , supported by Jelena , launched a ten @-@ year war against Venice . At the beginning of the war , Balša managed to capture the whole Scutari region except for the Scutari fortress . The Venetians offered a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ ducat reward for anyone able to kill both Balša and Jelena . When the Venetians in return captured Bar , Ulcinj and Budva , three of the most important ports of Zeta , Balša and Jelena fled from Ulcinj to <unk> Castle . 
 In 1409 , Jelena decided to travel to Venice to negotiate peace in person . At the end of May , she arrived in Dubrovnik but had to wait for almost two months because her hosts warned her that there were <unk> galleys in the Adriatic Sea . On 9 July 1409 , while she was still waiting in Dubrovnik , Venice purchased the entire Dalmatian coast from Ladislaus of Naples for 100 @,@ 000 ducats . The Kingdom of Naples was not a threat to Venetians anymore . By gaining the Dalmatian coast , Venetians further increased their influence and power in the region of the Adriatic Sea , which made Jelena 's negotiating position difficult . When she finally arrived in Venice at the end of July , she was financially broken because of her long voyage . The Venetians had to support her with three ducats a day during negotiations which lasted for the next three months . On 26 October 1409 , a year @-@ long peace agreement with the Venetian doge , Michele Steno , was signed without territorial changes for any of the parties . Jelena traveled back to Zeta through Dubrovnik where she received 100 ducats worth of presents . Although both she and the Venetian representative swore on the Gospel to respect the truce , in reality there was no peace . 
 = = = Marriage to Sandalj Hranić = = = 
 When Ladislaus of Naples sold his rights to the Kingdom of Dalmatia to the Republic of Venice and retreated from the Balkans in 1409 , many local nobles allied themselves with the Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund and accepted Ostoja as the King of Bosnia . This seriously weakened the position of Hrvoje Vukčić <unk> , a Grand Duke of Bosnia , whose niece Katarina was a second wife of Sandalj Hranić , a Grand Duke of Hum . In such circumstances Sandalj decided to ally with emperor Sigismund in mid 1411 and to establish closer connections with Sigismund 's important ally Stefan Lazarević . In December 1411 Sandalj divorced his wife Katarina and married Stefan 's sister Jelena at the end of the same year . Jelena married Sandalj because she wanted to strengthen the position of her son . With this marriage Sandalj , the most dangerous enemy of Balša III , became his stepfather and protector . Although it spoiled Sandalj 's relations with Hrvoje , it also strengthened traditionally close relations with the Lazarević family . Although Jelena was in her forties , Sandalj hoped they would have children and in 1413 deposited some money at a transactional account with the city of Dubrovnik for the child they would eventually have . 
 Jelena went to live with her husband at his court in Blagaj in Herzegovina while Balša remained as the only governor of Zeta . In his second marriage , concluded in 1412 or at the beginning of 1413 , Balša III married <unk> , a daughter of <unk> <unk> who was a Lord of Sati and <unk> in Albania . In 1413 Balša issued a charter to the church dedicated to Saint Nicholas he built in <unk> Monastery together with his mother Jelena . 
 Sandalj had a court in Novi ( modern day Herceg Novi ) where he spent some time every year , usually in winter and spring . Beginning in 1424 , Jelena spent a good part of the year at this court , accompanied by her sister Olivera . 
 At the beginning of February 1426 a special ceremony was dedicated to Jelena and Sandalj in Dubrovnik when they attended the feast of Sveti Vlaho ( Saint Blaise ) , the city 's patron saint . Jelena intended to be buried in the church she would build in Dubrovnik . Initially , Dubrovnik was interested in accepting her wish on the condition that she help them take control of Novi , its rival in salt @-@ trading . That is why Dubrovnik proposed to Sandalj to build an Orthodox church and home for old and sick people in 1434 . Sandalj died in 1435 before he replied to their proposal . He was succeeded by his nephew Stjepan Vukčić Kosača who was a son of Sandalj 's brother <unk> . After Sandalj 's death Jelena did not interfere in the governing of the realm previously controlled by her husband but went to live at the seaside , probably in Novi . In September 1435 Jelena asked the Ragusans to allow her to build a church in Dubrovnik in which would be her grave . Since circumstances had changed after Sandalj 's death , the Ragusans rejected Jelena 's request although it was supported by her nephew , Serbian Despot Đurađ Branković . They justified their refusal with the lack of the approval of the Pope . 
 = = = Gorički zbornik = = = 
 Three epistles she wrote to her spiritual adviser were included in the Gorički zbornik ( Serbian : <unk> <unk> ) , a medieval manuscript collection . Today only one of them , known as the <unk> <unk> ( Serbian : <unk> <unk> ) , is preserved . 
 Jelena wrote her will on 25 November 1442 . Based on its text it can be concluded that she had her own library and that in 1441 she told her chancellor <unk> <unk> to order a book cover . The book cover was made of silver and decorated with the image of Jesus . It was made by Andrija <unk> , who was a famous goldsmith from Kotor . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 She first reconstructed the Church of St. George built by Đurađ II Balšić on <unk> island on Lake Skadar and in 1439 / 1440 built as her endowment the Church of Holy Mother next to it . She was buried in its western vault , near the southern wall of the church . The purpose of her endowment was to be her crypt and to serve as the spiritual center which would continue the orientation of the Serbian culture toward Byzantine Orthodox spirituality in this historically last period of Serbian medieval statehood . In this way Jelena confirmed her loyalty to the tradition of the Nemanjić dynasty and her father Prince Lazar in the period when she was able to make a political choice between Islam and militant Catholicism . Jelena 's efforts had an additional dimension taking into consideration that her work is a testimony of the presence of the Byzantine hesychasm in the Serbian Despotate . 
 The sacred bones of Jelena Balšić were placed in the new relic case made of stone after the Church of Holy Mother she built on <unk> island was reconstructed in 2002 by the Metropolitanate of Montenegro and the Littoral . By the decision of the ' Metropolitanate of Montenegro and the Littoral ' in 2006 she was titled ' <unk> ' and named " <unk> Jelena <unk> Balšić " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Jelena Balšić was praised as an extraordinary woman who preserved the power of the Balšić family during a very turbulent period . It is obvious that she had a strong personality probably similar to her mother , Princess Milica of Serbia . She managed to maintain the cultural heritage of the Kingdom of Serbia , and her writing has been evaluated highly . 
 The literature award " Jelena Balšić " was established in 2007 by the ' Metropolitanate of Montenegro and the Littoral ' and is awarded every two years . As of 2013 , its laureates have been Đorđe <unk> , Žarko <unk> , Ranko <unk> and Slobodan Rakitić . 
 = = = Legends = = = 
 Legends incorrectly say that she was Jelena Obilić , a widow of Miloš Obilić . One of the legends about Jelena was recorded in Herzegovina . According to that legend Sandalj asked Jelena who was her favorite husband . Her reply was that she would give away both Sandalj and Balšić just to see Miloš Obilić one more time . Sandalj was angered and Jelena had to run away from him . While she was on the way to Zeta , in some nettle , she gave birth to a boy who was a founder of <unk> family ( <unk> , " nettle " ) . 
 Some of the preserved legends about Jelena include Queen Jelena 's Bees ( <unk> краљице Јелене / <unk> kraljice Jelene ) , Queen Jelena 's Fishpond ( <unk> краљице Јелене / <unk> kraljice Jelene ) , White Stone ( <unk> <unk> / <unk> kam ) and Queen Jelena 's Mowers ( <unk> краљице Јелене / <unk> kraljice Jelene ) . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = Sociology of leisure = 
 Sociology of leisure is the study of how humans organize their free time . Leisure includes a broad array of activities , such as sport , tourism , and the playing of games . The sociology of leisure is closely tied to the sociology of work , as each explores a different side of the work @-@ leisure relationship . More recent studies in the field move away from the work @-@ leisure relationship and focus on the relation between leisure and culture . 
 Studies of leisure have determined that observable patterns cannot be easily explained by socioeconomic variables such as income , occupation or education . The type of leisure activity is substantially influenced by the individual 's immediate situation ( presence or lack of family , age , and other factors ) . 
 = = Theory = = 
 Sociology of leisure is a fairly recent subfield of sociology , compared to more traditional subfields such as sociology of work , sociology of the family , and sociology of education : it saw most of its development in the second half of the 20th century . Until then , leisure had often been seen as a relatively unimportant , minor feature of society . Leisure is now recognized as a major social institution , deserving of serious sociological inquiry , particularly in Western societies . 
 As John Wilson and others have noted , it is difficult to define leisure . Its definitions are numerous and often mutually contradictory , for example as a discrete portion of one 's time or as a quality of experience irrespective of time . Joffre <unk> distinguished four distinct definitions of leisure , which begin broadly and gradually narrow in scope . The first and broadest defines leisure as a style of behavior that may occur even at work , the second defines it as any non @-@ work activity ; the third further excludes family and household obligations ; and , finally , the narrowest defines leisure as activities dedicated to self @-@ fulfillment . <unk> 's four definitions are not exhaustive . Incompatible definitions and measures are seen as a major factor accounting for occasionally contradictory research findings . 
 There are some unresolved questions concerning the definition of work : in particular , whether unpaid endeavors , such as volunteering or studying , are work . Non @-@ work time should not be equated with free time , as it comprises not only free time , dedicated to leisure , but also time dedicated to certain obligatory activities , such as housework . Dividing activities into free and dedicated time is not easy . For example , brushing one 's teeth is neither work nor leisure ; scholars differ in their classifications of activities such as eating a meal , shopping , repairing a car , attending a religious ceremony , or showering ( various individuals may or may not classify such activities as leisure ) . The relation between work and leisure can also be unclear : research indicates that some individuals find skills that they have acquired at work useful to their hobbies ( and vice versa ) , and some individuals have used leisure activities to advance their work careers . Sociologists also disagree as to whether political or spiritual activities should be included in studies of leisure . Further , among some occupational communities , such as police officers or miners , it is common for work colleagues to be off @-@ time friends and to share similar , work @-@ based leisure activities . 
 Apart from a definition of leisure , there are other questions of theoretical concern to the sociologist of leisure . For example , quantifying the results is difficult , as time @-@ budget studies have noted that a given amount of time ( for example , an hour ) may have different values , depending on when it occurs — within a day , a week , or a year . Finally , as with many other fields of inquiry in the social sciences , the study of the sociology of leisure is hampered by the lack of reliable data for comparative longitudinal studies , as there was little to no standardized data @-@ gathering on leisure throughout most of human history . The lack of longitudinal studies has been remedied in the last few decades by recurring national surveys such as the General Household Survey in the United Kingdom ( ongoing since 1971 ) . In addition to surveys , an increasing number of studies have been focusing on qualitative methods of research ( interviews ) . 
 = = Research = = 
 Over time , emphasis in studies of leisure has shifted from the work @-@ leisure relation , particularly in well @-@ researched majorities , to study of minorities and the relation between leisure and culture . Marshall Gordon noted that there are two approaches in the study of leisure : formal and historical @-@ theoretical . The formal approach focuses on empirical questions , such as the shifting of leisure patterns over an individual 's life cycle , the relation between leisure and work , and specific forms of leisure ( such as the sociology of sport ) . The historical @-@ theoretical approach studies the relation between leisure and social change , often from structural @-@ functionalist and neo @-@ Marxist perspectives . Sheila <unk> provided a different analysis , comparing North American and British studies . The British approaches focus on input from pluralism , critical Marxism , and feminism ; the American approaches concentrate on the social @-@ psychological tradition . 
 = = Findings = = 
 Many sociologists have assumed that a given type of leisure activity is most easily explained by socioeconomic variables such as income , occupation or education . This has yielded fewer results than expected ; income is associated with total money spent on such activities , but otherwise only determines what type of activities are affordable . Occupation has a similar effect , because most occupations heavily influence a person 's income ( for example , membership in a prestigious occupation and " country @-@ club " activities such as golf or sailing are significantly <unk> so is membership in those occupations and high income , and those activities with high cost ) . Education is correlated with having a wide range of leisure activities , and with higher dedication to them . As Kelly noted , " Predicting a person 's leisure behavior on the basis of his socioeconomic position is all but impossible . " 
 On the other hand , type of leisure activity is substantially influenced by the individual 's immediate situation — whether he has a family , whether there are recreational facilities nearby , and age . Early family influences , particularly involving the more social leisure activities , can be profound . The type of leisure activity also depends on the individual 's current place in the life cycle . 
 Specific findings in sociological studies of leisure are illustrated by John Robinson 's late @-@ 1970s study of American leisure . Robinson found that Americans , on average , have four hours of leisure time each weekday , and more on weekends — six hours on Saturdays , almost eight on Sundays . Amount of leisure time diminishes with age , work , marriage , and children . However , the amount of free time does not significantly depend on an individual 's wealth . People desire less free time if they are uncertain of their economic future , or if their job is their central interest . During the second half of the twentieth century , watching television became a major leisure activity , causing a substantial decrease in the time dedicated to other activities ; in the early 1970s the average American had 4 hours of leisure per day , and spent 1 @.@ 5 of them watching television . Shared leisure activities increase marital satisfaction . 
 = Carr Hill = 
 Carr Hill is a suburb in the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead in Tyne and Wear , England . It is bordered by Felling to the north , Sheriff Hill to the south , Windy Nook to the east and Deckham to the west . It lies 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) south of Gateshead , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of the city of Newcastle upon Tyne and 13 miles ( 21 km ) north of the historic City of Durham . Once a village in County Durham , it was incorporated into the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead by the Local Government Act 1972 on 1 April 1974 . 
 One of the less populous of the former villages that comprise the metropolitan borough , Carr Hill has a long history and was first developed by the Romans . During the Industrial Revolution it became the centre of pottery making in Tyneside , and numerous stone quarries , glass makers and windmills were set up . It also had a large reservoir providing water to several areas of Gateshead and Newcastle upon Tyne . 
 Industrial decline from the turn of the 20th century , coupled with the building of Gateshead 's first council estate , saw Carr Hill transformed from an industrial settlement into a residential suburb of the Gateshead Council ward of Deckham . Governed locally and nationally by the Labour Party , the suburb is economically disadvantaged compared to other areas of the borough and nationally , with high levels of unemployment and low levels of income . It is served by Carr Hill Primary School . There are two small parks that contribute to the social activity of the area , as does the Elgin Centre at Elgin Road . Two historic venues , both now closed , face uncertain futures , as does the parish church . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The origins of the name " Carr Hill " are subject to speculation . In the 18th and 19th centuries the village was usually referred to as Carr 's Hill , a possessive form suggesting that , like Deckham , the name stems from a notable family in residence . It is more likely however that the name was taken from the Scottish Gaelic carr , meaning " rocky shelf " . 
 Parts of the early village were in Upper Heworth , and the remainder in Gateshead Fell , a wild and treacherous area of common land notable for the criminality of the tinkers and hawkers who lived there . There is some evidence of Roman occupation ; a proposed enclosure map of Heworth Common from 1766 charts a Roman Causeway running between Carr Hill Lane ( now Carr Hill Road ) and Blue Quarries in Sheriff Hill . The likely explanation for Roman interest in the area is Swan Pond , twice the size of the pond at Saltwell Park , the fresh water from which might be used to fill bathhouses and flush latrines . Indeed , in 1697 , William Yarnold obtained a lease for the laying of cisterns and pipes to bring water from " the Great Pond at Carr 's Hill " , shown on ordnance survey maps as Swan Pond , to Newcastle upon Tyne . 
 = = = Industrial period 1740 – 1860 = = = 
 The most important event in Carr Hill 's formative history occurred in 1740 , when John Warburton established a pottery at Carr Hill Lane . Warburton 's pottery , later referred to as ' Carr Hill Pottery ' and widely credited with bringing white earthenware to the region , transformed the village into one of Gateshead 's potting <unk> and encouraged workers and traders to move to the area . Warburton passed the pottery to his son @-@ in @-@ law Issac Warburton in about 1760 , and by the time John Warburton died in June 1794 it was the largest in the Tyne Valley , commanding a rent of £ 100 per annum ; by comparison , the Tyne Pottery on Felling shore paid £ 20 . When placed for sale in 1812 , the advert described Carr Hill Pottery as " valuable and extensive " . 
 Carr Hill by 1820 was a modern and populous village , situated on hill , still isolated from Gateshead and Felling . A variety of industries had developed alongside Warburton 's pottery and were prospering ; a flint glass manufacturer , under the management of Alexander Elliot , three corn mills - Carr Hill Mill , Felling Windmill and St John 's Mill ( the latter built after an earlier mill was destroyed by a mysterious fire in 1824 ) – and a fire brick kiln . There were also three inns and " some neat houses occupied by respectable families " . By 1840 Carr Hill Reservoir had been built and , under the management of the Newcastle Water Company was the major water supplier for residents in Carr Hill , Sheriff Hill and Windy Nook , and freestone quarries , similar to Kells ' Quarry in Windy Nook , were producing Newcastle Grindstone of excellent quality . In 1856 a Methodist Chapel was built . During the mid @-@ 19th century , the increasing population led to calls for social amenities to be improved ; footpaths were a particular concern , although an examination of ordnance survey mapping demonstrates the continued isolation of the village generally . The success of Warburton 's pottery resulted in a street being named after him , but the lack of residential development is evident . Carr Hill glassworks and quarries are still clearly marked , along with Swan Pond and a public house , The Free Gardeners Arms . By the mid @-@ 19th century Carr Hill Reservoir was in the hands of the Whittle Dean Water Company , and in 1883 was converted into a 10 @-@ million imperial gallon ( 45 million l ; 12 million US gal ) open reservoir . 
 = = = Carr Hill House = = = 
 Carr Hill House was the largest estate in the village ; a freehold mansion house on Carr Hill Lane . The date of building is unknown , but it does not appear on an enclosure map of 1766 , suggesting it was built after that date . There is strong evidence that it was once a lunatic asylum ; in 1770 an advertisement in a local newspaper declared : 
 <unk> 
 Carr 's Hill House on Gateshead Fell 
 To The Public 
 We beg Leave to inform the Public that we have opened the above HOUSE pleasantly situated about a mile distant from Newcastle , which we have fitted up in an elegant manner , with every Accommodation for the reception of <unk> in genteel or opulent circumstances : in this House Persons entrusted to our Care shall be treated with the utmost Attention and Humanity . The terms are reasonable . R. Lambert , W. Keenlyside , H Gibson , R. Stoddard ( surgeons to the Infirmary ) , Newcastle 1767 . 
 By the turn of the 19th century Carr Hill House was a residential property and farm , and in 1806 Matthew Atkinson responded to an advertisement in the Newcastle Courant and purchased the 12 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) estate . In 1858 the house was in the hands of G. J <unk> , town clerk of Gateshead from 1855 until 1856 , who occupied a 26 @-@ acre ( 11 ha ) estate on which he kept a large number of pigs . 
 = = = Industrial decline and modern development = = = 
 By the late 19th century the village was in steep decline . In 1894 , Whellan described Carr Hill as " a scattered village , which ... was dotted with windmills , now fallen into ruins , as are many of the houses . " Carr Hill Pottery had operated throughout the 19th century , but the once thriving pottery had by 1860 become little more than a cottage industry , employing a mere 8 employees and paying just £ 15 per annum in rent . Ownership subsequently transferred to Thomas Patterson , of neighbouring Sheriff Hill Pottery , who eventually closed the Carr Hill works in 1893 . The buildings were demolished completely in 1932 ; only the Old Brown Jug public house and a street named in honour of Warburton survive as reminders of the area 's rich pottery heritage . Carr Hill Quarry on Elgin Quarry was infilled and replaced by a school , and although the windmills still stood , none operated as a going concern by 1890 , and were instead used as tenement property or storehouses Carr Hill Mill was demolished between 1919 and 1939 as was the last remaining mill in 1963 . Elliot 's glassworks suffered a similar fate , closing in about 1900 and demolished in 1932 . Carr Hill House fell into disrepair and was demolished in 1921 . Carr Hill Reservoir survived until 1973 , but by then the whole of Gateshead and Newcastle were supplied by the Newcastle and Water Company from <unk> and Whittle Dene in Northumberland and it had become redundant , and was covered soon after . 
 Carr Hill today is shaped by the housing development of the 20th century . A building boom begun in Gateshead at the start of the 20th century ; large tracts of development at Deckham were matched by development in Carr Hill at Mafeking , Methuen and Baden Powell Streets . In 1911 an offer to build Sutton Dwellings was made to Gateshead Council and was staunchly rebuffed and in 1917 Parliament made a further proposal which was again rejected . However , a Gateshead Council survey concluded in 1919 that " overcrowding in Gateshead was at dangerous levels , that landlords were scrimping on repairs and improvements " and that housing levels were unsustainable in light of rapid population growth . When in February 1919 the Town Improvement Committee recommended the purchase of 214 acres ( 0 @.@ 87 km2 ; 0 @.@ 334 sq mi ) of land between Dryden Road at Low Fell and Carr Hill under the Housing Act 1919 , the Council finally yielded and purchased 65 acres ( 0 @.@ 26 km2 ; 0 @.@ 102 sq mi ) of land in Carr Hill and Sheriff Hill at the cost of £ 19 @,@ 000 . The result was that , in 1921 , a large council estate was built in Carr Hill at Iona Road and the surrounding areas . The estate remains largely unchanged and shapes the suburb today , with only the width of Carr Hill Road ( indicating a village green ) , the ' Old Brown Jug ' inn and some stone cottages at Co @-@ Operative Terrace remaining of the industrial village which once stood in its stead . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Carr Hill is in the council ward of Deckham in the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead . This ward is approximately 1 @.@ 5 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 58 sq mi ) in area and has a population of 9 @,@ 228 . It is represented by three councillors . In June 2012 , they were Brian Coates , Martin Gannon and Bernadette Oliphant . 
 Carr Hill is part of the Westminster parliamentary constituency of Gateshead . It was previously in the Gateshead East and Washington West constituency which was abolished by boundary changes before the 2010 UK General Election . For many years the MP was Joyce Quin , who retired on 11 April 2005 and was awarded a life peerage into the House of Lords on 13 June 2006 and is now Baroness Quin . 
 The present MP Ian Mearns , is a member of the Labour party and his office is in Gateshead . He replaced Sharon Hodgson who successfully campaigned in the newly formed constituency of Washington and Sunderland West . In the 2010 UK General Election , Mearns was elected with a majority of 12 @,@ 549 over Frank Hindle . The swing from Labour to the Liberal Democrats was 3 @.@ 9 % . 
 Carr Hill is in a safe Labour seat . Mearns ' success in 2010 followed of Sharon Hodgson , who in the 2005 UK General Election polled over 60 % of the votes cast whilst in 2001 , Joyce Quin was returned with a majority of 53 @.@ 3 % . 
 = = Geography and topography = = 
 Carr Hill , at latitude 54 @.@ <unk> and longitude − 1 @.@ <unk> , is " pleasantly situated " 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) south @-@ east of Gateshead and 255 miles ( 410 km ) from London . It lies on a bed of sandstone and clay and the land is steep in places , slopes from south to north and reaches a height of around 140 metres ( 460 ft ) above sea level at the southern fringes . This distinctive , steep topography means that Carr Hill sits atop " a lofty hill " and , where not spoiled by house building , this provides residents with good views to Newcastle upon Tyne in the north , the north @-@ west and north @-@ east towards the North Sea . Around 25 % of the land is open space and 70 % residential . 
 Documents indicate that the settlement boundaries lie at the Split Crow Road in the north , Nursery Lane to the east , Hendon Road to the west and Sheriff Hill to the south . Carr Hill was part of County Durham until it was incorporated into the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead by the Local Government Act 1972 . It is now bordered by settlements which are also part of the metropolitan borough . These are Sheriff Hill to the south , Deckham to the west , Felling to the north and Windy Nook to the east . 
 The climate in Carr Hill is temperate like much of the north east of England . The mean highest temperature , at 12 @.@ 8 ° C ( 55 @.@ 0 ° F ) , is slightly lower than the England average ( 13 @.@ 1 ° C ( 55 @.@ 6 ° F ) ) though the mean lowest temperature , at 7 @.@ 2 ° C ( 45 @.@ 0 ° F ) , is somewhat higher ( 5 @.@ 6 ° C ( 42 @.@ 1 ° F ) ) . The total annual rainfall , at 643 @.@ 1 millimetres ( 25 @.@ 32 in ) , is significantly lower than the national average of 838 @.@ 7 millimetres ( 33 @.@ 02 in ) . 
 = = Demography = = 
 According to the United Kingdom Census 2001 , Carr Hill has an approximate population of 3 @,@ 200 – 53 % of the population are female , slightly above the national average , whilst 47 % are male . Only 1 @.@ 4 % of the population are from a black or other minority ethnic group ( BME ) , as opposed to 9 @.@ 1 % of the national population . Relatively few pensioners live in the suburb , 12 @.@ 2 % as compared to 15 @.@ 9 % nationally and 17 @.@ 3 % in the borough . 
 Carr Hill Nook has a high proportion of lone parent households at some 19 @.@ 3 % of all households . This is the fourth highest figure in Gateshead and compares with a borough average of 11 @.@ 5 % . Some 36 @.@ 9 % of households have dependent children , as opposed to 29 @.@ 5 % nationally and 28 @.@ 4 % in Gateshead . This is also the fourth @-@ highest figure in Gateshead . The Index of Multiple Deprivation , which divides England into 32 @,@ 482 areas and measures quality of life to indicate deprivation , splits Carr Hill into halves and lists one half in the top 5 % of all deprived areas in England in 2008 . The other half is listed in the top 20 % of all deprived areas . 
 In 2011 , Carr Hill had a population of 3 @,@ 465 , compared with 9 @,@ 938 for the wider Deckham ward . 
 Carr Hill is an area of Deckham and a sub area of the town of Gateshead . In 2011 , 6 @.@ 4 % of the population were non white <unk> , compared with 7 @.@ 7 % for the wider area and ward of Deckham . The ward is split into three sub districts , Central Deckham , Carr Hill and Mount Pleasant . Carr Hill is in the south of the ward and is less ethnically diverse than Mount Pleasant and Central Deckham . But the area is more so than nearby Pelaw and Windy Nook . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The decline of industry in Carr Hill and the rapid building of residential property transformed the village into a residential estate . There is a small commercial area at the junction of Carr Hill Road and Pottersway , which provides some employment and which has become a " social landmark " , but there is no major employer . A Tesco Extra store at the eastern fringe of the boundary with Windy Nook opened in 2012 and also provides employment to residents . 
 Carr Hill performs poorly in comparison to the wider borough in terms of economic activity and opportunity . Some 42 % of children in the ward live in poverty , the second @-@ highest figure in Gateshead . The adult unemployment rate is 7 % , compared to 5 % borough @-@ wide , the joint third @-@ highest figure in Gateshead . Youth unemployment is 10 % , also the joint third @-@ highest in the borough . The income of residents is £ 24 @,@ 000 ; £ 3 @,@ 000 below the regional median . Carr Hill has only 70 VAT @-@ registered businesses , compared to a borough average of 230 . Only 2 @.@ 6 % of residents are self @-@ employed , compared to 4 @.@ 5 % of the borough and 8 @.@ 3 % nationally . Overall , Carr Hill falls within the most deprived 20 % of regions in England according to the Index of Multiple Deprivation in 2010 . 
 = = Leisure and recreation = = 
 There are no libraries in Carr Hill , though Gateshead Central Library , the largest in the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead , is nearby . Gateshead Leisure Centre in Shipcote and Saltwell Park are close by . 
 = = = Parks = = = 
 There are two parks in Carr Hill . The first is Carr Hill Park , a small play area at the junction of Northway and Carr Hill Road known by locals as " the Top Park " Previously an under @-@ used resource , the play area was rebuilt in 2009 – 10 at a cost of £ 148 @,@ 000 . It now includes spring @-@ mounted play items , rope walks and other play equipment , whilst improvements to lighting , pathways and drainage to the football area were made . The park has become a valuable social open area ; in April 2011 it hosted a ' community play ' event , organised by Gateshead Council to encourage physical activity , attended by almost one hundred residents whilst in 2010 it hosted the first annual " Mark Turner Memorial Day " ; a fundraising event begun after Turner , a Sheriff Hill resident , was killed whilst on duty in Afghanistan . Around 1 @,@ 000 guests attended , including Michael Hood , the Mayor of Gateshead . 
 The second park is Carr Hill Reservoir Park , which occupies the site of the covered reservoir at Carr Hill and Ruskin Roads . This is a larger park containing a play area and contained sports area paid for by fundraising by local residents . There is also a full @-@ size football pitch , which is the base of Sheriff Hill Football Club ; a mixed @-@ sex club of around 125 players which is substantially funded by Gateshead Council . 
 = = = Venues = = = 
 There is some evidence that there were at least two inns during the 18th century , although their precise locations and names are unknown . In 1827 , Parson and White 's Directory listed the Brown Jug , adjoining Carr Hill Pottery at Carr Hill Lane and it is likely that this venue is one of those earlier inns . The second is likely the Old Fellows Inn , located near the Brown Jug at Carr Hill Lane , listed in 1844 , but later listed as ' The Free Gardeners Arms " . By 1856 , both the Brown Jug and the Free Gardeners Arms were well established and thriving and continued to prosper well into the 20th century , under the slightly different names of The Old Brown Jug and The Gardeners Arms . 
 Despite one document referring to both as " social landmarks " , they have experienced a significant downturn in recent years and their future is extremely uncertain . The Brown Jug has been closed and derelict for several years ; in 2009 an application was made to convert the property into a block of six apartments . Although the application was declined , the pub and surrounding locale became something of a " no @-@ go " area , and a new application by Yorkshire Homes to convert the public house into a single residential property was approved in 2011 . The Gardeners Arms continued to trade until 2011 but was vacant when , on 1 July 2012 , the inn was gutted by fire . It was immediately put up for sale by the owners . 
 = = Culture and community = = 
 There are no structures listed by English Heritage in Carr Hill , although the buildings at 179 – 185 Carr Hill Road were listed locally by Gateshead Council ; in 2004 Our Lady of the Annunciation Church was added to the local list . 
 = = = The Elgin Centre = = = 
 The Elgin Centre , on Elgin Road at the south – east boundary between Deckham and Carr Hill , provides " the key cluster " of community provisions for residents . These facilities contribute to the regeneration of the suburb . 
 The facilities are utilised by the Route 26 Community Project , a registered charity based at the centre that works towards the betterment of lives in Deckham and neighbouring wards . The project works with Gateshead Council and the Gateshead Housing Company to provide a community cafe promoting healthy eating ( the T – Junction ) , a gymnasium , indoor sports hall , outdoor Five @-@ a @-@ side football pitches and a meeting place for resident groups . The project has education provision for young children as a registered day – care provider and it also offers adult education and training . The project hosts the Carnival on the Hill / Deckham Festival , a collaborative enterprise between Route 26 , Gateshead Council and Home Group , offering free activities such as go @-@ karting and children 's soft play , against the backdrop of a steel band . The second Carnival on the Hill was held on 3 September 2011 and attracted more than 1 @,@ 000 visitors , including the Mayor of Gateshead and BBC local weatherman Paul Mooney . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The principal roads in Carr Hill are the local distributors : Carr Hill Road to the south , Coldwell Lane in the east and Nursery Lane , which bisects the suburb centrally . Journey time by car or bus to Gateshead town centre is ten minutes and fifteen minutes into the centre of Newcastle upon Tyne . Residents have a comparatively low level of car ownership , 46 @.@ 9 % as compared to a borough average of 56 @.@ 8 % . Some 27 @.@ 3 % of residents travel to work by public transport . 
 Carr Hill is on a bus route into Gateshead and Newcastle upon Tyne served by two bus services : the Orbit 51 , which travels to Heworth Interchange and terminates at Gateshead , and the 68 . All buses serving Carr Hill are operated by Go North East under the administration of Nexus . 
 The nearest Metro station is Felling , and the nearest railway station is Heworth Interchange . The nearest airport is Newcastle International Airport , some 7 @.@ 4 miles ( 11 @.@ 9 km ) away . 
 = = Education = = 
 Carr Hill Community Primary School , at the western end of Carr Hill on Carr Hill Road , caters for pupils in the 3 – 11 age range . It is a larger than average school where almost two thirds of the pupils are eligible for schools meals , well above the national average . The school has made steady and sustained improvement ; in 2008 an OFSTED inspection found the school to be " good " and in 2010 the school was rated ' outstanding ' , with excellent teaching and leadership noted and praised . Carr Hill Primary is the only school in the suburb , after Elgin Secondary Technical School , built in 1962 , was closed in the 1990s . The majority of children aged 11 – 16 now will attend Thomas Hepburn Community Academy in Felling . 
 Carr Hill compares unfavourably with the wider Gateshead area in respect of adults with educational qualifications . 43 @.@ 5 % of adults have no educational qualifications , compared to 38 @.@ 4 % across the whole of Gateshead and the England average of 28 @.@ 9 % . Only 30 @.@ 4 % of adults have five or more GCSE 's or equivalent at A * – C ( compared to 36 @.@ 9 % across Gateshead and 47 @.@ 6 % nationally ) whilst 13 @.@ 4 % of adults in the suburb have two or more A @-@ Level 's or equivalent . 
 = = Religion = = 
 According to the 2001 UK census , 78 @.@ 9 % of Carr Hill residents identify themselves as Christian . This is marginally less than the regional average of 80 @.@ 1 % but is higher than the national figure of 71 @.@ 7 % . About 0 @.@ 1 % of residents identify as Buddhist , slightly fewer as Sikh , 0 @.@ 4 % as Muslim , and around 0 @.@ 2 % with another unstated religion . No residents identified themselves as Jewish or Hindu . The percentage of residents who have " no religion " is 13 @.@ 6 % ; 6 @.@ 7 % of residents did not state any religion . 
 = = = Our Lady of the Annunciation Church = = = 
 Built in 1950 , this modern , Roman Catholic church is located at <unk> , and is the only place of worship in the suburb . It was also a social hub , hosting regular events such as Christmas <unk> . In 2009 however , parish priest David Taylor was arrested in connection with a number of indecent assaults on young boys in his care and was suspended from his joint parish of St Peter 's , Low Fell and the Annunciation . Taylor admitted five charges at Durham Crown Court in 2009 and was given a prison sentence . On 20 April 2012 , a final mass was held by the Bishop of Hexham and Newcastle and the church was closed . As of 2012 the building remains standing , although property company GVA are inviting tenders for the church and adjoining land . 
 = = = Academic and other texts = = = 
 = Keen Johnson = 
 Keen Johnson ( January 12 , 1896 – February 7 , 1970 ) was the 45th Governor of Kentucky , serving from 1939 to 1943 ; being the only journalist to have held that office . After serving in World War I , Johnson purchased and edited the Elizabethtown Mirror newspaper . He revived the struggling paper , sold it to a competitor and used the profits to obtain his journalism degree from the University of Kentucky in 1922 . After graduation , he became editor of The Anderson News , and in 1925 , he accepted an offer to co @-@ publish and edit the Richmond Daily Register . 
 In 1935 , Johnson was chosen as the Democratic nominee for lieutenant governor . He was elected and served under Governor A. B. " Happy " Chandler from 1935 to 1939 . He had already secured the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in 1939 when Chandler resigned and elevated Johnson to governor so that Johnson could appoint Chandler to the U.S. Senate seat vacated by the death of M. M. Logan . He went on to win a full gubernatorial term in the general election , defeating Republican King Swope . Johnson 's desire to expand the state 's social services was hampered by the financial strain imposed on the state by the outbreak of World War II . Nevertheless , he ran a fiscally conservative administration and took the state from being $ 7 million in debt to having a surplus of $ 10 million by the end of his term . 
 Following his term as governor , Johnson joined Reynolds Metals as a special assistant to the president . He continued his employment with Reynolds until 1961 . He took a year @-@ long leave of absence in 1946 to accept President Harry S. Truman 's appointment as the first U.S. Undersecretary of Labor , serving under Lewis B. Schwellenbach . He unsuccessfully ran for a seat in the U.S. Senate in 1960 , losing to incumbent Republican John Sherman Cooper . He died February 7 , 1970 , and was buried in Richmond Cemetery in Richmond , Kentucky . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Keen Johnson was born in a two @-@ room cabin at Brandon 's Chapel in Lyon County , Kentucky , on January 12 , 1896 . He was the only son of Reverend Robert and Mattie ( Holloway ) Johnson . His parents named him in honor of John S. Keen , a family friend from Adair County . The Johnsons also had two daughters — Catherine ( Keturah ) and Christine . Robert Johnson was a Methodist minister , and the family moved often as a result of his occupation . 
 After completing his elementary education in the public schools , Johnson attended Vanderbilt Preparatory School for Boys , a Methodist institution in Elkton , Kentucky . He finished his preparatory coursework in 1914 and matriculated to Central Methodist College in Fayette , Missouri . He had intended to continue his studies at the University of Missouri School of Journalism , but he interrupted his studies to enlist in the U.S. Army for service in World War I. 
 After basic training , Johnson entered officer training at Fort Riley on May 15 , 1917 . In August 1917 , he was appointed second lieutenant and assigned to the 354th Infantry , 89th Division of the American Expeditionary Forces at Camp Funston . He was promoted to first lieutenant on March 29 , 1918 , and on June 4 , 1918 , he was deployed to France , where he studied logistical communications at the Army School of the Line and Staff College . He remained in Europe with the American Expeditionary Force until April 1919 and was honorably discharged from the Army on October 31 , 1919 . 
 On June 23 , 1917 , while still completing his military training , Johnson married Eunice Nichols . Their only child , a daughter named Judith , was born May 19 , 1927 . Upon his return from military service , Johnson purchased the Elizabethtown Mirror with financial assistance from his father . He built the struggling paper almost from the ground up , and a competitor soon bought him out for a profit . Johnson used the profit from the sale of the Mirror to continue his education at the University of Kentucky . While a student , he worked as a reporter for the Lexington Herald . He received his Bachelor of Arts degree in journalism in 1922 . The university awarded him an honorary Doctor of Laws degree in 1940 . 
 After graduation , Johnson purchased half @-@ ownership of The Anderson News and served as the paper 's editor and publisher . In 1925 , Shelton M. <unk> asked Johnson to enter into a joint venture to purchase the Richmond Daily Register . Lured by the idea of publishing a daily paper , Johnson accepted . As a result of one of his editorials , Johnson was named executive secretary of the State Democratic Central Committee in 1932 . He continued to hold this position and publish the Register through 1939 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1935 , Johnson was one of three contenders for the Democratic nomination for lieutenant governor . In the primary , he received more votes than his opponents , J. E. Wise and B. F. Wright , but a newly enacted election law required a runoff if no candidate received a majority . On September 7 , Johnson defeated Wise in the runoff . 
 In the gubernatorial primary , A. B. " Happy " Chandler defeated Tom Rhea , the candidate favored by sitting governor Ruby Laffoon . Johnson had also favored Rhea , and had backed Robert T. Crowe over J. C. W. Beckham , Chandler 's choice in the 1927 Democratic primary . Nevertheless , the two put aside their differences and won the general election . Chandler defeated Republican King Swope by over 95 @,@ 000 votes , and Johnson defeated J. J. Kavanaugh by over 100 @,@ 000 votes . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 The division between Chandler and Laffoon led to factionalism within the state Democratic Party . When no strong gubernatorial candidate emerged from the Chandler faction in 1939 , Chandler threw his support behind Johnson . John Y. Brown , Sr. announced he would challenge Johnson in the primary . This solidified the Chandler faction 's support , as Brown was an outspoken critic of the Chandler administration . Brown gained the support of Chandler critics , notably former governor Ruby Laffoon , Tom Rhea , Earle C. Clements , and Alben Barkley . He further garnered the support of the United Mine Workers and labor boss John L. Lewis . It was to no avail , as Johnson defeated Brown in the primary by over 33 @,@ 000 votes to secure the Democratic gubernatorial nomination . 
 The Republicans chose King Swope , the loser in the 1935 gubernatorial election , to oppose Johnson . In the middle of the campaign , however , Johnson was elevated to governor . United States Senator M. M. Logan died in October 1939 , and Governor Chandler resigned so that Johnson — thus elevated to governor — could appoint him to the vacant seat . In the general election on November 17 , Johnson defeated Swope 460 @,@ 834 to 354 @,@ 704 , securing a full term as governor . 
 In his inaugural address , Johnson promised to be " a saving , thrifty , frugal governor " . His policies helped him eliminate the state 's debt of $ 7 million and left the treasury with a surplus of $ 10 million by the end of his term . It was the first time the state had had a surplus since the administration of J. C. W. Beckham in 1903 . Johnson achieved the surplus without enacting any tax increases . Not all in Johnson 's party were happy with his approach to governing ; one critic noted , " Old Keen frugaled here and frugaled there till he damn near frugaled us to death . " 
 Louisville Courier @-@ Journal reporter Howard Henderson wrote several stories exposing corruption in Johnson 's administration , including a significant one dealing with laundry contracts . Hubert Meredith , Johnson 's politically ambitious attorney general , freely aired his concerns about the administration , gaining recognition for himself from the publicity generated . Historian James C. Klotter opined " It is doubtful whether Johnson 's administration had any more political scandal than others , but the publicity made it seem that way . " 
 In the 1940 legislative session , Johnson successfully lobbied the General Assembly to allocate money to a teacher retirement system that had previously been authorized but left unfunded . Despite his fiscally conservative nature , he increased funds to programs to assist the elderly by $ 1 million per year . Other accomplishments of the session included the provision of pensions for justices on the Kentucky Court of Appeals , creation of soil conservation districts in the state , and banning the sale of marijuana . 
 Johnson 's primary interest lay in improving the state 's mental and penal institutions . These improvements began under Governor Chandler , and while Johnson stated that the mental hospitals and prisons were in their best condition in forty years by the end of his term , he was disappointed that he was not able to do more . In light of the financial obligations brought about by World War II , he had to curb state construction . 
 In the 1941 legislative session , Johnson vetoed a measure allowing the sale of alcoholic beverages to surrounding states , even those with laws forbidding alcohol sales . The bill was very popular , and was supported by many of the state 's powerful special interests . It had passed the Kentucky House of Representatives by a vote of 84 – 0 and the Kentucky Senate by a vote of 31 – 3 . After Johnson 's veto , the House reversed itself , voting 86 – 3 to sustain the veto . 
 In the 1942 legislative session , Johnson stressed the importance of allowing Kentucky cities to purchase and distribute power from the Tennessee Valley Authority . In an address to the Assembly , Johnson declared , " I have never had a stronger conviction on a question of public policy ... The principle involved is as correct as the Ten Commandments . " The Assembly passed the necessary legislation as Johnson requested . 
 A major accomplishment of the Johnson administration was the passage of a legislative redistricting bill . Despite the fact that the U.S. Constitution requires redistricting after every decennial census , Kentucky 's legislative districts had remained virtually unchanged between 1893 and 1941 . He asked the 1942 legislative session to adjourn early so he could call a special session for the sole purpose of considering a redistricting bill . The legislators obliged , and passed a bill by the end of the special session . 
 Johnson took an active part in the Democratic gubernatorial primary in 1943 . Among the candidates were Ben Kilgore , Rodes K. Myers , and J. Lyter Donaldson . Myers was Johnson 's lieutenant governor , but he had turned on the administration . Johnson called him a carpetbagger from North Carolina , " a political adventurer " , and " a phony farmer " . He also ridiculed Kilgore , who had strong support from the Louisville Courier @-@ Journal , the Rural Electric Association , and the Farm Bureau , by calling him a " Casanova " . Donaldson , Johnson 's former campaign manager , secured his support and the Democratic nomination . He was defeated in the general election by Republican Simeon Willis . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Beginning in 1940 , Johnson was a member of the State Democratic National Committee , serving until 1948 . On June 6 , 1942 , he was named to the board of regents of Eastern State College ( now Eastern Kentucky University or EKU ) , a position he held for eight years . EKU 's Keen Johnson Building , a 1939 Works Progress Administration project , was named in honor of him . The building and its clock tower is one of the most recognizable landmarks on the university 's campus . 
 On January 1 , 1944 , he was named a special assistant to the president of Reynolds Metals , advising him on postwar unemployment problems . He became vice @-@ president of public relations for the company in 1945 . 
 Johnson developed a strong rapport with union leaders and in 1946 , President Harry S. Truman and Kentucky Senator Alben Barkley asked him to accept an appointment to the newly created post of Undersecretary of Labor . In August 1946 , Johnson took a leave of absence from Reynolds and accepted the appointment . He frequently attended President Truman 's cabinet meetings due to the illness of Secretary Lewis B. Schwellenbach . 
 In mid @-@ 1947 , Johnson returned to Reynolds . In 1950 , he became a member of the company 's board of directors . In this capacity , he organized meetings of sales executives and traveled extensively to promote the company 's aluminum products . He retired from Reynolds in January 1961 . 
 In 1960 , Johnson sought a seat in the U.S. Senate . He defeated John Y. Brown , Sr. in the Democratic primary , but was unable to unseat Republican incumbent John Sherman Cooper in the general election . In 1961 and 1964 , he was appointed to the state board of education . He served as a delegate to an assembly to revise the state constitution in 1964 . In 1965 , the University of Kentucky honored him with a Centennial Award and inducted him into its Hall of Distinguished Alumni . He died February 7 , 1970 in Richmond , Kentucky , and is buried in Richmond Cemetery . 
 = Wish You Were Here ( Pink Floyd album ) = 
 Wish You Were Here is the ninth studio album by the English rock band Pink Floyd , released in September 1975 . Inspired by material the group composed while performing across Europe , Wish You Were Here was recorded in numerous sessions at London 's Abbey Road Studios . Some of the songs critique the music business , others express alienation , and " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " is a tribute to Syd Barrett , whose mental breakdown had forced him to leave the group seven years earlier . It was lead writer Roger Waters ' idea to split " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " into two parts and use it to bookend the album around three new compositions , introducing a new concept as the group had done with their previous album , The Dark Side of the Moon . 
 As with The Dark Side of the Moon , the band used studio effects and synthesizers , and brought in guest singers to supply vocals on some tracks of the album . These singers were Roy Harper , who provided the lead vocals on " Have a Cigar " , and The <unk> , who added backing vocals to " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " . The album became an instant commercial success and record company EMI was unable to print enough copies to satisfy demand . Although it initially received mixed reviews , the album has since been acclaimed by critics and appears on Rolling Stone 's list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . Band members Richard Wright and David Gilmour have each cited Wish You Were Here as their favourite Pink Floyd album . 
 = = Background = = 
 During 1974 , Pink Floyd sketched out three new compositions , " Raving and Drooling " , " You Gotta Be Crazy " and " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " . These songs were performed during a series of concerts in France and England , the band 's first tour since 1973 's The Dark Side of the Moon . As Pink Floyd had never employed a publicist and kept themselves distant from the press , their relationship with the media began to sour . Following the publication by NME of a negative critique of the band 's new material , written by Nick Kent ( a devotee of Syd Barrett ) and Pete Erskine , the band returned to the studio in the first week of 1975 . 
 = = Concept = = 
 Wish You Were Here is the second Pink Floyd album to use a conceptual theme written entirely by Roger Waters . It reflects his feeling that the camaraderie that had served the band was , by then , largely absent . The album begins with a long instrumental preamble and segues into the lyrics for " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " , a tribute to Syd Barrett , whose mental breakdown had forced him to leave the group seven years earlier . Barrett is fondly recalled with lines such as " Remember when you were young , you shone like the sun " and " You reached for the secret too soon , you cried for the moon " . 
 Wish You Were Here is also a critique of the music business . " Shine On " crosses seamlessly into " Welcome to the Machine " , a song that begins with an opening door ( described by Waters as a symbol of musical discovery and progress betrayed by a music industry more interested in greed and success ) and ends with a party , the latter epitomising " the lack of contact and real feelings between people " . Similarly , " Have a Cigar " scorns record industry " <unk> " with the lyrics repeating a stream of cliches heard by rising new @-@ comers in the industry , and including the question " by the way , which one 's Pink ? " asked of the band on at least one occasion . The lyrics of the next song , " Wish You Were Here " , relate both to Barrett 's condition , and to the dichotomy of Waters ' character , with greed and ambition battling with compassion and idealism . The album closes with a reprise of " Shine On " and further instrumental excursions . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Alan Parsons , EMI staff engineer for Pink Floyd 's previous studio album , The Dark Side of the Moon , had declined the band 's offer to continue working with them ( Parsons became successful in his own right with The Alan Parsons Project ) . The group had worked with engineer Brian Humphries on More , recorded at Pye Studios , and again in 1974 when he replaced an inexperienced concert engineer . Humphries was therefore the natural choice to work on the band 's new material , although as a stranger to EMI 's Abbey Road set @-@ up he encountered some early difficulties . On one occasion , Humphries inadvertently spoiled the backing tracks for " Shine On " , a piece that Waters and drummer Nick Mason had spent many hours perfecting , with echo . The entire piece had to be re @-@ recorded . 
 The sessions for Wish You Were Here at Abbey Road 's Studio Three lasted from January until July 1975 , recording on four days each week from 2 : 30 P.M. until very late in the evening . The group found it difficult at first to devise any new material , especially as the success of The Dark Side of the Moon had left all four physically and emotionally drained . Keyboardist Richard Wright later described these sessions as " falling within a difficult period " , and Waters recalled them as " torturous " . Mason found the process of multi @-@ track recording drawn out and tedious , while David Gilmour was more interested in improving the band 's existing material . Gilmour was also becoming increasingly frustrated with Mason , whose failing marriage had brought on a general malaise and sense of apathy , both of which interfered with his drumming . Mason has since stated that Nick Kent 's criticism in the NME may have had some influence in keeping the band together . 
 It was a very difficult period I have to say . All your childhood dreams had been sort of realised and we had the biggest selling records in the world and all the things you got into it for . The girls and the money and the fame and all that stuff it was all ... everything had sort of come our way and you had to reassess what you were in it for thereafter , and it was a pretty confusing and sort of empty time for a while ... 
 Humphries said his point of view of these struggled sessions in a 2014 interview : “ There were days when we didn ’ t do anything . I don ’ t think they knew what they wanted to do . We had a <unk> and an air rifle and we ’ d play these word games , sit around , get drunk , go home and return the next day . That ’ s all we were doing until suddenly everything started falling into place . ” 
 After several weeks , Waters began to visualise another concept . The three new compositions from 1974 's tour were at least a starting point for a new album , and " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " seemed a reasonable choice as a centrepiece for the new work . Mostly an instrumental twenty @-@ minute @-@ plus piece similar to " Echoes " , the opening four @-@ note guitar phrase reminded Waters of the lingering ghost of former band @-@ member Syd Barrett . Gilmour had composed the phrase entirely by accident , but was encouraged by Waters ' positive response . Waters wanted to split " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " , and sandwich two new songs between its two halves . Gilmour disagreed , but was outvoted three to one . " Welcome to the Machine " and " Have a Cigar " were barely veiled attacks on the music business , their lyrics working neatly with " Shine On " to provide an apt summary of the rise and fall of Barrett ; " Because I wanted to get as close as possible to what I felt ... that sort of indefinable , inevitable melancholy about the disappearance of Syd . " " Raving and Drooling " and " You Gotta Be Crazy " had no place in the new concept , and were set aside until the following album , 1977 's Animals . 
 = = = Syd Barrett 's visit to the studio = = = 
 One of the more notable events during the recording of Wish You Were Here occurred on 5 June 1975 , the day Gilmour married his first wife , Ginger , on the eve of Pink Floyd 's second US tour that year . The band were in the process of completing the final mix of " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " when an overweight man with shaven head and eyebrows , and holding a plastic bag , entered the room . Waters , who was working in the studio , initially did not recognise him . Wright was also mystified by the identity of the visitor , presumed he was a friend of Waters ' and asked him , but soon realised that it was Syd Barrett . Gilmour initially presumed he was an EMI staff member . Mason also failed to recognise him and was " horrified " when Gilmour identified him . In Mason 's personal memoir of Pink Floyd , Inside Out , he recalled Barrett 's conversation as " desultory and not entirely sensible " . Storm Thorgerson later reflected on Barrett 's presence : " Two or three people cried . He sat round and talked for a bit but he wasn 't really there . " 
 Waters was reportedly reduced to tears by the sight of his former bandmate , who was asked by fellow visitor Andrew King how he had managed to gain so much weight . Barrett said he had a large refrigerator in his kitchen , and that he had been eating lots of pork chops . He also mentioned that he was ready to avail the band of his services , but while listening to the mix of " Shine On " , showed no signs of understanding its relevance to his plight . He joined the guests at Gilmour 's wedding reception in the EMI canteen , but left without saying goodbye . None of the band members saw him from that day on until his death in 2006 . Although the lyrics had already been created , Barrett 's presence on that day may have influenced the final part of the song – a subtle refrain performed by Wright from " See Emily Play " is audible towards the end of the album . 
 I 'm very sad about Syd . Of course he was important and the band would never have fucking started without him because he was writing all the material . It couldn 't have happened without him but on the other hand it couldn 't have gone on with him . " Shine On " is not really about Syd – he 's just a symbol for all the extremes of absence some people have to indulge in because it 's the only way they can cope with how fucking sad it is , modern life , to withdraw completely . I found that terribly sad . 
 = = = Instrumentation = = = 
 As in The Dark Side of the Moon , the band used synthesizers such as the EMS VCS 3 ( on " Welcome to the Machine " ) , but softened with Gilmour 's acoustic guitar and percussion from Mason . The start of " Shine On " contains remnants from a previous but incomplete studio recording by the band known as " Household Objects " . Wine glasses had been filled with varying amounts of fluid , and recordings were made of a wet finger circling the edge of each glass . These recordings were multi @-@ tracked into chords , and used in the opening of " Shine On " . 
 Jazz violinist Stéphane <unk> and classical violinist Yehudi Menuhin were performing in another studio in the building , and were invited to record a piece for the new album . Menuhin watched as <unk> played on the song " Wish You Were Here " ; however , the band later decided his contribution was unsuitable and , until 2011 , it was believed that the piece had been wiped . It turns out his playing was included on the album , but so low in the final mix that the band presumed it would be insulting to credit him . He was paid £ 300 for his contribution ( equivalent to £ 2 @,@ 300 in 2016 ) . Dick Parry again played saxophone , on " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " . The opening bars of " Wish You Were Here " were recorded from Gilmour 's car radio , with somebody turning the dial ( the classical music heard is the finale of Tchaikovsky 's Fourth Symphony ) . 
 = = = Vocals = = = 
 Recording sessions had twice been interrupted by US tours ( one in April and the other in June 1975 ) , and the final sessions , which occurred after the band 's performance at Knebworth , proved particularly troublesome for Waters . He struggled to record the vocals for " Have a Cigar " , requiring several takes to perform an acceptable version . His problems stemmed in part from the stresses placed upon his voice while recording the lead vocals of " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " . Gilmour was asked to sing in his place , but declined , and eventually colleague and friend Roy Harper was asked to stand in . Harper was recording his own album in another of Abbey Road 's studios , and Gilmour had already performed some guitar licks for him . Waters later regretted the decision , believing he should have performed the song . The <unk> recorded backing vocals for " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 Wish You Were Here was sold in one of the more elaborate packages to accompany a Pink Floyd album . Storm Thorgerson had accompanied the band on their 1974 tour , and had given serious thought to the meaning of the lyrics , eventually deciding that the songs were , in general , concerned with " unfulfilled presence " , rather than Barrett 's illness . This theme of absence was reflected in the ideas produced by his long hours spent brainstorming with the band . Thorgerson had noted that Roxy Music 's Country Life was sold in an opaque green cellophane sleeve – censoring the cover image – and he copied the idea , concealing the artwork for Wish You Were Here in a black @-@ coloured shrink @-@ wrap ( therefore making the album art " absent " ) . The concept behind " Welcome to the Machine " and " Have a Cigar " suggested the use of a handshake ( an often empty gesture ) , and George Hardie designed a sticker containing the album 's logo of two mechanical hands engaged in a handshake , to be placed on the opaque sleeve ( the mechanical handshake logo would also appear on the labels of the vinyl album this time in a black and blue background ) . The album 's cover images were photographed by Aubrey ' Po ' Powell , Storm 's partner at the Pink Floyd design studio Hipgnosis and was inspired by the idea that people tend to conceal their true feelings , for fear of " getting burned " , and thus two businessmen were pictured shaking hands , one man on fire . " Getting burned " was also a common phrase in the music industry , used often by artists denied royalty payments . Two stuntmen were used ( Ronnie Rondell and Danny Rogers ) , one dressed in a fire @-@ retardant suit covered by a business suit . His head was protected by a hood , underneath a wig . The photograph was taken at the Warner Bros. studios in Los Angeles . Initially the wind was blowing in the wrong direction , and the flames were forced into Rondell 's face , burning his moustache . The two stuntmen changed positions , and the image was later reversed . Releases from 1975 to 2011 had the right man leaning backward , but with the 2011 reissue it was changed to have him leaning forward . The release of the album on Spotify had the cover with the mechanical handshake logo as the cover starting in 2011 , but it was changed to the actual cover in 2016 . 
 The album 's back cover depicts a faceless " Floyd salesman " , in Thorgerson 's words , " selling his soul " in the desert ( shot in the Yuma Desert in California again by Aubrey ' Po ' Powell ) . The absence of wrists and ankles signifies his presence as an " empty suit " . The inner sleeve shows a veil concealing a nude woman in a windswept Norfolk grove , and a splash @-@ less diver at Mono Lake – titled <unk> ( the German translation of Mono Lake ) on the liner notes – in California ( again emphasising the theme of absence ) . The decision to shroud the cover in black plastic was not popular with the band 's US record company , Columbia Records , who insisted that it be changed ( they were overruled ) . EMI were less concerned ; the band were reportedly extremely happy with the end product , and when presented with a pre @-@ production mockup , they accepted it with a spontaneous round of applause . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The band played much of Wish You Were Here on 5 July 1975 at the Knebworth music festival . Roy Harper , performing at the same event , on discovering that his stage costume was missing , proceeded to destroy one of Pink Floyd 's vans , injuring himself in the process . This delayed the normal setup procedure of the band 's sound system . As a pair of World War II Spitfire aircraft had been booked to fly over the crowd during their entrance , the band were not able to delay their set . The result was that a power supply problem pushed Wright 's keyboards completely out of tune , damaging the band 's performance . At one point he left the stage , but the band were able to continue with a less sensitive keyboard , a piano and a simpler light show . Following a brief intermission , they returned to perform The Dark Side of the Moon , but critics displeased about being denied access backstage savaged the performance . 
 The album was released on 12 September 1975 in the UK , and on the following day in the US . In Britain , with 250 @,@ 000 advance sales , it went straight to number one , and demand was such that EMI informed retailers that only 50 per cent of their orders would be fulfilled . With 900 @,@ 000 advance orders ( the largest for any Columbia release ) it reached number one on the US Billboard chart in its second week . Wish You Were Here was Pink Floyd 's fastest @-@ selling album ever . 
 On release , the album received mixed reviews . Ben Edmunds wrote in Rolling Stone : 
 Shine on You Crazy Diamond is initially credible because it purports to confront the subject of Syd Barrett , the long and probably forever lost guiding light of the original Floyd . But the potential of the idea goes unrealised ; they give such a matter @-@ of @-@ fact reading of the goddamn thing that they might as well be singing about Roger Waters 's brother @-@ in @-@ law getting a parking ticket . This lackadaisical demeanor forces , among other things , a reevaluation of their relationship to all the space cadet orchestras they unconsciously sired . The one thing those bands have going for them , in their <unk> inept way , is a sincere passion for their " art . " And passion is everything of which Pink Floyd is devoid . 
 Melody Maker 's reviewer similarly opined : " From whichever direction one approaches Wish You Were Here , it still sounds unconvincing in its ponderous sincerity and displays a critical lack of imagination in all departments . " 
 Robert Christgau thought highly of the album , however , writing in The Village Voice at the time : " The music is not only simple and attractive , with the synthesizer used mostly for texture and the guitar breaks for comment , but it actually achieves some of the symphonic dignity ( and cross @-@ referencing ) that The Dark Side of the Moon simulated so ponderously . " He later wrote : " My favorite Pink Floyd album has always been Wish You Were Here , and you know why ? It has soul , that 's why – it 's Roger Waters 's lament for Syd , not my idea of a tragic hero but as long as he 's Roger 's that doesn 't matter . " 
 According to Acclaimed Music , Wish You Were Here is the 185th most ranked record on critics ' all @-@ time lists . In 2012 , it was voted 211th on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . In 1998 Q readers voted Wish You Were Here the 34th greatest album of all time . In 2000 the same magazine placed it at number 43 in its list of the 100 Greatest British Albums Ever . In 2007 , one of Germany 's largest public radio stations , WDR 2 , asked its listeners to vote for the 200 best albums of all time . Wish You Were Here was voted number one . In 2004 Wish You Were Here was ranked number 36 on Pitchfork Media 's list of the Top 100 albums of the 1970s . IGN rated Wish You Were Here as the 8th greatest classic rock album . 
 Despite the problems during production , the album remained Wright 's favourite : " It 's an album I can listen to for pleasure , and there aren 't many Floyd albums that I can . " Gilmour shares this view : " I for one would have to say that it is my favourite album , the Wish You Were Here album . The end result of all that , whatever it was , definitely has left me an album I can live with very very happily . I like it very much . " 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Pink Floyd and their manager Steve O 'Rourke had been dissatisfied with the efforts of EMI 's US label Capitol Records , and Wish You Were Here was Pink Floyd 's first album with Columbia Records , an affiliate of CBS . The band remained with EMI 's Harvest Records in Europe . As a result of the label switch , the band gained ownership of their recordings , so that , from Wish You Were Here onward , every one of their albums has been copyrighted to either " Pink Floyd Music Limited " or ( after Waters ' departure ) " Pink Floyd ( 1987 ) Ltd . " instead of the corresponding record label . 
 The album was certified Silver and Gold ( 60 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 sales respectively ) in the UK on 1 August 1975 , and Gold in the US on 17 September 1975 . It was certified six times platinum on 16 May 1997 , and by 2004 has sold an estimated 13 million copies worldwide . " Have a Cigar " was chosen by Columbia as their first single , with " Welcome to the Machine " on the B @-@ side in the US . 
 = = Reissues and remastering = = 
 Wish You Were Here has been remastered and re @-@ released on several formats . In the UK and US the album was re @-@ issued in quadraphonic using the SQ format in 1976 , and in 1980 a special Hi @-@ Fi Today audiophile print was released in the UK . In the US it was released on CD in 1983 , and in the UK 1985 , and again as a remastered CD with new artwork in 1994 . In the US , Columbia 's CBS <unk> label released a half @-@ speed mastered audiophile LP in 1981 , and in 1994 Sony <unk> released a 24 @-@ carat gold @-@ plated CD , remastered using Super Bit Mapping , with the original artwork from the LP in both <unk> and jewel case forms , the latter with a cardboard slipcover . The album was included as part of the box set Shine On , and five years later Columbia Records released an updated remastered CD , 17 seconds longer than the EMI remasters from 1994 , giving a running time of 44 : 28 . Its label was a recreation of the original machine handshake logo , with a black and blue background . The album was subsequently re @-@ released in 2000 for its 25th anniversary , on the Capitol Records label in the US . The album was re @-@ released and remixed in 2011 in multiple editions as part of the Why Pink Floyd ... ? reissue campaign . The Wish You Were Here - Immersion Box Set includes the new stereo digital remaster ( 2011 ) by James Guthrie on CD , an unreleased 5 @.@ 1 Surround Mix ( 2009 ) by James Guthrie on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , a Quad Mix ( which had been released only on vinyl LP and 8 @-@ track tape ) on DVD , as well as the original stereo mix ( 1975 ) on DVD and Blu @-@ ray . This campaign also featured the 2011 stereo remaster on 180g heavyweight vinyl as well as the 2011 stereo remaster and the 5 @.@ 1 surround sound mix ( 2009 ) as a hybrid Super Audio CD ( SACD ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Roger Waters . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = M @-@ 211 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 211 is a state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula ( LP ) of Michigan that connects the community of Onaway with Onaway State Park . The highway runs through farmland and forests along the 5 @.@ 174 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 327 km ) route to the park . The trunkline was originally designated M @-@ 95 from 1919 until 1934 . In that year , the designation was moved to a different highway in the Upper Peninsula ( UP ) , and the state park connector was given the current number . The highway was last changed by 1960 when paving was completed . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 211 is a two @-@ lane highway that starts at M @-@ 68 in downtown Onaway . The trunkline runs north out of town on Main Street past business and residences . It crosses the North Eastern State Trail and passes the Leo E. Getz County Airport north of town . M @-@ 211 enters an area of farmland north of the airport . As it continues north and approaches Onaway State Park , the terrain transitions to forest land . M @-@ 211 ends at <unk> intersection with <unk> Beach Highway in front of the state park gate . All of M @-@ 211 is undivided highway . 
 Like other state highways in Michigan , M @-@ 211 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2010 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 1 @,@ 429 vehicles used the highway in the city of Onaway and 1 @,@ 254 vehicles did so north of the city line to the state park . No section of M @-@ 211 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 When the state highway system was initially signposted in 1919 , The highway that ran north from M @-@ 10 at Onaway toward Black Lake was numbered M @-@ 95 . By 1934 , the highway was redesignated M @-@ 211 to free up the M @-@ 95 number . At the time , a highway in the UP was numbered M @-@ 45 , but US Highway 45 was being extended into Michigan . The Michigan State Highway Department renumbered M @-@ 45 in the UP as M @-@ 95 , and M @-@ 95 in the LP as M @-@ 211 . By the middle of 1960 , all of the current M @-@ 211 was paved . The highway has remained unchanged since . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Presque Isle County . 
 = Thuppakki = 
 Thuppakki ( English : The Gun ) is a 2012 Indian Tamil @-@ language action film written and directed by AR Murugadoss . It features Vijay and Kajal Aggarwal in the lead roles , Vidyut <unk> as the antagonist , as well as Jayaram and Sathyan in supporting roles . The film , produced by S. Thanu , features background score and soundtrack composed by Harris Jayaraj with cinematography handled by Santhosh Sivan , who with Thuppakki , introduced the Arri Alexa camera to Indian cinema . The story revolves around an Indian army intelligence officer from a Mumbai @-@ based Tamil family on a mission to track down and destroy a terrorist group and deactivate the sleeper cells under its command . 
 The film , which commenced production in December 2011 in Mumbai , was released on 13 November 2012 , coinciding with the festival of Diwali . Upon release , the film became the highest grossing Tamil film of 2012 . The film was also released in Telugu under the same title in Andhra Pradesh , where it was also very well received . Thuppakki went on to win six Vijay Awards from sixteen nominations , and was nominated for seven South Filmfare Awards , including Best Film ( Tamil ) , Best Director ( Tamil ) and Best Actor ( Tamil ) . Murugadoss remade the film in Hindi as Holiday : A Soldier Is Never Off Duty in 2014 , while Baba Yadav remade it in Bengali as Game in the same year . The film has also been dubbed into Hindi as Indian Soldier Never on Holiday by Goldmines Telefilms . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jagadish ( Vijay ) , a captain in the Indian Army , returns to Mumbai from Kashmir . On his arrival , his parents and younger sisters force him to see Nisha ( Kajal Aggarwal ) , who they choose for him to be married to . At the bride @-@ viewing ceremony , Jagadish makes up excuses to avoid marrying her , which includes commenting about her being old @-@ fashioned . On the contrary , Nisha is a college @-@ level boxer , who is completely modern in her outlook . Jagadish realises this and proposes to her , which after initial refusal , she reciprocates . 
 One day , while travelling around the city with his police officer @-@ friend Balaji ( Sathyan ) , Jagadish witnesses the explosion of a bus in which they had travelled . He manages to capture the man ( Gautham Kurup ) who laid the bomb , but he escapes from the hospital where he was kept under custody . Jagadish kidnaps the bomber again , and also forces the police officer who helped the bomber 's escape , to commit suicide . Jagadish soon learns that the bomber is a mere executor , a sleeper agent , whose only role was to plant the bomb . He also discovers that the Islamic terrorist group Harkat @-@ ul @-@ Jihad al @-@ Islami , which the bomber belongs to , has planned various such attacks in the city in a couple of days . Enlisting the help of his fellow Army men and Balaji , Jagadish manages to thwart these attacks and kill the sleeper cell leader 's brother and eleven other terrorists , including the previously captured sleeper cell agent . 
 When the leader of the terrorist group ( Vidyut <unk> ) learns about the role of Jagdish in the failure of the terrorist attack , he begins to target the families of the army men , except Jagadish , by kidnapping someone close to them . When Jagadish realises the plan , he substitutes one of the people to be kidnapped , with his younger sister Sanjana ( Deepthi Nambiar ) . Using his pet dog and his sister 's dupatta , he manages to reach the terrorists ' hideout , rescuing his sister , who was about to be killed after Jagadish 's bluff was exposed , and the other victims and eliminating the terrorists assembled there . Asif Ali ( MD Asif ) , the second @-@ in @-@ command of the sleeper cells is captured and killed by Jagdish . 
 When this attack fails , the terrorist leader decides to target Jagadish himself . He asks Jagadish to surrender to him or else there would be more terrorist attacks . Jagadish decides to sacrifice his life and devises a plan with his fellow army men . Jagadish meets the leader in a ship , which has been rigged with a bomb planted by Jagadish 's friend . When he learns about the leader 's plan of infiltrating the Indian Army with sleeper agents with the help of a traitor in the Indian Defense — <unk> ( Zakir Hussain ) , Jagadish decides to abandon his suicidal plan . He mocks the leader and compels him to a fight before escaping in a boat , with the leader as hostage . After the ship explodes , he kills the bewildered leader . Jagadish confronts <unk> and forces him to commit suicide , before returning to Kashmir along with his fellow army men . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Director AR Murugadoss and Santosh Sivan make cameo appearances in the song " Google Google " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In July 2011 , sources reported that Vijay and AR Murugadoss would collaborate to make an action film , after completing their then @-@ respective ongoing projects , <unk> and <unk> Arivu . Vijay 's father S. A. Chandrasekhar was initially going to produce the film , but <unk> S. Thanu took over the project . Although Maalai Nerathu <unk> was initially considered as the title , the film became titled Thuppakki . A. Sreekar Prasad and Thotta Tharani , who was making a comeback to Tamil films after a three @-@ years hiatus , and Santosh Sivan were hired for editing , art direction and cinematography , respectively ; all of whom worked on an AR Murugadoss film for the first time . 
 Though Kingfisher Calendar model Angela Jonsson took part in a brief photo shoot with Vijay by Santosh Sivan in Chennai , Kajal Aggarwal was eventually confirmed as the female lead , while <unk> Gowda was cast to play the second female lead . Gautham Kurup was chosen to play an antagonistic role , while Vidyut <unk> , who was simultaneously shooting for Billa II , would be playing another negative role . Sathyan , following several collaborations with Vijay , confirmed that he was part of this project , too . Further , Malayalam actor Jayaram also confirmed his presence in this project . Murugadoss confirmed that he himself would appear in a cameo role . Dubai @-@ based Malayali orthodontist <unk> Nair was also signed to play a small but important role , making it his acting debut in Tamil cinema . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 According to early reports , filming was to commence at <unk> and continue in Mumbai . Even though it was supposed to start on 26 November 2011 , filming began on 5 December in Mumbai . Vijay would appear in a completely different hairstyle as well as a facial makeover . The first schedule , that lasted for 35 days , was completed by January 2012 . At Linking Road in Bandra , Mumbai , Vijay acted and operated the camera himself for one scene with cinematographer Santosh Sivan 's assistance , which had to be filmed quickly with the unaware public . Sivan commented that it was shot perfectly and decided to retain it in the film . Sivan further told that a major part of the film was being shot in real locations with hidden cameras . He did not use the usual 35 MM camera to shoot the film , but was said to have utilised the latest Arri digital technology , that was introduced in 2011 , becoming one of the first persons in the world to make use of the technology . 
 In March , the unit completed a 10 @-@ day shoot in Bangkok for a song sequence , featuring Vijay and Aggarwal . The second schedule started on 12 April in Mumbai . The third schedule ended in May 2012 , following which only two songs were remaining , both of which had been scheduled to be shot in Thailand . Vijay met with a minor accident during the shoot and hurt his knee . The shooting was stalled following the incident and the actor left to London to undergo treatment . The team then moved on to Pune for canning three songs . One of the songs was shot atop of a train , along with 300 dancers constructed by art director Sunil Babu . The dance sequence , choreographed by Shobi , was shot in the Mumbai Pune Expressway . The crew then left for Switzerland to shoot a romantic number , with Vijay and Aggarwal , at various locations , for which Sivan was unable to give dates , and Nutty , a Bollywood cameraman shot it instead . The final song shoot took place at DY Patil Stadium in Mumbai , with which principal photography wrapped . The budget of the film was estimated to be ₹ 700 million ( equivalent to ₹ 920 million or US $ 14 million in 2016 ) . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Harris Jayaraj composed the soundtrack of Thuppakki , teaming up with Murugadoss for the third time . The lyrics were written by Na . Muthukumar , Viveka and Madhan Karky , who had written over 35 <unk> for one of the songs . Vijay , seven years after his last attempt at playback singing , and Andrea Jeremiah lent their voices for " Google Google " , a party number in the film . Though Harris Jayaraj had announced in August that Thuppakki 's music launch would take place the following month , the audio was eventually released on 10 October 2012 . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was initially due to release on 9 November 2012 , but was postponed by four days to 13 November , coinciding with Diwali day . The film released in more than 1500 screens , becoming the widest release for a Vijay film . 
 Upon release , an Islamic group violently protested against the film , claiming that it portrayed Muslims as terrorists and traitors . Murugadoss , S. Thanu and Vijay 's father S. A. Chandrasekhar later tendered an open apology to representatives of 23 different Muslim outfits , and agreed to delete the scenes to which objections were raised , after activists had gathered near Vijay 's residence at <unk> and raised slogans against him and the film in Arabic and Urdu . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 The distribution rights for Thuppakki in Tamil Nadu were bought by Gemini Film Circuit . Several distributors including <unk> Suresh , Geetha Films and Suresh Films were competing for the Telugu dubbing rights , with SVR eventually purchasing the rights for ₹ 15 crore , the second highest in terms of obtaining the Telugu rights after Kamal Hasan 's <unk> . <unk> Entertainment had reportedly paid the highest price for a Vijay film to distribute the film in North America . It was distributed in France by BR Films International in more than 10 centres . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Thuppakki 's first look poster was leaked on the internet on 30 April 2012 , a day prior to its scheduled release on 1 May . The poster , that depicted Vijay holding a cigar in his mouth , led to criticism by social activists for violating the Indian Tobacco Act , which prohibits advertising tobacco products . Murugadoss however defended the poster , explaining that it was only for promotional purposes and added that the film had no such scenes , claiming that even a small sequence featuring Vijay smoking had been deleted from the film . 
 In October 2012 , another promotional poster , which depicted a police @-@ uniform clad Vijay carrying the Aggarwal on his hands was claimed to have been lifted from a poster of An Officer and a Gentleman ( 1982 ) which depicted its lead actor Richard Gere lifting actress Debra Winger . Murugadoss claimed that Thuppakki did not have an army backdrop like Gere 's film but was set in Mumbai instead , going on to assert that everything in his film was original . He however admitted to have used the poster of An Officer and a Gentleman , and in an interview with The Hindu said , " Sometimes , you admire something so much that sub @-@ consciously it becomes a part of your work " . 
 The makers confirmed that the film 's first trailer would be released on 22 June , coinciding with Vijay 's birthday . However , Murugadoss announced that the teaser was to be released on 1 July , ten days later . Upon progression , the teaser and poster launch event was delayed , following an injunction order from the court , which had directed the makers of the film not to use the Thuppakki title in any form . With the court case ending on 5 October , the first teaser was released in October 2012 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The broadcasting rights were purchased by STAR Vijay for ₹ 11 crore ( US $ 1 @.@ 6 million ) . Overseas DVD were marketed by Lotus <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 L <unk> M Singh of DNA India stated that the film " is different . The difference is visible in every shot , every dialogue spoken and the amazing attention to detail . What stands out most in this incredibly entertaining film is that Tamil films have finally come of age – in so many interesting ways " . Behindwoods.com rated the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , calling it " a fully loaded festival package from Vijay , Murugadoss and co " . Deccan Chronicle rated it 3 @.@ 5 / 5 and cited : " <unk> has come out as an action thriller that depends on mind games and smart plans rather than bloody fights . This is <unk> 's film in its true sense and Vijay adds immense value to it by his performance " . IBNLive named it a " well written Tamil film that engages the audience " and added that it had " the energy of Vijay and intellect of AR Murugadoss " . 
 Manoj Kumar of International Business Times wrote : " Director AR Murugadoss makes sure that he does not regress with any of his films . He frequently comes out with a different plot and narration style , and " <unk> is a brilliant example of this " . Sify 's critic stated that Murugadoss " has made a complete entertainer that blends with Vijay 's mass image , thanks to his racy script " , calling it a " perfect Diwali entertainer " . Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu commented : " One of the first promos of the film , with snapshots of Mumbai , lurking terror , the antagonist threatening Vijay to which he responds ' I am waiting ' went viral on social networks . The wait , clearly , has been worth it for the audience . And the man who 's probably having the last laugh is Murugadoss " . <unk> rated the film 3 out of 5 and said , " Vijay is stupendous in the role of an army officer . He brings a lot of energy to his character and thrills the audience in action sequences . Kajal Aggarwal looks good . Vidyut <unk> has done decent job and <unk> is good " . Haricharan Pudipeddi of The New Indian Express said , " Most of the characters are made to look dumb as Vijay steals all the attention . Kajal 's role as a boxer , which she squanders with her cliched performance , is definitely a turn off in the film . Jayaram and Sathyan , who 're supposed to make us laugh , fail miserably in the process " and concluded , " In essence , " Thuppakki " has the energy of Vijay and intellect of A.R. Murugadoss " . 
 J Hurtado of Twitch Film called the film 's cinematography " astonishingly good " and added that , " Murugadoss and Vijay have never worked on a better @-@ looking movie " , but called the film " an enjoyable , though largely forgettable film " . Kanchana Devi of <unk> rated the film 3 @.@ 75 / 5 , calling it " a perfect action entertainer and a great treat for Diwali from Vijay and <unk> " . N. <unk> of The Times of India said , " ' Thuppakki ' will definitely be picked up by a big Bollywood star for a remake . For , the gun was bang on target " . In contrast , Vivek <unk> from <unk> rated it 3 out of 5 and said that it " doesn 't meet the huge expectations it had created for itself " , calling it " another regular commercial film which entertains in bits and pieces " . Pavithra Srinivasan of Rediff rated the film 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 , saying " Vijay fans will find plenty to rejoice in this subdued avatar of their star , but audiences who seek intelligence in their movies will find it rather dull " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 India 
 On the opening day , Thuppakki netted around ₹ 92 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 4 million ) in Tamil Nadu box office alone . It collected a sum of ₹ 456 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 8 million ) in Tamil Nadu , and ₹ 653 @.@ 2 million ( US $ 9 @.@ 7 million ) worldwide by its first week . In Chennai city alone , the film netted ₹ 48 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 720 @,@ 000 ) in its first week with an average theatre occupancy of 99 % . The second week witnessed an occupancy of 90 % in the city and netted around ₹ 94 @.@ 1 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 4 million ) creating a new record for Vijay and taking a distributor share of ₹ 46 @.@ 0 million ( US $ 680 @,@ 000 ) in 13 days . It still stood in the number one position by the third week resulting in a total collection of ₹ 113 @.@ 6 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 7 million ) . After a long run for eight weeks at the Chennai box office , the film netted ₹ 134 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 0 million ) , the second highest figure among Tamil films . 
 Ten days after the release , Thuppakki was released in 31 screens in Mumbai . It was bought for a record price in Karnataka by a leading distributor , and opened well at the box office there . The opening 3 @-@ day collection from 8 multiplexes of Bangalore alone netted at ₹ 3 @,@ 180 @,@ 000 ( US $ 47 @,@ 000 ) Thuppakki was released in 126 screens in Kerala and collected ₹ 40 million ( US $ 590 @,@ 000 ) in two days with a distributor share of ₹ 20 million ( US $ 300 @,@ 000 ) , which is a record for any Tamil release . Many of the centres witnessed police charging before the shows and were forced to go for a fifth show on the first day which resulted in almost 600 shows in a single day : a record number of screenings for any film in the state . The film reached the ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) mark in 11 days of its release . The film 's total domestic box office collections at the end of its run stood at ₹ 1 @.@ 8 billion according to distributors Eros International . 
 Overseas 
 In its first weekend , Thuppakki earned £ 134 @,@ 280 ( ₹ 11 @.@ 8 million ) at the UK Box office . The film has collected ₹ 50 lakh in the second weekend on 11 screens . The total collection of the film in the UK and Ireland region was ₹ 1 @.@ 85 crore after the fourth weekend . In the US , the film collected $ 320 @,@ 349 ( ₹ 17 @.@ 6 million ) on 36 screens for the first week . The per screen average stands at $ 8 @,@ 899 ( ₹ 488 @,@ 000 ) and the Telugu version earned ₹ 846 @,@ 000 from nine screens . At the end of its second week , it once again topped the collection chart by adding ₹ 7 @.@ 5 million to its 13 @-@ day total ₹ 2 @.@ 51 crore ( $ 4 @,@ 52 @,@ 734 ) . In Australia , Thuppakki grossed A $ 80 @,@ 264 ( ₹ 46 @,@ 73 @,@ 000 ) on six screens and the average per screen collection of the film stands out at A $ 1656 after two weeks . The film continued to do good business at the International box office in its second week . It performed well in Malaysia , where it grossed around ₹ 87 @.@ 7 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 3 million ) at the box office after three weeks . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = Remakes = = 
 Murugadoss remade the film in Hindi as Holiday : A Soldier Is Never Off Duty in 2014 , starring Akshay Kumar in the leading role . Baba Yadav remade it in Bengali as Game the same year starring Jeet . The film was dubbed in Hindi as Indian Soldier Never on Holiday by Goldmines Telefilms . 
 = Lorena Hickok = 
 Lorena Alice Hickok ( March 7 , 1893 – May 1 , 1968 ) was an American journalist known for her close relationship with First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt . 
 Born in East Troy , Wisconsin to a dressmaker and a dairy @-@ farmer , Hickok had an unhappy childhood marked by isolation and abuse . After her mother 's death when Hickok was fourteen , she left home , worked on her own , and completed high school with the help of a cousin . She went into journalism after failing out of college , and soon became a successful reporter for the Minneapolis Tribune and the Associated Press ( AP ) , achieving several firsts for American women journalists . By 1932 , she had become the nation 's best @-@ known female reporter . 
 After being assigned to cover Roosevelt during her husband 's first presidential campaign , Hickok struck up a close relationship with the soon @-@ to @-@ be First Lady . For several years , the two corresponded almost every day , traveled together , and professed emotional and physical affection for one another . The exact nature of this relationship has been widely discussed by historians ; some have argued that the relationship was clearly romantic or erotic , while others have argued that historians have been misled by Roosevelt 's exuberant letters . More than 3 @,@ 000 letters from the pair 's correspondence are preserved at the Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum . 
 Compromised as a reporter by her personal relationship with Roosevelt , Hickok left the AP and began work as the chief investigator for the Federal Emergency Relief Administration ( FERA ) , a department of Franklin Roosevelt 's New Deal . Hickok encouraged or inspired several of Eleanor Roosevelt 's initiatives , including her syndicated column , her all @-@ women press conferences , and her planned community at Arthurdale , West Virginia . As Hickok grew more demanding of the First Lady , however , the pair 's initial closeness lessened . Following complications with her diabetes , Hickok resigned from FERA in 1936 and worked for three years promoting the 1939 New York World 's Fair . From 1940 to 1945 , she served as the executive secretary of the Women 's Division of the Democratic National Committee , living at the White House for most of this time . As her diabetes steadily worsened , she lived out her final years at Hyde Park to be near Roosevelt , publishing several books . 
 = = Early life and reporting career = = 
 Lorena Hickok , popularly known as " Hick " , was born in East Troy in Walworth County , Wisconsin , the daughter of Anna <unk> ( née Waite ) and Addison Hickok . Lorena 's mother made dresses , while her father was a <unk> . During childhood , Hickok experienced a troubled family life , characterized by abuse , unemployment , and repeated moves . When Hickok was ten , the family moved to <unk> , South Dakota . An introverted child , Hickok was embarrassed by her height , and later recalled that she spent most of her time in solitude , daydreaming or playing with the animals of her family 's farm . At fourteen , she left home following her mother 's death , and worked as a maid until her mother 's cousin , Ella Ellis , took her in . While living with Ellis , Hickok finished high school and enrolled at Lawrence College in Appleton , Wisconsin . 
 Unable to fit in at college , Hickok failed out in her first year . She was hired to cover train arrivals and departures and write personal interest stories at The Battle Creek Evening News for $ 7 a week . In an attempt to follow in the footsteps of her role model , novelist and former reporter Edna Ferber , she joined the Milwaukee Sentinel as its society editor , but moved on to the city beat where she developed a talent as an interviewer . She interviewed celebrities , including actress Lillian Russell , pianist Ignacy Paderewski , and opera singers Nellie Melba and Geraldine Farrar , gaining a wide audience . She also became close friends with diva Ernestine Schumann @-@ Heink . 
 Hickok moved to Minneapolis to work for the Minneapolis Tribune . She enrolled at the University of Minnesota , leaving upon being forced to live in a women 's dormitory . She stayed with the Tribune where she was given opportunities unusual for a female reporter . She had a byline and was the paper 's chief reporter , covering politics , sports , and preparing editorials . During her tenure with the paper , she also covered the football team , becoming one of the first female reporters to be assigned a sports beat . In 1923 , she won an award from the Associated Press for writing the best feature story of the month , a piece on President Warren G. Harding 's funeral train . 
 During her years in Minneapolis , Hickok lived with a society reporter named Ella Morse , with whom she had a six @-@ year relationship . In 1926 , Hickok was diagnosed with diabetes , and Morse persuaded her take a year 's leave from the newspaper so the pair could travel to San Francisco and Hickok could write a novel . At the beginning of the leave , however , Morse unexpectedly eloped with an ex @-@ boyfriend , leaving Hickok devastated . Unable to face a return to Minneapolis , Hickok moved to New York , landing a job with the New York Daily Mirror . 
 After working for The Mirror for about a year , Hickok obtained a job with the Associated Press in 1928 , where she became one of the wire service 's top correspondents . Her November 1928 story on the sinking of the SS Vestris was published in the New York Times under her own byline , the first woman 's byline to appear in the paper . She also reported on the Lindbergh kidnapping and other national events . By 1932 , she had become the nation 's best @-@ known female reporter . 
 = = Early relationship with Eleanor Roosevelt = = 
 Hickok first met Roosevelt in 1928 when assigned to interview her by the AP . In 1932 , Hickok convinced her editors to allow her to cover Eleanor Roosevelt during her husband 's presidential campaign and for the four @-@ month period between his election and inauguration . When the mother of Franklin 's secretary , Missy LeHand , died in October 1932 , Eleanor invited Hickok to accompany her to Potsdam , New York for the funeral . The women spent the long train ride talking , beginning a long friendship . By Franklin 's inauguration on March 4 , 1933 , Hickok had become Eleanor 's closest friend . The two made trips together to Albany and Washington , D.C. , and spent nearly every day in each other 's company . Hickok joined the Roosevelts every Sunday night for dinner , while on other nights Eleanor joined Hickok at the theater or opera , or at dinners alone at Hickok 's apartment . For the inauguration , Eleanor wore a sapphire ring Hickok had given her . 
 That same day , Hickok interviewed Roosevelt in a White House bathroom , her first official interview as First Lady . By this time , Hickok was deeply in love with Roosevelt and finding it increasingly difficult to provide objective reporting . In addition , Hickok 's job kept her largely in New York , while Eleanor was in Washington . Both women were troubled by the separation , professing their love by telephone and letter ; Roosevelt put a picture of Hickok up in her study , which she told Hickok she kissed every night and every morning . During this period , Roosevelt wrote daily ten- to fifteen @-@ page letters to " Hick " , who was planning to write a biography of the First Lady . 
 The nature of Hickok and Roosevelt 's relationship has been a subject of dispute among historians . Roosevelt was close friends with several lesbian couples , such as Nancy Cook and Marion Dickerman , and Esther Lape and Elizabeth Read , suggesting that she was familiar with the lifestyle ; Marie Souvestre , Roosevelt 's childhood teacher and a great influence on her later thinking , was also a lesbian . Hickok biographer Doris Faber published some of Roosevelt and Hickok 's correspondence in 1980 , but concluded that the lovestruck phrasing was simply an " unusually belated schoolgirl crush " and warned historians not to be misled . Researcher Leila J. Rupp criticized Faber 's argument , calling her book " a case study in homophobia " and arguing that Faber unwittingly presented " page after page of evidence that delineates the growth and development of a love affair between the two women " . In 1992 , Roosevelt biographer Blanche Wiesen Cook argued that the relationship was in fact romantic , generating national attention . 
 Biographer Doris Kearns Goodwin summarized the letters between Hickok and Roosevelt thus : 
 Hick longed to kiss the soft spot at the corner of Eleanor 's mouth ; Eleanor yearned to hold Hick close ; Hick despaired at being away from Eleanor ; Eleanor wished she could lie down beside Hick and take her in her arms . Day after day , month after month , the tone in the letters on both sides remains fervent and loving . 
 Goodwin concluded , however , that " whether Hick and Eleanor went beyond kisses and hugs " cannot be known for certain , and that the important issue is the impact the close relationship had on both women 's lives . A 2011 essay by Russell Baker reviewing two new Roosevelt biographies in the New York Times Review of Books stated , " That the Hickok relationship was indeed erotic now seems beyond dispute . " 
 = = In the Roosevelt administration = = 
 Early in the Roosevelt administration , Hickok is credited with pushing Eleanor to write her own newspaper column , " My Day " , and to hold weekly press conferences specifically for female journalists . Hickok found it difficult to objectively cover the Roosevelts herself , however , and once suppressed a story at Eleanor 's request . The declining quality of her reporting soon caused her to receive a pay cut . Despite her worries about leaving the career on which she had built her identity , Hickok quit the AP at Eleanor 's urging in mid @-@ 1933 . Eleanor then helped Hickok obtain the position as a Chief Investigator for Harry Hopkins ' Federal Emergency Relief Administration ( FERA ) , where she conducted fact @-@ finding missions . In 1933 , Hickok went on a two @-@ month tour of the American South , where she was horrified by the poverty , malnutrition , and lack of education that she encountered . She urged Eleanor to visit a tent city of homeless ex @-@ miners in Morgantown , West Virginia , an experience that led Eleanor to found the federal housing project of Arthurdale , West Virginia . In March 1934 , Hickok accompanied Eleanor on a fact @-@ finding trip to the US territory of Puerto Rico , reporting afterward to Hopkins that the island 's poverty was too severe for FERA to usefully intervene . 
 During her time with FERA , Hickok developed a dislike of reporters . In one report to Hopkins in 1934 , she wrote , " Believe me , the next state administrator who lets out any publicity on me is going to get his head cracked " . In February 1934 , Time called her " a rotund lady with a husky voice , a peremptory manner , baggy clothes " , a description that wounded Hickok . In a letter to Hopkins ' secretary , she asked , " Why the Hell CAN 'T they leave me alone ? " Following the incident , Hickok and Roosevelt redoubled their efforts to keep their relationship out of the spotlight ; on one occasion , Roosevelt wrote to her , " we must must be careful this summer & keep it out of the papers when we are off together . 
 As Roosevelt became more active as first lady , however , she had less time for Hickok . Hickok grew angry and jealous at perceived slights , and demanded more time alone , which Roosevelt was unable to give ; at other times , she attempted unsuccessfully to separate herself from Roosevelt . Though the pair remained friends throughout their lives , they continued to grow apart in the years that followed . In 1937 , Roosevelt wrote to Hickok that " I never meant to hurt you in any way , but that is no excuse having done it . . . I am pulling back from all my contacts now . . . Such cruelty & stupidity is unpardonable when you reach my age . " 
 After an incident with her diabetes while traveling , Hickok resigned her FERA post for health reasons in late 1936 . 
 = = World 's Fair = = 
 On the advice of Roosevelt 's secretary , Malvina Thompson , Hickok then sought work in New York with public relations man and politician Grover Whalen . Shortly after Franklin Roosevelt 's 1936 re @-@ election , Hickok was hired by Whalen to do publicity for the 1939 New York World 's Fair . Opportunities for female employees of the Fair were limited , and she found the work unrewarding compared to her reporting days . Hickok primarily worked on promoting the fair to young people , including arranging class trips . Because Hickok rented both a country home and an apartment , she often faced financial problems despite her good salary during these years , and Roosevelt occasionally sent her small gifts of money . 
 = = Democratic National Committee = = 
 With help from Roosevelt , Hickok became the executive secretary of the Women 's Division of the Democratic National Committee ( DNC ) in February 1940 , doing groundwork for the 1940 election . Taking to the road again , she wrote Roosevelt , " This job is such fun , dear ... It 's the nearest thing to newspaper work I 've found since I left the A.P. " 
 From early January 1941 until shortly after FDR 's fourth inauguration in 1945 , she lived at the White House . During her time there , Hickok 's nominal address was at the Mayflower Hotel in DC , where she met most people . Also during this time , she formed an intense friendship with Marion Janet Harron , a United States Tax Court judge who was ten years younger than she and almost the only person to visit her at the White House . 
 When Hickok 's diabetes worsened in 1945 , she was forced to leave her position with the DNC . Two years later , Roosevelt found her a position with the New York State Democratic Committee . When Hickok 's health continued to decline , she moved to Hyde Park to be closer to Roosevelt . She lived in a cottage on the Roosevelt estate , where she died in 1968 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Late in life , Hickok wrote several books . She co @-@ authored Ladies of Courage with Eleanor Roosevelt in 1954 . This was followed by The Story of Franklin D. Roosevelt ( 1956 ) , The Story of Helen Keller ( 1958 ) , The Story of Eleanor Roosevelt ( 1959 ) , and several more . 
