 Anthony Kiedis - vocals 
 Flea - bass , scream 
 John Frusciante - lead and rhythm guitar 
 Chad Smith - drums , percussion 
 Pete Weiss - Jew 's harp 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Cover version = = 
 A double @-@ parody of " Give It Away " and " Under the Bridge " titled " Bedrock Anthem " was recorded by " Weird Al " Yankovic in his 1993 album Alapalooza . 
 Idina Menzel performed a few bars of the song as part of her exit music on her 2015 World Tour . 
 = Nostradamus = 
 Michel de Nostredame ( depending on the source , 14 or 21 December 1503 – 2 July 1566 ) , usually Latinised as Nostradamus , was a French apothecary and reputed seer who published collections of prophecies that have since become widely famous . He is best known for his book Les Propheties , the first edition of which appeared in 1555 . Since the publication of this book , which has rarely been out of print since his death , Nostradamus has attracted a following that , along with much of the popular press , credits him with predicting many major world events . Most academic sources maintain that the associations made between world events and Nostradamus 's quatrains are largely the result of misinterpretations or mistranslations ( sometimes deliberate ) or else are so tenuous as to render them useless as evidence of any genuine predictive power . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Born on either 14 or 21 December 1503 in Saint @-@ Rémy @-@ de @-@ Provence , Provence ( Occitania ) , France , where his claimed birthplace still exists , Michel de Nostredame was one of at least nine children of notary Jaume ( or Jacques ) de Nostredame and <unk> , granddaughter of Pierre de Saint @-@ Rémy who worked as a physician in Saint @-@ Rémy . Jaume 's family had originally been Jewish , but his father , <unk> , a grain and money dealer , based in Avignon , had converted to Catholicism around 1459 @-@ 60 , taking the Christian name " Pierre " and the surname " Nostredame " ( Our Lady ) , the saint on whose day his conversion was solemnised . The earliest ancestor who can be identified on the paternal side is <unk> of Carcassonne , who died about 1420 . Michel 's known siblings included Delphine , Jean ( c . 1507 – 77 ) , Pierre , Hector , Louis , Bertrand , Jean II ( born 1522 ) and Antoine ( born 1523 ) . Little else is known about his childhood , although there is a persistent tradition that he was educated by his maternal great @-@ grandfather Jean de St. Rémy — a tradition which is somewhat undermined by the fact that the latter disappears from the historical record after 1504 , when the child was only one year old . 
 = = = Student years = = = 
 At the age of 15 Nostredame entered the University of Avignon to study for his baccalaureate . After little more than a year ( when he would have studied the regular trivium of grammar , rhetoric and logic , rather than the later quadrivium of geometry , arithmetic , music and astronomy / astrology ) , he was forced to leave Avignon when the university closed its doors in the face of an outbreak of the plague . After leaving Avignon , Nostredame , by his own account , travelled the countryside for eight years from 1521 researching herbal remedies . In 1529 , after some years as an apothecary , he entered the University of Montpellier to study for a doctorate in medicine . He was expelled shortly afterwards by the student procurator , Guillaume Rondelet , when it was discovered that he had been an apothecary , a " manual trade " expressly banned by the university statutes , and had been slandering doctors . The expulsion document , <unk> Montpellier , Register S 2 folio 87 , still exists in the faculty library . However , some of his publishers and correspondents would later call him " Doctor " . After his expulsion , Nostredame continued working , presumably still as an apothecary , and became famous for creating a " rose pill " that supposedly protected against the plague . 
 = = = Marriage and healing work = = = 
 In 1531 Nostredame was invited by Jules @-@ César Scaliger , a leading Renaissance scholar , to come to Agen . There he married a woman of uncertain name ( possibly Henriette d <unk> ) , who bore him two children . In 1534 his wife and children died , presumably from the plague . After their deaths , he continued to travel , passing through France and possibly Italy . 
 On his return in 1545 , he assisted the prominent physician Louis Serre in his fight against a major plague outbreak in Marseille , and then tackled further outbreaks of disease on his own in Salon @-@ de @-@ Provence and in the regional capital , Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence . Finally , in 1547 , he settled in Salon @-@ de @-@ Provence in the house which exists today , where he married a rich widow named Anne <unk> , with whom he had six children — three daughters and three sons . Between 1556 and 1567 he and his wife acquired a one @-@ thirteenth share in a huge canal project organised by Adam de <unk> to irrigate largely waterless Salon @-@ de @-@ Provence and the nearby <unk> de la <unk> from the river Durance . 
 = = = Seer = = = 
 After another visit to Italy , Nostredame began to move away from medicine and toward the occult . Following popular trends , he wrote an almanac for 1550 , for the first time <unk> his name from Nostredame to Nostradamus . He was so encouraged by the almanac 's success that he decided to write one or more annually . Taken together , they are known to have contained at least 6 @,@ 338 prophecies , as well as at least eleven annual calendars , all of them starting on 1 January and not , as is sometimes supposed , in March . It was mainly in response to the almanacs that the nobility and other prominent persons from far away soon started asking for horoscopes and " psychic " advice from him , though he generally expected his clients to supply the birth charts on which these would be based , rather than calculating them himself as a professional astrologer would have done . When obliged to attempt this himself on the basis of the published tables of the day , he frequently made errors and failed to adjust the figures for his clients ' place or time of birth . 
 He then began his project of writing a book of one thousand mainly French quatrains , which constitute the largely undated prophecies for which he is most famous today . Feeling vulnerable to opposition on religious grounds , however , he devised a method of obscuring his meaning by using " <unk> " syntax , word games and a mixture of other languages such as Greek , Italian , Latin , and Provençal . For technical reasons connected with their publication in three installments ( the publisher of the third and last installment seems to have been unwilling to start it in the middle of a " Century , " or book of 100 verses ) , the last fifty @-@ eight quatrains of the seventh " Century " have not survived in any extant edition . 
 The quatrains , published in a book titled Les Propheties ( The Prophecies ) , received a mixed reaction when they were published . Some people thought Nostradamus was a servant of evil , a fake , or insane , while many of the elite evidently thought otherwise . Catherine de Médicis , wife of King Henry II of France , was one of Nostradamus ' greatest admirers . After reading his almanacs for 1555 , which hinted at unnamed threats to the royal family , she summoned him to Paris to explain them and to draw up horoscopes for her children . At the time , he feared that he would be beheaded , but by the time of his death in 1566 , Queen Catherine had made him Counselor and Physician @-@ in @-@ Ordinary to her son , the young King Charles IX of France . 
 Some accounts of Nostradamus 's life state that he was afraid of being persecuted for heresy by the Inquisition , but neither prophecy nor astrology fell in this bracket , and he would have been in danger only if he had practiced magic to support them . In 1538 he came into conflict with the Church in Agen after an Inquisitor visited the area looking for Anti @-@ Catholic views . His brief imprisonment at <unk> in late 1561 was solely because he had violated a recent royal decree by publishing his 1562 almanac without the prior permission of a bishop . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 By 1566 , Nostradamus 's gout , which had plagued him painfully for many years and made movement very difficult , turned into edema , or dropsy . In late June he summoned his lawyer to draw up an extensive will bequeathing his property plus 3 @,@ 444 crowns ( around $ 300 @,@ 000 US today ) , minus a few debts , to his wife pending her remarriage , in trust for her sons pending their twenty @-@ fifth birthdays and her daughters pending their marriages . This was followed by a much shorter codicil . On the evening of 1 July , he is alleged to have told his secretary Jean de Chavigny , " You will not find me alive at sunrise . " The next morning he was reportedly found dead , lying on the floor next to his bed and a bench ( <unk> 141 [ originally 152 ] for November 1567 , as posthumously edited by Chavigny to fit what happened ) . He was buried in the local Franciscan chapel in Salon ( part of it now incorporated into the restaurant La <unk> ) but re @-@ interred during the French Revolution in the <unk> Saint @-@ Laurent , where his tomb remains to this day . 
 = = Works = = 
 In The Prophecies Nostradamus compiled his collection of major , long @-@ term predictions . The first installment was published in 1555 and contained 353 quatrains . The third edition , with three hundred new quatrains , was reportedly printed in 1558 , but now only survives as part of the omnibus edition that was published after his death in 1568 . This version contains one unrhymed and 941 rhymed quatrains , grouped into nine sets of 100 and one of 42 , called " Centuries " . 
 Given printing practices at the time ( which included type @-@ setting from dictation ) , no two editions turned out to be identical , and it is relatively rare to find even two copies that are exactly the same . Certainly there is no warrant for assuming — as would @-@ be " code @-@ breakers " are prone to do — that either the spellings or the punctuation of any edition are Nostradamus ' originals . 
 The <unk> , by far the most popular of his works , were published annually from 1550 until his death . He often published two or three in a year , entitled either <unk> ( detailed predictions ) , <unk> or <unk> ( more generalised predictions ) . 
 Nostradamus was not only a diviner , but a professional healer . It is known that he wrote at least two books on medical science . One was an extremely free translation ( or rather a paraphrase ) of The <unk> of Galen ( Paraphrase de C. <unk> , sus l <unk> de <unk> aux <unk> des <unk> <unk> , <unk> Medicine ) , and in his so @-@ called Traité des <unk> ( basically a medical cookbook containing , once again , materials borrowed mainly from others ) he included a description of the methods he used to treat the plague , including bloodletting , none of which apparently worked . The same book also describes the preparation of cosmetics . 
 A manuscript normally known as the <unk> Apollo also exists in the Lyon municipal library , where upwards of 2 @,@ 000 original documents relating to Nostradamus are stored under the aegis of Michel <unk> . It is a purported translation of an ancient Greek work on Egyptian hieroglyphs based on later Latin versions , all of them unfortunately ignorant of the true meanings of the ancient Egyptian script , which was not correctly deciphered until Champollion in the 19th century . 
 Since his death only the Prophecies have continued to be popular , but in this case they have been quite extraordinarily so . Over two hundred editions of them have appeared in that time , together with over 2 @,@ 000 commentaries . Their persistence in popular culture seems to be partly because their vagueness and lack of dating make it easy to quote them selectively after every major dramatic event and retrospectively claim them as " hits " . 
 = = Origins of The Prophecies = = 
 Nostradamus claimed to base his published predictions on judicial astrology — the astrological ' judgment ' , or assessment , of the ' quality ' ( and thus potential ) of events such as births , weddings , coronations etc . — but was heavily criticised by professional astrologers of the day such as Laurens <unk> for incompetence and for assuming that " comparative <unk> " ( the comparison of future planetary configurations with those accompanying known past events ) could actually predict what would happen in the future . 
 Research suggests that much of his prophetic work paraphrases collections of ancient end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ world prophecies ( mainly Bible @-@ based ) , supplemented with references to historical events and anthologies of omen reports , and then projects those into the future in part with the aid of comparative <unk> . Hence the many predictions involving ancient figures such as Sulla , Gaius Marius , Nero , and others , as well as his descriptions of " battles in the clouds " and " frogs falling from the sky . " Astrology itself is mentioned only twice in Nostradamus 's Preface and 41 times in the Centuries themselves , but more frequently in his dedicatory Letter to King Henry II . In the last quatrain of his sixth century he specifically attacks astrologers . 
 His historical sources include easily identifiable passages from Livy , Suetonius , Plutarch and other classical historians , as well as from medieval chroniclers such as Geoffrey of Villehardouin and Jean Froissart . Many of his astrological references are taken almost word for word from Richard <unk> 's Livre de l <unk> et mutations des temps of 1549 – 50 . 
 One of his major prophetic sources was evidently the Mirabilis Liber of 1522 , which contained a range of prophecies by Pseudo @-@ Methodius , the <unk> Sibyl , Joachim of Fiore , Savonarola and others ( his Preface contains 24 biblical quotations , all but two in the order used by Savonarola ) . This book had enjoyed considerable success in the 1520s , when it went through half a dozen editions , but did not sustain its influence , perhaps owing to its mostly Latin text , Gothic script and many difficult abbreviations . Nostradamus was one of the first to re @-@ paraphrase these prophecies in French , which may explain why they are credited to him . It should be noted that modern views of plagiarism did not apply in the 16th century ; authors frequently copied and paraphrased passages without acknowledgement , especially from the classics . The latest research suggests that he may in fact have used <unk> for this — randomly selecting a book of history or prophecy and taking his cue from whatever page it happened to fall open at . 
 Further material was gleaned from the De <unk> <unk> of 1504 by Petrus <unk> , which included extracts from Michael <unk> 's De <unk> , and the De <unk> <unk> ( Concerning the mysteries of Egypt ... ) , a book on Chaldean and Assyrian magic by Iamblichus , a 4th @-@ century Neo @-@ Platonist . Latin versions of both had recently been published in Lyon , and extracts from both are paraphrased ( in the second case almost literally ) in his first two verses , the first of which is appended to this article . While it is true that Nostradamus claimed in 1555 to have burned all of the occult works in his library , no one can say exactly what books were destroyed in this fire . 
 Only in the 17th century did people start to notice his reliance on earlier , mainly classical sources . This may help explain the fact that , during the same period , The Prophecies reportedly came into use in France as a classroom reader . 
 Nostradamus 's reliance on historical precedent is reflected in the fact that he explicitly rejected the label " prophet " ( i.e. a person having prophetic powers of his own ) on several occasions : 
 Although , my son , I have used the word prophet , I would not attribute to myself a title of such lofty sublimity — Preface to César , 1555 ( see caption to illustration above ) 
 Not that I would attribute to myself either the name or the role of a prophet — Preface to César , 1555 
 [ S ] ome of [ the prophets ] predicted great and marvelous things to come : [ though ] for me , I in no way attribute to myself such a title here . — Letter to King Henry II , 1558 
 Not that I am foolish enough to claim to be a prophet . — Open letter to Privy Councillor ( later Chancellor ) <unk> , 15 June 1566 
 His rejection of the title prophet is consistent with the fact that he entitled his book Les Propheties de M. Michel Nostradamus ( a title that , in French , as easily means " The Prophecies , by M. Michel Nostradamus " — which is what they were — as " The Prophecies of M. Michel Nostradamus " , which , except in a few cases , they were not , other than in the manner of their editing , expression and <unk> to the future ) . 
 Given this reliance on literary sources , it is doubtful whether Nostradamus used any particular methods for entering a trance state , other than contemplation , meditation and incubation . His sole description of this process is contained in letter 41 ' of his collected Latin correspondence . The popular legend that he attempted the ancient methods of flame gazing , water gazing or both simultaneously is based on a naive reading of his first two verses , which merely liken his efforts to those of the Delphic and <unk> oracles . The first of these is reproduced at the bottom of this article and the second can be seen by visiting the relevant facsimile site ( see External Links ) . In his dedication to King Henri II , Nostradamus describes " emptying my soul , mind and heart of all care , worry and unease through mental calm and tranquility " , but his frequent references to the " bronze tripod " of the Delphic rite are usually preceded by the words " as though " ( compare , once again , External References to the original texts ) . 
 = = Interpretations = = 
 Most of the quatrains deal with disasters , such as plagues , earthquakes , wars , floods , invasions , murders , droughts , and battles — all undated and based on foreshadowings by the Mirabilis Liber . Some quatrains cover these disasters in overall terms ; others concern a single person or small group of people . Some cover a single town , others several towns in several countries . A major , underlying theme is an impending invasion of Europe by Muslim forces from farther east and south headed by the expected Antichrist , directly reflecting the then @-@ current Ottoman invasions and the earlier Saracen equivalents , as well as the prior expectations of the Mirabilis Liber . All of this is presented in the context of the supposedly imminent end of the world — even though this is not in fact mentioned — a conviction that sparked numerous collections of end @-@ time prophecies at the time , including an unpublished collection by Christopher Columbus . 
 Nostradamus has been credited , for the most part in hindsight , with predicting numerous events in world history , from the Great Fire of London , and the rise of Napoleon and Adolf Hitler , to the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center . In 1992 one commentator who claimed to be able to contact Nostradamus under hypnosis even had him ' interpreting ' his own verse <unk> ( a prediction specifically about floods in southern France around the city of Nîmes and people taking refuge in its <unk> , or Colosseum , a Roman amphitheatre now known as the <unk> ) as a prediction of an undated attack on the Pentagon , despite the historical seer 's clear statement in his dedicatory letter to King Henri II that his prophecies were about Europe , North Africa and part of Asia Minor . Skeptics such as James Randi suggest that his reputation as a prophet is largely manufactured by modern @-@ day supporters who fit his words to events that have either already occurred or are so imminent as to be inevitable , a process sometimes known as " retroactive clairvoyance " ( <unk> ) . Thus , no Nostradamus quatrain is known to have been interpreted as predicting a specific event before it occurred , other than in vague , general terms that could equally apply to any number of other events . This even applies to quatrains that contain specific dates , such as <unk> , which predicts " in 1727 , in October , the king of Persia [ shall be ] captured by those of Egypt " — a prophecy that has , as ever , been interpreted retrospectively in the light of later events , in this case as though it presaged the known peace treaty between the Ottoman Empire and Persia of that year . Similarly , Nostradamus 's notorious ' 1999 ' prophecy at <unk> ( see Nostradamus in popular culture ) describes no event that commentators have succeeded in identifying either before or since , other than by dint of twisting the words to fit whichever of the many contradictory happenings they are keen to claim as ' hits ' . Moreover , no quatrain suggests , as is often claimed by books and films on the alleged Mayan Prophecy , that the world would end in December 2012 . In his preface to the Prophecies , Nostradamus himself stated that his prophecies extend ' from now to the year <unk> ' — an extraordinary date which , given that the preface was written in 1555 , may have more than a little to do with the fact that <unk> ( <unk> − 1555 ) had recently been proposed by his major astrological source Richard <unk> as a possible date for the end of the world . 
 = = Alternative views = = 
 Views on Nostradamus have varied widely throughout history . At one end of the spectrum , there are extreme academic views such as those of Jacques <unk> , who has suggested at great length and with great complexity that Nostradamus 's Prophecies are antedated forgeries written by later hands with a political axe to grind . No other major source accepts this view [ see reference @-@ list ] . 
 At the other end of the spectrum , there are numerous fairly recent popular books , and thousands of private websites , suggesting not only that the Prophecies are genuine but that Nostradamus was a true prophet . Due to the subjective nature of these interpretations , however , no two of them agree on exactly what he predicted , whether for the past or for the future . Many of these do agree , though , that particular predictions refer , for example , to the French Revolution , Napoleon , Adolf Hitler , both world wars , and the nuclear destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . There is also an evident consensus among popular authors that he predicted whatever major event had just happened at the time of each book 's publication , from the Apollo moon landings , through the death of Diana , Princess of Wales in 1997 , and the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster in 1986 , to the events of 9 / 11 : this ' movable feast ' aspect appears to be characteristic of the genre . 
 Possibly the first of these books to become popular in English was Henry C. Roberts ' The Complete Prophecies of Nostradamus of 1947 , reprinted at least seven times during the next forty years , which contained both transcriptions and translations , with brief commentaries . This was followed in 1961 ( reprinted in 1982 ) by Edgar Leoni 's Nostradamus and His Prophecies . After that came Erika Cheetham 's The Prophecies of Nostradamus , incorporating a reprint of the posthumous 1568 edition , which was reprinted , revised and republished several times from 1973 onwards , latterly as The Final Prophecies of Nostradamus . This served as the basis for the documentary The Man Who Saw Tomorrow and both did indeed mention possible generalised future attacks on New York ( via nuclear weapons ) , though not specifically on the World Trade Center or on any particular date . A two @-@ part translation of Jean @-@ Charles de <unk> 's Nostradamus : <unk> et prophète was published in 1980 , and John Hogue has published a number of books on Nostradamus from about 1987 including Nostradamus and the Millenium : Predictions of the Future , Nostradamus : The Complete Prophecies ( 1999 ) and Nostradamus : A Life and Myth ( 2003 ) . 
 With the exception of Roberts , these books and their many popular imitators were almost unanimous not merely about Nostradamus 's powers of prophecy , but also about various aspects of his biography . He had been a descendant of the Israelite tribe of Issachar ; he had been educated by his grandfathers , who had both been physicians to the court of Good King René of Provence ; he had attended Montpellier University in 1525 to gain his first degree ; after returning there in 1529 , he had successfully taken his medical doctorate ; he had gone on to lecture in the Medical Faculty there , until his views became too unpopular ; he had supported the heliocentric view of the universe ; he had travelled to the north @-@ east of France , where he had composed prophecies at the abbey of Orval ; in the course of his travels , he had performed a variety of prodigies , including identifying future Pope , Sixtus V , who was then only a seminary monk . He is credited with having successfully cured the Plague at Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence and elsewhere ; he had engaged in scrying , using either a magic mirror or a bowl of water ; he had been joined by his secretary Chavigny at Easter 1554 ; having published the first installment of his Propheties , he had been summoned by Queen Catherine de ' Medici to Paris in 1556 to discuss with her his prophecy at quatrain <unk> that her husband King Henri II would be killed in a duel ; he had examined the royal children at Blois ; he had bequeathed to his son a " lost book " of his own prophetic paintings ; he had been buried standing up ; and he had been found , when dug up at the French Revolution , to be wearing a medallion bearing the exact date of his disinterment . 
 Curiously , this particular story seems to have been first recorded by Samuel Pepys as early as 1667 , long before the French Revolution . Pepys records in his celebrated diary a legend that , before his death , Nostradamus made the townsfolk swear that his grave would never be disturbed ; but that 60 years later his body was exhumed , whereupon a brass plaque was found on his chest correctly stating the date and time when his grave would be opened and cursing the <unk> . 
 From the 1980s onwards , however , an academic reaction set in , especially in France . The publication in 1983 of Nostradamus 's private correspondence and , during succeeding years , of the original editions of 1555 and 1557 discovered by <unk> and <unk> , together with the unearthing of much original archival material revealed that much that was claimed about Nostradamus did not fit the documented facts . The academics revealed that not one of the claims just listed was backed up by any known contemporary documentary evidence . Most of them had evidently been based on unsourced rumours relayed as fact by much later commentators , such as <unk> ( 1656 ) , <unk> ( 1693 ) and <unk> ( 1840 ) , on modern misunderstandings of the 16th @-@ century French texts , or on pure invention . Even the often @-@ advanced suggestion that quatrain <unk> had successfully prophesied King Henri II 's death did not actually appear in print for the first time until 1614 , 55 years after the event . 
 Additionally , the academics , who themselves tend to eschew any attempt at interpretation , complained that the English translations were usually of poor quality , seemed to display little or no knowledge of 16th @-@ century French , were tendentious and , at worst , were sometimes twisted to fit the events to which they were supposed to refer ( or vice versa ) . None of them were based on the original editions : Roberts had based his writings on that of 1672 , Cheetham and Hogue on the posthumous edition of 1568 . Even Leoni accepted on page 115 that he had never seen an original edition , and on earlier pages he indicated that much of his biographical material was unsourced . 
 However , none of this research and criticism was originally known to most of the English @-@ language commentators , by function of the dates when they were writing and , to some extent , of the language in which it was written . Hogue was in a position to take advantage of it , but it was only in 2003 that he accepted that some of his earlier biographical material had in fact been apocryphal . Meanwhile , some of the more recent sources listed ( <unk> , Gruber , Wilson ) have been particularly scathing about later attempts by some lesser @-@ known authors and Internet enthusiasts to extract alleged hidden meanings from the texts , whether with the aid of anagrams , numerical codes , graphs or otherwise . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The prophecies retold and expanded by Nostradamus figured largely in popular culture in the 20th and 21st centuries . As well as being the subject of hundreds of books ( both fiction and nonfiction ) , Nostradamus 's life has been depicted in several films and videos , and his life and writings continue to be a subject of media interest . 
 There have also been several well @-@ known Internet hoaxes , where quatrains in the style of Nostradamus have been circulated by e @-@ mail as the real thing . The best @-@ known examples concern the collapse of the World Trade Center in the 11 September attacks , which led both to hoaxes and to reinterpretations by enthusiasts of several quatrains as supposed prophecies . 
 With the arrival of the year 2012 , Nostradamus 's prophecies started to be co @-@ opted ( especially by the History Channel ) as evidence suggesting that the end of the world was imminent , notwithstanding the fact that his book never mentions the end of the world , let alone the year 2012 . 
 = Glitter in the Air = 
 " Glitter in the Air " is a song by American recording artist Pink from her fifth studio album , Funhouse . In 2010 , it was released as the sixth single in North America , the only place of its release . Written by Pink and Billy Mann and Michele Mears , the song is a pop ballad with a soft piano accompaniment . Its lyrics talk about the power of love and taking a leap in faith , while using various metaphors . " Glitter in the Air " received mixed reviews from contemporary critics : some named it the best vocal performance of Funhouse , while others criticized it for being a cliché ballad . 
 " Glitter in the Air " debuted at number 18 and 13 in the United States and Canada , respectively . In the United States , the song marked the first time Pink had five singles from one album chart on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song was notably performed by Pink as part of her 2009 Funhouse Tour with her wearing a bodysuit and doing acrobatics using aerial tissue . A similar version of this performance was done at the 2010 Grammy Awards , where her performance received a standing ovation and was critically praised by media outlets . A similar version of these performances was also performed on The Truth About Love Tour . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Glitter in the Air " is a pop ballad , co @-@ written by Pink while produced by frequent collaborator Billy Mann . The song is musically similar to another ballad from Funhouse , " I Don 't Believe You " , as both contain a soft piano and string accompaniment . According to the sheet music published at musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , " Glitter in the Air " is composed in the key of F major , with a tempo of 100 beats per minute . Pink 's vocal range spans from the high @-@ tone of B ♭ 4 to the low @-@ tone of F3 . Nekesa Mumbi Moody of the Associated Press commented that although the song did not display the power of Pink vocals , " her voice is still potent , full of hurt and confusion that anyone can feel " . The song 's lyrics talk about the power of love and taking a leap in faith . Evan Sawdey of PopMatters said the song " reflect [ s ] on life 's simple joys and simply savor [ es ] them just for what they are " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Evan Sawdey of PopMatters said , " Of all the ballads , though , the quiet piano closer ' Glitter in the Air ' takes the cake , never once overplaying its hand , remaining sweet without once ever succumbing to saccharine niceties ( think of a Jason Robert Brown song without the vocal showboating ) . It 's the sweetest moment on the entire disc , but it only succeeds because it ’ s also the least complex song here " . Craig <unk> of The South End stated that while " every song has potential to do well and is quite likable , [ ... ] Pink 's vocals are strong and shine particularly in the ballad ' Glitter In The Air ' . " Nekesa Mumbi <unk> of the Associated Press said that " What makes the song so moving is that despite all of the heartache , she doesn 't appear gun @-@ shy about taking the leap again " . 
 Justin Pacheco of The Good 5 Cent Cigar compared it to " I Don 't Believe You " , saying , " [ it ] exemplifies the sappy ballad [ ... ] and would not seem out of place being sung by any other big pop singer . ' Glitter in the Air ' is another big pop ballad along the same the same lines " . Patrick Ferrucci of the New Haven Register commented in the album review that " She does get a little wishy @-@ washy though , going from tunes like ' Mean ' and ' It ’ s All Your Fault ' to ' Please Don 't Leave Me ' and ' Glitter in the Air ' " . He also added that the high points of Funhouse were the four tracks produced by Max Martin . Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine stated that one of the biggest problems in Funhouse was its songwriting , saying , " ' Glitter in the Air , ' with its emo @-@ esque " You called me sugar " bridge , is overwrought with its clichéd imagery " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Glitter in the Air " impacted radio as a new single by her record label , minutes after her performance at the Grammy Awards . On February 11 , 2010 , the song debuted at No. 18 on the Billboard Hot 100 , with sales over 114 @,@ 000 units . It became her fifth charting single from Funhouse in the United States , the most charting singles from one of her albums . The same week , it debuted at No. 13 on the Canadian Hot 100 . The song also received significant airplay on U.S. adult radio , peaking at No. 8 on the Adult Top 40 chart , her fourth top @-@ ten hit from the album on that chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Glitter in the Air " was performed by Pink on her 2009 Funhouse Tour . After the first encore of the tour – " Get the Party Started " from Missundaztood – Pink returned to the stage wearing a black robe , as glitter fell from the ceiling . Pink would begin singing while walking to the center of the runway extension of the stage . There , she took off the robe to reveal a white leotard and joined three female acrobats covered in glitter on suspension rigging which then lifted into the air . Pink continued through the song , twirling in suspended fabric above the audience . Underneath her , the acrobats performed , according to Jon Pareles of The New York Times , " slow @-@ motion , geometric Cirque du Soleil poses " . The apparatus dropped her into a tank of water and lifted her again to the air , before descending her at the end of the performance . Michael Menachem of Billboard commented , " When Pink finally touched down , she continued singing with bombast , as though the entire spectacle had been no sweat . If the rest of the show hadn 't already made the case that Pink has one of the best pop @-@ rock voices — and the most brazen moves — of her generation of stars , this final moment certainly did " . 
 On January 31 , 2010 , Pink performed the song at the 52nd Grammy Awards in a similar fashion . She began the performance walking out in a white silk robe , standing in front of a backdrop of electric blue screens . She <unk> into the aisle and took off the robe to reveal the bodysuit . After being lifted from the tank of water , Pink kept twirling and spreading water into all directions , before finally descending to the main stage . The audience greeted her with a standing ovation . The performance was deemed by various media outlets as the best of the ceremony . Glenn Gamboa of Newsday commented , " With her stunning Grammy performance of ' Glitter in the Air , ' Pink proved that you don ’ t have to be shocking or over @-@ the @-@ top to be the best or the most @-@ talked @-@ about . You just have to be amazing . " It was also voted on a readers ' poll in MTV.com as the best performance of the night . Staff reporter Kyle Anderson said " It 's easy to see why , as her acrobatic performance of ' Glitter in the Air ' was not only visually gorgeous , but also technically impressive — she was able to keep singing even as she was spinning around in the air " . Pink later explained she had almost fallen during the song , saying , " When I do it on tour , I don 't have lights above me . There were lights above me , so it almost went into a strobe thing , and I actually did get a little turned around . I thought ... I was going to fall on my nude butt . But I worked it out . " In 2013 , Brad Wete for Billboard ranked the performance as the best performance at the Grammy Awards from 2000 to 2012 , commenting it " graceful , show @-@ stopping performance of aerial , acrobatic and vocal brilliance . " 
 = = Appearances in other media = = 
 Pretty Little Liars - Episode : " A Person of Interest " 
 The Game - Episode : " <unk> " 
 Chase ( Used in a promotional trailer ) 
 Glee - Episode : " The Untitled Rachel Berry Project " as sung by Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Military history of Australia during World War II = 
 Australia entered World War II shortly after the invasion of Poland , declaring war on Germany on 3 September 1939 . This was because Australia at this time was a dominion of the British Empire . By the end of the war , almost a million Australians had served in the armed forces , whose military units fought primarily in the European theatre , North African campaign , and the South West Pacific theatre . In addition , Australia came under direct attack for the first time in its post @-@ colonial history . Its casualties from enemy action during the war were 27 @,@ 073 killed and 23 @,@ 477 wounded . 
 In effect , Australia fought two wars between 1939 and 1945 – one against Germany and Italy as part of the British Commonwealth 's war effort and the other against Japan in alliance with the United States and Britain . While most Australian forces were withdrawn from the Mediterranean following the outbreak of war in the Pacific , they continued to take part in large numbers in the air offensive against Germany . From 1942 until early 1944 , Australian forces played a key role in the Pacific War , making up the majority of Allied strength throughout much of the fighting in the South West Pacific . The military was largely relegated to subsidiary fronts from mid @-@ 1944 but continued offensive operations against the Japanese until the war ended . 
 World War II contributed to major changes in the nation 's economy , military and foreign policy . The war accelerated the process of industrialisation , led to the development of a larger peacetime military and began the process with which Australia shifted the focus of its foreign policy from Britain to the United States . The final effects of the war also contributed to the development of a more diverse and cosmopolitan Australian society . 
 = = Outbreak of war = = 
 Between World War I and World War II Australia suffered greatly from the Great Depression which started in 1929 . This limited Australian defence expenditure and led to a decline in the size and effectiveness of the armed forces during the late 1920s and early 1930s . In the years leading up to the war , Australia followed Britain 's policy towards Nazi Germany , supporting first its appeasement of Hitler and then its guarantee of Polish independence . 
 Australia entered the war against Germany on 3 September 1939 , shortly after Britain declared war when its ultimatum for Germany to withdraw from Poland expired . Unlike in Canada and South Africa , no legislative debate took place . The government of Australia believed that , as Prime Minister Robert Menzies said , " Britain is at war therefore Australia is at war " , and asked London to notify Germany that Australia was an associate of the United Kingdom . Australia 's support of the war was primarily made on the grounds that its interests were inextricably linked to those of Britain , and that a British defeat would destroy the system of imperial defence which Australia relied upon for security against Japan . This position received almost universal public support though there was little enthusiasm for war . 
 At the time war broke out in Europe , the Australian armed forces were less prepared than at the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 . The Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) , the best @-@ prepared of the three services , was small and equipped with only two heavy cruisers , four light cruisers , two sloops , five obsolete destroyers and a number of small and auxiliary warships . The Australian Army comprised a small permanent cadre of 3 @,@ 000 men and 80 @,@ 000 part @-@ time militiamen who had volunteered for training with the Citizen Military Forces ( CMF ) . The Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , the weakest of the services , had 246 aircraft , few of them modern . While the Commonwealth Government began a large military expansion and transferred some RAAF aircrew and units to British control upon the outbreak of war , it was unwilling to immediately dispatch an expeditionary force overseas due to the threat posed by Japanese intervention . 
 The first Australian shot of the war took place several hours after the declaration of war when a gun at Fort Queenscliff fired across the bows of an Australian ship as it attempted to leave Melbourne without required clearances . On 10 October 1939 a Short Sunderland of No. 10 Squadron , based in England for re @-@ equipment , became the first Australian and the first Commonwealth air @-@ force unit to go into action when it undertook a mission to Tunisia . 
 On 15 September 1939 Menzies announced the formation of the Second Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . This expeditionary force initially consisted of 20 @,@ 000 men organised into an infantry division ( the 6th Division ) and auxiliary units . The AIF was institutionally separate from the CMF , which was legally restricted to service in Australia and its external territories , and was formed by raising new units rather than transferring CMF units . On 15 November , Menzies announced the reintroduction of conscription for home @-@ defence service , effective 1 January 1940 . Recruitment for the AIF was initially slow , but one in six men of military age had enlisted by March 1940 and a huge surge of volunteers came forward after the fall of France in June 1940 . Men volunteered for the AIF for a range of reasons , with the most common being a sense of duty to defend Australia and the British Empire . In early 1940 each of the services introduced regulations which prohibited the enlistment of people not " substantially of European origin " ; while these regulations were strictly enforced by the RAN and Army , the RAAF continued to accept small numbers of non @-@ European Australians . 
 The AIF 's major units were raised between 1939 and 1941 . The 6th Division formed during October and November 1939 and embarked for the Middle East in early 1940 to complete its training and to receive modern equipment after the British Government assured the Australian Government that Japan did not pose an immediate threat . The division was intended to join the British Expeditionary Force in France when its preparations were complete , but this did not eventuate as Axis forces conquered France before the division was ready . A further three AIF infantry divisions ( the 7th Division , 8th Division and 9th Division ) were raised in the first half of 1940 , as well as a corps headquarters ( I Corps ) and numerous support and service units . All of these divisions and the majority of the support units deployed overseas during 1940 and 1941 . An AIF armoured division ( the 1st Armoured Division ) was also raised in early 1941 but never left Australia . 
 While the Government initially planned to deploy the entire RAAF overseas , it later decided to focus the force 's resources on training aircrew to facilitate a massive expansion of Commonwealth air @-@ power . In late 1939 Australia and the other Dominions established the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) to train large numbers of men for service in the British Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and in other Commonwealth air units . Almost 28 @,@ 000 Australians eventually trained through EATS in schools in Australia , Canada and Rhodesia . While many of these men were posted to Australian Article XV squadrons , the majority served with British and other Dominion squadrons . Moreover , these nominally " Australian " squadrons did not come under RAAF control and Australians often made up a minority of their airmen . As the Australian Government had no effective control over the deployment of airmen trained through EATS , most Australian historians regard the scheme as having hindered the development of Australia 's defence capability . Nevertheless , RAAF airmen trained through EATS represented about nine percent of all aircrew who fought for the RAF in the European and Mediterranean theatres and made an important contribution to Allied operations . 
 = = North Africa , the Mediterranean and the Middle East = = 
 During the first years of World War II , Australia 's military strategy was closely aligned with that of the United Kingdom . In line with this , most Australian military units deployed overseas in 1940 and 1941 were sent to the Mediterranean and Middle East where they formed a key part of the Commonwealth forces in the area . The three AIF infantry divisions sent to the Middle East saw extensive action , as did the RAAF squadrons and warships in this theatre . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 The RAN was the first of the Australian services to see action in the Mediterranean . At the time Italy entered the war on 10 June 1940 the RAN had a single cruiser ( Sydney ) and the five elderly destroyers of the so @-@ called ' Scrap Iron Flotilla ' at Alexandria with the British Mediterranean Fleet . During the first days of the Battle of the Mediterranean , Sydney sank an Italian destroyer and Voyager a submarine . The Mediterranean Fleet maintained a high operational tempo , and on 19 July Sydney , with a British destroyer squadron in company , engaged the fast Italian light cruisers Bartolomeo Colleoni and Giovanni dalle Bande Nere in the Battle of Cape Spada . In the running battle which followed , Bartolomeo Colleoni was sunk . The Australian ships spent much of their time at sea throughout 1940 and Sydney was relieved by her sister ship Perth in February 1941 . 
 The Australian Army first saw action in Operation Compass , the successful Commonwealth offensive in North Africa which was conducted between December 1940 and February 1941 . The 6th Division relieved the 4th Indian Division on 14 December . Although the 6th Division was not fully equipped , it had completed its training and was given the task of capturing Italian fortresses bypassed by the British 7th Armoured Division during its advance . 
 The 6th Division went into action at Bardia on 3 January 1941 . Although the fortress was manned by a larger Italian force , the Australian infantry quickly penetrated the defensive lines with the support of British tanks and artillery . The majority of the Italian force surrendered on 5 January and the Australians took 40 @,@ 000 prisoners . The 6th Division followed up this success by assaulting the fortress of Tobruk on 21 January . Tobruk was secured the next day with 25 @,@ 000 Italian prisoners taken . The 6th Division subsequently pushed west along the coast road to Cyrenaica and captured Benghazi on 4 February . The 6th Division was withdrawn for deployment to Greece later in February and was replaced by the untested 9th Division , which took up garrison duties in Cyrenaica . 
 In the last week of March 1941 , a German @-@ led force launched an offensive in Cyrenaica which rapidly defeated the Allied forces in the area , forcing a general withdrawal towards Egypt . The 9th Division formed the rear guard of this withdrawal , and on 6 April was ordered to defend the important port town of Tobruk for at least two months . During the ensuing siege of Tobruk the 9th Division , reinforced by the 18th Brigade of the 7th Division and British artillery and armoured regiments , used fortifications , aggressive patrolling and artillery to contain and defeat repeated German armoured and infantry attacks . Tobruk 's defenders were sustained by the Mediterranean Fleet , and the elderly Australian destroyers made repeated supply ' runs ' into the port . Waterhen and Parramatta were sunk during these operations . Upon the request of the Australian Government , the bulk of the 9th Division was withdrawn from Tobruk in September and October 1941 and was replaced by the British 70th Division . The 2 / 13th Battalion was forced to remain at Tobruk until the siege was lifted in December when the convoy evacuating it was attacked , however . The defence of Tobruk cost the Australian units involved 3 @,@ 009 casualties , including 832 killed and 941 taken prisoner . 
 Two Australian fighter squadrons also took part in the fighting in North Africa . No. 239 Wing , a Curtiss P @-@ 40 @-@ equipped unit in the Desert Air Force , was dominated by Australians , in the form of two RAAF squadrons — No. 3 Squadron and No. 450 Squadron — and numerous individual Australians in RAF squadrons . These two squadrons differed from the other RAAF squadrons in the Mediterranean in that they were made up of predominantly Australian ground staff and pilots ; the other RAAF units had ground crews made up of mostly British RAF personnel . 
 = = = Greece , Crete and Lebanon = = = 
 In early 1941 the 6th Division and I Corps headquarters took part in the ill @-@ fated Allied expedition to defend Greece from a German invasion . The corps ' commander , Lieutenant @-@ General Thomas Blamey , and Prime Minister Menzies both regarded the operation as risky , but agreed to Australian involvement after the British Government provided them with briefings which deliberately understated the chance of defeat . The Allied force deployed to Greece was much smaller than the German force in the region and the defence of the country was compromised by inconsistencies between Greek and Allied plans . 
 Australian troops arrived in Greece during March and manned defensive positions in the north of the country alongside British , New Zealand and Greek units . Perth also formed part of the naval force which protected the Allied troop convoys travelling to Greece and participated in the Battle of Cape Matapan in late March . The outnumbered Allied force was not able to halt the Germans when they invaded on 6 April and was forced to retreat . The Australians and other Allied units conducted a fighting withdrawal from their initial positions and were evacuated from southern Greece between 24 April and 1 May . Australian warships also formed part of the force which protected the evacuation and embarked hundreds of soldiers from Greek ports . The 6th Division suffered heavy casualties in this campaign , with 320 men killed and 2 @,@ 030 captured . 
 While most of the 6th Division returned to Egypt , the 19th Brigade Group and two provisional infantry battalions landed at Crete where they formed a key part of the island 's defences . The 19th Brigade was initially successful in holding its positions when German paratroopers landed on 20 May , but was gradually forced to retreat . After several key airfields were lost the Allies evacuated the island 's garrison . Approximately 3 @,@ 000 Australians , including the entire 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion , could not be evacuated , and were taken prisoner . As a result of its heavy casualties the 6th Division required substantial reinforcements and equipment before it was again ready for combat . Perth and the new destroyers Napier and Nizam also took part in operations around Crete , with Perth embarking soldiers for evacuation to Egypt . 
 The Allied defeat during the Greek Campaign indirectly contributed to a change of government in Australia . Prime Minister Menzies ' leadership had been weakened by the lengthy period he spent in Britain during early 1941 , and the high Australian losses in the Greek Campaign led many members of his United Australia Party ( UAP ) to conclude that he was not capable of leading the Australian war effort . Menzies resigned on 26 August after losing the confidence of his party and was replaced by Arthur Fadden from the Country Party , which was the UAP 's coalition partner . Fadden 's government collapsed on 3 October and was replaced by an Australian Labor Party government under the leadership of John Curtin . 
 The 7th Division and the 17th Brigade from the 6th Division formed a key part of the Allied ground forces during the Syria – Lebanon Campaign which was fought against Vichy French forces in June and July 1941 . RAAF aircraft also joined the RAF in providing close air support . The Australian force entered Lebanon on 8 June and advanced along the coast road and Litani River valley . Although little resistance had been expected , the Vichy forces mounted a strong defence which made good use of the mountainous terrain . After the Allied attack became bogged down reinforcements were brought in and the Australian I Corps headquarters took command of the operation on 18 June . These changes enabled the Allies to overwhelm the French forces and the 7th Division entered Beirut on 12 July . The loss of Beirut and a British breakthrough in Syria led the Vichy commander to seek an armistice and the campaign ended on 13 July . 
 = = = El Alamein = = = 
 In the second half of 1941 , the Australian I Corps was concentrated in Syria and Lebanon to rebuild its strength and prepare for further operations in the Middle East . Following the outbreak of war in the Pacific most elements of the Corps , including the 6th and 7th Divisions , returned to Australia in early 1942 to counter the perceived Japanese threat to Australia . The Australian Government agreed to British and United States requests to temporarily retain the 9th Division in the Middle East in exchange for the deployment of additional US troops to Australia and Britain 's support for a proposal to expand the RAAF to 73 squadrons . The Government did not intend that the 9th Division would play a major role in active fighting , and it was not sent any further reinforcements . All of the RAN 's ships in the Mediterranean were also withdrawn to the Pacific but most RAAF units in the Middle East remained in the theatre . 
 In June 1942 , four Australian N @-@ class destroyers were transferred to the Mediterranean from the Indian Ocean to participate in Operation Vigorous , which was an attempt to supply the besieged island of Malta from Egypt . This operation ended in failure , and Nestor had to be scuttled on 16 June after being bombed the previous day . After this operation , the three surviving destroyers returned to the Indian Ocean . 
 In mid @-@ 1942 , the Axis forces defeated the Commonwealth force in Libya and advanced into north @-@ west Egypt . In June , the British Eighth Army made a stand just over 100 km west of Alexandria , at the railway siding of El Alamein and the 9th Division was brought forward to reinforce this position . The lead elements of the Division arrived at El Alamein on 6 July and the Division was assigned the most northerly section of the Commonwealth defensive line . The 9th Division played a significant role in the First Battle of El Alamein which halted the Axis advance , though at the cost of heavy casualties , including the entire 2 / 28th Infantry Battalion which was forced to surrender on 27 July . Following this battle the division remained at the northern end of the El Alamein line and launched diversionary attacks during the Battle of Alam el Halfa in early September . 
 In October 1942 , the 9th Division and the RAAF squadrons in the area took part in the Second Battle of El Alamein . After a lengthy period of preparation , the Eighth Army launched its major offensive on 23 October . The 9th Division was involved in some of the heaviest fighting of the battle , and its advance in the coast area succeeded in drawing away enough German forces for the heavily reinforced 2nd New Zealand Division to decisively break though the Axis lines on the night of 1 / 2 November . The 9th Division suffered a high number of casualties during this battle and did not take part in the pursuit of the retreating Axis forces . During the battle the Australian Government requested that the division be returned to Australia as it was not possible to provide enough reinforcements to sustain it , and this was agreed to by the British and US governments in late November . The 9th Division left Egypt for Australia in January 1943 , ending the AIF 's involvement in the war in North Africa . 
 = = = Tunisia , Sicily and Italy = = = 
 Although the Second Battle of El Alamein marked the end of a major Australian role in the Mediterranean , several RAAF units and hundreds of Australians attached to Commonwealth forces remained in the area until the end of the war . After the 9th Division was withdrawn Australia continued to be represented in North Africa by several RAAF squadrons which supported the 8th Army 's advance through Libya and the subsequent Tunisia Campaign . Two Australian destroyers ( Quiberon and Quickmatch ) also participated in the Allied landings in North Africa in November 1942 . 
 Australia played a small role in the Italian Campaign . The RAN returned to the Mediterranean between May and November 1943 when eight Bathurst class corvettes were transferred from the British Eastern Fleet to the Mediterranean Fleet to protect the invasion force during the Allied invasion of Sicily . The corvettes also escorted convoys in the western Mediterranean before returning to the Eastern Fleet . No. 239 Wing and four Australian Article XV squadrons also took part in the Sicilian Campaign , flying from bases in Tunisia , Malta , North Africa and Sicily . No. 239 Wing subsequently provided air support for the Allied invasion of Italy in September 1943 and moved to the mainland in the middle of that month . The two Australian fighter bomber squadrons provided close air support to the Allied armies and attacked German supply lines until the end of the war . No. 454 Squadron was also deployed to Italy from August 1944 and hundreds of Australians served in RAF units during the campaign . 
 The RAAF also took part in other Allied operations in the Mediterranean . Two RAAF squadrons , No. 451 Squadron ( Spitfires ) and No. 458 Squadron ( Wellingtons ) , supported the Allied invasion of southern France in August 1944 . No. 451 Squadron was based in southern France in late August and September and when the operation ended both squadrons were moved to Italy , though No. 451 Squadron was transferred to Britain in December . No. 459 Squadron was based in the eastern Mediterranean until the last months of the war in Europe and attacked German targets in Greece and the Aegean Sea . In addition , 150 Australians served with the Balkan Air Force , principally in No. 148 Squadron RAF . This special duties squadron dropped men and supplies to guerrillas in Yugoslavia and attempted to supply the Polish Home Army during the Warsaw Uprising in 1944 . 
 = = Britain and Western Europe = = 
 While the majority of the Australian military fought on the Western Front in France during World War I , relatively few Australians fought in Europe during World War II . The RAAF , including thousands of Australians posted to British units , made a significant contribution to the strategic bombing of Germany and efforts to safeguard Allied shipping in the Atlantic . The other services made smaller contributions , with two Army brigades being briefly based in Britain in late 1940 and several of the RAN 's warships serving in the Atlantic . 
 = = = Defence of Britain = = = 
 Australians participated in the defence of Britain throughout the war . More than 100 Australian airmen fought with the RAF during the Battle of Britain in 1940 , including over 30 fighter pilots . Two AIF brigades ( the 18th and 25th ) were also stationed in Britain from June 1940 to January 1941 and formed part of the British mobile reserve which would have responded to any German landings . An Australian Army forestry group served in Britain between 1940 and 1943 . Several Australian fighter squadrons were also formed in Britain during 1941 and 1942 and contributed to defending the country from German air raids and , from mid @-@ 1944 , V @-@ 1 flying bombs . 
 The RAAF and RAN took part in the Battle of the Atlantic . No. 10 Squadron , based in Britain at the outbreak of war to take delivery of its Short Sunderland flying boats , remained there throughout the conflict as part of RAF Coastal Command . It was joined by No. 461 Squadron in April 1942 , also equipped with Sunderlands . These squadrons escorted Allied convoys and sank 12 U @-@ boats . No. 455 Squadron also formed part of Coastal Command from April 1942 as an anti @-@ shipping squadron equipped with light bombers . In this role the squadron made an unusual deployment to <unk> air base in the Soviet Union in September 1942 to protect Convoy PQ 18 . Hundreds of Australian airmen also served in RAF Coastal Command squadrons . In addition to the RAAF 's contribution , several of the RAN 's cruisers and destroyers escorted shipping in the Atlantic and Caribbean and hundreds of RAN personnel served aboard Royal Navy ships in the Atlantic throughout the war . 
 = = = Air war over Europe = = = 
 The RAAF 's role in the strategic air offensive in Europe formed Australia 's main contribution to the defeat of Germany . Approximately 13 @,@ 000 Australian airmen served in dozens of British and five Australian squadrons in RAF Bomber Command between 1940 and the end of the war . There was not a distinctive Australian contribution to this campaign , however , as most Australians served in British squadrons and the Australian bomber squadrons were part of RAF units . 
 The great majority of Australian aircrew in Bomber Command were graduates of the Empire Air Training Scheme . These men were not concentrated in Australian units , and were instead often posted to the Commonwealth squadron with the greatest need for personnel where they became part of a multi @-@ national bomber crew . Five Australian heavy bomber squadrons ( No. 460 , No. 462 , No. 463 , No. 466 and No. 467 squadrons ) were formed within Bomber Command between 1941 and 1945 , however , and the proportion of Australians in these units increased over time . No. 464 Squadron , which was equipped with light bombers , was also formed as part of Bomber Command but was transferred to the Second Tactical Air Force in June 1943 where it continued to attack targets in Europe . Unlike Canada , which concentrated its heavy bomber squadrons into No. 6 Group RCAF in 1943 , the RAAF squadrons in Bomber Command were always part of British units , and the Australian Government had little control over how they were used . 
 Australians took part in all of Bomber Command 's major offensives and suffered heavy losses during raids on German cities and targets in France . The Australian contribution to major raids was often substantial , and the Australian squadrons typically provided about 10 percent of the main bomber force during the winter of 1943 – 44 , including during the Battle of Berlin . Overall , the Australian squadrons in Bomber Command dropped 6 percent of the total weight of bombs dropped by the command during the war . Australian aircrew in Bomber Command had one of the highest casualty rates of any part of the Australian military during World War II . Although only two percent of Australians enlisted in the military served with Bomber Command , they incurred almost 20 percent of all Australian deaths in combat ; 3 @,@ 486 were killed and hundreds more were taken prisoner . 
 Hundreds of Australians participated in the liberation of Western Europe during 1944 and 1945 . Ten RAAF squadrons , hundreds of Australians in RAF units and about 500 Australian sailors serving with the Royal Navy formed part of the force assembled for the landing in Normandy on 6 June 1944 ; overall , it has been estimated that about 3000 Australian personnel took part in this operation . From 11 June until September 1944 the Spitfire @-@ equipped No. 453 Squadron RAAF was often based at forward airfields in France and it and Australian light bomber and heavy bomber squadrons supported the liberation of France . RAAF light bomber and fighter squadrons continued to support the Allied armies until the end of the war in Europe by attacking strategic targets and escorting bomber formations . No. 451 and 453 Squadrons formed part of the British Army of Occupation in Germany from September 1945 , and it was planned that there would be a long @-@ term Australian presence in this force . Few RAAF personnel volunteered to remain in Europe , however , and both squadrons were disbanded in January 1946 . 
 = = War in the Pacific = = 
 Due to the emphasis placed on cooperation with Britain , relatively few Australian military units were stationed in Australia and the Asia @-@ Pacific Region after 1940 . Measures were taken to improve Australia 's defences as war with Japan loomed in 1941 , but these proved inadequate . In December 1941 the Australian Army in the Pacific comprised the 8th Division , most of which was stationed in Malaya , and eight partially trained and equipped divisions in Australia , including the 1st Armoured Division . The RAAF was equipped with 373 aircraft , most of which were obsolete trainers , and the RAN had three cruisers and two destroyers in Australian waters . 
 In 1942 the Australian military was reinforced by units recalled from the Middle East and an expansion of the CMF and RAAF . United States Military units also arrived in Australia in great numbers before being deployed to New Guinea . The Allies moved onto the offensive in late 1942 , with the pace of advance accelerating in 1943 . From 1944 the Australian military was mainly relegated to subsidiary roles , but continued to conduct large @-@ scale operations until the end of the war . 
 = = = Malaya and Singapore = = = 
 From the 1920s Australia 's defence planning was dominated by the so @-@ called ' Singapore strategy ' . This strategy involved the construction and defence of a major naval base at Singapore from which a large British fleet would respond to Japanese aggression in the region . To this end , a high proportion of Australian forces in Asia were concentrated in Malaya during 1940 and 1941 as the threat from Japan increased . At the outbreak of war the Australian forces in Malaya comprised the 8th Division ( less the 23rd Brigade ) under the command of Major General Gordon Bennett , four RAAF squadrons and eight warships . The RAAF became the first service to see action in the Pacific when Australian aircraft shadowing the Japanese invasion convoy bound for Malaya were fired at on 6 December 1941 . Australian units participated in the unsuccessful Commonwealth attempts to defeat the Japanese landings , with RAAF aircraft attacking the beachheads and Vampire accompanying the British battleship Prince of Wales and battlecruiser Repulse during their failed attempt to attack the Japanese invasion fleet . 
 The 8th Division and its attached Indian Army units was assigned responsibility for the defence of Johor in the south of Malaya and did not see action until mid @-@ January 1942 when Japanese spearheads first reached the state . The division 's first engagement was the Battle of Muar , in which the Japanese Twenty @-@ Fifth Army was able to outflank the Commonwealth positions due to Bennett <unk> the forces under his command so that the weak Indian 45th Brigade was assigned the crucial coastal sector and the stronger Australian brigades were deployed in less threatened areas . While the Commonwealth forces in Johore achieved a number of local victories , they were unable to do more than slow the Japanese advance and suffered heavy casualties . After being outmanoeuvred by the Japanese , the remaining Commonwealth units withdrew to Singapore on the night of 30 – 31 January . 
 Following the withdrawal to Singapore the 8th Division was deployed to defend the island 's north @-@ west coast . Due to the casualties suffered in Johore most of the division 's units were at half @-@ strength . The commander of the Singapore fortress , Lieutenant General Arthur Ernest Percival , believed that the Japanese would land on the north @-@ east coast of the island and deployed the near full @-@ strength British 18th Division to defend this sector . The Japanese landing on 8 February took part in the Australian sector , however , and the 8th Division was forced from its positions after just two days of heavy fighting . The division was also unable to turn back the Japanese landing at Kranji and withdrew to the centre of the island . After further fighting in which the Commonwealth forces were pushed into a narrow perimeter around the urban area of Singapore , Percival surrendered his forces on 15 February . Following the surrender 14 @,@ 972 Australians were taken prisoner , though some escaped on ships . These escapees included Major General Bennett , who was found by two post @-@ war inquiries to have been unjustified in leaving his command . The loss of almost a quarter of Australia 's overseas soldiers , and the failure of the Singapore Strategy that had permitted it to accept the sending of the AIF to aid Britain , stunned the country . 
 = = = Netherlands East Indies and Rabaul = = = 
 While Australia 's contribution to the pre @-@ war plans to defend South East Asia from Japanese aggression was focused on the defence of Malaya and Singapore , small Australian forces were also deployed to defend several islands to the north of Australia . The role of these forces was to defend strategic airfields which could be used to launch attacks on the Australian mainland . Detachments of coastwatchers were also stationed in the Bismarck Archipelago and Solomon Islands to report on any Japanese operations there . 
 At the start of the Pacific War the strategic port town of Rabaul in New Britain was defended by ' Lark Force ' , which comprised the 2 / 22nd Infantry Battalion reinforced with coastal artillery and a poorly equipped RAAF bomber squadron . While Lark Force was regarded as inadequate by the Australian military , it was not possible to reinforce it before the Japanese South Seas Force landed at Rabaul on 23 January 1942 . The outnumbered Australian force was swiftly defeated and most of the survivors surrendered in the weeks after the battle . Few members of Lark Force survived the war , as at least 130 were murdered by the Japanese on 4 February and 1 @,@ 057 Australian soldiers and civilian prisoners from Rabaul were killed when the ship carrying them to Japan ( Montevideo Maru ) was sunk by a US submarine on 1 July 1942 . 
 AIF troops were also dispatched from Darwin to the Netherlands East Indies ( NEI ) in the first weeks of the Pacific War . Reinforced battalions from the 23rd Brigade were sent to Koepang in West Timor ( ' Sparrow Force ' ) and the island of Ambon ( ' Gull Force ' ) to defend these strategic locations from Japanese attack . The 2 / 2nd Independent Company was also sent to Dili in Portuguese Timor in violation of Portugal 's neutrality . The force at Ambon was defeated by the Japanese landing on 30 January and surrendered on 3 February 1942 . Over 300 Australian prisoners were subsequently killed by Japanese troops in a series of mass executions during February . While the force at Koepang was defeated after the Japanese landed there on 20 February and also surrendered , Australian commandos waged a guerrilla campaign against the Japanese in Portuguese Timor until February 1943 . Voyager and Armidale were lost in September and December 1942 , respectively , while operating in support of the commandos . 
 In the lead @-@ up to the Japanese invasion of Java a force of 242 carrier and land @-@ based aircraft attacked Darwin on 19 February 1942 . At the time Darwin was an important base for Allied warships and a staging point for shipping supplies and reinforcements into the NEI . The Japanese attack was successful , and resulted in the deaths of at least 243 military personnel and civilians , most of whom were non @-@ Australian Allied seamen , and heavy damage to RAAF Base Darwin and the town 's port facilities . 
 Several Australian warships , a 3 @,@ 000 strong Army unit and aircraft from several RAAF squadrons participated in the unsuccessful defence of Java when the Japanese invaded the island in March 1942 . Perth formed part of the main American @-@ British @-@ Dutch @-@ Australian Command ( ABDACOM ) naval force which was defeated in the Battle of the Java Sea on 27 February during an attempt to intercept one of the Japanese invasion convoys . Perth was sunk on 1 March when she and USS Houston encountered another Japanese invasion force while trying to escape to Tjilatjap on the south coast of Java . The sloop Yarra was also sunk off the south coast of Java when she was attacked by three Japanese cruisers while escorting a convoy on 4 March . Other Australian warships , including the light cruiser Hobart and several corvettes successfully escaped from NEI waters . An army force made up of elements from the 7th Division also formed part of the ABDACOM land forces on Java but saw little action before it surrendered at Bandung on 12 March after the Dutch forces on the island began to capitulate . RAAF aircraft operating from bases in Java and Australia also participated in the fighting , and 160 ground crew from No. 1 Squadron RAAF were taken prisoner . 
 Following the conquest of the NEI , the Japanese Navy 's main aircraft carrier force raided the Indian Ocean . This force attacked Ceylon in early April , and Vampire was sunk off Trincomalee on 12 April while escorting HMS Hermes , which was also lost . The Australian Army 's 16th and 17th Brigades formed part of the island 's garrison at the time of the raid but did not see action . 
 = = = Buildup of forces in Australia = = = 
 After the fall of Singapore the Australian Government and many Australians feared that Japan would invade the Australian mainland . Australia was ill @-@ prepared to counter such an attack as the RAAF lacked modern aircraft and the RAN was too small and unbalanced to counter the Imperial Japanese Navy . Additionally , the Army , although large , contained many inexperienced units and lacked mobility . In response to this threat most of the AIF was brought back from the Middle East and the Government appealed to the United States for assistance . British Prime Minister Winston Churchill attempted to divert the 6th and 7th Divisions to Burma while they were en route to Australia , but Curtin refused to authorise this movement . As a compromise two brigades of the 6th Division disembarked at Ceylon and formed part of the island 's garrison until they returned to Australia in August 1942 . 
 The perceived threat of invasion led to a major expansion of the Australian military . By mid @-@ 1942 the Army had a strength of ten infantry divisions , three armoured divisions and hundreds of other units . The RAAF and RAN were also greatly expanded , though it took years for these services to build up to their peak strengths . Due to the increased need for manpower , the restrictions which prohibited non @-@ Europeans from joining the military ceased to be enforced from late 1941 , and about 3000 Indigenous Australians eventually enlisted . Most of these personnel were integrated into existing formations , but a small number of racially segregated units such as the Torres Strait Light Infantry Battalion were formed . A number of small units made up of Indigenous Australians were also established to patrol northern Australia and harass any Japanese forces which landed there ; the members of these units did not receive pay or awards for their service until 1992 . Thousands of Australians who were ineligible for service in the military responded to the threat of attack by joining auxiliary organisations such as the Volunteer Defence Corps and Volunteer Air Observers Corps , which were modelled on the British Home Guard and Royal Observer Corps respectively . Australia 's population and industrial base were not sufficient to maintain the expanded military after the threat of invasion had passed , and the Army was progressively reduced in size from 1943 while only 53 of the 73 RAAF squadrons approved by the government were ever raised . 
 Despite Australian fears , the Japanese never intended to invade the Australian mainland . While an invasion was considered by the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters in February 1942 , it was judged to be beyond the Japanese military 's capabilities and no planning or other preparations were undertaken . Instead , in March 1942 the Japanese military adopted a strategy of isolating Australia from the United States by capturing Port Moresby in New Guinea and the Solomon Islands , Fiji , Samoa and New Caledonia . This plan was frustrated by the Japanese defeat in the Battle of the Coral Sea and was postponed indefinitely after the Battle of Midway . While these battles ended the threat to Australia , the Australian government continued to warn that an invasion was possible until mid @-@ 1943 . 
 The collapse of British power in the Pacific also led Australia to reorient its foreign and military policy towards the United States . In February 1942 the US and British Governments agreed that Australia would become a strategic responsibility of the United States and the Allied ANZAC Force was created specifically to defend the Australian continent . In March , General Douglas MacArthur arrived in Australia after escaping from the Philippines and assumed command of the South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) . All of the Australian military 's combat units in this area were placed under MacArthur 's command , and MacArthur replaced the Australian Chiefs of Staff as the Australian Government 's main source of military advice until the end of the war . Australian General Thomas Blamey was appointed the Allied land force commander , but MacArthur did not permit him to command American forces . MacArthur also rejected US Army Chief of Staff General George Marshall 's request that he appoint Australians to senior posts in his General Headquarters . Nevertheless , the partnership between Curtin and MacArthur proved beneficial for Australia between 1942 and 1944 as MacArthur was able to communicate Australian requests for assistance to the US Government . 
 Large numbers of United States military personnel were based in Australia during the first years of the Pacific War . The first US units arrived in Australia in early 1942 and almost 1 million US personnel passed through Australia during the war . Many US military bases were constructed in northern Australia during 1942 and 1943 , and Australia remained an important source of supplies to US forces in the Pacific until the end of the war . Though relations between Australians and Americans were generally good , there was some conflict between US and Australian soldiers , such as the Battle of Brisbane , and the Australian Government only reluctantly accepted the presence of African American troops . 
 = = = Papuan campaign = = = 
 Japanese forces first landed on the mainland of New Guinea on 8 March 1942 when they invaded Lae and Salamaua to secure bases for the defence of the important base they were developing at Rabaul . Australian guerrillas from the New Guinea Volunteer Rifles established observation posts around the Japanese beachheads and the 2 / 5th Independent Company successfully raided Salamaua on 29 June . 
 After the Battle of the Coral Sea frustrated the Japanese plan to capture Port <unk> via an amphibious landing , the Japanese attempted to capture the town by landing the South Seas Force at Buna on the north coast of Papua and advancing overland using the Kokoda Track to cross the rugged Owen Stanley Range . The Kokoda Track campaign began on 22 July when the Japanese began their advance , opposed by an ill @-@ prepared CMF brigade designated ' Maroubra Force ' . This force was successful in delaying the South Seas Force but was unable to halt it . Two AIF battalions from the 7th Division reinforced the remnants of Maroubra Force on 26 August but the Japanese continued to make ground and reached the village of Ioribaiwa near Port Moresby on 16 September . The South Seas Force was forced to withdraw back along the track on this day , however , as supply problems made any further advance impossible and an Allied counter @-@ landing at Buna was feared . Australian forces pursued the Japanese along the Kokoda Track and forced them into a small bridgehead on the north coast of Papua in early November . The Allied operations on the Kokoda Track were made possible by native Papuans who were recruited by the Australian New Guinea Administrative Unit , often forcibly , to carry supplies and evacuate wounded personnel . The RAAF and USAAF also played an important role throughout the campaign by attacking the Japanese force 's supply lines and airdropping supplies to Australian Army units . 
 Australian forces also defeated an attempt to capture the strategic Milne Bay area in August 1942 . During the Battle of Milne Bay two brigades of Australian troops , designated Milne Force , supported by two RAAF fighter squadrons and US Army engineers defeated a smaller Japanese invasion force made up of Japanese Special Naval Landing Forces units . This was the first notable Japanese land defeat and raised Allied morale across the Pacific Theatre . 
 Australian and US forces attacked the Japanese bridgehead in Papua in late November 1942 but did not capture it until January 1943 . The Allied force comprised the exhausted 7th Division and the inexperienced and ill @-@ trained US 32nd Infantry Division and was short of artillery and supplies . Due to a lack of supporting weapons and MacArthur and Blamey 's insistence on a rapid advance the Allied tactics during the battle were centred around infantry assaults on the Japanese fortifications . These resulted in heavy casualties and the area was not secured until 22 January 1943 . Throughout the fighting in Papua , most of the Australian personnel captured by Japanese troops were murdered . In response , Australian soldiers aggressively sought to kill their Japanese opponents for the remainder of the war . The Australians generally did not attempt to capture Japanese personnel , and some prisoners of war were murdered . 
 Following the defeats in Papua and Guadalcanal the Japanese withdrew to a defensive perimeter in the Territory of New Guinea . In order to secure their important bases at Lae and Salamaua they attempted to capture Wau in January 1943 . Reinforcements were flown into the town and defeated the Japanese force in its outskirts following heavy fighting . The Japanese force began to withdraw towards the coast on 4 February . Following their defeat at Wau the Japanese attempted to reinforce Lae in preparation for an expected Allied offensive in the area . This ended in disaster when , during the Battle of the Bismarck Sea , a troop convoy was destroyed by USAAF and RAAF aircraft from the US Fifth Air Force and No. 9 Operational Group RAAF with the loss of about 3 @,@ 000 troops . 
 The Papuan campaign led to a significant reform in the composition of the Australian Army . During the campaign , the restriction banning CMF personnel from serving outside of Australian territory hampered military planning and caused tensions between the AIF and CMF . In late 1942 and early 1943 Curtin overcame opposition within the Labor Party to extending the geographic boundaries in which conscripts could serve to include most of the South West Pacific and the necessary legislation was passed in January 1943 . The 11th Brigade was the only CMF formation to serve outside of Australian territory , however , when it formed part of Merauke Force in the NEI during 1943 and 1944 . 
 = = = Attacks on Australian shipping = = = 
 The Japanese efforts to secure New Guinea included a prolonged submarine offensive against the Allied lines of communication between the United States and Australia and Australia and New Guinea . These were not the first Axis naval attacks on Australia ; during 1940 and 1941 five German surface raiders operated in Australian waters at various times . The German attacks were not successful in disrupting Australian merchant shipping , though Sydney was sunk with the loss her entire crew of 641 men in November 1941 in a battle with the German auxiliary cruiser Kormoran , off the coast of Western Australia . 
 Following the defeat of the Japanese surface fleet the IJN deployed submarines to disrupt Allied supply lines by attacking shipping off the Australian east coast . This campaign began with an unsuccessful midget submarine raid on Sydney Harbour on the night of 31 May 1942 . Following this attack , Japanese submarines operated along the Australian east coast until August 1942 , sinking eight merchant ships . The submarine offensive resumed in January 1943 and continued until June during which time a further 15 ships were sunk off the east coast . The 1943 sinkings included the hospital ship Centaur , which was torpedoed off Queensland on 14 May with the loss of 268 lives . The Japanese did not conduct further submarine attacks against Australia after June 1943 as their submarines were needed to counter Allied offensives elsewhere in the Pacific . A single German submarine , U @-@ 862 , operated in the Pacific Ocean during the war , cruising off the Australian coast and New Zealand in December 1944 and January 1945 . It sank two ships in Australian waters before returning to Batavia . 
 Considerable Australian and other Allied military resources were devoted to protecting shipping and ports from Axis submarines and warships . For instance , the RAN escorted over 1 @,@ 100 coastal convoys the Army established coastal defences to protect important ports and a high proportion of the RAAF 's operational squadrons were used to protect shipping at various times . Nevertheless , the use of these units for defensive tasks and the shipping casualties in Australian waters did not seriously affect the Australian economy or Allied war effort . 
 = = = New Guinea offensives = = = 
 After halting the Japanese advance , Allied forces went on the offensive across the SWPA from mid 1943 . Australian forces played a key role throughout this offensive , which was designated Operation Cartwheel . In particular , General Blamey oversaw a highly successful series of operations around the north @-@ east tip of New Guinea which " was the high point of Australia 's experience of operational level command " during the war . 
 After the successful defence of Wau the 3rd Division began advancing towards Salamaua in April 1943 . This advance was mounted to divert attention from Lae , which was one of the main objectives of Operation Cartwheel , and proceeded slowly . In late June the 3rd Division was reinforced by the US 162nd Regimental Combat Team which staged an amphibious landing to the south of Salamaua . The town was eventually captured on 11 September 1943 . 
 In early September 1943 Australian @-@ led forces mounted a pincer movement to capture Lae . On 4 September 9 Division made an amphibious landing to the east of the town and began advancing to the west . The following day , the US 503rd Parachute Regiment made an unopposed parachute drop at Nadzab , just west of Lae . Once the airborne forces secured Nadzab Airfield the 7th Division was flown in and began advancing to the east in a race with the 9th Division to capture Lae . This race was won by the 7th Division , which captured the town on 15 September . The Japanese forces at Salamaua and Lae suffered heavy losses during this campaign , but were able to escape to the north . 
 After the fall of Lae the 9th Division was given the task of capturing the Huon Peninsula . The 20th Brigade landed near the strategic harbour of Finschhafen on 22 September 1943 and secured the area . The Japanese responded by dispatching the 20th Division overland to the area and the remainder of the 9th Division was gradually brought in to reinforce the 20th Brigade against the expected counter @-@ attack . The Japanese mounted a strong attack in mid @-@ October which was defeated by the 9th Division after heavy fighting . During the second half of November the 9th Division captured the hills inland of Finschhafen from well dug in Japanese forces . Following its defeat the 20th Division retreated along the coast with the 9th Division and 4th Brigade in pursuit . The Allies scored a major intelligence victory towards the end of this campaign when Australian engineers found the 20th Division 's entire cipher library , which had been buried by the retreating Japanese . These documents led to a code breaking breakthrough which enabled MacArthur to accelerate the Allied advance by bypassing Japanese defences . 
 While the 9th Division secured the coastal region of the Huon Peninsula the 7th Division drove the Japanese from the inland Finisterre Range . The Finisterre Range campaign began on 17 September when the 2 / 6th Independent Company was air @-@ landed in the Markham Valley . The company defeated a larger Japanese force at Kaiapit and secured an airstrip which was used to fly the Division 's 21st and 25th Brigades in . Through aggressive patrolling the Australians forced the Japanese out of positions in extremely rugged terrain and in January 1944 the division began its attack on the key Shaggy Ridge position . The ridge was taken by the end of January , with the RAAF playing a key supporting role . Following this success the Japanese withdrew from the Finisterre Range and Australian troops linked up with American patrols from Saidor on 21 April and secured Madang on 24 April . 
 In addition to supporting the Army 's operations on the New Guinea mainland , the RAN and RAAF took part in offensive operations in the Solomon Islands . This involvement had begun in August 1942 when both of the RAN 's heavy cruisers , Australia and Canberra , supported the US Marine landing at Guadalcanal . On the night after the landing , Canberra was sunk during the Battle of Savo Island and the RAN played no further role in the Guadalcanal Campaign . RAAF aircraft supported several US Army and Marine landings during 1943 and 1944 and a RAAF radar unit participated in the capture of Arawe . The Australian cruisers Australia and Shropshire and destroyers Arunta and Warramunga provided fire support for the US 1st Marine Division during the Battle of Cape Gloucester and the US 1st Cavalry Division during the Admiralty Islands campaign in late 1943 and early 1944 . The landing at Cape Gloucester was also the first operation for the RAN amphibious transport Westralia . 
 = = = North Western Area Campaign = = = 
 The attack on Darwin in February 1942 marked the start of a prolonged aerial campaign over northern Australia and the Japanese @-@ occupied Netherlands East Indies . Following the first attack on Darwin the Allies rapidly deployed fighter squadrons and reinforced the Army 's Northern Territory Force to protect the town from a feared invasion . These air units also attacked Japanese positions in the NEI and the Japanese responded by staging dozens of air raids on Darwin and nearby airfields during 1942 and 1943 , few of which caused significant damage . These raids were opposed by US , Australian and British fighters and suffered increasingly heavy casualties as Darwin 's defences were improved . The Japanese also conducted a number of small and ineffective raids on towns and airfields in northern Queensland and Western Australia during 1942 and 1943 . 
 While the Japanese raids on northern Australia ceased in late 1943 , the Allied air offensive continued until the end of the war . During late 1942 Allied aircraft conducted attacks on Timor in support of the Australian guerrillas operating there . From early 1943 United States heavy bomber squadrons operated against Japanese targets in the eastern NEI from bases near Darwin . The Allied air offensive against the NEI intensified from June 1943 in order to divert Japanese forces away from New Guinea and the Solomons and involved Australian , Dutch and United States bomber units . These attacks continued until the end of the war , with the US heavy bombers being replaced by Australian B @-@ 24 Liberator @-@ equipped squadrons in late 1944 . From 1944 several RAAF PBY Catalina squadrons were also based at Darwin and conducted highly effective mine @-@ laying sorties across South East Asia . 
 = = = Advance to the Philippines = = = 
 The Australian military 's role in the South @-@ West Pacific decreased during 1944 . In the latter half of 1943 the Australian Government decided , with MacArthur 's agreement , that the size of the military would be reduced to release manpower for war @-@ related industries which were important to supplying Britain and the US forces in the Pacific . Australia 's main role in the Allied war effort from this point forward was supplying the other Allied countries with food , materials and manufactured goods needed for the defeat of Japan . As a result of this policy , the Army units available for offensive operations were set at six infantry divisions ( the three AIF divisions and three CMF divisions ) and two armoured brigades . The size of the RAAF was set at 53 squadrons and the RAN was limited to the ships which were in service or planned to be built at the time . In early 1944 all but two of the Army 's divisions were withdrawn to the Atherton Tableland in north Queensland for training and rehabilitation . Several new battalions of Australian @-@ led Papuan and New Guinea troops were formed during 1944 and organised into the Pacific Islands Regiment , however , and largely replaced the Australian Army battalions disbanded during the year . These troops had seen action alongside Australian units throughout the New Guinea campaign . 
 After the liberation of most of Australian New Guinea the RAAF and RAN participated in the US @-@ led Western New Guinea campaign , which had the goal of securing bases to be used to mount the liberation of the Philippines . Australian warships and the fighter , bomber and airfield construction squadrons of No. 10 Operational Group RAAF participated in the capture of Hollandia , Biak , Noemfoor and Morotai . After western New Guinea was secured No. 10 Operation Group was renamed the First Tactical Air Force ( 1TAF ) and was used to protect the flank of the Allied advance by attacking Japanese positions in the NEI and performing other garrison tasks . The losses incurred whilst performing these relatively unimportant roles led to a decline in morale , and contributed to the ' Morotai Mutiny ' in April 1945 . 
 Elements of the RAN and RAAF also took part in the liberation of the Philippines . Four Australian warships and the assault transports Kanimbla , Manoora and Westralia — along with a number of smaller warships and support ships — took part in the US landing at Leyte on 20 October 1944 . Australian sources state that Australia became the first Allied ship to be struck by a kamikaze when she was attacked during this operation on 21 October , though this claim was disputed by US historian Samuel Eliot Morison . Australian ships also participated in the Battle of Leyte Gulf , with Shropshire and Arunta engaging Japanese ships during the Battle of Surigao Strait on 25 October . The Australian naval force took part in the Invasion of Lingayen Gulf in January 1945 ; during this operation Australia was struck by a further five Kamikazes which killed 44 of her crew and forced her to withdraw for major repairs . RAN ships also escorted US supply convoys bound for the Philippines . The RAAF 's No. 3 Airfield Construction Squadron and No. 1 Wireless Unit also landed in the Philippines and supported US operations there , and 1TAF raided targets in the southern Philippines from bases in the NEI and New Guinea . 
 While the Australian Government offered MacArthur I Corps for service in Leyte and Luzon , nothing came of several proposals to utilise it in the liberation of these islands . The Army 's prolonged period of relative inactivity during 1944 led to public concern , and many Australians believed that the AIF should be demobilised if it could not be used for offensive operations . This was politically embarrassing for the government , and helped motivate it to look for new areas where the military could be employed . 
 = = = Mopping up in New Guinea and the Solomons = = = 
 In late 1944 , the Australian Government committed twelve Australian Army brigades to replace six US Army divisions which were conducting defensive roles in Bougainville , New Britain and the Aitape @-@ Wewak area in New Guinea . While the US units had largely conducted a static defence of their positions , their Australian replacements mounted offensive operations designed to destroy the remaining Japanese forces in these areas . The value of these campaigns was controversial at the time and remains so to this day . The Australian Government authorised these operations for primarily political reasons . It was believed that keeping the Army involved in the war would give Australia greater influence in any post @-@ war peace conferences and that liberating Australian territories would enhance Australia 's influence in its region . Critics of these campaigns argue that they were unnecessary and wasteful of the lives of the Australian soldiers involved as the Japanese forces were already isolated and ineffective . 
 The 5th Division replaced the US 40th Infantry Division on New Britain during October and November 1944 and continued the New Britain Campaign with the goals of protecting Allied bases and confining the large Japanese force on the island to the area around Rabaul . In late November the 5th Division established bases closer to the Japanese perimeter and began aggressive patrols supported by the Allied Intelligence Bureau . The division conducted amphibious landings at Open Bay and Wide Bay at the base of the Gazelle Peninsula in early 1945 and defeated the small Japanese garrisons in these areas . By April the Japanese had been confined to their fortified positions in the Gazelle Peninsula by the Australian force 's aggressive patrolling . The 5th Division suffered 53 fatalities and 140 wounded during this campaign . After the war it was found that the Japanese force was 93 @,@ 000 strong , which was much higher than the 38 @,@ 000 which Allied intelligence had estimated remained on New Britain . 
 The II Corps continued the Bougainville Campaign after it replaced the US Army 's XIV Corps between October and December 1944 . The corps consisted of the 3rd Division , 11th Brigade and Fiji Infantry Regiment on Bougainville and the 23rd Brigade which garrisoned neighbouring islands and was supported by RAAF , RNZAF and USMC air units . While the XIV Corps had maintained a defensive posture , the Australians conducted offensive operations aimed at destroying the Japanese force on Bougainville . As the Japanese were split into several enclaves the II Corps fought geographically separated campaigns in the north , centre and southern portions of the island . The main focus was against the Japanese base at Buin in the south , and the offensives in the north and centre of the island were largely suspended from May 1945 . While Australian operations on Bougainville continued until the end of the war , large Japanese forces remained at Buin and in the north of the island . 
 The 6th Division was assigned responsibility for completing the destruction of the Japanese Eighteenth Army , which was the last large Japanese force remaining in the Australian portion of New Guinea . The division was reinforced by CMF and armoured units and began arriving at Aitape in October 1944 . The 6th Division was also supported by several RAAF squadrons and RAN warships . In late 1944 the Australians launched a two @-@ pronged offensive to the east towards Wewak . The 17th Brigade advanced through the inland Torricelli Mountains while the remainder of the division moved along the coast . Although the Eighteenth Army had suffered heavy casualties from previous fighting and disease , it mounted a strong resistance and inflicted significant casualties . The 6th Division 's advance was also hampered by supply difficulties and bad weather . The Australians secured the coastal area by early May , with Wewak being captured on 10 May after a small force was landed to the east of the town . By the end of the war the Eighteenth Army had been forced into what it had designated its ' last stand ' area which was under attack from the 6th Division . The Aitape @-@ Wewak campaign cost Australia 442 lives while about 9 @,@ 000 Japanese died and another 269 were taken prisoner . 
 = = = Borneo Campaign = = = 
 The Borneo Campaign of 1945 was the last major Allied campaign in the SWPA . In a series of amphibious assaults between 1 May and 21 July , the Australian I Corps , under Lieutenant General Leslie Morshead , attacked Japanese forces occupying the island . Allied naval and air forces , centred on the US 7th Fleet under Admiral Thomas Kinkaid , 1TAF and the US Thirteenth Air Force also played important roles in the campaign . The goals of this campaign were to capture Borneo 's oilfields and Brunei Bay to support the US @-@ led invasion of Japan and British @-@ led liberation of Malaya which were planned to take place later in 1945 . The Australian Government did not agree to MacArthur 's proposal to extend the offensive to include the liberation of Java in July 1945 , however , and its decision to not release the 6th Division for this operation contributed to it not going ahead . 
 The campaign opened on 1 May 1945 when the 26th Brigade Group landed on the small island of Tarakan off the east coast of Borneo . The goal of this operation was to secure the island 's airstrip as a base to support the planned landings at Brunei and Balikpapan . While it had been expected that it would take only a few weeks to secure Tarakan and re @-@ open the airstrip , intensive fighting on the island lasted until 19 June and the airstrip was not opened until 28 June . As a result , the operation is generally considered to have not been worthwhile . 
 The second phase of the Borneo Campaign began on 10 June when the 9th Division conducted simultaneous assaults on the north @-@ west on the island of Labuan and the coast of Brunei . While Brunei was quickly secured , the Japanese garrison on Labuan held out for over a week . After the Brunei Bay region was secured the 24th Brigade was landed in North Borneo and the 20th Brigade advanced along the western coast of Borneo south from Brunei . Both brigades rapidly advanced against weak Japanese resistance , and most of north @-@ west Borneo was liberated by the end of the war . During the campaign the 9th Division was assisted by indigenous fighters who were waging a guerrilla war against Japanese forces with the support of Australian special forces . 
 The third and final stage of the Borneo Campaign was the capture of Balikpapan on the central east coast of the island . This operation had been opposed by General Blamey , who believed that it was unnecessary , but went ahead on the orders of Macarthur . After a 20 @-@ day preliminary air and naval bombardment the 7th Division landed near the town on 1 July . Balikpapan and its surrounds were secured after some heavy fighting on 21 July but mopping up continued until the end of the war . The capture of Balikpapan was the last large @-@ scale land operation conducted by the Western Allies during World War II . Although the Borneo Campaign was criticised in Australia at the time , and in subsequent years , as pointless or a waste of the lives of soldiers , it did achieve a number of objectives , such as increasing the isolation of significant Japanese forces occupying the main part of the Dutch East Indies , capturing major oil supplies and freeing Allied prisoners of war , who were being held in deteriorating conditions . 
 Australia 's leadership changed again during the Borneo Campaign . Prime Minister Curtin suffered a heart attack in November 1944 and Deputy Prime Minister Frank Forde acted in his place until 22 January 1945 . Curtin was hospitalised with another bout of illness in April 1945 and Treasurer Ben Chifley became acting Prime Minister as Forde was attending the San Francisco Conference . Curtin died on 5 July 1945 and Forde was sworn in as Prime Minister . Forde did not have the support of his party , however , and was replaced by Chifley after a leadership ballot was held on 13 July . 
 = = = Intelligence and special forces = = = 
 Australia developed large intelligence services during the war . Prior the outbreak of war the Australian military possessed almost no intelligence gathering facilities and was reliant on information passed on by the British intelligence services . Several small signals intelligence units were established in 1939 and 1940 , which had some success intercepting and deciphering Japanese transmissions before the outbreak of the Pacific War . 
 MacArthur began organising large scale intelligence services shortly after his arrival in Australia . On 15 April 1942 , the joint Australian @-@ US Central Bureau signals intelligence organisation was established at Melbourne . Central Bureau 's headquarters moved to Brisbane in July 1942 and Manila in May 1945 . Australians made up half the strength of Central Bureau , which was expanded to over 4 @,@ 000 personnel by 1945 . The Australian Army and RAAF also provided most of the Allied radio interception capability in the SWPA , and the number of Australian radio interception units was greatly expanded between 1942 and 1945 . Central Bureau broke a number of Japanese codes and the intelligence gained from these decryptions and radio direction finding greatly assisted Allied forces in the SWPA . 
 Australian special forces played a significant role in the Pacific War . Following the outbreak of war commando companies were deployed to Timor , the Solomon and Bismarck islands and New Caledonia . Although the 1st Independent Company was swiftly overwhelmed when the Japanese invaded the Solomon Islands in early 1942 , the 2 / 2nd and 2 / 4th Independent Companies waged a successful guerrilla campaign on Timor which lasted from February 1942 to February 1943 when the Australian force was evacuated . Other commando units also played an important role in the New Guinea , New Britain , Bougainville and Borneo campaigns throughout the war where they were used to collect intelligence , spearhead offensives and secure the flanks of operations conducted by conventional infantry . 
 Australia also formed small @-@ scale raiding and reconnaissance forces , most of which were grouped together as the Allied Intelligence Bureau . Z Special Unit conducted raids far behind the front line , including a successful raid on Singapore in September 1943 . M Special Unit , coastwatchers and smaller AIB units also operated behind Japanese lines to collect intelligence . AIB parties were often used to support Australian Army units and were assigned to inappropriate tasks such as tactical reconnaissance and liaison . AIB missions in Timor and Dutch New Guinea were also hampered by being placed under the command of unpopular Dutch colonial administrators . The RAAF formed a specially @-@ equipped unit ( No. 200 Flight ) in 1945 to support these operations by transporting and supplying AIB parties in areas held by the Japanese . 
 = = = Operations against the Japanese home islands = = = 
 Australia played a minor role in the Japan campaign in the last months of the war and was preparing to participate in the invasion of Japan at the time the war ended . Several Australian warships operated with the British Pacific Fleet ( BPF ) during the Battle of Okinawa and Australian destroyers later escorted British aircraft carriers and battleships during attacks on targets in the Japanese home islands . Despite its distance from Japan , Australia was the BPF 's main base and a large number of facilities were built to support the fleet . 
 Australia 's participation in the planned invasion of Japan would have involved elements of all three services fighting as part of Commonwealth forces . It was planned to form a new 10th Division from existing AIF personnel which would form part of the Commonwealth Corps with British , Canadian and New Zealand units . The corps ' organisation was to be identical to that of a US Army corps , and it would have participated in the invasion of the Japanese home island of Honshū which was scheduled for March 1946 . Australian ships would have operated with the BPF and US Pacific Fleet and two RAAF heavy bomber squadrons and a transport squadron were scheduled to be redeployed from Britain to Okinawa to join the strategic bombardment of Japan as part of Tiger Force . Planning for operations against Japan ceased in August 1945 when Japan surrendered following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 
 General Blamey signed the Japanese Instrument of Surrender on behalf of Australia during the ceremony held on board USS Missouri on 2 September 1945 . Several RAN warships were among the Allied ships anchored in Tokyo Bay during the proceedings . Following the main ceremony on board Missouri , Japanese field commanders surrendered to Allied forces across the Pacific Theatre . Australian forces accepted the surrender of their Japanese opponents at ceremonies conducted at Morotai , several locations in Borneo , Timor , Wewak , Rabaul , Bougainville and Nauru . 
 = = Australians in other theatres = = 
 In addition to the major deployments , Australian military units and service men and women served in other theatres of the war , typically as part of British @-@ led Commonwealth forces . About 14 @,@ 000 Australians also served in the Merchant Navy and crewed ships in many areas of the world . 
 Australia played a minor role in the British @-@ led campaigns against Vichy French colonial possessions in Africa . In late September 1940 , the heavy cruiser Australia took part in the unsuccessful British and Free French attempt to capture Dakar in which she sank a Vichy French destroyer . The Australian Government was not informed of the cruiser 's involvement in this operation prior to the battle and complained to the British Government . Three Australian destroyers also took part in the invasion of Madagascar in September 1942 . Closer to home , Adelaide played a significant role in ensuring that New Caledonia came under Free French control in September 1940 by escorting a pro @-@ Free French Governor to Nouméa and taking station off the city during the popular protests which resulted in the Governor replacing the pro @-@ Vichy authorities . 
 Australian warships served in the Red Sea and Persian Gulf through much of the war . From June to October 1940 HMAS Hobart took part in the East African Campaign , and played an important role in the successful evacuation of Berbera . In May 1941 , Yarra supported an operation in which Gurkha troops were landed near Basra during the Anglo @-@ Iraqi War . In August 1941 Yarra and Kanimbla took part in the Anglo @-@ Soviet invasion of Iran , with Yarra sinking the Iranian sloop <unk> near <unk> and Kanimbla landing troops at Bandar Shapur . A dozen Bathurst class corvettes also escorted Allied shipping in the Persian Gulf during 1942 . 
 While most Australian units in the Pacific Theatre fought in the SWPA , hundreds of Australians were posted to British units in Burma and India . These included 45 men from the 8th Division who volunteered to train Chinese guerrillas with the British Mission 204 in southern China and served there from February to September 1942 . Hundreds of Australians also served with RAF units in India and Burma , though no RAAF units were deployed to this theatre . In May 1943 , some 330 Australians were serving in forty @-@ one squadrons in India , of which only nine had more than ten Australians . In addition , many of the RAN 's corvettes and destroyers served with the British Eastern Fleet where they were normally used to protect convoys in the Indian Ocean from attacks by Japanese and German submarines . 
 = = Prisoners of war = = 
 Just under 29 @,@ 000 Australians were taken prisoner by the Axis during the war . Only 14 @,@ 000 of the 21 @,@ 467 Australian prisoners taken by the Japanese survived captivity . The majority of the deaths in captivity were due to malnutrition and disease . 
 The 8 @,@ 000 Australians captured by Germany and Italy were generally treated in accordance with the Geneva Conventions . The majority of these men were taken during the fighting in Greece and Crete in 1941 , with the next largest group being 1 @,@ 400 airmen shot down over Europe . Like other western Allied POWs , the Australians were held in permanent camps in Italy and Germany . As the war neared its end the Germans moved many prisoners towards the interior of the country to prevent them from being liberated by the advancing Allied armies . These movements were often made through forced marches in harsh weather and resulted in many deaths . Four Australians were also executed following a mass escape from Stalag Luft III in March 1944 . While the Australian prisoners suffered a higher death rate in German and Italian captivity than their counterparts in World War I , it was much lower than the rate suffered under Japanese internment . 
 Like the other Allied personnel captured by the Japanese , most of the thousands of Australians captured in the first months of 1942 during the conquest of Malaya and Singapore , the NEI and New Guinea were held in harsh conditions . Australians were held in camps across the Asia @-@ Pacific region and many endured long voyages in grossly overcrowded ships . While most of the Australian POWs who died in Japanese captivity were the victim of deliberate malnutrition and disease , hundreds were deliberately killed by their guards . The Burma @-@ Thai Railway was the most notorious of the prisoner of war experiences , as 13 @,@ 000 Australians worked on it at various times during 1942 and 1943 alongside thousands of other Allied POWs and Asians conscripted by the Japanese ; nearly 2 @,@ 650 Australians died there . Thousands of Australian POWs were also sent to the Japanese home islands where they worked in factories and mines in generally harsh conditions . The POWs held in camps at Ambon and Borneo suffered the highest death rates ; 77 percent of those at Ambon died and few of the 2 @,@ 500 Australian and British prisoners in Borneo survived ; almost all were killed by overwork and a series of death marches in 1945 . 
 The treatment of the POWs prompted many Australians to remain hostile towards Japan after the war . Australian authorities investigated the abuses against Allied POWs in their country 's zone of responsibility after the war , and guards who were believed to have mistreated prisoners were among those tried by Australian @-@ administered war crimes trials . 
 Thousands of Axis POWs were held in Australia during the war . A total of 25 @,@ 720 POWs were held in Australia : 18 @,@ 432 Italians , 5 @,@ 637 Japanese and 1 @,@ 651 Germans . These prisoners were housed in purpose @-@ built camps and were treated in accordance with the Geneva Convention . A total of 16 @,@ 798 civilians were also interned . These included 8 @,@ 921 Australian @-@ resident " enemy aliens " , while the remainder were civilians sent to Australia for internment by other Allied countries . On the morning of 5 August 1944 , approximately half of the 1 @,@ 104 Japanese held at a camp near Cowra , New South Wales attempted to escape . The prisoners overwhelmed their guards and over 400 broke through the wire fences ; however , every escapee was either recaptured or killed within 10 days . 
 = = Home front = = 
 During the war the Australian Government greatly expanded its powers in order to better direct the war effort , and Australia 's industrial and human resources were focused on supporting the Allied armed forces . The expansion of the government 's powers began on 9 September 1939 when the National Security Act became law . This act enabled the government to introduce industrial conscription , and both men and women were ordered into essential industries . Rationing was first introduced in 1940 and was greatly expanded during 1942 . The Government also strongly encouraged austerity and war bonds as a means of reducing demand for scarce resources . 
 Government policies to develop war @-@ related industries were successful in increasing the sophistication of Australia 's industrial sector and self @-@ sufficiency in most categories of weapons . In the decades leading up to the war successive Australian governments had provided subsidies , tariffs and other incentives encourage the development of military @-@ related manufacturing sectors such as the production of aircraft , automobiles , electronics and chemicals . These secondary industries were integrated into a war economy during 1940 and 1941 and were able to meet most of the Army 's needs by 1942 . Government @-@ led efforts to develop and manufacture advanced technology enjoyed some notable successes , including the development of lightweight radar sets , optical devices for artillery and equipment adapted for use in the tropics . Australian industry also developed new weapons which were mass @-@ produced for the military , including the Owen submachine gun and a shortened version of the Ordnance QF 25 pounder . In addition , Australian scientists and pharmaceutical companies made important advances in the treatment of tropical diseases . Not all development projects were successful though : efforts to develop an Australian tank ( the Sentinel ) did not cease until after it had been rendered obsolete and unnecessary , and the development of Australian @-@ designed advanced bomber and fighter aircraft ( the CAC Woomera and CAC CA @-@ 15 respectively ) were abandoned as the engines these aircraft required were not available and adequate US and British designs were produced under licence instead . 
 The massive expansion of the military led to a critical shortage of male workers and increased female participation in the labour force . The number of Australian women in paid employment increased from 644 @,@ 000 in 1939 to 855 @,@ 000 in 1944 . While this was only a 5 percentage point increase in the proportion of all Australian women who were working , large numbers of women moved from traditionally " female " roles such as domestic servants into " male " roles in industry . Female branches of the armed forces were established in 1941 , and by 1944 almost 50 @,@ 000 women were serving in the Women 's Royal Australian Naval Service , Australian Women 's Army Service and Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force . Thousands more served with the civilian Australian Women 's Land Army or undertook voluntary war work . Manpower shortages became an increasingly significant economic issue towards the end of the war , and the Australian military was reduced in size from 1944 to free up personnel for war industries and the civilian economy . 
 Industrial conscription and the drive to increase productivity led to an increasing degree of industrial unrest over time . Many workers were required to work long hours in poor conditions and were not able to change their employment due to the manpower laws . Poor work conditions were exacerbated by the Government 's austerity measures reducing workers ' standards of living . As a result , strikes and other forms of protest disrupted Australian production , especially from 1943 onwards . These protests attracted considerable criticism from other civilians and members of the military . In May 1943 the Government introduced policies which enabled workers who were undertaking unlawful industrial action to be conscripted into the military , but this had little impact due to the shortage of skilled labour in the industries most prone to industrial disputes . 
 World War II marked the beginning of a long period of Australian economic growth . The war greatly increased the size and importance of the Australian manufacturing sector and stimulated the development of more technologically advanced industries . As part of this trend many workers acquired relatively high skill levels and female labour force participation rates greatly increased . Many women were forced out of traditionally male @-@ dominated industries after the war , however . 
 = = After the war = = 
 World War II cost thousands of Australian lives and consumed a large portion of the national income . During the war , 27 @,@ 073 members of the Australian military were either killed , died of wounds or died while prisoners of war . Of these , 9 @,@ 572 were killed in the war against Germany and Italy and 17 @,@ 501 in the war against Japan . Prisoners of war held by the Japanese made up nearly half of Australia 's deaths in the Pacific . At least 386 Australian civilian seamen were killed during the war . Total Australian war expenditure was £ 2 @,@ 949 @,@ 380 @,@ 000 and at its peak in 1942 – 43 , military costs accounted for 40 @.@ 1 percent of national income . 
 In the months after the war , Australian authorities were responsible for administering all of Borneo and the NEI east of Lombok until the British and Dutch colonial governments were re @-@ established . While British and Indian forces in the west of the NEI became caught up in the Indonesian National Revolution , the Australians were able to avoid clashes with local nationalists . Australian forces were also responsible for guarding the 344 @,@ 000 remaining Japanese in the NEI and Australian territories and administering war crimes trials in these areas . A volunteer force was formed as Australia 's contribution to the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) in Japan , and Australia provided the BCOF 's headquarters and a high proportion of its personnel . This force later formed the nucleus of the post @-@ war Australian Army , which included permanent combat units for the first time . 
 The Australian military was rapidly demobilised after the Japanese surrender . At the end of the war the military had a strength of nearly 600 @,@ 000 personnel , of whom 224 @,@ 000 were serving in the Pacific and 20 @,@ 000 in Britain and other places . Demobilisation planning had begun at the end of 1942 with the final scheme being approved by the Government in March 1945 . General demobilisation started on 1 October 1945 and was completed in February 1947 . The process generally ran smoothly , though there were protests over delays at Morotai and Bougainville . Personnel were provided with training while they waited to be demobilised and the government provided post @-@ demobilisation assistance with employment , loans , education and other benefits . Service women were given similar assistance to their male counterparts , but were placed under pressure to return to ' traditional ' family roles . 
 World War II led to significant changes to Australian society . Economically , the war accelerated the development of Australia 's manufacturing industry and led to a large fall in unemployment . The impact of World War II changed Australian society , and contributed to the development of a more cosmopolitan society in which women were able to play a larger role . The war also resulted in a greater maturity in Australia 's approach to international affairs , as demonstrated by the development of a more independent foreign policy and the encouragement of mass immigration after the war . 
 = Rock Springs massacre = 
 The Rock Springs massacre , also known as the Rock Springs Riot , occurred on September 2 , 1885 , in the present @-@ day United States city of Rock Springs in Sweetwater County , Wyoming . The riot , between Chinese immigrant miners and white immigrant miners , was the result of racial tensions and an ongoing labor dispute over the Union Pacific Coal Department 's policy of paying Chinese miners lower wages than white miners . This policy caused the Chinese to be hired over the white miners , which further angered the white miners and contributed to the riot . Racial tensions were an even bigger factor in the massacre . When the rioting ended , at least 28 Chinese miners were dead and 15 were injured . Rioters burned 75 Chinese homes resulting in approximately US $ 150 @,@ 000 in property damage ( $ 3 @.@ 95 million in present @-@ day terms ) . 
 Tension between whites and Chinese immigrants in the late 19th century American West was particularly high , especially in the decade preceding the violence . The massacre in Rock Springs was the violent outburst of years of anti @-@ Chinese sentiment in the United States . The 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act suspended Chinese immigration for ten years , but not before thousands of immigrants came to the American West . Most Chinese immigrants to Wyoming Territory took jobs with the railroad at first , but many ended up employed in coal mines owned by the Union Pacific Railroad . As Chinese immigration increased , so did anti @-@ Chinese sentiment from whites . The Knights of Labor , one of the foremost voices against Chinese immigrant labor , formed a chapter in Rock Springs in 1883 , and most rioters were members of that organization . However , no direct connection was ever established linking the riot to the national Knights of Labor organization . 
 In the immediate aftermath of the riot , federal troops were deployed in Rock Springs . They escorted the surviving Chinese miners , most of whom had fled to Evanston , Wyoming , back to Rock Springs a week after the riot . Reaction came swiftly from the era 's publications . In Rock Springs , the local newspaper endorsed the outcome of the riot , while in other Wyoming newspapers , support for the riot was limited to sympathy for the causes of the white miners . The massacre in Rock Springs touched off a wave of anti @-@ Chinese violence , especially in the Puget Sound area of Washington Territory . 
 = = Background = = 
 Chinese immigration to the United States at that time was neither uniform nor widespread . J.R. Tucker , writing for The North American Review in 1884 , stated that the vast majority of the nearly 100 @,@ 000 Chinese immigrants resided within the American West : California , Nevada , Oregon , and the Washington Territory . The U.S. Minister to China , George Seward , had asserted similar numbers in Scribner 's Magazine five years earlier . 
 The first jobs Chinese laborers took in Wyoming were on the railroad , working for the Union Pacific company ( UP ) as maintenance @-@ of @-@ way workers . Chinese workers soon became an asset to Union Pacific and worked along UP lines and in UP coal mines from Laramie to Evanston . Most Chinese workers in Wyoming ended up working in Sweetwater County , but a large number settled in Carbon and Uinta counties . Most Chinese people in the area were men working in the mine . Racism against Chinese immigrants was widespread and largely uncontroversial at the time . Tucker , in the aforementioned 1884 article , referred to Asian immigrants as " ... the Asiatic race , alien in blood , habits , and civilization " . He also noted , " Chinese are the chief element in this Asiatic population . " 
 In 1874 – 75 , after labor unrest disrupted coal production , the Union Pacific Coal Department hired Chinese laborers to work in their coal mines throughout southern Wyoming . Even so , the Chinese population rose slowly at first ; however , where there were Chinese immigrants , they were generally concentrated in one area . At Red Desert , a remote section camp in Sweetwater County , there were 20 inhabitants , of whom 12 were Chinese . All 12 were laborers who worked under an American foreman . To the east of Red Desert was another remote section camp , Washakie . An American section foreman lived there amongst 23 others , including 13 Chinese laborers and an Irish crew foreman . In the various section camps along the main line of the Union Pacific Railroad , Chinese workers far outnumbered any other nationality . Though the 79 Chinese in Sweetwater County in 1870 represented only 4 % of the total population , they were , again , concentrated . In Rock Springs and Green River , the largest towns along the UP line , there were no Chinese residents reported in 1870 . 
 Throughout the 1870s , the Chinese population in Sweetwater County and all of Wyoming steadily increased . During the decade , Wyoming 's total population rose from 9 @,@ 118 to 20 @,@ 789 . In the 1870 U.S. Census , what the government today calls " Asian and Pacific Islanders " represented 143 members of the population of Wyoming . The increase during the 1870s was the largest percentage increase in the Asian population of Wyoming of any decade since ; the increase represented a 539 % jump in the Asian population . By 1880 , most Chinese residents in Sweetwater County lived in Rock Springs . At that time , Wyoming was home to 914 " Asians " ; that number fell significantly during the 1880s to 465 . 
 Although most Chinese workers in 1880 were employed in the coal mines around Wyoming and Sweetwater County , the Chinese in Rock Springs worked mostly in occupations outside of mining . In addition to Chinese laborers and miners , a professional gambler , a priest , a cook , and a barber resided in the city . In Green River , Wyoming , there was a Chinese doctor . Chinese servants and waiters found work in Green River and in Fort Washakie . In Atlantic City , Miner 's Delight , and Red Canyon , Wyoming , Chinese gold miners were employed . However , the majority of the 193 Chinese residing in Sweetwater County by 1880 worked in the coal mines or on the railroad . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The riot was the result of a combination of race prejudice and general resentment against Union Pacific . In 1882 , the Chinese Exclusion Act required that " … from and after the expiration of ninety days next after the passage of this act , and until the expiration of ten years next after the passage of this act , the coming of Chinese laborers to the United States be , and the same is hereby , suspended ; and during such suspension it shall not be lawful for any Chinese laborer to come . " In the years preceding the Rock Springs massacre , the importation of Chinese labor was seen as a " system worse than slavery " . The white miners at Rock Springs , being mostly Cornish , Irish , Swedish , and Welsh immigrants , believed lower @-@ paid Chinese laborers drove down their wages . 
 The Chinese at Rock Springs were aware of the animosity and rising racial tension with white miners , but had not taken any precautions , as no prior events indicated there would be any race riots . Underlying the outbreak of violence were racism and resentment of the policies of the Union Pacific Coal Department . Until 1875 , the mines in Rock Springs were worked by whites ; in that year , a strike occurred , and the strikers were replaced with Chinese strikebreakers less than two weeks after the strike began . The company resumed mining with 50 white miners and 150 Chinese miners in its employ . As more Chinese arrived in Rock Springs , bitterness from the white miners increased . At the time of the massacre , there were about 150 white miners and 331 Chinese miners in Rock Springs . 
 In the two years before the massacre , a " <unk> 's Town " was established in Rock Springs . By 1883 , the Knights of Labor organized a chapter in Rock Springs . The Knights were one of the major groups which spearheaded opposition to Chinese labor during the 1880s ; in 1882 , the Knights had worked for the passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act . No evidence has been uncovered to prove that the national Knights of Labor organization was behind the massacre at Rock Springs . In August 1885 , notices were posted from Evanston to Rock Springs , demanding the expulsion of Chinese immigrants , and on the evening of September 1 , 1885 , one day before the violence , white miners in Rock Springs held a meeting regarding the Chinese immigrants . It was rumored that threats were made that night against the Chinese , according to immigrants then residing there . 
 = = Massacre = = 
 = = = Chronology = = = 
 At 7 : 00 a.m. on September 2 , 1885 , ten white men , in ordinary garb and miner 's uniforms , arrived at coal pit number six at the Rock Springs mine . They declared that the Chinese laborers had no right to work in a particularly desirable " room " in the mine ; miners were paid by the ton , thus location was important to the miners . A fight broke out , and two Chinese workers at pit number six were badly beaten . One of the Chinese workers later died due to his injuries . The white miners , most of whom were members of the Knights of Labor , walked out of the mine . 
 After the work stoppage at pit number six , more white miners assembled near the town . They marched to Rock Springs by way of the railroad , carrying firearms . At about 10 : 00 a.m. , the bell in the Knights of Labor meeting hall tolled , and the miners inside the building joined the already large group . There were white miners who opted to go to saloons instead of joining the gathering mob , but by 2 : 00 p.m. , the saloons and grocers were persuaded by a Union Pacific official to close . 
 With the saloons and grocers closed , about 150 men , armed with Winchester rifles , moved toward Chinatown in Rock Springs . They moved in two groups and entered Chinatown by crossing separate bridges . The larger group entered by way of the railroad bridge and was divided into squads , a few of which remained standing on the opposite side of the bridge outside Chinatown . The smaller group entered by way of the town 's plank bridge . 
 Squads from the larger group broke off and moved up the hill toward coal pit number three . One squad took up a position at the pit number three coal shed ; another , at the pump house . A warning party was sent ahead of the squads into Chinatown . They warned the Chinese they had one hour to pack up and leave town . After only 30 minutes , the first gunshots were fired by the squad at the pump house , followed by a volley from those at the coal shed . Lor Sun Kit , a Chinese laborer , was shot and fell to the ground . As the group at coal pit number three rejoined them , the crowd pressed on toward Chinatown , some men firing their weapons as they went . The smaller group of white miners at the plank bridge divided itself into squads and surrounded Chinatown . One squad stayed at the plank bridge to cut off any Chinese escape . 
 As the white miners moved into Chinatown , the Chinese became aware of the riot and that Leo Dye Bah and Yip Ah <unk> , residents from the west and east sides of Chinatown , had already been killed . As the news of the murders spread , the Chinese fled in fear and confusion . They ran in every direction : up the hill behind coal pit number three ; others , along the base of the hill at coal pit number four ; others still , from the eastern end of town , fled across Bitter Creek to the opposite hill ; and more fled the western end of Chinatown across the base of the hill to the right of coal pit number five . The mob came from three directions by this time , from the east and west ends of town and from the wagon road . The Chinese immigrants present at the Rock Springs massacre presented their own grisly account of the mêlée to the Chinese consul in New York City : 
 Whenever the mob met a Chinese they stopped him and , pointing a weapon at him , asked him if he had any revolver , and then approaching him they searched his person , robbing him of his watch or any gold or silver that he might have about him , before letting him go . Some of the rioters would let a Chinese go after depriving him of all his gold and silver , while another Chinese would be beaten with the butt ends of the weapons before being let go . Some of the rioters , when they could not stop a Chinese , would shoot him dead on the spot , and then search and rob him . Some would overtake a Chinese , throw him down and search and rob him before they would let him go . Some of the rioters would not fire their weapons , but would only use the butt ends to beat the Chinese with . Some would not beat a Chinese , but rob him of whatever he had and let him go , yelling to him to go quickly . Some , who took no part either in beating or robbing the Chinese , stood by , shouting loudly and laughing and clapping their hands . 
 By 3 : 30 p.m. the massacre was well under way . A group of women in Rock Springs had gathered at the plank bridge , where they stood and cheered on the rampage . Two of the women reportedly fired shots at the Chinese . As the riot wore on into the night , the Chinese miners scattered into the hills , lying in the grass to hide . Between four and nine p.m. , rioters set fire to the camp houses belonging to the coal company . By nine p.m. , all but one Chinese camp house was burned completely . In all , 79 Chinese homes were destroyed by fire . Damage to Chinese @-@ owned property was estimated at around $ 147 @,@ 000 . 
 Some Chinese died on the banks of Bitter Creek as they fled , others near the railroad bridge as they attempted to escape Chinatown . The rioters threw Chinese bodies into the flames of burning buildings . Other Chinese immigrants , who had hidden in their houses instead of fleeing , were murdered , and then their bodies were burned with their houses . Those who could not run , including the sick , were burned alive in their camp houses . Many of the Chinese who were burned in their houses apparently tried " to dig a hole in the cellar to hide themselves . But the fire overtook them when about half way in the hole , burning their lower limbs to a crisp and leaving the upper trunk untouched . " One remaining Chinese immigrant was found dead in a laundry house in <unk> 's Town , his home demolished by rioters . 
 The attacks at Rock Springs were extraordinarily violent , revealing a long @-@ held , almost " feral " , hatred of the victims . The sheer brutality of the violence " startled " the entire country . Besides those who were burned alive , Chinese miners were scalped , mutilated , branded , decapitated , dismembered , and hanged from gutter spouts . One of the Chinese miners ' penis and testicles were cut off and toasted in a nearby saloon as a " trophy of the hunt " . The events amounted to racial terrorism . 
 There were 28 confirmed deaths , and at least 15 miners were wounded . But various sources assert that 40 to 50 fatalities might be a more accurate number , as some of those who fled were never accounted for . The Chinese consul in New York City compiled a detailed list of the massacre 's victims . 
 = = = Names of the dead = = = 
 = = = = Bodies found mutilated = = = = 
 Leo Sun Tsung , 51 : found in his hut with multiple wounds , including a bullet wound to the face 
 Leo Kow Boot , 24 : found between mines three and four with a bullet wound to the neck 
 <unk> See Yen , 36 : found near Bitter Creek with a bullet wound to the temple 
 Leo Dye Bah , 56 : found near the plank bridge with a bullet wound to the chest 
 = = = = Bodies found burned = = = = 
 Choo Bah <unk> , 23 : found in a hut adjoining Camp No. 34 , partially burned 
 Sia Bun Ning , 37 : head , neck and shoulders found in a hut near the Chinese temple , the rest of the body had been burned off 
 Leo Lung Hong , 45 : upper torso found in a hut near Camp No. 27 , the rest of the body was burned off 
 Leo Chih Ming , 49 : head and chest found in a hut , the rest of the body was burned off 
 Liang Tsun Bong , 42 : upper torso found in a hut , the rest of the body was burned off 
 Hsu Ah Cheong , 32 : skull found in a hut , no other remains were available 
 Lor Han Lung , 32 : sole and heel of left foot found in a hut near Camp No. 34 
 Hoo Ah Nii , 43 : right half of head and backbone found in a hut 
 Leo Tse Wing , 39 : lower half bones found in a hut near Camp No. 14 
 = = = = Bone fragments only or no bodies found = = = = 
 Leo Jew Foo , 35 
 Leo Tim Kwong , 31 
 Hung <unk> <unk> , 42 
 Tom He Yew , 34 
 Mar Tse Choy 
 Leo Lung Siang 
 Yip Ah <unk> 
 Leo Lung Hon 
 Leo Lung Hor 
 Leo Ah Tsun 
 <unk> Ding 
 Leo Hoy Yat 
 Yuen Chin Sing 
 Hsu Ah Tseng 
 Chun Quan Sing 
 = = Outcome = = 
 = = = Immediate aftermath = = = 
 In the days following the riot , surviving Chinese immigrants in Rock Springs fled and were picked up by Union Pacific trains . By September 5 , almost all survivors were in Evanston , Wyoming , 100 miles ( 160 km ) west of Rock Springs . Once there , they were subjected to threats of murder and other crimes ; Evanston was another area in Wyoming where anti @-@ Chinese sentiment was high . 
 Rumors of the return of the Chinese to Rock Springs circulated since immediately after the riots . On September 3 , the Rock Springs Independent published an editorial which confirmed the rumors of " the return " , as a few Chinese began to trickle back into town to search for valuables . The Independent said of the return of Chinese laborers to Rock Springs , " It means that Rock Springs is killed , as far as white men are concerned , if such program is carried out . " The massacre was defended in the local newspaper , and , to an extent , in other western newspapers . In general , however , Wyoming newspapers disapproved of the acts of the massacre while supporting the cause of white miners . 
 Wyoming 's territorial Governor Francis E. Warren visited Rock Springs on September 3 , 1885 , the day after the riot , to make a personal assessment . After his trip to Rock Springs , Warren traveled to Evanston , where he sent telegrams to U.S. President Grover Cleveland appealing for federal troops . Back in Rock Springs , the riot had calmed , but the situation was still unstable . Two companies of the United States Army 's 7th Infantry arrived on September 5 , 1885 . One company , under the command of a Lieutenant Colonel Anderson , was stationed in Evanston , Wyoming ; the other , under a Colonel Chipman , was stationed in Rock Springs . At Camp Murray , Utah Territory , Colonel Alexander McDowell McCook was ordered to augment the garrison sent to Wyoming with six more companies . 
 On September 9 , 1885 , one week after the massacre , six companies of soldiers arrived in Wyoming . Four of the six companies then escorted the Chinese back to Rock Springs . Once back in Rock Springs , the Chinese laborers found scorched tracts of land where their homes once stood . The mining company had buried only a few dead ; others remained lying in the open , mangled , decomposing , and partially eaten by dogs , hogs , or other animals . 
 The situation in Rock Springs was stabilized as early as September 15 , when Warren first requested the removal of federal troops , but the mines at Rock Springs remained closed for a time . On September 30 , 1885 , white miners , mostly Finnish immigrants who were members of the Knights of Labor , walked out of mines in Carbon County , Wyoming , in protest of the company 's continued use of Chinese miners . In Rock Springs , the white miners were not back at work in late September , because the company still used Chinese labor . Rock Springs steadily became quieter , and , on October 5 , 1885 , emergency troops , except for two companies , were removed . However , the temporary posts of Camp Medicine Butte , established in Evanston , and of Camp Pilot Butte , in Rock Springs , remained long after the riot . Camp Pilot Butte closed in 1899 after the onset of the Spanish – American War . 
 The labor strike was unsuccessful , and the miners went back to work within a couple of months . The national Knights of Labor organization refused to support the Carbon strike and the hold out by white miners in Rock Springs following the Rock Springs Riot . The organization avoided supporting the miners along the Union Pacific Railroad , because it did not want to be seen as condoning the violence at Rock Springs . When the Union Pacific Coal Department reopened the mines , it fired 45 white miners connected to the violence . 
 = = = Arrests = = = 
 After the riot in Rock Springs , sixteen men were arrested , including Isaiah Washington , a member @-@ elect to the territorial legislature . The men were taken to jail in Green River , where they were held until after a Sweetwater County grand jury refused to bring indictments . In explaining its decision , the grand jury declared that there was no cause for legal action , stating , in part : " We have diligently inquired into the occurrence at Rock Springs .... [ T ] hough we have examined a large number of witnesses , no one has been able to testify to a single criminal act committed by any known white person that day . " 
 Those arrested as suspects in the riot were released a little more than a month later , on October 7 , 1885 . On their release , they were " ... met ... by several hundred men , women and children , and treated to a regular ovation " , according to The New York Times . The defendants in the Rock Springs case enjoyed the same broad community consent that lynch mobs often received . No person or persons were ever convicted in the violence at Rock Springs . 
 = = = Diplomatic and political issues = = = 
 After the riot , the U.S. government hesitated to make amends to the Chinese for the massacre . In China , the governor @-@ general of the Guangdong region suggested that Americans in China might be the target of revenge for the events in Rock Springs . The American envoy to China , Charles Harvey Denby , and others in the diplomatic corps reported rising anti @-@ American sentiment in Hong Kong and in Canton , Guangdong , following the riot . American diplomats warned their government that the backlash from the massacre could ruin U.S. trade with China ; they also reported that British merchants and newspapers in China were encouraging the Chinese to " stand up for their oppressed countrymen in America . " Denby advised that U.S. Secretary of State Thomas Bayard obtain compensation for the victims of the massacre . 
 The United States government agreed to pay compensation for the damaged property but not for the actual victims of the massacre , although Bayard was inclined to resist the requests for payments . In a letter to the minister of China 's Washington legation dated February 18 , 1886 , he expressed a personal view that the violence against Chinese immigrants was precipitated by their resistance to cultural assimilation , and that racism against Chinese was typically found among other immigrants rather than the majority of the populace : 
 Chinese immigrants ... segregate themselves from the rest of the residents and citizens of the United States and ... refuse to mingle with the mass of population ... As a consequence , race prejudice has been more excited against them , notably among aliens of other nationalities ... 
 Denby 's predictions caused Bayard to seek a Congressionally appropriated indemnity . At Bayard 's urging , the U.S. Congress provided US $ 147 @,@ 748 @.@ 74 as an indemnity . The compensation was made as a monetary gift and not as a legal decree of responsibility for the massacre and the outcome amounted to a minor diplomatic victory for China . 
 Correspondence between Wyoming 's territorial Governor , Francis Warren , and Union Pacific officials during Warren 's term in office indicate that he petitioned the company for years to clear the titles on land he owned . He condemned the riot as " the most brutal and damnable outrage that ever occurred in any country . " 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 After the riot , rhetoric and reaction came from publications and key political figures concerning the events . The New York Times blasted the city of Rock Springs in the first of at least two editorials on the topic , stating , " the appropriate fate for a community of this kind would be that of Sodom and Gomorrah " . In another Times editorial on November 10 , 1885 , the paper continued to assail not only the residents of Rock Springs who were involved in the violence , but those who stood by and let the mob continue its behavior . Newspapers in Wyoming , such as the Cheyenne Tribune and the Laramie Boomerang , reacted with sympathy toward the white miners . The Boomerang stated it " regretted " the riot but found extenuating circumstances surrounding the violence . 
 In addition to newspapers , anti @-@ Chinese sentiment and stereotypes came from other publications . Religious publications , such as Baptist Missionary Magazine , depicted the Chinese as " heathens . " The <unk> : A Weekly <unk> characterized the Chinese as weak and defenseless , stating in its coverage of the massacre : " To murder an industrious Chinaman is the same kind of fiendish work as the murder of women and children – it is equally a violation of the rights of the defenceless . " 
 Knights of Labor leader Terence Powderly wrote in a letter to W.W. Stone ( excerpts of which he included in a report to the U.S. Congress ) that , " It is not necessary for me to speak of the numerous reasons given for the opposition to this particular race – their habits , religion , customs and practices ... " Powderly blamed the " problem " of Chinese immigration on the failings of the 1882 Exclusion Act . He faulted lax law enforcement , not those involved in the riots , for the attacks at Rock Springs . Powderly wrote that the U.S. Congress should stop " winking at violations of this statute " and reform the laws which barred Chinese immigration , which he believed could have prevented incidents such as " the recent assault upon the Chinese at Rock Springs " . 
 In December 1885 , U.S. President Grover Cleveland presented his State of the Union report to Congress , and in it , his reaction to the Rock Springs massacre . Cleveland 's report pointed out that the United States was interested in good relations with China . He stated , " All of the power of this government should be exhorted to maintain the <unk> good faith towards China in the treatment of these men , and the inflexible sternness of the law ... must be insisted upon ... race prejudice is the chief factor to originating these disturbances " . 
 = = Post @-@ massacre violence = = 
 The massacre at Rock Springs led to other incidents of anti @-@ Chinese aggression , primarily in Washington Territory , though there were incidents in Oregon and other states as well . Near Newcastle , Washington a mob of whites burned down the barracks of 36 Chinese coal miners . Throughout the Puget Sound area , Chinese workers were driven out of communities and subject to violence in Washington cities and towns , including Tacoma , Seattle , Newcastle , and Issaquah . Chinese workers were driven out of other Washington towns , but sources indicated , as early as 1891 , that the above events were specifically connected to the wave of violence touched off at Rock Springs . 
 The wave of anti @-@ Chinese violence in the western United States following the Rock Springs Riot spread further , to the state of Oregon . Mobs drove Chinese workers out of small towns throughout the state in late 1885 and mid @-@ 1886 . Other states reported incidents as well : As far away as Augusta , Georgia , anger was expressed against the Chinese in response to the massacre at Rock Springs . According to The New York Times , the rioting in Rock Springs fueled the desire of anti @-@ Chinese Georgians in Augusta to air their grievances . 
 = = Significance and context = = 
 The Rock Springs massacre was seen by observers at the time , and by historians today , as the worst , most significant instance of anti @-@ Chinese violence in the 19th century United States . The riot received widespread media coverage from publications such as The National Police Gazette and The New York Times . Among the events of anti @-@ Chinese violence in the American west , the Rock Springs massacre is considered the most widely publicized . 
 Today , nearly all historians hold the view that the prime factor which contributed to the riot was race prejudice . However , a 1990 work on the Rock Springs massacre , written by journalist Craig Storti , marginalized the racial factor and put a stronger emphasis on the economic factors which contributed to violence . His book , Incident at Bitter Creek : The Rock Springs Massacre , was widely criticized in reviews , though Storti stated he represented the historical record as it stood . There were labor considerations that contributed to the violence in Rock Springs , though they are generally seen as less significant . The use of Chinese workers by the railroad during an 1875 strike created widespread resentment among the white miners , which continued to build until the Rock Springs massacre . Storti 's book described anti @-@ Chinese racism as " pervasive " even while downplaying its significance to the riot . The view that the Chinese refused to assimilate into American culture was held historically and still carries some weight in present @-@ day interpretations of the historical record . 
 Present @-@ day Rock Springs has a population pushing 20 @,@ 000 . The former settlement is a full @-@ fledged city . The area that once encompassed Camp Pilot Butte is located on the north bank of Bitter Creek , in the northwest part of the city . The camp covered 5 1 ⁄ 2 acres of Union Pacific property ; the parade ground was in the center of a present @-@ day city block bounded by Soulsby Street on the west , Pilot Butte Avenue on the east , Bridger Avenue on the north and Elias Avenue on its south . In 1973 , the area where the army post once existed was listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places as an historic district . At that time , there were only two remaining original structures . The two buildings were owned by the Saints Cyril and Methodius Catholic Church in Rock Springs . The buildings are no longer extant , and the property is no longer listed on the National Register . The area that was once Chinatown , just north of where Camp Pilot Butte once stood , had a public elementary school built over part of it . In general , the locations in Rock Springs associated with the massacre have been surrounded and absorbed by the city 's growth . 
 = SMS Freya = 
 SMS Freya was a protected cruiser of the Victoria Louise class , built for the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) in the 1890s , along with her sister ships Victoria Louise , Hertha , Vineta , and Hansa . Freya was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig in 1895 , launched in April 1897 , and commissioned into the Navy in October 1898 . The ship was armed with a battery of two 21 cm guns and eight 15 cm guns and had a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . 
 Freya served in the German fleet for the initial years of her career , unlike her sister ships , all of which served abroad on foreign stations . As a result , she led a fairly uneventful career in the fleet . After a modernization in 1905 – 1907 , Freya was used as a school ship for cadets . At the outbreak of World War I , Freya was mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group , but served in front @-@ line duty only briefly . She was used as a barracks ship after 1915 , and ultimately sold for scrapping in 1921 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Freya was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Freya " and was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig in 1895 . She was launched on 27 April 1897 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the German navy on 20 October 1898 . The ship was 110 @.@ 6 meters ( 363 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 17 @.@ 4 m ( 57 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 58 m ( 21 @.@ 6 ft ) forward . She displaced 6 @,@ 491 t ( 6 @,@ 388 long tons ; 7 @,@ 155 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of three vertical 4 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by twelve coal @-@ fired Belleville boilers . Her engines provided a top speed of 19 kn ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) and a range of approximately 3 @,@ 412 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 319 km ; 3 @,@ 926 mi ) at 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 31 officers and 446 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with two 21 cm SK L / 40 guns in single turrets , one forward and one aft . The guns were supplied with 58 rounds of ammunition each . They had a range of 16 @,@ 300 m ( 53 @,@ 500 ft ) . Vineta also carried eight 15 cm SK L / 40 guns . Four were mounted in turrets amidships and the other four were placed in casemates . These guns had a range of 13 @,@ 700 m ( 44 @,@ 900 ft ) . She also carried ten 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 35 guns . The gun armament was rounded out by machine guns . She was also equipped with three 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes , two launchers were mounted on the broadside and the third was in the bow , all below the waterline . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Freya served with the German fleet . On 1 September 1902 , Freya joined the Cruiser Division of the I Squadron of the German home fleet . The Division consisted of the armored cruiser Prinz Heinrich , the flagship , Victoria Louise , and the light cruisers Hela , Amazone , and Niobe . The Division participated in the summer fleet maneuvers of August – September 1902 . In 1905 , Freya went into drydock at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven for modernization . During the refit she was re @-@ boilered ; she had been built originally with three stacks , and during the modernization they were trunked into two funnels . The refit was finished in 1907 , after which Freya was used as a training ship for naval cadets . 
 In 1907 , Günther Lütjens served aboard the ship as a cadet ; Lütjens went on to command the task force composed of Bismarck and Prinz Eugen in World War II . In August 1908 , Freya represented Germany at celebrations in Halifax , Canada , commemorating the 150th anniversary of the opening of the Canadian Parliament . While entering the port at around midnight on 9 August , she inadvertently rammed a schooner in heavy fog . Nine sailors were killed in the accident . 
 Freya had a short career during World War I. At the outbreak of hostilities , she was briefly mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group , which was tasked with training cadets in the Baltic Sea . By the end of 1914 , however , the ships were again removed from service . She was then put into service as a coastal defense ship . After 1915 , she was withdrawn from front @-@ line duty again and returned to service as a training ship based in Flensburg . She served in this capacity through to the end of the war . In 1915 , Bernhard Rogge , who would go on to command the raider Atlantis during World War II , served aboard the ship as a cadet . The old aviso Grille became Freya 's tender starting in July 1915 . She was stricken on 25 January 1920 and used briefly as a barracks ship for police in Hamburg . She was ultimately broken up for scrap in Harburg in 1921 . 
 = 1989 North Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1989 North Indian Ocean cyclone season was a below @-@ average season in annual cycle of tropical cyclone formation . The season has no official bounds but cyclones tend to form between April and December . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northern Indian Ocean . There are two main seas in the North Indian Ocean — the Bay of Bengal to the east of the Indian subcontinent and the Arabian Sea to the west of India . The official Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre in this basin is the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) , while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) releases unofficial advisories . An average of five tropical cyclones form in the North Indian Ocean every season with peaks in May and November . Cyclones occurring between the meridians 45 ° E and 100 ° E are included in the season by the IMD . 
 Throughout the season , the IMD monitored ten depressions , three of which became cyclonic storms . The strongest storm of the year was Super Cyclonic Storm Gay . Crossing the Malay Peninsula into the Bay of Bengal on November 4 , Gay became one of the most powerful systems on record in the basin , attaining an estimated pressure of 930 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 46 inHg ) . Collectively , the storms were responsible for at least 1 @,@ 785 fatalities , 1 @,@ 445 of which were due the disastrous flooding triggered by the July Cyclonic Storm , and more than $ 25 million in damage . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 01 / 01B = = = 
 In mid @-@ May , a monsoon trough situated over the Bay of Bengal began showing signs of cyclonic development . By May 20 , synoptic data indicated the presence of a weak circulation ; however , the system remained disorganized . Following a dramatic increase in convection and organization , the JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert on May 23 and subsequently began monitoring the system as a tropical depression hours later . Initially , the depression tracked slowly towards the north @-@ northwest before abruptly turning westward and slowing due to weak mid @-@ level steering currents . During this time , the storm gradually intensified and was limited by northwesterly wind shear . By May 26 , the storm turned northward and accelerated . Later that day , 01B attained its peak intensity with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) shortly before making landfall in eastern India . The system quickly weakened once inland and was last noted on May 27 as a dissipating low . 
 Striking India on May 26 , the storm brought wind gusts up to 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) and torrential rains , amounting to 210 mm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) , which caused widespread damage . The hardest hit area was Midnapore where more than 10 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed . At least 17 people were killed in the district alone and more than 50 @,@ 000 were left homeless . Communications across Orissa were severely disrupted as broadcast stations , government buildings , and hundreds of telephone poles were destroyed . Further inland , heavy rains from the storm triggered several landslides that killed at least two people in Darjeeling Hills . Throughout eastern India , 61 people were killed and more than 500 @,@ 000 were left homeless by the storm . 
 In nearby Bangladesh , strong winds produced by the storm destroyed 500 homes across 11 villages . Areas devastated by a tornado a month prior were severely affected by the cyclone . In Tangail , a powerful tornado spawned by the storm destroyed 2 @,@ 000 homes and killed 10 people . At least 60 people perished and 2 @,@ 000 others were injured across the country . Offshore , 150 fishermen went missing during the storm and were feared dead . In the wake of the storm , widespread search and rescue missions took place in cities flattened by the cyclone . 
 = = = Depression ARB 01 / 02A = = = 
 On June 7 , small area of low pressure developed off the west coast of India . Over the following two days , convection associated with the low gradually organized and by June 9 , satellite intensity estimates from the JTWC reached 55 km / h ( 30 mph ) . A TCFA was subsequently issued for the system before it made landfall in Gujarat early on June 10 . Although overland , the low maintained significant convection as it turned westward and through its re @-@ emergence into the Arabian Sea on June 11 . Once back over water , convection rapidly spread westward in response to an anticyclone over the Arabian Peninsula and Afghanistan . Early on June 12 , the cyclone was estimated to have attained tropical storm status based on a ship report near the center of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) sustained winds and a surface pressure of 998 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 47 inHg ) . Later that day , strong wind shear stemming from the anticyclone displaced convection from the tropical storm by more than 110 km ( 70 mi ) , prompting the final advisory from the JTWC . The remnants of the system were last noted on June 13 dissipating over the Arabian Sea . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm BOB 04 = = = 
 On July 22 , the IMD began monitoring a depression over the Bay of Bengal . Tracking west @-@ northwest , the system intensified into a cyclonic storm later that day before making landfall in Andhra Pradesh , just north of Vishakhapatnam . Once onshore the storm accelerated towards the northwest and weakened . By July 24 , the remnants of the cyclone were located over the state of Maharashtra . The system was last noted the following day over Gujarat and moving into Pakistan . 
 Across Andhra Pradesh , Orissa , and Uttar Pradesh heavy rains produced by the storm triggered flash flooding and mudslides that killed at least 414 people . According to Chief Minister Nandamuri <unk> Rama Rao , approximately 70 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed in Andhra Pradesh . While over Maharashtra , the storm produced torrential rainfall , reaching 280 mm ( 11 in ) in 24 hours in Bombay , which caused deadly flash flooding and mudslides . Most of the railway tracks in metropolitan Bombay were left underwater , paralyzing the city and forcing businesses to close for several days . The city 's stock exchange remained open , though only sparse trading was observed . Flood waters isolated 46 villages in the region , prompting the deployment of the Indian Army for rescue missions . At least 500 people were killed throughout Maharashtra , more than 200 of which took place in the Raigad district . An unknown number of people were killed after a bridge collapsed with two train carriages on it . Additionally , 75 others were reported missing in the district according to local police . Offshore , 500 fishermen went missing in connection to the storm and are believed to have died . 
 Flooding rains extended into Pakistan by July 26 . Flash floods in the slums outside Karachi killed at least 16 people and washed away 500 huts . An estimated 20 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in the city . Communication and transportation throughout Karachi was reportedly paralyzed as well due to widespread power outages . Further north in Hyderabad , six others were killed by the storm . Throughout the country , at least 31 people were killed . 
 = = = Super Cyclonic Storm Gay = = = 
 On November 2 , a tropical depression , later named Gay , developed in the Gulf of Thailand and favorable atmospheric conditions allowed the system to undergo rapid intensification . By November 3 , Gay had intensified to a Category 3 @-@ equivalent typhoon before striking Thailand . Crossing the Kra Isthmus in approximately six hours , the system emerged into the Bay of Bengal as a Category 1 @-@ equivalent cyclone and assumed a west @-@ northwesterly track towards India . For the next four days , the storm gradually reorganized before reaching a small area favorable for more significant intensification late on November 6 . Hours before making landfall in India , Gay attained its peak intensity as a Category 5 @-@ equivalent cyclone with winds estimated at 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) . Additionally , the IMD estimated that the storm had three @-@ minute sustained winds of 240 km / h ( 145 mph ) , classifying Gay as a modern @-@ day Super Cyclonic Storm . The powerful storm soon made landfall near Kavali , India , in Andhra Pradesh before rapidly weakening onshore . The system eventually dissipated over Maharashtra on November 10 . 
 In Thailand , the storm caused extensive damage both onshore and off , killing 833 people and inflicting approximately ฿ 11 billion ( US $ 497 million ) in damage . Striking India as a powerful cyclone , Gay damaged or destroyed about 20 @,@ 000 homes in Andhra Pradesh , leaving 100 @,@ 000 people homeless . In that country , 69 deaths and ₹ 410 million ( US $ 25 @.@ 3 million ) in damage were attributed to Gay . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 In addition to the storms listed above , the IMD monitored six other depressions throughout the year . 
 June 12 – 14 
 Formed in the northern Bay of Bengal and made landfall in Orissa , India . 
 June 20 – 21 
 Formed in the northern Bay of Bengal and made landfall in West Bengal , India . 
 August 16 – 17 
 Formed in the Bay of Bengal and made landfall in Andhra Pradesh , India . 
 October 17 – 18 
 Formed in the Bay of Bengal and made landfall near the India / Bangladesh border . In Bangladesh , heavy rains and high winds , estimated at 60 to 70 km / h ( 37 to 43 mph ) , caused significant damage . At least 100 people were injured and 1 @,@ 000 homes were damaged or destroyed , mainly in the Chandpur District . Following the storm , the Bangladesh Red Crescent Society dispatched four medical teams and relief materials to the affected regions . 
 November 11 
 Brief depression formed over the Bay of Bengal before dissipating just north of Sri Lanka the same day . 
 November 17 – 20 
 A slow moving depression formed over the Bay of Bengal , northeast of Sri Lanka , and meandered in the same general area for three days before dissipating . 
 = Hurricane Florence ( 2006 ) = 
 Hurricane Florence was the first North Atlantic hurricane to produce hurricane force winds on the island of Bermuda since Hurricane Fabian in September 2003 . The seventh tropical storm and second hurricane of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season , Florence developed from a tropical wave in the eastern Atlantic Ocean on September 3 . Due to unfavorable conditions , the system failed to organize initially , and as a result , the storm grew to an unusually large size . After several days , Florence encountered an area of lesser wind shear and intensified into a hurricane on September 10 . It passed just west of Bermuda while recurving northeastward , and on September 13 it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . 
 Florence produced wind gusts of up to 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) on Bermuda , which caused several power outages and minor damage . Florence then brought heavy rains across Newfoundland as an extratropical storm , destroying one house and causing minor damage to several others . There were no fatalities as a result of the hurricane . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 29 . It tracked slowly westward , and first showed signs of development two days later . On August 31 , a second tropical wave exited the coast of Africa at a faster speed than its predecessor . The two waves interacted , and by September 2 combined to form a large area of disturbed weather across the eastern Atlantic Ocean . Convection increased within the system , and it developed a concentrated area of convection in conjunction with a well @-@ defined low pressure area . By late on September 3 , the system maintained a broad closed circulation and enough convective organization to be classified Tropical Depression Six while located about midway between the Lesser Antilles and Africa . 
 Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression maintained multiple cloud swirls within a common center . Banding features increased , though southwesterly wind shear and the lack of a well @-@ defined circulation prevented initial strengthening . Dry air encountered the depression , and as such it developed very slowly ; forecasters maintained considerable difficulty in determining a center of circulation . It continued its motion to the west @-@ northwest while tracking around the southern periphery of a deep @-@ layer subtropical ridge to its north . Though convection remained focused near the outer periphery of the system , the overall organized continued to steadily increase , and it is estimated the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Florence on September 5 while located about 1 @,@ 120 miles ( 1 @,@ 800 km ) east @-@ northeast of Anguilla . 
 After attaining tropical storm status , the maximum sustained winds fluctuated for three days between 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . This was due to the large size of Florence ; the overall wind field reached a diameter of 460 miles ( 745 km ) , and the radius of maximum winds reached about 110 miles ( 170 km ) . By September 6 , a well @-@ defined cloud swirl became evident , with thin rainbands developing in the southeast and northwest quadrants . As a result , hurricane forecasters anticipated Florence would develop significantly and attain major hurricane status . Though convection gradually migrated closer to the center of the storm , forecasters could not detect a well @-@ defined center of circulation by late on September 6 . On September 7 , convection developed over and to the west of the center for the first time in its duration . However , Florence failed to intensify further , as its wind field had increased to more than 1 @,@ 035 miles ( 1 @,@ 670 km ) in diameter . This led to difficulties in forecasting , as its environment favored further strengthening ; the storm tracked through an area of 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) water temperatures and light shear , and the system maintained a large low @-@ level cyclonic envelop with abundant convection . By early on September 8 , the storm consisted of an elongated , shapeless cloud pattern atypical of a tropical cyclone . Later that day , as an anticyclone developed over Florence , the storm began to consolidate around a vorticity center on the western side of the large cyclonic envelope . It began to strengthen more steadily as it turned to the northwest . Early on September 10 , an eye began developing within a round central dense overcast over the center , and shortly thereafter Florence attained hurricane status while located about 390 miles ( 630 km ) south of Bermuda . 
 Hurricane Florence turned to the north and north @-@ northeast through a break in the subtropical ridge . Though its eyewall was open on the north side , favorable conditions led forecasters to predict Florence passing near Bermuda as a strong Category 2 hurricane . The inner core of convection became ragged @-@ looking on satellite imagery , and based on reports from Hurricane Hunters it is estimated the hurricane attained peak winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) late on September 10 . Subsequent to further erosion of the eyewall , the hurricane weakened , and on September 11 passed about 60 miles ( 95 km ) west of Bermuda with winds of 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) . The overall cloud pattern became slightly better organized , and Florence briefly re @-@ strengthened before encountering increased upper @-@ level winds and cooler waters . Dry air wrapping around the southern periphery of the cyclone eroded most of the deep convection by early on September 12 . The cloud shield became asymmetrically displaced to the north of the center , and frontal @-@ like features began to form . It continued to lose tropical characteristics , and on September 13 Florence transitioned into an extratropical cyclone about 485 miles ( 780 km ) south @-@ southwest of Cape Race , Newfoundland . Initially maintaining hurricane @-@ force winds , the extratropical remnant passed near Cape Race before turning to the east @-@ northeast , and on September 14 the winds weakened to gale force . The storm executed a broad cyclonic half @-@ loop to the southwest of Iceland over the subsequent days , and after turning to the west the extratropical remnants of Florence were absorbed to the east of Greenland by a developing extratropical cyclone to its south . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The government of Bermuda issued a hurricane watch for the island on September 8 , which was followed by a tropical storm warning on September 9 . These were replaced by a hurricane warning on September 10 , coinciding with the storm 's strengthening to hurricane intensity . The government urged the potentially impacted citizens to take preparations for the storm , many of whom bought supplies at local hardware stores . Residents installed storm shutters , while boat owners moved their yachts to safer locations . An emergency shelter was prepared on the island . Prior to the arrival of the storm , officials canceled bus and ferry service , and also closed all schools and government offices on the day of impact . The Bermuda International Airport was also closed . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Florence produced strong swells and dangerous surf conditions along the northern Lesser Antilles , Virgin Islands , Puerto Rico , Hispaniola , and Bermuda . Later in its duration , the tight pressure gradient between Florence and a high @-@ pressure system over southeastern Canada produced strong winds and rough waves along the East Coast of the United States . The hurricane also caused strong swells and rough ocean conditions , including rip currents , in the Bahamas and Atlantic Canada . In South Carolina , high waves produced severe beach erosion on several beaches . 
 Passing a short distance west of Bermuda , Hurricane Florence produced strong winds on the island ; sustained winds peaked at 82 mph ( 132 km / h ) on St. David 's Island at an elevation of 157 feet ( 48 m ) , while gusts reached 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) at the Maritime Operations Centre in St. George 's Parish at an elevation of 256 feet ( 78 m ) . The winds knocked down trees and power lines , leaving over 25 @,@ 000 homes and businesses without electricity during the peak of the storm . The powerful winds damaged ten houses , including destroying the roofs of three , and blew out windows across the island . A few people were injured by flying glass , though none required hospital care . Rainfall on the island reached 1 @.@ 32 inches ( 34 mm ) at the Bermuda International Airport . A possible tornado in Southampton Parish downed trees and caused light property damage . At the Bermuda Zoo and Aquarium , two flamingos died due to falling branches . During the peak of the storm , police officials advised citizens to remain indoors away from harm , though there were several reports of looting throughout the territory . On the island , the storm 's damage totaled over $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 2006 USD ) . Shortly after the storm passed through , BELCO began restoring power , and by six hours after the peak of the storm power had been restored to 7 @,@ 000 homes and businesses . By the day after the storm , about 3 @,@ 000 remained without electricity on the island . The storm damaged the causeway between St. David 's Island and Hamilton Parish , temporarily limiting traffic to one lane in each direction . 
 As an extratropical storm over Newfoundland , Florence produced powerful winds peaking at 101 mph ( 163 km / h ) and moderate amounts of rainfall of up to 2 @.@ 6 inches ( 67 mm ) . Flooding and power outages were reported , although they were isolated . The hurricane caused flight interruptions at St. John 's International Airport and also to the Trans Canada ferry between Newfoundland and Cape Breton Island in eastern Nova Scotia . Strong winds destroyed a house in the small Newfoundland village of Francois . Residents in Francois agreed to rebuild the wrecked home while the family temporarily resided in a summer home of another family . The winds also caused damage to shingles and sides of homes , while the strong waves damaged roads and boats along the Burin Peninsula . 
 = Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen ( video game ) = 
 Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen is a 2009 third @-@ person shooter video game based on the 2009 live action film Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen . The PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions were developed by <unk> , and ported to the Microsoft Windows by Beenox . The PlayStation 2 and Wii versions were developed by Krome Studios , and the PlayStation Portable version was developed by Savage Entertainment . The game was released on June 23 , 2009 , one day before the film 's release in the United States . Australia received the game one day later , and Europe on June 26 , 2009 . 
 The series of games loosely follow the plot of their movie counterpart . The PC , PS3 and Xbox 360 versions feature a split @-@ campaign format , with both an Autobot and Decepticon campaign . The PS2 and Wii versions combine the Autobot and Decepticon stories into one campaign that alternates between factions . Transformers Revenge of the Fallen : Autobots and Transformers Revenge of the Fallen : Decepticons are the Nintendo DS versions of Revenge of the Fallen , developed by Vicarious Visions . Similar to Transformers Autobots and Transformers Decepticons , the DS version is split into two separate games . Autobots follows the heroes ' perspective while Decepticons follows the perspective of the villains . 
 Revenge of the Fallen received mixed reviews on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 systems , holding scores of 63 @.@ 55 % and 63 @.@ 46 % at GameRankings and 63 and 61 out of 100 at Metacritic . The PlayStation 2 and Wii scored lower , with 46 % and 53 % at GameRankings , respectively . The DS iterations fared slightly better , with a critic average of 66 @.@ 82 % for Autobots and 69 % for Decepticons at GameRankings . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As with Transformers : The Game , Revenge of the Fallen features two separate campaigns ; one depicting the actions of the Autobots , and the other the actions of the Decepticons . The game expands on the movie plot with additional missions and characters . Unlike its predecessor , Revenge of the Fallen features a hub @-@ like , non @-@ linear mission progression . This allows the player to choose what missions they would like to accomplish and where in order to further drive the story . Multiplayer features five different modes . " Deathmatch " allows players to choose any character in a free @-@ for @-@ all battle . " Team Deathmatch " features Autobots vs Decepticons . " Control Points " features gameplay similar to the Star Wars Battlefront series , with teams battling for control of specific areas to gain points . " One Shall Stand " is similar to Team Deathmatch ; the difference is that the objective is for a player to take out the enemy leader ( Optimus Prime or Megatron ) while protecting their own . The final mode , " Battle for the Shards " , features Capture the Flag @-@ style gameplay ; teams search for shards of the AllSpark and return them to their base to earn points . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = PC , PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 = = = 
 = = = = Autobot campaign = = = = 
 At the start of the Autobot campaign , NEST Pilot Sgt. Epps is reporting Decepticons in Shanghai , China . Upon the arrival of the Autobots , Major William Lennox informs them there are Decepticons in the perimeter that must not escape , and Ironhide is sent to fight them . Ironhide then battles and defeats Sideways . When Optimus Prime gets word that Ironhide is missing , Ratchet heads out to find him and get him to safety . After locating Ironhide , his power is recharged and another Decepticon battle ensues . After annihilating Decepticon troops , Optimus battles Demolishor . Upon his defeat , Demolishor states that " The Fallen shall rise again . " 
 The Autobots then head to Burbank , California where a previously unknown fragment of the AllSpark has surfaced in possession of Mikaela Banes . When the Decepticons detect the fragment , Bumblebee is sent to protect Mikaela . Meanwhile , the Autobots learn that a second Allspark fragment held by the Americans has been stolen . Soundwave learns of Megatron 's location in the Laurentian Abyss and transmits it to the Decepticons . Breakaway is sent to defend the carrier fleet Deep @-@ 6 which guards Megatron 's corpse from the Decepticons . Despite his efforts , Megatron is reactivated . 
 On the East Coast , Sam Witwicky is kidnapped by the Decepticon troops and is taken to an industrial park near his college . Ratchet manages to locate Sam in an abandoned foundry and sends Bumblebee the coordinates . Bumblebee rescues Sam and takes him to the extraction point , upon which Grindor attacks Bumblebee . Following Bumblebee 's victory , Optimus decides to give the humans a Cybertronian weapon called the Axiom Gun to help combat the growing Decepticon threat . He personally escorts the Axiom Gun to NEST headquarters . After getting the convoy to their destination , the Autobots escort Sam to meet with former Agent Simmons . With intel from Simmons , Sam has Bumblebee take him to the museum to seek out a robot named Jetfire . While Sam looks for Jetfire , Bumblebee defends the museum from the Decepticon troops . Jetfire emerges from the museum and takes Sam through the trans @-@ dimensional Space Bridge to Cairo , Egypt ; the Autobots then follow . 
 Jetfire reveals that the Dynasty of Primes have constructed a machine called the Sun Harvester hidden in an Egyptian pyramid . He says the device destroys stars to harvest their power , converting it into energon . Upon arrival in the outskirts of Cairo , the Autobots search for Sam while evading Decepticon troops . After locating Sam , Optimus Prime takes him to the Tomb of the Ancients . While Sam is in the tomb , Optimus and Jetfire defend it from Megatron and Starscream . Optimus defeats them , but they escape after Megatron impales Jetfire . The Fallen reveals himself and the Sun Harvester , powering its systems up and begging the harvesting of the Earth 's sun . A dying Jetfire lends his wings and parts to Optimus in order to help Optimus defeat The Fallen . Elsewhere , Bumblebee ends up fighting and defeating Devastator . Optimus battles The Fallen , defeating him by impaling his face with his blade . The Fallen falls into the Sun Harvester and destroys it . With the Ancient Transformers avenged , Ratchet informs Optimus that Megatron escaped on a ship to a distant galaxy . Optimus then salutes his troops for their good work in stopping the Decepticons . 
 = = = = Decepticon campaign = = = = 
 The Decepticon campaign begins in Shanghai with Sideways searching the area for fuel and power , and also for Megatron 's lost body . He learns of Autobots in the area and hunts and eliminates them . He then learns that Grindor has gone missing and that Sideways must find , repair , and transport Grindor to the extraction site . Once Grindor is safe , he attacks Autobots protecting NEST arrays and infects the arrays with a virus , giving the Decepticons access to NEST communications . Elsewhere , Long Haul destroys NEST bases located around Shanghai . Ironhide emerges to fight Long Haul but is defeated , and Starscream proclaims the victory as a warning to Optimus Prime . 
 The Decepticons then head to Burbank . There Soundwave has learned that Sam has given a shard of the Allspark to Mikaela . They formulate a plan to recover the shard and use it to revive Megatron . Long Haul captures men who may know Mikaela 's location , who are then interrogated by Starscream . Starscream is able to discover Mikaela 's location , and he sends Long Haul to retrieve her . Starscream receives word that the Decepticon troops transporting Mikaela have been intercepted by the Autobots . In the wake of defeat , the Decepticons learn of another shard held by American armed forces which is retrieved . 
 The Decepticons learn from NSA Chief Galloway that Megatron is buried deep in the Laurentian Abyss . Starscream disables the Deep @-@ 6 aircraft carriers that guard Megatron 's remains in the Laurentian Abyss , allowing the Decepticons to gain access to Megatron 's remains . Megatron is revived , and the Decepticons return to the east coast . Megatron disables Optimus Prime and has Starscream destroy a museum that Sam entered , but he is not among the ruins . They learn he was transported to Cairo , Egypt via a space bridge created by Jetfire . Megatron arrives on the outskirts of Cairo and engages Autobots in combat . Jetfire and Bumblebee challenge him , but are defeated . Elsewhere , Long Haul destroys the <unk> Gun that the Autobots gave to the NEST Troops . Megatron learns that The Fallen has betrayed him by promising to make him a Prime , learning that Primes are born , not made . Megatron then destroys him before he can fully activate the Sun Harvester . Victorious , he begins plans to form an army of new Decepticons . 
 = = = PlayStation 2 and Wii = = = 
 At the beginning of the game the Decepticon Soundwave hacks onto a satellite and finding a piece of Cybertronian technology on a NEST truck in Shanghai . Sideways and Demolishor are contacted to steal the technology . Optimus Prime is transported to near where the technology was stolen , where he confronts Devastator . Nearby Ironhide engages in battle with Demolishor . Elsewhere in the city , Bumblebee chases Sideways through the streets , who narrowly escapes with assistance from Starscream . Starscream and Sideways travel to the Laurentian Abyss , where the dead body of Megatron is being guarded by military forces . Starscream attacks the navy ships , giving Sideways an opportunity to retrieve the body . Megatron is then resurrected by The Fallen , becoming his servant . 
 Back in Shanghai , Optimus takes down the colossal Decepticon known as Devastator , and retrieves a piece of Cybertronian technology unearthed by Devastator . Optimus and Ironhide find that Bumblebee is missing , and they learn that he has been taken by Starscream . Megatron reveals himself to the Autobots , and challenges Optimus to one final fight . Meanwhile , Bumblebee is released by Jetfire , who has been taken captive by the Decepticons . Optimus and Megatron battle , ending with Optimus close to death . Jetfire places Optimus 's body in an escape pod , where Optimus 's eyes light up , revealing that he is still clinging to life . Starscream and Megatron take the last piece of Cybertronian technology . 
 Jetfire then goes to the desert and finds a weakened Optimus , who flew his escape pod to Egypt . Shortly after arriving Jetfire becomes mortally wounded by Starscream and sacrifices himself to give Optimus power to defeat The Fallen . Ironhide destroys the security around the Sun Harvester , and Optimus defeats Megatron . With the security down , Optimus battles The Fallen , destroying both him and the Sun Harvester . Megatron and Starscream get sucked into a space bridge , which transports them to The Fallen 's throne room . At the end of the game , the Autobots rebuild the destroyed pyramid , and Megatron and Starscream observe the creation of a massive Decepticon army now under their control . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 ^ a Character is available in their G1 design as downloadable content in campaign and multiplayer . ^ b Character has an unlockable alternate livery . ^ c Character is available in multiplayer only via downloadable content . ^ d Character has alternate livery via downloadable content . ^ e Character is available in campaign and multiplayer via downloadable content . 
 = = Development = = 
 PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 developer <unk> updated the transformation system of the game to allow for more fluid transforming of the robots . Players can now transform in mid @-@ air , carry over momentum gained prior to transforming , and transform directly into attacks . It features online play and downloadable content , announced on July 15 , 2009 . New features include the following : new multiplayer characters , including G1 versions of characters and new liveries ; new multiplayer maps ; the ability to use new characters in the campaign ; an expert difficulty mode ; and new achievements ( Xbox 360 ) and trophies ( PS3 ) . It was released August 27 , 2009 for the PS3 and Xbox 360 . 
 The PS2 and Wii versions of the game were developed by Krome Studios . These versions feature a special cooperative mode , where the second player enters the battle as a floating shield and weapon system . Players work together to survive against waves of enemies . Unlike the PS3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game , the PS2 and Wii versions feature only one campaign . Players alternate between controlling various Autobots and Decepticons over the game 's fifteen missions . The Wii version of the game contains motion controls for combat and quick @-@ time events . Each Transformer has a special move where the character transforms temporarily . 
 The PSP version of Transformers was developed by Savage Entertainment . In this version , the game is played from a top @-@ down perspective while in robot mode , with driving and escort levels also added . Ad @-@ Hoc cooperative play is supported . Gameplay in robot form is reminiscent of the arcade shooter Smash TV and the Dreamcast title Cannon Spike . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Revenge of the Fallen retains most of the cast from its film counterpart with a few exceptions . Hugo Weaving , who voices Megatron in the live action films , does not voice Megatron in the game . Instead Frank Welker , who voiced Megatron in The Transformers animated series returns to voice the character . Devastator , who was voiced by Welker in the film , is voiced by Fred Tatasciore in the game . The game features Neil Kaplan , the voice of Optimus Prime in the series Transformers : Robots in Disguise . Kaplan does not voice Prime , but instead voices the character Long Haul as well as additional minor characters . Electronic rock band Julien @-@ K , who contributed one track to the first movie 's soundtrack , provided the score with Steve Jablonsky . John DiMaggio , who later go on to voice <unk> in Dark of the Moon , voices Sideways and Maj. Lennox . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen received mixed reviews from critics , with the Xbox 360 version of the game holding a 63 @.@ 46 % at GameRankings and 61 out of 100 at Metacritic . The PlayStation 3 version scored similarly , with a 63 @.@ 55 % at GameRankings and 63 out of 100 at Metacritic . The PC version scored slightly lower at 56 % and 58 out of 100 , respectively . IGN 's Chris Roper gave the game 6 out of 10 , saying that it had a " complete and utter lack [ of presentation ] " . 1UP.com 's Thierry Nguyen gave the PS3 and X360 versions a C + , saying " Transformers 2 is a significant improvement upon its terrible predecessor " . GamePro was more forgiving , giving the game four stars out of five and stating " If you like Transformers , buy this game . Even if you don 't ( or you just hate Michael Bay ) , you should still give Optimus Prime a try . " Eurogamer gave the Xbox 360 version 4 out of 10 , stating " It 's never much fun , but nor is it wonky enough to be terrible . It 's simply there , a forgettable distraction . " The PC port was cited as having a number of technical issues , causing lower scores than its console counterparts . GameSpot scored the PC version 6 out of 10 , whereas the 360 and PS3 versions received 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 . GameSpy gave the X360 version three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , praising the professional voice work and " strong multiplayer gameplay " . They further said that " the multiplayer mode [ will ] keep Revenge of the Fallen relevant long after the movie has gone to DVD " . 
 The PS2 and Wii versions received mixed to negative reviews from critics , with the PS2 version of the game holding a 46 % at GameRankings and a 51 out of 100 at Metacritic . The Wii version scored a bit higher , with a 53 % at GameRankings and 53 out of 100 at Metacritic . The PS2 and Wii versions of Revenge of the Fallen were panned for having awful controls . Specifically , IGN stated that " the game will often ignore what you want to do , and instead does something different " , giving the game 4 @.@ 2 out of 10 . GameZone panned the controls of the Wii version , saying that " control problems – among other missteps – ruined this game " . 
 The PSP version received even worse reviews , earning a 36 @.@ 50 % at GameRankings and a 37 out of 100 at Metacritic . GameSpot 's Chris Watters gave Revenge of the Fallen four out of 10 , saying that " this dull and unpleasant action game is in desperate need of a tune @-@ up " . IGN rated the game 2 @.@ 8 , calling it " one of the worst games on the PSP " . GameZone called the game " a considerably flawed game from start to finish " . 
 At the 2009 Spike Video Game Awards , Megan Fox won the Best Performance By A Human Female award for her portrayal as Mikaela Banes in the game . 
 = Hypsibema missouriensis = 
 Hypsibema missouriensis ( pronounced / <unk> <unk> / ; originally Neosaurus missouriensis , first renamed to Parrosaurus missouriensis , also spelled Hypsibema <unk> ) is a species of plant @-@ eating dinosaur in the genus Hypsibema , and the state dinosaur of the U.S. state Missouri . One of the few official state dinosaurs , bones of the species were discovered in 1942 , at what later became known as the Chronister Dinosaur Site near Glen Allen , Missouri . The remains of Hypsibema missouriensis at the site , which marked the first known discovery of dinosaur remains in Missouri , are the only ones to have ever been found . Although first thought to be a sauropod , later study determined that it was a hadrosaur , or " duck @-@ billed " dinosaur , whose snouts bear likeness to ducks ' bills . Some of the species ' bones found at the Chronister Dinosaur Site are housed in Washington , D.C. ' s Smithsonian Institution . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The species is estimated to have had around 1 @,@ 000 small teeth , weighed 3 – 4 short tons ( 2 @.@ 7 – 3 @.@ 6 t ) ( or around as much as an elephant today ) , stood 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) tall at its back , and stretched about 30 – 35 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 – 10 @.@ 7 m ) from head to tail . H. missouriensis lived in what is now southeast Missouri during the Campanian age of the Late Cretaceous period . It was not a carnivorous species , its teeth were more serrated than other hadrosaurs , an indicator that the vegetation of Missouri at the time was very coarse or tough . 
 Paleontologist Charles Whitney Gilmore and geologist Dan R. Stewart described the caudal vertebrae retrieved from Missouri in a 1945 Journal of Paleontology report , writing , " Caudal vertebrae <unk> ; centra longer than wide ; ends having concave central areas decorated with radiating ridges and depressions surrounded by a flattened peripheral border ; chevron facets only on posterior ends . " Of the thirteen adult tail bones , twelve appeared to be consecutive , and the smallest centrum was 69 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 7 in ) long . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Remains of Hypsibema missouriensis were first discovered in Bollinger County , Missouri by members of the Chronister family while they were digging a cistern , and were subsequently collected by Stewart , later nicknamed " Dinosaur Dan . " In 1942 , Stewart , of the Missouri Geological Survey , had been examining clay near Glen Allen when he came upon a boy who led him to the family at work digging . According to Stewart , property owner Lulu Chronister had found several " unusual " bones while digging and had saved them . They had been found about 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) deep in the <unk> ' well , which had an overall depth of 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) , " imbedded in a black plastic clay . " Stewart reported his discovery to the Smithsonian Institution , which bought the remains — thirteen vertebrae of a dinosaur 's tail — from Chronister for US $ 50 , which was later used to purchase a cow . Two other bones , of unknown type , were also recovered from the site , while one additional vertebrae had been given by Lulu Chronister to a friend . At the Smithsonian , the bones were analyzed but the species from which they originated was incorrectly identified . 
 The site where the bones were found was largely untouched by paleontologists until around 1990 , when excavations restarted . Remains of other dinosaurs , fish , turtles , and plants have also been found , including teeth belonging to a member of the Tyrannosauroidea . Other parts of H. missouriensis , including dental remains and part of a jaw , have also been found . The variety of faunal remnants found at the Chronister site suggest that a large body of water once existed close to the area . 
 = = = Geology of dig site = = = 
 Guy <unk> , a paleontologist from St. Louis , Missouri currently working at the dig site , said it was " pretty much a miracle " that dinosaur bones were found in Missouri , because the state 's soft soil has resulted in the deterioration of most prehistoric remains . However , some of the remains found have been damaged by erosion and other processes . While much of Missouri lies upon rocks from the Paleozoic or Precambrian eras , the Chronister site is situated over Mesozoic rock . Stewart , who found the bones after being assigned to study the origins of clay in the southeastern portion of the Ozarks , was able to conclude that part of the region lies upon deposits from the Upper Cretaceous period , although much of the sediment from that time period has eroded away . 
 The Chronister family dug the well ( which they ultimately abandoned after it was unable to provide enough water ) just southwest of their farmhouse , atop a body of limestone . The farmhouse was located near the bottom of a steep valley , sitting atop the remains of a terrace . The layer of clay in which the bones were found was described by Stewart as being 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) thick , situated below 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) of yellow @-@ brown clay and gravel at the surface , and above a dense mass of limestone . 
 The Chronister dig site is located atop the Ripley Formation . The land around the Chronister home and dig site sits atop sandstone from the Lower Ordovician Period or Canadian Epoch . It is located in a section of the Ozarks affected by erosion and filled with chert and sandstone debris . In addition , the region has been impacted by frequent faulting , leading to the combination of rocks from different geologic periods . As a result , it is difficult to create an accurate geologic map of the area . 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 Gilmore , at the Smithsonian , along with Stewart , first described the species as a sauropod in the January 1945 issue of the Journal of Paleontology , a classification made in error and without positive evidence . Gilmore only deemed the species a sauropod by process of elimination ; when he was left with the possibilities of Hadrosauridae and Sauropoda , he dismissed the former , saying , " The more elongate centra of the Chronister specimen , with the possible exception of Hypsibema <unk> Cope , and the presence of chevron facets only on the posterior end appear sufficient to show that these vertebral centra do not pertain to a member of the Hadrosauridae . " 
 The species , first called Neosaurus missouriensis , was renamed to Parrosaurus missouriensis later that year by Gilmore and Stewart because the name " Neosaurus " was preoccupied . However , Gilmore died soon after , and the bones were left untouched for several decades . 
 Parrosaurus missouriensis was once again moved in 1979 , to the genus Hypsibema , this time by Donald Baird and John R. Horner . In the late 1970s , Bruce L. Stinchcomb , a geologist , traveled to the Chronister site after reading about Gilmore 's report in the 1950s . He was able to purchase the property from a member of the Chronister family , and in the 1980s , test excavations were performed by Stinchcomb , David Parris , and Barbara Grandstaff , leading them to conclude that H. missouriensis was actually a hadrosaur rather than a sauropod . Thomas Holtz has suggested reverting to Parrosaurus for this species . 
 = = State dinosaur designation = = 
 On January 21 , 2004 , a bill was introduced in the Missouri House of Representatives by State Representatives Rod Jetton and Jason Crowell . Jetton had originally proposed the hadrosaur as the state dinosaur , but was not specific enough , so the House Conservation and Natural Resources Committee settled on Hypsibema missouriensis . The bill was then sent to the 92nd Missouri General Assembly . It passed the Missouri House of Representatives on March 8 , 2004 with a vote of 147 – 4 , the Missouri Senate on May 14 , 2004 with a vote of 34 – 0 , and was approved by then @-@ governor Bob Holden on July 9 , 2004 . The bill , House Bill 1209 , went into effect August 28 , 2004 . Missouri became the sixth U.S. state to have designated an official state dinosaur , following Colorado , Maryland , New Jersey , Texas , and Wyoming , as well as the District of Columbia . 
 = = Local impact = = 
 In 2005 , representatives from Bollinger County businesses and local government officials met in an effort to generate more revenue , and came up with a dinosaur @-@ centered tourism campaign . Some businesses contributed to the creation of a billboard along Interstate 55 that would advertise , " Bollinger County , Home of the Missouri Dinosaur . " The Bollinger County Museum of Natural History , which displays some of the bones found , has said their exhibit on the species has attracted tourists from other parts of the United States , and the museum says the designation of H. missouriensis as the state dinosaur resulted in a tripling of visitors . 
 In March 2008 , construction on a full @-@ size model of a H. missouriensis was completed and placed on display at the museum . Jetton , then Speaker of the Missouri House of Representatives , sponsored a dinner event for state legislators to celebrate the completion of the exhibit on March 7 , 2008 . The two @-@ year project was directed by <unk> , who was also in charge of excavations at the Chronister excavation site , and is the only permanent museum exhibit to feature the species . At the opening of the exhibit , Jetton mentioned that he hoped the dig site would become part of a state park one day . Currently , excavation is being conducted by the Missouri Ozark Dinosaur Project . The site has been covered to prevent water from flowing over dig material . The Chronister dig site near Glen Allen , currently under private ownership by Stinchcomb , is the only location in Missouri where dinosaur bones have been found . 
 = Leuschner Observatory = 
 Leuschner Observatory , originally called the Students ' Observatory , is an observatory jointly operated by the University of California , Berkeley and San Francisco State University . The observatory was built in 1886 on the Berkeley campus . For many years , it was directed by Armin Otto Leuschner , for whom the observatory was renamed in 1951 . In 1965 , it was relocated to its present home in Lafayette , California , approximately 10 miles ( 16 km ) east of the Berkeley campus . In 2012 , the physics and astronomy department of San Francisco State University became a partner . 
 Presently , Leuschner Observatory has two operating telescopes . One is a 30 @-@ inch ( 760 mm ) optical telescope , equipped with a CCD for observations in visible light and an infrared detector used for infrared astronomy . The other is a 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) radio dish used for an undergraduate radio astronomy course . The observatory has been used to perform professional astronomy research , such as orbit determination of small solar system bodies in the early 1900s and supernova surveys in the 1980s and 1990s . It has also served as a primary tool in the education of graduate and undergraduate students at UC Berkeley . 
 = = History = = 
 The Students ' Observatory was constructed in 1886 on the Berkeley campus , with the original funds provided by the California legislature in order for the observatory to provide practical training to civil engineers . Very quickly , the Students ' Observatory became seen as a training ground for students studying astronomy , so that they would be better prepared to go on to use the facilities at Lick Observatory . This contributed to the separation of the departments of civil engineering and astronomy in the mid @-@ 1890s , with the Students ' Observatory becoming the home of the Berkeley Astronomy Department . 
 In 1898 , Armin Otto Leuschner was appointed the director of the Students ' Observatory , a post that he held until his retirement in 1938 . During this time , " the observatory became a center for the computation of the orbits of comets , minor planets , and satellites . " Astronomer Simon Newcomb said that Leuschner organized the department and observatory into " a thorough school of astronomy , than which [ ... ] there is none better . " After he stepped down , the observatory was directed by a series of well regarded astronomers , including Otto Struve from 1950 – 59 and Louis G. <unk> from 1959 – 64 . The Students ' Observatory was renamed Leuschner Observatory by the Regents of the University of California in 1951 in honor of A. O. Leuschner . The Space Sciences Lab , which operates SETI , began operations in 1960 at Leuschner Observatory until a permanent home in the Berkeley hills was completed in 1966 . 
 In 1965 , the observatory was relocated a short distance east of the Berkeley campus in the hills of Lafayette , California , on the 283 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 15 km2 ) Russell Reservation . In 1968 , the observatory was equipped with a new 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) Ritchey @-@ Chretien telescope built by Tinsley Laboratories . Since , the observatory has been used as a testing ground for a variety of experiments and instruments . The predecessor to the Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope was tested at Leuschner Observatory in the early 1990s , and in the early 2000s , the first prototype of the telescopes used at the Allen Telescope Array was unveiled at Leuschner . Leuschner Observatory 's 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) telescope continues to be regularly used in undergraduate astronomical instruction , while the 20 @-@ inch ( 51 cm ) telescope was decommissioned and is in disrepair . In 2012 , the physics and astronomy department of San Francisco State University bought into the 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) telescope . SF State and UC Berkeley staff jointly refurbished and upgraded the motors and control system of the larger telescope ; SF State also installed a remote observing station based in its frequently fog @-@ laden San Francisco campus . 
 = = Instruments = = 
 = = = Optical / infrared = = = 
 Leuschner Observatory houses two optical telescopes , one with a 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) diameter and the other with a 20 @-@ inch ( 51 cm ) diameter . As of 2010 , the 20 @-@ inch ( 51 cm ) telescope is not usable , and the 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) telescope is undergoing upgrades . The 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) telescope is of Ritchey @-@ Chretien design , and is equipped with both a charge coupled device ( CCD ) for observations in visible light and an infrared detector that was fabricated in 2000 in order to create an infrared laboratory course for undergraduate students at UC Berkeley . Both optical telescopes are also outfitted with control systems which allow them be automated , meaning observations are made with minimal human intervention . 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 Leuschner Observatory is home to a single 3 @.@ 6 @-@ metre ( 12 ft ) radio telescope . The telescope was one of the prototypes for the Allen Telescope Array that were tested at Leuschner , and has since been used in the undergraduate radio astronomy lab . The telescope operates between 1320 – 1740 MHz and uses an <unk> element spectrometer with spectral resolution of about 1 @.@ 5 kHz and a 12 MHz bandwidth . The operating range allows for it to be used to observe the 21 @-@ cm hydrogen line as well as hydroxyl lines from astrophysical masers . 
 = = Research and discoveries = = 
 = = = Orbit determination = = = 
 Research at the Students ' Observatory under A. O. Leuschner was primarily focused on performing astrometry in order to determine orbits for newly discovered comets . When Clyde Tombaugh reported the discovery of Pluto in 1930 , Leuschner began observing it using the instruments at Students ' Observatory to determine its orbit . Within months of its discovery , Leuschner cast the first doubt on Pluto 's status as a planet , suggesting instead that it was unclear whether Pluto was a large asteroid , a planet , or a comet . Using a few weeks of observation at the Students ' Observatory , he and his students Fred Whipple and E. C. Bower determined the orbital elements for Pluto and an upper limit of one half the mass of Earth . This mass meant Pluto was insufficiently massive to be the Planet X thought to cause discrepancies between the predicted and observed orbit of Neptune . 
 = = = Supernova = = = 
 The observatory was for a time home to two automated supernova surveys . The Berkeley Automated Supernova Search , led by Saul Perlmutter , who went on to head the Supernova Cosmology Project , used the 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) telescope at Leuschner to scan the skies nightly for supernova . The Leuschner Observatory Supernova Search ( LOSS ) began in 1992 , as the Berkeley Automated Imaging Telescope ( <unk> ) also searched for supernova , in this case under Alex <unk> . Both were used as testing grounds for automated searches at other sites , with <unk> eventually being succeeded by the Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope located at Lick Observatory . While LOSS operated at Leuschner , it discovered SN <unk> , SN <unk> , SN <unk> , SN <unk> , SN <unk> , SN <unk> , and SN <unk> . 
 The 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) telescope was also used as part of a program called Hands @-@ On Universe that allows elementary and high school students to request observations on the telescope . In late March 1994 , two high school students in Oil City , Pennsylvania , requested observations of the Whirlpool Galaxy . When astronomers discovered SN <unk> in the Whirlpool Galaxy a few days later , they realized that the observations made with the 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) telescope at Leuschner had captured the earliest images of the supernova . Even more , the images provided astronomers some of " earliest supernovae light curve data on record . " 
 = = = SETI = = = 
 Leuschner Observatory is also home to an optical SETI experiment , carried out under the direction of UC Berkeley astronomer Dan <unk> . The program consists of a targeted search for bright pulses of short duration around 2500 nearby stars using the automated 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) telescope . Similar efforts are carried out at Lick Observatory using the Nickel telescope . 
 = = = Maffei 1 and 2 = = = 
 In 1968 , Italian astronomer Paolo Maffei reported observing two strange objects . A graduate student at Berkeley used the 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) telescope at Leuschner Observatory to make the first identification of the two objects as being elliptical galaxies . Once it was known what they were , the two objects were named Maffei 1 and Maffei 2 after their discover . In identifying the nature of the objects , astronomers realized they were very nearby objects , perhaps even belonging to the Local Group . While eventually membership in the Local Group was ruled out , Maffei 1 is now recognized as being the nearest major elliptical galaxy . 
 = = = Nemesis = = = 
 In 1984 , paleontologists David M. Raup and Jack Sepkoski suggested that extinction events on Earth followed a periodic trend . Richard Muller , a professor of physics at Berkeley , was part of a team that suggested that the Sun had an unseen stellar companion which caused this periodicity , with this hypothetical companion being dubbed Nemesis . Muller was already involved in the automated supernova searches underway at Leuschner , and began the search for Nemesis using the optical telescopes at Leuschner Observatory . 
 = Scaly @-@ foot gastropod = 
 Chrysomallon squamiferum , common name the scaly @-@ foot gastropod , is a species of deep @-@ sea hydrothermal @-@ vent snail , a marine gastropod mollusc in the family Peltospiridae . This vent @-@ endemic gastropod is known only from deep @-@ sea hydrothermal vents in the Indian Ocean , where it has been found at depths of about 2 @,@ 400 – 2 @,@ 800 m ( 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 7 mi ) . Chrysomallon squamiferum differs greatly from other deep @-@ sea gastropods , even the closely related neomphalines . The shell is of a unique construction , with three layers ; the outer layer consists of iron sulfides , the middle layer is equivalent to the organic periostracum found in other gastropods , and the innermost layer is made of aragonite . The foot is also unusual , being armored with iron @-@ mineralised sclerites . 
 The snail 's oesophageal gland houses symbiotic gammaproteobacteria from which the snail appears to obtain its nourishment . This species is considered to be one of the most peculiar deep @-@ sea hydrothermal @-@ vent gastropods , and it is the only known extant animal that incorporates iron sulfide into its skeleton ( into both its sclerites and into its shell as an exoskeleton ) . Its heart is , proportionately speaking , unusually large for any animal : the heart comprises approximately 4 % of its body volume . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 This species was first discovered in April 2001 , and has been referred to as the " scaly @-@ foot " gastropod since 2001 . In terms of its scientific name , it has been referred as Chrysomallon squamiferum since 2003 , but it was not formally described in the sense of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature until Chen et al. named it in 2015 . Type specimens are stored in the Natural History Museum , London . During the time when the name was not yet formalized , an incorrect spelling variant was " <unk> squamiferum " . 
 Chrysomallon squamiferum is the type species and the sole species within the genus Chrysomallon . The generic name Chrysomallon is from the Ancient Greek language , and means " golden haired " , because pyrite ( a compound occurring in its shell ) is golden in color . The specific name squamiferum is from the Latin language and means " scale @-@ bearing " , because of its sclerites . At first it was not known to which family this species belonged . <unk> et al. classified this species in the family Peltospiridae , within the <unk> in 2003 . Molecular analyses based on sequences of cytochrome @-@ c oxidase I ( COI ) genes confirmed the placement of this species within the Peltospiridae . <unk> from two localities are dark ; a morphotype from a third locality is white ( see next section for explanation of localities ) . These different colored snails appear to be simply " varieties " of the same species , according to the results of genetic analysis . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The scaly @-@ foot gastropod is a vent @-@ endemic gastropod known only from the deep @-@ sea hydrothermal vents of the Indian Ocean , which are around 2 @,@ 780 metres ( 1 @.@ 73 mi ) in depth . The species was discovered in 2001 , living on the bases of black smokers in the Kairei hydrothermal vent field , 25 ° 19 @.@ 239 ′ S 70 ° 02 @.@ 429 ′ E , on the Central Indian Ridge , just north of the Rodrigues Triple Point . The species has subsequently also been found in the Solitaire field , 19 ° 33 @.@ 413 ′ S 65 ° 50 @.@ 888 ′ E , Central Indian Ridge , within the Exclusive Economic Zone of Mauritius and Longqi ( aka . Dragon ) field , 37 ° 47 @.@ 027 ′ S 49 ° 38 @.@ 963 ′ E , Southwest Indian Ridge . Longqi field was designated as the type locality ; all type material originated from this vent field . The distance between Kairei and Solitaire is about 700 km ( 430 mi ) . The distance between Solitaire and Longqi is about 2 @,@ 500 km ( 1 @,@ 600 mi ) . 
 Peltospiridae snails are mainly know to live in Eastern Pacific vent fields . Nakamura et al. hypothetized that the occurrence of scaly @-@ foot gastropods in the Indian Ocean suggests a relationship of the hydrothermal vent faunas between these two areas . 
 Research expeditions have included : 
 2000 – an expedition of the Japan Agency for Marine @-@ Earth Science and Technology using the ship RV Kairei and ROV Kaikō discovered the Kairei vent field , but scaly @-@ foot gastropods were not found at that time . This was the first vent field discovered in the Indian Ocean . 
 2001 – an expedition of the U.S. research vessel RV Knorr with ROV Jason discovered scaly @-@ foot gastropods in the Kairei vent field . 
 2007 – an expedition of RV Da Yang Yi Hao discovered the Longqi vent field . 
 2009 – an expedition of RV Yokosuka with DSV Shinkai 6500 discovered the Solitaire field and sampled scaly @-@ foot gastropods there . 
 2009 – an expedition of RV Da Yang Yi Hao visually observed scaly @-@ foot gastropods at Longqi vent field . 
 2011 – an expedition of the British Royal Research Ship RRS James Cook with ROV Kiel 6000 sampled the Longqi vent field . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In this species , the sides of the snail 's foot are extremely unusual , in that they are armoured with hundreds of iron @-@ mineralised sclerites ; these are composed of iron sulfides greigite and pyrite . Each sclerite has a soft epithelial tissue core , a conchiolin cover , and an uppermost layer containing pyrite and greigite . Prior to the discovery of the scaly @-@ foot gastropod , it was thought that the only extant molluscs possessing scale @-@ like structures were in the classes Caudofoveata , <unk> and Polyplacophora . However , sclerites are not homologous to a gastropod operculum . The sclerites of scaly @-@ foot gastropods are also not homologous to the sclerites found in chitons ( Polyplacophora ) . It has been hypothesized that the sclerites of Cambrian halwaxiids such as Halkieria may potentially be more analogous to the sclerites of this snail than are the sclerites of chitons or aplacophorans . However , as recently as 2015 , detailed morphological analysis for testing this hypothesis had not been carried out . 
 The sclerites of Chrysomallon squamiferum are mainly proteinaceous ( conchiolin is a complex protein ) ; in contrast , the sclerites of chitons are mainly calcareous . There are no visible growth lines of conchiolin in cross @-@ sections of sclerites . No other extant or extinct gastropods possess dermal sclerites , and no other extant animal is known to use iron sulfides in this way , either in its skeleton , or exoskeleton . 
 The size of each sclerite is about 1 × 5 mm in adults . The Solitaire population of snails has white sclerites instead of black ; this is due to a lack of iron in the sclerites . The sclerites are imbricated ( overlapped in a manner reminiscent of roof tiles ) . The purpose of sclerites has been speculated to be protection or detoxification . The sclerites may help protect the gastropod from the vent fluid , so that its bacteria can live close to the source of electron donors for chemosynthesis . Or alternatively , the sclerites may result from deposition of toxic sulfide waste from the endosymbionts , and therefore represent a novel solution for detoxification . But the true function of sclerites is , as yet , unknown . The sclerites of the Kairei population , which have a layer of iron sulphide , are ferrimagnetic . Surprisingly , the non @-@ iron @-@ sulfide @-@ mineralized sclerite from the Solitaire morphotype showed greater mechanical strength of the whole structure in the three @-@ point bending stress test ( 12 @.@ 06 MPa ) than did the sclerite from the Kairei morphotype ( 6 @.@ 54 MPa ) . 
 In life , the external surfaces of sclerites host a diverse array of epibionts : Epsilonproteobacteria and <unk> . These bacteria probably provide their mineralization . <unk> et al . ( 2004 ) hypothetized that the snail secretes some organic compounds that facilitate the attachment of the bacteria . 
 = = = Shell = = = 
 The shell of these species has three whorls . The shape of the shell is globose and the spire is compressed . The shell sculpture consists of ribs and fine growth lines . The shape of the aperture is elliptical . The apex of the shell is fragile and it is corroded in adults . 
 This is a very large peltospirid compared to the majority of other species , which are usually below 15 millimetres ( 3 ⁄ 5 in ) in shell length . The width of the shell is 9 @.@ 80 – 40 @.@ 02 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 1 @.@ 58 in ) The maximum with of the shell reaches 45 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 79 in ) . The average with of the shell of adult snails is 32 mm . The average shell width in the Solitaire population was slightly less than that in the Kairei population . The height of the shell is 7 @.@ 65 – 30 @.@ 87 mm ( 0 @.@ 30 – 1 @.@ 22 in ) . The width of the aperture is 7 @.@ 26 – 32 @.@ 52 mm ( 0 @.@ 29 – 1 @.@ 28 in ) . The height of the aperture is 6 @.@ 38 – 27 @.@ 29 mm ( 0 @.@ 25 – 1 @.@ 07 in ) . 
 The snail 's shell is also unusual . The shell structure consists of three layers . The outer layer is about 30 μm thick , black , and is made of iron sulfides , containing greigite <unk> . This feature makes this gastropod the only extant animal known so far that employs this material in its skeleton . The middle layer ( about 150 μm ) is equivalent to the organic periostracum which is also found in other gastropods . The periostracum is thick and brown . The innermost layer is made of aragonite ( about 250 μm thick ) , a form of calcium carbonate that is commonly found both in the shells of molluscs and in various corals . The color of the aragonite layer is milky white . 
 Each shell layer appears to contribute to the effectiveness of the snail 's defence in different ways . The middle organic layer appears to absorb mechanical strain and energy generated by a squeezing attack ( for example by the claws of a crab ) , making the shell much tougher . The organic layer also acts to dissipate heat . Features of this composite material are in focus of researchers for possible use in civilian and military protective applications . 
 = = = Operculum = = = 
 In this species , the shape of the operculum changes during growth , from a rounded shape in juveniles to a curved shape in adults . The relative size of the operculum decreases as individuals grow . About a half of all adult snails of this species possess an operculum among the sclerites at the rear of the animal . It seems likely that the sclerites gradually grow and fully cover the whole foot for protection , and the operculum loses its protective function as the animal grows . 
 = = = External anatomy = = = 
 The Scaly @-@ foot gastropod has a thick snout , which tapers distally to a blunt end . The mouth is a circular ring of muscles when contracted and closed . The two smooth cephalic tentacles are thick at the base and gradually taper to a fine point at their distal tips . This snail has no eyes . There is no specialised copulatory appendage . The foot is red and large , and the snail cannot withdraw the whole foot entirely into the shell . There is no pedal gland in the front part of the foot . There are also no <unk> tentacles . 
 = = = Internal anatomy = = = 
 In Chrysomallon squamiferum , the soft parts of the animal occupy approximately two whorls of the interior of the shell . The shell muscle is horseshoe @-@ shaped and large , divided in two parts on the left and right , and connected by a narrower attachment . The mantle edge is thick but simple without any distinctive features . The mantle cavity is deep and reaches the posterior edge of the shell . The medial to left side of the cavity is dominated by a very large bipectinate ctenidium . Ventral to the visceral mass , the body cavity is occupied by a huge esophageal gland , which extends to fill the ventral floor of the mantle cavity . 
 The digestive system is simple , and is reduced to less than 10 % of the typical volume in gastropods . The radula is " weak " , of the rhipidoglossan type , with a single pair of <unk> cartilages . The formula of the radula is ∼ 50 + 4 + 1 + 4 + ∼ 50 . The radula ribbon is 4 mm long , 0 @.@ 5 mm wide ; the width to length ratio is approximately 1 : 10 . There is no jaw , and no salivary glands . A part of the anterior oesophagus rapidly expands into a huge , hypertrophied , blind @-@ ended esophageal gland , which occupies much of the ventral face of the mantle cavity ( estimated 9 @.@ 3 % body volume ) . The oesophageal gland has a uniform texture , and is highly vascularised with fine blood vessels . The stomach has at least three ducts at its anterior right , connecting to the digestive gland . There are consolidated pellets in both the stomach and in the hindgut . These pellets are probably granules of sulfur produced by the endosymbiont as a way to detoxify hydrogen sulfide . The intestine is reduced , and only has a single loop . The extensive and unconsolidated digestive gland extends to the posterior , filling the shell apex of the shell . The rectum does not penetrate the heart , but passes ventral to it . The anus is located on the right side of the snail , above the genital opening . 
 In the excretory system , the nephridium is central , tending to the right side of the body , as a thin dark layer of glandular tissue . The nephridium is anterior and ventral of the digestive gland , and is in contact with the dorsal side of the foregut . 
 The respiratory system and circulatory system consist of a single left bipectinate ctenidium ( gill ) , which is very large ( 15 @.@ 5 % of the body volume ) , and is supported by extensive blood sinuses filled with haemocoel . On dissection , the blood sinuses and lumps of haemocoel material are a prominent feature throughout the body cavity . There are thin gill filaments on either side of the ctenidium . The bipectinate ctenidium extends far behind the heart into the upper shell whorls ; it is much larger than in <unk> . Although this species has a similar shell shape and general form to other <unk> , the ctenidium is proportional size to that of <unk> , which has the largest gill among peltospirid genera that have been investigated anatomically so far . 
 The ctenidium provides oxygen for the snail , but the circulatory system is enlarged beyond the scope of other similar vent gastropods . There are no endosymbionts in or on the gill of Chrysomallon squamiferum . The enlargement of the gill is probably to facilitate extracting oxygen in the low @-@ oxygen conditions that are typical of hydrothermal @-@ vent ecosystems . 
 At the posterior of the ctenidium is a remarkably large and well @-@ developed heart . The heart is unusually large for any animal proportionally . Based on the volume of the single auricle and ventricle , the heart complex represents approximately 4 % of the body volume ( for example , the heart of humans is 1 @.@ 3 % of the body volume ) . This proportionally giant heart primarily sucks blood through the ctenidium and supplies the highly vascularised oesophageal gland . In Chrysomallon squamiferum the endosymbionts are housed in an esophageal gland , where they are isolated from the vent fluid . The host is thus likely to play a major role in supplying the endosymbionts with necessary chemicals , leading to increased respiratory needs . Detailed investigation of the haemocoel of Chrysomallon squamiferum will reveal further information about its respiratory pigments . 
 The Scaly @-@ foot gastropod is a chemosymbiotic <unk> . It hosts <unk> ( sulfur @-@ oxidising ) <unk> endosymbionts in a much enlarged oesophageal gland , and appears to rely on these symbionts for nutrition . In this species , the size of the oesophageal gland is about two orders of magnitude larger than the usual size . There is a significant <unk> within the oesophageal gland , where the blood pressure likely decreases to almost zero . The elaborate cardiovascular system most likely evolved to oxygenate the endosymbionts in an oxygen @-@ poor environment , and / or to supply hydrogen sulfide to the endosymbionts . <unk> gammaproteobacteria have a full set of genes required for aerobic respiration , and are probably capable of switching between the more efficient aerobic respiration , and the less efficient anaerobic respiration , depending on oxygen availability . In 2014 , the endosymbiont of the scaly @-@ foot gastropod become the first endosymbiont of any gastropod for which the complete genome was known . Chrysomallon squamiferum was previously thought to be the only species of Peltospiridae that has an enlarged oesophageal gland , but later it was discovered that both species of Gigantopelta also have an enlarged oesophageal gland . 
 The nervous system is large , and the brain is a solid neural mass without ganglia . The nervous system is reduced in complexity and enlarged in size compared to other <unk> taxa . As is typical of gastropods , the nervous system is composed of an anterior oesophageal nerve ring and two pairs of longitudinal nerve cords , the ventral pair innervating the foot and the dorsal pair forming a twist via <unk> . The frontal part of the oesophageal nerve ring is large , connecting two lateral swellings . The huge fused neural mass is directly adjacent to , and passes through , the <unk> gland , where the bacteria are housed . There are large tentacular nerves projecting into the cephalic tentacles . The sensory organs of the scaly @-@ foot gastropod include statocysts surrounded by the oesophageal gland , each statocyst with a single statolith . There are also sensory ctenidial <unk> on the tip of the gill filaments ; these are known to be present in most <unk> , and are present some neomphalines . 
 The reproductive system has some unusual features . The gonads of adult snails are not inside the shell ; they are in the head @-@ foot region on the right side of the body . Adults possess both testis and ovary in different levels of development . The testis is placed ventrally ; the ovary is placed dorsally , and the nephridium lies between them . There is a " spermatophore packaging organ " next to the testis . <unk> from the testis and ovary are initially separate , but apparently fuse to a single duct , and emerge as a single genital opening on the right of the mantle cavity . The animal has no copulatory organ . 
 It is hypothetized that the derived strategy of housing endosymbiotic microbes in an oesophageal gland , has been the catalyst for anatomical innovations that serve primarily to improve the fitness of the bacteria , over and above the needs of the snail . The great enlargement of the oesophageal gland , the snail 's protective dermal sclerites , its highly enlarged respiratory and circulatory systems and its high fecundity are all considered to be adaptations which are beneficial to its endosymbiont microbes . These adaptations appear to be a result of specialisation to resolve energetic needs in an extreme chemosynthetic environment . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 This species inhabits the hydrothermal vent fields of the Indian Ocean . It lives adjacent to both acidic and reducing vent fluid , on the walls of black @-@ smoker chimneys , or directly on diffuse flow sites . 
 The depth of the Kairei field varies from 2 @,@ 415 to 2 @,@ 460 m ( 7 @,@ 923 to 8 @,@ 071 ft ) , and its dimensions are approximately 50 by 50 m ( 160 by 160 ft ) . The slope of the field is 10 ° to 30 ° . The substrate rock is troctolite and depleted mid @-@ ocean ridge basalt . The Kairei @-@ field scaly @-@ foot gastropods live in the low @-@ temperature diffuse fluids of a single chimney . The transitional zone , where these gastropods were found , is about 1 – 2 m ( 3 – 7 ft ) in width , with temperature of 2 – 10 ° C. The preferred water temperature for this species is about 5 ° C. These snails live in an environment which has high concentrations of hydrogen sulfide , and low concentrations of oxygen . 
 The abundance of scaly @-@ foot gastropods was lower in the Kairei field than in the Longqi field . The Kairei hydrothermal @-@ vent community consists of 35 taxa , including sea anemones Marianactis sp . , crustaceans Austinograea rodriguezensis , Rimicaris kairei , Mirocaris indica , Munidopsis sp . , Neolepadidae genus and sp . , Eochionelasmus sp . , bivalves Bathymodiolus marisindicus , gastropods Lepetodrilus sp . , <unk> sp . , Eulepetopsis sp . , Shinkailepas sp . , and Alviniconcha marisindica , Desbruyeresia marisindica , <unk> <unk> , Phymorhynchus sp . , <unk> sp . , Slit limpet sp . 1 , Slit limpet sp . 2 , <unk> <unk> , solenogastres <unk> ? sp . , annelids Amphisamytha sp . , Archinome jasoni , <unk> sp . 1 , <unk> sp . , Hesionoidae sp . 1 , Hesionoidae sp . 2 , Branchinotogluma sp . , <unk> sp . , <unk> ? sp . , <unk> ? sp . , <unk> sp . , unidentified Nemertea and unidentified Platyhelminthes . Scaly @-@ foot gastropods live in colonies with Alviniconcha marisindica snails , and there are colonies of Rimicaris kairei above them . 
 The Solitaire field is at a depth of 2 @,@ 606 m ( 8 @,@ 550 ft ) , and its dimensions are approximately 50 by 50 m ( 160 by 160 ft ) . The substrate rock is enriched mid @-@ ocean ridge basalt . Scaly @-@ foot gastropods live near the high @-@ temperature diffuse fluids of chimneys in the vent field . The abundance of scaly @-@ foot gastropods was lower than it was in the Longqi field . The Solitaire hydrothermal @-@ vent community comprises 22 taxa , including : sea anemones Marianactis sp . , crustaceans Austinograea rodriguezensis , Rimicaris kairei , Mirocaris indica , Munidopsis sp . , Neolepadidae gen et sp . , Eochionelasmus sp . , bivalves Bathymodiolus marisindicus , gastropods Lepetodrilus sp . , Eulepetopsis sp . , Shinkailepas sp . , Alviniconcha sp. type 3 , Desbruyeresia sp . , Phymorhynchus sp . , annelids <unk> genus and sp . , Archinome jasoni , Branchinotogluma sp . , echinoderm <unk> <unk> gen et sp . , fish <unk> genus and sp . , unidentified Nemertea , and unidentified Platyhelminthes . 
 The Longqi vent field is in a depth of 2 @,@ 780 m ( 9 @,@ 120 ft ) . Chrysomallon squamiferum was densely populated in the areas immediately surrounding the diffuse @-@ flow venting . The Longqi hydrothermal @-@ vent community include sea anemones , the gastropod Gigantopelta aegis , mussels , and stalked barnacles . Shrimps ( usually dominant in vent fields ) were not recorded in Longqi vent field . 
 = = = Feeding habits = = = 
 The scaly @-@ foot gastropod is probably not a filter @-@ feeder . The nutrition of the scaly @-@ foot gastropod throughout its entire post @-@ larval life probably depends on the <unk> of its endosymbiotic bacteria , which provide most of its nutrition . It is currently unclear whether or not this species uses other mechanisms for feeding ( for example it is not known if it uses its radula for eating any normal food ) . 
 For identification of trophic interactions in a habitat , where direct observation of feeding habits is complicated , there were measured carbon and nitrogen stable @-@ isotope compositions . There are depleted values of δ13C in the oesophageal gland ( relatively to photosynthetically derived organic carbon ) . Chemoautotrophic symbionts were presumed as a source of such carbon . Chemoautotrophic origin of the stable carbon isotope 13C was confirmed experimentally . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 This gastropod is a simultaneous hermaphrodite . It is the only species in the family <unk> that is so far known to be a simultaneous hermaphrodite . It has a high fecundity . It lays eggs that are probably of lecithotrophic type . Eggs of the scaly @-@ foot gastropods show negative buoyancy under atmospheric pressure . Neither the larvae nor the protoconch are known as of 2016 , but it is thought that the species has a planktonic dispersal stage . One of the smallest Chrysomallon squamiferum juvenile specimens ever collected had a shell length ca . 3 mm . The results of statistical analyses revealed no genetic differentiation between the two populations in the Kairei and Solitaire fields , suggesting potential connectivity between the two vent fields . The Kairei population represents a potential source population for the two populations in the Central Indian Ridge . These snails are difficult to keep alive in an artificial environment , however , they survived in aquaria at atmospheric pressure for more than three weeks . 
 = Parson Russell Terrier = 
 The Parson Russell Terrier is a breed of small white terrier that was the original Fox Terrier of the 18th century . The breed is named after the person credited with the creation of this type of dog , the Reverend John " Jack " Russell . It is the recognised conformation show variety of the Jack Russell Terrier and was first recognised in 1990 in the United Kingdom as the Parson Russell Terrier . In America , it was first recognised as the Jack Russell Terrier in 1997 . The name was changed to its current form in 1999 in the UK and by 2008 all international kennel clubs recognised it under the new name . 
 A mostly white breed with either a smooth , rough or broken coat , it conforms to a narrower range of sizes than the Jack Russell . It is a feisty , energetic terrier , suited to sports and able to get along with children and other animals . It has a range of breed @-@ related health issues , mainly relating to eye disorders . 
 = = History = = 
 This breed shares a common history with the Jack Russell Terrier until the early 1980s . 
 This type of small white terrier dates back to the work of the Reverend John Russell , born in 1795 . In 1819 he purchased a small white and tan female terrier named Trump from a milkman in the hamlet of Elmsford . She formed the basis for his breeding program , and by the 1850s the dogs were recognised as a distinct type of Fox Terrier . 
 In 1894 , the Devon and Somerset Badger Club was founded by Arthur Blake Heinemann who created the first breed standard for this type of terrier . The club was formed with the aim of promoting badger digging , rather than fox hunting . By the turn of the 20th century , the name of John Russell had become associated with this type of terrier . The Devon and Somerset Badger Club would go on to be renamed the Parson Jack Russell Terrier Club and continued until just before World War II when the club folded . 
 The Jack Russell Terrier Club of Great Britain was established in 1974 as the parent club for the Jack Russell Terrier in the UK . The club has actively opposed recognition of the Jack Russell Terrier by Kennel Club ( UK ) . In 1983 , the Parson Jack Russell Terrier Club ( <unk> ) was reformed with the aim of seeking Kennel Club recognition for the breed . The initial application was turned down , but after several further rejections , the Parson Jack Russell Terrier was recognised on 9 January 1990 as a variant of the Fox Terrier , with the United Kennel Club following suit in 1991 . The American Kennel Club recognised the breed as the Jack Russell Terrier effective 1 November 1997 . 
 On 1 August 1999 , the <unk> successfully petitioned the Kennel Club ( UK ) to change the name of the breed to the Parson Russell Terrier , with the name of the breed club following suit . The international kennel association , the Fédération Cynologique Internationale , recognised the Parson Russell Terrier on 4 June 2001 . The American Kennel Club updated the name of the recognised breed from Jack Russell Terrier on 1 April 2003 . The United Kennel Club adopted the new name on 23 April 2008 . 
 The Australian National Kennel Council ( ANKC ) , New Zealand Kennel Club and United Kennel Club ( UKC ) are the only three major kennel clubs to recognise both the Jack Russell Terrier and the Parson Russell Terrier separately . In 2009 , there were 18 Parsons registered with the ANKC compared to 1073 Jack Russells . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Parson Russell Terrier is bred to conform to a conformation show standard . Unlike its close relative , the Jack Russell Terrier , Parson Russell Terriers have noticeably longer legs that are about as tall as the length of the Terrier 's body . It is a predominantly white breed with black , tan or tricolour markings and an easy to groom coat which is either smooth or broken ( similar to a smooth coat , but with some longer hair on the head , face , legs or body ) . The breed standard does not recognise a Parson Russell with a curly or rough coat . There is a clear outline with only a hint of eyebrows and beard should the dog be broken coated . They possess moderately thick small " V " shaped drop ears with the tip pointed towards the eyes . The nose of the dog should be black . The normal range of sizes is between 13 – 14 inches ( 33 – 36 cm ) tall at the withers , with a weight around 13 – 17 pounds ( 5 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 7 kg ) . 
 The Parson Russell has a relatively square outline , with a body about as long as the dog is tall . Compared to the Jack Russell Terrier , the Parson Russell has a longer head and a larger chest along with overall a slightly larger body size . The Parson retains the flat skull but not the elongated shape of the Fox Terrier , and with lower set ears . In addition , the Jack Russell Terrier has a greater variation in size , ranging between 10 – 15 inches ( 25 – 38 cm ) in height at the withers . 
 Two hands should be able to span the chest of the dog behind its elbows , with the thumbs at the withers . This is required in show judging , with the judge lifting the dog 's front legs gently off the ground in this motion in order to measure the size of the chest . The judges fingers should meet under the chest and the thumbs on top of the spine . The American Kennel Club describes this as a " significant factor and a critical part of the judging process . " It is not done to measure the size of the chest , but rather to feel for the correct shape . 
 Under the show standard , there are several physical points which would be treated as faults in the show ring . These are for the height of the dog at the withers to be outside of the standard range , or for the dog to possess either pricked up ears , a liver or brown coloured nose , an overshot or undershot jawline or to have brindle markings . 
 = = Temperament = = 
 The Parson is a feisty and energetic type of Terrier . They can excel in dog sports such as flyball or agility and require vigorous exercise in order to prevent them from becoming bored and potentially destructive in the home . They can be suited to live with children but as they have a typical Terrier temperament , they will not tolerate rough handling . The AKC describes them as being single minded , tenacious and courageous when at work , while at home they can be exuberant , playful and affectionate . However , it is unusual for dogs of this breed to be involved in work , such as fox hunting , typical of a small white terrier , as they are more adapted to the show bench . 
 They can be playful with other dogs , and get along with horses . The breed standard requires that shyness be treated as a fault , although it states that this should not be confused with submissiveness which is not treated as such . Overt aggression towards another dog is not accepted and is a criterion for disqualification in the show ring . 
 = = Health = = 
 Eye conditions which affect the Parson Russell Terrier include primary lens luxation , a heritable condition . This disease causes the <unk> fibres to be abnormal and begin to disintegrate in affected dogs . The fibres support the lens of the eye , and their destruction can cause the lens to fall into the wrong location within the eye . If the lens falls into the anterior chamber of eyeball then a secondary glaucoma can occur , causing loss of vision . National kennel associations such as the Kennel Club ( UK ) publish DNA screening results on Parson Russell Terriers , broken down into three groups ; clears , carriers , and <unk> . 
 Other eye conditions which appear in the breed include cataracts in juveniles , corneal dystrophy , progressive retinal atrophy and posterior vitreous detachment . Non @-@ eye breed related conditions which may affect a Parson are deafness and patella luxation . The average lifespan of a Parson Russell Terrier is between 14 and 15 years . 
 = New York State Route 598 = 
 New York State Route 598 ( NY 598 ) is a north – south state highway located within Onondaga County , New York , in the United States . It extends for 2 @.@ 31 miles ( 3 @.@ 72 km ) from an intersection with NY 5 in the city of Syracuse to a junction with NY 298 in the adjacent town of Salina . The route intersects Interstate 690 ( I @-@ 690 ) near its southern terminus and passes through Syracuse 's Eastwood neighborhood near its midpoint , where it meets NY 290 . 
 NY 598 was assigned c . 2004 . The northernmost portion of the route replaced NY 930M , a short unsigned reference route that extended from NY 298 in Salina southeast to the Syracuse city line at North Midler Avenue . NY 930M itself was a remnant of New York State Route 433 , a highway assigned in the early 1950s and removed in the mid @-@ 1960s that , upon removal , followed the same alignment as modern NY 598 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 598 begins at an intersection with NY 5 ( Erie Boulevard ) east of downtown Syracuse . The route heads north as the four @-@ lane South Midler Avenue , crossing a CSX Transportation @-@ owned railroad spur known as the Peat Street Runner at @-@ grade ahead of an interchange with I @-@ 690 ( exit 15 ) at the southern edge of the Eastwood neighborhood . North of I @-@ 690 , the route narrows to two lanes as it travels through the densely populated residential neighborhood . 
 The homes cease temporarily around NY 598 's intersection with NY 290 ( James Street ) , a prominent retail corridor in eastern Syracuse . Upon crossing NY 290 , NY 598 becomes North Midler Avenue as it becomes surrounded by houses once more . At the Syracuse city line three blocks to the north , North Midler Avenue splits off to the northeast while NY 598 becomes New Court Avenue . The switch in both the town of DeWitt and name also brings about a switch in surroundings as the route heads northwest into a heavily industrial area built up along CSX 's Mohawk Subdivision rail line . NY 598 ends shortly afterward at an intersection with NY 298 just inside the Salina town line . The portion of NY 598 in DeWitt and Salina is maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) ; the remainder of the route is maintained by the city of Syracuse . 
 = = History = = 
 All of Midler Avenue , including the portion of the street not currently part of NY 598 in DeWitt , was originally designated as NY 433 in the early 1950s . At the time , NY 433 ended at the junction of Midler Avenue and Court Street Road ( then NY 298 ) . By 1954 , New Court Avenue , an east – west connector between NY 298 and NY 433 in DeWitt , was designated as NY 436 . In the late 1950s , construction began on a bypass of Court Street that extended from the western terminus of NY 436 in Salina to the junction of NY 298 and Thompson Road ( modern NY 635 ) in DeWitt . The bypass was opened to traffic as a realignment of NY 298 by 1961 . NY 433 was then extended northeastward along NY 298 's former routing on Court Street to Carrier Circle , where it met the realigned NY 298 . 
 The alignments of NY 433 and NY 436 north of the Syracuse city line were flipped c . 1962 , placing NY 433 on Midler Avenue and New Court Avenue and NY 436 on Midler Avenue and Court Street Road . Both designations were removed at some point in the latter half of the 1960s . The portion of NY 433 's former routing outside of Syracuse became NY 930M , an unsigned reference route . NY 930M went unchanged until c . 2004 when it was incorporated into NY 598 , a new route extending from NY 5 to NY 298 by way of NY 433 's final alignment . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Onondaga County . 
 = 2015 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix ( formally known as the 2015 Formula 1 Etihad Airways Abu Dhabi Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held at the Yas Marina Circuit on 29 November 2015 . The race was the nineteenth and final round of the 2015 season , and marked the seventh running of the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix as a round of the World Championship since its inception in 1950 . 
 Lewis Hamilton was the defending race winner and had already secured his third Drivers ' Championship earlier in the season at the United States Grand Prix . His team , Mercedes , had decided the Constructors ' Championship in their favour at the Russian Grand Prix . 
 In Saturday 's qualifying , Nico Rosberg ( Mercedes ) secured his sixth consecutive pole position and went on to win the race ahead of teammate Hamilton . Kimi Räikkönen finished third for Ferrari . It was the twelfth one @-@ two finish for Mercedes , cementing a record @-@ breaking season that saw them finish with the highest ever number of points scored by a constructor , most front row lookouts and one @-@ two finishes over the course of any Formula One season . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Going into the race weekend , both Championships were already decided . Lewis Hamilton had already secured the drivers ' title three races earlier at the 2015 United States Grand Prix and was leading the Drivers ' Championship with 363 points , 66 points ahead of his teammate Nico Rosberg . In the Constructors ' Championship , their team Mercedes had also secured the constructors ' title four races earlier at the 2015 Russian Grand Prix and was leading Ferrari on 660 to 401 points . However , several positions in the standings were still undecided . In the battle for fourth place in the Drivers ' Championship , Valtteri Bottas was just one point ahead of compatriot Kimi Räikkönen , with Felipe Massa in sixth also still able to get the position , being 19 points behind his Williams teammate Bottas . Red Bull teammates Daniil Kvyat and Daniel Ricciardo were just ten points apart in the battle for seventh in the championship . In the Constructors ' standings , sixth placed Lotus was just nine points ahead of Toro Rosso , while McLaren needed at least nine points as well to overcome Sauber for eighth , a points tally they had only managed once during the rest of the season . 
 Pirelli supplied the teams with the yellow banded soft and the red banded super @-@ soft tyres as the two dry weather options for the race . It was the 150th race for Force India under their current moniker . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were scheduled , two 1 @.@ 5 @-@ hour sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . Lewis Hamilton was fastest in the first free practice session , run in clear and sunny conditions , lapping in a time of <unk> , over one @-@ tenth of a second faster than teammate Rosberg in second . Rosberg had set new fastest sector times on his last fast run , but a mistake in the last part of the track lost him a chance at the best time . Kimi Räikkönen was third fastest for Ferrari , ahead of Daniil Kvyat . Kvyat 's Red Bull teammate Ricciardo changed back to his older specification Renault power unit , after being unsatisfied with the performance of his updated unit at the previous race in Brazil . He finished the session seventh fastest . At Lotus , Jolyon Palmer replaced Romain Grosjean , but had to sit out most of the session due to a water leak , managing just nine laps . 
 In the second session of Friday afternoon , Nico Rosberg topped the timesheets , setting a time of <unk> , finishing more than a tenth of a second ahead of Hamilton . Third fastest was Sergio Pérez for Force India , although he was unable to run in the last twenty minutes of the session due to brake issues . The Red Bull drivers Kvyat and Ricciardo were fourth and sixth respectively , while Fernando Alonso came within one second of Rosberg 's time in ninth . 
 Rosberg was again fastest in the third session on Saturday with a time of <unk> Hamilton was second quickest , almost three @-@ tenths of a second slower , unable to get a clean lap to match his teammate . On the slower soft tyres , one lap was impeded by traffic , another was disturbed by Hamilton spinning after hitting the kerb at turn five . He again failed in his attempt on a very fast lap on the super @-@ soft tyres later in the session , being forced wide after repeating his mistake at turn five . Hamilton was just marginally ahead of Sebastian Vettel , who finished third ahead of Pérez . Daniil Kvyat was unable to set a timed lap as his team worked to solve an electrical problem . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . At the beginning of the first part of qualifying ( Q1 ) , Mercedes sent both their drivers out on the faster super @-@ soft compound , while Ferrari stayed on the slower soft tyres . Even though Ferrari eventually decided to give both their drivers out on the faster tyres towards the end of the session , Sebastian Vettel aborted his last flying lap , believing his time to be sufficient for proceeding into the next round , only for Jenson Button to set a time to relegate Vettel into 16th place on the grid , eliminating him from qualifying . Vettel would later describe his and the team 's judgement as " a small mistake with a big consequence " . Fernando Alonso in the other McLaren did not make the cut , after a puncture on his last lap left him without a chance at a faster time , while Marcus Ericsson was held up by a technical issue , qualifying 18th . Both Manor Marussia drivers were eliminated at the bottom of the standings , with Will Stevens 1 @.@ 137 seconds ahead of his teammate Roberto Merhi . 
 Lewis Hamilton was fastest in Q2 , two tenths of a second ahead of his teammate Rosberg . In his last qualifying session with Lotus , Romain Grosjean experienced technical difficulties that forced him to come back into the pits . Even though he was sent out again , he was unable to set a time , stopping his car at turn seven . His teammate Pastor Maldonado also did not proceed into Q3 , as did Jenson Button who missed out by two tenths of a second . The two other drivers eliminated were Felipe Nasr for Sauber and Max Verstappen , who was unable to match the time of his teammate Carlos Sainz , Jr . 
 The top ten drivers competed for pole position in Q3 and it was a battle between the two Mercedes . Lewis Hamilton set his fastest time first with Rosberg right behind him . A much better time in the third sector of the track allowed Rosberg to take his sixth consecutive pole position almost four tenths ahead of his teammate . Sergio Pérez held third spot for much of the session but was beaten to it by Kimi Räikkönen during the second turn of runs . The two were followed by Daniel Ricciardo and Valtteri Bottas on the third row of the grid . Following a gearbox change after qualifying , Romain Grosjean was demoted five places on the grid . Roberto Merhi and Will Stevens also received five place penalties : Stevens for a change of the Control Electronics unit , Merhi for changes made to his suspension . Both would start the race from the back row of the grid . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 At the start of the race on Sunday , Hamilton got away slowly but was able to keep both Pérez and Räikkönen behind him while Rosberg retained the lead . Further back , Fernando Alonso made contact with Felipe Nasr and then crashed into Pastor Maldonado , who was forced to retire . Alonso needed to pit for a new front wing and was later given a drive @-@ through penalty , dropping him to the end of the field . Meanwhile , Nico Hülkenberg and Sebastian Vettel made up places , sitting in fifth and twelfth respectively after the first lap . Valtteri Bottas on the other hand lost positions , finding himself in tenth . Rosberg soon built a lead of over one second , giving Hamilton no chance to deploy DRS for an overtake manoeuvre . By lap 5 , both Kvyat and Nasr had come into the pits for the harder compound tyre , followed by Ricciardo , Massa and Pérez one lap later . On lap seven , both Hülkenberg and Sainz Jr. pitted . While Hülkenberg was able to stay ahead of Massa , Sainz 's stop was unfortunate and he lost time due to a problem with the tyre change . Another two laps later , Valtteri Bottas pitted and was sent out into the path of Button , damaging his front wing , which he needed to replace the following lap . He also received a five @-@ second penalty to be served at his next scheduled stop . The leaders pitted for new tyres around laps ten and eleven , with the order now being Rosberg ahead of Vettel , who was yet to stop , Hamilton , and Räikkönen . Romain Grosjean , who started on the harder tyres just as Vettel , was up to sixth . 
 On lap 13 , Felipe Massa passed Marcus Ericsson for ninth place and one lap later , Hamilton capitalised on a mistake by Vettel and overtook him to retake second position . Vettel lost another position when he let Räikkönen pass him on lap 16 , the two being on different strategies . Meanwhile , Rosberg had built up a lead of around six seconds to Hamilton . On lap 19 , Carlos Sainz , Jr. allowed teammate Max Verstappen to pass him , while Alonso came in for what was his third pit stop of the race , leaving him in last position . Two laps later , Verstappen created <unk> on his tyres when he locked up his brakes , forcing him to pit . He emerged in 15th position . Vettel came in for his first pit stop on lap 24 , coming out in sixth place ahead of compatriot Nico Hülkenberg . At the same time , Hamilton started to reduce the gap to Rosberg in front , cutting it down to less than two seconds by lap 29 . With his teammate closing in , Rosberg pitted on lap 32 , with Räikkönen following suit , whose pit stop was delayed , losing him around four seconds . Sergio Pérez was starting to close the gap to both Ferraris in front of him after pitting early . Vettel reacted on lap 41 and changed to the super @-@ soft tyres , coming out behind both Pérez and Ricciardo in sixth . One lap later , Hamilton came in for his second and final stop , having asked his team before if it would be possible to finish the race without stopping again . He emerged twelve seconds behind Rosberg and started to cut into his advantage immediately . 
 Further back in the field , Max Verstappen overtook Nasr and Button to move into twelfth place on laps 44 and 46 respectively . However , he was deemed to have forced Button wide and was handed a five @-@ second penalty to be added to his finishing time . Lap 53 saw Romain Grosjean move into the final point scoring position of tenth by passing Carlos Sainz , Jr. into turn eight . Just one lap later , he took ninth place from Daniil Kvyat . At the front , Hamilton proved unable to reach his teammate , who took the checkered flag for his sixth win of the season . Kimi Räikkönen completed the podium , followed by Vettel , Pérez and Ricciardo . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 In the podium interviews , conducted by former Formula One driver David Coulthard , Nico Rosberg expressed excitement over how the end of the season had worked out for him , describing the race in the United States as his " low point " . Speaking about racing his teammate Hamilton , he called him " one of the best out there " and said that it was " an even better feeling to win , definitely against such opposition " . Hamilton in turn praised his team for their performance over the whole season , saying that they had " surpassed their own expectations " , albeit confessing that he was happy that the season was over . During the press conference , third @-@ placed Kimi Räikkönen said : " It ’ s never nice to finish third but I ’ ll take it after previous races " , pointing to a season that had been marred with small mistakes and misfortunes for him . He also stated that securing fourth place in the World Championship did not mean much to him , dismissing the idea of a " Finnish championship " between himself and Valtteri Bottas . 
 Fourth @-@ placed Sebastian Vettel said after the race : " The best result one way or another would be P3 and P4 so we can be very happy with today " , adding that he and Räikkönen had " a clean race for P3 " . He also described his 2015 campaign as " a miracle " , after Ferrari had endured a winless 2014 . Speaking about the incident between Bottas and Button at the first round of pit stops , Williams ' head of performance engineering Rob Smedley said that the team had released their driver at the right moment , declaring the accident happened because Bottas saw Button too late . Following two incidents during the race , Max Verstappen was given time penalties and three penalty points on his FIA Super Licence – one for overtaking Jenson Button outside track limits and two for ignoring blue flags while Lewis Hamilton tried to lap him . The penalties meant that he was just four points away from a one @-@ race ban . 
 Räikkönen taking fourth position from Bottas in the Drivers ' Championship was the only change in both championship standings as a result of the Grand Prix . Following the Grand Prix , Renault confirmed their takeover of Lotus , meaning that it was the last Grand Prix for the team in their incarnation under the Lotus moniker that had started in 2012 . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes : 
 ^ 1 — Romain Grosjean received a five @-@ place grid penalty for an unscheduled gearbox change . 
 ^ 2 — Will Stevens received a five @-@ place grid penalty for a change of his Control Electronics unit . 
 ^ 3 — Roberto Merhi started the race from pit lane after the team took his car out of parc fermé to alter his suspension set @-@ up . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes : 
 ^ 1 — Max Verstappen originally finished twelfth , but received a five @-@ second time penalty for overtaking Jenson Button outside track limits and another twenty @-@ second penalty for ignoring blue flags while being lapped . 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 Bold text indicates 2015 World Champions . 
 = 56th Independent Mixed Brigade = 
 The 56th Independent Mixed Brigade was an Imperial Japanese Army unit of World War II . It was raised in June 1944 to reinforce the defences of Japanese @-@ occupied Borneo , and was initially stationed in the north @-@ east of the island . In early 1945 most of the brigade 's units were ordered to move to the Brunei Bay area of west Borneo , with the brigade 's personnel subsequently making a difficult march across the centre of the island . 
 During June and July 1945 the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade saw combat against Australian forces in the Borneo Campaign . Its units were greatly under @-@ strength at this time due to the casualties suffered while moving across Borneo , and the elements which engaged Australian forces were rapidly defeated . The remainder of the brigade withdrew into central Borneo , and surrendered to the Australians following the end of the war . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 During mid @-@ 1944 the Imperial Japanese Army 's General Staff decided to reinforce the garrisons of the southern Philippines and Borneo ahead of an expected Allied offensive to liberate these areas . As part of this effort , the 54th , 55th , 56th , 57th and 58th Independent Mixed Brigades were ordered to be formed for service with the Southern Expeditionary Army Group during June . Aside from the 58th Independent Mixed Brigade , which was formed by converting an existing unit , these new brigades were to be organised in forward areas from personnel shipped from Japan . Upon formation , the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade was assigned to the Borneo Defence Force ( BDF ) . 
 The process of establishing the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade took longer than expected , which delayed its deployment to Borneo . While three battalions worth of personnel departed Japan in mid @-@ July 1944 , the first did not arrive at Borneo until September . The final elements of the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade reached Borneo in mid @-@ November . The 8 @,@ 000 personnel allocated to the brigade had not trained together while in Japan , and were organised into fighting units after their arrival in Borneo . They were also shipped to Borneo separately from their weapons and other equipment . Once its organisation was complete , the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade comprised six infantry battalions ( the 366th to 371st Independent Infantry Battalions ) , each with an authorised strength of 997 men , and small artillery , engineer and signal units . Like the other independent mixed brigades raised in mid @-@ 1944 , the 56th had only 18 trucks and a small number of horses to transport its equipment and supplies . The brigade was commanded by Major General Taijiro Akashi . 
 The BDF and its superior headquarters , the Seventh Area Army , initially disagreed over where the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade should be deployed . In July 1944 the BDF believed that the Allies were likely to invade northern Borneo in January 1945 or later , and wanted to station the brigade in this area . However , the Seventh Area Army judged that Allied forces were more likely to attack the Brunei Bay region in western Borneo to support a drive on Singapore . Moreover , the area army believed that it would be difficult to transfer units from northern to western Borneo due to the island 's rugged terrain . The BDF eventually won the debate , and the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade 's units were landed in the Sandakan area of north @-@ east Borneo as they arrived from Japan . 
 Once the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade arrived in Borneo , the brigade headquarters and all the combat battalions other than the 371st Independent Infantry Battalion were concentrated at Tawau . The 371st Independent Infantry Battalion was stationed in Sandakan and placed under the command of the 41st Independent Garrison Battalion . As of 20 December 1944 , the brigade had responsibility for defending the area around Tawau and Tarakan Island . 
 = = = Redeployment = = = 
 In late 1944 the 37th Army ( the former BDF ) changed its views on likely Allied intentions , and concluded that the expected invasion would probably be focused on the Brunei Bay region . The Southern Expeditionary Army Group agreed with this assessment , and ordered in January 1945 that the 37th Army 's forces be concentrated around Brunei Bay . As the Allies had air superiority over Borneo and nearby waters , it was not possible to move the units in north @-@ east Borneo by sea . Instead , they would need to march across the island . 
 The 56th Independent Mixed Brigade , less its 369th and 370th Independent Infantry Battalions , began to march across Borneo in late January 1945 . This proved difficult , with the movement through the mountainous jungle in the centre of the island being hampered by the poor state of the road network , bad weather and food shortages . Many of the brigade 's soldiers fell sick during the march , and all four infantry battalions were considerably below their authorised strength by the time they arrived at Brunei Bay between April and June . The 370th Independent Infantry Battalion was transferred to the direct control of the 37th Army and remained at Tawau , and the 369th Independent Infantry Battalion was shipped to Banjarmasin in southern Borneo during March and assigned to the 22nd Special Naval Base Force . 
 The brigade was widely dispersed following its arrival in the Brunei Bay area . In June 1945 , the brigade headquarters and the 366th and 367th Independent Infantry Battalions were stationed in Brunei . The 368th Independent Infantry Battalion was located at the inland town of Beaufort , and the 371st Independent Infantry Battalion formed the main body of the island of Labuan 's garrison . Of the support units , the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade Artillery Unit was at Brunei and the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade Engineer and Signal Units were at Beaufort . All of the brigade 's heavy weapons had been left behind at Tawau , and due to the casualties incurred during the march across Borneo its combat units were not fit for battle . 
 = = = Battle of North Borneo = = = 
 Two brigades of the Australian 9th Division with large numbers of support units invaded the Brunei Bay area on 10 June 1945 . At this time the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade was the main Japanese combat force in the region , but was in the process of withdrawing inland to defensive positions located around rice @-@ growing areas . 
 The 371st Independent Infantry Battalion was destroyed on Labuan by the 24th Brigade during 11 days of at times fierce fighting . The 367th Independent Infantry Battalion retreated from Brunei to the <unk> River as a formed unit , and the 366th Independent Infantry Battalion broke up into small groups as it fought a rearguard action against the Australian 20th Brigade . While Beaufort was attacked by the 24th Brigade , the 368th Independent Infantry Battalion was not involved in its defence . 
 During the last weeks of the war the remnants of the 366th Independent Infantry Battalion were pursued by Australian Army patrols , air attacks and groups of local Dayaks organised by the Australian Services Reconnaissance Department . These attacks led to the disintegration of the unit . Major General Akashi led the remnants of the forces stationed at Brunei as well as a number of Japanese civilians to the inland town of Tenom ; this trek took 40 days and involved traversing mountainous and trackless terrain . However , the forces involved suffered heavy casualties , with 50 percent of the 367th Battalion 's soldiers being killed between 10 June and the end of the war . The 369th and 370th Independent Infantry Battalions did not see combat , and remained largely intact at the end of the war . Following the Japanese surrender , the survivors of the 56th Independent Mixed Brigade were concentrated in locations selected by the Australian forces . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The 56th Independent Mixed Brigade comprised the following units : 
 Brigade headquarters 
 366th Independent Infantry Battalion 
 367th Independent Infantry Battalion 
 368th Independent Infantry Battalion 
 369th Independent Infantry Battalion 
 370th Independent Infantry Battalion 
 371st Independent Infantry Battalion 
 56th Independent Mixed Brigade Artillery Unit 
 56th Independent Mixed Brigade Engineer Unit 
 56th Independent Mixed Brigade Signal Unit 
 = Francis Nash = 
 Francis Nash ( <unk> — October 7 , 1777 ) was a brigadier general in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War . Prior to the war , he was a lawyer , public official , and politician in Hillsborough , North Carolina , and was heavily involved in opposing the Regulator movement , an uprising of settlers in the North Carolina piedmont between 1765 and 1771 . Nash was also involved in North Carolina politics , representing Hillsborough on several occasions in the colonial North Carolina General Assembly . 
 Nash quickly became engaged in revolutionary activities , and served as a delegate to the first three Patriot provincial congresses . In 1775 , he was named lieutenant colonel of the 1st North Carolina Regiment under Colonel James Moore , and served briefly in the southern theater of the Revolutionary War before being ordered north . Nash was made a brigadier general in 1777 upon Moore 's death , and given command of the North Carolina brigade of the Continental Army under General George Washington . He led North Carolina 's soldiers in the Philadelphia campaign , but was wounded at the Battle of Germantown on October 4 , 1777 , and died several days later . Nash was one of only ten Patriot generals to die from wounds received in combat between 1775 and 1781 . He is honored by several city and county names , including those of Nashville , Tennessee , Nashville , North Carolina , and Nash County , North Carolina . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Nash was born around 1742 in Amelia County , Virginia ( in an area that would later become Prince Edward County ) to John and Ann Owen Nash . His parents were originally from Wales , and several of his seven siblings , including at least one brother , were born there . One of Nash 's brothers was Abner Nash , who later became a statesman in North Carolina . 
 By 1763 , Francis Nash had moved along with Abner to <unk> , which later became Hillsborough . There Francis started a law practice , and became a clerk of court in 1763 , a position which paid an annual stipend of £ 100 sterling . The Nash brothers also owned substantial property in the town , and established a mill on the Eno River , while Francis invested in a local store . From 1764 to 1765 , he served his first term in the North Carolina Assembly representing Orange County . 
 In 1770 , Nash married Sarah Moore , the daughter of colonial jurist Maurice Moore , niece of James Moore , and sister of future United States Supreme Court Alfred Moore . Their union would produce two daughters : Ann , who died as a child , and Sarah , who went on to marry John Waddell , the son of North Carolina colonial soldier Hugh Waddell , and was the grandmother to American Civil War Confederate blockade runner James Iredell Waddell . Nash had two children out of wedlock , one of whom some scholars identify as a son also named Francis Nash , possibly born in 1770 or 1771 . The mother of one of the children was reported as Hillsborough barmaid Ruth Jackson . The elder Nash provided Jackson with property west of Hillsborough , and several slaves . 
 = = War of the Regulation and pre @-@ Revolution politics = = 
 Nash showed an interest in military affairs while living in Hillsborough , and received informal military training from a retired English soldier living there . He worked his way up through the Orange County militia ranks until he eventually became its commanding colonel . During the War of the Regulation , in 1768 , he ordered the militia to put down several riots incited by the Regulators , but the militiamen were sympathetic towards the rioters and refused . Nash entered into a pact with others including Edmund Fanning , Adlai Osborne , and future governor Alexander Martin , to protect one another 's property against Regulator threats , but the parties to that agreement lived at great distances from each other , rendering the pact ineffective . 
 Along with Fanning , who was a personal friend , Nash was accused of extorting money from Hillsborough 's residents . Regulator leaders attempted to have Nash tried for corruption , but the charges against him were dismissed . In September 1770 , a group of Regulators took control of Hillsborough , forcing Nash and other public officials to flee for fear of bodily harm . Nash subsequently fought alongside Governor William Tryon in the Battle of Alamance against the Regulator militia . He served in the " Lower House " of the colonial Assembly in 1771 and from 1773 to 1775 as a representative for Hillsborough . 
 In 1774 , Royal Governor Josiah Martin postponed the scheduled convening of the colonial Assembly to prevent the North Carolina Assembly from selecting delegates to the proposed Continental Congress , which was to begin in Philadelphia in September . In response , members of the Assembly , many of whom would later become Patriot supporters , convened the First North Carolina Provincial Congress in August 1774 . Nash and his brother , Abner , were both elected to that body , along with 69 other North Carolinians , which then selected delegates to the Continental Congress . Governor Martin condemned the Provincial Congress as an extra @-@ legal body not permitted to assemble and represent the people of North Carolina . In an attempt to quash its work , the Governor called the colonial Assembly to convene on April 5 , 1775 , but the Second North Carolina Provincial Congress met in a session several hours before the Assembly was set to open and many of the congressional delegates , including Nash , voted to support the work of the Continental and Provincial Congresses . In response , Martin dissolved the Assembly . The Royal government would never again call an Assembly to session in North Carolina . 
 = = American Revolutionary War = = 
 = = = Southern theater = = = 
 In 1775 , Nash served in the Third North Carolina Provincial Congress , which organized eight regiments of soldiers on instructions from the Continental Congress . Later that year , the Provincial Congress appointed Nash lieutenant colonel of the 1st North Carolina Regiment under the command of then @-@ colonel James Moore . In November , the 1st North Carolina was formally integrated into the Continental Army organization . Nash served as an officer under Moore during the maneuvers that led up to the Battle of Moore 's Creek Bridge in February 1776 but , like Moore , did not participate in the battle , arriving after its conclusion . 
 During April 1776 , Nash was promoted to colonel to replace Moore , who had been promoted to brigadier general . Nash took part in the expedition to aid Charleston in 1776 , which culminated in the Battle of Sullivan 's Island . Immediately prior to that engagement , Nash had been ordered by Major General Charles Lee , commander of the Southern Department , to relieve William Moultrie 's South Carolina troops on Sullivan 's Island , but the British assault prevented that relief . Moultrie would go on to successfully defend the island from a much larger British force , while Nash 's unit guarded the unfinished rear of Fort Sullivan . 
 = = = Philadelphia campaign = = = 
 Nash returned with his regiment to North Carolina in anticipation of joining General George Washington 's army in the north , but fears of British and Indian attacks in Georgia prevented any such action , and caused Nash to remain in his home state . On February 5 , 1777 , he was promoted to brigadier general by the Continental Congress . He was also tasked with recruiting more soldiers from the western part of the state , but was forced to abandon that task after James Moore 's death on April 15 , 1777 . Nash was then placed in command of the North Carolina brigade . Although fellow North Carolinian Robert Howe 's commission as a brigadier general predated Nash 's , Howe had been made commander of the Southern Department of the Continental Army , and he was forced to remain in command of the troops defending South Carolina . Nash marched north to join Washington 's army and commanded all nine North Carolina Continental Army regiments at the Battle of Brandywine . 
 = = = Battle of Germantown and death = = = 
 After the British captured Philadelphia on September 11 , 1777 , Washington took to the offensive and struck at the main part of the British Army near Philadelphia in the Battle of Germantown . Initially , the North Carolina brigade was intended to serve in the Continental Army 's reserve but Washington , out of a desire to defend his flank , ordered Nash into action . Nash was commanding a fighting retreat , slowly moving his unit backwards to stall the British advance , when , on October 4 , 1777 , he was mortally wounded by a cannonball that struck him in the hip and killed his horse . The same cannonball killed Major James Witherspoon , son of John Witherspoon , the president of Princeton University and a signer of the Declaration of Independence . Nash may have also been blinded by a musket ball that struck him in the head . Thomas Paine , who saw him taken off the battlefield , later stated that Nash 's wounds had made him unrecognizable . 
 Nash was treated by Washington 's personal physician , James Craik , who could not stem his bleeding , which was reported to have fully soaked through two mattresses . Nash succumbed to his wounds on October 7 at a private residence near <unk> , Pennsylvania . His final words are alleged to have been " From the first dawn of the Revolution I have been ever on the side of liberty and my country " . He was buried in the Towamencin Mennonite Meetinghouse Cemetery in Towamencin Township , Pennsylvania , on October 9 , 1777 , along with other officers who had perished at Germantown . Most of the Continental Army 's senior officers , including Washington himself , attended the funeral service . Nash 's friend and colleague , Alexander Martin , who later became Governor of the State of North Carolina and who had witnessed Nash 's wounding , subsequently composed a funeral poem in the fallen general 's honor . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Nash was one of only ten Patriot generals who died during the American Revolutionary War . After his death , on April 29 , 1784 , Congress awarded his heirs a land grant representing 84 months of Continental Army service , which exceeded Nash 's actual service time . Nashville , Tennessee ( originally called " Fort <unk> " ) , Nashville , North Carolina , and Nash County , North Carolina , are named in his honor . In 1906 , a stone arch was erected on the grounds of Guilford Courthouse National Military Park in Nash 's honor , but it was demolished in 1937 . Nash 's home in Hillsborough is now known as the Nash @-@ Hooper House , as it was purchased by William Hooper , a signatory to the Declaration of Independence , after Nash 's death . In 1938 , a historical marker was placed near the house commemorating Nash 's life and service . The Nash @-@ Hooper House was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1971 . It is located in the Hillsborough Historic District . 
 = Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 1 = 
 The Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 1 ( Микоян @-@ Гуревич МиГ @-@ 1 ) was a Soviet fighter aircraft of World War II that was designed to meet a requirement for a high @-@ altitude fighter issued in 1939 . To minimize demand on strategic materials such as aluminum , the aircraft was mostly constructed from steel tubing and wood . Flight testing revealed a number of deficiencies , but it was ordered into production before they could be fixed . Although difficult to handle , one hundred were built before the design was modified into the MiG @-@ 3 . The aircraft was issued to fighter regiments of the Soviet Air Forces ( VVS ) in 1941 , but most were apparently destroyed during the opening days of Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 = = = Design phase = = = 
 The MiG @-@ 1 was designed in response to a requirement for a high @-@ altitude fighter with an inline engine issued by the VVS in January 1939 . Initially the aircraft , designated I @-@ 200 , was designed in the Polikarpov construction bureau . Work started in June 1939 , under the direction of Nikolai Polikarpov and his assistant M. <unk> . Polikarpov himself preferred radial engines and promoted his I @-@ 180 design at that time , but when the powerful Mikulin AM @-@ 37 inline engine became available , he decided to use it in a fighter . The approach that he selected was to build the smallest possible aircraft around the intended powerplant , thereby minimising weight and drag — the philosophy of the light fighter . As specified , the aircraft was to be capable of reaching 670 km / h ( 417 mph ) . In August 1939 , Polikarpov fell out of favour with Joseph Stalin and as a result , when Polikarpov went in November 1939 to tour Germany 's aviation works , the Soviet authorities decided to scatter his construction team and create a new Experimental Construction Section ( OKO ) , headed by Artem Mikoyan and Mikhail Gurevich , which remained formally subordinated to Polikarpov bureau until June 1940 . Further work upon the I @-@ 200 design was assigned to Mikoyan and Gurevich , who later became recognized — not with full justice — as its designers . 
 The MiG @-@ 1 was a low @-@ wing monoplane with a tail @-@ dragging undercarriage of mixed construction . Due to shortages of light alloys the rear fuselage was made from wood , but the front fuselage , from the propeller to the rear of the cockpit was a welded steel tube truss covered by duralumin . The bulk of the wing was wooden , but the center section was all @-@ metal with a steel I @-@ section main spar . The wing used a Clark YH profile . It was evenly tapered with rounded tips and the outer wing panels had 5 ° of dihedral . All three landing gear wheels retracted hydraulically ; the main units inwards into the wing center section . The cockpit was situated well aft , which seriously limited forward vision when landing and taxiing . The AM @-@ 37 engine was not yet available and the less powerful V @-@ 12 Mikulin AM @-@ 35A had to be substituted . It had six exhaust <unk> , one for each pair of cylinders , that provided some additional thrust . It drove a VISh @-@ <unk> controllable @-@ pitch propeller 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) in diameter . The air intakes for the supercharger were in the wing roots and the oil cooler was on the port side of the engine cowling . The radiator was underneath the cockpit . Armament included two fuselage @-@ mounted 7 @.@ 62 mm ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) ShKAS machine guns and one 12 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) UBS machine gun . 
 The result was a highly conventional aircraft that first flew on schedule on 5 April 1940 at the Khodynka Aerodrome in Moscow with chief test pilot Arkadij <unk> at the controls . On 24 May the first prototype attained a speed of 648 @.@ 5 km / h ( 402 @.@ 9 mph ) at 6 @,@ 900 m ( 22 @,@ 638 ft ) . It could not , however , attain the speed originally specified by the Air Force with this engine . The second prototype took to the air on 9 May , but the third aircraft , the first to be armed , was forced to wait until 6 June , as problems with its synchronization gear prolonged the ground firing tests . On 5 August 651 km / h ( 405 mph ) was reached at 7 @,@ 000 m ( 23 @,@ 000 ft ) using maximum boost . Time to altitude figures were 5 @.@ 1 minutes to 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) and 7 @.@ 2 minutes to 7 @,@ 000 m ( 23 @,@ 000 ft ) and speeds at lower altitudes were 579 km / h ( 360 mph ) at 2 @,@ 200 m ( 7 @,@ 200 ft ) and 605 km / h ( 376 mph ) at 3 @,@ 630 m ( 11 @,@ 910 ft ) . 
 = = = Production and improvements = = = 
 The I @-@ 200 was ordered into production almost immediately , on 31 May 1940 . In contrast to the other competing designs , the I @-@ 26 ( Yak @-@ 1 ) and I @-@ 301 ( LaGG @-@ 3 ) , the I @-@ 200 successfully completed the state trials in August on its first attempt . But the trials revealed a number of serious defects , including inadequate visibility when taxiing , poor @-@ quality plexiglas in the canopy obscuring the pilot 's view , heavy controls , poor longitudinal stability , difficulty in opening canopy , an excessively hot cockpit and a " dangerous propensity to flick from a simple stall into a spin from which it was almost impossible to recover " . 
 A number of improvements were ordered to be made to the aircraft as a result of the deficiencies discovered during the trials , but only a few of them were able to be implemented before production began as the VVS was very anxious to get modern fighters into service . These included an additional air intake on the starboard side of the nose for the oil cooler , rubber sheaths around the fuel tanks to make them self @-@ sealing , two underwing bomb racks each capable of carrying a 100 @-@ kilogram ( 220 lb ) FAB @-@ 100 bomb , a PBP @-@ 1 gunsight and each ShKAS was given 375 rounds and the UBS 300 rounds . From the ninth aircraft onwards the side @-@ opening canopy was replaced by a rear @-@ sliding canopy that could be jettisoned in flight . On 9 December 1940 the first 100 I @-@ 200s were designated as the MiG @-@ 1 ( after the initials of Mikoyan and Gurevich ) . 
 The improvement process continued throughout the production run , but they weren 't immediately implemented on the production line , but were instead incorporated in a fourth prototype for evaluation . This aircraft first flew on 29 October 1940 and was a significant improvement over the I @-@ 200s then in production . It passed its State acceptance trials and its improvements were incorporated on the production line from the 101st I @-@ 200 . These were designated as the MiG @-@ 3 on 9 December , although the first production MiG @-@ 3 was not completed until 20 December 1940 . 
 = = = Additional testing = = = 
 The I @-@ 200 prototypes were used to evaluate a number of proposals . For example , the second prototype was fitted with a prototype of the AM @-@ 37 engine and first flew with that engine on 6 January 1941 . It experienced severe vibration problems and , despite efforts to cure the problems , failed during a flight on 7 May , and was destroyed in the ensuing crash . The third prototype was generally used for armament trials , experimenting with 82 mm ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) RS @-@ 82 rockets among other weapons . For another trial it was equipped with the experimental 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) MP @-@ 3 autocannon carried underneath the wings in external pods and redesignated as the IP @-@ 201 . The 12 @.@ 7 mm UBS gun was removed for these tests and the space freed up was used to install an extra fuel tank . Initially the cannon had the low rate of fire of only 300 rounds per minute , but this was soon doubled and the gun was renamed as the MP @-@ 6 . Installation of the guns was difficult , despite the aircraft 's metal outer wing panels , and the wings deformed when the cannon were first mounted . It made its first , and only , flight on 1 December 1940 carrying two MP @-@ 6s and two 12 @.@ 7 mm AP @-@ 12 @.@ 7 machine guns , but a blocked fuel line caused a forced landing before the guns could be fired . But testing on a variety of other aircraft revealed very unsatisfactory performance by the guns and their development was canceled . The designers were arrested on 15 May 1941 and executed on 28 October 1941 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 On 3 December 1940 the VVS ordered that the 41st Fighter Regiment ( <unk> 'nyy <unk> <unk> ) , based at the Crimean town of <unk> , was to conduct the operational trials for the I @-@ 200 and that they were to be transferred to the 146th Fighter Regiment at Yevpatoria , also in the Crimea , for pilot training after the conclusion of the trials . By 22 February 1941 89 had been issued to regular fighter units , notably the 89th Fighter Regiment at Kaunas , Lithuania and the 41st Fighter Regiment at Białystok , Poland , both places under Soviet occupation since 1939 – 40 . On 1 June 1941 they were spread out a bit more , with 31 in the Baltic Military District , 37 in the Western Special Military District , one in the Kiev Military District and eight in the Odessa Military District for a total of 77 on hand , of which only 55 were operational . An additional eight MiG @-@ 1s were assigned to the Soviet Navy . However , only four pilots were trained to handle either the MiG @-@ 1 or the MiG @-@ 3 . 
 Little is known of the performance of the MiG @-@ 1 in combat as most were likely destroyed during the opening days of Operation Barbarossa . However , one was still in the inventory of the VVS as late as 1944 when it was recorded as withdrawn that year . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Izdeliye @-@ 61 : This was the internal OKB designation of the I @-@ 200 prototype . 
 I @-@ 200 : MiG @-@ 1 prototype , 3 made . 
 MiG @-@ 1 : Single @-@ seat interceptor fighter aircraft for the Soviet Air Force . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Soviet Union 
 VVS 
 Soviet Navy 
 = = Specifications ( Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 1 ) = = 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : One 
 Length : 8 @.@ 16 m ( 26 ft 9 in ) 
 Wingspan : 10 @.@ 20 m ( 33 ft 5 in ) 
 Height : 2 @.@ 62 m ( 8 ft 7 in ) 
 Wing area : 17 @.@ 5 m ² ( 188 ft ² ) 
 Airfoil : Clark YH 
 Empty weight : 2 @,@ 602 kg ( 5 @,@ 736 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 3 @,@ 099 kg ( 6 @,@ 832 lb ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 3 @,@ 319 kg ( 7 @,@ 317 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Mikulin AM @-@ 35A liquid @-@ cooled V @-@ 12 , 1 @,@ 007 kW ( 1 @,@ 350 hp ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 657 km / h ( 410 mph ) 
 Range : 580 km ( 362 mi ) 
