 In early June before starting recording , Orbit met Madonna at her house in New York , and she played him the music she had worked on with other producers up to May 1997 , which he felt sounded " slick " . They visited the Hit Factory later that week , where Madonna invited the producer to work on Ray of Light . Orbit then sent her a tape of musical snippets he was working on , which were usually eight or sixteen @-@ bar phrases and stripped down versions of tracks that would later be heard on the album . Madonna listened to the samples , over and over again , until she was inspired to write lyrics . Once she had an idea about the lyrical direction of the song , she would take her ideas back to Orbit , and they would expand on the original music ideas . As most of the tracks pre @-@ existed , Madonna worked on the lyrics while at home or while travelling . 
 The album was recorded over four and a half months at Larrabee North Studio in North Hollywood , California , beginning in mid @-@ June 1997 , the longest Madonna had ever worked on an album . For most of the recording process , only three other people were in the studio with Madonna : William Orbit , engineer named Pat McCarthy , and his assistant engineer , Matt Silva . They started recording in Los Angeles , but the recording process was initially plagued with machinery problems , as Orbit preferred to work with samples , synth sounds , and Pro Tools , and not with live musicians . The computers would break down , and recording would have to be delayed until they could be repaired . Orbit recorded the bulk of the album 's instrumentation over a four @-@ month period . Orbit recalls playing the guitar and having his fingers bleed during the long hours he spent in the studio . 
 After some errors in her pronunciation of Sanskrit <unk> " Yoga <unk> " during the song " Shanti / Ashtangi " , the BBC arranged for Madonna to take telephonic lessons to learn the basic correct pronunciation of Sanskrit words from eminent scholar Dr B P T <unk> Shastri . She then made the necessary pronunciation corrections on the album . In an interview with MTV , Madonna recalled the recording of the album , and said her business partner Guy Oseary was a helpful friend , and that she and Orbit played him the tracks , and , to their dismay , he said nothing and left the studio . " He really hates those icy strings . Right when I think the track 's done , he sort of pushes us another step further . ' Maybe we should try this ' , or ' I really don 't want to hear that ' . And then of course , later on , it creeps in my brain , and I 'm like , ' maybe I should have done a background vocal on that ' . And then she comes in and happily does it , right ? " , Madonna said . Orbit also recalled during an interview with Q magazine that Madonna recorded " Swim " the day her friend and fashion designer Gianni Versace was killed in Miami , Florida . He also commented that this is probably why the track has an emotional impact . 
 = = Title and artwork = = 
 According to spokesperson Liz Rosenberg , Madonna considered titling the album Mantra , which she thought was a " really cool title " . However , she changed the title to Ray of Light , as her albums were always titled after one of the songs from that album . The artwork was shot by Peruvian photographer Mario Testino . They had previously collaborated for a Versace brand collection . Madonna was impressed with the natural look Testino had captured and she booked him again for the album 's photoshoot . He recalled , " At 2pm she said , ' OK , I 'm tired . We 're done ' . And I said , ' But I don 't have the pictures yet ' . She said , ' You 're working for me and I say we 're done ' . I said , ' No , we carry on ' . The picture she used on the cover came after that " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Ray of Light was a notable departure from Madonna 's previous work , and has been described her most " adventurous " record . It contains elements of several different types of music , including techno , trance , drum and bass , trip hop , ambient , rock , new wave , eastern and classical music . Vocally , the album was also a marked change from Madonna 's previous work ; as the singer underwent vocal training lessons for her 1996 film Evita , her vocals exhibited greater breadth and range , as well as a fuller timbre . In many songs , she also abandoned the vibrato which was present in her previous work . Critically , it is said to have Madonna 's most full @-@ bodied vocals . 
 The album 's opening track and third single , " Drowned World / Substitute For Love " is a downtempo ballad drawing influences from jungle , drum and bass and trip hop music . The title is inspired by J.G. Ballard 's post @-@ apocalyptic science fiction novel The Drowned World ( 1962 ) . " Swim " , the second song , has a spiritual tone . She sings : " Swim to the ocean floor / So that we can begin again / Wash away all our sins / Crash to the other shore " . " Ray of Light " , the third track and album 's second single , is an up @-@ tempo electronic dance @-@ pop song which contains strong techno tendencies and influences of trance music . A " sonically progressive " track , it also incorporates elements of rock music , with a prominent electric guitar riff . The melody also has several sound effects , including whistles and bleeps . " Candy Perfume Girl " has a grunge intro and continues to pair post @-@ modern beeps and beats with old @-@ fashioned electric guitar flare ups . In the next song , " Skin " , Madonna sings " Do I know you from somewhere ? " in a yearning voice over the beats of an electronic orchestra . The sixth track " Nothing Really Matters " is an up @-@ tempo dance track which contains influences of techno . 
 " Sky Fits Heaven " focuses on Madonna 's spiritual studies and her daughter Lourdes . Some lyrics include : " Sky fits heaven so fly it , that 's what the prophet said to me / Child fits mother so hold your baby tight , that 's what my future can see " . Elements of the lyric are taken from the poem What Fits ? by poet Max Blagg , the poem used for a 1993 advertisement for Gap Inc . " Shanti / Ashtangi " is a Hindu Sanskrit prayer and up @-@ tempo techno song sung by Madonna with an Indian accent over a driving dance rhythm . The techno dance track features Madonna singing the adapted version of Shankaracharya entirely in Sanskrit with lines such as " <unk> <unk> <unk> / <unk> <unk> <unk> " . 
 " Frozen " , the ninth track and album 's first single , is a mid @-@ tempo electronic ballad which has a layered sound enhanced by synthesizers and strings . The song additionally contains ambient qualities , a moderate dance rhythm during the chorus and techno @-@ influenced beats towards the end . Madonna 's vocals throughout the song lack vibrato , and have drawn comparisons to medieval music . Lyrically , the song is about a cold and emotionless man ; nevertheless , subtexts have been noticed . According to Jarman @-@ Ivens , lyrics such as " You 're frozen , when your heart 's not open " reflected an artistic palette , " encompassing diverse musical , textual and visual styles in its lyrics . " " The Power Of Good @-@ Bye " is an emotional ballad which lyrically meditates on loss and longing . It was released as the album 's fourth single . " To Have and Not to Hold " is about a distant lover and " Little Star " is about her daughter , Lourdes . Both are superficially vibrant but with underlying subtlety and restrained arrangements prevailing . " Mer Girl " , the album 's final track , is a surreal meditation on mortality and the death of Madonna 's mother , in which she sings , " And I smelled her burning flesh / Her rotting bones , her decay / I ran and I ran / I 'm still running away . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Ray of Light was released in Japan on February 22 , 1998 , with an additional Japan @-@ only bonus track " Has to Be " . The album was later released in the United States on March 3 , 1998 . In New Zealand , a box set of Ray of Light and The Immaculate Collection was released to accompany the album . It reached number 12 on the albums chart and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipment of 7 @,@ 500 copies . A promotional <unk> VHS compilation titled Rays of Light was released in the United Kingdom in 1999 , compiling all the music videos to all five singles from the album . All five videos were later included on the compilation The Video Collection 93 : 99 ( 1999 ) . " Sky Fits Heaven " was released as a promotional single in the United States . It peaked at number 41 on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart . 
 To promote the album , Madonna made a number of televised appearances and live performances of the album 's songs . On February 14 , 1998 , she debuted " Sky Fits Heaven " , " Shanti / Ashtangi " and " Ray of Light " at Roxy NYC nightclub . " Frozen " was performed on The National Lottery Show in the UK ( February 21 ) , 1998 Sanremo Music Festival in Italy ( February 24 ) , Wetten , dass .. ? in Germany ( February 28 ) and Rosie O 'Donnell Show in the United States ( March 13 ) . On April 27 , Madonna made an unannounced appearance at Rock for the Rainforest benefit concert at Carnegie Hall in New York City to sing " Frozen " . She also joined the other stars of the concert , including Sting , Elton John , and Billy Joel to perform " With a Little Help From My Friends " and " Twist and Shout " with them . On May 29 , Madonna appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show and sang " Little Star " and " Ray of Light " there . On September 10 , she opened 1998 MTV Video Music Awards in New York City with the performance of " Shanti / Ashtangi " and " Ray of Light " featuring Lenny Kravitz on guitar . " The Power of Good @-@ bye " was sung at 1998 MTV Europe Music Awards in Italy ( November 12 ) and Top of the Pops in the UK ( November 19 ) . On February 24 , 1999 , Madonna performed " Nothing Really Matters " at the 41st Grammy Awards ceremony at Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles . 
 Madonna performed " Drowned World / Substitute For Love " , " Ray Of Light " , " Candy Perfume Girl " , " Sky Fits Heaven " , " Frozen " and " Mer Girl " on the Drowned World Tour , her fifth concert tour , which promoted Ray of Light and its successor album . It started in June 2001 and was Madonna 's first tour in eight years . The tour was to be started before the new millennium , but she had become pregnant with her son Rocco Ritchie , released Music that year , and married Ritchie in December 2000 . The show was divided into five sections , Cyber @-@ Punk , Geisha , Cowgirl , Spanish and Ghetto . The Drowned World Tour received positive reviews . The tour was a commercial success , grossing a total of US $ 75 million , and it was the top concert tour of a solo artist in 2001 . The concert was broadcast live on HBO from The Palace of Auburn Hills in Auburn Hills , Michigan on August 26 , 2001 . The Drowned World Tour 2001 DVD was released in all regions on November 13 , 2001 . Like the original airing of the show , the DVD received very good reviews . The photographs used on the DVD packaging were taken by Madonna 's friend Rosie O 'Donnell . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Frozen " was released as the lead single from the album on February 23 , 1998 . It peaked inside the top five in most musical markets worldwide , while topping the singles chart in Finland , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom , where it became Madonna 's first single to debut at number one . It became her sixth single to peak at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 , setting a record for Madonna as the artist with most number @-@ two hits in the chart history . The song received critical acclaim , and was labelled a masterpiece whose sound was described as " cinematic " . However , the Belgian court in 2005 ruled that the opening four @-@ bar theme to the song was plagiarized from the song " Ma vie fout le camp " , composed by Salvatore Acquaviva . The ruling forbade the sale of the single and the entire Ray of Light album , as well as other compilations that included the track in Belgium . The album 's second single , " Ray of Light " , was released on May 6 , 1998 . It peaked at number one in Spain and attained the top five position in Canada , Finland , Italy , the United Kingdom and the United States . It entered the Hot 100 at number five , becoming Madonna 's highest debut on the chart ever . The song was also a hit on Hot Dance Club Play chart , remaining at number one for four weeks , and became the " Top Hot Dance Club Play Single " of 1998 . Critically , it also received positive reviews , being praised for its club @-@ perfect , yet " sonically progressive " sound , as well as her powerful vocals . 
 " Drowned World / Substitute for Love " was released on August 24 , 1998 as the third single outside the United States . It reached number one in Spain and the top ten in Italy and the United Kingdom . The music video , directed by Walter Stern , caused controversy due to scenes that featured Madonna being chased by paparazzi on motor @-@ bikes , a scenario similar to Princess Diana 's death in 1997 . The fourth single , " The Power of Good @-@ Bye " , was released on September 22 , 1998 . It reached the top @-@ ten peaks in Austria , Canada , Netherlands , Finland , Germany , Italy , Spain , Sweden , Switzerland , the United Kingdom . In the United States , the song peaked at number eleven on the Hot 100 . Its music video was directed by Matthew Rolston . " Nothing Really Matters " was released as the album 's fifth and final single on March 2 , 1999 . It became a top @-@ ten hit in Canada , Finland , Italy , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . In the United States , it became Madonna 's lowest @-@ charting single on the Hot 100 , peaking at number 93 , but was a number @-@ one hit on its dance chart . Its music video , directed by Johan Renck , was inspired by Arthur Golden 's book Memoirs of a Geisha , and featured Madonna dressed as a geisha . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Ray of Light received widespread acclaim from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic called Ray of Light Madonna 's " most adventurous record " and her " most mature and restrained album . " In his review he gave the album four and a half out of five stars . Paul Verna from Billboard commented : " Easily her most mature and personal work to date , Ray of Light finds Madonna weaving lyrics with the painstaking intimacy of diary entries and wrapping them in hymn @-@ like melodies and instrumentation swathed in lush , melancholy ambience — with forays into classic house , trance , and even guitar pop . Of course , she balances the set 's serious tone with chewy pop nuggets that allow her to flex her immeasurably widened vocal range to fine effect . " He finished the review by calling the album " a deliciously adventurous , ultimately victorious effort from one of pop music 's most compelling performers . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine described the album as " one of the great pop masterpieces of the ' 90s " and stated that : " Its lyrics are uncomplicated but its statement is grand " and " Madonna hasn 't been this emotionally candid since Like a Prayer " . Sheffield 's review for Rolling Stone called the album " brilliant " , but was critical of Orbit 's production , saying that he doesn 't know enough tricks to produce a whole album , and so becomes repetitive . 
 David Browne of Entertainment Weekly wrote , " For all her <unk> with self @-@ enlightenment , Madonna seems more relaxed and less contrived than she 's been in years , from her new Italian earth @-@ mother makeover to , especially , her music . Ray of Light is truly like a prayer , and you know she 'll take you there . " Roni Sarig , in a review for City Pages , was most impressed by Madonna 's vocal range , depth , and clarity and called Ray of Light " her richest , most accomplished record yet . " Music critic Robert Hilburn from Los Angeles Times wrote , " One reason why her new Ray of Light is the most satisfying album of her career is that it reflects the soul @-@ searching of a woman who is at a point in her life where she can look at herself with surprising candor and perspective . " Writing for Melody Maker in February 1998 , Mark Roland drew comparisons with the music of St Etienne and Björk 's Homogenic album , highlighting Ray of Light 's lack of cynicism as its most positive aspect : " It 's not an album turned on the lathe of cynical pop manipulation , rather it 's been squished out of a lump of clay on a foot @-@ powered wheel . <unk> teased into life , Ray of Light is like the ugly mug that doesn 't match but is all the more special because of it . " Joan Anderman from The Boston Globe said that Ray of Light is a remarkable album . He described it as a deeply spiritual dance record , ecstatically textured , a serious cycle of songs that goes a long way toward liberating Madonna from a career built on scavenged images and cultivated identities . Robert Christgau was less impressed in Playboy , deeming Ray of Light a " great @-@ sounding " but average record because of enlightenment themes that always yield awkward results for pop entertainers , although he praised sensual songs such as " Skin " and " Candy Perfume Girl " . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 At the 41st Annual Grammy Awards , Ray of Light received four awards out of six nominations . The album won Best Pop Album and Best Recording Package , and was nominated for Album of the Year , while the title track won Best Dance Recording and Best Short Form Music Video , and was nominated for Record of the Year . The album gave Madonna her first musical Grammy of her career as previously she only won in the video category . Madonna also became the biggest winner of the 1998 MTV Video Music Awards , winning six awards from nine nominations . " Frozen " won Best Special Effects ; " Ray of Light " won Best Choreography , Best Direction , Best Editing , Best Female Video and Video of the Year , and was also nominated for Best Cinematography , Best Dance Video and Breakthrough Video . American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) honored Madonna two awards of Most Performed Song for " Frozen " and " Ray of Light " at the 1999 ASCAP Pop Music Awards , as well as Top Dance Song for " Ray of Light " at the 1999 ASCAP Rhythm & Soul Music Awards . 
 Ray of Light also gave Madonna several trophies from various international award shows — including two Danish Grammy Awards for Best International Album and Best International Female Vocalist from IFPI Denmark , a Fryderyk award for Best Foreign Album from Związek <unk> Audio Video ( ZPAV ) in Poland , a Golden Giraffe Award for International Pop Album of the Year from Mahasz in Hungary , two Porin awards for Best International Album and Best International Video ( " Frozen " ) in Croatia , and two Rockbjörnen awards for Best International Album and Best International Artist in Sweden . 
 In Canada , Madonna won Best International Video for " Ray of Light " at the 1999 MuchMusic Video Awards and was nominated for Best Selling Album ( Foreign or Domestic ) at the 1999 Juno Awards . She also received Best Female and Best Album trophies at the 1998 MTV Europe Music Awards . At the 14th annual International Dance Music Awards , Madonna won Best Dance Solo Artist and Best Dance Video for " Ray of Light " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , Ray of Light debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 albums chart on the issue dated March 21 , 1998 . It set the record for biggest first @-@ week sales by a female artist in Nielsen SoundScan era at that time with 371 @,@ 000 copies sold . However , the album was not able to top the soundtrack album of the motion picture Titanic , becoming Madonna 's fifth album to peak at the runner @-@ up position . During the second week , the album sold 225 @,@ 000 copies and was still kept off the top spot by the soundtrack . On March 16 , 2000 , the album was certified four times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of four million units of the album . According to Nielsen SoundScan , Ray of Light had sold 3 @.@ 9 million copies in the United States as of September 2011 . This figure does not include units sold through clubs like the BMG Music , where the album sold over 459 @,@ 000 copies . In Canada , the album debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart with first week sales of 59 @,@ 900 copies . It was later certified seven times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for shipment of 700 @,@ 000 copies . The album also achieved commercial success in Oceania , debuting at number one on the albums chart in Australia and New Zealand . It was certified triple platinum by Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and platinum by Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipments of 210 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 copies respectively . 
 In the United Kingdom , Ray of Light debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart , remaining at the top spot for two weeks . It was certified six times platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipment of 1 @.@ 8 million copies . In France , the album entered the albums chart at number two , staying there for seven weeks before descending the chart . It was certified three times platinum by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) for shipments of 900 @,@ 000 copies . Actual sales of the album in France stand at 925 @,@ 400 copies . In Germany , the album reached number one on the Media Control Charts and remained there for seven weeks . It remains Madonna 's best @-@ selling album in Germany with three times platinum certification from Bundesverband Musikindustrie ( BVMI ) for shipment of 1 @.@ 5 million copies . Due to its commercial success in European countries , the album ultimately topped the European Top 100 Albums chart and was certified seven times platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) for sales of seven million copies . Ray of Light achieved similar success in the rest of world , topping the official charts of Belgium , Netherlands , Finland , Greece , Hungary , Israel , Norway , Singapore , Spain and Switzerland . In total , Ray of Light has sold over 16 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ray of Light has been credited for bringing electronica music into global pop culture . Los Angeles Times noted that " aside from occasional breakthroughs such as Fatboy Slim , electronica wasn 't totally mainstream fare when Madonna released Ray of Light . " Until the album brought the genre to the top of music charts , according to author J. Randy Taraborrelli , " techno and electronica had , for years , been the music played at so @-@ called raves , hugely popular , illegal underground parties taking place in abandoned warehouse and deserted areas on the outskirts of town all around the world . " AllMusic editor Liana Jonas stated that the album 's title track has " brought mainstream attention to electronica music , which ascended from its underground status to wild popularity in the early 21st century . " Thomas Harrison , author of Music of the 1990s , wrote that the production style of Ray of Light was " idiomatic of new trends in electronic music with significant use of digital sampling and use of an electronic synthesizer . " 
 Elliott H. Powell in an American Studies for New York University observed that Ray of Light made South Asian culture accessible to the American public in the 1990s . Rhonda Hammer and Douglas Kellner in their book Media / cultural Studies : Critical Approaches recalled that " the phenomenon of South Asian @-@ inspired femininity as a Western media trend can be traced to February 1998 , when pop icon Madonna released her video " Frozen " . " They explained that " although Madonna did not initiate the fashion for Indian beauty accessories [ ... ] she did propel it into the public eye by attracting the attention of the worldwide media . " 
 According to Taraborrelli , the album has been hailed as bold and refreshing in contemporary music of the late 1990s , which was dominated by <unk> and teenage artists such as the Backstreet Boys , NSYNC , Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera . Larry Flick from Billboard said that the album " not only provided the chameleon @-@ like artist with her first universally applauded critical success , it has also proved that she remains a vital figure amongst woefully fickle young audiences . " Music critic Lucy O 'Brien commented : " 1998 's Ray of Light certainly rehabilitated Madonna 's image . Up to that point she had still been written off as an average pop glamour girl who got lucky , but with this record she reached a whole new audience , proving that she was a good songwriter with an intensely productive talent . " Mary von Aue from Stereogum stated that " Ray of Light reestablished Madonna as a groundbreaking artist . " 
 Ray of Light continued to influence mainstream music when British singer and songwriter , Adele , stated that the album was one of the main sources of inspiration for her third studio album , 25 . Particularly , " Frozen " was a source of inspiration as well , admitting that the track gave her " confidence to come and do me again " . Adele further added that Ray of Light was Madonna 's best album and found several comparisons between herself and Madonna during that stage of her life . 
 Due to its impact on popular music , Ray of Light has been featured on numerous critics ' lists of greatest albums of all time . Rolling Stone magazine placed the album at number 367 on the list of " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . In 2001 , a quarter of a million music fans on VH1 voted Ray of Light as the 10th of " 100 Best Albums of All Time " . In 2003 , Ray of Light was allocated at number 17 on Q magazine readers ' list of " 100 Greatest Albums Ever " . The album is also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . Mojo magazine also listed Ray of Light at number 29 on " 100 Modern Classics : The Greatest Albums of Our Lifetime " . In 2013 , the album was also included at number 241 on NME magazine 's list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . Madonna herself considered Ray of Light the most fulfilling evolution of her career . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Additional notes : 
 " Drowned World / Substitute for Love " contains a sample of " Why I Follow the Tigers " , as performed by the San Sebastian Strings . 
 " Shanti / Ashtangi " adapted from text by Shankaracharya , taken from the Yoga <unk> . Additional text : Traditional , Translation by <unk> Houston and Eddie Stern . 
 " Mer Girl " contains an interpolation and elements from " Space " performed by Gábor Szabó . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Dustbin Baby ( film ) = 
 Dustbin Baby is a BBC television film directed by Juliet May , based on Jacqueline Wilson 's 2001 novel of the same name . It was first broadcast on BBC One on 21 December 2008 . The film stars Dakota Blue Richards as April , a troubled teenager who was abandoned in a dustbin as an infant , and Juliet Stevenson as Marion Bean , April 's adoptive mother . David Haig stars as Elliot , Marion 's friend and colleague . The screenplay was written by Helen Blakeman , and the film was produced by Kindle Entertainment . Dustbin Baby deals with themes including maternal bonding , bullying , and youth crime . The story revolves around April running away on her fourteenth birthday , while Marion searches for her . April 's life is recounted in flashbacks as she meets people and visits places that are significant to her . 
 Both Wilson and critics responded positively to the film , with Wilson saying she thought it was the best film adaptation of any of her works . It was released on DVD on 12 January 2009 . Dustbin Baby was awarded the International Emmy in the Children and Young People category at the 2009 ceremony . Helen Blakeman won a Children 's BAFTA for the screenplay , while the film itself was shortlisted for a Children 's BAFTA in the Drama category and shortlisted for the Kids ' Vote award . The film was also awarded the 2010 KidScreen Award for Best One @-@ off , Special , or TV movie aimed at a Family Audience and the KidScreen Award for Best Acting . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On April 's fourteenth birthday , Marion , her adoptive mother , gives her earrings , not the mobile phone she wanted . They argue , and April leaves for school . After lying to her friends , claiming she has a phone and is going to the dentist 's , April chooses to play truant . While at work at a stately home , Marion hears that April has not arrived at school . She talks to her friend and colleague Elliot , who unsuccessfully tries to dissuade her from leaving . April visits the home of Pat Williams , who cared for her as a baby . Pat remembers April and gives her a newspaper cutting telling the story of her discovery as a baby in a dustbin behind a pizza parlour . In a flashback , a young April is seen living with Janet and Daniel Johnson . The Johnsons ' relationship is an abusive one , leading to Janet 's suicide . Meanwhile , Marion goes to April 's school , where she talks to April 's friends , and realises that they were lied to . April then leaves Pat 's home , and travels alone to Janet 's grave . Marion continues to search , and , in a shopping centre , meets Elliot , who has joined her . April then visits the now abandoned <unk> Children 's Home , where she lived when she was younger . In a flashback , an eight @-@ year @-@ old April lives at the <unk> . <unk> for by a woman named Mo , April befriends an older girl called Gina and is introduced to Pearl , a girl of her age . Pearl behaves in front of Mo , but actually bullies April . Gina wakes April one night to involve her in a burglary , and , later , Pearl attacks April , holding her head under water , and then tears up April 's beloved paper dolls . April confronts Pearl , who she pushes down a flight of stairs , and is reprimanded by Mo . A voice @-@ over from 14 @-@ year @-@ old April says Gina was then " moved on " , and , eventually , April is also moved on . 
 The flashback jumps forward to April 's time at Fairdale Residential School . She befriends Poppy , who has Asperger syndrome . In the present , Marion buys a mobile phone for April . Back at Fairdale , April is being taught by Miss Bean ( Marion ) . A piece of work on family trees leads to the pair fighting . At night , April tries to escape the school to find Gina , but is caught by Marion , who sends her back . Marion reads April 's records , and , having learnt of her history , apologises for the family tree incident . Banned from going out on a Saturday with her peers , April is instead taken to the stately home by Marion . A present @-@ day Marion goes alone to her house , to find that there are no messages on the phone . The younger Marion introduces April to Elliot as they continue to visit the home . The present @-@ day Marion goes to April 's room , and looks in April 's box , which contains mementos from different times in her life . The younger April and Marion walk through the home 's garden , and Marion tells April she is leaving Fairdale . April becomes angry , thinking that Marion , like others before her , is now going to leave her life . Marion invites April to move in with her , and she accepts . When shown around her new bedroom , April 's first concern is to have somewhere to put her box . The present April considers returning to Marion , but realises there is another place she wants to visit . It occurs to Marion where April will be going , and she drives away from her house . April goes to the street where she was found as a baby , and stands among the bins . Marion opens April 's mobile and rings Reno 's , the pizza parlour . April then notices a phone number on the side of a dustbin . Marion asks for directions to the pizza parlour , while April dials the number she found . It is not her mother who answers , as she hoped , but Frankie , the pizza boy who found her . She meets Frankie in the pizza parlour , and Marion arrives . April explains who Frankie is , and Marion gives April her new phone . The three sit down together . A voice @-@ over from April says that , though she will probably never know her real mother , she has a mother in Marion , and this is just the beginning . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 The film 's screenplay was based on <unk> Wilson 's 2001 novel Dustbin Baby , and was written by Helen Blakeman , who had previously worked on <unk> . Dustbin Baby was co @-@ commissioned by CBBC and BBC One , and was produced by Kindle Entertainment , a production company specialising in children 's television . According to The Guardian , the film was billed as " a key part of BBC1 's Christmas family line @-@ up " . Blakeman said that when she had read the novel , she " knew it was something [ she ] had to write " . The film 's executive producers were Anne Brogan and Melanie Stokes for Kindle , with Sue Nott as executive producer for CBBC . The producer was Julia Ouston . Director Juliet May , at the time of filming , had 14 @-@ year @-@ old twins , and so found " the fact that the lead , April , is 14 years old ... very interesting " as she felt she could " kind of understand 14 @-@ year @-@ old children " . 
 Though the " gritty realism " of Wilson 's novels was different from Dakota Blue Richards 's first role as Lyra <unk> in The Golden Compass , she was happy to take on the character of April . She said she " can really relate to the characters " in Wilson 's novels , but found that April was " a really different person " to her . Wilson , who had previously seen Richards in The Golden Compass , was " over the moon to hear she was going to be in Dustbin Baby . Richards was to play the 14 @-@ year @-@ old April , but other actresses were required to play younger versions of the character . Lucy Hutchinson , who was five at the time of filming , played the youngest April . Director Juliet May described her as " one of the most remarkable five year olds I have ever met " , saying that " it 's like she 's not acting at all " . Alex Hewitt was selected to play the " middle April " . May described her as having " utter truth in her acting " . Though ten years old , Hewett plays April at eight . 
 Juliet Stevenson said she was attracted to the part of Marion as " it 's very boring playing versions of yourself " , and because she did at the time have a 14 @-@ year @-@ old daughter . David Haig filmed Dustbin Baby , along with three other television appearances that summer , to earn money to help support his family while he appeared in the play Loot . He described his role as a " snug cameo with a purpose " . Dustbin Baby was filmed over summer 2008 in London and the surrounding areas , with scenes at Hatfield House and in Barnet . Before the completion of the filming , Wilson was quoted as saying she was " thrilled at the prospect of Dustbin Baby being brought to life by such a talented cast and production team . I am looking forward to seeing the end result immensely . " 
 The BBC purposefully searched for an actress with Asperger syndrome to play the part of Poppy . Lizzy Clark auditioned for the part after her mother saw an advert on an autism website . Clark was selected to play Poppy , and the role in Dustbin Baby was her first experience of professional acting . Clark was the first actress with Asperger syndrome to portray a fictional character with the condition . Clark , who has since campaigned with her mother against characters with conditions such as Asperger syndrome being played by actors without the condition , said " My Asperger 's made some things on the film set difficult at first , like dealing with the sudden noise of the storyboard , but I was soon so focused on acting that I didn 't notice anything else . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Blakeman said that she read the book in a single sitting , before " crying her eyes out " . The film includes the themes of bullying , youth crime , domestic violence , unwanted pregnancy , and teenage angst . For Blakeman , April 's " heartbreaking journey in searching for her real mum is also about being brave enough to let love in . " Tom Sutcliffe , writing for The Independent , spoke of the limits of taboo themes in family dramas , and said the film 's " account of a life lived in care couldn 't have had swearing , or casual drug use , and when a shadow fell over a child 's bed at night , it wasn 't the care @-@ home manager coming to exercise some horrible droit de seigneur [ sic ] , as it might have been in an adult drama " . The film also addressed the theme of Asperger syndrome through the character of Poppy . The BBC claimed that Clark , who has the condition herself , was able to offer " a unique take " on the role . <unk> summarised the themes of the film , saying that " At the centre of the story , Marion finds out that she loves this girl . And that is an amazing liberation when you discover someone more important to you than you are . That is what is incredible about becoming a parent – you care about your child more than you care about yourself . " 
 On Behind the Bin , a making @-@ of documentary about Dustbin Baby , Wilson said that " lots and lots of people will identify with " the central theme of adoption , as at fourteen " you start to look at your mum and dad and think ' I 'm nothing like them ' , and everyone seems to have fantasies about that they were adopted or something , and so I think that it 's a typical teenage thing that you question who you are " . Richards says that she likes the idea that April " went on a journey to try and find herself " as " a lot of people [ her age ] try and do that because a lot of people get to the point where they 're not really sure who they are any more " . Richards also discusses the motif of April 's paper dolls , saying that April can relate to them as in different places , she is " still the same person " , but that she is " coloured in differently by different people and different surroundings " . Alexandra Hewett , who played the Young April , described the dolls as April 's " only real friends " . 
 Stevenson described the character of Marion as " cranky , stubborn and lonely " , saying that living alone has made her " become quite idiotic and eccentric " . When the character of April arrives , Stevenson explains that " Marion has to go from nought to 80 in terms of parenting . There are lots of reasons she wouldn 't get it right " which leads on to the guilt and anxiety that Marion suffers when April runs away . Stevenson compared her own difficulties of parenting to Marion 's , saying " it is easier for me than someone like Marion because I have had 14 years experience " . Richards spoke of the character of April , saying that " the residential schools and children 's homes were completely different from my life . [ April ] doesn 't feel connected to anybody and she struggles to know who she is " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wilson , after seeing an early screening of Dustbin Baby , said that it was the best film adaptation of any of her works . Haig said that the film was his favourite of his summer projects , saying " it was a terrific story and very touchingly done . I think Juliet Stevenson was very funny and moving in it " . Critics also responded positively . In an article in The Times David Chater awarded the programme the TV choice of the day , describing it as " tremendous " , and " the wonderful surprise of Christmas " . The film was described in The Telegraph as a " rare treat " , as it is " something that teenagers and parents can watch together " . This view was shared by producer Anne Brogan , who said that the film was something " that parents and children will enjoy watching while giving them much to talk about " . Tom Sutcliffe , writing for The Independent , said Stevenson was " good as a woman who was far more comfortable in the past than the present " , and that " her performance was more than matched by that of Dakota Blue Richards as April , mostly banked @-@ down and wary but prone to sudden wild flashes of anger " . He criticised some of the " implausibilities " , saying that the plot was , at times , " a lot kinder than the world might have been " , but said that " it still made you well up with its final reconciliation " with emotion that had been " honestly earned " . Euan Ferguson , in an article in The Guardian , said that the film " hooked and haunted " , and added that Stevenson played Marion like " a kind of updated " Jean Brodie . During its initial run on BBC One , Dustbin Baby was watched by 2 @.@ 3 million viewers , giving it a 15 @.@ 4 % share of the audience . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 In 2009 , Dustbin Baby was one of four works of children 's television shortlisted for the International Emmy Award in the children and young people category at the 37th International Emmy Awards . The other nominations were <unk> Poo Koo E @-@ Joo ( produced by <unk> Entertainment ) , The Little Emperor 's Christmas ( produced by Rede Globo ) , and Mille ( produced by the Danish Broadcasting Corporation ) . The film was one of nine nominations for the UK , which had more than any other nation . The film won the award , making it one of six International Emmys for the UK , and one of three for the BBC , in 2009 . Dustbin Baby was also shortlisted for the British Academy Children 's Awards in the drama category , along with The Sarah Jane Adventures ( also by the BBC ) , S4C 's <unk> Nadolig Wil , and the online show following boyband <unk> . The ceremony was held on 29 November at The London Hilton on Park Lane and hosted by Dick and Dom . Dustbin Baby lost out to <unk> Nadolig Wil . Blakeman was shortlisted for the British Academy Children 's Award for best writer , thanks to her screenplay for Dustbin Baby , and won . The film was also entered into the BAFTA Kids ' Vote in the television category . Children aged between seven and fourteen were able to vote for their favourite television show from a choice also featuring Blue Peter , Dani 's House , Newsround , Prank Patrol , The Sarah Jane Adventures , Hannah Montana , Phineas & Ferb , iCarly , and SpongeBob SquarePants . The Kids ' Vote was won by Hannah Montana . 
 In February 2010 , Dustbin Baby was awarded the 2010 KidScreen Award for best one @-@ off , special , or TV movie aimed at a family audience . The film also won the Creative Talent award for best acting . These were two of five prizes won by CBBC at the inaugural KidScreen Awards , and Joe Godwin , the BBC Children 's director , said " I 'm truly delighted that CBBC programmes are being recognised globally for being original and inspiring to children everywhere ... It 's especially satisfying to win awards for really distinctive and hard @-@ hitting factual and drama , which has always been , and always will be , a unique and central part of what BBC Children 's does . " 
 = = Home media release = = 
 Dustbin Baby was released on DVD in January 2009 by ITV DVD . It was rated PG by the British Board of Film Classification , due to " mild threat , violence and one sex reference " , and was marketed with the tagline " April is about to lift the lid on her past " . The DVD included a 24 @-@ minute making @-@ of feature , " Behind the Bin : The Making of Dustbin Baby " , containing interviews with Jacqueline Wilson and production staff and cast . 
 = British military intervention in the Sierra Leone Civil War = 
 The United Kingdom began a military intervention in Sierra Leone on 7 May 2000 under the codename Operation Palliser . Although small numbers of British personnel had been deployed previously , Palliser was the first large @-@ scale intervention by British forces in the Sierra Leone Civil War . In early May 2000 , the Revolutionary United Front ( RUF ) — one of the main parties to the civil war — advanced on the country 's capital , Freetown , prompting the British government to dispatch an " operational reconnaissance and liaison team " ( ORLT ) to prepare to evacuate foreign citizens . On 6 May , the RUF blocked the road connecting Freetown to the country 's main airport , Lungi . The next day , British soldiers began to secure the airport and other areas essential to an evacuation . The majority of those who wished to leave were evacuated within the first two days of the operation , but many chose to stay following the arrival of British forces . 
 After the effective completion of the evacuation , the mandate of the British forces began to expand . They assisted with the evacuation of besieged peacekeepers — including several British ceasefire observers — and began to assist the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone ( UNAMSIL ) and the Sierra Leone Army ( SLA ) . Despite the mission expansion , it was not until 17 May that British soldiers came into direct contact with the RUF . The rebels attacked a British position near Lungi airport , but were forced to retreat after a series of firefights . On the same day , the RUF 's leader , Foday Sankoh , was captured by Sierra Leonean forces , leaving the RUF in disarray . After deciding that the RUF would not disarm voluntarily , the British began training the SLA for a confrontation . During the training mission , a patrol returning from a visit to Jordanian peacekeepers was taken captive by a militia group known as the West Side Boys . Negotiations achieved the release of five of the eleven soldiers , and three weeks into the crisis , British special forces launched a mission codenamed Operation Barras , freeing the remaining six . The success of Operation Barras restored confidence in the British mission ; one academic suggested that its failure would have forced the British government to withdraw all its forces from Sierra Leone . 
 The overall British operation was mostly completed by September 2000 . The RUF began to disarm after political pressure , and later economic sanctions , were exerted on Liberia — which had supported the RUF in exchange for conflict diamonds smuggled out of Sierra Leone . The Sierra Leonean government eventually signed a ceasefire with the RUF that obliged the latter to enter the Disarmament , Demobilisation , and Reintegration ( DDR ) process . By September 2001 , when the British training teams were replaced by an international force , the DDR process was almost complete . British forces continued to be involved in Sierra Leone by providing the largest contribution of personnel to the international training team and advising on a restructuring of Sierra Leone 's armed forces . A small force was deployed to the area in 2003 to ensure stability while several indictments and arrests were made by the Special Court for Sierra Leone . The success of British operations in Sierra Leone vindicated several concepts , including the retention of high @-@ readiness forces . The Prime Minister , Tony Blair , was keen to see Western interventions in other conflicts , and — along with France — supported the creation of several European Union Battlegroups for the purpose . As it happened , political opposition and later British commitments in Afghanistan and Iraq prevented further British operations in Africa . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Sierra Leone = = = 
 Sierra Leone is a country in West Africa , close to the equator , with an area of 71 @,@ 740 square kilometres ( 27 @,@ 700 square miles ) — similar in size to South Carolina or Scotland . It shares land borders with Guinea and Liberia and is bordered to the west by the Atlantic Ocean . The country became a British colony in 1808 , though British influence began in the late 18th century when former slaves were settled in the area that became known as Freetown , now the capital city . Freetown lies on a peninsula , and is separated from the country 's main airport , Lungi , by the estuary of the Sierra Leone River , which is several miles wide . The colony was granted independence from the United Kingdom in 1961 and Sir Milton <unk> was appointed its first prime minister . He was replaced in 1962 by his brother , Albert , who was defeated by <unk> Stevens in the 1967 general election . Stevens was overthrown within hours by the commander of the army , but was later reinstated after the commander was himself overthrown . Sierra Leone became a republic in 1971 , and Stevens was installed as its first president . 
 In 1978 , Sierra Leone formally became a one @-@ party state and the All People 's Congress ( APC ) became the only legal political party . Stevens retired in 1985 and appointed Joseph Momoh as his successor . Momoh was accused of corruption and abuse of power , and the Revolutionary United Front ( RUF ) was formed later in the decade with the aim of overthrowing him . Sponsored by Liberia , the RUF began attacking settlements along the border in 1991 and quickly took control of the diamond mines , whose products they smuggled through Liberia and traded for weapons . The following years saw a series of coups and interventions by private military companies , Nigeria , the Economic Community of West African States , and the United Nations ( UN ) , while a bloody civil war devastated the country . 
 On 7 July 1999 , the Lomé Peace Accord was signed . Among other provisions , the agreement mandated an immediate ceasefire between the main parties to the civil war and the disarmament of the Sierra Leone Army ( SLA ) and the RUF . It also gave the RUF status as a legitimate political party , a role in the Sierra Leone Government , and four of the twenty @-@ two seats in the cabinet . Foday Sankoh , leader of the RUF , was given responsibility for the diamond mines — an appointment much criticised by observers and the international media given the RUF 's history of diamond smuggling . However , Peter Hain , Minister of State for Africa , suggested that the British government had no choice but to endorse the Lomé agreement given the RUF 's dominance , and that the only alternative was continued civil war . A military intervention by the United Kingdom in 1999 was ruled out as the British government had received no request for military assistance and felt it lacked the backing of the international community for a unilateral intervention . An intervention was also deemed to be politically and militarily impractical given the British military 's involvement with NATO operations in Yugoslavia . 
 = = = Tony Blair and the British Armed Forces = = = 
 The intervention in Sierra Leone was the fourth expeditionary operation and the second significant deployment undertaken by Her Majesty 's Armed Forces under Tony Blair , who was elected as Prime Minister in 1997 . The first two were relatively minor operations : a series of air strikes against Iraq in 1998 codenamed Operation Desert Fox , and a deployment of a company of Gurkhas and special forces on peacekeeping operations in East Timor in 1999 . The third operation , the first major deployment under Blair , was in Kosovo in 1999 , where British forces led a NATO intervention in the Kosovo War . 
 During the British operations in Kosovo , Blair delivered a speech in Chicago , in which he outlined his " Doctrine of the International Community " . Blair advocated a greater use of humanitarian intervention — the use of armed force to protect a civilian population , rather than exclusively to protect national interests . Kosovo did not diminish Blair 's belief in the use of military force for humanitarian purposes " where a strong moral case could be made " , and he outlined a set of criteria for intervention . The intervention in Sierra Leone , according to Andrew M. Dorman of King 's College London , " appears to embody much of the ethos contained within [ the Chicago speech ] " . 
 = = Previous British deployments = = 
 The intervention in May 2000 was the first major deployment of British forces to Sierra Leone during the civil war , but was not the first time British personnel had served there . In May 1997 , a two @-@ man training team from the British Army was sent to train SLA officers but discovered that the SLA 's strength was much lower than it had reported . The government was overthrown in a coup before any training could take place . Following the restoration of the elected government by the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group ( <unk> ) in February 1998 , HMS Cornwall sailed to Freetown with food and medical supplies . Her crew assisted with infrastructure repairs and her helicopter was used to move people and supplies around Sierra Leone until she left in mid @-@ April . As the security situation in Sierra Leone deteriorated later in the year , the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) conducted a non @-@ combatant evacuation operation under the codename Operation <unk> over Christmas 1998 . Approximately 80 people — predominantly British citizens , many of them staff or dependants from the British High Commission — were evacuated over two days . 
 In January 1999 , the RUF attacked Freetown . They were pushed back to the eastern edges of the city by <unk> , after which HMS Norfolk was sent to offer assistance . On arrival , a team from the Department for International Development ( DfID ) was based on board the ship to assist the crew 's efforts . Peter Penfold , the British High Commissioner — who had been evacuated to Guinea — temporarily lived on the ship before it was deemed safe for him to return to his residence in Freetown . He flew ashore on the Norfolk 's helicopter for daily meetings , with a detachment of Royal Marines ensuring security . HMS Norfolk was replaced by HMS Westminster , shortly after which Penfold moved back to his residence and the Royal Marines took over security of the compound temporarily . 
 The fighting was eventually ended by the Lomé Peace Accord , which was signed in July 1999 . The United Nations Observer Mission to Sierra Leone was replaced with the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone ( UNAMSIL ) , which included a force of 260 military observers . The observers were unarmed and tasked with monitoring the ceasefire mandated by the Lomé Agreement . The observer force , like UNAMSIL itself , was primarily made up of personnel from other African nations , but the United Kingdom contributed a small number of officers from the British Army and Royal Marines . In addition to the observers in Sierra Leone , personnel from the Royal Logistic Corps were serving in New York , assisting UNAMSIL with organising air @-@ lifts to bring the mission up to its authorised strength . 
 = = Build @-@ up to the intervention = = 
 In accordance with the Lomé Agreement , UNAMSIL set up disarmament camps throughout Sierra Leone that were intended to disarm the Sierra Leone Army , the RUF , and the militia groups operating in the country . The SLA and some militia groups began to enter the camps but the RUF did not . In April 2000 , 10 members of the RUF entered a UNAMSIL camp without the knowledge of the RUF 's leadership . Upon locating its fighters , the RUF demanded their return . The military observers refused , and the RUF responded by besieging the camp and attacking other UNAMSIL bases in the area . They took large numbers of UN personnel prisoner , and then began to advance into areas previously controlled by the Sierra Leone government . On 3 May , the RUF took control of the town of <unk> . Foreign diplomats in the country estimated that the RUF could be in Freetown within a week , since the SLA had been confined to barracks and had handed over most of its weapons in accordance with the Lomé Agreement . The United Nations issued a statement condemning the violence , after which Secretary @-@ General Kofi Annan told the British representative to the UN that it expected the United Kingdom , as the former colonial power , to intervene in Sierra Leone directly , rather than relying on the international community . 
 On 5 May , the British government continued to state that it would provide only logistical and technical support to UNAMSIL , but was privately exploring its options for a military deployment . The United Kingdom had a greater level of political involvement in Sierra Leone than in any other African country and , with the country 's stability deteriorating , it was reluctant to see that investment wasted . In addition , an estimated 1 @,@ 000 entitled personnel were in Sierra Leone , and the government feared for their safety . Academics have since suggested that the credibility of UNAMSIL and future UN peacekeeping operations would have been at stake had the mission in Sierra Leone been allowed to fail . The British Armed Forces were not as widely deployed in 2000 as they were to be later in the decade . The British Army had two brigades serving with NATO in the Balkans , and the Ministry of Defence ( MoD ) had ongoing commitments to Cyprus , the Falkland Islands , and elsewhere , but the armed forces — particularly units threatened by proposed cuts to the defence budget — were keen to participate in an operation . Senior officers thus advised the government that an operation in Sierra Leone was feasible . Over the following days , there was debate within the British government as to what the aims of a military deployment to Sierra Leone would be . The Foreign and Commonwealth Office ( FCO ) advocated a full @-@ scale intervention to assist UNAMSIL , arguing that a non @-@ combatant evacuation operation would not be sufficient and would undermine the UN , but the MoD believed that the armed forces would be unable to sustain a larger @-@ scale operation . 
 The British government 's emergency committee , COBRA , was convened and presented with three options for an evacuation of entitled persons — deployment of aircraft and special forces to conduct an evacuation via Lungi airport , deployment of regular ground forces for a similar operation , or re @-@ routing the Amphibious Ready Group ( ARG ) . COBRA concluded that it lacked sufficient information to recommend one of the three options and instructed the MoD to continue to develop them , while also recommending that an " operational reconnaissance and liaison team " ( ORLT ) be sent to Sierra Leone to assess the situation and advise on how the military could be useful . The Prime Minister , Tony Blair , approved the ORLT , which was led by Brigadier David Richards , Chief of Joint Force Operations . Richards had previously visited Sierra Leone twice during the civil war — first on the HMS Norfolk in early 1999 and again in early 2000 — and was familiar with the political leadership of the country . He and his team left from RAF Northolt eight hours later accompanied by a close protection force , and arrived in Freetown in the early hours of 6 May . The ORLT established itself in the British High Commission in Freetown , where daily political – military coordination meetings were held throughout the operation . 
 The readiness of several other assets was heightened on 5 May . Two Royal Navy vessels — the aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious and the frigate HMS Argyll — were ordered to sail to the area , as was the ARG ( which had been on exercise in southern France ) . The standby special forces squadron and 1st Battalion , Parachute Regiment ( 1 PARA ) , were both ordered to prepare for a potential operation in Sierra Leone ; and several RAF transport aircraft were taken off other duties and ordered to be prepared to airlift special forces and / or 1 PARA to Lungi airport . At the same time , four RAF CH @-@ 47 Chinooks were ordered to deploy to Sierra Leone — two from the Balkans and two from their base in the United Kingdom . The RAF lacked aircraft large enough to transport Chinooks and so the helicopter crews flew themselves to Freetown . The 3 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 4 @,@ 800 km ) flight undertaken by the two aircraft based in the UK was the longest self @-@ deployment of helicopters in British history . 
 = = Operation Palliser = = 
 On 6 May , the RUF blocked the road connecting Freetown to Lungi Airport , prompting UNAMSIL staff to evacuate to the Mamy Yoko Hotel in preparation for a total withdrawal from Sierra Leone if the RUF advance continued towards Freetown . In response to the deterioration Richards requested that British troops be sent to Dakar , Senegal , to decrease the time required to launch an operation in Sierra Leone . Richards also spoke to the 1 PARA command to update them on the situation . Following the conversation , 1 PARA ( with 2 PARA 's D Company replacing A Company , who were on exercise in Jamaica , and with several attached assets including artillery ) moved to the Air Movements Centre in South Cerney , Gloucestershire . The following day Richards was designated Joint Task Force Commander and his ORLT became the forward headquarters for a British deployment . At the same time , the authority to launch an evacuation operation was delegated to Richards and the British High Commissioner , Alan Jones . 
 With the RUF rapidly advancing on Freetown and controlling most of the interior of Sierra Leone , the only means of rapidly evacuating entitled persons or reinforcing UNAMSIL was by air via Lungi airport . Thus , the enhanced 1 PARA was flown to Dakar on 7 May , where C Company and the special forces squadron were almost immediately put aboard RAF Hercules C @-@ 130s with orders to secure the airport . They arrived at Lungi before sunset and were joined by the remaining elements of 1 PARA the next morning . The soldiers were able to deploy rapidly and with minimal equipment , knowing that they would not have to wait long for the ARG 's reinforcements and supplies should they be needed . The soldiers immediately set about securing the areas that would be vital to an evacuation , including the Mamy Yoko hotel , which became the evacuation centre , and Lungi airport . Jones requested in the afternoon of 8 May that Richards commence the evacuation — codenamed Operation Palliser — which Richards did almost immediately . Entitled persons who wished to leave were instructed to assemble at the Mamy Yoko hotel . From there , they would be <unk> to the airport by Chinooks and then flown to Dakar . 
 Over the course of a week , British forces evacuated approximately 500 entitled persons from Sierra Leone — almost 300 of whom left in the first two days of the operation . The arrival of British soldiers boosted morale in the country , and many foreign citizens opted to stay . The operation took on a slower pace after the first two days , but personnel and aircraft remained ready to evacuate any entitled persons who had been unable to reach Freetown earlier and to evacuate the British High Commission if the security situation deteriorated . 
 = = Mission expansion = = 
 In Westminster , the three government departments concerned with the British role in Sierra Leone — the MoD , the FCO , and DfID — struggled to agree on the objectives of the military deployment beyond the evacuation , which led to delays in issuing orders . Richards did not receive precise instructions until after Operation Palliser had commenced , and rules of engagement ( <unk> ) were not issued before the start of the operation . Commanders defaulted to the <unk> used in Northern Ireland , their most recent relevant experience . 
 With the evacuation largely complete , the British government turned its attention to the four British United Nations Military Observers ( UNMOs ) being held by the RUF . British forces in Freetown helped facilitate the escape of four UNMOs ( three British and one from New Zealand ) from a UNAMSIL camp at Makeni , which had been besieged by the RUF since ten RUF fighters had been accepted into the disarmament process . After consulting with the British command in Freetown , the four officers left the camp and covertly passed the RUF line before trekking west . They arrived at the UN base at Mile 91 almost 24 hours later , and an RAF Chinook picked them up and flew them to Freetown . No longer having the unarmed observers to protect , the Kenyan UNAMSIL detachment at Makeni fought their way out of the siege and proceeded west to join other UNAMSIL forces . With the three British officers from Makeni freed , only one British <unk> — Major Andy Harrison — remained a prisoner of the RUF , and the British government began discreetly attempting to establish his location . Harrison and ten other UNMOs had initially been held by the RUF at the latter 's base until Harrison convinced the RUF to allow the observers to join the Indian UNAMSIL contingent at Kailahun . 
 In addition to the missing UNMOs , the British government faced political and diplomatic problems . The deployment of British troops to Sierra Leone had lifted morale and halted the RUF advance on Freetown , and there were concerns that violence would resume once the British left . Another consequence of the British operation was that it effectively sidelined UNAMSIL . The United Nations and several of the contributing nations to UNAMSIL applied pressure on the British government to integrate its forces into UNAMSIL , but the MoD lacked faith in the competence of UNAMSIL headquarters and was unwilling to place its troops under UNAMSIL command . The MoD was also reluctant to deploy the brigade @-@ sized force necessary to take command of UNAMSIL , given the armed forces ' commitments elsewhere , and thus the British force in Sierra Leone remained outside UNAMSIL . The British government was also reluctant to commit British troops to an open @-@ ended peacekeeping operation , especially given the opposition in the House of Commons — particularly from the Conservative Party — to the initial deployment to Sierra Leone , and accusations from the British media of " mission creep " . By contrast , the operation was well @-@ received on the international stage , and met with the approval of the UN Security Council . 
 On 12 May , Baroness Symons , a junior minister in the MoD , told the House of Lords that British forces would remain in Sierra Leone , mainly to ensure the security of Lungi airport while UNAMSIL brought in reinforcements . Soldiers also remained at the evacuation point in Freetown to ensure its security , while others patrolled the streets of Freetown in an attempt to reassure residents . HMS Illustrious , with her air group , and the ARG both arrived on 14 May , bringing the number of British personnel in the operational area to approximately 4 @,@ 500 . Harriers from Illustrious began flying reassurance patrols over Freetown and the ARG supplemented British firepower , particularly at Lungi , with the provision of artillery . In the field , the British forces divided their efforts between three lines of operation : support to UNAMSIL , support to the SLA , and preparation to provide humanitarian assistance , should it be necessary , though the expanded mandate only became formal government policy several days later . During the following week , the RUF began to <unk> in the north of the country . The UN and the Sierra Leonean government feared that UNAMSIL troops between the RUF and Freetown might not be able to stand up to an assault by the RUF , and so the RAF Chinooks — in the country to conduct the evacuation — were used to ferry reinforcements from Lungi as they arrived . Meanwhile , President Ahmad Kabbah formed an alliance of militia groups ( including the self @-@ styled Civil Defence Force and the West Side Boys ) and the remnants of the SLA , totalling around 6 @,@ 000 personnel , to assist UNAMSIL forces in blocking the RUF advance . The British also provided reconnaissance for UNAMSIL using ground @-@ based signals and intelligence personnel and special forces as well as flights by Harriers and a Nimrod R1 . 
 The RUF continued to advance , resulting in sporadic confrontations with UNAMSIL and government forces , until on 17 May they came into direct contact with British forces . The Pathfinder Platoon had stationed itself at Lungi Lol , a village 12 miles ( 19 km ) north of Freetown close to Lungi airport , and shortly after were confronted by a group of RUF members . The resulting series of firefights lasted several hours , after which the RUF withdrew , having suffered 30 casualties . According to Richards , the British success in the confrontation provided an " immense " psychological victory and a deterrent against further attacks . Foday Sankoh , leader of the RUF , was captured later the same day by forces loyal to President Kabbah and handed over to the Sierra Leone Police , but had to be evacuated by an RAF Chinook after a hostile crowd gathered outside the building in which he was held . Sankoh 's capture created a power vacuum at the top of the RUF and the subsequent in @-@ fighting provided an opportunity for the MoD to order a rotation of forces deployed in Sierra Leone . The 1 PARA battlegroup was ordered back to the United Kingdom to resume its spearhead role as the permanent stand @-@ by battalion that would form the basis of any emergency deployment , while 42 Commando , Royal Marines , came ashore to replace the soldiers . 
 In Whitehall , the British government laid out its longer @-@ term objectives for the military intervention in Sierra Leone on 23 May . These were : to establish sustainable peace and security in Sierra Leone , to support UNAMSIL operations , to prevent another humanitarian disaster in Freetown , to see the release of captive UN personnel , and finally to avoid British casualties and devise an exit strategy that avoided " mission creep " without undermining UNAMSIL or the Sierra Leonean government . 
 = = Operation Khukri = = 
 The British government was particularly keen to secure the release of Major Andy Harrison — the last British <unk> being held by the RUF . Harrison 's contingent of UNMOs was protected by an Indian Army detachment . The Indian Army Gurkhas — attached to UNAMSIL — were under siege by the RUF at their base in Kailahun . The British and Indian commands in Sierra Leone had devised a plan to extract the UNMOs . British special forces remained in the country , ready to carry it out , but the UN and the British command feared that the RUF would retaliate against other UNAMSIL forces they had besieged if the UNMOs were extracted . Thus , Major General Vijay Kumar <unk> , Commander of UNAMSIL , was allowed to continue negotiations for the release of the other besieged UNAMSIL contingents . 
 When the last besieged garrison ( aside from Kailahun ) was evacuated on 30 May , preparations for a military extraction — should <unk> 's negotiations fail — began to increase . The operation ( codenamed Operation Khukri ) was eventually launched on 10 July . Two RAF Chinooks transported Indian special forces to the outskirts of Kailahun . The helicopters returned to Freetown with Harrison , his fellow UNMOs , and several Gurkhas who had been wounded during the siege . Harrison was safely extracted and the 600 Gurkhas successfully fought their way out of Kailahun , suffering one casualty in the process . 
 = = Training the SLA = = 
 The British government had decided that the RUF could not be trusted , and would have to be confronted and forced to enter the UN 's Disarmament , Demobilisation , and Reintegration ( DDR ) process . They assessed that there were three options available to achieve this — to deploy British forces against the RUF , for UNAMSIL to expand its operations and confront the RUF , or for the Sierra Leonean government to use loyal forces ( the SLA , former SLA personnel , the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council , and several other militia groups ) to take on the RUF . Richards estimated that a British deployment against the RUF would require at least a brigade @-@ sized force ( in excess of 5 @,@ 000 troops ) . Nevertheless , British forces ' involvement in Sierra Leone was politically unpopular in Westminster and the MoD could not assemble such a force while maintaining its commitments elsewhere , so the use of British forces to directly confront the RUF was ruled out . Also ruled out was a UNAMSIL @-@ led confrontation . Although UNAMSIL 's mandate would have allowed it to enter into combat with the RUF , the national contingents were reluctant to leave their bases and its focus remained on peacekeeping rather than the peace enforcement that the British and others believed was necessary . 
 This left the SLA and the alliance of militia groups — which became known as the " Unholy Alliance " , and was directed by a " Joint Military Committee " — the only forces capable of confronting the RUF . The SLA had been disarmed through the UN 's DDR process ; to restructure it and allow it to re @-@ arm , the UN lifted its arms embargo on Sierra Leone , and the British forces began advising and training the SLA . An international team had been planned to deploy to Sierra Leone to assist the SLA with longer @-@ term development and democratic accountability , and a British Short @-@ Term Training Team ( STTT ) deployed simultaneously to improve the SLA 's infantry skills . The STTT mission was codenamed Operation Basilica and based at the Benguema Training Centre , an abandoned barracks near Waterloo that had been refurbished for the purpose . The first unit to take on the role was based around 2nd Battalion , The Royal Anglian Regiment , and comprised approximately 250 personnel , including 45 instructors and a force protection company . The Anglians arrived at Benguema on 15 June to train 1 @,@ 000 SLA recruits , and the ARG withdrew . The training at Benguema included instruction on the Geneva Convention , unit cohesiveness , and other skills and knowledge to build the SLA into a professional army . 
 Despite the British training , the SLA was not large enough or strong enough to enter into combat with the RUF while also holding the ground it had recaptured , so the British persuaded UNAMSIL to move forward behind the advancing SLA to defend its recaptured ground . Additional British liaison officers were attached to UNAMSIL , and the British facilitated a daily coordination meeting for SLA and UNAMSIL commanders , while also assisting the UN forces in drawing up a campaign plan . 
 = = Operation Barras = = 
 The Anglians were replaced by a detachment of 1st Battalion , The Royal Irish Regiment , formed around C Company . On 25 August , a patrol from the Royal Irish went to visit a militia group known as the West Side Boys ( WSB ) . At the village of Magbeni , where the WSB were based , the Royal Irish were overpowered and taken captive . British officers undertook negotiations with the WSB , leading to the release of five of the eleven soldiers on 31 August . 
 On 9 September , the WSB 's spokesman stated that the remaining six members of the patrol , who had now been held for over a fortnight , would only be released after a new government was formed in Sierra Leone , leading negotiators to conclude that the increasingly unrealistic demands were stalling tactics rather than a serious attempt to conclude the crisis . At around the same time , teams that had been observing the West Side Boys ' base for four days reported that they had seen no sign of the captive soldiers in that time . There were also concerns that an assault would become more dangerous if the West Side Boys moved the hostages . The combination of these factors led COBRA to order an extraction mission . 
 The mission , codenamed Operation Barras , was undertaken by D Squadron of 22 Special Air Service Regiment , who assaulted the village of Gberi Bana to extract the soldiers , while a company group formed around A Company , 1 PARA , assaulted Magbeni , on the opposite side of Rokel Creek . The operation was successful and all the British captives were extracted , along with their SLA liaison and 22 Sierra Leonean civilians , while the WSB were defeated as a military force . A British soldier and at least 25 West Side Boys were killed in the operation . Many other West Side Boys fled and later surrendered to Jordanian peacekeepers . The Jordanians had received 30 by the end of the day , and 371 — including 57 children — had surrendered within a fortnight . Some of those who surrendered went on to volunteer for the new Sierra Leone Army , and those who were accepted went into the British @-@ run training programme at Benguema . Following Operation Barras , two SLA battalions — graduates of the British short @-@ term training programme — swept the area surrounding the West Side Boys ' camp to clear it of any remaining gang members . 
 The risks of Operation Barras were acknowledged by the MoD and by officers involved in the planning and the assault . It was described by an SAS soldier as " not a clinical , black balaclava , Princes Gate type operation . It was a very grubby , green operation with lots of potential for things to go wrong " . Despite the risks , Richard Connaughton observed in Small Wars & <unk> that the operation showed the Blair government was not averse to the possibility of casualties when they felt the cause was just . During the crisis and its immediate aftermath , the British government came under pressure from opposition politicians to end the deployment to Sierra Leone , and Dorman suggested that the success or failure of Operation Barras was " inextricably linked " to the fate of the wider British operation . He suggested that , had the British forces been defeated , the United Kingdom would have been forced to withdraw all its forces from Sierra Leone . 
 = = Confronting the RUF = = 
 The capture of the Royal Irish patrol reinforced to the British government that its efforts so far — and those of the international community — would not be sufficient to bring the civil war to an end . In Westminster , meanwhile , opposition politicians renewed their objection to the continued presence of British forces in Sierra Leone . The government was seeking an exit strategy that would end a politically unpopular deployment without abandoning Sierra Leone . 
 In August 2000 , the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 1313 , which blamed the RUF for the continuing conflict in Sierra Leone , citing multiple breaches of the Lomé Peace Accord . The resolution authorised an increase in the size of UNAMSIL and strengthened its mandate , which prompted the UN to once again apply pressure to the British government for a troop contribution . Several countries were reluctant to send their own troops to Sierra Leone without contributions from Western nations , and felt that the United Kingdom in particular should be contributing to the UN mission . 
 Despite the political pressure , the MoD continued to lack confidence in UNAMSIL leadership . Thus , the British government refused to place combat troops under UN command , but did second additional staff officers to UNAMSIL , to the UN headquarters in New York , and to the SLA . The officers attached to UNAMSIL were tasked with assisting its commanders in planning and mounting operations and were led by a brigadier who became UNAMSIL 's chief of staff , while in New York , the officers attached to UN headquarters provided planning support for logistics operations to bring UNAMSIL up to its mandated strength . At the same time , the focus of the British training programme shifted . Although six battalions had been trained , the SLA still lacked many combat support functions as well as command and control capabilities . The STTTs set out to improve the SLA 's capabilities in these areas by providing the next set of recruits with more specialised training in addition to basic infantry training provided to the first intake . The British trainers also constructed an operations room at the SLA 's headquarters and provided other support to improve the SLA 's communications and logistical capabilities . 
 Resolution 1313 was a significant shift in attitude for UNAMSIL , away from its previous neutrality to support of the Sierra Leone government , a shift that made the governments of several troop @-@ contributing nations uncomfortable . In particular , the governments of Jordan and India — two of the largest contributors , with nearly 5 @,@ 000 troops between them serving with UNAMSIL — were moved to withdraw their forces . The withdrawal coincided with the end of the rainy season , after which there were fears that the RUF would resume its advance towards Freetown , and the UN and British government feared that UNAMSIL would be vulnerable . As a deterrent , the ARG was once more deployed off the coast , and was instructed to conduct amphibious landing demonstrations as a show of force . 
 = = Ceasefire = = 
 The RUF was coming under increasing pressure from political angles as well as from the British @-@ trained SLA . It was heavily dependent on Sierra Leone 's south @-@ eastern neighbour Liberia , led by Charles Taylor , and derived the majority of its income from the sale of diamonds smuggled through Liberia , which became known as blood diamonds . In late 2000 , the Sierra Leone government — supported by the British , UNAMSIL , and the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) — entered into talks with the RUF . On 10 November , the two parties signed a 30 @-@ day ceasefire that provided for UNAMSIL to deploy throughout the entire country ( it had previously been prevented from operating in many RUF @-@ controlled areas ) , for the RUF to return seized weapons and equipment to UNAMSIL , and for the RUF to enter the DDR process . The ceasefire was later extended by a further 90 days . The UN Security Council embargoed Liberian diamonds in Resolution 1343 in March 2001 . Shortly afterwards , the RUF began large @-@ scale disarmament and agreed to a simultaneous disarmament with the Civil Defence Force , a militia group loyal to the government . By September , over 16 @,@ 000 militia members ( including around 6 @,@ 500 RUF ) had been through the DDR process and the combatants in the diamond @-@ producing areas had all disarmed . 
 By March 2002 , over 50 @,@ 000 people had been through the DDR process and the RUF had been entirely disarmed . A company of Gurkhas and a Royal Navy frigate were sent to the area in March 2003 to ensure stability while several prominent people — including Charles Taylor of Liberia , cabinet minister Samuel <unk> Norman , and several former RUF leaders — were arrested and indicted by the Special Court for Sierra Leone . 
 The last STTT , formed around 2nd Battalion , The Light Infantry , left Sierra Leone at the end of September 2001 . Approximately 8 @,@ 500 SLA personnel were trained by the STTTs , which were replaced by the International Military Assistance and Training Team ( <unk> ) — an organisation formed of personnel from countries including Australia , Canada , and the United States , with the UK providing the largest contingent as well as an infantry company for force protection . The STTTs also formed a small special forces unit within the SLA — the Force Reconnaissance Unit ( <unk> ) — to provide a morale boost and to give soldiers something to which they could aspire . Later in 2001 , the British Army advised the Sierra Leonean government on a merger of Sierra Leone 's armed forces into a unified command , which became the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces in early 2002 . In 2008 , the permanent British contingent in Sierra Leone was reduced to 100 personnel . British soldiers remained in Sierra Leone as of 2013 , continuing to form part of the <unk> , whose size has further reduced in accordance with the increased capabilities of the Sierra Leone armed forces . 
 = = Impact = = 
 According to Penfold , who served as High Commissioner until the week before the deployment of British troops , " The fact that the major country in the region , i.e. Nigeria , and a permanent member of the UN Security Council , i.e. the UK , took an active interest was crucial in resolving the conflict " . On the other hand , he believed that the international community had failed to recognise that the Sierra Leone Civil War was part of a larger conflict in the sub @-@ region , and " it was not until the problem of Charles Taylor and Liberia was addressed that the conflict was resolved " . In a later book , Penfold praised Richards ' leadership of the operation , stating that it was " extremely fortunate that Operation Palliser was under the command of an officer of the calibre of David Richards , with his knowledge of the situation and his experience and commitment . David Richards knew that with the resources available he could do more than just assist an evacuation ... he realised that he could actively stabilise the situation " . Richards received the Distinguished Service Order for his leadership of British forces in Sierra Leone , while several other personnel received decorations for gallantry or distinguished service . 
 The intervention in Sierra Leone was the fourth deployment of British forces abroad during the premiership of Tony Blair , and the largest operation undertaken by the United Kingdom alone since the Falklands War ( 1982 ) . It was the second major operation of the Blair government , after Kosovo . During his remaining time in office , British forces undertook operations in Afghanistan and Iraq , but Sierra Leone was the only unilateral operation . Unlike Afghanistan and Iraq , the intervention in Sierra Leone was widely regarded as successful . It became a " benchmark " for successful expeditionary operations , and was cited by Blair in his rationale for later deployments to Afghanistan and Iraq . Success in Sierra Leone encouraged the Blair government to continue its support to Africa , particularly with regard to resolving conflicts . 
 Sierra Leone also encouraged Blair 's policy of humanitarian intervention . Critics claimed that it led Blair to see military force as " just another foreign policy option " and that the apparent ease of the success shifted his focus towards the effectiveness of the use of force rather than the political and military risks . In his autobiography , Blair described the operation as one of the least @-@ discussed aspects of his time in office but one of the things of which he is most proud . He was keen to intervene in other African nations where civilian populations were at risk , particularly Darfur and Zimbabwe , but a lack of political support , combined with the pressure of large deployments to Afghanistan and Iraq after the 11 September attacks on the United States , prevented further interventions in Africa . It was not until 2011 — when Operation Ellamy was launched as part of a multi @-@ national intervention in Libya — that the United Kingdom undertook another military intervention in Africa . 
 The experience in Sierra Leone proved the effectiveness of relatively small numbers of well trained and equipped soldiers . It inspired the British government to work more closely with European allies , particularly France after the latter led Operation Artemis , a UN @-@ mandated intervention in the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2003 . After a summit in 2003 , the two governments called on the European Union ( EU ) to develop the capability to rapidly deploy a battle group of around 1 @,@ 500 personnel able to respond to crises , particularly in Africa . The member states of the EU approved the creation of 13 battle groups in 2004 . 
 Sierra Leone convinced Blair and his Defence Secretary Geoff Hoon of the need to alter the focus of British defence policy towards less conventional conflicts and away from more traditional wars between states . The MoD published a white paper in 2003 , Delivering Security in a Changing World , which revisited aspects of the 1998 " Strategic Defence Review " ( SDR ) . The SDR had focused on the Middle East and North Africa , and had not envisaged a need to deploy troops to sub @-@ Saharan Africa other than for a potential non @-@ combatant evacuation operation in Zimbabwe . Thus , the white paper recommended preparations for relatively short , intense operations against forces with inferior technology , with a particular focus on Africa . 
 The rapidity with which forces were required to deploy to Sierra Leone emphasised the need for the United Kingdom to retain high @-@ readiness forces . That need also vindicated concepts such as the ARG and the spearhead battalion ( the capacity in which 1 PARA was serving when it deployed ) , and protected 1 PARA in the 2004 review of the infantry structure . The 2004 review reduced the total number of British Army battalions from 40 to 36 and created the Special Forces Support Group ( SFSG ) , which was inspired by the success of 1 PARA in Operation Barras . The SFSG — initially formed around 1 PARA — provides specialist capabilities or acts as a force multiplier for British special forces on large or complex operations . As the largest unilateral operation undertaken by the United Kingdom since their creation , the intervention in Sierra Leone was the first major test of the ORLT and joint task force concepts . Both were created as a result of the 1997 SDR and provide a headquarters staff at very high readiness to command an expeditionary operation at operational level . According to Richards , both were " thoroughly validated " and were vital in coordinating the large numbers of assets deployed at short notice and reporting back to the Permanent Joint Headquarters in Northwood . 
 A 2015 study in the Journal of Strategic Studies finds that the intervention in Sierra Leone was a success . 
 = Paraceratherium = 
 Paraceratherium is an extinct genus of hornless rhinoceros , and one of the largest terrestrial mammals that has ever existed . It lived from the early to late Oligocene epoch ( 34 – 23 million years ago ) ; its remains have been found across Eurasia between China and the Balkans . It is classified as a member of the <unk> subfamily Indricotheriinae . " Paraceratherium " means " near the hornless beast " , in reference to Aceratherium , a genus that was once thought similar . 
 The exact size of Paraceratherium is unknown because of the incompleteness of the fossils . Its weight is estimated to have been 15 to 20 tonnes ( 33 @,@ 000 to 44 @,@ 000 lb ) at most ; the shoulder height was about 4 @.@ 8 metres ( 16 feet ) , and the length about 7 @.@ 40 metres ( 24 @.@ 3 feet ) . The legs were long and pillar @-@ like . The long neck supported a skull that was about 1 @.@ 3 metres ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) long . It had large , tusk @-@ like incisors and a nasal incision that suggests it had a prehensile upper lip or proboscis . The lifestyle of Paraceratherium may have been similar to that of modern large mammals such as the elephants and extant rhinoceroses . Because of its size , it would have had few predators and a slow rate of reproduction . It was a browser , eating mainly leaves , soft plants , and shrubs . It lived in habitats ranging from arid deserts with a few scattered trees to subtropical forests . The reasons for the animal 's extinction are unknown , but various factors have been proposed . 
 The taxonomy of the genus and the species within has a long and complicated history . Other genera of Oligocene indricotheres , such as Baluchitherium , Indricotherium , and Dzungariotherium have been named , but no complete specimens exist , making comparison and classification difficult . Most modern scientists consider these genera to be junior synonyms of Paraceratherium , and that it contains four discernible species ; P. bugtiense ( the type species ) , P. transouralicum , P. prohorovi , and P. orgosensis , although the last may be a distinct genus . The most completely @-@ known species is P. transouralicum , so most reconstructions of the genus are based on it . Differences between P. bugtiense and P. transouralicum may be due to sexual dimorphism , which would make them the same species . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The taxonomic history of Paraceratherium is complex due to the fragmentary nature of the known fossils and because western , Soviet , and Chinese scientists worked in isolation from each other for much of the 20th century and published research mainly in their respective languages . Scientists from different parts of the world did attempt to compare their finds to get a more complete picture of these animals , but were hindered by politics and wars . The opposing taxonomic tendencies of " lumping and splitting " have also contributed to the problem . Inaccurate geological dating previously led scientists to believe various geological formations that are now known to be contemporaneous were of different ages . Many genera were named on the basis of subtle differences in molar characteristics — features that vary within populations of other rhinoceros taxa — and are therefore not accepted by most scientists for distinguishing species . 
 Early discoveries of indricotheres were made through various colonial links to Asia . The first known indricothere fossils were collected from Balochistan ( in modern @-@ day Pakistan ) in 1846 by a soldier named <unk> , but these fragments were unidentifiable at the time . The first fossils now recognised as Paraceratherium were discovered by the British geologist Guy <unk> Pilgrim in Balochistan in 1907 – 1908 . His material consisted of an upper jaw , lower teeth , and the back of a jaw . The fossils were collected in the <unk> Formation of Dera Bugti , where Pilgrim had previously been exploring . In 1908 , he used the fossils as basis for a new species of the extinct rhinoceros genus Aceratherium ; A. bugtiense . Aceratherium was by then a wastebasket taxon ; it included several unrelated species of hornless rhinoceros , many of which have since been moved to other genera . Fossil incisors that Pilgrim had previously assigned to the unrelated genus <unk> were later shown to belong to the new species . 
 In 1910 , more partial fossils were discovered in Dera Bugti during an expedition by the British palaeontologist Clive Forster @-@ Cooper . Based on these remains , Foster @-@ Cooper moved A. bugtiense to the new genus Paraceratherium , meaning " near the hornless beast " , in reference to Aceratherium . His rationale for this reclassification was the species ' distinctly down @-@ turned lower tusks . In 1913 , Forster @-@ Cooper named a new genus and species , <unk> ( " wonderful beast " ) osborni , based on larger fossils from the same excavations , but he renamed the genus Baluchitherium later that year because the former name was preoccupied , as it had already been used for a hemipteran insect . The fossils of Baluchitherium were so fragmentary that Foster @-@ Cooper was only able to identify it as a kind of odd @-@ toed ungulate , but he mentioned the possibility of confusion with Paraceratherium . The American palaeontologist Henry Fairfield Osborn , which B. osborni was named after , suggested it may had been a <unk> . 
 A Russian Academy of Sciences expedition later found fossils in the Aral Formation near the Aral Sea in Kazakhstan ; it was the most complete indricothere skeleton known , but it lacked the skull . In 1916 , based on these remains , Aleksei <unk> Borissiak erected the genus Indricotherium named for a mythological monster , the " <unk> beast " . He did not assign a species name , I. <unk> , until 1923 , but Maria Pavlova had already named it I. transouralicum in 1922 . Also in 1923 , Borissiak created the subfamily Indricotheriinae to include the various related forms known by then . In 1939 , Borissiak also named a new species of Paraceratherium from Kazakhstan , P. prohorovi . 
 In 1922 , American explorer Roy Chapman Andrews led a well documented expedition to China and Mongolia sponsored by the American Museum of Natural History . Various indricothere remains were found in formations of the Mongolian Gobi Desert , including the legs of a specimen standing in an upright position , indicating that it had died while trapped in quicksand , as well as a very complete skull . These remains became the basis of Baluchitherium grangeri , named by Osborn in 1923 . 
 Dzungariotherium orgosensis was described in 1973 based on fossils — mainly teeth — from Dzungaria in Xinjiang , northwest China . A multitude of other species and genus names — mostly based on differences in size , snout shape , and front tooth arrangement — have been coined for various indricothere remains . Fossils attributable to Paraceratherium continue to be discovered across Eurasia , but the political situation in Pakistan has become too unstable for further excavations to occur there . 
 = = = Species and synonyms = = = 
 In 1936 , American palaeontologists Walter Granger and William K. Gregory proposed that Forster @-@ Cooper 's Baluchitherium osborni was likely a junior synonym ( an invalid name for the same taxon ) of Paraceratherium bugtiense , because these specimens were collected at the same locality and were possibly part of the same morphologically variable species . William Diller Matthew and Forster @-@ Cooper himself had expressed similar doubts few years earlier . Although it had already been declared a junior synonym , the genus name Baluchitherium remained popular in various media because of the publicity surrounding Osborn 's B. grangeri . 
 In 1989 , palaeontologists Spencer G. Lucas and Jay C. Sobus published a revision of indricothere taxa , which is followed by most western scientists today . They concluded that Paraceratherium , as the oldest name , was the only valid indricothere genus from the Oligocene , and contained four valid species , P. bugtiense , P. transouralicum , P. prohorovi , and P. orgosensis . They considered most other names to be junior synonyms of those taxa , or as dubious names , based on remains too fragmentary to identify properly . By analysing alleged differences between named genera and species , Lucas and Sobus found that these most likely represented variation within populations , and that most features were indistinguishable between specimens , as had been pointed out in the 1930s . The fact that the single skull assigned to P. transouralicum or Indricotherium was domed , while others were flat at the top was attributed to sexual dimorphism . Therefore , it is possible that P. bugtiense fossils represent the female , while P. transouralicum represents the male of the same species . 
 According to Lucas and Sobus , the type species P. bugtiense from the late Oligocene of Pakistan includes junior synonyms such as B. osborni and P. <unk> . P. transouralicum , formerly Indricotherium , from the late Oligocene of Kazakhstan , Mongolia , and northern China includes B. grangeri and I. minus . P. orgosensis , formerly Dzungariotherium from the middle and late Oligocene of northwest China includes D. <unk> and P. <unk> . P. orgosensis may be distinct enough to warrant its original genus name , but its exact position requires evaluation . P. prohorovi from the late Oligocene of Kazakhstan may be too incomplete for its position to be resolved in relation to the other species ; the same applies to proposed species such as I. intermedium and P. <unk> , as well as genera like <unk> and <unk> . Though the genus name Indricotherium is now a junior synonym of Paraceratherium , the subfamily name Indricotheriinae is still in use because genus name synonymy does not affect the names of higher level taxa that are derived from these . Members of the subfamily are therefore still commonly referred to as indricotheres . 
 In contrast to the revision by Lucas and Sobus , a 2003 paper by Chinese researchers suggested that Indricotherium and Dzungariotherium were valid genera , and that P. prohorovi did not belong in Paraceratherium . They also recognised the validity of species such as P. <unk> , P. <unk> , and P. sui . A 2004 paper by Chinese paleontologist Tao Deng and colleagues also recognised three distinct genera . Some western writers have similarly used names otherwise considered invalid since the 1989 revision , but without providing detailed analysis and justification . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The superfamily <unk> , which includes modern rhinoceroses , can be traced back to the early Eocene — about 50 million years ago — with early precursors such as <unk> . <unk> contains three families ; the <unk> , the Rhinocerotidae ( " true rhinoceroses " ) , and the <unk> . The diversity within the rhinoceros group was much larger in prehistoric times ; they ranged from dog @-@ sized to the size of Paraceratherium . There were long @-@ legged , cursorial forms adapted for running and squat , semi aquatic forms . Most species did not have horns . Rhinoceros fossils are identified as such mainly by characteristics of their teeth , which is the part of the animals most likely to be preserved . The upper molars of most rhinoceroses have a pi @-@ shaped ( π ) pattern on the crown , and each lower molar has paired L @-@ shapes . Various skull features are also used for identification of fossil rhinoceroses . 
 The Indricotheriinae subfamily , to which Paraceratherium belongs , was first classified as part of the <unk> family by Leonard B. <unk> in 1966 . Previously , they had been regarded as a subfamily within <unk> , or even a full family , <unk> . In a 1999 cladistic study of <unk> , Luke Holbrook found indricotheres to be outside the <unk> clade , and wrote that they may not be a monophyletic ( natural ) grouping . <unk> 's scheme is the prevalent hypothesis today . The <unk> family contains long @-@ legged members adapted to running , such as <unk> , and were distinguished by incisor characteristics . <unk> are distinguished from other <unk> by their larger size and the derived structure of their snouts , incisors and canines . The earliest known indricothere is the dog @-@ sized <unk> from the middle and late Eocene of western North America and Asia . The cow @-@ sized <unk> is known from the middle Eocene ; by the late Eocene the genus <unk> of Asia had almost reached the size of Paraceratherium . Paraceratherium itself lived in Eurasia during the Oligocene period , 23 to 34 million years ago . The genus is distinguished from other indricotheres by its large size , nasal incision that would have supported a muscular snout , and its down @-@ turned premaxillae . It had also lost the second and third lower incisors , lower canines , and lower first premolars . 
 The cladogram below follows the 1989 analysis of Indricotheriinae by Lucas and Sobus , and shows the closest relatives of Paraceratherium : 
 Lucas and colleagues had reached similar conclusions in a previous 1981 analysis of <unk> , wherein they still retained Paraceratherium and Indricotherium as separate genera . 
 = = Description = = 
 Paraceratherium is one of the largest known land mammals that have ever existed , but its exact size is unclear because of the lack of complete specimens . Early estimates of 30 tonnes ( 66 @,@ 000 lb ) are now considered exaggerated ; it may have been in the range of 15 to 20 tonnes ( 33 @,@ 000 to 44 @,@ 000 lb ) at maximum , and as low as 11 tonnes ( 24 @,@ 000 lb ) on average . Calculations have mainly been based on fossils of P. transouralicum because this species is known from the most complete remains . Estimates have been based on skull , teeth , and limb bone measurements , but the known bone elements are represented by individuals of different sizes , so all skeletal reconstructions are composite extrapolations , resulting in several weight ranges . Its total body length was estimated as 8 @.@ 70 m ( 28 @.@ 5 ft ) from front to back by Granger and Gregory in 1936 , and 7 @.@ 40 m ( 24 @.@ 3 ft ) by Vera Gromova in 1959 , but the former estimate is now considered exaggerated . The weight of Paraceratherium was similar to that of some extinct proboscideans , with the largest complete skeleton known belonging to the steppe mammoth ( Mammuthus trogontherii ) . In spite of the roughly equivalent mass , Paraceratherium may have been taller than any proboscidean . Its shoulder height was estimated as 5 @.@ 25 m ( 17 @.@ 2 ft ) at the shoulders by Granger and Gregory , but 4 @.@ 8 m ( 16 ft ) by Gregory S. Paul in 1997 . The neck was estimated at 2 to 2 @.@ 5 m ( 6 @.@ 6 to 8 @.@ 2 ft ) long by Michael P. Taylor and Mathew J. Wedel in 2013 . The teeth of P. orgosensis ( which that species is mainly known from ) are 25 percent larger than those of P. transouralicum , making it the largest known indricothere . 
 No complete set of vertebrae and ribs of Paraceratherium have yet been found and the tail is completely unknown . The atlas and axis vertebrae of the neck are wider than in most modern rhinoceroses , with space for strong ligaments and muscles that would be needed to hold up the large head . The rest of the vertebrae were also very wide , and had large zygapophyses with much room for muscles , tendons , ligaments , and nerves , to support the head , neck , and spine . The neural spines were long and formed a long " hump " along the back , where neck muscles and nuchal ligaments for holding up the skull were attached . The ribs were similar to those of modern rhinoceroses , but the ribcage would have looked smaller in proportion to the long legs and large bodies , because modern rhinoceroses are comparatively short @-@ limbed . The last vertebra of the lower back was fused to the sacrum , a feature found in advanced rhinoceroses . Like sauropod dinosaurs , Paraceratherium had <unk> @-@ like openings ( hollow parts of the bone ) in their pre @-@ sacral vertebrae , which may have helped to lighten the skeleton . 
 The limbs were large and robust to support the animal 's large weight , and were in some ways similar to and convergent with those of elephants and sauropod dinosaurs with their likewise graviportal ( heavy and slow moving ) builds . Unlike such animals , which tend to lengthen the upper limb bones while shortening , fusing and compressing the lower limb , hand , and foot bones , Paraceratherium had short upper limb bones and long hand and foot bones — except for the disc @-@ shaped phalanges — similar to the running rhinoceroses from which they descended . Some foot bones were almost 50 centimetres ( 20 in ) long . The thigh bones typically measured 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) , a size only exceeded by those of some elephants and dinosaurs . The thigh bones were pillar @-@ like and much thicker and more robust than those of other rhinoceroses , and the three <unk> on the sides were much reduced , as this robustness diminished their importance . The limbs were held in a column @-@ like posture instead of bent , as in smaller animals , which reduced the need for large limb muscles . The front limbs had three toes . 
 Due to the fragmentary nature of known Paraceratherium fossils , the animal has been reconstructed in several different ways since its discovery . In 1923 , W. D. Matthew supervised an artist to draw a reconstruction of the skeleton based on the even less complete P. transouralicum specimens known by then , using the proportions of a modern rhinoceros as a guide . The result was too squat and compact , and Osborn had a more slender version drawn later the same year . Some later life restorations have made the animal too slender , with little regard to the underlying skeleton . Gromova published a more complete skeletal reconstruction in 1959 , based on the P. transouralicum skeleton from the Aral Formation , but this also lacked several neck vertebrae . 
 There are no indications of the colour and skin texture of the animal because no skin impressions or mummies are known . Most life restorations show the creature 's skin as thick , folded , grey , and hairless , based on modern rhinoceroses . Because hair retains body heat , modern large mammals such as elephants and rhinoceroses are largely hairless . American palaeontologist Donald Prothero has proposed that , contrary to most depictions , Paraceratherium had large , elephant @-@ like ears that it used for thermoregulation . The ears of elephants enlarge the body 's surface area and are filled with blood vessels , making the dissipation of excess heat easier . According to Prothero , this would have been true for Paraceratherium ; he points to robust bones around the ear openings . The palaeontologists Pierre @-@ Olivier Antoine and Darren Naish have expressed scepticism towards this idea . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The largest skulls of Paraceratherium are around 1 @.@ 3 metres ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) long , 33 to 38 centimetres ( 13 to 15 in ) at the back of the skull , and 61 centimetres ( 24 in ) wide across by the zygomatic arches . Paraceratherium had a long forehead , which was smooth and lacked the roughened area that serves as attachment point for the horns of other rhinoceroses . The bones above the nasal region are long and the nasal incision goes far into the skull . This indicates that Paraceratherium had a prehensile upper lip similar to that of the black rhinoceros and the Indian rhinoceros , or a short proboscis or trunk as in tapirs . The back of the skull was low and narrow , without the large lambdoid crests at the top and along the sagittal crest , which are otherwise found in horned and tusked animals that need strong muscles to push and fight . It also had a deep pit for the attachment of nuchal ligaments , which hold up the skull automatically . The occipital condyle was very wide and Paraceratherium appears to have had large , strong neck muscles , which allowed it to sweep its head strongly downwards while foraging from branches . One skull of P. transouralicum has a domed forehead , whereas others have flat foreheads , possibly because of sexual dimorphism . A brain endocast of P. transouralicum shows it was only 8 percent of the skull length , while the brain of the Indian rhinoceros is 17 @.@ 7 percent of its skull length . 
 The species of Paraceratherium are mainly discernible through skull characteristics . P. bugtiense and P. orgosensis share features such as relatively slender maxillae and premaxillae , shallow skull roofs , mastoid @-@ <unk> processes that are relatively thin and placed back on the skull , a lambdoid crest which extends less back , and an occipital condyle with a horizontal orientation . P. transouralicum has robust maxillae and premaxillae , upturned <unk> , domed frontal bones , thick mastoid @-@ <unk> processes , a lambdoid crest that extends back , and occipital condyles with a vertical orientation . P. orgosensis is distinguished from the other species by the larger size of its teeth , and distinct crochets of its molars . 
 Unlike most primitive rhinoceroses , the front teeth of Paraceratherium were reduced to a single pair of incisors in either jaw , which were large and conical , and have been described as tusks . The upper incisors pointed downwards ; the lower ones were shorter and pointed forwards . Among known rhinoceroses , this arrangement is unique to Paraceratherium and the related <unk> . The incisors may have been larger in males . The canine teeth otherwise found behind the incisors were lost . The incisors were separated from the row of cheek teeth by a large diastema ( gap ) . This feature is found in mammals where the incisors and cheek teeth have different specialisations . The upper molars , except for the third upper molar that was V @-@ shaped , had a pi @-@ shaped ( π ) pattern and a reduced <unk> . The premolars only partially formed the pi pattern . Each molar was the size of a human fist ; among mammals they were only exceeded in size by proboscideans , though they were small relative to the size of the skull . The lower cheek teeth were L @-@ shaped , which is typical of rhinoceroses . 
 = = Palaeobiology = = 
 Zoologist Robert M. Alexander has suggested that overheating may have been a serious problem in Paraceratherium due to its size . According to Prothero , the best living analogues for Paraceratherium may be large mammals such as elephants , rhinoceroses and hippopotamuses . To aid in thermoregulation , these animals cool down during the day by resting in the shade or by wallowing in water and mud . They also forage and move mainly at night . Because of its large size , Paraceratherium would not have been able to run and move quickly , but they would have been able to cross large distances , which would be necessary in an environment with a scarcity of food . They may therefore have had large home ranges and have been migratory . Prothero suggests that animals as big as indricotheres would need very large home ranges or territories of at least 1 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 250 @,@ 000 acres ) and that , because of a scarcity of resources , there would have been little room in Asia for many populations or a multitude of nearly identical species and genera . This principle is called competitive exclusion ; it is used to explain how the black rhinoceros ( a browser ) and white rhinoceros ( a grazer ) exploit different niches in the same areas of Africa . 
 Most predators in their habitat were relatively small — about the size of a wolf — and were not a threat to Paraceratherium . Adult individuals would be too large for most predators to attack but the young would have been vulnerable . Bite marks on bones from the Bugti beds indicate that even adults may have been preyed on by 10 @-@ to @-@ 11 @-@ metre ( 33 to 36 ft ) -long crocodiles , Crocodylus <unk> . As in elephants , the gestation period of Paraceratherium may have been lengthy and individuals may have had long lifespans . Paraceratherium may have lived in small herds , perhaps consisting of females and their calves , which they protected from predators . It has been proposed that 20 tonnes ( 44 @,@ 000 lb ) may be the maximum weight possible for land mammals , and Paraceratherium was close to this limit . The reasons mammals cannot reach the much larger size of sauropod dinosaurs are unknown . The reason may be ecological instead of biomechanical , and perhaps related to reproduction strategies . Movement , sound , and other behaviours seen in CGI documentaries such as " Walking With Beasts " are entirely conjectural . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The simple , low @-@ crowned teeth indicate that Paraceratherium was a browser with a diet consisting of relatively soft leaves and shrubs . Later rhinoceroses were grazers , with high @-@ crowned teeth because their diets contained grit that quickly wore down their teeth . Studies of <unk> on Paraceratherium teeth confirm the creatures had a soft diet of leaves ; microwear studies have yet to be conducted . Isotope analysis shows that Paraceratherium fed chiefly on C3 plants , which are mainly leaves . Like its <unk> relatives the horses , tapirs , and other rhinoceroses , Paraceratherium would have been a hindgut fermenter ; it would extract relatively little nutrition from its food and would have to eat large volumes to survive . Like other large herbivores , Paraceratherium would have had a large digestive tract . 
 Granger and Gregory argued that the large incisors were used for defence or for loosening shrubs by moving the neck downwards , thereby acting as picks and levers . <unk> use their proboscis to wrap around branches while stripping off bark with the front teeth ; this ability would have been helpful to Paraceratherium . Some Russian authors suggested that the tusks were probably used for breaking twigs , stripping bark and bending high branches and that , because species from the early Oligocene had larger tusks than later ones , they probably had a more bark than leaf based diet . Since the species involved are now known to have been contemporaneous , and that the differences in tusks are perhaps sexually dimorphic , the latter idea is not accepted today . Herds of Paraceratherium may have migrated while continuously foraging from tall trees , which smaller mammals could not reach . Osborn suggested that its mode of foraging would have been similar to that of the high @-@ browsing giraffe and okapi , rather than to modern rhinoceroses , whose heads are carried close to the ground . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Remains assignable to Paraceratherium have been found in early to late Oligocene ( 34 – 23 million years ago ) formations across Eurasia , in modern @-@ day China , Mongolia , India , Pakistan , Kazakhstan , Georgia , Turkey , Romania , Bulgaria , and the Balkans . Their distribution may be correlated with the <unk> development of the Alpine @-@ Himalayan mountain belt . The range of Paraceratherium finds implies that they inhabited a continuous landmass with a similar environment across it , but this is contradicted by <unk> maps that show this area had various marine barriers , so the genus was successful in being widely distributed despite this . The fauna which coexisted with Paraceratherium included other rhinoceroses , artiodactyls , rodents , <unk> , weasels , <unk> , <unk> and cats . 
 The habitat of Paraceratherium appears to have varied across its range , based on the types of geological formations it has been found in . The <unk> Gol Formation of Mongolia represents an arid desert basin , and the environment is thought to have had few tall trees and limited brush cover , as the fauna consisted mainly of animals that fed from tree tops or close to the ground . A study of fossil pollen showed that much of China was woody shrubland , with plants such as saltbush , <unk> tea ( Ephedra ) , and nitre bush ( <unk> ) , all adapted to arid environments . Trees were rare , and concentrated near groundwater . The parts of China where Paraceratherium lived had dry lakes and abundant sand dunes , and the most common plant fossils are leaves of the desert @-@ adapted <unk> . Trees in Mongolia and China included birch , elm , oaks , and other deciduous trees , while Siberia and Kazakhstan also had walnut trees . Dera Bugti in Pakistan had dry , temperate to subtropical forest . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 The reasons Paraceratherium became extinct after surviving for about 11 million years are unknown , but it is unlikely that there was a single cause . <unk> reasons include climate change , low reproduction rate , and invasion by <unk> proboscideans from Africa in the late Oligocene . <unk> may have been able to considerably change the habitats they entered , in the same way that African elephants do today , by destroying trees and turning woodland into grassland . Once their food source became scarce and their numbers dwindled , Paraceratherium populations would have become more vulnerable to other threats . Large predators like <unk> and <unk> also entered Asia from Africa during the early Miocene ; these may have predated Paraceratherium calves . Other herbivores also invaded Asia during this time . 
 = 2006 Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl = 
 The 2006 Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl was a postseason college football match between the Georgia Bulldogs and the Virginia Tech Hokies at the Georgia Dome in Atlanta , Georgia . The University of Georgia represented the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) and Virginia Tech represented the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) in the competition . The game was the final competition of the 2006 football season for each team and resulted in a 31 – 24 Georgia victory , even though spread bettors favored Virginia Tech to win by three points . In exchange for the right to pick the first ACC team after the Bowl Championship Series selections , bowl representatives paid US $ 3 @.@ 25 million to the ACC , while the SEC , whose fifth team was selected , received $ 2 @.@ 4 million . The combined $ 5 @.@ 65 million payout was the seventh @-@ largest among all college football bowl games , and the fourth @-@ largest non @-@ BCS bowl game payout . 
 In a game that was expected to be a defensive struggle , Virginia Tech took a 21 – 3 lead in the first half . After halftime , Georgia answered Tech 's first @-@ half success , thanks in part to four second @-@ half turnovers by Tech quarterback Sean Glennon . Virginia Tech 's No. 1 ranked defense struggled in the second half , allowing 153 yards ( of 200 total ) in the final 30 minutes . As time ran out , Georgia held a one @-@ touchdown lead , 31 – 24 , having beaten back a last @-@ second Tech rally . 75 @,@ 406 people attended the game , making it the 10th consecutive Peach Bowl sellout , the largest crowd to ever attend an event at the Georgia Dome , and the third @-@ largest bowl game in terms of attendance for the 2006 – 2007 season . Each school sold out its allotment of 18 @,@ 500 tickets quickly . 31 @,@ 922 people attended the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A " fan fest " before the game , setting a new attendance record . Virginia Tech 's loss brought it to a final 2006 record of 10 – 3 , while Georgia 's final @-@ game win earned it a record of 9 – 4 . 
 = = Selection process = = 
 Beginning with the 2006 game , the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl had purchased the right to select the highest @-@ ranked Atlantic Coast Conference team after representatives from the Bowl Championship Series made their selection . According to the official selection rules still used today , the team chosen to represent the ACC must be within one conference victory of the remaining , highest @-@ ranked conference team or be ranked more than five spaces ahead of the ACC team with the best Conference record available in the final BCS Standings . 
 In choosing the SEC opponent , the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl selection committee had the right to select the first SEC school after the Bowl Championship Series , Cotton Bowl Classic , Capital One Bowl , and Outback Bowl made their selections . Just as in the ACC , the selection committee could not select an SEC team with two more losses than the highest available team . The bowl earned the right to select these teams via its multimillion @-@ dollar payout system , which guarantees a certain amount of money to the participating conferences . Prior to 2006 , the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl ( then known as the Peach Bowl ) matched the No. 5 team in the SEC versus the No. 3 team in the ACC . After the bowl increased its payout to $ 2 @.@ 8 million per squad , it then was given the second pick from the ACC , with the Gator Bowl dropping to third . 
 Leeman Bennett , the former head coach of the Atlanta Falcons and Tampa Bay Buccaneers , served as chairman of the selection committee , which had the task of picking the best teams from those made available by the selection criteria set by the two conferences . The committee would have approximately one month to select the two teams that would attract the most people to the game and generate the largest possible television audience . This fact helped eliminate ACC runner @-@ up Georgia Tech from the selection process , as the Yellow Jackets had already played Georgia earlier in the season , thus making a potential Georgia @-@ Georgia Tech showdown less attractive . In addition , that matchup , while attractive to football fans in the Atlanta area ( the site of the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl and home to Georgia Tech ) , would have less appeal to television viewers outside the Georgia area . Supervising the selection committee was the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl Executive Committee , which consisted of representatives from various Atlanta businesses and the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A corporation . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 On the morning of December 3 , 2006 , Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl representatives selected Virginia Tech to represent the ACC in the 2006 Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl . A few hours later , Georgia was selected as the second half of the matchup . Two days after the selections were announced , the game was declared sold out , the 10th consecutive sellout in the combined history of the Peach and Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowls . Georgia and Virginia Tech each were assigned initial allocations of 18 @,@ 500 tickets for distribution , and following the quick sales of those ticket blocs , each asked for and received additional tickets to distribute . 
 The game was the third time Virginia Tech and the University of Georgia faced each other on the football field . The two previous games — one in 1931 and the other in 1932 — resulted in one loss and one win for each team . Various casinos and betting organizations favored Virginia Tech by 2 @.@ 5 – 3 points when setting their point spread . 
 = = = Media coverage = = = 
 Media discussion of the game in the weeks leading up to kickoff centered on the Hokies ' No. 1 @-@ nationally ranked defense and Georgia 's 5th @-@ ranked SEC defense . Most pundits predicted a low @-@ scoring game , and a few predicted an " all @-@ out defensive war " . A week before departing for Atlanta , Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer revealed that Ike Whitaker , Virginia Tech 's backup quarterback , would not be attending the game for undisclosed reasons . It was later revealed that Whitaker had been admitted to an alcohol treatment center in Salem , Virginia . 
 For Georgia , discussion centered on the play @-@ calling duties of assistant coach Mike Bobo . Bobo had been named the temporary offensive coordinator for the Bulldogs after then @-@ assistant coordinator Neil Calloway had been named the new head coach at the University of Alabama @-@ Birmingham . Calloway would remain with the Bulldogs as the offensive line coach during the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl , but Bobo would take over his role as offensive coordinator for the game . It was only the second time that Bobo performed as a play @-@ caller for the Bulldogs , the previous game having come in Georgia 's regular @-@ season closer , a 15 – 12 win against Georgia Tech . 
 = = = Offensive matchups = = = 
 With the fifth @-@ ranked defense in the SEC going up against the number @-@ one ranked scoring defense in the nation , attention centered on the likelihood of a low @-@ scoring defensive struggle . Of particular interest were the two teams ' quarterbacks and how they would likely fare against such a tough defense . Georgia struggled on offense for much of the season , resulting in a battle for the starting quarterback position between senior Joe <unk> and freshman Matthew Stafford . Though Stafford was eventually given the starting role , he struggled in his first year , completing 126 of 235 passes ( 53 @.@ 6 % ) for 1 @,@ 620 yards , with six touchdowns and 12 interceptions heading into the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl . On the opposite side of the field , Virginia Tech would be starting redshirt sophomore Sean Glennon . Named the starting quarterback at the beginning of the 2006 season , Glennon replaced Marcus Vick , who had been expelled from Virginia Tech at the end of the previous year . While not as statistically successful as Marcus Vick , Glennon still managed to lead the Hokies to their third consecutive 10 @-@ win season , and had the edge over Stafford in terms of experience . 
 On the ground , it appeared that Virginia Tech had the edge in experience , forcing Georgia 's defense to concentrate on stopping Tech 's run game . Virginia Tech running back Branden Ore suffered an ankle injury in the Hokies ' regular @-@ season game against Wake Forest , but still took the field in the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl . The same could not be said for Georgia , whose original starting running back , Thomas Brown , suffered a season @-@ ending knee injury in October . Filling his role were two inexperienced players : Kregg Lumpkin and Danny Ware . Making up for this inexperience , the two players were coached by Tony Ball , a former Virginia Tech wide receivers coach with insights into the Tech defense . 
 With Ore still not fully recovered from his injury and two inexperienced players on the Georgia side , it appeared that the teams ' passing offenses would have to take up the slack . Virginia Tech 's Eddie Royal , with 452 receiving yards , led both teams in receiving yardage coming into the game . Georgia 's receiving corps was led by wide receiver Mohammed Massaquoi and tight end <unk> Milner . Massaquoi caught 28 passes for 348 yards and two touchdowns coming into the game , while Milner had 27 receptions for 376 yards and two touchdowns . 
 = = = Defensive matchups = = = 
 Each offense would face tough defense in the air and on the ground . The Virginia Tech defense , led by junior linebackers Vince Hall and Xavier Adibi , was expected to present a challenge for the Georgia offense . " You try to find some kind of mismatch , but it 's very difficult to do " , Georgia head coach Mark Richt said before kickoff . " That 's why they 're the best ( defense ) in the country . Their interior defensive linemen are very , very strong and physical , and , really , everybody else is built for speed . Their edge rushers are tremendous , and their linebackers are outstanding and physical . Their defensive backs can all run and hit . It 's going to be a real challenge . " Of particular concern for quarterback Matt Stafford were Virginia Tech 's cornerbacks , whom he would have to go through in order to complete passes to his receivers . " They play kind of a different scheme than a lot of teams so it would be tough if you only had one week to try to prepare for these guys " , Stafford said in an interview prior to the game . " They trust their corners a lot , but they 've got good ones and can . They lock up a lot of time single receiver side because they 've got a good corner down there that plays on the boundary . " 
 Georgia 's defense , ranked fifth in the SEC , was no less a concern for Virginia Tech 's offense . " Defense is one of the major aspects of the SEC " , said Georgia center Nick Jones before the game . " You face great defenses week in and week out , and we face a great one week in and week out in practice against our defense . We 've been up against great defenses and great personnel , so it 's nothing new for us . " Heading into the game , Georgia was ranked ninth in total defense , giving up only 264 yards per game , and 22nd in scoring defense , allowing an average of just 17 @.@ 1 points a game . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2006 Chick @-@ fil @-@ A bowl kicked off on December 30 , 2006 at 8 : 00 p.m. The game was nationally televised on ESPN , with over 5 million households tuning into the game at home , enough to earn ESPN a television rating of 4 @.@ 8 for the broadcast . 75 @,@ 406 people attended the game in person , making it the 10th consecutive Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl sell @-@ out , the first since the word " Peach " was dropped from the title , the largest crowd ever to attend an event at the Georgia Dome , and the third @-@ largest bowl game in terms of attendance for the 2006 – 2007 season . 31 @,@ 922 people attended the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A " fan fest " prior to the game , setting a new attendance record . Due to the proximity of Atlanta to the University of Georgia 's main campus in Athens , Georgia , gave Georgia a home @-@ field <unk> but the Virginia Tech fans , known for traveling well to their bowl appearances , quickly bought out their school 's allotment of tickets and ensured a divided crowd . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Defense dominated in the first quarter of the game . Virginia Tech received the opening kickoff , but failed to capitalize on its opening drive thanks to a personal foul penalty that forced the Hokies to punt . On its first possession , Georgia moved into scoring position courtesy of a 26 @-@ yard run by Kregg Lumpkin . Failing to advance the ball further , Georgia sent in kicker Brandon Coutu who kicked a 39 @-@ yard field goal to give Georgia the early lead , 3 – 0 . 
 The two teams proceeded to trade possessions , with no side able to gain an advantage over the other 's defense . Tech received the kickoff from Georgia , but was again hampered by penalties after earning a first down . After the Virginia Tech punt , Georgia went three @-@ and @-@ out , punting to the Hokies , who also went three @-@ and @-@ out . 
 After taking possession on his own 16 @-@ yard line , Georgia quarterback and true freshman Matthew Stafford caused the first turning point of the game as he threw an interception to Brenden Hill of Virginia Tech . Starting deep in Georgia territory , Virginia Tech was further aided by a personal foul on Georgia , which set up a first @-@ and @-@ goal situation for Virginia Tech on the Georgia 6 @-@ yard line . A two @-@ yard run by Virginia Tech tailback Branden Ore brought the ball closer to the goal line and ended the first quarter of play . 
 At the end of the first quarter , Georgia led Virginia Tech 3 – 0 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 The second quarter began with Virginia Tech inside the Georgia 10 @-@ yard line . After two unsuccessful plays , Virginia Tech was finally able to reach the end zone on a Branden Ore one @-@ yard rush in a fourth @-@ and @-@ one situation . The touchdown and extra point gave Virginia Tech a 7 – 3 lead with 13 : 23 left in the half . 
 Georgia began its first possession with a 25 @-@ yard kickoff return , but failed to earn a first down in the face of a tough Hokie defensive effort . Georgia punter Gordon Ely @-@ Kelso kicked a 56 @-@ yard punt following the Virginia Tech defensive stop . A breakdown in special teams coverage by Georgia allowed Virginia Tech kick returner Eddie Royal to break free , returning the kick 56 yards back to the original line of scrimmage . As a result of the excellent field position provided by the return , Virginia Tech was able to drive the remaining 30 yards to the end zone . Branden Ore earned his second touchdown of the game , making the score 14 – 3 with 6 : 13 remaining on the clock . 
 After a short return , Georgia QB Stafford went to work on the Georgia 24 @-@ yard line . Two incomplete passes and one sack later , Georgia was again punting . Virginia Tech again was in excellent field position , starting on their own 47 @-@ yard line . Instead of rushing the ball , as had been the trend for the Tech offense up to that point , Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer called for a trick play . At the snap , quarterback Sean Glennon lateraled the football to wide receiver Eddie Royal . Rather than running the ball , Royal threw the ball downfield , catching the Georgia defense off guard . Tight end Sam Wheeler , the target of the throw , had been left uncovered by a defense expecting a run . The pass was completed , and Wheeler ran unimpeded 53 yards for a touchdown . The play took 19 seconds to execute , and gave Virginia Tech a 21 – 3 lead with 4 : 00 remaining in the half . 
 Georgia was again unable to earn a first down in the ensuing possession , and attempted three straight rushing plays that earned a total of six yards . After a Georgia punt , Virginia Tech ran two rushing plays before attempting the same Royal pass that had gone for a touchdown earlier . Georgia , having anticipated the play , sacked Royal for a loss of two yards , ending the first half . 
 At halftime , Virginia Tech led Georgia 21 – 3 . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Because Virginia Tech had received the opening kickoff , Georgia received the ball to open the second half . Stafford was able to connect with wide receiver Mario Raley for a 24 @-@ yard gain , taking Georgia to the 50 @-@ yard line , but Virginia Tech 's defense stiffened and Georgia was forced to punt . Pinned at their ten @-@ yard line by the Georgia punt , Virginia Tech went three @-@ and @-@ out and was itself forced to punt . 
 A 19 @-@ yard punt return by Mikey Henderson put Georgia into good field position . Stafford capitalized on the opportunity , completing a 26 @-@ yard pass to put Georgia into field @-@ goal range . After three unsuccessful plays , kicker Brandon Coutu connected on a 51 @-@ yard field goal to cut the Virginia Tech lead to 21 – 6 . 
 On the kickoff following the field goal , Georgia head coach Mark Richt ordered an unorthodox onside kick . Surprised by the unexpected play , the Virginia Tech coverage team was unable to recover the ball , which was leapt upon by the kicker , Brian <unk> . With a new chance at offense and a sense of optimism triggered by the successful onside kick , Georgia drove down the field . Aided by 20 yards in penalties against Virginia Tech , the drive resulted in a six @-@ yard touchdown pass to <unk> Milner . The touchdown and extra point boosted Georgia 's morale and cut the score to 21 – 13 , Virginia Tech leading by eight . 
 The third quarter came to a close as Virginia Tech struggled to answer the two Georgia scores . Tech quarterback Sean Glennon connected on a 29 @-@ yard pass to Eddie Royal , driving the Hokies to the Bulldog 47 @-@ yard line as the clock hit zero . 
 At the end of the third quarter , Virginia Tech still led Georgia , 21 – 13 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 The fourth quarter began with Virginia Tech searching for a way to answer Georgia 's previous two scores and quash the momentum Georgia had picked up . On the third play of the quarter , however , Virginia Tech quarterback Sean Glennon threw an interception to Georgia 's Tony Taylor . Beginning on their own 35 @-@ yard line , Georgia capitalized on the mistake quickly , courtesy of a 15 @-@ yard personal foul penalty and a 41 @-@ yard completion from Stafford to Milner . Georgia , hoping to tie the time , attempted and completed a two @-@ point conversion . The resulting scores tied the game at 21 – 21 with 12 : 39 remaining in the game . 
 Virginia Tech 's hopes to answer were smashed on the first play after Georgia 's kickoff as Glennon fumbled the snap , losing the ball to Georgia 's Quentin Moses . Georgia failed to pick up a first down following the turnover , but the fumble did turn into three points for the Bulldogs , as kicker Brandon Coutu connected on his third field goal of the day , giving Georgia its first lead since the first quarter , 24 – 21 . 
 After the Georgia kickoff , Glennon was again intercepted by Tony Taylor , who earned his second interception on the day and created Glennon 's third turnover . Taylor returned the ball 16 yards to the Tech one @-@ yard line , setting up an easy touchdown for the Bulldogs . With 6 : 54 remaining , Georgia took a 31 – 21 lead over Virginia Tech . 
 On the ensuing Tech possession , Tech 's quarterback continued to play poorly . On the third play following the kickoff , Glennon was intercepted for the fourth time in the game . The downfield interception set up Georgia at their own 11 @-@ yard line . Georgia rushed the ball three times , forcing Virginia Tech to use two timeouts in order to stop the clock . The punt by Georgia 's Ely @-@ Kelso was poorly done , and traveled only 15 yards before going out of bounds . 
 As a result of the excellent field position , Virginia Tech seemed in position for an easy score . However , after a quick Tech first down , the Georgia defense stiffened and Tech was forced to settle for a field goal . The 28 @-@ yard kick by Brandon Pace cut Georgia 's lead to 31 – 24 , but only 3 : 42 remained on the clock . Due to the short time remaining , Virginia Tech was forced to attempt an onside kick in order to have another chance at offense . The kick was recovered by Georgia , however , and the Bulldogs proceeded to rush the ball in three consecutive plays , forcing the Hokies to use their last timeout in order to conserve time for one final drive . 
 Georgia 's punt rolled into the end zone for a touchback , and with 1 : 28 remaining in the game , Virginia Tech began the final drive on its own 20 @-@ yard line . Any tension was soon defused by the Georgia defense , which forced three incompletions and a sack . Glennon 's attempt at a Hail Mary pass fell short , giving Georgia the win with a final score of 31 – 24 . 
 = = Final statistics = = 
 The 18 @-@ point comeback was the largest for Georgia under coach Mark Richt up to that point . In recognition of their performances during the game , Georgia linebacker Tony Taylor and quarterback Matthew Stafford were named the defensive and offensive MVPs of the game , respectively . Taylor 's two interceptions tied the Georgia bowl record for interceptions , first set by Scott Woerner and Ronnie Harris . The four Virginia Tech turnovers resulted in 18 Georgia points . Georgia 's sole turnover resulted in seven points for Virginia Tech . 
 = = = Georgia statistical recap = = = 
 Over a third of Georgia 's 71 rushing yards came on a single 26 @-@ yard run in the first quarter by halfback Kregg Lumpkin . After the run , Lumpkin would amass only 13 additional yards in the remaining three quarters of play . Over half of Georgia 's total offensive yards ( 200 total yards ) came through the air from Stafford , who finished with 129 passing yards , one interception , and one touchdown . Approximately a third ( 41 yards ) of Stafford 's passing yards came on a single completion in the fourth quarter . Another long pass play netted Stafford 24 yards . Together , the two plays accounted for half of Stafford 's total passing yards . Seven other completions netted only 64 yards , an average of just over 9 yards a play . 
 Georgia 's kicking game had a far more active day than its offense . Punter Gordon Ely @-@ Kelso booted seven punts and kicker Brandon Coutu nailed three field goals . The field goals , kicked from 39 , 51 , and 28 yards away and two extra points made Coutu Georgia 's leading scorer in the game , earning 11 points . Ely @-@ Kelso netted 264 yards in punts , an average of 37 @.@ 7 yards per kick . Though not long , the punts were high enough in the air to allow Georgia 's special teams to get downfield and prevent long punt returns . Only two of Ely @-@ Kelso 's punts were returned by Tech kick returner Eddie Royal , and one return was for negative yardage . 
 Georgia 's defense managed a strong performance statistically and in real terms . The most obvious examples of this were the three interceptions and one forced fumble that proved to be the turning point in the game . Two of the interceptions were caught by linebacker Tony Taylor , who also had nine tackles , two for a loss of yards . The tackles tied him with Paul Oliver , who also had nine . The third interception came from <unk> Johnson , while the fumble was forced by Charles Johnson . Johnson had an active day as well . In addition to the forced fumble , he recorded four tackles , two sacks , and a pass break @-@ up . 
 The defensive play of Taylor , Oliver , and Johnson greatly affected the course of the game and is apparent in Georgia 's time of possession and average starting position in each of the quarters . During the first and second quarters , Georgia had average starting positions on their own 19 and 26 @-@ yard lines , respectively . Their first @-@ quarter time of possession was just 5 : 41 , and their second @-@ quarter possession time was 6 : 34 . During the third and fourth quarters , when all four Virginia Tech turnovers took place , Georgia 's time of possession jumped to 10 : 41 and 7 : 47 , respectively . In the third quarter , their average starting possession gained ten yards to the Georgia 36 , and during the final quarter , their average starting position was the Virginia Tech 36 @-@ yard line . This fact allowed Georgia to capitalize on the Virginia Tech turnovers , turning them into points on the scoreboard . 
 = = = Virginia Tech statistical recap = = = 
 Sean Glennon 's four turnovers tied a career high for interceptions and brought his season interception mark to 11 . He completed 13 of his 26 passes for 94 yards and a completion percentage of 50 % . The passing total of 94 yards was the second @-@ lowest total in the entire season , coming behind only a November 4 game in Miami where Glennon passed for just 86 yards in the face of a tough defense . In a statistic unusual for the 2006 season , Glennon was not the only Tech player to complete a pass . Wide receiver Eddie Royal 's 53 @-@ yard TD pass made him just the third Virginia Tech player to complete a pass during the 2006 season . The play on which Royal made his throw , a lateral WR pass , had been attempted once previously in the season during a 38 – 27 loss to Georgia Tech . 
 On the ground , the Hokies had even less success than they did in the air . Branden Ore , Tech 's starting tailback , earned 42 yards in 20 short rushes during the game . With a long run of eight yards , Ore was kept in check by Georgia 's defense . The only other Hokie to achieve positive yardage on the ground was backup tailback Kenny Lewis , who only managed five yards . Glennon was sacked three times , once fumbling the ball . These sacks wiped out the 11 rushing yards he managed to gain during his scrambles for yardage . In the second quarter , Virginia Tech was aided by excellent field position , enabling them to score three offensive touchdowns . Tech 's average starting field position in that quarter was the Georgia 48 @-@ yard line , allowing for easy scores even for a struggling offense . 
 As with Georgia , Virginia Tech 's kicking and special teams proved to have more success than either aspect of the offense . Virginia Tech kicker Brandon Pace scored a single 28 @-@ yard field goal late in the fourth quarter , and punter Nic Schmitt blasted four punts for a total of 195 yards , averaging 48 @.@ 8 yards a punt . Pace 's field goal helped to trigger a late @-@ game rally by Virginia Tech , which had been stunned by a Georgia onside kick and several interceptions thrown by Glennon . Schmitt 's long punts , meanwhile , denied Georgia good field position in the first half of the game . Only in the second half , when Glennon 's interceptions allowed Georgia to start on the Tech side of the field , was the Georgia offense able to reach the end zone . In the first and second quarters , Georgia 's average starting position was their own 19 @-@ yard line and own 26 @-@ yard line , respectively . 
 That starting field position proved a boon for the Virginia Tech defense , which only allowed 200 total yards in the game . Tech linebacker Vince Hall led the Hokies and all defensive players with 13 tackles in the game . Tech recorded one interception during the game , courtesy of Brenden Hill , who also made three tackles . Georgia 's offensive line , despite starting only six scholarship offensive linemen , allowed just two sacks to the Virginia Tech defense . Chris Ellis and Noland <unk> each earned a single sack , accounting for a loss of 15 total yards . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 The win over # 14 Virginia Tech enabled the Bulldogs to break into the Top 25 rankings in the final college football poll of the season . Georgia was ranked # 23 in the country thanks to its win over the Hokies , who dropped to # 19 nationally following the loss . The loss snapped a six @-@ game winning streak by Virginia Tech and ended the Hokies ' bid at becoming just the fourth team in school history to win 11 games in a season . The 2006 Georgia Bulldogs , consequently , became the first team in school history to defeat three consecutive ranked teams . No. 5 Auburn , No. 16 Georgia Tech , and No. 14 Virginia Tech all fell to Georgia in November or December . The game and the tens of thousands of fans it attracted injected an estimated $ 35 million into the Atlanta area economy , mostly as a result of food , hotel , and other expenses incurred by visiting fans . 
 = = = 2007 season = = = 
 In August 2007 , Frank Beamer closed team practices to outside observers for the first time in 20 years . He cited concerns about unknown individuals watching Virginia Tech practice in Atlanta before the Hokies ' loss to Georgia , potentially leading to the defeat . During the 2007 season , Virginia Tech quarterback Sean Glennon was replaced as the Hokies ' starter by freshman Tyrod Taylor , causing many pundits to point to the four interceptions Glennon threw in the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl as an example of his failure as a quarterback . Brian <unk> , the former walk @-@ on who kicked and recovered the onside kick that began Georgia 's rally was named the Bulldogs ' starting punter for the 2007 season , partially due to his performance in the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl . 
 At the end of the 2007 NCAA Division I FBS football season , both Georgia and Virginia Tech were named to Bowl Championship Series bowl games , indicating an increase over their 2006 performances . Georgia earned a bid to the 2008 Sugar Bowl in New Orleans , Louisiana against the Hawaii Warriors , who they defeated , 41 – 10 . Virginia Tech , having won the 2007 ACC Championship Game , earned an automatic bid to the 2008 Orange Bowl in Miami , Florida , losing 24 – 21 to the Kansas Jayhawks . 
 = 6th National Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam = 
 The 6th National Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam ( Vietnamese : Đại hội Đảng Cộng <unk> Việt Nam VI ) ( CPV ) was held in Ba Đình Hall , Hanoi , between 15 and 18 December 1986 . 1 @,@ 129 delegates represented the party 's estimated 1 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 members . The congress occurs once every five years . Preparations for the 6th National Congress began with 8th plenum of the 5th Central Committee and ended with the 10th plenum , which lasted 19 days . After the 10th plenum , local and provincial party organizations began electing delegates to the congress as well as updating party documents . 
 The congress is noteworthy because of the introduction of economic reforms , labelled Đổi Mới ( Renovation ) , and the election of a new party leadership . The sitting General Secretary , Trường Chinh was not reelected , and Nguyễn Văn Linh took his place . The 6th Politburo , 6th Secretariat and the Control Commission were elected . The Advisory Council to the Central Committee was established , and contained high @-@ ranking officials who had retired at the 6th National Congress . The 6th National Congress emphasized the need to strengthen the socialist mode of production . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = The 8th plenum and reforms = = = 
 The 8th plenum of the 5th Central Committee ( 10 – 17 June 1985 ) — and its antecedents the 6th ( 3 – 10 July 1984 ) and the 7th ( 11 – 17 December 1984 ) <unk> — instructed the party to direct a performance review of its organization , personnel and efficiency . Lê Đức Thọ , head of the Central Organizing Commission , said the party had become " a cumbersome and ponderous mechanism , only marginally efficient , marked by ill @-@ defined responsibilities and poorly divided functions . " He further stated that confusion within the party over operational responsibilities between the central party leadership , mass organizations and the state , and between higher and lower party echelons had developed into a serious problem , and that a cynical collective mindset within the party had taken hold and manifested itself through corruption , inflexibility and dishonesty . 
 The plenum put forward three points to solve the problems alleged by Tho ; ( 1 ) to get party cadres to focus on technical economic and management responsibilities , ( 2 ) cadres were to be organized and get specialized training in economic and administrative fields to reequip them with information on how to run an increasingly complex economy , and ( 3 ) engineer a shift in the internal balance of <unk> a Nhân Dân ( The People ) editorial , Lê Đức Thọ stressed the need to go beyond political slogans and <unk> to enhance the level of management skills of party cadres in party @-@ level organizations . Lê Đức Thọ wanted to change the party 's role in the economy from that of <unk> to one of supervisor . The central leadership faced an obstacle ; most party cadres had what the party leadership considered an outdated education from 20 to 30 years ago , while the party lacked young cadres . To solve this problem , the central party leadership began talking about the need to introduce personnel planning , a retirement age , rotation of officials and tenure length for cadres and sensitive posts . 
 Early in the reform process , the CPV devolved some powers of the party secretaries to the district @-@ level committees . The party planned to decentralize some duties and responsibilities at departmental and sectoral levels while empowering ward @-@ level party organs by strengthening their role in economic planning , market management and public security , and trying to improve the performance of the Control Commission and its lower @-@ level bodies . The party leadership tried to make the cumbersome bureaucracy efficient . 
 Economic reforms in 1985 led to rampant inflation , and the 9th plenum ( mid @-@ December 1985 ) forced the central leadership to reintroduce rationing in order to reduce the hardships for the poor , while in March 1985 the Council of Ministers legalized limited , small @-@ scale , private enterprise in the handicraft and small industry sectors . The CPV tried to introduce market rules into the planned economy , while stressing the need to control the markets . At this early stage , the party started a discussion on how much state control and economic planning were necessary . On 8 April , the 5th Politburo issued the " Draft Resolution on guaranteeing autonomy to basic economic units " , which decreed the implementation of the reform program agreed upon by the 8th plenum . The resolution tried to solve several problems by streamlining the bureaucracy to make it more efficient . However , while the party supported making state @-@ owned enterprises more autonomous , they still sought the abolition of individual trade — that is trade not sanctioned by the state . At this stage , the authorities did not seek to alter the duties and responsibilities of central state and party organs . 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 Planning for the 6th National Congress began at the 19 @-@ day @-@ long 10th plenum of the 5th Central Committee ( 19 May – 9 June 1986 ) . Lê Duẩn , the General Secretary , gave the opening speech , where he reaffirmed the central party leadership 's commitment to reform . The 10th plenum unanimously approved the draft Political Report for the 6th National Congress . Preparations for the Congress began with party congresses at the grass @-@ root and provincial @-@ levels , during which delegates were elected . 
 Preparation for the Congress began slowly . According to a Central Organizing Commission conference , the lack of preparations were due to an unidentified number of party grassroots organs failing to prepare their personnel for the Congress , and superior echelons failing to inform lower @-@ level echelons on the status of the Congress . The 5th Secretariat announced the organizing of a Criticism / Self @-@ criticism campaign on 11 March on all party levels to prepare for the Congress . The campaign 's main goals were to discipline party committees at the upcoming local party congresses ; to assess the party 's performance with an emphasis on economics since the 5th National Congress ; to contribute to the future reorganization of the party and reassignment of personnel ; and to ensure that the drafting of the Congress ' resolutions were finished on time and to appoint new local executive committees in light of the requirements to implement reform . The 5th Secretariat published a list of requirements for possible candidates for membership in local executive committees in mid @-@ March 1986 , these were ; 
 ( 1 ) the ability of candidates to understand the economic and managerial skills articulated by the 8th plenum of the 5th Central Committee ; 
 ( 2 ) the need for young members within the party organization , with an emphasis on appointing officials to provincial @-@ level executive committees in the age group 40 – 49 , while officials aged 30 – 39 were to be appointed to district and grassroots executive committees ; 
 ( 3 ) to ensure geographical mobility and flexibility regarding personnel assignments . 
 = = = District and provincial congresses and conferences = = = 
 The local congresses preceding the 6th National Congress were far more organized than those held before the 5th National Congress . Unlike the previous Congress , the central party leadership issued instructions and training programs for party cadres on how to organize party congresses and conferences . Certain party cadres were made responsible for tutoring the executive committee directly subordinate to them on the Central Committee 's draft Political Report . Local executive committees started convening conferences in early August to study the draft report . These conferences acted as precursors to the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and enterprise @-@ level Party committee congresses , which started convening in mid @-@ August . By early August , some grassroots @-@ level party organs had begun the election of delegates to the 6th National Congress . At least five provinces had completed preparations for the basic @-@ level party congresses by September , in four of these the basic @-@ level congresses ran until late September . 
 District @-@ level congresses convened in some provinces in late August , while other provinces started convening them in late September . According to the Vietnamese media , the district @-@ level congresses mostly agreed on basic economic goals and several proposed amendments to the draft Political Report . At the Binh Tri Thien Provincial Party Organization , 250 cadres reportedly made 3 @,@ 000 suggestions , " including amendments to and revision of the Draft Political Report " and concrete policies which featured prominently in it . The same occurred in the Standing Committee of the Hồ Chí Minh City Party Committee , where leading cadres unanimously approved a program for action and proposed changes to the draft Political Report . The Nha Trang Municipal Party Organization held a day @-@ long conference discussing the Draft Political Report , which ended tepidly ; the discussions were extended so that the delegates reached an unenthusiastic " identity of views " ( what was discussed is unknown as the media did not state them ) . While other party conferences criticized the draft Political Report , several others expressed enthusiasm or unanimously supported it . Because the National Assembly failed to issue a draft of the 4th Five @-@ Year Plan , the district @-@ level conferences were forced to discuss mostly local economic aims because they lacked national economic data . 
 The Cuu Long conference held between 6 and 10 October was the first provincial @-@ level conference to be held . By 22 October , 21 provinces had held provincial @-@ level party conferences . The central party leadership faced less criticism on the draft Political Report and socio @-@ economic policies from the provincial @-@ level conferences than by district @-@ level conferences . The provincial @-@ level conferences criticized central policies less and were evasive about critical issues . However , the provincial @-@ level conferences were not completely dormant and scored some minor victories , such as reducing the average age needed to join an executive committee and they adopted a more flexible and efficient mode of planning and organization . As during the district @-@ level conferences , there were certain convocations which attracted attention ; the An Giang Party Committee criticized past economic performance , while the Ha Son Binh Congress criticized the irrational management of provincial economic affairs . While these committees criticized past policies or well @-@ known deficiencies , none of them criticized the policies of the central party leadership . 
 General Secretary Trường Chinh in a speech to the Hồ Chí Minh City Party Organization admitted to " serious shortcomings and mistakes " by the central party leaders in economic leadership , and criticized the imposition of a superstructure on Vietnam 's current conditions . Trường Chinh endorsed the program of the 8th plenum of the 5th Central Committee and " new economic concepts " , but told the attendees that the 5th Politburo had undertaken a systematic assessment of economic policies , which included the continuation of a mixed economy , the acceptance of private ownership for the foreseeable future , the need to end bureaucratic centralism , and the need for decentralization in economic decision @-@ making . In his speech to the 4th Congress of the Hồ Chí Minh City Party Organization , Nguyễn Văn Linh , a member of the 5th Politburo and 5th Secretariat , endorsed the platforms of 6th , 7th and 8th <unk> of the 5th Central Committee while supporting the conclusion reached at the 10th plenum of the 5th Central Committee . He emphasized several Politburo directives . Phạm Hùng , the Minister of Interior , in his speech to the Cuu Long Provincial Congress said that the reintroduction of the market economy and the renewed acceptance of private ownership would not hurt Vietnam 's socialist transformation . To secure Vietnam 's socialist credentials , the state would remain dominant to protect Vietnam from the uncontrolled free market . The 11th plenum ( 17 – 25 November 1986 ) , the last plenum before the 6th Congress , endorsed the platform for the congress . 
 = = The Congress = = 
 The 6th National Congress was convened on 15 December 1986 and lasted until 18 December . The Congress reaffirmed its commitment to the reform program of the 8th plenum of the 5th Central Committee , and issued five points ; 
 " concerted efforts to increase the production of food , consumer goods and exportable items " ; 
 " continue the efforts to control small merchants and capitalists , while at the same time acknowledging the reality of supporting a mixed economy " ; 
 " to regenerate the planning bureaucracy while making the economic management system more efficient by decentralizing authority and making room for more independent decision @-@ making " ; 
 " to clarify the powers and jurisdiction of the Council of Ministers , and the reorganization of state management apparatus to make it more efficient ; 
 " to improve party organizational capabilities , leadership and cadre training . " 
 In the Political Report delivered to the 6th National Congress on 15 December , Trường Chinh said that the Central Committee , the Politburo , the Secretariat and the Council of Ministers were responsible for their own inadequacies and Vietnam 's economic failures . The report functioned as a severe self @-@ criticism of the central party leadership . The leadership 's failures were reiterated by a host of speakers , including Nguyễn Văn Linh , who spoke about the problems of " sluggish production , confusion in distribution systems , enduring socio @-@ economic difficulties , and flagging confidence of the population " . Nguyễn Thanh Bình , the Central Committee Secretary responsible for agriculture , echoed previous sentiments during the preparations for the Congress and spoke of the need for decentralization , household and family economics , and the introduction of an independent market . Võ Trần Chí , a member of the Standing Committee of the Hồ Chí Minh City Party Committee , affirmed the Congress ' commitment to reform to strengthen productivity and managerial performance . 
 While supporting change , Trường Chinh in his Political Report talked about the validity of the party 's organizational principles , which had governed Vietnam 's economy . Democratic centralism was to remain unchanged , and centralized management of certain sectors were to be retained . In a closed session , the Presidium of the 6th National Congress on 18 December acknowledged the importance of the continued transformation of private industry and commerce and the validity of economic contracts between production and business units . He endorsed the state 's role as a supplier of goods produced by state @-@ owned enterprises and supported the long @-@ time policy of labour distribution . These policies were passed , and underwrote the economic policies initiated at the 4th and 5th National Congresses . The party leadership 's immediate goals set forth in the Political Report were : To restructure the production system ; readjust the investment outlay within the system ; continue the building and strengthening of the socialist relations of production ; to utilize and develop the economic sectors in the correct way ; to renovate the way economy was managed ; to emphasize the role of science and technology in the economy ; and to expand and to increase the effectiveness of Vietnam 's foreign economic relations . 
 Neither the Political Report nor any of the speakers at the 6th National Congress signalled a shift in Vietnam 's foreign policy . The Congress reaffirmed Vietnam 's strong ties with the Soviet Union and its " special relationships " with the socialist states of Laos and Kampuchea ( Cambodia ) . However , the Congress highlighted the need to strengthen its relationship with countries belonging to Comecon , the international communist trade organization . Yegor Ligachev , the head of the Soviet delegation to the Congress , surprised the Vietnamese and many foreign observers by announcing an economic aid package 8 – 9 million rubles ( 11 – 13 million US dollars ) at the time , and was about equal per capita of aid given to South Vietnam by the United States before 1975 . The Political Report mentioned the importance of Vietnam 's relations with India and its continued membership in the Non @-@ Aligned Movement . The Congress announced Vietnam 's wishes to improve its relations with the capitalist world , specifically mentioning Sweden , Finland , France , Australia and Japan . 
 Võ Văn Kiệt , a Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers , delivered the Economic Report to the 6th National Congress . The political and economic reports stressed Đổi Mới ( Renovation ) , and Vietnam specialist Carlyle Thayer wrote that Võ Văn Kiệt may have been the foremost advocate of this concept . In his speech to the Congress , Võ Văn Kiệt said , " in the economic field , there will be renovation in economic policies and the management system . " Võ Văn Kiệt said that agriculture and not heavy industry would be most important during the 4th Five @-@ Year Plan . During the 4th Five @-@ Year Plan , Võ Văn Kiệt said , " [ t ] he ... main orientation for heavy industry in this stage is to support agriculture and light industry on a proper scale and at an appropriate technical level . " Võ Văn Kiệt stressed the role of exports and the production of grain , food , and consumer goods to revitalize the Vietnamese economy . The main objective of the 4th Five @-@ Year Plan was the production of grain and food products ; " a target of 22 – 30 million metric tons of grain in paddy " was set for 1990 . While several methods were to be used to reach this goal , material incentives and end @-@ product contracts would play a prominent role . 
 The increases in grain and food production would in turn , according to the Economic Report , increase the production of consumer goods . The report stated that these policies were " aimed at ensuring the daily needs of the people , and the regeneration of the labour force , as well as attracting a million of labourers to solve the problem of employment for the people , and , on that basis , create the source of accumulation and an important source of export . " According to the Economic Report , during the 4th Five @-@ Year Plan , " the level of exports must be elevated by approximately 70 per cent over that of the previous five @-@ year period " . The export of agricultural products , " farm processing products , light industrial , small industrial , handicraft goods and aquatic and maritime products " were emphasized in the Economic Report . To achieve these goals the Economic Report stated economic reforms to improve efficiency coupled with the importance of foreign investment and possible tourism revenues . 
 The 6th National Congress elected the 6th Central Committee . At the 4th , 5th and 6th National Congresses approximately 45 percent of full Central Committee members were retained , 18 percent of alternate members were promoted to full membership and 37 percent were newly elected to the Central Committee as either full or alternate members . The 6th Congress continued the trend of increasing the size of the Central Committee ; membership was 124 full and 49 alternate members . Most of the new officials in the Central Committee were from the second generation of Vietnamese revolutionaries who gained prominence during Vietnam 's struggle against French colonial rule in the 1940s and 1950s . The composition of the Central Committee changed at the 6th National Congress , with a notable increase of economic specialists , technocrats and provincial secretaries as members , but military representation in the Central Committee decreased . Only 8 percent of members of the 6th Central Committee were from the Vietnam People 's Army . The number of central @-@ level officials also decreased ; 74 percent of the members of the 2nd Central Committee were central @-@ level officials , while only 46 percent in the 6th Central Committee were from the centre . These changes reflected the party 's overriding concern about basic problems . 
 = = = 1st plenum of the 6th Central Committee = = = 
 On 18 December at the end of the 6th National Congress , the delegates elected the 6th Central Committee , which contained eight more members than the 5th Central Committee , while alternate membership was increased by 13 ; the total membership of the new Central Committee was 173 . Immediately after the 8th National Congress on 18 December , the 6th Central Committee convened its 1st plenum to elect the composition of the 6th Politburo , the 6th Secretariat , the Control Commission and other central @-@ level party organs . 
 The 1st plenum of the 6th Central Committee brought an end to the protracted generational succession which had begun at the 4th National Congress in 1976 . On 17 December , the Congress ' third day , the three top leaders — Trường Chinh , Lê Đức Thọ — and head of government Phạm Văn Đồng , announced that they would not seek membership of the 6th Politburo or the 6th Central Committee . However , these three were appointed to the Advisory Council to the Central Committee . This was not new ; at the 5th National Congress six senior members of the 5th Politburo retired . When asked by foreign journalists if the same pattern would continue , a party spokesman stated that it would continue at the 6th National Congress . Văn Tiến Dũng , the Minister of National Defense , retired from the politburo but retained his seat in the 6th Central Committee . The 1st plenum elected Nguyễn Văn Linh to succeed Trường Chinh as party General Secretary . 
 = Keller Fountain Park = 
 Keller Fountain Park is a city park in downtown Portland , Oregon . Originally named Forecourt Fountain or Auditorium Forecourt , the 0 @.@ 92 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 37 ha ) park opened in 1970 across Third Avenue from what was then Civic Auditorium . In 1978 , the park was renamed after Ira Keller , head of the Portland Development Commission ( PDC ) from 1958 – 1972 . Civic Auditorium was renamed as Keller Auditorium in 2000 , but is named in honor of Richard B. Keller . 
 The central feature of the park is the concrete water fountain . Keller Fountain is often noted as a memorable feature of the public landscape in downtown Portland , and in 1999 was awarded a medallion from the American Society of Landscape Architects . The fountain was designed by Angela Danadjieva using inspiration from waterfalls in the Columbia River Gorge located east of Portland . While the park is named Keller Fountain Park , the fountain itself is named Ira Keller Fountain . The fountain 's pools hold 75 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 280 @,@ 000 l ; 62 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of water , while the waterfalls pump 13 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 49 @,@ 000 l ; 11 @,@ 000 imp gal ) per minute over the cascade . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to being a park , the block was the location of a popular tavern run by Bud Clark , who was later to become a mayor of Portland . Clark purchased the tavern formerly known as " Dot Tavern " for $ 1 @,@ 600 , including acquisition of the lease for the building . Clark renamed it the <unk> and it was reopened in October 1962 . As the area was already part of the South Auditorium urban renewal area , Clark lost the lease when the PDC acquired the block in May 1967 . The firm of Skidmore , Owings and Merrill was then asked by PDC to draw plans for the park , which foresaw a fountain , a traffic turnaround , and underground parking for 150 cars . Protests were raised however , by Walter Gordon , the architectural adviser to the PDC , and in July 1968 the Lawrence Halprin design firm was commissioned in to design the park , partly due to Gordon 's advocacy . 
 Angela Danadjieva , a designer at Lawrence Halprin & Associates , was charged with the artistic conception . Danadjieva began her career in design with work on Constructivist set designs for the Bulgarian State Film agency . In the early 1960s she defected to Paris and studied at the École des Beaux Arts , and then emigrating to the United States towards the end of the decade . She took her inspiration from a book on waterfalls of the Columbia River Gorge , which was given to her by Ira Keller at the design studio . It was built by the Schrader Construction Company for $ 512 @,@ 000 . 
 The plaza was dedicated on June 23 , 1970 by Halprin who called for the people of Portland to come together , referring to the Portland State University protests , which had occurred only weeks previously , stating , " I hope this will help us live together as a community , both here and all over this planet Earth " . As the water began flowing , Halprin waded into the water , dressed in a jacket and tie . Jane Jacobs , author of The Death and Life of Great American Cities , mayor Terry Schrunk , and PDC chairman Ira Keller attended the fountain opening . In 2003 , an article by Randy Gragg in The Oregonian summarized the moment , saying : 
 [ T ] he fountain 's 1970 unveiling became a local legend . Held in the edgy days following a violent clash between Portland police and antiwar protesters , the dedication took on the mood of a Wild West drama as city officials gathered for speeches at the foot of the fountain and hundreds of youths assembled at the top . When the spigots released the fountain 's 13 @,@ 000 @-@ gallon @-@ a @-@ minute flow , however , any tensions quickly dissolved . While the officials politely applauded , the youths jumped in to the rallying cries of " Right on ! " " These very straight people have somehow grasped what cities can be all about , " Halprin said , turning from dignitaries to revelers to emphasize the democratic spirit underlying his design . " As you play in this garden , please try to remember that we are all in this together " . 
 In 1988 , the Portland Water Bureau expressed their surprise at the cost of running the fountain , which at the time was consuming $ 34 @,@ 000 in water and $ 13 @,@ 000 in electricity each year . Also in 1988 , a 26 @-@ year @-@ old Vancouver man was drowned when he attempted to swim through a small water pipe and got wedged under a concrete slab . He was taken to the Oregon Health & Science University and was listed in critical condition . According to Portland police , he had been drinking alcohol . 
 In 1993 , all city departments were requested by mayor Vera Katz to identify areas where budgets could be reduced , and the Portland Water Bureau suggested mothballing fountains , including the Keller Fountain . The Oregonian stated " administrator Mike Rosenberger said the fountains were not an essential service , but he conceded that he would probably be taken out and shot before the public allowed him to shut the water off " . 
 Vandalism from " <unk> " , putting dish detergent in the fountain , has been common , and the massive amounts of generated foam cause more than $ 1000 damage , due to the need to drain and clean the fountain . In the first " soaping " incident soap and green dye was placed in the fountain the night before it opened . Another incident happened in September 2002 . In 2007 , the Portland Water Bureau posted the name and photograph of a 19 @-@ year @-@ old who placed dish soap in the fountain and received a misdemeanor criminal mischief . The public shaming of the teen caused the incident to be discussed in many places , including KATU , The Oregonian , The Portland Mercury ( " This is what happens when you screw with the Water Bureau " ) , and The New York Times ( " Don 't mess with the Portland Water Bureau " ) . The fountain was <unk> at least four times in August 2007 alone . 
 From May to late August 1996 the park was closed for a $ 700 @,@ 000 refurbishment that included repairs and upgrades to filters and pumps , automated chlorination , restoration of cement , and updating of the lighting system . The fountain was also shut down in 1997 and 1998 for 10 months while the water bureau replaced a 1930s @-@ era pump . The piping was also relined with cross @-@ linked polyethylene in the spring of spring 2000 , a costly operation due to the original piping being cast into the concrete . 
 The Halprin Landscapes Conservancy was formed in 2001 and an article in The New York Times in 2008 stated that Keller was a Portland " ensemble considered to be one of Mr. Halprin 's masterpieces " . 
 = = Features = = 
 The park holds 75 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 280 @,@ 000 l ; 62 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of water , pumping 13 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 49 @,@ 000 l ; 11 @,@ 000 imp gal ) per minute through the waterfalls . While Portland Parks & Recreation maintains the park , in 1988 the Portland Water Bureau assumed responsibility for the fountain . 
 The park , which is known for its accessibility for allowing visitors to stand at the top of the waterfall , is designed according to construction code to prevent children or adults from falling down the waterfall ; the top of the falls are actually 36 inches ( 910 mm ) pockets of water , acting as a safety wall . City officials were worried about liability from falls and had wanted a fence put across the top . 
 Trees in the park include shore pines . For many years , the park has been home to a popular food cart serving <unk> . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 In 1987 , Tom Grant played a piano solo in the park for a KGW TV public service advertisement . In 1988 , a parade and march of The Music Man began at the fountain , walking to Pioneer Courthouse Square with actors John Davidson and Sally Spencer . 
 In September 2008 , the Time @-@ Based Art Festival included the " City Dance of Lawrence and Anna Halprin " , held at the fountain . The Oregonian called the performance " a major event and brilliant achievement " . The event included music by Morton Subotnick . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In June 1970 , Ada Louise Huxtable said it " may be one of the most important urban spaces since the Renaissance " , comparing it to the Piazza <unk> and the Trevi Fountain . An article for The New York Times by Ivan Doig discussed how Portland 's " livability " didn 't contribute to its " <unk> " , pointing out that the Forecourt Fountain and lunchtime was " one more moment of Portland 's showing some loveliness and then getting back to its self @-@ assured routine of life " . The Oregonian wrote that Halprin 's parks " changed the way American landscape architects thought about city parks , and it sparked a Portland tradition of great urban plazas and parks " . In 2003 , New York 's Thomas <unk> said , " I love the Lovejoy and Forecourt fountains " when asked what Portland open spaces stood out the most to him . 
 In 1999 , the park was awarded a centennial medallion from the American Society of Landscape Architects in a ceremony with Vera Katz on July 29 . 
 According to Steven Koch of the Halprin Landscapes Conservancy , the parks in Lawrence 's Portland Open Space Sequence represent local geography : Source Fountain is above the timberline , Lovejoy Fountain and Pettygrove Park are in the middle , and Keller Fountain represents " the foothills with the roaring falls " . A writer in the Oregonian said the fountain " is an abstraction of a mountain waterfall " . Local architect Marcy <unk> said " they were the first full realization of a theory about reflecting forces of nature but not mimicking natural forms . People came from all over the world to see them " . Bob Gerding , who turned the First Regiment Armory Annex into the LEED Platinum @-@ rated performing arts center , said that in 25 years , " I hope [ the Armory is ] loved by the city . I hope people love to see plays there or have a meeting there or whatever , that it becomes just a cool thing in the city , like the Keller Fountain " . 
 In 2006 , Laurie Olin said the Halprin 's Portland sequence was " a huge influence on even becoming a landscape architect . I had gone off to Europe and saw them published there . They had to do with representation and meaning but also had an exuberance . They are landmark pieces . When Ada Louis Huxtable wrote in The New York Times that Forecourt Fountain ( in front of Keller Auditorium ) was the greatest civic fountain since the Renaissance , I knew she was right . They were also transformative for the field of landscape architecture , not all for the best , because there were a lot of bad copies and wannabes " . 
 = Baltimore – Washington Parkway = 
 The Baltimore – Washington Parkway ( also referred to as the B – W Parkway ) is a highway in the U.S. state of Maryland , running southwest from Baltimore to Washington , D.C. The road begins at an interchange with U.S. Route 50 ( US 50 ) and Maryland Route 201 ( MD 201 ) near Cheverly in Prince George 's County at the D.C. border , and continues northeast as a parkway maintained by the National Park Service ( NPS ) to MD 175 near Fort Meade , serving many federal institutions . This portion of the parkway is dedicated to Gladys Noon Spellman , a representative of Maryland 's 5th congressional district , and has the unsigned Maryland Route 295 ( MD 295 ) designation . Commercial vehicles , including trucks , are prohibited within this stretch . This section is administered by the NPS ' Greenbelt Park unit . After leaving park service boundaries the highway is maintained by the state and signed with the MD 295 designation . This section of the parkway passes near Baltimore – Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport . Upon entering Baltimore , the Baltimore Department of Transportation takes over maintenance of the road and it continues north to an interchange with Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) . Here , the Baltimore – Washington Parkway ends and MD 295 continues north unsigned on Russell Street , which carries the route north into downtown Baltimore . In downtown Baltimore , MD 295 follows Paca Street northbound and Greene Street southbound before ending at US 40 . 
 Plans for a parkway linking Baltimore and Washington date back to Pierre Charles L 'Enfant 's original layout for Washington D.C. in the 18th century but did not fully develop until the 1920s . Major reasons surrounding the need for a parkway included high accident rates on adjacent US 1 and defense purposes before World War II . In the mid @-@ 1940s , plans for the design of the parkway were finalized and construction began in 1947 for the state @-@ maintained portion and in 1950 for the NPS @-@ maintained segment . The entire parkway opened to traffic in stages between 1950 and 1954 . Following the completion of the B – W Parkway , suburban growth took place in both Washington and Baltimore . In the 1960s and the 1970s , there were plans to give the segment of the parkway owned by the NPS to the state and make it a part of I @-@ 295 and possibly I @-@ 95 ; however , they never came through and the entire road is today designated as MD 295 , despite only being signed on the state portion . Between the 1980s and the 2000s , the NPS portion of the road was modernized . MD 295 is in the process of being widened from four to six lanes , with more widening and a new interchange along this segment planned for the future . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = NPS segment = = = 
 The parkway begins at a large hybrid cloverleaf just outside the Washington , D.C. boundary at Tuxedo , Maryland that is maintained by the Maryland State Highway Administration . Two routes converge at the southern and western ends of the interchange : US 50 , which heads west into Washington , D.C. to become New York Avenue ; and MD 201 , which begins at the D.C. line along the northernmost tip of the Kenilworth Avenue Freeway ( which continues into the District of Columbia as D.C. Route 295 ) . US 50 continues east from this interchange as the John Hanson Highway , a freeway , and MD 201 continues north on Kenilworth Avenue , a surface road that closely parallels the B – W Parkway to the east past the interchange . 
 The portion of the B – W Parkway between the southern terminus and MD 175 is maintained by the National Park Service ( NPS ) . It continues north as a six @-@ lane limited @-@ access parkway with the unsigned MD 295 designation , containing brown signs featuring the Clarendon typeface . Along this section of the parkway , commercial vehicles such as trucks are prohibited ; however , buses and limousines are allowed . [ 2 ] The parkway heads through wooded surroundings near industrial areas and passes over MD 201 , where there is a ramp from southbound MD 201 to the southbound B – W Parkway . It continues northeast , passing near Prince George 's Hospital Center , to interchanges with MD 202 ( Landover Road ) in Cheverly and with MD 450 ( Annapolis Road ) in Bladensburg and Landover Hills and the former Capital Plaza Mall . Bladensburg itself is a historical waterfront town that consists of houses dating back to the mid @-@ 18th century . 
 It continues north as a four @-@ lane road with a wide , tree @-@ filled median , and passes through woodland , skirting residential neighborhoods hidden by the trees . The road has a junction with MD 410 ( Riverdale Road ) west of New Carrollton . This route provides access to the towns of Riverdale Park , which features an 1801 mansion named Riversdale surrounded by suburban development , and Hyattsville , which has buildings dating back to the railroad days of the 1870s and the streetcar and automobile days of the early 20th century . North of here , the route runs near more residences before entering Greenbelt , a suburban garden community built as a model " green town " during the New Deal program in the 1930s , and Greenbelt Park , a park under the jurisdiction of the NPS that has the nearest public camping area to Washington , D.C. In the northeastern corner of the park , the Baltimore – Washington Parkway comes to an interchange with I @-@ 95 and I @-@ 495 ( the Capital Beltway ) . This interchange is the only place where the park service has used green signs compliant with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices ( MUTCD ) . 
 Just past the Capital Beltway , the route heads into the heart of the city of Greenbelt , having an interchange with MD 193 ( Greenbelt Road ) . The headquarters of the U.S. Park Police , which patrol this portion of the parkway , is located off this exit along MD 193 . MD 193 provides access to College Park , which is home to the College Park Airport , a 1909 airport where the Wright Brothers taught the U.S. Army how to fly an airplane , and the University of Maryland , College Park , a public educational institution established in 1862 . At the northern edge of the town , the route has employee @-@ only access to the Goddard Space Flight Center , the first NASA space flight center opened in 1958 that contributed majorly to many space missions ; from here , the route then enters the Beltsville Agricultural Research Center , the largest agricultural research center in the world owned by the United States Department of Agriculture . The parkway 's only interchange within the center is at Powder Mill Road , south of Capitol College . 
 Outside the Beltsville Agricultural Research Center , the parkway comes to MD 197 ( Laurel – Bowie Road ) south of Laurel . Near this exit of the parkway is the Montpelier Mansion , a Georgian mansion built by Major Thomas Snowden in 1783 . Past MD 197 , the road passes through the western edge of the Patuxent National Wildlife Research Refuge , a wildlife center established in 1936 by President Franklin D. Roosevelt , crossing the Patuxent River into Anne Arundel County . Here the parkway continues northeast through dense woodland and comes to the exit for MD 198 ( Fort Meade Road ) to the east of Laurel , which itself is a suburb that originated in the 1830s as a mill town that contains many historical sites such as the Laurel Railroad Station ( still used today by MARC Train ) , an 1844 Queen Anne house , and an 1840s <unk> house that is home to the Laurel Museum . 
 Continuing north , the parkway encounters MD 32 ( Savage Road ) near Fort Meade . MD 32 offers northbound travelers direct access into the fort and to the National Security Agency , while the next interchange , another employee @-@ only access road into Fort Meade , features only a southbound exit and northbound entrance . Fort Meade itself is a military installation opened in 1917 that trained 3 @.@ 5 million troops during World War II and is still a major fort . To the west of the parkway off MD 32 is the Savage Mill , which was an operating cotton mill from 1822 to 1947 and is currently an antique mall , and the Bollman Truss Railroad Bridge , an 1869 cast and wrought iron bridge along the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad ( now CSX ) line between Baltimore and Washington D.C. After this interchange , the road continues to a cloverleaf interchange with MD 175 ( Jessup Road ) , where NPS maintenance of the parkway comes to an end at the south end of the interchange . 
 = = = Maryland Route 295 = = = 
 Past the MD 175 junction , MD 295 signage begins and the road continues north as a four @-@ lane grade @-@ separated freeway maintained by the Maryland State Highway Administration , where the truck ban ends . This section of the road features standard MUTCD green signage . It heads through wooded areas and comes to MD <unk> ( Arundel Mills Boulevard ) , which provides access to the Arundel Mills shopping mall and the Maryland Live ! Casino at a diverging diamond . Past this interchange , MD 295 comes to a cloverleaf interchange with MD 100 . Continuing northeast , the route curves to the northwest of Baltimore – Washington International Airport ( the largest airport in Maryland ) , passing near an industrial park before reaching I @-@ 195 , the main access road to the airport . Within this interchange , before passing under I @-@ 195 , the road crosses over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor . I @-@ 195 westbound provides access from the Baltimore – Washington Parkway to the Thomas Viaduct , which carries the B & O railroad line over the Patapsco River , and Patapsco Valley State Park , a 14 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 57 km2 ) state park that preserves the valley of the Patapsco River for recreational purposes . 
 Still on a northeast track , the route widens to six lanes and intersects West Nursery Road near Linthicum , adjacent to the BWI Hotel District . Past West Nursery Road , the road meets I @-@ 695 ( the Baltimore Beltway ) at a full cloverleaf interchange . Turning north , the route passes under MD 168 ( Nursery Road ) before crossing the Patapsco River into Baltimore County . Upon crossing into Baltimore County , MD 295 reaches a partial interchange with I @-@ 895 ( Harbor Tunnel Thruway ) , with access from northbound MD 295 to northbound I @-@ 895 and from southbound I @-@ 895 to southbound MD 295 . Past I @-@ 895 , the road continues through wooded surrounding with residential developments behind the trees , before entering the city of Baltimore . 
 In Baltimore , MD 295 continues as a limited @-@ access freeway maintained by the Baltimore Department of Transportation , still surrounded by trees with urban residential and industrial neighborhoods nearby and interchanging with MD 648 ( Annapolis Road ) and Waterview Avenue just beyond the city line . Now running due north , the parkway soon reaches its northern terminus at I @-@ 95 , where MD 295 downgrades from a limited @-@ access freeway to a six @-@ lane divided city street called Russell Street . 
 MD 295 continues northeast on Russell Street , where it is unsigned for the remainder of the route , through a mix of industrial and commercial areas , heading to the northwest of Horseshoe Casino Baltimore . Farther north , the street passes to the west of M & T Bank Stadium , where the Baltimore Ravens of the National Football League play . Past here , the road features an interchange with Martin Luther King Jr . Boulevard , which becomes I @-@ 395 south of Russell Street . After this interchange , MD 295 runs west of Oriole Park at Camden Yards , home to Major League Baseball 's Baltimore Orioles , as a four @-@ lane divided street . Immediately after Camden Yards , MD 295 splits into a one @-@ way pair at the intersection with Washington Boulevard with northbound traffic following Paca Street and southbound traffic following Greene Street . Along the one @-@ way pair , the route intersects many major streets in downtown Baltimore , including Pratt Street , Lombard Street , Baltimore Street , Fayette Street , and Saratoga Street . 
 Greene Street passes the University of Maryland Medical Center between Lombard Street and Baltimore Street , the Baltimore VA Medical Center between Baltimore Street and Fayette Street , and Westminster Hall and Burying Ground at the corner of Fayette Street . Paca Street passes by the <unk> Building north of Pratt Street ; the Heiser , Rosenfeld , and Strauss Buildings north of Lombard Street ; the historic Paca Street Firehouse and Sanitary Laundry Company Building just north of the intersection with Fayette Street ; and Lexington Market at the intersection with Lexington Street . MD 295 officially ends at US 40 , which follows Mulberry Street eastbound and Franklin Street westbound , in downtown Baltimore . MD 129 continues north from the northern terminus of MD 295 , following Paca Street northbound and Pennsylvania Avenue southbound . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Plans for a parkway connecting Baltimore and Washington date back to the 1920s as a part of a system that was initially included in Pierre Charles L 'Enfant 's layout of Washington , D.C from the 18th century . In 1924 , Harry W. Nice , who would later become Governor of Maryland , called for the parkway to be constructed . 
 Early proposals made by the National Capital Park and Planning Commission involved a route that followed US 1 north to MD 198 , then east to Fort Meade , but lack of funding led to simpler plans to widen US 1 instead . During the 1930s , the New Deal programs promulgated by President Franklin Roosevelt led to a heightened awareness of the parkway proposals ; a 1937 report by the Maryland State Planning Commission increased awareness further . Increasing accident levels on US 1 ( which was called one of the deadliest roads in the world at the time ) along with awareness of the need to mobilize national defense before World War II provided additional motivation for construction of the parkway . 
 In 1942 , the Bureau of Public Roads began the process to start the construction design for the parkway . Federal and state officials commissioned the firm J.E. Greiner to create designs for the parkway , which included a large Y @-@ junction at the southern terminus to connect with New York Avenue and the proposed Anacostia Freeway . Meanwhile , the northern end included a similar wye , with one end running to US 40 ( Franklin Street ) and the other end crossing the Inner Harbor , but this was modified in 1945 to the current configuration . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Construction on the northern portion of the highway began in 1947 by the state of Maryland , while construction on the NPS segment started in 1950 . The land for the portion that was to be built by the NPS was acquired at the same time as Greenbelt Park , a park that is under the jurisdiction of the NPS . The state @-@ maintained portion was completed in December 1950 between MD 46 ( now I @-@ 195 ) and Hollins Ferry Road at the Baltimore city line and in 1952 from MD 175 to MD 46 . The portion of the parkway within the city of Baltimore opened in 1951 while the NPS @-@ maintained portion opened in October 1954 . The portion of the road not maintained by the NPS was known as the Baltimore – Washington Expressway while the section maintained by the NPS was called the Baltimore – Washington Parkway . 
 = = = Post @-@ construction = = = 
 Around the time the highway was completed , the federal government began to promote suburbanization by moving several federal agencies out of the capital in order to protect them against nuclear attack . As a result , suburban neighborhoods began to appear in Laurel , Severn , Bowie , and Greenbelt . In addition , the road became a prime commuting route into both Washington and Baltimore , leading to suburban growth that would eventually cause the two distinct cities to merge into one large metropolitan area . 
 In 1963 , the State Roads Commission , the National Park Service , and the Bureau of Public Roads ( the predecessor of the Federal Highway Administration ) ( FHWA ) created tentative plans to transfer the NPS segment of the parkway to the state of Maryland , who would then rebuild it to modern freeway standards , with trucks and buses permitted throughout . The plan collapsed due to the state 's reluctance to spend the money necessary to reconstruct the parkway , which was one of the most dangerous roads in the NPS road system . 
 In 1968 , the State Roads Commission proposed to the FHWA that the parkway be included in the Interstate Highway System and designated Interstate 295 ( in anticipation of the completion of the parallel @-@ running I @-@ 95 that occurred in 1971 ) . The designation was granted in 1969 , but later withdrawn from all except the current portion signed as I @-@ 295 due to lack of funds available to modernize the route . As a result of the withdrawal of the Interstate designation , the parkway remained an unnumbered road south of I @-@ 695 while the portion north of there became a part of MD 3 by 1975 . Despite this setback , however , plans still existed to widen the parkway to six or even eight lanes . Even though the 1970 Federal Highway Act provided $ 65 million ( equivalent to $ 396 million in 2016 ) for this purpose , funding was insufficient to execute these projects . The cancellation of the North Central Freeway and the Northeast Freeway ( I @-@ 95 's routing between New York Avenue and the College Park Interchange ) offered a chance for modernization , as plans existed to route I @-@ 95 via the B – W Parkway ; however , this did not happen and trucks were banned from the parkway again . 
 By 1973 , MD 3 was designated along the Baltimore – Washington Expressway between I @-@ 695 and Monroe Street in Baltimore . MD 295 was designated along the state @-@ maintained portions of the expressway , replacing the MD 3 designation between I @-@ 695 and Monroe Street , by 1981 . By the 1990s , the portion of the road known as the Baltimore – Washington Expressway became known as the Baltimore – Washington Parkway . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , the National Park Service , along with the Federal Highway Administration , began a reconstruction of the NPS segment to modernize the road , including the improvement of several interchanges . Around 2002 , the federal government completed the project with the reconstruction of the MD 197 interchange . 
 In 2004 , Maryland Governor Robert L. Ehrlich announced plans to widen portions of MD 295 near Baltimore – Washington International Airport . The MDSHA widened the parkway from two lanes on each side to three lanes on each side from I @-@ 195 north to I @-@ 695 . Construction on the $ 12 @.@ 4 million project , which began in late 2008 , was completed in late 2011 . The widening made use of the median as the extra travel lanes were to be added inside of each carriageway . 
 The Maryland State Highway Administration closed the southbound ramps of the interchange between the Baltimore – Washington Parkway and Arundel Mills Boulevard starting Monday , May 7 , 2012 . The closure was for the expedited replacement of the existing dumbbell interchange with Maryland 's first diverging diamond interchange . The new interchange was part of $ 5 million in road upgrades being funded by the <unk> Company ahead of the June 6 opening of the company 's Maryland Live ! development , which features a casino , near Arundel Mills . The new interchange opened on June 11 . 
 = = = Dedications = = = 
 In 1983 , the NPS @-@ maintained section of the Baltimore – Washington Parkway was named in honor of Gladys Noon Spellman , a congresswoman who represented Maryland 's 5th congressional district from January 3 , 1975 , to January 3 , 1981 , after a bill introduced into the United States Senate by Senator Paul Sarbanes was signed into law . Gladys Noon Spellman was an educator in Prince George 's County and chairperson of the National Mental Health Study Center before becoming the first woman to serve on the county ’ s Board of Commissioners . She suffered a heart attack that ended her congressional career on October 13 , 1980 , leaving her in a coma until her death on June 19 , 1988 . On May 9 , 1991 , the Baltimore – Washington Parkway was listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = = Incidents = = = 
 In 1989 , an overpass being built at MD 198 over the B – W Parkway just east of Laurel collapsed during rush hour , injuring fourteen motorists and construction workers . The incident was blamed on faulty scaffolding used to support the uncompleted span . On July 9 , 2005 , a sinkhole opened beneath the parkway at a construction site , leading to the complete closure of the northbound roadway . The sinkhole was filled with concrete to shore up the roadbed and prevent further collapse ; the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers attempted to expedite repairs , but the route remained closed until the next day . On August 24 , 2007 , both directions of the parkway were closed when chunks of concrete fell from the overpass at MD 193 ( Greenbelt Road ) onto the northbound lanes . 
 = = = Renovation = = = 
 MD 295 is planned to be widened to six lanes between MD 100 and I @-@ 195 with a new interchange is planned to be constructed at Hanover Road . The type of interchange has not yet been decided upon with choices including a diamond interchange , a single @-@ point urban interchange , and a modified cloverleaf interchange . Planning for the $ 24 million project concluded in 2012 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Arthur Sullivan = 
 Sir Arthur Seymour Sullivan MVO ( 13 May 1842 – 22 November 1900 ) was an English composer . He is best known for his series of 14 operatic collaborations with the dramatist W. S. Gilbert , including H.M.S. Pinafore , The Pirates of Penzance and The Mikado . His works comprise 23 operas , 13 major orchestral works , eight choral works and oratorios , two ballets , incidental music to several plays , and numerous hymns and other church pieces , songs , and piano and chamber pieces . The best known of his hymns and songs include " Onward Christian Soldiers " and " The Lost Chord " . 
 The son of a military bandmaster , Sullivan composed his first anthem at age eight . He was selected as soloist in the boys ' choir of the Chapel Royal . In 1856 , the Royal Academy of Music awarded the first Mendelssohn Scholarship to the 14 @-@ year @-@ old Sullivan , allowing him to study first at the Academy and then in Germany , at the Leipzig Conservatoire . His graduation piece was a suite of incidental music to Shakespeare 's The Tempest . When it was performed in London in 1862 , it was an immediate sensation . Sullivan began his composing career with a series of ambitious works , interspersed with hymns , parlour ballads and other light pieces . Among his best received early pieces were a ballet , L 'Île Enchantée ( 1864 ) , and his Irish Symphony , Cello Concerto and Overture in C ( In Memoriam ) ( all in 1866 ) . From 1861 to 1872 , he supplemented his income by working as a church organist and music teacher , and writing hymns and songs . 
 In 1866 , Sullivan composed a one @-@ act comic opera , Cox and Box , which is still widely performed . His most successful orchestral work , the Overture di Ballo , premiered in 1870 . Sullivan 's talent and native charm earned him many friends in musical and social circles , including Queen Victoria 's son Alfred , Duke of Edinburgh . In 1871 , Sullivan wrote his first opera with W. S. Gilbert , Thespis . Sullivan then produced his Festival Te Deum ( 1872 ) , an oratorio , The Light of the World ( 1873 ) , and incidental music for West End productions of several Shakespeare plays . He also had conducting and academic appointments . In 1875 , producer Richard D 'Oyly Carte reunited Gilbert and Sullivan to create a one @-@ act piece , Trial by Jury , which was a surprise hit . Their 1878 opera H.M.S. Pinafore became an international sensation , as did The Pirates of Penzance ( 1879 ) and Patience ( 1881 ) . Sullivan never married but had a long love affair with an American socialite , Fanny Ronalds . After the death of his brother Fred in 1877 , Sullivan supported Fred 's large family financially for the rest of his life , effectively adopting his nephew Bertie . 
 Carte used his profits from the Gilbert and Sullivan partnership to build the Savoy Theatre in 1881 , and their joint works then became known as the Savoy operas . Later hits in the series were Iolanthe ( 1882 ) , The Mikado ( 1885 ) , The Yeomen of the Guard ( 1888 ) and The Gondoliers ( 1889 ) . Sullivan was knighted for his contributions to music in 1883 . His infrequent serious pieces during the 1880s included two cantatas , The Martyr of Antioch ( 1880 ) and The Golden Legend ( 1886 ) , his most popular choral work . Sullivan 's only serious opera , Ivanhoe , though initially successful in 1891 , was little @-@ heard after that . Gilbert broke from Sullivan and Carte in 1890 , quarrelling over expenses at the Savoy . They reunited in the 1890s for two more operas , but those did not achieve the popularity of their earlier works . Sullivan continued to compose comic operas with other librettists and wrote a number of other major and minor works throughout the decade . He died at the age of 58 , regarded as Britain 's foremost composer . His comic opera style served as a model for the generations of musical theatre composers that followed , and his music is still frequently performed , recorded and pastiched . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Sullivan was born in Lambeth , London . His parents were Thomas Sullivan ( 1805 – 1866 ) , a military bandmaster , clarinettist and music teacher born in Ireland and raised in Chelsea , London , and Mary Clementina ( née Coghlan , 1811 – 1882 ) , English born , of Irish and Italian descent . Thomas Sullivan was based from 1845 to 1857 at the Royal Military College , Sandhurst , where he was the bandmaster and taught music privately to supplement his income . Young Sullivan became proficient with many of the instruments in the band and had composed an anthem , " By the waters of Babylon " , by the age of eight . He later recalled : 
 I was intensely interested in all that the band did , and learned to play every wind instrument , with which I formed not merely a passing acquaintance , but a real , life @-@ long , intimate friendship . I gradually learned the peculiarities of each ... what it could do and what it was unable to do . I learned in the best possible way how to write for an orchestra . 
 While recognising the boy 's obvious musical talent , his father knew the insecurity of a musical career and discouraged him from pursuing it . While studying at a private school in Bayswater , Sullivan , then aged 11 , persuaded his parents and the headmaster to allow him to apply for membership in the choir of the Chapel Royal . Despite concerns that Sullivan at nearly 12 years of age was too old to give much service as a treble before his voice broke , he was accepted and soon became a soloist and , by 1856 , was promoted to " first boy " . Even at this age , Sullivan 's health was delicate , and he was easily fatigued . 
 Sullivan flourished under the training of the Reverend Thomas Helmore , master of the choristers , and began to compose anthems and songs . Helmore encouraged the young Sullivan 's composing talent and arranged for one of his pieces , " O Israel " , to be published in 1855 , Sullivan 's first published work . Helmore also enlisted Sullivan 's assistance in creating harmonisations for a volume of The Hymnal Noted and arranged for Sullivan 's compositions to be performed ; one of the boy 's anthems was given at the Chapel Royal in St James 's Palace under the direction of Sir George Smart . 
 = = = Mendelssohn scholar = = = 
 In 1856 , the Royal Academy of Music awarded the first Mendelssohn Scholarship to the 14 @-@ year @-@ old Sullivan , granting him a year 's training at the academy . His principal teacher there was John Goss , whose own teacher , Thomas Attwood , had been a pupil of Mozart . He studied piano with the head of the academy , William Sterndale Bennett , and with Arthur O 'Leary . During this year at the Royal Academy , Sullivan continued to sing solos with the Chapel Royal , which provided a small amount of spending money . 
 Sullivan 's scholarship was extended to a second year , and in 1858 in what the biographer Arthur Jacobs calls an " extraordinary gesture of confidence " the scholarship committee extended his grant for a third year so that he could study in Germany , at the Leipzig Conservatoire . While there , Sullivan studied composition with Julius Rietz and Carl Reinecke , counterpoint with Moritz Hauptmann and Ernst Richter and the piano with Louis Plaidy and Ignaz Moscheles . He was trained in Mendelssohn 's ideas and techniques but was also exposed to a variety of musical styles , including Schubert , Verdi , Bach , and Wagner . Visiting a synagogue , he was so struck by some of the cadences and progressions of the music that thirty years later he could recall them for use in his serious opera , Ivanhoe . 
 Though the scholarship was extended to permit Sullivan to spend one year in Leipzig , he stayed for three years . There , he became friendly with the impresario Carl Rosa and the violinist Joseph Joachim . For his last year at Leipzig , his father scraped together the money for living expenses , and the conservatoire assisted by waiving its fees . Sullivan credited his Leipzig period with tremendous musical growth . His graduation piece , completed in 1861 , was a set of incidental music to Shakespeare 's The Tempest . Revised and expanded , it was performed at the Crystal Palace in 1862 , a year after his return to London , and was an immediate sensation . He began building a reputation as England 's most promising young composer . 
 = = = Rising composer = = = 
 Sullivan embarked on his composing career with a series of ambitious works , interspersed with hymns , parlour songs and other light pieces in a more commercial vein . His compositions were not enough to support him financially , and from 1861 to 1872 he supplemented his income by working as a church organist , which he enjoyed , and as a music teacher , sometimes at the Crystal Palace School , which he hated and gave up as soon as he could . Sullivan had an early chance to compose several pieces for royalty in connection with the wedding of the Prince of Wales in 1863 . 
 Sullivan 's association with works for voice and orchestra began with The Masque at Kenilworth ( Birmingham Festival , 1864 ) . During a spell as organist at Covent Garden , he composed his first ballet , L 'Île Enchantée ( 1864 ) . In 1866 , he premiered his Irish Symphony and Cello Concerto , his only works in each such genre . In the same year , his Overture in C ( In Memoriam ) , commemorating the recent death of his father , was a commission from the Norwich Festival . During his lifetime , it achieved considerable popularity . In 1867 , his overture Marmion was premiered by the Philharmonic Society . The Times called it " another step in advance on the part of the only composer of any remarkable promise that just at present we can boast . " In the autumn of 1867 , Sullivan travelled with George Grove to Vienna in search of neglected manuscript scores by Schubert . They found and copied several and were particularly excited about their final discovery , the score to Rosamunde . 
 Sullivan 's first attempt at opera , The Sapphire Necklace ( 1863 – 64 ) to a libretto by Henry F. Chorley , was not produced and is now lost , except for the overture and two songs from the work , which were separately published . His first surviving opera , Cox and Box ( 1866 ) , was written for a private performance . It then received charity performances in London and Manchester , and was later produced at the Gallery of Illustration , where it ran for an extraordinary 264 performances . W. S. Gilbert , writing in Fun magazine , pronounced the score superior to F. C. Burnand 's libretto . Sullivan and Burnand were soon commissioned by Thomas German Reed for a two @-@ act opera , The Contrabandista ( 1867 ; revised and expanded as The Chieftain in 1894 ) , but it did not do as well . Sullivan wrote a group of seven part songs in 1868 , the best @-@ known of which is " The Long Day Closes " . Sullivan 's last major work of the 1860s was a short oratorio , The Prodigal Son , premiered in Worcester Cathedral as part of the 1869 Three Choirs Festival to much praise . 
 = = = 1870s ; first collaborations with Gilbert = = = 
 Sullivan 's most enduring orchestral work , the Overture di Ballo , was composed for the Birmingham Festival in 1870 . Also in 1870 , Sullivan met Gilbert . 1871 was a busy year for Sullivan . He published his only song cycle , The Window ; or , The Songs of the Wrens , to words by Tennyson , and he wrote the first of a series of suites of incidental music for West End productions of Shakespeare plays . Still in 1871 , Sullivan composed a dramatic cantata , On Shore and Sea , for the opening of the London International Exhibition , and the hymn Onward , Christian Soldiers , with words by Sabine Baring @-@ Gould . The Salvation Army adopted the latter as its favoured processional , and it became Sullivan 's most enduring hymn . 
 At the end of 1871 , the impresario John Hollingshead commissioned Sullivan to work with W. S. Gilbert to create the burlesque @-@ style comic opera Thespis for the Gaiety Theatre . Played as a Christmas entertainment , it ran through to Easter 1872 , a good run for such a piece . After Thespis , Gilbert and Sullivan went their separate ways until they collaborated on three parlour ballads in late 1874 and early 1875 . 
 Sullivan 's large @-@ scale works of the early 1870s were the Festival Te Deum ( Crystal Palace , 1872 ) ; and the oratorio , The Light of the World ( Birmingham Festival , 1873 ) . He provided suites of incidental music for productions of The Merry Wives of Windsor at the Gaiety in 1874 and Henry VIII at the Theatre Royal , Manchester in 1877 . He continued to compose hymns throughout the decade . In 1873 , Sullivan contributed songs to Burnand 's Christmas " drawing room extravaganza " , The Miller and His Man . 
 In 1875 , the manager of the Royalty Theatre , Richard D 'Oyly Carte , needed a short piece to fill out a bill with Offenbach 's La Périchole . Carte had conducted Sullivan 's Cox and Box . Remembering that Gilbert had suggested a libretto to him , Carte reunited Gilbert and Sullivan , and the result was the one @-@ act comic opera Trial by Jury . Trial , starring Sullivan 's brother Fred as the Learned Judge , became a surprise hit , earning glowing praise from the critics and playing for 300 performances over its first few seasons . The Daily Telegraph commented that the piece illustrated the composer 's " great capacity for dramatic writing of the lighter class " , and other reviews emphasised the felicitous combination of Gilbert 's words and Sullivan 's music . One wrote , " it seems , as in the great Wagnerian operas , as though poem and music had proceeded simultaneously from one and the same brain . " Soon after the opening of Trial , Sullivan wrote The Zoo , another one @-@ act comic opera , with a libretto by B. C. Stephenson . But the latter work had only a few short runs , and for the next 15 years Sullivan 's sole operatic collaborator was Gilbert ; the two created an additional 12 operas together . 
 Sullivan also turned out more than 80 popular songs and parlour ballads , most of them written before the end of the 1870s . His first popular song was " Orpheus with his Lute " ( 1866 ) , and a well @-@ received part song was " Oh ! hush thee , my <unk> " ( 1867 ) . The best known of his songs is " The Lost Chord " ( 1877 , lyrics by Adelaide Anne Procter ) , written in sorrow at the death of his brother Frederic . The sheet music for his best received songs sold in large numbers and were an important part of his income ; many of them were adapted as dance pieces . 
 In this decade , Sullivan 's conducting appointments included the Glasgow Choral Union concerts ( 1875 – 77 ) and the Royal Aquarium , London ( 1876 ) . In addition to his appointment as Professor of Composition at the Royal Academy of Music , of which he was a Fellow , he was appointed as the first Principal of the National Training School for Music in 1876 . He accepted the latter post reluctantly , fearing that discharging the duties thoroughly would leave too little time for composing . In this he was correct , as his successor Hubert Parry also discovered . Sullivan was not effective in the post , and he resigned in 1881 . 
 Sullivan 's next collaboration with Gilbert , The Sorcerer ( 1877 ) , ran for 178 performances , a success by the standards of the day , but H.M.S. Pinafore ( 1878 ) , which followed it , turned Gilbert and Sullivan into an international phenomenon . The bright and cheerful music of Pinafore was composed during a time when Sullivan suffered from excruciating pain from a kidney stone . Pinafore ran for 571 performances in London , the then @-@ second @-@ longest theatrical run in history , and more than 150 unauthorised productions were quickly mounted in America alone . Among other favourable reviews , The Times noted that the opera was an early attempt at the establishment of a " national musical stage " ... free from risqué French " improprieties " and without the " aid " of Italian and German musical models . The Times and several of the other papers agreed , however , that while the piece was entertaining , Sullivan was capable of higher art , and frivolous light opera would hold him back . This criticism would follow Sullivan throughout his career . 
 In 1879 , Sullivan suggested to a reporter from The New York Times the secret of his success with Gilbert : " His ideas are as suggestive for music as they are quaint and laughable . His numbers ... always give me musical ideas . " Pinafore was followed by The Pirates of Penzance in 1879 , another international success , which opened in New York and then ran in London for 363 performances . 
 = = = Early 1880s = = = 
 In 1880 , Sullivan was appointed director of the triennial Leeds Music Festival . For his first festival he was commissioned to write a sacred choral work . He chose Henry Hart Milman 's 1822 dramatic poem based on the life and death of Saint Margaret the Virgin for its basis . Gilbert adapted the libretto for Sullivan . The Martyr of Antioch premiered in October 1880 . Sullivan was not a showy conductor , and some thought him dull and old fashioned on the podium , but his composition had an enthusiastic reception and was frequently revived . A grateful Sullivan presented his collaborator with an engraved silver cup inscribed " W.S. Gilbert from his friend Arthur Sullivan . " 
 After the run of The Pirates of Penzance , Carte opened the next Gilbert and Sullivan piece , Patience , in April 1881 at London 's Opera Comique , where their past three operas had played . In October , Patience transferred to the new , larger , state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art Savoy Theatre , built with the profits of the previous Gilbert and Sullivan works . The rest of the partnership 's collaborations were produced at the Savoy , as a result of which they are widely known as the " Savoy Operas " . Iolanthe ( 1882 ) , Gilbert and Sullivan 's fourth hit in a row , was the first of the operas to premiere at the new theatre . Sullivan , despite the financial security of writing for the Savoy , increasingly viewed his work with Gilbert as unimportant , beneath his skills , and also repetitious . After Iolanthe , Sullivan had not intended to write a new work with Gilbert , but he suffered a serious financial loss when his broker went bankrupt in November 1882 . Therefore , he concluded that his financial needs required him to continue writing Savoy operas . In February 1883 , he and Gilbert signed a five @-@ year agreement with Carte , requiring them to produce a new comic opera on six months ' notice . 
 On 22 May 1883 , Sullivan was knighted by Queen Victoria for his " services ... rendered to the promotion of the art of music " in Britain . The musical establishment , and many critics , believed that this should put an end to his career as a composer of comic opera – that a musical knight should not stoop below oratorio or grand opera . Having just signed the five @-@ year agreement , Sullivan suddenly felt trapped . In mid @-@ December , he bade farewell to his sister @-@ in @-@ law Charlotte , Fred 's widow , who emigrated with her young family to America . Sullivan 's oldest nephew , Herbert , stayed behind in England as his uncle 's ward . The next opera , Princess Ida ( 1884 , the duo 's only three @-@ act , blank verse work ) , had a noticeably shorter run than its four predecessors , although Sullivan 's score was praised . With box office receipts lagging in March 1884 , Carte gave the six months ' notice , under the partnership contract , requiring a new opera . Sullivan 's close friend , the composer Frederic Clay , had suffered a serious stroke in early December 1883 that effectively ended his career at the age of 45 . Sullivan , reflecting on this , on his own longstanding kidney problems , and on his desire to devote himself to more serious music , replied to Carte , " [ I ] t is impossible for me to do another piece of the character of those already written by Gilbert and myself . " 
 Gilbert had already started work on a new opera involving a plot in which people fell in love against their wills after taking a magic lozenge . The composer wrote , on 1 April 1884 that he had " come to the end of my tether " with the operas : " I have been continually keeping down the music in order that not one [ syllable ] should be lost . ... I should like to set a story of human interest & probability where the humorous words would come in a humorous ( not serious ) situation , & where , if the situation were a tender or dramatic one the words would be of similar character . " In a lengthy exchange of correspondence , Sullivan pronounced Gilbert 's plot sketch ( particularly the " lozenge " element ) unacceptably mechanical , and too similar in both its grotesque " elements of <unk> " and in actual plot to their earlier work , especially The Sorcerer , and repeatedly requested that Gilbert find a new subject . The impasse was finally resolved on 8 May when Gilbert proposed a plot that did not depend on any supernatural device . The result was Gilbert and Sullivan 's most successful work , The Mikado ( 1885 ) . The piece ran for 672 performances , which was the second @-@ longest run for any work of musical theatre , and one of the longest runs of any theatre piece , up to that time . 
 = = = Later 1880s = = = 
 In 1886 , Sullivan composed his second and last large @-@ scale choral work of the decade . It was a cantata for the Leeds Festival , The Golden Legend , based on Longfellow 's poem of the same name . Apart from the comic operas , this proved to be Sullivan 's best received full @-@ length work . It was given hundreds of performances during his lifetime , and at one point he declared a moratorium on its presentation , fearing that it would become over @-@ exposed . Only Handel 's Messiah was performed more often in Britain in the 1880s and 90s . It remained in the repertory until about the 1920s , but since then it has been seldom performed , although it received its first professional recording in 2001 . The musical scholar and conductor David Russell Hulme writes that the work influenced Elgar and Walton . 
 Ruddigore followed The Mikado at the Savoy in 1887 . It was profitable , but its nine @-@ month run was disappointing compared with most of the earlier Savoy operas . For their next piece , Gilbert submitted another version of the magic lozenge plot ; Sullivan immediately rejected it . Gilbert finally proposed a comparatively serious opera , to which Sullivan agreed . Although it was not a grand opera , The Yeomen of the Guard ( 1888 ) provided him with the opportunity to compose his most ambitious stage work to date . As early as 1883 , Sullivan had been under pressure from the musical establishment to write a grand opera . In 1885 , he told an interviewer , " " The opera of the future is a compromise [ among the French , German and Italian schools ] – a sort of eclectic school , a selection of the merits of each one . I myself will make an attempt to produce a grand opera of this new school . ... Yes , it will be an historical work , and it is the dream of my life . " After The Yeomen of the Guard opened , Sullivan turned once again to Shakespeare , composing incidental music for Henry Irving 's production of Macbeth ( 1888 ) . 
 Sullivan wished to produce further serious works with Gilbert . He had collaborated with no other librettist since 1875 . But Gilbert felt that the reaction to The Yeomen of the Guard had " not been so convincing as to warrant us in assuming that the public want something more earnest still . " He proposed instead that Sullivan should go ahead with his plan to write a grand opera , but should continue also to compose comic works for the Savoy . Sullivan was not immediately persuaded . He replied , " I have lost the liking for writing comic opera , and entertain very grave doubts as to my power of doing it . " Nevertheless , Sullivan soon commissioned a grand opera libretto from Julian Sturgis ( who was recommended by Gilbert ) , while suggesting to Gilbert that he revive an old idea for an opera set in colourful Venice . The comic opera was completed first : The Gondoliers ( 1889 ) was a piece described by Gervase Hughes as a pinnacle of Sullivan 's achievement . It was the last great Gilbert and Sullivan success . 
 = = = 1890s = = = 
 The relationship between Gilbert and Sullivan suffered its most serious breach in April 1890 , during the run of The Gondoliers , when Gilbert objected to Carte 's financial accounts for the production , including a charge to the partnership for the cost of new carpeting for the Savoy Theatre lobby . Gilbert believed that this was a maintenance expense that should be charged to Carte alone . Carte was building a new theatre to present Sullivan 's forthcoming grand opera , and Sullivan sided with Carte , going so far as to testify erroneously as to certain old debts . Gilbert took legal action against Carte and Sullivan and vowed to write no more for the Savoy , and so the partnership came to an acrimonious end . Sullivan wrote to Gilbert in September 1890 that he was " physically and mentally ill over this wretched business . I have not yet got over the shock of seeing our names coupled ... in hostile antagonism over a few miserable pounds " . 
 Sullivan 's only grand opera , Ivanhoe , based on Walter Scott 's novel , opened at Carte 's new Royal English Opera House on 31 January 1891 . Sullivan completed the score too late to meet Carte 's planned production date , and costs mounted ; Sullivan was required to pay Carte a contractual penalty of £ 3 @,@ 000 for his delay . The production lasted for 155 consecutive performances , an unprecedented run for a serious opera , and earned good notices for its music . Afterwards , Carte was unable to fill the new opera house with other opera productions , however , and Ivanhoe was blamed for the failure of the opera house . The opera passed into obscurity after a touring revival in 1894 – 95 . The episode was , as the critic Herman Klein observed , " the strangest <unk> of success and failure ever chronicled in the history of British lyric enterprise ! " Sullivan did not seriously consider writing grand opera again . Later in 1891 , Sullivan composed music for Tennyson 's The Foresters , which ran well at Daly 's Theatre in New York in 1892 , but failed in London the following year . 
 Sullivan returned to comic opera , but because of the fracture with Gilbert , he and Carte sought other collaborators . Sullivan 's next piece was Haddon Hall ( 1892 ) , with a libretto by Sydney Grundy based loosely on the historical elopement of Dorothy Vernon with John Manners . Although still comic , the tone and style of the work was considerably more serious and romantic than most of the operas with Gilbert . It enjoyed a modest popularity , running for 204 performances , and earned critical praise . In 1895 , Sullivan once more provided incidental music for the Lyceum , this time for J. Comyns Carr 's King Arthur . 
 The partnership with Gilbert had been so profitable that Carte and his wife sought to reunite the author and composer , eventually succeeding with the help of Tom Chappell , their music publisher . Their next opera , Utopia Limited ( 1893 ) , ran for 245 performances , barely covering the expenses of the lavish production , although it was the longest run at the Savoy in the 1890s . Sullivan came to disapprove of the leading lady , Nancy McIntosh , and refused to write another piece featuring her , while Gilbert insisted that she must appear in his next opera . Instead , Sullivan teamed up again with his old partner , F. C. Burnand . The Chieftain ( 1894 ) , a heavily @-@ revised version of their earlier two @-@ act opera , The Contrabandista , flopped . Gilbert and Sullivan reunited one more time , after McIntosh announced her retirement from the stage , for The Grand Duke ( 1896 ) . This also failed , and Sullivan never worked with Gilbert again , although their operas continued to be revived with success at the Savoy . 
 In May 1897 , Sullivan 's full @-@ length ballet , Victoria and Merrie England , opened at the Alhambra Theatre to celebrate the Queen 's Diamond Jubilee . The work 's seven scenes celebrate English history and culture , with the Victorian period as the grand finale . Its six @-@ month run was considered a great achievement . The Beauty Stone ( 1898 ) , with a libretto by Arthur Wing Pinero and J. Comyns Carr was based on mediaeval morality plays . The collaboration did not go particularly well : Sullivan wrote that Pinero and Comyns Carr were " gifted and brilliant men , with no experience in writing for music " , and , when he asked for alterations to improve the structure , they refused . Sullivan 's score , moreover , was too serious for the Savoy audiences ' tastes . The opera was a critical failure and did not attract a following , running for only seven weeks . 
 In 1899 , to benefit " the wives and children of soldiers and sailors " on active service in the Boer War , Sullivan composed the music of a jingoistic song , " The Absent @-@ Minded Beggar " , to a text by Rudyard Kipling , which became an instant sensation and raised an unprecedented £ 250 @,@ 000 from performances and the sale of sheet music and related merchandise . In The Rose of Persia ( 1899 ) , Sullivan returned to his comic roots , writing to a libretto by Basil Hood that combined an exotic Arabian Nights setting with plot elements of The Mikado . Sullivan 's tuneful score was well received , and the opera proved to be his most successful full @-@ length collaboration apart from those with Gilbert . Another opera with Hood , The Emerald Isle , quickly went into preparation , but Sullivan died before it could be completed . 
 = = = Death , honours and legacy = = = 
 Having suffered from long @-@ standing recurrent kidney disease that made it necessary , from the 1880s , for him to conduct sitting down , Sullivan died of heart failure , following an attack of bronchitis , at his flat in London on 22 November 1900 . His unfinished opera , The Emerald Isle , was completed by Edward German and produced in 1901 . His Te Deum Laudamus , written to commemorate the end of the Boer War , was performed posthumously . 
 A monument in the composer 's memory featuring a weeping Muse was erected in the Victoria Embankment Gardens in London and is inscribed with Gilbert 's words from The Yeomen of the Guard : " Is life a boon ? If so , it must befall that Death , <unk> 'er he call , must call too soon " . Sullivan wished to be buried in Brompton Cemetery with his parents and brother , but by order of the Queen he was buried in St. Paul 's Cathedral . In addition to his knighthood , honours awarded to Sullivan in his lifetime included Doctor in Music , honoris causa , by the universities of Cambridge ( 1876 ) and Oxford ( 1879 ) ; Chevalier , Légion d 'honneur , France ( 1878 ) ; The Order of the <unk> conferred by the Sultan of Turkey ( 1888 ) ; and appointment as a Member of the Fourth Class of the Royal Victorian Order ( MVO ) in 1897 . 
 In all , Sullivan 's artistic output included 23 operas , 13 major orchestral works , eight choral works and oratorios , two ballets , one song cycle , incidental music to several plays , numerous hymns and other church pieces , and a large body of songs , parlour ballads , part songs , carols , and piano and chamber pieces . Sullivan 's operas have often been adapted , first in the 19th century as dance pieces and in foreign adaptations of the operas themselves . Since then , his music has been made into ballets ( Pineapple Poll ( 1951 ) and Pirates of Penzance - The Ballet ! ( 1991 ) ) and musicals ( The Swing Mikado ( 1938 ) , The Hot Mikado ( 1939 ) and Hot Mikado ( 1986 ) , Hollywood Pinafore ( 1945 ) , The Black Mikado ( 1975 ) , etc . ) . His operas are not only frequently performed , but also frequently parodied , pastiched , quoted and imitated in comedy routines , advertising , law , film , television , and other popular media . His legacy , apart from writing the Savoy operas and his other works , is felt perhaps most strongly today through his influence on the American and British musical theatre . The innovations in content and form of the works that he and Gilbert developed directly influenced the development of the modern musical throughout the 20th century . In addition , biographies and scholarly articles and analyses continue to be written about Sullivan 's life and work . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Romantic life = = = 
 Sullivan never married , but he had serious love affairs with several women . The first was with Rachel Scott Russell ( 1845 – 1882 ) , the daughter of the engineer John Scott Russell . Sullivan was a frequent visitor at the Scott Russell home in the mid @-@ 1860s , and by 1865 the affair was in full bloom . Rachel 's parents did not approve of a possible union with a young composer with uncertain financial prospects , but the two continued to see each other covertly . At some point in 1868 , Sullivan started a simultaneous ( and secret ) affair with Rachel 's sister Louise ( 1841 – 1878 ) . Both relationships had ceased by early 1869 . 
 Sullivan 's longest love affair was with the American socialite , Fanny Ronalds , a woman three years his senior , who had two children . He met her in Paris around 1867 , and the affair began in earnest soon after she moved to London permanently in 1871 . A contemporary account described Fanny Ronalds this way : " Her face was perfectly divine in its loveliness , her features small and exquisitely regular . Her hair was a dark shade of brown – <unk> <unk> [ deep chestnut ] – and very abundant ... a lovely woman , with the most generous smile one could possibly imagine , and the most beautiful teeth . " Sullivan called her " the best amateur singer in London " . She often performed Sullivan 's songs at her famous Sunday soirees . She became particularly associated with " The Lost Chord " , singing it both in private and in public , often with Sullivan accompanying her . When Sullivan died , he left her the autograph manuscript of that song , along with other bequests . 
 Ronalds was separated from her American husband , but they never divorced . Social conventions of the time compelled Sullivan and Ronalds to keep their relationship private . In his diary , he would refer to her as " Mrs. Ronalds " when he saw her in a public setting , but " L. W. " ( for " Little Woman " ) or " D. H. " ( possibly " Dear Heart " ) when they were alone together , often with a number in parentheses indicating the number of sexual acts completed . Ronalds was apparently pregnant on at least two occasions and procured abortions in 1882 and 1884 . Sullivan had a roving eye , and his diary records the occasional quarrel when Ronalds discovered his other liaisons , but he always returned to her . She was a constant companion up to the time of Sullivan 's death , but around 1889 or 1890 , the sexual relationship seems to have ended . He started to refer to her in the diary as " Auntie " , and the tick marks indicating sexual activity were no longer there , although similar notation continued to be used for his relationships with other women who have not been identified , and who were always referred to by their initials . 
 In 1896 , the 54 @-@ year @-@ old Sullivan proposed marriage to the 22 @-@ year @-@ old Violet Beddington ( 1874 – 1962 ) , but she refused him . 
 = = = Leisure and family life = = = 
 Sullivan loved to spend time in France ( both in Paris and the south of France ) , where his friends ranged from European royalty to the composer Claude Debussy , and where the casinos enabled him to indulge his passion for gambling . He enjoyed hosting private dinners and entertainments at his home , often featuring famous singers and well @-@ known actors . In 1865 he was initiated into Freemasonry and was Grand Organist of the United Grand Lodge of England in 1887 during Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee . Sullivan 's talent and native charm gained him the friendship of many not only in the musical establishment , such as Grove , Chorley , and Herman Klein , but also in society circles , such as Alfred , Duke of Edinburgh . Sullivan enjoyed playing tennis although , according to George Grossmith , " I have seen some bad lawn @-@ tennis players in my time , but I never saw anyone so bad as Arthur Sullivan " . 
 Sullivan was devoted to his parents , particularly his mother , with whom he corresponded regularly , when away from London , until her death in 1882 . Henry Lytton wrote , " I believe there was never a more affectionate tie than that which existed between [ Sullivan ] and his mother , a very witty old lady , and one who took an exceptional pride in her son 's accomplishments . Sullivan was also very fond of his brother Fred , whose acting career he assisted whenever possible , and of Fred 's children . When Fred died at the age of 39 , he left his pregnant wife , Charlotte , with seven children under the age of 14 . After Fred 's death , Arthur visited the family often and became guardian to all of the children . 
 In late 1883 , Charlotte and six of her children emigrated to Los Angeles , California , leaving the oldest boy , " Bertie " , in Sullivan 's sole care . Despite his reservations about the move to America , Sullivan paid all the costs and gave substantial financial support to the family . Only a year later , in January 1885 , Charlotte died , leaving the six children to be raised mostly by her brother and the older girls . From June to August 1885 , after The Mikado premiered , Sullivan visited the family in Los Angeles and took them on a sightseeing trip of the American west . Throughout the rest of his life , and in his will , he contributed financially to Fred 's children , continuing to correspond with them and to be concerned with their education , marriages and financial affairs . Bertie stayed with his uncle Arthur for the rest of the composer 's life . 
 Three of Sullivan 's cousins , the daughters of his uncle John Thomas Sullivan , performed with D 'Oyly Carte : Rose , Jane ( " Jennie " ) and Kate Sullivan , the first two of whom used the stage surname Hervey . Kate was a chorister who defected to the Comedy Opera Company 's rival production of H.M.S. Pinafore , where she had the opportunity to play Josephine in 1879 . Jennie was a D 'Oyly Carte chorister for fourteen years . Rose took principal roles in many of the companion pieces that played with the Savoy operas . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Method of composition and text setting = = = 
 Sullivan told an interviewer , Arthur Lawrence , " I don 't use the piano in composition – that would limit me terribly " . Sullivan explained that his process was not to wait for inspiration , but " to dig for it . ... I decide on [ the rhythm ] before I come to the question of melody . ... I mark out the metre in dots and dashes , and not until I have quite settled on the rhythm do I proceed to actual notation . " Sullivan 's text setting , compared with that of his 19th century English predecessors or his European contemporaries , was " vastly more sensitive . ... Sullivan 's operatic style attempts to create for itself a uniquely English text @-@ music synthesis " , and , in addition , by adopting a conservative musical style , he was able to achieve " the clarity to match Gilbert 's finely honed wit with musical wit of his own . " 
 In composing the Savoy operas , Sullivan wrote the vocal lines of the musical numbers first , and these were given to the actors . He , or an assistant , improvised a piano accompaniment at the early rehearsals ; he wrote the orchestrations later , after he had seen what Gilbert 's stage business would be . He left the overtures until last and often delegated their composition , based on his outlines , to his assistants , often adding his suggestions or corrections . Those Sullivan wrote himself include Thespis , Iolanthe , Princess Ida , The Yeomen of the Guard , The Gondoliers , The Grand Duke and probably Utopia Limited . Most of the overtures are structured as a potpourri of tunes from the operas in three sections : fast , slow and fast . Those for Iolanthe and The Yeomen of the Guard are written in a modified sonata form . The overtures from the Gilbert and Sullivan operas remain popular , and there are many recordings of them . Sullivan invariably conducted the operas on their opening nights . 
 In 1957 , a review in The Times gave this rationale for " the continued vitality of the Savoy operas " : 
 " [ T ] hey were never really contemporary in their idiom . ... Gilbert and Sullivan 's [ world was ] an artificial world , with a neatly controlled and shapely precision . ... For this , each partner has his share of credit . The neat articulation of incredibilities in Gilbert 's plots is perfectly matched by his language . ... [ Of ] equal importance ... Gilbert 's lyrics almost invariably take on extra point and sparkle when set to Sullivan 's music . ... Sullivan 's tunes , in these operas , also exist in a make @-@ believe world of their own . ... [ He is ] a delicate wit , whose airs have a precision , a neatness , a grace , and a flowing melody " . 
 = = = Melody and rhythm = = = 
 The Musical Times noted that Sullivan 's tunes , at least in the comic operas , appeal to the professional as much as to the layman : his continental contemporaries such as Debussy , Leoncavallo and Saint @-@ Saëns held the Savoy operas in high regard . Hughes writes , " When Sullivan wrote what we call ' a good tune ' it was nearly always ' good music ' as well . Outside the ranks of the giants there are few other composers of whom the same could be said . " Although his melodies sprang from rhythm , some of his themes may have been prompted by his chosen instrumentation or his harmonic techniques . 
 In the comic operas , where many numbers were in verse @-@ plus @-@ refrain form , Sullivan frequently produced two climaxes in the melodic line . Hughes instances " If you go in " ( Iolanthe ) as a good example . In Hughes 's view , though most of the tunes in the Savoy operas are good ones , Sullivan rarely reached the same class of excellence elsewhere when he had no librettist to feed his imagination . Even so , on those occasions when Gilbert wrote in unvaried metre , Sullivan often followed suit and produced phrases of simple repetition , such as " Love is a plaintive song " ( Patience ) and " A man who would woo a fair maid " ( The Yeomen of the Guard ) . 
 Sullivan 's deliberate echoes of other composers are covered below under " Musical Quotations " , but other echoes may not have been conscious : Hughes cites the concluding bars of " Tell a tale of cock and bull " from The Yeomen of the Guard as an example of Handel 's influence , and another critic , Edward Greenfield , found a theme in the slow movement of the Irish Symphony " an outrageous crib " from Schubert 's Unfinished Symphony . 
 = = = Harmony and counterpoint = = = 
 Harmony 
 Sullivan was trained in the classical style , and contemporary music did not greatly attract him . Harmonically his early works used the conventional formulae of Auber , Donizetti , Balfe and Schubert . Later he drew on Gounod and Bizet . Mendelssohn 's influence , conspicuous in early works , appears intermittently in later ones . As a contemporary writer observed , Sullivan draws on these various influences while remaining recognisably himself . Yet , in the field of harmony , Hughes writes , Sullivan remained an eclectic : " He had easily recognisable habits but his style never achieved individuality " . 
 In general , Sullivan preferred to write in major keys . In the Savoy operas , there are only eleven substantial numbers wholly in a minor key ( less than 5 % of the musical numbers ) , and even in his serious works the major prevails . Examples of Sullivan 's rare excursions into minor keys include the long E minor melody in the first movement of the Irish Symphony , " Go away , madam " in the Act I finale of Iolanthe ( echoing Verdi and Beethoven ) and the funeral march in the Act I finale of The Yeomen of the Guard . Sullivan was happy on occasion to use chords traditionally considered technically incorrect . When reproached for using consecutive fifths in Cox and Box , he replied " if <unk> turn up it doesn 't matter , so long as there is no offence to the ear . " Hughes comments that harmonic contrast in the Savoy works is enhanced by Sullivan 's characteristic modulation between keys , as in " Expressive glances " ( Princess Ida ) , where he smoothly negotiates E major , C sharp minor and C major , or " Then one of us will be a queen " ( The Gondoliers ) , where he writes in F major , D flat major and D minor . 
 Both Hughes and Jacobs in Grove 's Dictionary of Music and Musicians comment adversely on Sullivan 's over @-@ use of tonic pedals , usually in the bass , which Hughes attributes to " lack of enterprise or even downright laziness " . Another Sullivan trademark criticised by Hughes is the repeated use of the chord of the augmented fourth at moments of pathos . In his serious works , Sullivan attempted to avoid harmonic devices associated with the Savoy operas , with the result , according to Hughes , that The Golden Legend is a " hotch @-@ potch of harmonic styles " . 
 Counterpoint 
 Despite his thorough contrapuntal training in London and Leipzig , as well as his experience as a church organist , Sullivan rarely composed fugues . Hughes cites examples from the Epilogue to The Golden Legend and Victoria and Merrie England . In the Savoy operas , fugal style is reserved for making fun of legal solemnity in Trial by Jury and Iolanthe ( e.g. , the Lord Chancellor 's leitmotif in the latter ) . Less formal counterpoint is employed in numbers such as " Brightly Dawns our Wedding Day " ( The Mikado ) and " When the Buds are <unk> " ( Ruddigore ) . 
 Sullivan 's best known contrapuntal device was " the simultaneous presentation of two or more distinct melodies previously heard independently " . He was not the first composer to combine themes in this way , but it became a characteristic feature of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas . Sometimes the melodies were for solo voices , as in " Once more the face I loved so well " ( The Zoo ) , and " I am so proud " ( The Mikado ) , which combines three melodic lines ; other examples are in choruses , where typically a graceful tune for the ladies is combined with a robust one for the men . Examples include " When the <unk> bares his steel " ( The Pirates of Penzance ) , " In a doleful train " ( Patience ) and " Welcome , gentry " ( Ruddigore ) . At other times , notably in " How beautifully blue the sky " ( The Pirates of Penzance ) , one theme is given to the chorus and the other to solo voices . 
 = = = Orchestration = = = 
 Gervase Hughes concludes his chapter on Sullivan 's orchestration : " [ I ] n this vitally important sector of the composer 's art he deserves to rank as a master . " Sullivan was a competent player of at least four orchestral instruments ( flute , clarinet , trumpet and trombone ) and a technically highly skilled orchestrator . Though sometimes inclined to indulge in grandiosity when writing for a full symphony orchestra , he was adept in using smaller forces to the maximum effect . Percy Young writes that orchestral players generally like playing Sullivan 's music : " Sullivan never asked his players to do what was either uncongenial or impracticable . " 
 Sullivan 's orchestra for the Savoy Operas was typical of any other pit orchestra of his era : 2 flutes ( + piccolo ) , oboe , 2 clarinets , bassoon , 2 horns , 2 cornets , 2 trombones , timpani , percussion and strings . According to Geoffrey Toye , the number of players in the Savoy orchestra was originally 31 . Sullivan argued hard for an increase in the pit orchestra 's size , and starting with The Yeomen of the Guard , the orchestra was augmented with a second bassoon and a bass trombone . Sullivan generally orchestrated each score at almost the last moment , noting that the accompaniment for an opera had to wait until he saw the staging , so that he could judge how heavily or lightly to orchestrate each part of the music . For his large @-@ scale orchestral pieces , Sullivan added a second oboe part , sometimes double bassoon and bass clarinet , more horns , trumpets , tuba , and sometimes an organ and / or a harp . Many of these pieces used very large orchestras . 
 One of the most recognisable features in Sullivan 's orchestration is his woodwind scoring . Hughes especially notes Sullivan 's clarinet writing , exploiting all registers and colours of the instrument , and his particular fondness for oboe solos . For instance , the Irish Symphony contains two long solo oboe passages in succession , and in the Savoy operas there are many shorter examples . In the operas , and also in concert works , another characteristic Sullivan touch is his fondness for pizzicato passages for all the string sections . Most of the operas have at least one number that Hughes calls " virtually a pizzicato ostinato " ; he instances " Kind sir , you cannot have the heart " ( The Gondoliers ) , " Free from his fetters grim " ( The Yeomen of the Guard ) and " In vain to us you plead " ( Iolanthe ) . 
 = = = Musical quotations and parodies = = = 
 Sullivan often quoted or imitated famous themes and passages from well @-@ known tunes or parodied the styles of famous composers . He also liked to evoke familiar musical styles , such as his madrigals in The Mikado , Ruddigore and The Yeomen of the Guard , glees in H.M.S. Pinafore and The Mikado and <unk> in Ruddigore and The Gondoliers . In The Sorcerer , there is a country dance in " If you 'll marry me " . In Ruddigore , the sailor character dances a hornpipe , while in The Mikado , Sullivan quotes a Japanese war song in " Miya Sama " . Sullivan 's 1882 trip to Egypt inspired musical styles in his later opera , The Rose of Persia . Of the <unk> " I hear the soft note " in Patience , Sullivan said to the singers , " I think you will like this . It is Dr. Arne and Purcell at their best . " 
 In early pieces , he imitated Mendelssohn ( for example in his incidental music for The Tempest ) , Auber in his Henry VIII music and Gounod in The Light of the World . In his comic operas , Sullivan followed Offenbach 's lead in parodying the idioms of French and Italian opera , such as those of Donizetti , Bellini and Verdi . His music also shows the influence of Handel , Schubert and , conspicuously in the fairy music in Iolanthe , Mendelssohn . The then @-@ popular composer Michael Balfe is parodied in The Sorcerer and The Pirates of Penzance , and " Twenty Love Sick Maidens " imitates William Vincent Wallace 's " Alas Those Chimes " from Maritana . The sextet " A Nice Dilemma " in Trial by Jury parodies " D 'un pensiero " in Bellini 's La sonnambula . 
 Other examples of opera parody include Mabel 's aria " Poor Wand 'ring One " in The Pirates of Penzance and the duet " Who are you , sir ? " from Cox and Box . In H.M.S. Pinafore , the whispered plans for elopement in " This very night " parody the conspirators ' choruses in Verdi 's Il trovatore and Rigoletto , and the octet , " Farewell , my own , " evokes the ensemble " Mag der Himmel euch <unk> " in Flotow 's Martha and such concerted numbers as the sextet in Donizetti 's Lucia di Lammermoor . The mock @-@ jingoistic " He is an Englishman " in H.M.S. Pinafore and choral passages in The Zoo satirise patriotic British tunes such as Arne 's " Rule , Britannia ! " . The chorus " With catlike tread " from Pirates is an imitation of Verdi 's " Anvil Chorus " from Il trovatore . 
 In Princess Ida , there is a strong Handelian flavour to <unk> 's song in Act III ( " This helmet , I suppose " ) , and the Act II quartet " The world is but a broken toy " has been called " <unk> " . Florian 's statement in " Gently , Gently " : " In this college , useful knowledge / Everywhere one finds " is a quotation from Chopin 's Waltz No. 5 in A @-@ flat Major ( Op. 42 ) . In The Gondoliers , there are the Spanish cachucha , the Italian saltarello and tarantella , and the Venetian barcarolle . Hughes compares " Here is a case unprecedented " from The Gondoliers to the Act II quintet from Bizet 's Carmen . In " A more humane Mikado " , when the Mikado mentions " Bach interwoven with Spohr and Beethoven " , the clarinet and bassoon quote the fugue subject of Bach 's Fantasia and Fugue in G minor . The Golden Legend shows the influence of Liszt and Wagner . 
 Sullivan frequently gives groups or locations their own characters and motifs . Hughes points to the striking difference between the male chorus of rustics in The Sorcerer and the eponymous gondoliers , and between the fairies in Iolanthe and the undergraduates in Princess Ida . <unk> Pinafore retains " a nautical tang throughout " , and in The Yeomen of the Guard the Tower of London is evoked continually by its own motif . A distinctive four @-@ note theme is associated with the character Iolanthe , and the Fairy Queen 's music parodies that of Wagnerian heroines such as Brünnhilde . This use of Wagnerian leitmotif technique is repeated and developed further in Ivanhoe . 
 = = Reputation and criticism = = 
 = = = Early reception = = = 
 Sullivan 's critical reputation has undergone extreme changes since he first came to prominence in the 1860s . At first , critics were struck by his potential , and he was hailed as the long @-@ awaited great English composer . His incidental music to The Tempest received an acclaimed premiere at the Crystal Palace just before Sullivan 's 20th birthday in April 1862 . The Athenaeum wrote : 
 It ... may mark an epoch in English music , or we shall be greatly disappointed . Years on years have elapsed since we have heard a work by so young an artist so full of promise , so full of fancy , showing so much conscientiousness , so much skill , and so few references to any model elect . 
 His Irish Symphony of 1866 won similarly enthusiastic praise , but as Arthur Jacobs notes , " The first rapturous outburst of enthusiasm for Sullivan as an orchestral composer did not last . " A comment typical of those that followed him throughout his career was that " Sullivan 's unquestionable talent should make him doubly careful not to mistake popular applause for artistic appreciation . " 
 When Sullivan turned to comic opera with Gilbert , the serious critics began to express disapproval . Peter Gammond writes of " misapprehensions and prejudices , delivered to our door by the Victorian firm Musical Snobs Ltd . ... frivolity and high spirits were sincerely seen as elements that could not be exhibited by anyone who was to be admitted to the sanctified society of Art . " As early as 1877 The Figaro wrote that Sullivan " has all the ability to make him a great composer , but he wilfully throws his opportunity away . ... He possesses all the natural ability to have given us an English opera , and , instead , he affords us a little more @-@ or @-@ less excellent fooling . " Few critics denied the excellence of Sullivan 's theatre scores . The Theatre wrote that " Iolanthe sustains Dr Sullivan 's reputation as the most spontaneous , fertile , and scholarly composer of comic opera this country has ever produced . " However , comic opera , no matter how skilfully crafted , was viewed as an intrinsically lower form of art than oratorio . The Athenaeum 's review of The Martyr of Antioch declared : " [ I ] t is an advantage to have the composer of H.M.S. Pinafore occupying himself with a worthier form of art . " 
 = = = Knighthood and later years = = = 
 Sullivan 's knighthood in 1883 gave the serious music critics further ammunition . The Musical Review of that year wrote : 
 [ S ] ome things that Mr. Arthur Sullivan may do , Sir Arthur ought not to do . In other words , it will look rather more than odd to see announced in the papers that a new comic opera is in preparation , the book by Mr. W. S. Gilbert and the music by Sir Arthur Sullivan . A musical knight can hardly write shop ballads either ; he must not dare to soil his hands with anything less than an anthem or a madrigal ; oratorio , in which he has so conspicuously shone , and symphony , must now be his line . Here is not only an opportunity , but a positive obligation for him to return to the sphere from which he has too long descended [ and ] do battle for the honour of English art ... against all foreign rivals , and arouse us thoroughly from our present half @-@ torpid condition . 
 Even Sullivan 's friend George Grove wrote : " Surely the time has come when so able and experienced a master of voice , orchestra , and stage effect – master , too , of so much genuine sentiment – may apply his gifts to a serious opera on some subject of abiding human or natural interest . " Sullivan finally redeemed himself in critical eyes with The Golden Legend in 1886 . The Observer hailed it as a " triumph of English art " . The World called it " one of the greatest creations we have had for many years . Original , bold , inspired , grand in conception , in execution , in treatment , it is a composition which will make an " epoch " and which will carry the name of its composer higher on the wings of fame and glory . ... The effect of the public performance was unprecedented . " 
 Hopes for a new departure were evident in the Daily Telegraph 's review of The Yeomen of the Guard ( 1888 ) , Sullivan 's most serious opera to that point : " [ T ] he music follows the book to a higher plane , and we have a genuine English opera , forerunner of many others , let us hope , and possibly significant of an advance towards a national lyric stage . " Sullivan 's only wholly serious opera , Ivanhoe ( 1891 ) , received generally favourable reviews , although J. A. Fuller Maitland , in The Times , expressed reservations , writing that the opera 's " best portions rise so far above anything else that Sir Arthur Sullivan has given to the world , and have such force and dignity , that it is not difficult to forget the drawbacks which may be found in the want of interest in much of the choral writing , and the brevity of the concerted solo parts . " Sullivan 's 1898 ballet Victoria and Merrie England was one of several late pieces that won praise from most critics : 
 Sir Arthur Sullivan 's music is music for the people . There is no attempt made to force on the public the dullness of academic experience . The melodies are all as fresh as last year 's wine , and as exhilarating as sparkling champagne . There is not one tune which tires the hearing , and in the matter of orchestration our only humorist has let himself run riot , not being handicapped with libretto , and the gain is enormous . ... All through we have orchestration of infinite delicacy , tunes of alarming simplicity , but never a tinge of vulgarity . 
 Although the more solemn members of the musical establishment could not forgive Sullivan for writing music that was both comic and accessible , he was , nevertheless , " the nation 's de facto composer laureate " . 
 = = = Posthumous reputation = = = 
 In the decade after his death , Sullivan 's reputation sank considerably . In 1901 , Fuller Maitland took issue with the generally laudatory tone of most of the obituaries : " Is there anywhere a case quite parallel to that of Sir Arthur Sullivan , who began his career with a work which at once stamped him as a genius , and to the height of which he only rarely attained throughout life ? ... It is because such great natural gifts – gifts greater , perhaps , than fell to any English musician since ... Purcell – were so very seldom employed in work worthy of them . " Edward Elgar , to whom Sullivan had been particularly kind , rose to Sullivan 's defence , branding Fuller Maitland 's obituary " the shady side of musical criticism ... that foul unforgettable episode . " 
 Fuller Maitland 's followers , including Ernest Walker , also dismissed Sullivan as " merely the idle singer of an empty evening " . As late as 1966 , Frank Howes , music critic of The Times condemned Sullivan for a " lack of sustained effort ... a fundamental lack of seriousness towards his art [ and ] inability to perceive the smugness , the sentimentality and banality of the Mendelssohnian detritus ... to remain content with the flattest and most obvious rhythms , this yielding to a fatal facility , that excludes Sullivan from the ranks of the good composers . " 
 Thomas F. Dunhill wrote a in 1928 that Sullivan 's " music has suffered in an extraordinary degree from the vigorous attacks which have been made upon it in professional circles . These attacks have succeeded in surrounding the composer with a kind of barricade of prejudice which must be swept away before justice can be done to his genius . " Sir Henry Wood continued to perform Sullivan 's serious music . In 1942 , Wood presented a Sullivan centenary concert at the Royal Albert Hall , but it was not until the 1960s that Sullivan 's music other than the Savoy operas began to be widely revived and reassessed . In 1960 Hughes published the first full @-@ length book about Sullivan 's music " which , while taking note of his weaknesses ( which are many ) and not hesitating to castigate his lapses from good taste ( which were comparatively rare ) [ attempted ] to view them in perspective against the wider background of his sound musicianship . " The work of the Sir Arthur Sullivan Society , founded in 1977 , books about Sullivan by musicians such as Young ( 1971 ) and Jacobs ( 1986 ) , and a growing number of recordings have contributed to the re @-@ evaluation of Sullivan 's serious music . 
 The Symphony in E had its first professional recording in 1968 , and a considerable number of Sullivan 's non @-@ Gilbert works have since been recorded . Scholarly critical editions of a growing number of Sullivan 's works have been published . In a 2000 article in The Musical Times , Nigel Burton wrote : 
 [ Sullivan ] spoke naturally to all people , for all time , of the passions , sorrows and joys which are forever rooted in the human consciousness . He believed ... that the human being 's prime duty in life is to serve humanity . It is his artistic consistency in this respect which obliges us to pronounce him our greatest Victorian composer . Time has now sufficiently dispersed the mists of criticism for us to be able to see the truth , to enjoy all his music , and to rejoice in the rich diversity of its panoply . ... [ L ] et us resolve to set aside the " One @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ <unk> " syndrome once and for all , and , in its place , raise <unk> LOUD <unk> . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 On 14 August 1888 , George Gouraud introduced Thomas Edison 's phonograph to London in a press conference , including the playing of a piano and cornet recording of Sullivan 's " The Lost Chord " , one of the first recordings of music ever made . Sullivan was invited to a party on 5 October 1888 given to demonstrate the technology . After dinner , he recorded a speech to be sent to Edison , saying , in part : 
 I can only say that I am astonished and somewhat terrified at the result of this evening 's experiments : astonished at the wonderful power you have developed , and terrified at the thought that so much hideous and bad music may be put on record forever . But all the same I think it is the most wonderful thing that I have ever experienced , and I congratulate you with all my heart on this wonderful discovery . 
 These recordings were discovered in the Edison Library in New Jersey in the 1950s : 
 The first commercial recordings of Sullivan 's music , beginning in 1898 , were of individual numbers from the Savoy operas . In 1917 , the Gramophone Company ( also known as HMV ) produced the first album of a complete musical score of a Gilbert and Sullivan opera , The Mikado , followed by recordings of eight more of the operas . Electrical recordings of the complete musical scores of most of the operas were then issued by the Gramophone Company and Victor Talking Machine Company beginning in the late 1920s . These recordings were supervised by Rupert D 'Oyly Carte . The D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company continued to produce recordings until 1979 . Between 1988 and 2003 , after the company was revived , it recorded seven of the operas . 
 Other recordings have been made by opera companies such as Gilbert and Sullivan for All , and Australian Opera , among many others . Ad hoc companies of operatic singers conducted by Sir Malcolm Sargent in the 1950s and 60s and Sir Charles Mackerras in the 1990s have made audio sets of several Savoy operas , and in the 1980s Alexander Faris conducted video recordings of most of the operas with casts including show @-@ business stars as well as professional singers . The long @-@ running Broadway production of The Pirates of Penzance presented by Joseph Papp , re @-@ orchestrated with synthesisers replacing the strings , was put on record in 1981 . Since 1994 , the International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival has released numerous professional and amateur CDs and videos of its productions and other Sullivan recordings . 
 Sullivan 's non @-@ Savoy works were infrequently recorded until the 1960s . A few of his songs were put on disc in the early years of the 20th century , including versions of " The Lost Chord " by Enrico Caruso and Clara Butt . The first of many recordings of the Overture di Ballo was made in the 1940s . Sullivan 's Irish Symphony was first recorded in 1968 under Sir Charles Groves . Since then , much of Sullivan 's serious music and his operas without Gilbert have been recorded . Some highlights include the cello concerto by Julian Lloyd Webber ( 1986 ) , The Golden Legend under Ronald Corp ( 2001 ) and Ivanhoe , under the conductor David Lloyd @-@ Jones ( 2009 ) . Mackerras 's Sullivan ballet score , Pineapple Poll , has received many recordings since its premiere in 1951 , four of them conducted by Mackerras . 
 = Lord Snow = 
 " Lord Snow " is the third episode of the HBO medieval fantasy television series Game of Thrones . It first aired on May 1 , 2011 . It was written by the show creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss , and directed by series regular Brian Kirk . Critical reception was generally positive , and viewership was up 10 % from the first two episodes of the series . 
 The plot follows Jon Snow 's training at The Wall ; Eddard 's arrival at King 's Landing , followed by Catelyn , looking for Bran 's would @-@ be murderer ; Arya reveals her desire to learn sword fighting to her father ; Joffrey is given a lesson in ruling the Kingdom by Cersei , and Robert longs for the glory of his past . Meanwhile , Daenerys learns she is pregnant . The episode was the first to feature Old Nan , played by Margaret John , who died before the series was broadcast ; the episode is dedicated to her memory in the final credit . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = In the Dothraki Sea = = = 
 Daenerys ( Emilia Clarke ) is beginning to gain confidence in her new role as Drogo 's wife and gains the respect of the exiled knight Ser Jorah Mormont ( Iain Glen ) , but her relationship with her brother Viserys ( Harry Lloyd ) becomes strained when he angrily assaults her under the assumption that she is giving him commands . As punishment , Viserys is choked and nearly killed by Daenerys 's <unk> <unk> ( <unk> Gabel ) and is forced to walk back to camp after Daenerys intervenes to spare his life . 
 <unk> ( Amrita <unk> ) notices that Daenerys is pregnant and shares the news with Jorah and <unk> . Rather than be pleased , Jorah mysteriously departs for the Free City of <unk> for supplies . In their tent , Daenerys reveals to Drogo ( Jason Momoa ) that their child is a boy . 
 = = = In Winterfell = = = 
 With Bran ( Isaac Hempstead @-@ Wright ) now awake , Old Nan ( Margaret John ) tells him a tale of a long @-@ ago endless winter , when the White Walkers first appeared riding their dead horses and raising <unk> from the men they slaughtered . Her story is interrupted by Robb ( Richard Madden ) who sadly confirms to Bran that his injuries are permanent , and he 'll never walk again . Bran , saying he is unable to remember anything about his fall , wishes he were dead . 
 = = = At the Wall = = = 
 Jon has joined the other recruits under the firm hand of Ser Alliser Thorne ( Owen Teale ) and easily beats every opponent sent against him . Ser Alliser berates them all for their poor performance , but has no kind words for Jon , dubbing him " Lord Snow " to mock his bastard heritage and telling him that he 's " the least useless person here . " Disheartened , Jon asks Benjen ( Joseph Mawle ) to take him in a several @-@ month @-@ long ranging north of the Wall , but his uncle blocks this , telling Jon that " here , a man gets what he earns when he earns it . " 
 Tyrion ( Peter Dinklage ) tells Jon that he isn 't " better " than any of his new " brothers , " but only more fortunate , as he was trained by a master @-@ at @-@ arms , while the others are all orphan boys or criminals who have likely never held a sword before today . To make amends , Jon decides to give his fellow recruits proper sword training . Later , Tyrion is beseeched by Lord Commander Jeor Mormont ( James Cosmo ) and the elderly , blind Maester Aemon ( Peter Vaughan ) to ask his sister and brother @-@ in @-@ law for more men for the Night 's Watch , as the wildlings are massing in numbers greater than the Watch is able to deal with , and rumours that the White Walkers have returned are becoming more widespread . Tyrion is skeptical , but agrees to do so . Before leaving the Wall , Tyrion fulfills his ambition to urinate off the top of the Wall and says goodbye to Jon , who finally accepts Tyrion as a friend . 
 = = = In King 's Landing = = = 
 Eddard 's party arrives at King 's Landing . Eddard ( Sean Bean ) is immediately summoned to a meeting of the king 's Small Council . On his way through the throne room , Eddard encounters Jaime Lannister ( Nikolaj Coster @-@ Waldau ) , and the audience is told that Jaime killed the Mad King Aerys Targaryen , the father of Daenerys and Viserys Targaryen . Jaime reminds Eddard that Aerys had murdered Eddard 's father and brother ; however , Eddard does not consider this grounds for Jaime to break his oath as a knight of the Kingsguard . 
 Eddard joins the Small Council , consisting of the king 's brother , Lord Renly ( Gethin Anthony ) , the eunuch Lord Varys ( Conleth Hill ) , Grand Maester Pycelle ( Julian Glover ) and the Master of Coin Lord Petyr " Littlefinger " Baelish ( Aidan Gillen ) . Littlefinger had once dueled Eddard 's brother for Catelyn 's hand in marriage and implies that he is still in love with her . Renly announces that Robert plans to hold a great tourney in honor of Eddard 's appointment as the Hand of the King . Eddard learns that the crown is heavily indebted , primarily to the queen 's father , Lord Tywin Lannister . 
 Catelyn arrives in King 's Landing , supposedly in secret . However , she is taken by a pair of city watchmen to a brothel owned by Littlefinger . He meets her to tell her that he had her brought there to keep her safe and hidden . Varys , also present , reveals that he learned of Catelyn 's arrival through his spies . The three of them and Ser Rodrik ( Ron Donachie ) discuss the attempted murder of Bran . Littlefinger shocks them all by admitting that the assassin 's dagger was once his own . He claims that he lost it to Tyrion Lannister , betting on Jaime Lannister to win a previous tourney . Littlefinger arranges a meeting between Eddard and Catelyn , and Lord Stark reluctantly takes on Littlefinger as an ally who will help them find Bran 's assailant . 
 Eddard returns to his keep , only to find his daughters arguing . Arya ( Maisie Williams ) is furious at Sansa ( Sophie Turner ) for lying to protect Joffrey Baratheon . Ned reminds her that Joffrey is a prince and will be king one day with Sansa as his wife . Learning that his younger daughter aspires to be a swordsman and has a sword of her own , he hires the <unk> " water dancer " ( fencer ) Syrio Forel ( Miltos Yerolemou ) to teach her the art of swordsmanship . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Lord Snow " was written by the show creators and executive producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss , based on the original book by George R. R. Martin , chapters Eddard IV , Arya II , Bran IV , Catelyn IV , Jon III , Tyrion III , and Daenerys IV . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The third episode introduces a number of new characters to the story , due to the expansion of the story to the new locales of King 's Landing and the Wall . 
 In the capital city the members of the council are presented . Series regular Aidan Gillen , known for his roles in Queer as Folk and The Wire takes the role of Lord Petyr Baelish , the king 's master of coin known as " Littlefinger . " Gethin Anthony plays the king 's youngest brother Renly Baratheon , and veteran actor Julian Glover , well known to science fiction and fantasy fans after appearing in films such as The Empire Strikes Back and Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade , was cast as Grand Maester Pycelle after actor Roy Dotrice had to be replaced for medical reasons . Author George R. R. Martin wrote on the casting of Conleth Hill as spymaster Varys : " Hill , like Varys , is quite a chameleon , an actor who truly disappears inside the characters he portrays , more than capable not only of bringing the slimy , simpering eunuch to life . " Ian McElhinney plays Ser Barristan Selmy , the commander of the Kingsguard , and Miltos <unk> appears as the fencing instructor Syrio Forel . McElhinney had previously played Gillen 's father in Queer as Folk . 
 The hierarchy of the Wall is introduced with James Cosmo as commander Jeor Mormont , Peter Vaughan as the blind <unk> Aemon , Owen Teale as the trainer of the new recruits Ser Alliser Thorne , and Francis Magee as the recruiter Yoren . 
 This episode also marks the first appearance of the Welsh actress Margaret John as Old Nan . 84 @-@ year @-@ old Margaret John died on 2 February 2011 , a few months after having finished recording her scenes in Game of Thrones , which was her last role on television . With a 50 @-@ year acting career , she is remembered for her role of Doris on the BBC television show Gavin and Stacy . Executive producers David Benioff and Dan Weiss issued a statement grieving her death . The episode " Lord Snow " is dedicated to her , with the last credit being " In the memory of Margaret John . " 
 = = = Filming locations = = = 
 To film the scenes at the Wall the production built a set on the abandoned quarry of <unk> , a few minutes north of Belfast . The composite set ( with both exteriors and interiors ) consisted of a large section of Castle Black including the courtyard , the <unk> , the mess hall and the barracks , and used the stone wall of the quarry as the basis for the ice wall that protects Westeros from the dangers that dwell beyond . They also made a real elevator to lift the rangers to the top of the Wall . 
 For the streets of King 's Landing , the production flew to Malta . The gate of Fort Ricasoli doubled as the The King 's Gate , shown at the beginning of the episode when the royal entourage enters the city . The entrance of the Red Keep used when Catelyn and Rodrik enter the fortification corresponds to Mdina Gate , and also in Mdina the <unk> Mesquita is the location for the entrance to the brothel owned by Lord Baelish . 
 Ron Donachie , the actor playing Ser Rodrik Cassel , said that the scene where he entered King 's Landing was his favourite moment . Visiting a museum in the Maltese capital of Valletta , Donachie had seen a painting of armed knights riding through that Gate of Mdina itself and found exciting that to be able to do the same thing , " especially in Rodrik ’ s full @-@ scale Stark battle regalia " . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 On the scene where Old Nan offers to tell Bran stories , she claims that his favorites are the ones about Ser Duncan the Tall . The tales of Duncan and his squire Egg are a series of novellas written by author George R. R. Martin , taking place about a hundred years before the events of Game of Thrones . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Lord Snow " ' s first airing was seen by 2 @.@ 4 million viewers , which represented a 10 % increase in the ratings from the two previous episodes . Combined with the second airing it reached 3 @.@ 1 million viewers , which were considered good results especially considering that the news of Osama Bin Laden 's death broke during the West Coast airing of the episode . 
 In the UK , the viewership figures were in line with those obtained on the previous week , with around 510 @,@ 000 viewers . Those figures are in the top end for the network , Sky Atlantic . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 While the majority of the critics gave " Lord Snow " a positive review , many suggested that it suffered from having to introduce many new characters and locations . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes surveyed 10 reviews of the episode and judged 80 % of them to be positive . The website 's critical consensus reads , " ' Lord Snow ' is an intriguing and heavy transitional episode with standout performances from Bean and Gillen , though it would be better served with more focus on character change and development . " Myles McNutt wrote at Cultural Learnings that it was " perhaps the most narratively uninteresting episode of the first six , " although he highlighted that it was " hardly a bad episode of television , filled as it is with satisfying sequences that capture many themes key to the series , " and added that many issues introduced in this episode had a payoff in future installments . Entertainment Weekly 's James Hibberd also thought that it was his least favorite episode of the first six , due to too much character development . However , Alan Sepinwall from HitFix , liked the " more rambling quality of ' Lord Snow , ' " and while admitting it is heavy on exposition he felt it worked " because the stories are being told with such passion . " IGN 's Matt Fowler wrote that " Lord Snow " was " dense and filled with tons of exposition and backstory , which may or may not have interested those new to this story - but I found myself hanging on every precious word . " Alan Sepinwall wrote a positive review of the episode for HitFix , saying " Arya 's fencing lesson is a wonderful scene , carried by the joy of Maisie Williams ' performance and the playful , Inigo Montoya @-@ ish quality of her new teacher Syrio , but it 's also such a small , simple thing that you wouldn 't ordinarily expect it to be the note that an episode of dramatic television goes out on " and continued " I liked the looser , more rambling quality of " Lord Snow , " an episode largely about transitions , fish out of water , and old ghosts . 
 Some of the scenes were highly praised by reviewers . The closing scene with Arya taking her first lesson from the <unk> Syrio Forel was highlighted . Maureen Ryan from AOL TV stated that it was her favorite scene of the series so far , and James Hibberd remarked upon the quality of all the child actors of the show and stated that Maisie Williams owned her role in this episode . Other scenes that were noted by the critics were the father @-@ daughter dialogue with Eddard Stark and Arya , King Robert remembering with the members of his Kingsguard their first killings , and Eddard attending his first session of the Small Council . 
 = Schneller Orphanage = 
 Schneller Orphanage , also called the Syrian Orphanage , was a German Protestant orphanage that operated in Jerusalem from 1860 to 1940 . It was one of the first structures to be built outside the Old City of Jerusalem ( the others are <unk> Sha ’ <unk> and the Russian Compound ) and paved the way for the expansion of Jerusalem in the 19th century . As a philanthropic institution offering academic and vocational training to hundreds of orphaned and abandoned Arab children , it also exerted a strong influence on the Arab population of Jerusalem and the Middle East through its graduates , who spread its philosophies of " orderliness , discipline , and German language " throughout the region . 
 The orphanage provided both academic and vocational training to orphaned boys and girls from Palestine , Syria , Egypt , Ethiopia , Armenia , Turkey , Russia , Iran , and Germany , graduating students skilled in such trades as tailoring , shoemaking , engraving , carpentry , metalworking , pottery , painting , printing , farming , and gardening . In 1903 a school for the blind was opened on the premises , including dormitories , classrooms and vocational workshops . The orphanage also operated its own printing press and <unk> ; flour mill and bakery ; laundry and clothing @-@ repair service ; carpentry ; pottery factory ; tree and plant nursery ; and brick and tile factory . Located on high ground and surrounded by a high stone wall , the orphanage 's distinctive onion @-@ dome tower , multistory buildings , and decorative facades exuded the power and influence of European Christians in Jerusalem in the mid @-@ 19th century . 
 Continuous building and land acquisitions increased the size of the orphanage grounds to nearly 150 acres ( 600 dunam ) by World War I. At the beginning of World War II , the British mandatory government deported the German teachers and turned the compound into a closed military camp with the largest ammunition stockpile in the Middle East . On March 17 , 1948 , the British abandoned the camp and the Etzioni Brigade of the Haganah used it as a base of operations during the 1948 Israeli War of Independence . For the next 60 years the site served as an Israeli army base known as Camp Schneller . The army vacated the premises in 2008 . As of 2011 , the compound is being developed for luxury housing . 
 In 2015 , remains of a Jewish settlement of the late Second Temple period were discovered at the site . In 2016 , archaeologists unearthed an ancient Roman bathhouse and a large wine production facility . 
 = = History = = 
 In the mid @-@ 19th century , English and German Protestant missions were operating in the Old City of Jerusalem . In 1854 Johann Ludwig Schneller ( 1820 – 1896 ) , a German Lutheran missionary , came to Jerusalem from Württemberg together with his wife Magdalene <unk> and six other members of the <unk> of Saint <unk> , Basel , Switzerland , in order to manage the German Protestant mission . On 11 October 1855 Schneller bought from the people of <unk> , a parcel of land outside <unk> , approximately 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) northwest of Jaffa Gate , with the intention of living among and missionizing to the local Arab population , and drew up plans for the construction of a home for his family . The house was constructed from 1855 – 56 . After Schneller and his family took occupancy , the house was attacked several times by Arab robbers from the village of Beit <unk> , forcing them to retreat to the safety of the Old City . At the end of the decade , after the Turks had erected outposts and dispatched armed guards on horseback to patrol Jaffa Road ( the route between Jerusalem and the port city of Jaffa , which lay near the Schneller compound ) , Schneller and his family were able to return to their home . 
 In 1860 Lebanese Druze massacred thousands of Maronite Christians in Lebanon and Syria . Schneller traveled to Beirut with the intention of rescuing battle @-@ orphaned children . He was rebuffed by the local community , which did not trust foreign Protestant missionaries , but managed to bring back nine orphaned boys to Jerusalem in October 1860 . He decided to open an orphanage for them in his home , and by the end of 1861 had enrolled 41 boys in what became known as the Syrian Orphanage ( German : <unk> <unk> ) . Over the next four years Schneller expanded his property to 13 @.@ 6 acres ( 55 dunam ) and erected a 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) -high stone wall around it . Through 1867 Schneller expanded and added new infrastructure , creating a kitchen , dining room , storage cellar , bedrooms and living areas . In 1867 the orphanage began accepting girls . 
 Funds for construction and expansion , together with clothing and blankets , were solicited from Protestant communities in Germany and Switzerland . Between 1861 and 1885 Schneller collected a total of 550 @,@ 000 francs in donations . 
 Schneller was determined to give orphaned and abandoned Arab children a complete education , including teaching them a trade . To that end , he employed both academic and vocational teachers , primarily from Germany . The latter led professional workshops in tailoring , shoemaking , engraving , carpentry , metalworking , pottery , painting , printing , farming , and gardening . 
 Children stayed at the orphanage for up to 10 years , graduating at the age of 18 . They came from all parts of Palestine as well as Syria , Egypt , Ethiopia , Armenia , Turkey , Russia , Iran , and Germany . They were also of differing religious denominations , including Protestant , Greek Orthodox , Catholic , Coptic , and Maronite . Notwithstanding the ethnic diversity of the student body , the language of instruction was German and Arabic . Most of the teachers employed during the orphanage ’ s first 50 years were German , with some Armenians and Arabs . 
 In 1876 the orphanage had an enrollment of 70 students aged 4 to 17 . By 1898 enrollment stood at 200 students . By the time of Schneller ’ s death on 18 October 1896 , 1500 students had passed through the orphanage ’ s doors . The actual number of graduates totaled 425 in 1885 and 1169 at the 50th anniversary of the orphanage in 1910 . 
 In 1901 a German noble bequeathed his entire fortune of 700 @,@ 000 marks toward the establishment of a school for the blind at the orphanage . It opened in 1903 with space for 40 to 50 children , plus workshops to teach the blind weaving and spinning . 
 Besides classes and vocational workshops , the orphanage operated its own printing press and <unk> where it produced its own textbooks , Braille books , and German @-@ language newspapers . It also operated a flour mill and bakery that produced 35 @,@ 000 loaves of bread a year , a laundry and clothing @-@ repair service , a carpentry , a pottery factory that produced all the clay utensils used in the orphanage , and a tree and plant nursery . At the beginning of the 20th century , a large brick and tile factory was erected on the premises , which produced one million bricks and 250 @,@ 000 tiles annually . 
 In 1889 Schneller acquired 1 @,@ 235 acres ( 5 @,@ 000 dunam ) in Bir Salem ( today Kibbutz Netzer Sereni ) in order to develop an agricultural school and land for settlement for his students and graduates . In 1906 another 890 acres ( 3 @,@ 600 dunam ) was added to the original parcel . Although the agricultural school did not materialize , the grain , fruits and vegetables produced by the farm supplemented the orphanage diet during the food shortages of World War I. 
 In 1889 Schneller gave over the operation of the orphanage to a consortium based in Stuttgart , while his eldest son , Theodor ( 1856 – 1935 ) , became manager of the institution . In 1927 Theodor ’ s youngest son , Ernst , took over the management of the institution until its confiscation by the British in 1940 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Like other European Christian institutions built in Jerusalem in the 1800s , the Schneller Orphanage was situated on high ground and was surrounded by a high stone wall , with an iron gate that was locked at night . The property exuded the power and influence of European Christians in Jerusalem with its multistory buildings , a clock tower , and decorative façade , including reliefs in stone and epigrams . Engraved on the façade of the main building is the verse " Jesus the Messiah has compassion upon us " in German and Arabic , as well as the name of the institution , Syrian Orphanage ( German : <unk> <unk> ) . There is also a stone relief of a lamb carrying a flag with a cross on it . Following the visit of Kaiser Wilhelm to Jerusalem in 1898 , the orphanage received three bells for its tower . 
 The architectural style of the main building is a combination of Southern German and local Arabic . The tile roof and onion @-@ dome tower mounted on a square base reflects the former , while wide , rounded arches for doors and windows reflect the latter . A lightning rod extends from the onion dome . The H @-@ shaped main building has two interior courtyards which held a water cistern , garden and play area . The entire building covers an area of 50 @,@ 590 square feet ( 4 @,@ 700 square meters ) . At three stories , the main building housed the central dining room , a kitchen , a study hall , a library , a reading room , a small museum , and a Lutheran church in which students and staff worshipped . 
 Johann Ludwig Schneller brought in skilled Arab laborers from Bethlehem and Beit Jala to construct a total of eight buildings , which were constructed in stages and completed in the early 20th century . The year of completion and the name of the German city in which the donors for that building lived were engraved on each building façade . One of the buildings , called “ the Red House ” or “ the model house , ” was built entirely from materials produced on the orphanage grounds , including bricks , floor tiles and wrought @-@ iron work . 
 For most of its existence , the orphanage was in a continual state of expansion and modernization . Ruth Kark et al. notes : 
 ... the locksmith @-@ shop was remodeled and changed location within the complex five times between the period of 1861 and 1930 ( 1861 , 1867 , 1900 , 1908 , 1930 ) . The bakery changed place and was modernized six times and – in a similar way – most of the functions and uses of the rooms changed during the seventy years of the institution ’ s existence . 
 Johann Ludwig Schneller also purchased land in the vicinity of the orphanage and constructed houses for workers . Two of these <unk> Schneller ( Schneller Houses ) still stand across the street from the main entrance , as well as three of the original five homes built several yards to the west ( near the present corner of <unk> Yisrael and <unk> Yisrael Streets ) . A plaque on each home bears the name of the German city of its donors . The cities are : Halle , Stuttgart , <unk> , Munich , Hamburg , Petersberg , and <unk> , Schneller ’ s birthplace . 
 = = 20th century = = 
 By 1903 the educational facility had grown to eight buildings and included the orphanage , the school for the blind , and vocational workshops for youth . 
 In 1910 , the jubilee year of the orphanage ’ s founding , a fire destroyed the third floor and wooden roof of the main building , and damaged the second floor where the church was housed . Ludwig Schneller , a son of the founder who was the administrator at the time , managed to collect over 200 @,@ 000 marks in donations from Germany and rebuilt the entire structure . The upper story of the building was rebuilt in stone . 
 Building and expansion continued up to World War I , by which time the orphanage occupied 150 acres ( 600 dunam ) of land . The Schneller grounds reached all the way to present @-@ day Romema , where Schneller planted forests on land that eventually housed the Jerusalem Biblical Zoo . The orphanage ’ s holdings were gradually reduced to 17 @.@ 5 acres with the sale of land to the new neighborhoods of <unk> Baruch and <unk> Avraham . 
 During World War I , the compound was used by the Turkish army and its allies as a barracks . From 1921 to 1927 , Theodor Schneller resumed management of the orphanage , overseeing the modernization of the property with electrical and sewage installations , as well as new machinery for the various workshops . His son Ernst directed the orphanage from 1927 until its confiscation by the British army in 1940 . The orphanage 's German funding sources were severely curtailed during the 1930s when the Nazi government of Germany banned citizens from sending funds abroad . 
 = = Military base = = 
 = = = British military camp = = = 
 When World War II broke out , the British shut down the orphanage and deported its German teachers . The British turned the compound into a closed military camp known as the Schneller Barracks , installing about 50 watchtowers and huts . The camp housed the largest ammunition stockpile in the Middle East , as well as grain storehouses . The Royal Army Pay Corps 90th Battalion occupied the barracks in the late 1940s . 
 The British camp was targeted for attack by the Irgun on two occasions . On 27 June 1939 , the paramilitary group placed a letter bomb in the mailbox attached to the outside wall ; the subsequent explosion collapsed part of the wall and injured five Arabs in the vicinity . On 12 March 1947 , the Irgun penetrated the camp itself in a pre @-@ dawn operation and detonated explosives in one of the buildings to protest the imposition of martial law on Jerusalem . One British soldier was killed and eight injured in the blasts ; martial law was lifted four days later . 
 = = = Israeli military base = = = 
 On 17 March 1948 , the British abandoned the camp and the Etzioni Brigade of the Haganah used it as a home base during the 1948 Israeli War of Independence . For the next 60 years , the compound served as a training base for the Israel Defense Forces and an army clinic ; at one point , it also served as headquarters for the Home Front Command . 
 In 1951 the Israeli army summoned representatives of the World Lutheran Church to remove religious artifacts from the orphanage church ; church representatives removed bells , windows and a pipe organ , but left the heavy marble altar encased in a wooden chest . The church was then converted into a basketball arena for the soldiers . In October 2009 , on a tour of the facility after the army had vacated the grounds , the provost of the Evangelical German Lutheran Church of the Redeemer noticed the chest and asked for it to be opened , exposing the altar . The Lutherans negotiated for it to be moved to the Lutheran church at Augusta Victoria Hospital , where it was inaugurated in November 2010 . 
 During the 60 years of occupancy by the Israeli army , the base was served by an army synagogue in one of the halls of the main building , including a Torah ark , bookcase , and a balcony door set with 12 stained @-@ glass windows depicting the Twelve Tribes of Israel . 
 = = Current use = = 
 In 2008 the army base relocated to the <unk> base near Mount Scopus . The Jerusalem municipality put together a " preservation and construction plan " for the Schneller compound , calling for the eight historic buildings to be developed for public use by the Orthodox Jewish community nearby . In November 2010 , part of the Schneller grounds were designated as a public parking lot by the municipality to ease the parking problems in the neighboring <unk> commercial district . One hundred parking spaces were made available for up to three hours . 
 In 2011 the Israel Land Administration approved plans for the development of 218 luxury apartments on the property while preserving the eight historic orphanage buildings . 
 As of 2012 , parts of the complex are being used for a <unk> Yaakov girls ' school , a Gerrer Talmud Torah , a training area for urban combat police , and municipal waste storage . 
 = = Successor schools = = 
 The philosophy and mission of the Schneller Orphanage continued after World War II in two successor schools in the Middle East . 
 The Johann Ludwig Schneller School in Khirbat <unk> , Western Beqaa District , Lebanon , was started in Lebanon in 1948 by Elias al @-@ Haddad and 12 Schneller students , and was established in its present location in 1952 by Hermann Schneller , a grandson of Johann Ludwig Schneller . Like the Schneller Orphanage in Jerusalem , it provides academic and vocational training for impoverished local children . Today the school is owned and operated by the National Evangelical Church of Beirut . 
 The Theodor Schneller School was founded in Marka , 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) northwest of Amman , Jordan , in 1959 by Hermann Schneller and graduates of the Schneller Orphanage in Jerusalem . Providing academic and vocational training for 265 orphaned and impoverished boys , it is funded by the Schneller Schools Society in Stuttgart and is under the auspices of the Episcopal Church in Jerusalem . The Marka refugee camp , established nearby in 1968 , is often called the " Schneller camp " because of its proximity to this school . 
 = James McCormack = 
 James McCormack , Jr . ( 8 November 1910 – 3 January 1975 ) was a United States Army officer who served in World War II , and was later the first Director of Military Applications of the United States Atomic Energy Commission . 
 A 1932 graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point , McCormack also studied at Hertford College , Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar , and at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , where he earned a Master of Science degree in civil engineering . In 1942 , he was assigned to the War Department General Staff . On 1 July 1944 , he became the Chief of the Movements Branch of Twelfth United States Army Group , remaining in this role until 28 May 1945 . He then returned to the War Department General Staff , where he served in the Operations and Plans Division . 
 In 1947 McCormack was chosen as the Director of Military Applications of the United States Atomic Energy Commission with the rank of brigadier general . He took a pragmatic approach to handling the issue of the proper agency to hold custody of the nuclear weapons stockpile , and encouraged and supported Edward Teller 's development of thermonuclear weapons . He transferred to the United States Air Force on 25 July 1950 , and was appointed Director of Nuclear Applications at the Air Research and Development Center in Baltimore , Maryland , in 1952 . He was subsequently promoted to major general , and became Deputy Commander of the Air Research and Development Command . 
 After retiring from the Air Force in 1955 , McCormack became the first head of the Institute for Defense Analysis , a non @-@ profit research organization created to provide advice and support to the Department of Defense 's scientific and technological research efforts formed by ten universities . In 1958 he became vice president for industrial and governmental relations at MIT , in which capacity he originated the proposal that the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics be used as the basis for a new space agency , which eventually became the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . He was Chairman of the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority , and from 1965 to 1970 was chairman of the Communications Satellite Corporation . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 James McCormack , Jr . , was born in Chatham , Louisiana , on 8 November 1910 . He attended the Riverside Military Academy in Gainesville , Georgia , before entering the United States Military Academy at West Point on 2 July 1928 . He was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the United States Army Corps of Engineers on graduation on 14 August 1932 , ranking 19th in his class . He departed for England where he studied at Hertford College , Oxford , as a Rhodes Scholar . He was promoted to first lieutenant in August 1935 , and awarded his Bachelor of Arts degree from Oxford . On returning to the United States , he was posted to the 8th Engineers at Fort McIntosh , Texas , as a troop commander . 
 In June 1936 he became a student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , from which he graduated with a Master of Science degree in civil engineering in August 1937 . He then became a student officer at the Engineering School at Fort Belvoir , Virginia . In June 1938 , he reported to Vicksburg , Mississippi , as Assistant Project Engineer on the Sardis Reservoir Project . 
 = = World War II = = 
 McCormack reported to Fort Benning , Georgia , as a company commander in the 21st Engineers in October 1939 . He was promoted to captain on 9 September 1940 , and after serving as adjutant of the 20th Engineers at Fort Benning , he temporarily commanded one of the regiment 's battalions before assuming command of the 76th Engineer Company at Fort McClellan , Alabama , in mid @-@ 1941 . Later that year he attended the United States Army Command and General Staff College , after which he was promoted to major on 1 February 1942 , and posted to the War Department General Staff . He was Assistant Chief of the Types and Allowances Branch of G @-@ 4 from March 1942 to March 1943 , with a promotion to lieutenant colonel on 9 October 1942 , and then Chief of the Construction Branch of G @-@ 4 from March 1943 to September 1943 . 
 In October 1943 , McCormack became Chief of the Transportation Branch of the First United States Army Group , and was promoted to colonel on 1 December 1943 . On 1 July 1944 , he became the Chief of the Movements Branch of Twelfth United States Army Group , remaining in this role until 28 May 1945 . For his services in the European Theater of Operations , he was awarded the Legion of Merit on 30 December 1944 , and the Bronze Star Medal in May 1945 . The British government made him an honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire on 24 March 1945 , while the French government awarded him the Croix de guerre with the silver star on 29 January 1945 , and made him a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor on 3 October 1945 . 
 On 4 June 1945 , McCormack returned to duty with the War Department General Staff as a member of the Policy Section of the Strategy and Policy Group , becoming the assistant section chief on 16 September 1945 . He was then a staff officer with the Strategy and Policy Group from 16 February until 16 August 1946 , when he became chief of the Politico @-@ Military Survey Section of the Operations and Plans Division . For his service with the War Department General Staff , he was awarded an oak leaf cluster to his Legion of Merit on 8 April 1947 . 
 = = Cold War = = 
 At this point , McCormack had become apprehensive about his career , but in early 1947 a new and exciting opportunity opened up . The Atomic Energy Act of 1946 had created the United States Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) to oversee research and development of nuclear power and nuclear weapons . The Act had created a statutory position inside the AEC called the Director of Military Applications , which the AEC commissioners envisaged as a staff post responsible for military planning and policy formulation . By law , the Director of Military Applications had to be a serving armed forces officer . 
 The frontrunner for the post was the wartime commander of the Manhattan District , Brigadier General Kenneth Nichols . Indeed , Nichols was the War Department 's only nominee . However , the AEC commissioners had different ideas . Nichols was seen as too closely identified with the wartime Manhattan Project ; he had opinions at variance with the commissioners on whether the Director of Military Applications was a staff or a line position ; and he had a strong disagreement with the commissioners over the vexing issue of which agency should hold custody of the nuclear weapons stockpile . Accordingly , the AEC commissioners decided to find another candidate . 
 The AEC commissioners asked for Major General Lauris Norstad , the head of the Operations and Plans Division , but neither the Chief of Staff of the Army , General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower , nor the Secretary of War , Robert P. Patterson , was willing to release him . The commissioners then selected McCormack . The job came with a promotion to brigadier general . The commissioners got the kind of officer that they wanted . McCormack was willing to accept the post as a staff job , and took a pragmatic approach to the custody issue . Like most military officers , he was convinced that the men who had to use the nuclear weapons in battle needed to have experience in their proper maintenance , storage and handling . However , he was also aware of the sensitivity of the issue of custody , which Congress had assigned to the AEC . Rather than continue to press for changes in the law , he accepted the situation as it was , and strove to make the best of it , working within the existing framework . 
 McCormack became involved in discussions with Edward Teller over the possibility of developing thermonuclear weapons , then known as the " Super " . McCormack became an early advocate of the Super , which promised yields in the megaton range , and directed Norris Bradbury at the Los Alamos National Laboratory to proceed with its development even at the detriment of other weapons . The debate over the merits of the Super pitted the United States Air Force against the other services , which wanted more small , tactical weapons . Concurrently , there was a technical debate between Teller and other scientists like Robert Oppenheimer over the feasibility of the Super , because there was no guarantee that it would work , and even after Operation Greenhouse , the processes involved in thermonuclear reactions were not fully understood . It ultimately became apparent that the Super design would not work , but the development of the Teller @-@ Ulam design provided a new path to high yield thermonuclear weapons . For his services as Director of Military Applications , McCormack was awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal . 
 = = Later life = = 
 McCormack transferred to the United States Air Force on 25 July 1950 . After leaving the AEC in August 1951 , he became Special Assistant to the Deputy Chief of Staff of the Air Force for Development . In January 1952 he was appointed Director of Nuclear Applications at the Air Research and Development Center in Baltimore , Maryland . He was subsequently promoted to major general , and became Deputy Commander of the Air Research and Development Command . He was called to testify at the Oppenheimer security hearing . Like other witnesses , McCormack testified that Oppenheimer was loyal , and that while the two men had disagreed over the merits of the Super , that he saw nothing dishonest or disloyal in Oppenheimer 's opposition to it . 
 McCormack retired from the Air Force in 1955 , and became the first head of the Institute for Defense Analysis , a non @-@ profit research organization to provide advice and support to the Department of Defense 's scientific and technological research efforts formed by ten universities . In 1958 he became vice president for industrial and governmental relations at MIT . He originated the proposal that the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics be used as the basis for a new space agency , which eventually became the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . 
 In 1964 , the Governor of Massachusetts , Endicott Peabody , appointed McCormack as Chairman of the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority . In October 1965 , he was appointed chairman of the Communications Satellite Corporation ( COMSAT ) , with a $ 125 @,@ 000 salary . To allow himself to concentrate on his new position , he resigned all his company directorships , along with his post at MIT . He attended his first board meeting in Washington , DC , in his dinner jacket , having flown from Los Angeles after a speaking engagement . As head of a quasi @-@ government organization , McCormack strove to employ the company 's resources to carry out the policies of Congress and the President , and was able to persuade Congress to declassify plans for a domestic satellite network so he could consult with the television networks . He retired as chairman due to ill health in 1970 , although he remained a director . 
 McCormack died at his winter home in Hilton Head Island , South Carolina , on 3 January 1975 , and was buried in Arlington National Cemetery . He was survived by his wife , Eleanor née Morrow ; his son , Major James R. McCormack , who was stationed at Fort Rucker , Alabama ; and his daughter , Anne M. Stanton , who was living at Fort Campbell , Kentucky . 
 = Inglourious Basterds = 
 Inglourious Basterds is a 2009 German @-@ American war film written and directed by Quentin Tarantino and starring Brad Pitt , Christoph Waltz and Mélanie Laurent . The film tells the fictional alternate history story of two plots to assassinate Nazi Germany 's political leadership , one planned by Shosanna Dreyfus ( Laurent ) , a young French Jewish cinema proprietor , and the other by a team of Jewish @-@ American soldiers led by First Lieutenant Aldo Raine ( Pitt ) . Christoph Waltz co @-@ stars as Hans Landa , an SS colonel tracking down Raine 's group who has a connection to Shosanna 's past . The film 's title was inspired by Italian director Enzo G. Castellari 's macaroni combat film , The Inglorious Bastards ( 1978 ) . 
 Tarantino wrote the script in 1998 but struggled with the ending and chose to hold off filming and instead direct the two @-@ part film Kill Bill . After directing Death Proof in 2007 ( as part of the double feature Grindhouse ) , Tarantino returned to work on Inglourious Basterds . A co @-@ production of the United States and Germany , the film began principal photography in October 2008 and was filmed in Germany and France with a $ 70 million production budget . Inglourious Basterds premiered on May 20 , 2009 , at the 62nd Cannes Film Festival . It was widely released in theaters in the United States and Europe in August 2009 by The Weinstein Company and Universal Pictures . 
 The film was commercially successful , grossing over $ 321 million in theaters worldwide , making it Tarantino 's highest @-@ grossing film at that point , and second @-@ highest to date , after Django Unchained ( 2012 ) . It received multiple awards and nominations , among them eight Academy Award nominations , including Best Picture , Best Director and Best Original Screenplay . For his role as Landa , Waltz won the Cannes Film Festival 's Best Actor Award , as well as the BAFTA , Screen Actors Guild , Golden Globe , and Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Chapter One : Once Upon a Time ... In Nazi @-@ Occupied France = = = 
 In 1941 , SS colonel Hans Landa , the " Jew Hunter , " interrogates French dairy farmer Perrier La <unk> as to the whereabouts of the last unaccounted @-@ for Jewish family in the area . In exchange for the Germans agreeing to leave his family alone for the rest of the war , La <unk> reveals that the Dreyfus family is hidden under the floor . Landa orders SS soldiers to shoot through the floorboards . The whole family is killed except for Shosanna , a young woman who escapes when Landa decides not to shoot her as she flees . 
 = = = Chapter Two : Inglourious Basterds = = = 
 Three years later , Lieutenant Aldo " The Apache " Raine of the First Special Service Force recruits Jewish @-@ American soldiers to the Basterds , who spread fear among the German soldiers by brutally killing and scalping them . The Basterds also recruit Sergeant Hugo Stiglitz , a German soldier who murdered thirteen Gestapo officers . Adolf Hitler interviews a German soldier , Private Butz , the only survivor of a Basterd attack on his squad . Raine carved the Nazi swastika into Butz 's forehead with a knife so he could never hide that he served in the German Heer . 
 = = = Chapter Three : German Night in Paris = = = 
 Meanwhile , Shosanna is operating a cinema in Paris under an assumed name . She meets Fredrick Zoller , a German sniper who killed 250 soldiers in a single battle ; Zoller is to star in a Nazi propaganda film , Stolz der Nation ( Nation 's Pride ) . Infatuated with Shosanna , Zoller convinces Joseph Goebbels to hold the premiere of the film at her cinema . Shosanna plots with her projectionist and lover , Marcel , to kill the Nazi leaders attending the premiere by setting the cinema ablaze . 
 = = = Chapter Four : Operation Kino = = = 
 Unknown to Shosanna , British Army Lieutenant Archie Hicox is working with the Basterds to plan an attack on the same premiere . Hicox goes to a tavern with Hugo Stiglitz and Basterd Wilhelm Wicki to meet with an undercover agent , the German film star Bridget von Hammersmark . A German soldier named Wilhelm engages them in friendly conversation , but Gestapo Major Dieter Hellstrom overhears them and becomes suspicious of Hicox 's German accent . Hicox convinces him that he is from the Swiss mountains , but then gives himself away by ordering three drinks and gestures three with his fingers , but the German three is the thumb with your first two fingers . After they are discovered , the Basterds open fire and everyone is killed except Wilhelm and Hammersmark , who is wounded . Raine arrives and negotiates with Wilhelm for Hammersmark to be released , but the actress kills Wilhelm when he lowers his guard . Raine learns from Hammersmark that Hitler himself will be attending the film premiere and decides to continue the mission . Later , Landa investigates the aftermath at the tavern and finds one of Hammersmark 's shoes and a napkin with her signature , clues that will lead him to her . 
 = = = Chapter Five : Revenge of the Giant Face = = = 
 At the premiere , two of the Basterds , Donny " The Bear Jew " Donowitz and Omar Ulmer , join him in posing as Italians , hoping to fool the Germans unfamiliar with the language . However , Landa , who speaks fluent Italian , converses briefly with the Basterds before sending Donowitz and Ulmer to their seats . He takes Hammersmark to a private room , verifies that the shoe from the tavern fits her foot , then strangles her to death . Raine and another of his men , Smithson " The Little Man " Utivich , are taken prisoner , but Landa has Raine contact his superior with the OSS and cuts a deal : He will allow the mission to proceed in exchange for immunity and rewards . 
 During the screening , Zoller slips away to the projection room to see Shosanna . After she rejects his advances , he becomes aggressive . She pretends to acquiesce , then pulls a pistol from her bag and shoots him . Zoller , mortally wounded , raises his pistol and shoots her before they both die . 
 As the film reaches its climax , spliced @-@ in footage of Shosanna tells the audience that they are about to be killed by a Jew . Marcel , having locked the doors of the cinema , ignites a pile of flammable nitrate film behind the screen as Shosanna 's image laughs . Ulmer and Donowitz break into the box containing Hitler and Goebbels , killing them , then fire their submachine guns into the crowd until the bombs go off , killing everyone in the theater . 
 Landa and his radio operator drive Raine and Utivich into Allied territory , where they surrender . Raine shoots the radio operator , carves a swastika into Landa 's forehead , and tells Utivich with a grin , " This just might be my masterpiece . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Quentin Tarantino as scalped Nazi 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Tarantino spent just over a decade writing the film 's script because , as he told Charlie Rose in an interview , he became " too precious about the page , " meaning the story kept growing and expanding . Tarantino viewed the script as his masterpiece in the making , so he felt it had to become the best thing he had ever written . Tarantino described an early premise of the film as his " bunch @-@ of @-@ guys @-@ on @-@ a @-@ mission " film . He said it was " my Dirty Dozen or Where Eagles Dare or Guns of Navarone kind of thing " . According to Tarantino , all his films make the audience laugh at things that are not supposed to be funny , but the sense of humor differs in each . 
 By 2002 , Tarantino found Inglourious Basterds to be a bigger film than planned and saw that other directors were working on World War II films . At this point , Tarantino had produced three nearly finished scripts , proclaiming that it was " some of the best writing I 've ever done . But I couldn 't come up with an ending . " Consequently , the director held off his planned film and moved on to direct the two @-@ part film Kill Bill ( 2003 – 2004 ) . After the completion of Kill Bill , Tarantino went back to his first storyline draft and came up with the idea of turning it into a mini @-@ series . Instead he trimmed the script , using his script for Pulp Fiction as a guide to the right length . He then planned to begin production of Inglourious Basterds in 2005 . The revised premise focused on a group of soldiers who escape from their executions and embark on a mission to help the Allies . He described the men as " not your normal hero types that are thrown into a big deal in the Second World War " . 
 In November 2004 , Tarantino decided to hold off the film 's production and instead took an acting role in Takashi Miike 's Western film Sukiyaki Western Django and intended to make a kung fu film entirely in Mandarin . This project foundered as well , and he ultimately directed a part of the 2007 Grindhouse before returning to work on Inglourious Basterds . The film 's title was inspired by the English @-@ language title of director Enzo G. Castellari 's 1978 war film , The Inglorious Bastards . When asked for an explanation of the film 's title 's spelling during a news conference at the Cannes Film Festival , Tarantino said , " I 'm never going to explain that " . When pushed on it , Tarantino would not explain the first u in Inglourious , but said , " The Basterds ? That 's just the way you say it : Basterds . " Tarantino later stated in an interview that the misspelled title is " a Basquiat @-@ esque touch . " He further commented on Late Show with David Letterman that Inglourious Basterds is a " Quentin Tarantino spelling . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Tarantino originally sought Leonardo DiCaprio to be cast as Hans Landa , before deciding to have the character played by a German actor . The role ultimately went to Austrian Christoph Waltz , who , according to Tarantino , " gave me my movie " as he feared the part was " unplayable . " Pitt and Tarantino had wanted to work together for a number of years , but were forced to wait for the right project . When Tarantino was halfway through the film 's script , he sensed that Pitt was a strong possibility for the role of Aldo Raine . By the time he had finished writing , Tarantino thought Pitt " would be terrific " and called Pitt 's agent to ask if he was available . 
 Tarantino asked Adam Sandler to play the role of Donny Donowitz , but Sandler declined due to schedule conflicts with the film Funny People . Eli Roth was cast in the role instead . Roth also directed the film @-@ within @-@ the @-@ film , Nation 's Pride , which used 300 extras . The director also wanted to cast Simon Pegg in the film as Lt. Archie Hicox , but he was forced to drop out due to scheduling difficulties with Spielberg 's Tintin adaptation . Irish @-@ German actor Michael Fassbender began final negotiations to join the cast as Hicox in August 2008 , although he originally auditioned for the role of Landa . The Office actor and writer , B. J. Novak , was also cast in August 2008 as Private First Class Smithson Utivich , " a New York @-@ born soldier of ' slight build ' " . 
 Tarantino talked to actress <unk> Kinski about playing the role of Bridget von Hammersmark and even flew to Germany to meet her , but a deal could not be reached and Tarantino cast Diane Kruger instead . Rod Taylor was effectively retired from acting and no longer had an agent , but came out of retirement when Tarantino offered him the role of Winston Churchill in the film . This would be Taylor 's last appearance on film before his death on January 7 , 2015 . In preparation for the role , Taylor watched dozens of DVDs with footage of Churchill in order to get the Prime Minister 's posture , body language , and voice , including a lisp , correct . Taylor initially recommended British actor Albert Finney for the role during their conversation , but agreed to take the part because of Tarantino 's " passion . " Mike Myers , a fan of Tarantino , had inquired about being in the film since Myers ' parents had been in the British Armed Forces . In terms of the character 's dialect , Myers felt that it was a version of Received Pronunciation meeting the officer class , but mostly an attitude of " I 'm fed up with this war and if this dude can end it , great because my country is in ruins . " Tarantino met Mélanie Laurent in three rounds and played all the characters on the first . On the second one , he shared the lines with her , and the third one , it was dinner face @-@ to @-@ face . During the dinner , he told Laurent , " Do you know something — there 's just something I don 't like . It 's that you ’ re famous in your country , and I 'm really wanting to discover somebody . " Laurent replied " No , no , no . … I 'm not so famous . " And after four days he called and finalized her for the role of Shosanna . Samm Levine was cast as PFC Hirschberg , because , according to Levine , Tarantino was a big fan of Freaks and Geeks , which starred Levine . 
 Director Enzo Castellari also makes a cameo appearance in the film at the movie premiere . He previously cameoed as a German in his own Inglorious Bastards and reprised the same role in this film , but under a different rank and SS organization . Bo Svenson , who starred in Castellari 's The Inglorious Bastards , also has a small cameo in the film as a US colonel in the Nation 's Pride movie . Samuel L. Jackson and Harvey Keitel , who have both previously starred in Tarantino 's films , make small voice @-@ only contributions as the narrator and an OSS commander , respectively . German musician Bela B. has an uncredited cameo appearance as an usher at the cinema . Two characters , Mrs. <unk> and Madame Ada <unk> , played by Cloris Leachman and Maggie Cheung respectively , were both cut from the final film due to length reasons . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Tarantino teamed with The Weinstein Company to prepare what he planned to be his film for production . In July 2008 , Tarantino and executive producers Harvey and Bob Weinstein set up an accelerated production schedule to be completed for release at the Cannes Film Festival in 2009 , where the film would compete for the Palme d 'Or . The Weinstein Company co @-@ financed the film and distributed it in the United States , and signed a deal with Universal Pictures to finance the rest of the film and distribute it internationally . Germany and France were scheduled as filming locations and principal photography started in October 2008 on location in Germany . Filming was scheduled to begin on October 13 , 2008 , and shooting started that week . Special effects were handled by KNB EFX Group with Greg Nicotero and much of the film was shot and edited in the Babelsberg Studios in Potsdam , Germany and in Bad <unk> , a small spa town near Germany 's border with the Czech Republic . Roth claimed that they " almost got incinerated " , during the theater fire scene , as they projected the fire would burn at 400 ° C ( 750 ° F ) , but it instead burned at 1200 ° C ( 2000 ° F ) . He claimed the swastika was not supposed to fall either , as it was fastened with steel cables , but the steel softened and snapped . On January 11 , 2013 , on the BBC 's The Graham Norton Show , Tarantino claimed that for the scene where Kruger was strangled , he personally strangled the actress , with his own bare hands , in one take , to aid authenticity . 
 Following the film 's screening at Cannes , Tarantino stated that he would be re @-@ editing the film in June before its ultimate theatrical release , allowing him time to finish assembling several scenes that were not completed in time for the hurried Cannes première . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Tarantino originally wanted Ennio Morricone to compose the film 's soundtrack . Morricone was unable to , because the film 's sped @-@ up production schedule conflicted with his scoring of Giuseppe <unk> 's <unk> . However , Tarantino did use eight tracks composed by Morricone in the film , with four of them included on the CD . 
 The opening theme is taken from the pseudo @-@ folk ballad " The Green Leaves of Summer " , which was composed by Dimitri Tiomkin and Paul Francis Webster for the opening of the 1960 film The Alamo . The soundtrack uses a variety of music genres , including spaghetti western , R & B and David Bowie 's theme from the 1982 film Cat People . This is the first of Tarantino 's soundtracks that does not include dialogue excerpts from the film . The soundtrack was released on August 18 , 2009 . 
 = = Release = = 
 When the script 's final draft was finished , it was leaked on the Internet and several Tarantino fan sites began posting reviews and excerpts from the script . 
 The film 's first full teaser trailer premiered on Entertainment Tonight on February 10 , 2009 , and was shown in US theaters the following week attached to Friday the 13th . The trailer features excerpts of Lt. Aldo Raine talking to the Basterds , informing them of the plan to ambush and kill , torture , and scalp unwitting Nazi servicemen , intercut with various other scenes from the film . It also features the spaghetti @-@ <unk> terms Once Upon A Time In Nazi Occupied France , which was considered for the film 's title , and A Basterd 's Work Is Never Done , a line not spoken in the final film ( the line occurs in the script during the Bear Jew 's backstory ) . 
 The film was released on August 19 , 2009 in the United Kingdom and France , two days earlier than the US release date of August 21 , 2009 . It was released in Germany on August 20 , 2009 . Some European cinemas , however , showed previews starting on August 15 . In Poland , the artwork on all advertisements and on DVD packaging is unchanged , but the title was translated non @-@ literally to <unk> <unk> ( Bastards of War ) , so that Nazi iconography could stylize the letter " O " . 
 = = = Promotion in Germany = = = 
 Universal Pictures adjusted the film 's German publicity website to the German penal law , as the display of Nazi iconography is restricted in Germany . The title has the swastika removed and the steel helmet has a bullet hole instead of the Nazi symbol . The German site 's download section was revised to exclude wallpaper downloads that openly feature the swastika . Though the advertisement posters and wallpapers may not show Nazi iconography , this does not apply to " works of art " according to German law , so the film itself is not censored in Germany . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on single @-@ disc DVD and a two @-@ disc special edition DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on December 15 , 2009 , by Universal Studios Home Entertainment in the United States and Australia . It was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on December 7 , 2009 , in the UK . On its first week of release , the film was number two , only behind The Hangover , selling an estimated 1 @,@ 581 @,@ 220 DVDs making $ 28 @,@ 467 @,@ 652 in the United States . 
 The German version is 50 seconds longer than the American version . The scene in the tavern has been extended . Although in other countries , the extended scene was released as a bonus feature , the German theatrical , DVD , and Blu @-@ ray versions are the only ones to include the full scene . To comply with Germany 's prohibition of the swastika symbol , some German DVD and Blu @-@ ray releases of the film show a bullet hole partially obscuring the swastika on the cover . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Opening in 3 @,@ 165 screens , the film earned $ 14 @.@ 3 million on the opening Friday of its North American release , on the way to an opening weekend gross of $ 38 million , giving Tarantino a personal best weekend opening and the number one spot at the box office , ahead of District 9 . The film fell to number two in its second weekend , behind The Final Destination , with earnings of $ 20 million , and grossed $ 73 @.@ 8 million in its first ten days . Inglourious Basterds opened internationally at number one in 22 markets on 2 @,@ 650 screens making $ 27 @.@ 49 million . First place openings included France , taking in $ 6 @.@ 09 million on 500 screens . The United Kingdom was not far behind making $ 5 @.@ 92 million ( £ <unk> ) on 444 screens . Germany took in $ 4 @.@ 20 million on 439 screens and Australia with $ 2 @.@ 56 million ( A $ <unk> ) on 266 screens . It has come to gross $ 120 @.@ 5 million in the United States and Canada and $ 200 @.@ 9 million in other territories , making its worldwide gross $ 321 @.@ 4 million . Inglourious Basterds was Tarantino 's highest grossing film , both in the U.S. and worldwide until Django Unchained in 2012 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 89 % of 297 critics have given the film a positive review , with a rating average of 7 @.@ 8 out of 10 . According to the site 's critical consensus , " A classic Tarantino genre @-@ blending thrill ride , Inglourious Basterds is violent , unrestrained , and thoroughly entertaining . " Metacritic , which assigns a score of 1 – 100 to individual film reviews , gives the film an averaged rating of 69 based on 36 reviews . 
 Critics ' initial reactions at the Cannes Film Festival were mixed . The film received an eight- to eleven @-@ minute standing ovation from critics after its first screening at Cannes , although Le Monde , a leading French newspaper , dismissed it , saying " Tarantino gets lost in a fictional World War II " . Despite this , Anne Thompson of Variety praised the film , but opined that it was not a masterpiece , claiming , " Inglourious Basterds is great fun to watch , but the movie isn 't entirely engaging ... You don 't jump into the world of the film in a participatory way ; you watch it from a distance , appreciating the references and the masterful mise en scène . This is a film that will benefit from a second viewing " . Critic James Berardinelli gave the film his first four @-@ star review of 2009 , stating , " With Inglourious Basterds , Quentin Tarantino has made his best movie since Pulp Fiction , " and that it was " one hell of an enjoyable ride . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times also gave the film a four @-@ star review , writing that " Quentin Tarantino 's Inglourious Basterds is a big , bold , audacious war movie that will annoy some , startle others and demonstrate once again that he 's the real thing , a director of quixotic delights . " Author and critic Daniel Mendelsohn was disturbed by the portrayal of Jewish @-@ American soldiers mimicking German atrocities done to European Jews , stating , " In Inglourious Basterds , Tarantino indulges this taste for vengeful violence by — well , by turning Jews into Nazis " . Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian stated he was " struck ... by how exasperatingly awful and <unk> disappointing it is " . While praising Christoph Waltz 's performance ( " a good actor new to American audiences " ) , David Denby , of The New Yorker , dismissed the film with the following words : " The film is skillfully made , but it 's too silly to be enjoyed , even as a joke . [ ... ] Tarantino has become an embarrassment : his virtuosity as a maker of images has been overwhelmed by his inanity as an idiot de la <unk> . " Christopher Hitchens likened the experience of watching the film to " sitting in the dark having a great pot of warm piss emptied very slowly over your head . " 
 The film has met some criticism from Jewish press , as well . In Tablet , Liel <unk> criticizes the film as lacking moral depth . He argues that the power of film lies in its ability to impart knowledge and subtle understanding , but Inglourious Basterds serves more as an " alternative to reality , a magical and Manichaean world where we needn 't worry about the complexities of morality , where violence solves everything , and where the Third Reich is always just a film reel and a lit match away from cartoonish defeat " . Anthony <unk> , writer for the online magazine <unk> Australis , has criticized the film for failing to develop its characters sufficiently , labeling the film " <unk> , but lacking in Jewish content " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Christoph Waltz was singled out for Cannes honors , receiving the Best Actor Award at the festival 's end . Film critic Devin Faraci of CHUD.com stated : " The cry has been raised long before this review , but let me continue it : Christoph Waltz needs not an Oscar nomination but rather an actual Oscar in his hands .... he must have gold " . The film received four Golden Globe Award nominations including Best Motion Picture – Drama and Best Supporting Actor for Waltz , who went on to win the award . The film also received three Screen Actors Guild Award nominations and went on to win the awards for Best Cast and Best Supporting Actor , which was awarded to Waltz . The film was nominated for six BAFTA Awards , including Best Director for Tarantino , winning only one award — Best Supporting Actor for Waltz . In February 2010 , the film was nominated for eight Academy Awards , including Best Picture , Best Director , Best Supporting Actor for Waltz , and Best Original Screenplay . Waltz was awarded the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 On December 5 , 2010 , " The Fight Before Christmas " , the eighth episode of The Simpsons ' 22nd season , featured an Inglourious Basterds sequence during a World War II flashback . 
 When the Jewish , 6 feet 7 inches ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) , 314 @-@ pound American football player Gabe Carimi was drafted in the 2011 NFL Draft 's first round by the Chicago Bears , he was nicknamed " The Bear Jew " , a reference to the character in Inglourious Basterds . 
 In the American sitcom Community , the character Chang recruits a group of bodyguards he names " The <unk> Bastards " ' . 
 = Al Pacino = 
 Alfredo James " Al " Pacino ( / <unk> / ; born April 25 , 1940 ) is an American actor of stage and screen , filmmaker , and screenwriter . Pacino has had a career spanning fifty years , during which time he has received numerous accolades and honors both competitive and honorary , among them an Academy Award , two Tony Awards , two Primetime Emmy Awards , a British Academy Film Award , four Golden Globe Awards , the Lifetime Achievement Award from the American Film Institute , the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award , and the National Medal of Arts . He is also one of few performers to have won a competitive Oscar , an Emmy and a Tony Award for acting , dubbed the " Triple Crown of Acting " . 
 A method actor and former student of the Herbert Berghof Studio and the Actors Studio in New York City , where he was taught by Charlie Laughton and Lee Strasberg , Pacino made his feature film debut with a minor role in Me , Natalie ( 1969 ) and gained favourable notices for his lead role as a heroin addict in The Panic in Needle Park ( 1971 ) . He achieved international acclaim and recognition for his breakthrough role as Michael Corleone in Francis Ford Coppola 's The Godfather ( 1972 ) . He received his first Oscar nomination and would reprise the role in sequels Part II ( 1974 ) and Part III ( 1990 ) . Pacino 's performance as Corleone is now regarded as one of the greatest screen performances in film history . 
 Pacino received his first Best Actor Oscar nomination for Serpico ( 1973 ) ; he was also nominated for The Godfather Part II , Dog Day Afternoon ( 1975 ) and ... And Justice for All ( 1979 ) and won the award in 1993 for his performance as a blind Lieutenant Colonel in Scent of a Woman ( 1992 ) . For his performances in The Godfather , Dick Tracy ( 1990 ) and Glengarry Glen Ross ( 1992 ) , Pacino was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor . Other notable roles include Tony Montana in Scarface ( 1983 ) , Carlito <unk> in Carlito 's Way ( 1993 ) , Lieutenant Vincent Hanna in Heat ( 1995 ) , Benjamin Ruggiero in Donnie Brasco ( 1997 ) , Lowell Bergman in The Insider ( 1999 ) and Detective Will Dormer in Insomnia ( 2002 ) . In television , Pacino has acted in several productions for HBO including the miniseries Angels in America ( 2003 ) and the Jack Kevorkian biopic You Don 't Know Jack ( 2010 ) , both of which won him the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie . 
 In addition to his work in film , Pacino has had an extensive career on stage and is a two @-@ time Tony Award winner , in 1969 and 1977 , for his performances in Does a Tiger Wear a <unk> ? and The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel respectively . A lifelong fan of Shakespeare , Pacino directed and starred in Looking for Richard ( 1996 ) , a documentary film about the play Richard III , a role which Pacino had earlier portrayed on @-@ stage in 1977 . He has also acted as Shylock in a 2004 feature film adaptation and a 2010 production of The Merchant of Venice . Having made his filmmaking debut with Looking for Richard , Pacino has also directed and starred in the independent film Chinese Coffee ( 2000 ) and the films Wilde Salomé ( 2011 ) and Salomé ( 2013 ) , about the play Salomé by Oscar Wilde . Since 1994 , Pacino has been the joint president of the Actors Studio with Ellen Burstyn and Harvey Keitel . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Pacino was born in New York City ( East Harlem ) , to Sicilian @-@ American parents Salvatore Pacino and Rose , who divorced when he was two years old . His mother moved near the Bronx Zoo to live with her parents , Kate and James <unk> , who , coincidentally , had come from a town in Sicily named Corleone . His father , who was from San Fratello in the Province of Messina , moved to Covina , California , and worked as an insurance salesman and restaurateur . 
 In his teen years " Sonny " , as he was known to his friends , aimed to become a baseball player , and was also nicknamed " The Actor " . Pacino dropped out of many classes , but not English . He dropped out of school at age 17 . His mother disagreed with his decision ; they argued and he left home . He worked at low @-@ paying jobs , messenger , busboy , janitor , and postal clerk , to finance his acting studies . He once worked in the mail room for Commentary magazine . 
 He began smoking and drinking at age nine , and took up casual cannabis use at age 13 , but never used hard drugs . His two closest friends died from drug abuse at the ages of 19 and 30 . Growing up in The Bronx , he got into occasional fights and was considered something of a troublemaker at school . 
 He acted in basement plays in New York 's theatrical underground but was rejected for the Actors Studio while a teenager . Pacino then joined the Herbert Berghof Studio ( HB Studio ) , where he met acting teacher Charlie Laughton ( not to be confused with the British actor Charles Laughton ) , who became his mentor and best friend . In this period , he was often unemployed and homeless , and sometimes slept on the street , in theaters , or at friends ' houses . 
 In 1962 , his mother died at the age of 43 . The following year , Pacino 's grandfather James <unk> , one of the most influential people in his life , also died . 
 = = Actors Studio training = = 
 After four years at HB Studio , Pacino successfully auditioned for the Actors Studio . The Actors Studio is a membership organization of professional actors , theatre directors and playwrights in the Hell 's Kitchen neighborhood of Manhattan in New York City . Pacino studied " method acting " under acting coach Lee Strasberg , who later appeared with Pacino in the films The Godfather Part II and in ... And Justice for All . 
 During later interviews he spoke about Strasberg and the Studio 's effect on his career . " The Actors Studio meant so much to me in my life . Lee Strasberg hasn 't been given the credit he deserves ... Next to Charlie , it sort of launched me . It really did . That was a remarkable turning point in my life . It was directly responsible for getting me to quit all those jobs and just stay acting . " 
 In another interview he added , " It was exciting to work for him [ Lee Strasberg ] because he was so interesting when he talked about a scene or talked about people . One would just want to hear him talk , because things he would say , you 'd never heard before ... He had such a great understanding ... he loved actors so much . " 
 Pacino is currently co @-@ president , along with Ellen Burstyn and Harvey Keitel , of the Actors Studio . 
 = = Stage career = = 
 In 1967 , Pacino spent a season at the Charles Playhouse in Boston , performing in Clifford Odets ' Awake and Sing ! ( his first major paycheck : $ 125 a week ) ; and in Jean @-@ Claude Van <unk> 's America , Hurrah , where he met actress Jill Clayburgh on this play . They had a five @-@ year romance and moved back together to New York City . 
 In 1968 , Pacino starred in Israel Horovitz 's The Indian Wants the Bronx at the Astor Place Theater , playing Murph , a street punk . The play opened January 17 , 1968 , and ran for 177 performances ; it was staged in a double bill with Horovitz 's It 's Called the Sugar Plum , starring Clayburgh . Pacino won an Obie Award for Best Actor for his role , with John Cazale winning for Best Supporting actor and Horowitz for Best New Play . Martin Bregman saw the play and became Pacino 's manager , a partnership that became fruitful in the years to come , as Bregman encouraged Pacino to do The Godfather , Serpico and Dog Day Afternoon . " Martin Bregman discovered me off Broadway . I was 26 , 25 . And he discovered me and became my manager . And that 's why I 'm here . I owe it to Marty , I really do , " Pacino himself has stated about his own career . 
 Pacino and this production of The Indian Wants the Bronx traveled to Italy for a performance at the Festival dei Due Mondi in Spoleto . It was Pacino 's first journey to Italy ; he later recalled that " performing for an Italian audience was a marvelous experience " . Pacino and Clayburgh were cast in " Deadly Circle of Violence " , an episode of the ABC television series NYPD , premiering November 12 , 1968 . Clayburgh at the time was also appearing on the soap opera Search for Tomorrow , playing the role of Grace Bolton . Her father would send the couple money each month to help . 
 On February 25 , 1969 , Pacino made his Broadway debut in Don Petersen 's Does a Tiger Wear a <unk> ? at the Belasco Theater produced by A & P Heir Huntington Hartford . It closed after 39 performances on March 29 , 1969 , but Pacino received rave reviews and won the Tony Award on April 20 , 1969 . Pacino continued performing onstage in the 1970s , winning a second Tony Award for The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel and performing the title role in Richard III . In the 1980s , Pacino again achieved critical success on stage while appearing in David Mamet 's American Buffalo , for which Pacino was nominated for a Drama Desk Award . Since 1990 , Pacino 's stage work has included revivals of Eugene O 'Neill 's Hughie , Oscar Wilde 's Salome and in 2005 Lyle Kessler 's Orphans . 
 Pacino made his return to the stage in summer 2010 , as Shylock in a Shakespeare in the Park production of The Merchant of Venice . The acclaimed production moved to Broadway at the Broadhurst Theatre in October , earning US $ 1 million at the box office in its first week . The performance also garnered him a Tony Award nomination for Best Leading Actor in a Play . In October 2012 Pacino starred in the 30th anniversary Broadway revival of David Mamet 's classic play , Glengarry Glen Ross , which ran through January 20 , 2013 . 
 From the end of 2015 through January 2016 he starred on Broadway in " China Doll " , a play written for him by David Mamet . It is a limited run of 87 performances , after acclaimed reviews of 4 performances in October 2015 . 
 = = Film career = = 
 = = = Early film career = = = 
 Pacino found acting enjoyable and realized he had a gift for it while studying at The Actors Studio . However , his early work was not financially rewarding . After his success on stage , Pacino made his movie debut in 1969 with a brief appearance in Me , Natalie , an independent film starring Patty Duke . In 1970 , Pacino signed with the talent agency Creative Management Associates ( CMA ) . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 It was the 1971 film The Panic in Needle Park , in which he played a heroin addict , that brought Pacino to the attention of director Francis Ford Coppola , who cast him as Michael Corleone in the blockbuster Mafia film The Godfather ( 1972 ) . Although several established actors — including Jack Nicholson , Robert Redford , Warren Beatty , and little @-@ known Robert De Niro — also tried out for the part , Coppola selected the relatively unknown Pacino , to the dismay of studio executives . 
 Pacino 's performance earned him an Academy Award nomination , and offered a prime example of his early acting style , described by Halliwell 's Film Guide as " intense " and " tightly clenched " . Pacino boycotted the Academy Award ceremony , insulted at being nominated for the Supporting Acting award , noting that he had more screen time than co @-@ star and Best Actor winner Marlon Brando — who also boycotted the awards , but for unrelated reasons . 
 In 1973 , he co @-@ starred in Scarecrow , with Gene Hackman , and won the Palme d 'Or at the Cannes Film Festival . That same year , Pacino was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor after starring in Serpico , based on the true story of New York City policeman Frank Serpico , who went undercover to expose the corruption of fellow officers . In 1974 , Pacino reprised his role as Michael Corleone in the sequel The Godfather Part II , which was the first sequel to win the Best Picture Oscar ; Pacino , meanwhile , was nominated for his third Oscar . 
 Newsweek has described his performance in The Godfather Part II as " arguably cinema 's greatest portrayal of the hardening of a heart " . In 1975 , he enjoyed further success with the release of Dog Day Afternoon , based on the true story of bank robber John <unk> . It was directed by Sidney Lumet , who had directed him in Serpico a few years earlier , and Pacino was again nominated for Best Actor . 
 In 1977 , Pacino starred as a race @-@ car driver in Bobby Deerfield , directed by Sydney Pollack , and received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama for his portrayal of the title role . His next film was the courtroom drama ... And Justice for All , which again saw Pacino lauded by critics for his wide range of acting abilities , and nominated for the Best Actor Oscar for a fourth time . However he lost out that year to Dustin Hoffman in Kramer vs. Kramer — a role that Pacino had declined . 
 During the 1970s , Pacino had four Oscar nominations for Best Actor , for his performances in Serpico , The Godfather Part II , Dog Day Afternoon , and ... And Justice for All . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 Pacino 's career slumped in the early 1980s ; his appearances in the controversial Cruising , a film that provoked protests from New York 's gay community , and the comedy @-@ drama Author ! Author ! , were critically panned . However , 1983 's Scarface , directed by Brian De Palma , proved to be a career highlight and a defining role . Upon its initial release , the film was critically panned due to violent content , but later received critical acclaim . The film did well at the box office , grossing over US $ 45 million domestically . Pacino earned a Golden Globe nomination for his role as Cuban drug lord Tony Montana . 
 In 1985 , Pacino worked on his personal project , The Local <unk> , a 1969 Off Broadway play by the English writer Heathcote Williams . He starred in the play , remounting it with director David Wheeler and the Theater Company of Boston in a 50 @-@ minute film version . The film was not released theatrically , but was later released as part of the Pacino : An Actor 's Vision box set in 2007 . 
 His 1985 film Revolution about a fur trapper during the American Revolutionary War , was a commercial and critical failure , which Pacino blamed on a rushed production , resulting in a four @-@ year hiatus from films . At this time Pacino returned to the stage . He mounted workshop productions of Crystal Clear , National Anthems and other plays ; he appeared in Julius Caesar in 1988 in producer Joseph Papp 's New York Shakespeare Festival . Pacino remarked on his hiatus from film : " I remember back when everything was happening , ' 74 , ' 75 , doing The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui on stage and reading that the reason I 'd gone back to the stage was that my movie career was waning ! That 's been the kind of ethos , the way in which theater 's perceived , unfortunately . " Pacino returned to film in 1989 's Sea of Love , when he portrayed a detective hunting a serial killer who finds victims through the singles column in a newspaper . The film earned solid reviews . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Pacino received an Academy Award nomination for playing Big Boy Caprice in the box office hit Dick Tracy in 1990 , of which critic Roger Ebert described Pacino as " the scene @-@ stealer " . Later in the year he followed this up in a return to one of his most famous characters , Michael Corleone , in The Godfather Part III ( 1990 ) . The film received mixed reviews , and had problems in pre @-@ production due to script rewrites and the withdrawal of actors shortly before production . 
 In 1991 , Pacino starred in Frankie and Johnny with Michelle Pfeiffer , who co @-@ starred with Pacino in Scarface . Pacino portrays a recently paroled cook who begins a relationship with a waitress ( Pfeiffer ) in the diner where they work . It was adapted by Terrence McNally from his own Off @-@ Broadway play Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune ( 1987 ) , that featured Kenneth Welsh and Kathy Bates . The film received mixed reviews , although Pacino later said he enjoyed playing the part . Janet Maslin in The New York Times wrote , " Mr. Pacino has not been this uncomplicatedly appealing since his " Dog Day Afternoon " days , and he makes Johnny 's endless enterprise in wooing Frankie a delight . His scenes alone with Ms. Pfeiffer have a precision and honesty that keep the film 's maudlin aspects at bay . " 
 In 1992 , Pacino won the Academy Award for Best Actor , for his portrayal of the blind U.S. Army Lieutenant Colonel Frank Slade in Martin Brest 's Scent of a Woman . That year , he was also nominated for Best Supporting Actor for Glengarry Glen Ross , making Pacino the first male actor ever to receive two acting nominations for two movies in the same year , and to win for the lead role . 
 Pacino starred alongside Sean Penn in the crime drama Carlito 's Way in 1993 , in which he portrayed a gangster released from prison with the help of his lawyer ( Penn ) and vows to go straight . Pacino starred in Michael Mann 's Heat ( 1995 ) , in which he and Robert De Niro appeared on @-@ screen together for the first time ( though both Pacino and De Niro starred in The Godfather Part II , they did not share any scenes ) . 
 In 1996 , Pacino starred in his theatrical docudrama Looking for Richard , a performance of selected scenes of Shakespeare 's Richard III and a broader examination of Shakespeare 's continuing role and relevance in popular culture . The cast brought together for the performance included Alec Baldwin , Kevin Spacey , and Winona Ryder . Pacino played Satan in the supernatural thriller The Devil 's Advocate ( 1997 ) which co @-@ starred Keanu Reeves . The film was a success at the box office , taking US $ 150 million worldwide . Roger Ebert wrote in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , " The satanic character is played by Pacino with relish bordering on glee . " 
 In 1997 's Donnie Brasco , Pacino played gangster " Lefty " in the true story of undercover FBI agent Donnie Brasco ( Johnny Depp ) and his work in bringing down the mafia from the inside . In 1999 , Pacino starred as 60 Minutes producer Lowell Bergman in the multi @-@ Oscar nominated The Insider opposite Russell Crowe , and in Oliver Stone 's Any Given Sunday . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
