 Pacino has not received another Academy Award nomination since winning for Scent of a Woman , but has won three Golden Globes since the year 2000 , the first being the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2001 for lifetime achievement in motion pictures . 
 In 2000 , Pacino released a low @-@ budget film adaptation of Ira Lewis ' play Chinese Coffee to film festivals . Shot almost exclusively as a one @-@ on @-@ one conversation between two main characters , the project took nearly three years to complete and was funded entirely by Pacino . Chinese Coffee was included with Pacino 's two other rare films he was involved in producing , The Local <unk> and Looking for Richard , on a special DVD box set titled Pacino : An Actor 's Vision , which was released in 2007 . Pacino produced prologues and epilogues for the discs containing the films . 
 Pacino turned down an offer to reprise his role as Michael Corleone in the computer game version of The Godfather . As a result , Electronic Arts was not permitted to use Pacino 's likeness or voice in the game , although his character does appear in it . He did allow his likeness to appear in the video game adaptation of 1983 's Scarface , quasi @-@ sequel titled Scarface : The World is Yours . 
 Director Christopher Nolan worked with Pacino on Insomnia , a remake of the Norwegian film of the same name , co @-@ starring Robin Williams . Newsweek stated that " he [ Pacino ] can play small as <unk> as he can play big , that he can implode as well as explode " . The film and Pacino 's performance were well received , gaining a favorable rating of 93 percent on the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes . The film did moderately well at the box office , taking in $ 113 million worldwide . His next film , S1m0ne , did not gain much critical praise or box office success . 
 He played a publicist in People I Know , a small film that received little attention despite Pacino 's well @-@ received performance . Rarely taking a supporting role since his commercial breakthrough , he accepted a small part in the box office flop Gigli , in 2003 , as a favor to director Martin Brest . The Recruit , released in 2003 , featured Pacino as a CIA recruiter and co @-@ stars Colin Farrell . The film received mixed reviews , and has been described by Pacino as something he " personally couldn 't follow " . Pacino next starred as lawyer Roy Cohn in the 2003 HBO miniseries Angels in America , an adaptation of Tony Kushner 's Pulitzer Prize winning play of the same name . For this performance , Pacino won his third Golden Globe , for Best Performance by an Actor , in 2004 . 
 Pacino starred as Shylock in Michael Radford 's 2004 film adaptation of The Merchant of Venice , choosing to bring compassion and depth to a character traditionally played as a villainous caricature . In Two for the Money , Pacino portrays a sports gambling agent and mentor for Matthew McConaughey , alongside Rene Russo . The film was released on October 8 , 2005 , to mixed reviews . Desson Thomson wrote in The Washington Post , " Al Pacino has played the mentor so many times , he ought to get a kingmaker 's award ... the fight between good and evil feels fixed in favor of Hollywood redemption . " 
 On October 20 , 2006 , the American Film Institute named Pacino the recipient of the 35th AFI Life Achievement Award . On November 22 , 2006 , the University Philosophical Society of Trinity College , Dublin awarded Pacino the Honorary Patronage of the Society . 
 Pacino played a spoof role in Steven Soderbergh 's Ocean 's Thirteen , alongside George Clooney , Brad Pitt , Matt Damon , Elliott Gould and Andy García , as the villain Willy Bank , a casino tycoon targeted by Danny Ocean and his crew . The film received generally favorable reviews . 
 88 Minutes was released on April 18 , 2008 , in the United States , after having been released in various other countries in 2007 . The film co @-@ starred Alicia Witt and was critically panned , although critics found fault with the plot , and not Pacino 's acting . In Righteous Kill , Pacino and Robert De Niro co @-@ star as New York detectives searching for a serial killer . The film was released to theaters on September 12 , 2008 . While it was an anticipated return for the two stars , it was not well received by critics . Lou Lumenick of the New York Post gave Righteous Kill one star out of four , saying : " Al Pacino and Robert De Niro collect bloated paychecks with intent to bore in Righteous Kill , a slow @-@ moving , ridiculous police thriller that would have been shipped straight to the remainder bin at Blockbuster if it starred anyone else . " 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 Pacino played Dr. Jack Kevorkian in an HBO Films biopic entitled You Don 't Know Jack , which premiered April 2010 . The film is about the life and work of the physician @-@ assisted suicide advocate . The performance earned Pacino his second Emmy Award for lead actor and his fourth Golden Globe award . 
 It was announced in May 2011 that Pacino was to be honored with the " Glory to the Film @-@ maker " award at the 68th Venice International Film Festival . The award was presented ahead of the premiere of his film Wilde Salome , the third film Pacino has directed . Pacino , who plays the role of Herod in the film , describes it as his " most personal project ever " . 
 The United States premiere of Wilde Salomé took place on the evening of March 21 , 2012 , before a full house at the 1 @,@ 400 @-@ seat Castro Theatre in San Francisco 's Castro District . Marking the 130th anniversary of Oscar Wilde 's visit to San Francisco , the event was a benefit for the GLBT Historical Society . 
 Pacino most recently starred in a 2013 HBO biographical picture about record producer Phil Spector 's murder trial , titled Phil Spector . 
 Pacino and Robert De Niro were reportedly set to star in the upcoming project The Irishman , to be directed by Martin Scorsese and co @-@ star Joe Pesci . It was announced in January 2013 that Pacino would play the late former Penn State University football coach Joe Paterno in the movie tentatively titled Happy Valley and based on a 2012 biography of Paterno by sportswriter Joe Posnanski . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Although he has never married , Pacino has three children . The eldest , Julie Marie ( born 1989 ) , is his daughter with acting coach Jan Tarrant . He also has twins , son Anton James and daughter Olivia Rose ( born January 25 , 2001 ) , with actress Beverly D 'Angelo , with whom he had a relationship from 1996 until 2003 . Pacino had a relationship with Diane Keaton , his co @-@ star in the Godfather trilogy . The on @-@ again , off @-@ again relationship ended following the filming of The Godfather Part II . He has had relationships with Tuesday Weld , Jill Clayburgh , Marthe Keller , Kathleen Quinlan and Lyndall Hobbs . 
 The Internal Revenue Service filed a tax lien against Pacino , claiming he owes the government a total of $ 188 @,@ 000 for 2008 and 2009 . A representative for Pacino blamed his former business manager Kenneth Starr for the discrepancy . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Pacino has been nominated and has won many awards during his acting career , including eight Oscar nominations ( winning one ) , 15 Golden Globe nominations ( winning four ) , five BAFTA nominations ( winning two ) , two Primetime Emmy Awards for his work on television , and two Tony Awards for his stage work . In 2007 , the American Film Institute awarded Pacino with a lifetime achievement award and , in 2003 , British television viewers voted Pacino as the greatest film star of all time in a poll for Channel 4 . 
 = Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories = 
 Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories is a book of short stories published in 1991 by San Antonio @-@ based Mexican @-@ American writer Sandra Cisneros . The collection reflects Cisneros 's experience of being surrounded by American influences while still being <unk> bound to her Mexican heritage as she grew @-@ up north of the Mexico @-@ US border . 
 These tales focus on the social role of women , and their relationships with the men and other women in their lives . The majority of the characters are stereotypes : men embody machismo while women are naïve and generally weak . Cisneros focuses on three feminine clichés : the passive virgin , sinful seductress , and traitorous mother . Not properly belonging to either Mexico or America , the Chicana protagonists earnestly search for their identity , only to discover abuse and shattered dreams . Apart from focusing on these issues of struggling females , Cisneros simultaneously develops the readers ' sensitivity towards the lives of immigrants . 
 The vignettes are quite short on average ; the longest is 29 pages , while the shortest is fewer than five paragraphs . Despite such limited space , Cisneros experiments with daring poetic prose in her storytelling ; for example , each story presents a new character with a distinct literary voice and style . Such writing has earned her the title of an accomplished Chicana poet , with the added credentials of her published books of poetry My Wicked Wicked Ways ( 1987 ) and Loose Woman ( 1994 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 From early on , a bond ran throughout Cisneros 's family as a result of being separated from their homeland and having to live as Mexican @-@ Americans in Chicago . Cisneros was born into a family of seven children and was often singled out as she was the only daughter . Despite the abundance of sibling playmates , Cisneros always felt lonely as a child , thus prompting her to begin creating stories to vary her daily routine . 
 After many years of writing , Cisneros used Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories to explore the failed relationships of the female characters via their reactions to the men in their lives . This feminine focus in the stories may reflect Cisneros 's own views on relationships , as she does not appear to have a strong connection to any male figures in her life : " For her , men seem to be a utility that a woman turns on and off as required . " As the writing is from a Mexican @-@ American immigrant 's point of view , this feminism contends not only with the stereotype of gender , but of class and race as well . Cisneros " creates stories , not explanations or analyses or arguments " , which describe her feminist views with " more provisional , personal , emotional , and intuitive forms of narrative " . 
 An example of her feminine focus is found in the title story " Woman Hollering Creek " , which concentrates on a woman who is physically abused by her husband and feels drawn towards the nearby creek . She becomes depressed and sits beside the water with her new baby , contemplating how a woman could be driven crazy . Cisneros develops this tale , which has also been found slightly modified in Aztec , Greek , and Spanish cultures , from the legend of La Llorona ( Spanish for " weeping woman " ) , a ghost story found in Mexico and Texas . In the myth , " a beautiful young woman named Maria falls in love and marries a handsome , rich boy , and their union is blessed with two sons and a daughter " . Soon after , the man loses his affection for his wife . Maria , knowing that her husband no longer loves her , drowns their three children in the river and then herself . Upon reaching heaven , Maria is told that she cannot enter until she has found her children . She is sent back to Earth , where she wails sorrowfully for her children . According to legend , any child that happens upon her ghost is pulled into the river and drowned . The real Woman Hollering Creek , a body of water just off Interstate 10 in Texas , is the river which Cisneros mentions in her story . The protagonist in " Woman Hollering Creek " is rescued from her abusive husband by two strangers before she goes mad . 
 = = Plot summaries = = 
 Cisneros 's collection of stories is divided into three sections . The first section , which focuses on the innocence of the characters during childhood , is called " My Lucy Friend Who Smells Like Corn " . The following section , called " One Holy Night " , includes two short stories highlighting the troublesome adolescent years of its characters . The final section , called " There Was a Man , There Was a Woman " , concentrates on characters during their tumultuous adulthood . Most of the stories in the collection are between one and fifteen pages in length ; " Eyes of Zapata " , the longest story , is 29 pages long , while " Salvador Late or Early " and " There Was a Man , There Was a Woman " each occupies a single page . 
 The first and second plot of the story in this book shares the title , " My Lucy Friend Who Smells Like Corn " , with its corresponding section and is a short narrative about an unnamed narrator and her best friend Lucy Anguiano , the " Texas girl who smells like corn " . This vignette offers a snapshot into life just north of the United States @-@ Mexico border for two girls who are presumably of Mexican descent . Lucy 's home is portrayed as a low @-@ income , Mexican @-@ American family . Her mother is overworked and busy with many children while her father is rarely around . However , the story focuses on the freedom that the girls have when no one of authority is watching ; for example , waving at strangers , jumping on mattresses , scratching mosquito bites , picking scabs , and somersaulting in dresses . 
 The book 's second segment , " One Holy Night " , contains two short narratives focusing on adolescent females and the way their self @-@ worth is affected by the tension of remaining loyal to Mexico while integrating into the American lifestyle . The title story " One Holy Night " introduces the reader to a young teenage girl , Ixchel , who , in her quest for true love , meets a 37 @-@ year @-@ old man named Chato . He lies to her about belonging to ancient Mayan royalty , seduces her , and then abandons her , only to return in an attempt to kill her . In her youth and naivety , Ixchel desires to be romanced by someone with alleged Mexican roots , only to be disappointed by the reality of having fallen in love with a Mexican @-@ American serial killer . 
 The final section , entitled " There Was A Man , There Was A Woman " , includes the title story " Women Hollering Creek " , " Eyes of Zapata " , and " Never Marry A Mexican " , these being three out of the thirteen stories contained in this portion of the book . The title story , " Woman Hollering Creek " , is about a Mexican woman , named Cleófilas , who marries Juan Pedro Martínez Sánchez . After moving across the border to Seguín , Texas , her hopes of having a happy marriage , like the characters she watches in the telenovelas , are dashed . Throughout their marriage , Juan Pedro is unfaithful , abusive and often leaves her in isolation . As her depression increases , so does her interest in the legendary figure , la <unk> , and the creek named after her that runs behind her house . However , unlike this " weeping woman " , who chooses death as a means to escape her unloving husband , Cleófilas , in a sense , chooses life . With the aid of two independent women , Felice and Graciela , she is able to leave her life of abuse and escape back to Mexico . 
 Clemencia is the Chicana protagonist of the story " Never Marry a Mexican " , who experiences rejection by her white lover . She takes revenge on this man by luring his naïve son into a lover ’ s role , and makes it known that in due time , this young man will inevitably pay for his father ’ s transgressions . 
 " Eyes of Zapata " is a story that looks into the life of female protagonist , Inés , who offers a reflection on her life in the context of her illegitimate relationship with Mexican revolutionary Emiliano Zapata . She struggles with being constantly abandoned by her lover , who is off " revolutionizing the country " , and she describes her efforts to raise a family on her own despite hardships such as famine , disease , and poverty . In the end , she speaks about Zapata 's assassination , revealing his failure to the revolution and Inés makes it evident that essentially , Zapata , her unfaithful lover , has failed her and this protagonist is left clinging to dreams that can no longer exist . 
 = = Characters = = 
 As this book is a collection of short stories and contains many different protagonists , the following is a selection of the book 's main characters who most exemplify the qualities of the three sections of the book ( youth , adolescence , and adulthood ) , or who have the most impact on Cisneros 's use of female archetypes : 
 Lucy Anguiano , the childhood friend of the narrator in " My Lucy Friend Who Smells Like Corn " , is a dark skinned , Texas girl with eyes like knife slits . She is from a family with nine children , an exhausted mother and an absent father . She influences the narrator ’ s desire to share in the unadulterated and simple pleasures that childhood can bring . 
 Ixchel , the self @-@ named protagonist of " One Holy Night " , is a thirteen @-@ year @-@ old girl who lives in Chicago with her uncle and grandmother who immigrated from Mexico . Employed by her uncle , every Saturday , this young teen sells produce from his pushcart . Ixchel being a foolish girl , <unk> gives herself to one of her customers , a captivating , yet dangerous 37 @-@ year @-@ old man . Over time , she realises that she has been seduced by a mass murderer but remains unable to reconcile herself with the fact that she is still in love with him . 
 <unk> Uxmal <unk> is another self @-@ named character in the story " One Holy Night " , nicknamed Boy Baby , but whose real name is Chato , which means fat @-@ face . He was born on the streets , along with numerous brothers and sisters , in a Mexican town called Miseria . In this story he has grown up and is now a 37 @-@ year @-@ old serial killer who seduces and then abandons the young , naïve protagonist by romanticizing her with a lie about being from an ancient line of Mayan kings . 
 Inés , the protagonist in " Eyes of Zapata " , whose mother was raped and murdered for living an illegitimate lifestyle , is the mistress of Mexican revolutionary Emiliano Zapata . Inés struggles with being defined by the different roles she must play in her relationship with her lover . She is frustrated with the power of the male patriarchy that pushes her to be not only Zapata 's lover , but also the mother to two of his children and his " political sister " in their shared fight for freedom . 
 Cleófilas is the protagonist of the title story " Woman Hollering Creek " , who recreates the image of la <unk> . She is a traditional Mexican woman who naïvely allows her father to give her in marriage to a man who would become her abusive , unfaithful husband . However , through the hardships of her marriage , she is empowered , to fight for her rights . This is solidified when she meets Felice and Graciela , two independent , wage @-@ earning women who act as new role models for Cleófilas . In the end , they help her escape this abusive lifestyle . 
 Clemencia is the Chicana protagonist of " Never Marry a Mexican " , whose life choices can be related to those of the historical figure La Malinche , an indigenous woman who befriended the Spanish Conquistadors in the 16th century . Both La Malinche and Clemencia were mistresses to men of a different ethnicity than their own , " doomed to exist within a racial and class @-@ cultural wasteland , unanchored by a sense of ever belonging either to [ their ] ethnic or [ their ] natal homeland " . Clemencia 's final revenge in this vignette is not only a triumph in the memory of La Malinche , but also for the women who feel that their value depreciates if they do not have a husband . 
 Rosario ( Chayo ) De Leon is a character who writes the last prayer note in " Little Miracles , Kept Promises " ; a collection of letters in Cisneros 's book , from Mexican @-@ Americans to the Virgin of Guadalupe , the patron saint of Mexico who symbolizes female virginity . Chayo 's letter provides a contrast between the Virgin of Guadalupe and La Malinche . She illustrates the difficulties of living as a modern Chicana with her beliefs on religion , race , and gender being constantly challenged . In attempts to free herself from being caught in between her modern day Chicana lifestyle and her Mexican heritage she begins to redefine who she is as a woman . In order to do this Chayo must accept that she is not quite <unk> or virgin and she does this by acknowledging " the Virgin 's pacifism and Malinche 's sexuality through knowledge of her own Indian heritage " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 There are many themes found in this book ; some that are recurring are roles in society , religion , relationships , and also hybrid nature of American and Mexican ethnicities . Within these short stories Cisneros concentrates on the identities which women appropriate as a result of relationships , and how these are connected with their roles in society . Critic Mary Reichart observes that in Cisneros 's previous work as well as " in Woman Hollering Creek ( 1991 ) , the female characters break out of the molds assigned to them by the culture in search of new roles and new kinds of relationships . Cisneros portrays women who challenge stereotypes and break taboos , sometimes simply for the sake of shocking the establishment , but most often because the confining stereotypes prevent them from achieving their own identity . " An example of this is Cleófilas , who had hoped for a better life after leaving her home in Mexico to live in the United States . The soap operas she had seen had led her to believe that her life was going to be a fairy tale . Instead , with a failing marriage and another child on the way she sees that her life resembles only the saddest aspects of a soap opera . Another example of this is found in the final section of this book , entitled " There Was A Man , There Was A Woman " , where Cisneros illustrates how women can use their bodies as political instruments in their attempts to fight against male domination . The two female protagonists in " Never Marry a Mexican " and " Eyes of Zapata " use their bodies in attempts to gain recognition and acceptance from husband and lover . However , in doing so , they face the problems of objectification and oppression ; two issues which end up adversely shaping the characters ' identities . In the end , the illegitimate societal roles of these women influence their quest for female identity . For example , Inés , in " Eyes of Zapata " , talks about the role she plays as lover , not a wife : " You married her , that woman from Villa de Ayala , true . But see , you came back to me . You always come back . In between and beyond the others . That 's my magic . You come back to me . " 
 The protagonists are examined not only as individuals , but also by how they connect to people in their lives , such as in the conflicting love and failed relationships between man and woman ; mother and daughter . For example , critic Elizabeth Brown @-@ Guillory notes of the story " Never Marry a Mexican " : " Cisneros portrays the mother as a destructive emotional force , alienating and condemning her daughter to repeating her own mother ’ s destructive powers . " This unsuccessful relationship between daughter and mother also affects the ways in which the women relate to men , as the mother is left at fault for any problematic situations with the daughter 's male companions . For example , the daughter Clemencia remembers : " Never marry a Mexican , my ma said once and always . She said this because of my father . ... I ’ ll [ Clemencia ] never marry . Not any man . " 
 Cisneros also incorporates religion as she " pays tribute to the faith of simple people who express their petitions and gratitude . " This is especially apparent in her story " Little Miracles , Kept Promises " , where people make petitions to the Virgen Mary , such as : " <unk> de Dios , Thank you . Our child is born healthy ! Rene y Janie Garza , Hondo , TX . " 
 From the experience of growing up within two cultures Cisneros was able to combine both ethnicities , and in her stories she develops a major theme of hybridity between the American and Mexican cultures . She draws upon her life experience as she " depicts the situation of the Mexican @-@ American woman : typically caught between two cultures , she resides in a cultural borderland . The topics of the stories range from the confusions of a bicultural and bilingual childhood to the struggles of a dark @-@ skinned woman to recognize her own beauty in the land of Barbie dolls and blond beauty queens . " Because these issues are complex , Cisneros does not try to resolve all of them . Instead , she attempts to find neutral ground where the characters can try to meld their Mexican heritage with an American lifestyle , without feeling homesick for a country which , in some cases , the women have not even experienced . 
 Although the book has recurring themes such as , ( Chicana ) feminism , Cisneros uses her power of observation so her stories and narrative are not overwhelmed by these themes . This feminism is portrayed as " women who establish identities for themselves , but also develop an independent , confident , even exultant sexuality " . Not only this , but they learn to " love ... [ men ] as they wish , and to establish sisterhood , mutually supportive relationships with other women . " 
 Cisneros displays an abundance of poetic prose which uses frankness to captivate an audience . Reviewer Susan Wood suggests the reader sees that " Cisneros is a writer of power and eloquence and great lyrical beauty " . Critic Deborah L. Madsen has said that " the narrative techniques of her fiction demonstrate daring technical innovations , especially in her bold experimentation with literary voice and her development of a hybrid form that weaves poetry into prose to create a dense and evocative linguistic texture of symbolism and imagery that is both technically and aesthetically accomplished " . Madsen emphasizes Cisneros 's creative ability to combine both prose and poetry . 
 She also changes her narrative mode according to the demands of the story . For example , her narrative point of view almost continually changes , sometimes using first person , as we see in the story " Little Miracles , Kept Promises " , and sometimes third person , as in " La <unk> : a Texas Operetta " . Additionally , " Never Marry a Mexican " is characterized by the consistent use of interior monologue . Cisneros used this style in her previous novel The House on Mango Street where she mastered writing from the point of view of Esperanza ; however , " moving on meant experimenting with many voices " . She accomplished this in Woman Hollering Creek where she uses " a complex variety of voices and points of view . " Moore Campbell states that " [ it ] is this deluge of voices that Ms. Cisneros so faithfully taps in her work . " 
 Cisneros intertwines the American and Mexican cultures linguistically , as " [ her ] stories are full of Spanish words and phrases . She clearly loves her life in two worlds , and as a writer is grateful to have ' twice as many words to pick from ... two ways of looking at the world . ' A sometime poet , Cisneros uses those words so precisely that many of her images stick in a reader 's mind . Of two people kissing , for instance , she writes : ' It looked as if their bodies were ironing each other 's clothes . ' " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cisneros has been honored with several awards as a result of Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories , including the PEN Center West Award for best fiction , the Lannan Foundation Literary Award , the Quality Paperback Book Club New Voices Award , and , in 1993 , the Anisfield @-@ Wolf Book Award . K. Prescott states that once the book was published , Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories was well @-@ received because women of many cultures could relate to the stories : " Cisneros surveys woman 's condition — a condition that is both precisely Latina and general to women everywhere . Her characters include preadolescent girls , disappointed brides , religious women , consoling partners and deeply cynical women who enjoy devouring men . They are without exception strong girls , strong women . " Marcia <unk> comments again on the characters , saying that Cisneros " writes with humour and love about people she knows intimately " . For critic Ilan Stavans , the stories are not just words , but " a mosaic of voices of Mexican @-@ Americans who joke , love , hate and comment on fame and sexuality ... They are verbal photographs , memorabilia , reminiscences of growing up in a Hispanic milieu . " The American Library Journal and The New York Times honoured Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories as a noteworthy book of the year . The New York Times reviewer Bebe Moore Campbell wrote in 1991 that " [ these ] stories about women struggling to take control of their lives traverse geographical , historical and emotional borders and invite us into the souls of characters as unforgettable as the first kiss " . Apart from much praise , one criticism is that Cisneros stereotypes Hispanic men and women in her stories . Stavans argues that the males " are always abusive , alcoholic and egotistical " , while the women are " naïve [ and ] doll @-@ like " . 
 Susan Wood comments on the publication of Woman Hollering Creek by Random House : " Despite the growing number and influence of Latinos in the USA , the only identifiably Latin 's names – with a few exceptions like Oscar Hijuelos – on books published by major houses are those translations of Latin American novels . " 
 = USS Blakeley ( DD @-@ 150 ) = 
 The second USS Blakeley ( DD – 150 ) was a Wickes @-@ class destroyer in the United States Navy , named for Captain Johnston Blakeley . 
 Built in 1918 , she saw patrol duty along the East Coast of the United States during the interwar era . Decommissioned for several years , she returned to duty at the outset of World War II . She spent much of the war on convoy patrol duty in the Caribbean . On 25 May 1942 , while on patrol , she was struck by a torpedo fired by German submarine U @-@ 156 , which blew off her forward 60 feet ( 18 m ) . Fitted with temporary measures , she steamed to Philadelphia Naval Yard where she was fitted with the forward section of sister ship USS Taylor . She spent much of the rest of the war on convoy patrol duty before being sold for scrap in 1945 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Blakely was one of 111 Wickes @-@ class destroyers built by the United States Navy between 1917 and 1919 . She , along with 20 of her sisters , were constructed at William Cramp and Sons shipyards in Philadelphia using specifications and detail designs drawn up by Bath Iron Works . 
 She had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 154 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 136 long tons ; 1 @,@ 272 short tons ) an overall length of 314 feet 5 inches ( 95 @.@ 83 m ) , a beam of 31 feet 8 inches ( 9 @.@ 65 m ) and a draught of 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) . On trials , Blakeley reached a speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) . She was armed with four 4 " / 50 caliber guns , two 3 " / 23 caliber gun , and twelve 21 @-@ inch torpedo tubes . She had a regular crew complement of 122 officers and enlisted men . She was driven by two Curtis steam turbines powered by four Yarrow boilers . 
 Specifics on Blakeley 's performance are not known , but she was one of the group of Wickes @-@ class destroyers known unofficially as the ' Liberty Type ' to differentiate them from the destroyers constructed from detail designs drawn up by Bethlehem Steel , which used Parsons or Westinghouse turbines . The ' Liberty ' type destroyers deteriorated badly in service , and in 1929 all 60 of this group were retired by the Navy . Actual performance of these ships was far below intended specifications especially in fuel economy , with most only able to make 2 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 600 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) instead of the design standard of 3 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 700 km ; 3 @,@ 600 mi ) at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . The class also suffered problems with turning and weight . 
 She was the second ship to be named for Johnston Blakeley , the first was a torpedo boat commissioned in 1904 . A subsequent USS Blakely would be commissioned , this one a Knox @-@ class frigate . This third ship would also be named for Charles Adams Blakely . 
 = = History = = 
 Blakeley was launched 19 September 1918 by William Cramp and Sons Ship and Engine Building Company in Philadelphia and sponsored by the wife of Charles Adams Blakeley . The ship was commissioned 8 May 1919 , under the command of Commander W. Brown , Jr .. She immediately joined the Atlantic Fleet . Blakely patrolled along the East Coast of the United States until she was decommissioned on 29 June 1922 , and returned to Philadelphia . She was recommissioned from 1932 to 1937 to serve with the Scouting Fleet , and then was again decommissioned in Philadelphia . Low military budgets were the cause of these periods of inactivity , as the Navy did not have the funds or manpower to maintain a number of ships , including Blakeley . 
 Blakeley was again commissioned on 16 October 1939 . She then joined the Neutrality Patrol until the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and the U.S. entrance into World War II . She then began convoy duty in the Caribbean , including a February 1942 mission to guard a convoy carrying troops to garrison Curaçao in the Netherlands West Indies . 
 On 25 May 1942 , Blakeley was on a patrol off Martinique , inspecting all incoming ships for evidence of activities by Vichy French collaborators alongside her sister USS Ellis . At 08 : 30 a.m. , she altered course to pursue a sound ping on her sonar . Nothing was found at the site of the ping , and the crew assumed it was caused by a school of blackfish . As the ship turned to resume its course , it was struck by a torpedo fired by the unnoticed German submarine U @-@ 156 under the command of Werner Hartenstein . The torpedo struck between frames 18 and 24 at about 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) below her water line . The force of the impact blew off 60 feet ( 18 m ) of her forward bow and forecastle . After several minutes , the crew determined they could still operate the ship , and it was brought back under control and sailed for Fort @-@ de @-@ France . The ship was steered with a combination of rudder and varying shaft speeds , and four hours after the attack , she was moored in Fort @-@ de @-@ France . Six men died and twenty one were wounded during the attack . <unk> radioed a U @-@ boat headquarters in Lorient requesting permission to finish Blakeley off , but permission was denied . Destroyers Breckinridge , Greer , Tarbell and two PBY Catalina planes from VP @-@ 53 were scrambled to assist the stricken Blakeley . 
 At Fort @-@ de @-@ France , she was fitted with a wooden bulkhead to cover the area blown off by the torpedo , and an anchor was improvised out of a truck 's axle and differential housing . She then sailed under her own power to San Juan , Puerto Rico where a steel stub bow was attached . From there , the steamed for Philadelphia Naval Yard for permanent repairs . During mid @-@ 1942 , Blakeley was fitted with the forward section of her decommissioned sister ship , Taylor . She was also fitted with newer weapons and electronics systems , such as updated radar . Repairs were completed in September 1942 and she resumed her convoy duties in the Caribbean . 
 Blakeley spent most of the rest of the war on convoy escort duty in the Caribbean Sea Frontier , except for two short deployments in the Atlantic Ocean . On 1 January to 23 February 1943 she was assigned to hunter @-@ killer duty with Task Group 21 @.@ 13 in the North Atlantic , and from 24 March to 11 May 1943 , she escorted a convoy to Bizerte , Tunisia . From 18 March to 13 June 1945 , she was stationed in New London , Connecticut , training U.S. submarines in Long Island Sound to avoid destroyers . 
 Following this duty , Blakeley was decommissioned at Philadelphia Naval Yard on 21 July 1945 and sold for scrap on 30 November 1945 . She received one battle star for her wartime convoy duty . 
 = Juan Fernández ( basketball ) = 
 Juan Manuel " Lobito " Fernández ( born July 22 , 1990 ) is an Argentine professional basketball player . His father , Gustavo , was a point guard for a number of professional basketball teams in Argentina . Pepe Sánchez convinced Fernández to play basketball at his alma mater , Temple University , and Fernández joined the Temple Owls team in December 2008 . As a sophomore , he was named Atlantic 10 Tournament Most Valuable Player . After struggling through a prolonged shooting slump as a junior , he hit an off @-@ balance 18 @-@ foot shot with .4 seconds to play to defeat Penn State in the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament and was named to the All @-@ Atlantic 10 Third Team . In addition to his college exploits , he led Argentina to a gold medal in the 2008 Under @-@ 18 World Championship . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Fernández was born on July 22 , 1990 in Rio Tercero , Argentina to Gustavo Fernández and Nancy <unk> . His father was a point guard for a number of professional basketball teams in Argentina . He earned the nickname " Lobito " ( Spanish for " little wolf " ) after starring on a basketball team with a wolf mascot . Juan Fernández 's little brother , also named Gustavo , fell out of a chair when he was a toddler and used a wheelchair for life . He is one of the top wheelchair tennis players in the world under the age of 18 . The family operates the Pinot <unk> restaurant in Río Tercero . 
 At the urging of his father , Juan Fernández began playing basketball when he was six years old . He described himself as a " fat little kid " who was more interested in being a soccer goalie at first . When Fernández showed star potential on junior club teams , he was given the " Lobito " nickname , while his father became known as " Lobo " . 
 As a teenager , Fernández was offered deals to play in the Spanish B and C league when he graduated from Dr. Alexis Carrel High School . At the same time , he was considering playing college basketball in the United States . His mother went to Connecticut for six months to learn English , and she persuaded him that it would be a good place to be a student @-@ athlete . Pepe Sánchez , an Argentine basketball player who played college basketball at Temple University , offered some advice in an e @-@ mail : 
 " I 'm not the kind of guy who preaches about what people should do . But when kids like Juan ask me , I tell them my two greatest experiences in basketball was playing for my college team and my national team – the two times that money wasn 't involved . It was about the chance to represent your school and your country . More than that , it just opened my mind to so much . 
 " When I spoke with Juan , it just struck me he was the same and that college was the right situation to him . I told him regardless of what happens in basketball – whether he plays in the NBA , in Europe , whatever – going to college would make the biggest difference in his life . " 
 Sánchez had recommended Fernández to the coach of his alma mater , Fran Dunphy . Dunphy dispatched assistant Matt Langel to recruit Fernández to Temple . On one recruiting trip , Langel drove for 10 hours on the backroads of Argentina searching for Fernández , who was practicing with the national team instead of home in Rio Tercero as Langel had thought . After his official visit to the Philadelphia campus in September 2008 , Fernández signed his letter of intent . He graduated high school in December , and enrolled at Temple . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 Fernández played college basketball with the Temple Owls men 's basketball team . At Temple , Fernández drew immediate comparisons to Sánchez ; he was dubbed " Pepe Sánchez with a jump shot . " He chose Sánchez 's jersey , number 4 , but Fernández said this was to honor his father . Unfamiliar with the practice of lifting weights , Fernández wore gloves to his first session , drawing the laughs of his teammates . Against Kent State , Fernández contributed eight points and four assists in his Temple debut , three days after arriving in the United States . He scored a season @-@ high 19 points on February 15 , 2009 , to power Temple past Duquesne 78 – 73 . The Owls reached the 2009 NCAA Tournament after winning the Atlantic 10 tournament title . In 23 games , he averaged 5 @.@ 5 points and 2 @.@ 7 assists per game on the basketball court , and earned a 3 @.@ 0 grade point average in the classroom . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 In his sophomore year , Fernández was moved to shooting guard in the Temple starting lineup , a change that felt strange for him as he was used to playing point guard . He was still in frequent playmaking positions , and led the team in assists with 3 @.@ 6 per game . He increased his scoring average to 12 @.@ 6 points per game , second on the team , and led the Atlantic 10 in three @-@ point percentage ( 45 @.@ 3 % ) . Fernández scored in double figures in 23 games . On December 13 , he netted a career best 33 points to upset local rival and third @-@ ranked Villanova 75 – 65 ; he shot 7 @-@ for @-@ 10 from beyond the arc . This earned him Philadelphia Big Five Player of the Week honors for the week of December 7 – 14 . As a result of his performance against Villanova and his 21 points versus Seton Hall , Fernández was named Atlantic 10 Player of the Week on December 20 . In the Fordham game on January 23 , 2010 , he took a blow to the head and was forced to leave in the second half . He missed the February 2 game against Richmond with post @-@ concussive symptoms . 
 Fernández became a fan favorite at Temple . Every time he made a three @-@ pointer against Bowling Green , the Temple student section chanted " Ole , ole , ole ! " Seton Hall fans were not so kind , mocking him with " Messi , Messi . " Little did they realize that Lionel Messi was one of his favorite soccer players , and their comments only served as inspiration . On his return flights to Argentina , strangers frequently went up to Fernández to congratulate him on his recent performances . 
 Fernández helped Temple to a 29 – 5 season , capture a share of the Atlantic 10 conference regular season championship with a 14 – 2 record , and earn a third consecutive Atlantic 10 conference tournament title and an automatic bid to the NCAA Tournament . He was named Atlantic 10 Tournament Most Valuable Player after scoring 18 points in the final versus Richmond . In the NCAA Tournament , Temple was seeded fifth and matched up with 12 seed Cornell in the first round . Fernández had 14 points , but his Owls were upset by the Big Red 78 – 65 . Following the season , Fernandez was an All @-@ Atlantic 10 Honorable Mention selection . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 With the graduation of Luis Guzmán , Fernández switched back to his natural position at point guard in his junior campaign . Fernandez was a preseason All @-@ Atlantic 10 Second Team selection . He was on the watchlist for the Bob Cousy Award honoring the top point guard in college basketball . A shooting slump that lasted the majority of the season saw his field goal percentage drop to 35 @.@ 5 % , his three point percentage drop to 33 @.@ 3 % , and his scoring average drop to 11 @.@ 2 points per game . He still led the team in assists , with 3 @.@ 9 per game . Fernández did miss four games in the middle of the season due to a bone bruise in his knee , but the shooting slump was more devastating and caused him to consult a sports psychologist . One of the worst games of his career was in an Atlantic 10 Tournament loss to Richmond , in which he went 3 @-@ for @-@ 17 from the field and committed three turnovers . After the game Fran Dunphy convinced Fernández that he had to take less shots and get his teammates involved . 
 Fernández led Temple to a 26 – 8 record and a seven seed in the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . In the Round of 64 , he hit an off @-@ balance 18 @-@ foot shot with .4 seconds to play to defeat Penn State , 66 – 64 , and finished with a season @-@ high 23 points . In the timeout that preceded the shot , teammate Khalif Wyatt convinced coach Dunphy to draw up a play for Fernández , despite his struggles during the season . Fernández finished with 14 points against San Diego State , but the Owls fell in double overtime . He was named to the All @-@ Atlantic 10 Third Team and Academic Team at the conclusion of the regular season and was a Philadelphia Big Five Second Team honoree . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 Fernández was a preseason All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team selection as a senior . He was named to the All @-@ Atlantic 10 Third Team and Academic Team at the conclusion of the regular season . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Fernández began his professional career in 2012 , after signing with the Italian League club Olimpia Milano . At the beginning of the 2012 – 13 season he was loaned to Centrale del Latte Brescia of the Italian Second Division . In 40 games played in the Italian 2nd Division , he averaged 28 @.@ 2 minutes , 8 @.@ 8 points and 4 @.@ 8 assists per game . 
 He was then released by Olimpia Milano , and signed with the first division Italian League club Dinamo Sassari . 
 For the next season he returned to Centrale del Latte Brescia of the Italian Second Division . Posting 12 @.@ 7 PPG and 5 APG in 23 games of the 2014 @-@ 15 regular season . 
 In the 2015 @-@ 16 season " Lobito " played in 28 games of the regular season , he averaged 23 minutes , 10 @.@ 6 points and 4 @.@ 3 assists per game . In the Second Division playoffs he started 16 games , averaged 8 @.@ 1 points and 4 @.@ 3 assist per game helping Basket Brescia <unk> win the finals against <unk> Bologna in 5 games and returning to Italian League after 28 years . 
 = = Argentine national team = = 
 Fernández was a participant in the 2008 Under @-@ 18 World Championship representing the junior national team of Argentina . In six U18 matches , he averaged 8 @.@ 4 points , 3 @.@ 0 assists , 1 @.@ 4 steals and 17 minutes per game . In a victory over the United States squad in the World Championship game , he scored 16 points . In the 2009 U19 World Championship , he averaged 8 @.@ 4 points , 3 @.@ 6 rebounds , and 3 @.@ 6 assists per game . 
 Fernández has also been a member of the senior Argentine national basketball team . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = NCAA = = = 
 = = Awards and accomplishments = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 2009 – 10 All @-@ Atlantic 10 Honorable Mention 
 2010 Atlantic 10 Tournament MVP 
 2010 – 11 All @-@ Atlantic 10 Third Team 
 2010 – 11 All @-@ Atlantic 10 Academic Team 
 = Kingdom ( 2007 TV series ) = 
 Kingdom is a British television series produced by Parallel Film and Television Productions for the ITV network . It was created by Simon Wheeler and stars Stephen Fry as Peter Kingdom , a Norfolk solicitor who is coping with family , colleagues , and the strange locals who come to him for legal assistance . The series also starred Hermione Norris , Celia Imrie , Karl Davies , Phyllida Law and Tony Slattery . 
 The first series of six one @-@ hour episodes was aired in 2007 and averaged six million viewers per week . Despite a mid @-@ series ratings dip , the executive chairman of ITV praised the programme and ordered a second series , which was filmed in 2007 and broadcast in January and February 2008 . Filming on the third series ran from July to September 2008 for broadcast from 7 June 2009 . 
 Stephen Fry announced in October 2009 that ITV was cancelling the series , a fact later confirmed by the channel , which said that given tighter budgets , more expensive productions were being cut . 
 = = Series synopses = = 
 The series follows Peter Kingdom , a small @-@ town solicitor whose work revolves around cases brought by the eclectic and eccentric populace of Market Shipborough . The series retains a largely episodic format , where self @-@ contained plots play out before the hour concludes , though a continuing storyline concerns the mysterious disappearance of Simon Kingdom , Peter 's half @-@ brother . The first episode reveals that he vanished at sea six months previously and that everybody who knew him ( including Peter ) assumed that he committed suicide . Each week there are further indications that he did not die , culminating in episode six when it is revealed that he had a relationship with a woman , and that she had become pregnant with his child after he had supposedly died . In the first series we are also introduced to Peter 's half @-@ sister , Beatrice , who slowly becomes an integral character in the series . 
 Simon returns in the second series and is charged with faking his own death . He is released from custody after Lyle uses Simon 's own money to bail him , and when Simon reveals he was actually attempting suicide . Beatrice learns that she is pregnant , so she leaves Market Shipborough until the baby is born in the last episode of the series . Lyle threatens to leave Kingdom & Kingdom when his mentor Peter begins to neglect him , but he changes his mind when Peter makes him a partner . In the final episode , a torrential storm hits Market Shipborough , flooding much of the town . While searching for his brother , who drove off the previous night , Peter encounters something unseen by the audience , which is revealed to be Simon 's dead body in Series 3 . 
 Series 3 largely steps away from Simon as we are now aware that he has died . Instead , this series focuses more on Peter 's life , Beatrice and her new baby ( Petra ) , Lyle , and Gloria , the receptionist . Toward the end of the series Peter begins to suffer from small blackouts . He has some minor tests done to find out the cause of the problem . It is revealed in the last episode that Peter has Type 2 diabetes . When Peter asks the doctor whether he should tell Beatrice and Petra to get checked out , the doctor revealed that diabetes isn 't the only thing they discovered . In the final scenes Peter reveals that he has found out that he has no blood relation to Beatrice or Simon , and that therefore " their " father was not in fact his father . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The characters are described by Wheeler as " three families " ; Peter 's relations , his colleagues , and the populace of Market Shipborough . 
 Peter Kingdom ( played by Stephen Fry ) is Cambridge @-@ graduated lawyer and one half of Kingdom & Kingdom , a practice he ran with his father . Peter is respected and regarded as compassionate by the local community . Fry describes him as " kind and empathetic " , " on the side of the ordinary people " and as being " lonely and isolated " and not revealing his true emotions . Phyllida Law describes Peter as " into the community like one of those old French village priests " . 
 Beatrice Kingdom ( played by Hermione Norris ) is Peter 's half @-@ sister , who arrives in the first episode after leaving rehabilitation . She is described by Wheeler as intended to be the " ultimate annoying little sister " . By series two , she is successfully controlling her mental illness with medication and has become more responsible and reliable . Norris 's second pregnancy ( with her daughter , Hero ) was worked into the series storyline ; Beatrice is portrayed as promiscuous in the first series and takes several pregnancy tests in the second series , which all come up positive . Beatrice goes into labour in episode five of the second series and asks Simon to be present at the birth . The identity of Petra 's father is initially not known , and Simon tells Peter he " will totally flip " when he finds out . It is later revealed her father is a local philandering judge . Petra is played by twin girls in the third series . Their mother answered a casting call for young twins in a local newspaper . 
 Lyle Anderson ( played by Karl Davies ) is a trainee solicitor at Kingdom & Kingdom during the first series . At the end of the second series , he qualifies , and is offered and accepts a partnership in the practice . Lyle is a somewhat comic character often having bad luck , whether he misses out on a potential relationship or gets hit by a golf ball . The writers created a running joke for the character , where he gets wet in almost every episode , from falling in swimming pools to landing in dykes . 
 Gloria Millington ( played by Celia Imrie ) is a legal secretary who is recovering from the death of her husband a year before the first series . She has a young son ( played by Angus Imrie , the actress 's son ) and is " the sister he ( Peter ) deserved " but never had . Gloria is antagonised by Beatrice during the first series , but the two become friends after a day out together . 
 Sidney Snell ( played by Tony Slattery ) is a smelly local and a frequent client of Peter who often finds ways to sue the local council . Slattery described Snell as an " everyman anti @-@ hero " , with Wheeler calling him an " unlikely guardian of Market Shipborough " on account of his numerous attempts to stop building work . Snell develops a close friendship with the recently widowed Gloria in the first series . To emphasise his unwashed state , the wardrobe department rotated Snell 's costume only once in the first series . 
 Aunt <unk> ( played by Phyllida Law ) is Peter 's aunt and confidante . She lives in a retirement home on a large country estate . 
 Nigel Pearson ( played by John Thomson ) is introduced in the second series as the captain of Market Shipborough 's cricket team . Peter investigates Nigel after discovering he has not honoured sponsorship contracts made with several local businesses . Nigel confides in Peter that his marriage is breaking down - his wife ( played by Rachel Fielding ) is having an affair with Simon , and he returns the money owed . Nigel returns as a regular cast member in the third series , now working as a relationship counsellor . 
 Simon Kingdom ( played by Dominic <unk> ) was an unseen character ( with the exception of some photographs ) in the first series , with the final episode revealing that he had fled to Dublin , apparently to escape large debts . In the second series , he returns to Market Shipborough and is charged with faking his own death . Simon has a reputation as a ne 'er @-@ do @-@ well , and usually behaves in a self @-@ centered manner . At the end of the second series , he disappears after fleeing from a Mafia @-@ type gang during a storm . It is revealed at the start of series three that he now really is dead , with the opening scene showing Peter , Beatrice and <unk> standing at his grave . 
 Thomas Fisher plays Ted , a local yokel who is the landlord of the local pub and a friend of Sidney Snell . Gerard Horan plays DC Yelland , who is in charge of prosecuting the Simon Kingdom case but also sometimes appears on other matters . Both Ted and Yelland 's roles are expanded in the second series . In the first series , Maryann Turner plays a recurring minor character referred to only as " Mrs Thing " , whom Peter is constantly trying to avoid . Simon 's pregnant partner , Honor O 'Sullivan ( played by Kelly Campbell ) , is introduced in the final episode of the first series . By the second series she has given birth to baby Daniel and is living with Beatrice and Peter , where she develops an attraction to Lyle . She leaves after Simon returns . 
 Guest appearances in the first series are made by Richard Wilson ( as Peter 's old university tutor in episode four ) , Robert Bathurst ( as a cross @-@ dressing husband in episode five ) , Lynsey De Paul as Sheila Larsen , who drowns in her own swimming pool , Joss Ackland ( as an Auschwitz survivor in episode six ) , and Rory Bremner ( as a vicar , also in episode six ) . Bremner , known more for satire than acting , has joked that he played the vicar " as " Michael Howard and Rowan Williams and that his character 's name was " Jane " , due to an error in the script . Wilson returned for the second series , which also includes roles by Lucy Benjamin and Richard Briers , and Diana Quick . Local residents appear as background extras and in crowd scenes . Guest stars confirmed for the third series include Pippa Haywood , James and Oliver Phelps , June Whitfield , Peter Sallis , Colin Baker , Sandi Toksvig , Jack Dee , Miriam Margolyes , Adrian Scarborough , Sophie Winkleman , Anna Massey and Jaye Griffiths . 
 = = Production = = 
 Wheeler spent two years developing the idea for the series before filming began in 2006 and proposed the Peter character as " helping people more than doing the law " . The series was originally to be based around a probate solicitor , with the title Where There 's a Will . Stephen Fry disapproved of the title and raised the point that it would be difficult to produce six scripts featuring his character dealing with probate issues . A series of six episodes was announced in June 2006 . 
 The series is primarily a vehicle for Fry , and was his first television drama series for ITV since the conclusion of Jeeves and Wooster in 1993 . Most of the main cast had worked with Fry before : Slattery had been in Footlights with Fry , and he and Law appeared with him in Peter 's Friends ; Imrie appeared in <unk> though the two did not share any scenes . Already being acquainted allowed the cast to appear more relaxed in front of the camera . Norris had not made any appearances with the rest of the cast beyond a credit with Imrie in Hospital ! , a one @-@ off Channel 5 comedy . However she is married to Wheeler , and he had previously written for Wire in the Blood , in which she formerly starred . She took the role as a change of pace from the " ice maiden " characters she often portrays . 
 Location filming is primarily based in Swaffham . Filming of the first series began on 10 July 2006 and was scheduled for 12 weeks . Shooting also took place in nearby Hunstanton , Holkham , Thetford and Dereham . Beach and harbour scenes were shot at Wells , as well as the Lifeboat station being used for that of Market Shipborough . Fry recommended Swaffham to the producers , citing market towns as " more revealing of what Britain is like than a city is . " Locations used within Swaffham include Oakleigh House ( as the offices of Kingdom and Kingdom ) and the Greyhound pub ( renamed " The Startled Duck " ) , among others . The producers noted that Oakleigh House was ideal for the offices as there was an " authenticity " of opening the door straight onto the market square , instead of a transition from studio to location footage . 
 First @-@ series scenes featuring Fry driving an Alvis TE 21 were placed in jeopardy when the actor was caught speeding in May 2006 . His counsel successfully postponed the hearing until December , allowing filming to resume unaffected ( Fry was eventually banned from driving for six months ) . The first two episodes were directed by Robin Sheppard , the third and fourth by <unk> Hüseyin and the final two by Sandy Johnson . A making @-@ of special was filmed for the ITV3 Behind the Scenes strand and was broadcast on 27 May 2007 , immediately following the end of episode six on ITV . 
 Filming of the second series was scheduled in two blocks : the first — directed by Andrew Grieve — ran from 2 July to 11 August and the second — directed by Edward Hall — from 20 August to 29 September . Shooting was again based in Swaffham . Norris took a break from filming in August to give birth to her daughter , returning to the set to complete her scenes in September . 
 Series 3 commenced filming in July 2008 . Scenes were filmed on Holkham beach featuring the Blues and Royals of the Household Cavalry , who have been based in nearby Watton . During September , scenes set in Stockport , Greater Manchester were filmed in Kings Lynn and Halifax . Shooting concluded at the end of the month . Edward Hall returned to direct three episodes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a preview , Radio Times described it as " Sunday night television at its <unk> " , though called the plot of episode one " feeble " . Comments by The Stage echoed this , calling the storyline a " run of the mill affair " , but praised the locations and referred to the series as a whole as " nice " . Following the broadcast of the first episode The Guardian wrote that the series " slips down as smoothly as a pint of <unk> " and ( with tongue in cheek ) welcomed it as a change from " loutish " Michael Kitchen in " relentlessly vulgar " fellow Sunday @-@ night drama Foyle 's War . The Times had a negative view , awarding the episode one star out of five and criticising Stephen Fry for " playing Stephen Fry " . The casting of the other characters was also criticised , though the costuming was wryly praised . 
 The programme received some criticism in Norfolk for its inaccurate depiction of local accents . Local journalist and broadcaster Keith Skipper told the Eastern Daily Press : " If they are going to set these dramas in a specific location with locals and extras surely they should get the accent right otherwise it is self defeating . " An ITV spokesman told the paper : " We hired a professional dialect coach to help the actors achieve their Norfolk accent . The Norfolk accent is different in one area of Norfolk to another . What we are trying to achieve is something that resembles a Norfolk accent that cannot be pinned down . " However , he failed to identify any area of Norfolk in which the accent contains a <unk> " r " . 
 ITV executive chairman Michael Grade was pleased with the series , describing it at a conference in June 2007 as having " done well for [ ITV ] " in the prestigious 9 p.m. slot . 
 Following Simon 's reappearance in the second series , a writer on The Herald expressed disappointment that the air of mystery had gone from the programme ; " As the sage and saintly Peter , Stephen Fry no longer has any great detective @-@ style fraternal conundrum to unravel , or <unk> over . " The fifth episode of Series 2 won the 9 p.m. slot with 5 @.@ 4 million viewers and a 22 % audience share , beating the BAFTA coverage on BBC One . The series has been compared to Doc Martin , another ITV series featuring a professional working in a rural town . 
 The ratings for the first episode of Series 3 were affected by a scheduling clash with the finale of The Apprentice on BBC One ; the episode had 4 @.@ 95 million viewers and a 19 @.@ 1 % audience share . 
 = = = " The Kingdom effect " = = = 
 Filming of the series in Swaffham and surrounding areas has given a boost to the local economy , dubbed " the Kingdom effect " by producer Georgina Lowe . Businesses have capitalised on the popularity of the series by offering guided tours of featured locations , as well as tourist merchandise such as " Kingdom rock " and postcards . Lowe gave a lecture to Swaffham 's Iceni Partnership in 2007 , in which she explained that the production team used local businesses " for everything from equipment and scaffold rental to buying props , costumes , food and drink " . By the end of the filming of the second series , Parallel Productions had invested approximately £ 2 @.@ 5 million into the local economy . 
 = = Ratings = = 
 = = Series information = = 
 = = = Broadcast history = = = 
 The first series aired on the ITV network in the UK at 9 p.m. on Sunday nights from 22 April to 27 May 2007 . The second series was commissioned before the first episode was broadcast . It was filmed from July to September 2007 and broadcast from January to February 2008 . The third series was commissioned in March 2008 and began broadcast on 7 June 2009 . STV decided not to broadcast series 3 . 
 International distribution rights were bought by Portman Film and Television , which sold the series to 14 international networks by February 2007 . Seven regional European Hallmark Channels broadcast it , with other showings on NRK in Norway , RÚV in Iceland , YLE in Finland , Rai Tre in Italy and één in Flanders . The Australian rights were picked up by the Seven Network , although the ABC aired seasons 1 and 2 in 2011 and season 3 late in 2012 , with TVNZ buying it for New Zealand . The programme aired in the United States on some PBS affiliates in early 2008 . A wider syndication deal was struck with American Public Television later that year for the first two series to be available to all affiliates , and other public stations ; the third season begins distribution on 1 December 2009 . In Canada , the first and second series are being broadcast this year , ( April – June , 2010 ) , on the Vision TV network . The third series premièred on the Flemish channel één on 10 April 2009 . 
 = = = DVD releases = = = 
 The first series was released by 2 Entertain Video on 28 May 2007 and includes the ITV3 Behind the Scenes special . 2 Entertain holds the worldwide rights to the DVD release in 2007 . The complete second series was released on six DVDs in The Daily Telegraph and The Sunday Telegraph between 1 and 7 March 2008 and was also generally released from the 15th of June 2009 . 
 = = = Digital release = = = 
 In August 2009 , the six episodes of the first season were released in the United States on Hulu , as part of Hulu 's partnership with ITV . All series of Kingdom are also available in the UK on the internet TV service <unk> which launched on 17 February 2010 As of 2011 , it is available on Netflix streaming video . From June 2012 , it is also available on <unk> . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 A soundtrack album featuring the original music from the series , composed and conducted by Mark Russell was released on the 15th of June 2009 and is only available through the iTunes Store at the moment . The album mainly contains music from the third series although some of it has been used earlier in the series . 
 = Gunpowder artillery in the Middle Ages = 
 Artillery in the Middle Ages primarily consisted of the introduction of the cannon , large tubular firearms designed to fire a heavy projectile over a long distance . Guns , bombs , rockets and cannons were first invented in China during the Han Chinese Song Dynasty and then later spread to Europe and the Middle East during the period . 
 Although gunpowder was known in Europe during the High Middle Ages due to the usage of guns and explosives by the Mongols and the Chinese firearms experts employed by the Mongols as mercenaries during the Mongol conquests of Europe , it was not until the Late Middle Ages that European versions of cannons were widely developed . The first cannons introduced into Europe were probably used in Iberia , during the Christian wars against Muslims in the 13th century ; their use was also first documented in the Middle East around this time . English cannons first appeared in 1327 , and later saw more general use during the Hundred Years ' War , when primitive cannons were engaged at the Battle of Crécy in 1346 . By the end of the 14th century , the use of cannons was also recorded in Russia , Byzantium and the Ottoman Empire . 
 The earliest medieval cannon , the pot @-@ de @-@ fer , had bulbous , vase @-@ like shape , and was used more for psychological effect than for causing physical damage . The later culverin was transitional between the handgun and the full cannon , and was used as an anti @-@ personnel weapon . During the 15th century , cannon advanced significantly , so that bombards were effective siege engines . Towards the end of the period , the cannon gradually replaced siege engines — among other forms of aging weaponry — on the battlefield . 
 The Middle English word Canon was derived from the Old Italian word <unk> , meaning large tube , which came from Latin canna , meaning cane or reed . The Latinised word canon has been used for a gun since 1326 in Italy , and since 1418 in English . The word <unk> , or " bombard " , was earliest term used for " cannon " , but from 1430 it came to refer only to the largest weapons . 
 = = Early use in China and East Asia = = 
 The first documented battlefield use of gunpowder artillery took place on 28 January 1132 , when Song General Han Shizhong used <unk> to capture a city in Fujian . The world 's earliest known hand cannon is the Heilongjiang hand cannon dated 1288 , which was found in Mongol @-@ held Manchuria . The first known illustration of a cannon is dated to 1326 . In his 1341 poem , The Iron Cannon Affair , one of the first accounts of the use of gunpowder artillery in China , Xian Zhang wrote that a cannonball fired from an eruptor could " pierce the heart or belly when it strikes a man or horse , and can even transfix several persons at once . " 
 = = Use in the Islamic world = = 
 The Arabs acquired knowledge of gunpowder some time after 1240 , but before 1280 , by which time had written , in Arabic , recipes for gunpowder , instructions for the purification of saltpeter , and descriptions of gunpowder incendiaries . 
 Ahmad Y. al @-@ Hassan claims that the Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260 saw the Mamluks use against the Mongols in " the first cannon in history " gunpowder formulae which were almost identical with the ideal composition for explosive gunpowder , which he claims were not known in China or Europe until much later . However , <unk> Alam Khan states that it was invading Mongols who introduced gunpowder to the Islamic world and cites Mamluk antagonism towards early riflemen in their infantry as an example of how gunpowder weapons were not always met with open acceptance in the Middle East . 
 Al @-@ Hassan interprets Ibn Khaldun as reporting the use of cannon as siege machines by the Marinid sultan Abu Yaqub Yusuf at the siege of Sijilmasa in 1274 . Super @-@ sized bombards were used by the troops of Mehmed II to capture Constantinople , in 1453 . Urban , a Hungarian cannon engineer , is credited with the introduction of this cannon from Central Europe to the Ottoman realm . It could fire heavy stone balls a mile , and the sound of their blast could reportedly be heard from a distance of 10 miles ( 16 km ) . A piece of slightly later date ( see pic ) was cast in bronze and made in two parts : the chase and the breech , which , together , weighed 18 @.@ 4 tonnes . The two parts were screwed together using levers to facilitate the work . 
 = = Use in Europe = = 
 In Europe , one of the earliest mentions of gunpowder appeared in Roger Bacon 's " Opus Maior " . It describes a recipe for gunpowder and recognized its military use : 
 We can , with saltpeter and other substances , compose artificially a fire that can be launched over long distances ... By only using a very small quantity of this material much light can be created accompanied by a horrible fracas . It is possible with it to destroy a town or an army ... In order to produce this artificial lightning and thunder it is necessary to take saltpeter , sulfur , and <unk> <unk> Vir Can <unk> . 
 In 1250 , the Norwegian <unk> <unk> mentioned , in its military chapter , the use of " coal and sulphur " as the best weapon for ship @-@ to @-@ ship combat . 
 = = = Muslim and Christian Iberia = = = 
 The Almohad dynasty of Al @-@ Andalus used Moorish cannon defensively at the sieges of Seville , in 1248 , and Niebla , in 1262 . In reference to the siege to Alicante in 1331 , the Spanish historian Zurita recorded a " new machine that caused great terror . It threw iron balls with fire . " The Spanish historian Juan de Mariana recalled further use of cannon during the Siege of Algeciras ( 1342 @-@ 1344 ) : 
 The besieged did great harm among the Christians with iron bullets they shot . This is the first time we find any mention of gunpowder and ball in our histories . 
 Juan de Mariana also relates that the English Earl of Derby and Earl of Salisbury had both participated in the siege of Algeciras , and they could have conceivably transferred the knowledge about the effectiveness of cannon to England . 
 The Iberian kings at the initial stages enlisted the help of Moorish experts : 
 The first artillery @-@ masters on the Peninsula probably were Moors in Christian service . The king of Navarre had a Moor in his service in 1367 as maestro de las <unk> de <unk> . The <unk> of Tudela at that time had fame for their capacity in <unk> de <unk> . 
 = = = Britain and France = = = 
 Cannon seem to have been introduced to the Kingdom of England in the 14th century , and is mentioned as being in use against the Scots in 1327 . The first metal cannon was the pot @-@ de @-@ fer , first depicted in an illuminated manuscript by Walter de <unk> , of 1327 that was presented to Edward III upon his accession to the English throne . The manuscript shows a four @-@ legged stand supporting a " bulbous bottle " , while the gunner stands well back , firing the charge with a red @-@ hot iron bar . A bolt protrudes from the muzzle , but no wad is shown . Although illustrated in the treatise , no explanation or description was given . 
 This weapon , and others similar , were used by both the French and English during the Hundred Years ' War ( 1337 – 1453 ) , when cannon saw their first real use on the European battlefield . The cannon of the 14th century were still limited in many respects , as a modern historian summarises : 
 Early cannon were inferior in every respect to the great siege @-@ engines : they were slow and small , they were limited … [ in the 14th century ] to firing bolts or ' <unk> ' and they had a very limited range . The weaknesses were due to limited technology : inability to forge or cast in one piece or make iron balls . They were probably as dangerous to their users as to the enemy and affected the morale of men ( and horses ) rather than damaged persons or buildings . 
 During the 1340s , cannon were still relatively rare , and were only used in small numbers by a few states . " Ribaldis " were first mentioned in the English Privy Wardrobe accounts during preparations for the Battle of Crécy between 1345 and 1346 . These were believed to have shot large arrows and simple grapeshot , but they were so important they were directly controlled by the Royal Wardrobe . According to the contemporary chronicler Jean Froissart , the English cannon made " two or three discharges on the Genoese " , which is taken to mean individual shots by two or three guns because of the time taken to reload such primitive artillery . The Florentine Giovanni Villani agreed that they were destructive on the field , though he also indicated that the guns continued to fire upon French cavalry later in the battle : 
 The English guns cast iron balls by means of fire … They made a noise like thunder and caused much loss in men and horses … The Genoese were continually hit by the archers and the gunners … [ by the end of the battle ] the whole plain was covered by men struck down by arrows and cannon balls . 
 = = Advances in the Late Middle Ages = = 
 Similar cannon to those used at Crécy appeared also at the Siege of Calais in the same year , and by the 1380s the " ribaudekin " clearly became mounted on wheels . Wheeled gun carriages became more commonplace by the end of the 15th century , and were more often cast in bronze , rather than banding iron sections together . There were still the logistical problems both of transporting and of operating the cannon , and as many three dozen horses and oxen may have been required to move some of the great guns of the period . 
 Another small @-@ bore cannon of the 14th century was the culverin , whose name derives from the snake @-@ like handles attached to it . It was transitional between the handgun and the full cannon , and was used as an anti @-@ personnel weapon . The culverin was forged of iron and fixed to a wooden stock , and usually placed on a rest for firing . 
 The culverin was also common in 15th century battles , particularly among Burgundian armies . As the smallest of medieval gunpowder weapons , it was relatively light and portable . It fired lead shot , which was inexpensive relative to other available materials . There was also the demi @-@ culverin , which was smaller and had a bore of 4 inches ( 10 cm ) . 
 Considerable developments in the 15th century produced very effective " bombards " — an early form of battering cannon used against walls and towers . These were used both defensively and offensively . Bamburgh Castle , previously thought impregnable , was taken by bombards in 1464 . The keep in Wark , Northumberland was described in 1517 as having five storeys " in each of which there were five great murder @-@ holes , shot with great vaults of stone , except one stage which is of timber , so that great bombards can be shot from each of them . " An example of a bombard was found in the moat of Bodiam Castle , and a replica is now kept inside . 
 Artillery crews were generally recruited from the city craftsmen . The master gunner was usually the same person as the caster . In larger contingents , the master gunners had responsibility for the heavier artillery pieces , and were accompanied by their journeymen as well as smiths , carpenters , rope makers and carters . Smaller field pieces would be manned by trained volunteers . At the Battle of Flodden , each cannon had its crew of gunner , <unk> and drivers , and a group of " pioneers " were assigned to level to path ahead . Even with a level path , the gunpowder mixture used was unstable and could easily separate out into sulphur , saltpetre and charcoal during transport . 
 Once on site , they would be fired at ground level behind a hinged timber shutter , to provide some protection to the artillery crew . Timber wedges were used to control the barrel 's elevation . The majority of medieval cannon were breechloaders , although there was still no effort to standardise calibres . The usual loading equipment consisted of a copper loading scoop , a ramrod , and a felt brush or " sponge " . A bucket of water was always kept beside the cannon . Skins or cloths soaked in cold water could be used to cool down the barrel , while acids could also be added to the water to clean out the inside of the barrel . Hot coals were used to heat the shot or keep the wire primer going . 
 Some Scottish kings were very interested in the development of cannon , including the unfortunate James II , who was killed by the accidental explosion of one of his own cannon besieging Roxburgh Castle in 1460 . Mons Meg , which dates from about the same time , is perhaps the most famous example of a Scottish cannon . James IV was Scotland 's first Renaissance figure , who also had a fascination with cannon , both at land and at sea . By 1502 , he was able to invest in a Scottish navy , which was to have a large number of cannon — his flagship , the Great Michael , was launched in 1511 , with 36 great guns , 300 lesser pieces and 120 gunners . 
 = = Use in Eastern Europe = = 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 The first cannon appeared in Russia in the 1370 @-@ 1380s , although initially their use was confined to sieges and the defence of fortresses . The first mention of cannon in Russian chronicles is of <unk> , small howitzer @-@ type cannon that fired case @-@ shot , used to defend Moscow against Tokhtamysh Khan in 1382 . Cannon co @-@ existed with throwing @-@ machines until the mid @-@ 15th century , when they overtook the latter in terms of destructive power . In 1446 , a Russian city fell to cannon fire for the first time , although its wall was not destroyed . The first stone wall to be destroyed in Russia by cannon fire came in 1481 . 
 = = = Byzantine and Ottoman Empires = = = 
 During the 14th century , the Byzantine Empire began to accumulate its own cannon to face the Ottoman threat , starting with medium @-@ sized cannon 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) long and of 10 " calibre . Only a few large bombards were under the Empire 's control . The first definite use of artillery in the region was against the Ottoman siege of Constantinople in 1396 , as the attackers did not yet have any gunpowder of their own . These loud Byzantine weapons , possibly operated by the Genoese or " Franks " of Galata , forced the Turks to withdraw . 
 The Ottomans had acquired their own cannon by the siege of 1422 , using " falcons " , which were short but wide cannon . The two sides were evenly matched technologically , and the Turks had to build barricades " in order to receive … the stones of the bombards . " Because the Empire at this time was facing economic problems , Pope Pius II promoted the affordable donation of cannon by European monarchs as a means of aid . Any new cannon after the 1422 siege were gifts from European states , and aside from these , no other advances were made to the Byzantine arsenal . 
 In contrast , when Sultan Mehmet II laid siege to Constantinople in April 1453 , he used 68 Hungarian @-@ made cannon , the largest of which was 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) long and weighed 20 tons . This fired a 1 @,@ 200 pound stone cannonball , and required an operating crew of 200 men . Two such bombards had initially been offered to the Byzantines by the Hungarian artillery expert Urban , which were the pinnacle of gunpowder technology at the time ; he boasted that they could reduce " even the walls of Babylon " . However , the fact that the Byzantines could not afford it illustrates the financial costs of artillery at the time . These cannon also needed 70 oxen and 10 @,@ 000 men just to transport them . They were extremely loud , adding to their psychological impact , and Mehmet believed that those who unexpectedly heard it would be struck dumb . 
 The 55 @-@ day bombardment of Constantinople left massive destruction , as recounted by the Greek chronicler <unk> : 
 And the stone , borne with enormous force and velocity , hit the wall , which it immediately shook and knocked down and was itself broken into many fragments and scattered , hurling the pieces everywhere and killing those who happened to be nearby . 
 Byzantine counter artillery allowed them to repel any visible Turkish weapons , and the defenders repulsed any attempts to storm any broken points in the walls and hastily repaired any damage . However , the walls could not be adapted for artillery , and towers were not good gun emplacements . There was even worry that the largest Byzantine cannon could cause more damage to their own walls than the Turkish cannon . Gunpowder had also made the formerly devastating Greek fire obsolete , and with the final fall of what had once been the strongest walls in Europe on May 29 , " it was the end of an era in more ways than one " . 
 = = Cannon at the end of the Middle Ages = = 
 Toward the end of the Middle Ages , the development of cannon made revolutionary changes to siege warfare throughout Europe , with many castles becoming susceptible to artillery fire . The primary aims in castle wall construction were height and thickness , but these became obsolete because they could be damaged by cannonballs . Inevitably , many fortifications previously deemed impregnable proved inadequate in the face of gunpowder . The walls and towers of fortifications had to become lower and wider , and by the 1480s , " Italian tracing " had been developed , which used the corner bastion as the basis of fortifications for centuries to come . The introduction of artillery to siege warfare in the Middle Ages made geometry the main element of European military architecture . 
 In 16th century England , Henry VIII began building Device Forts between 1539 and 1540 as artillery fortresses to counter the threat of invasion from France and Spain . They were built by the state at strategic points for the first powerful cannon batteries , such as Deal Castle , which was perfectly symmetrical , with a low , circular keep at its centre . Over 200 cannon and gun ports were set within the walls , and the fort was essentially a firing platform , with a shape that allowed many lines of fire ; its low curved bastions were designed to deflect cannonballs . 
 To guard against artillery and gunfire , increasing use was made of earthen , brick and stone breastworks and redoubts , such as the geometric fortresses of the 17th century French Marquis de Vauban . Although the obsolescence of castles as fortifications was hastened by the developments of cannon from the 14th century on , many medieval castles still managed to " put up a prolonged resistance " against artillery during the English Civil War of 17th century . 
 = Paramount Television Network = 
 The Paramount Television Network ( PTN ) was a venture by American film corporation Paramount Pictures to organize a television network in the late 1940s . The company built television stations KTLA in Los Angeles and WBKB in Chicago ; it also invested US $ 400 @,@ 000 in the DuMont Television Network , which operated stations WABD in New York City , WTTG in Washington , D.C. , and WDTV in Pittsburgh . <unk> disputes between Paramount and DuMont concerning breaches of contract , company control , and network competition erupted regularly between 1940 and 1956 , and culminated in the dismantling of the DuMont Network . Television historian Timothy White called the clash between the two companies " one of the most unfortunate and dramatic episodes in the early history of the television industry . " 
 The Paramount Television Network aired several programs , including the Emmy Award @-@ winning children 's series Time for Beany . Filmed in Hollywood , the programs were distributed to an ad @-@ hoc network of stations across the United States . The network signed affiliation agreements with more than 50 television stations in 1950 ; despite this , most of Paramount 's series were not widely viewed outside the West Coast . The Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) , which filed suit against Paramount for anti @-@ trust violations , prevented the studio from acquiring additional television stations . Paramount executives eventually gave up on the idea of a television network , and continued to produce series for other networks . In 1995 , after four decades of television production for other companies , Paramount re @-@ entered the broadcast network field when the company and Chris @-@ Craft Industries launched the United Paramount Network ( UPN ) , a television network that operated until 2006 . Paramount 's television division is now owned by CBS Television Studios . 
 = = Origins = = 
 William Wadsworth <unk> founded American film corporation Paramount Pictures in 1914 . Famous Players @-@ Lasky Corporation acquired the company in 1916 and by the 1920s Paramount became a key player in Hollywood . The company founded or acquired many film production and exhibition properties ; among these were the 2 @,@ 000 @-@ screen theater chain United Paramount Theatres ( UPT ) , newsreel service Paramount News and animation studio Famous Studios . The company became one of the " big five " Hollywood studios . By the 1940s , however , Paramount was the target of several anti @-@ trust lawsuits by the federal government , culminating with U.S. vs. Paramount Pictures , et al . ( 1948 ) , which found that Paramount and other studios conducted monopolistic practices . Due to this Supreme Court decision , the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) forced Paramount to sell off its theater division in 1949 . 
 As early as 1937 , executives at Paramount Pictures were interested in the new medium of television . The following year , Paramount purchased a minority interest in DuMont Laboratories , a pioneer in early television technology founded by Dr. Allen B. DuMont . Relations between Paramount and DuMont staff were strained by 1940 , when Paramount , without DuMont , opened Chicago television station WBKB and Los Angeles station KTLA . Dr. DuMont claimed that the original 1937 acquisition proposal required that Paramount would expand its television interests " through DuMont " . Paramount representative Paul Raibourn denied that any such restriction was ever discussed ( a 1953 examination of the original draft document vindicated DuMont on this point ) . The stock in DuMont , coupled with the Chicago and Los Angeles stations , gave Paramount full or partial ownership of four of the first nine television stations in the United States . 
 DuMont Laboratories launched the DuMont Television Network in 1946 . Despite Paramount 's partial ownership of DuMont , Paramount 's two stations never aired television programs from DuMont 's television network ( with the exception of KTLA , which ran DuMont programs for one year from 1947 to 1948 ) , and competed against DuMont 's affiliates in Los Angeles and Chicago . According to authors <unk> and Boyd , Paramount 's construction of KTLA and WBKB and its subsequent launch of the Paramount Television Network " undercut " DuMont , a company it had invested in . 
 KTLA began commercial broadcasts on January 22 , 1947 ; its first evening broadcast was hosted by Bob Hope and featured Kirk Douglas , William Bendix , Dorothy Lamour , William Demarest , Ray Milland and Cecil B. DeMille . KTLA was the first commercial television station to sign on west of the Mississippi River . Although other Los Angeles television stations operated experimentally and eventually received commercial licenses , KTLA had a head start as the first commercially @-@ licensed station in Los Angeles . The revenue stream from commercials helped to fund more professional programming , therefore generating a large viewership ; a 1949 audience estimate from the C. E. Hooper company indicated that KTLA was broadcasting 28 of the top 30 television series in Los Angeles . The popularity of KTLA 's local programs opened up the possibility that they would become national hits if released to other stations across the country . 
 = = Launch = = 
 Paramount 's television division , Television Productions , Inc . , created the Paramount Television Network in 1948 . A full @-@ page advertisement announcing the newly created network , with KTLA as the flagship station , ran in Billboard on May 22 of that year . Filming of programs took place at KTLA ; a coaxial cable link between KTLA and KFMB @-@ TV in San Diego transmitted a live signal to San Diego viewers . Other television stations across the United States received Paramount programs via kinescope recording for airing ; these filmed series allowed stations to " fill in " their schedules during hours when ABC , NBC , CBS and DuMont were not broadcasting shows , or when station managers preferred Paramount 's filmed offerings to those of the four networks . Station managers at WBKB @-@ TV in Chicago also had plans to distribute their own <unk> programs . 
 Paramount management planned to acquire additional owned @-@ and @-@ operated stations ( " O & Os " ) ; the company applied to the FCC for additional stations in San Francisco , Detroit and Boston . Officials at the FCC , however , denied Paramount 's applications . A few years earlier , the federal regulator had placed a five @-@ station cap on all television networks : no network was allowed to own more than five VHF television stations . Paramount was hampered by its minority stake in the DuMont Television Network . Although both DuMont and Paramount executives stated that the companies were separate , the FCC ruled that Paramount 's partial ownership of DuMont meant that DuMont and Paramount were in theory branches of the same company . Since DuMont owned three television stations and Paramount owned two , the federal agency ruled neither network could acquire additional television stations . The FCC requested that Paramount relinquish its stake in DuMont , but Paramount refused . According to television historian William Boddy , " Paramount 's checkered anti @-@ trust history " helped convince the FCC that Paramount controlled DuMont . Both television networks suffered as a result , with neither company being able to acquire five O & Os . Meanwhile , CBS , ABC and NBC had each acquired the maximum of five stations by the mid @-@ 1950s . 
 Author Timothy White has called Paramount 's efforts to launch its own television service , which directly competed with the DuMont Television Network , an unwise decision – Paramount in effect was competing with itself . The resulting ill feelings between Paramount 's and DuMont 's executives continued to escalate throughout the early 1950s , and the lack of cooperation hindered both entities ' network plans . According to White , by 1953 , even the public pretense of cooperation between Paramount and DuMont was gone . 
 = = Programs = = 
 The Paramount Television Network aired several television series during its years of operations . The following is a partial list : 
 Adventures in Music – hosted by the " godfather of exotica " , <unk> Pandit , playing the <unk> and Hammond Organ 
 Armchair Detective – a half @-@ hour crime reenactment series produced at KTLA that aired on CBS and Paramount stations 
 Bandstand Revue – a 30 @-@ minute long music program sponsored by Ralston Purina 
 Dixie Showboat – a weekly country and western musical variety program 
 Frosty Frolics – an ice skating show that also briefly aired ( for four weeks ) on ABC 
 Harry Owens ' Royal Hawaiians – a series featuring Hawaiian music which aired in Los Angeles and San Francisco and later moved to the CBS television network 
 Hollywood Opportunity – a talent show 
 Hollywood Reel – a Hollywood gossip program narrated by Hollywood columnist Erskine Johnson 
 Hollywood Wrestling – an early professional wrestling series 
 Latin Cruise – a musical series starring Bobby Ramos 
 Magazine of the Week – a women 's program 
 Meet Me in Hollywood – a man on the street interview series that was broadcast from the famed intersection of Hollywood Boulevard and Vine Street 
 <unk> , RSVP – a charades program 
 Olympic Wrestling – another professional wrestling series 
 Sandy Dreams – a children 's program that also briefly aired on ABC stations 
 The Spade Cooley Show – a variety program hosted by Spade Cooley and that featured Dick Lane , Anita Aros , Phil Gray , and Kay Cee Jones 
 Time for Beany – a children 's series that received an Emmy Award in 1949 , in the category Best Children 's Show 
 Yer Ole Buddy – a comedy program 
 Various press releases indicated that other KTLA series would be offered on the network . There is no indication , however , that the following series aired outside Los Angeles : 
 Girls Only – a comedy / drama starring Mary Gordon as an aging ex @-@ actress with four young female charges 
 The Ina Ray Hutton Show – a series featuring bandleader Ina Ray Hutton 
 The Lawrence Welk Show – a musical program starring Lawrence Welk that moved to ABC in summer 1955 
 Mayfair Mystery House – a 39 @-@ episode drama filmed in England 
 Spade Cooley 's Western Varieties – another series featuring Spade Cooley 
 = = Staff = = 
 Paul Raibourn served as the president of Paramount Television Productions . Raibourn was also appointed vice president of Paramount Pictures Corporation , and , due to Paramount 's minority interest in DuMont , was installed as treasurer of the DuMont Television Network . This appointment created another point of conflict between Paramount and DuMont . According to Leonard Goldenson , president of ABC during this era , Raibourn " constantly <unk> and needled [ Allen DuMont ] over the smallest expenditures . DuMont came to the point where , psychologically , he thought he couldn 't do anything without Raibourn 's approval . " Raibourn trimmed DuMont 's budgets at a time when the network should have been expanding . Goldenson credits Raibourn as one of the reasons ABC eventually became a successful , established television network while the DuMont network failed : " the name of the television game is programs . If you won 't put money into programs , you won 't succeed . " 
 Klaus Landsberg , a German immigrant , produced many Paramount Television Network series ; he also served as one of the company 's vice presidents and as KTLA 's general manager . Other Paramount executives included George T. <unk> , Paramount Television Productions ' program sales executive ; Burt Balaban , programming executive ; John Howell , sales executive ; and Bernard Goodwin , a director and vice president of Paramount Television Productions . 
 = = Affiliates = = 
 During the 1940s and 1950s , television networks in the United States were restricted to owning no more than five local VHF television stations . This system , which evolved from similar FCC regulations governing radio , resulted in executives of television networks forming alliances with local station owners in order to air network programs across the U.S. These alliances were codified in network affiliation contracts ; Paramount Television Network staff required affiliate station managers to sign a network contract even if the station only aired one Paramount program . At its peak in late 1950 , the Paramount Television Network was distributing five television series a week to over 40 affiliated television stations . Most Paramount stations were in the United States , but at least two were Canadian stations . 
 During this era , American television programs were either broadcast live to local television stations via microwave relay and AT & T 's coaxial cable service or were recorded on kinescope and delivered through the mail to local stations . The live broadcast method was expensive , but was preferred by executives at each of the four major U.S. television networks ( ABC , NBC , CBS and DuMont ) ; in 1954 , DuMont alone spent $ 3 million on live television broadcasts . The major networks sent kinescopes to stations when live transmissions were not possible . " Film networks " , which sent out only prerecorded material , also existed ; kinescopes were cheap to produce and cost little to mail . Paramount 's television service was a hybrid of the two systems , with a live connection between KTLA and KFMB @-@ TV in San Diego , and other affiliates broadcasting programs from kinescope recordings . Paramount executives considered a live connection between Los Angeles and San Francisco too expensive . Uniquely , Paramount 's The Harry Owens Show was broadcast live in Los Angeles and San Francisco by having the program 's performers and crew commute via airplane between the two stations for sequential performances . 
 The table below lists stations that carried Paramount Television Network programs , including the company 's two owned @-@ and @-@ operated stations , KTLA and WBKB . DuMont 's three VHF stations , WABD , WTTG and WDTV , which aired little or no Paramount programming but which the FCC ruled were O & Os of the same entity , also appear in this list . Also included are DuMont 's two short @-@ lived UHF licenses : <unk> @-@ TV – which only operated for a few months , and WHK @-@ TV – which never signed on . A number of stations carried Armchair Detective , Sandy Dreams and Frosty Frolics when those programs aired on CBS and ABC . Stations that aired those programs as part of an ABC or CBS affiliation are not shown in the table below . 
 = = End of network = = 
 In May 1951 , ABC chairman Edward Noble and United Paramount Theatres president Leonard Goldenson announced a proposed merger between their companies . The plan was to merge ABC and its five television stations with United Paramount Theatres , a company only recently spun off from Paramount Pictures . UPT also owned the network 's Chicago station , WBKB ; that station would have to be sold in order for the merged company to stay under the five @-@ station cap . Because the proposed merger involved the sale of a television station , it required the approval of the FCC , which opened a hearing on the issue that August . The proposed deal was complex , and would affect many parties involved in television broadcasting , including Paramount , DuMont , and CBS ( CBS executives wanted to purchase WBKB ) . During the hearing , Allen DuMont asked the FCC to force Paramount to sell its share of the DuMont Network . He stated that Paramount in effect owned two television networks , the PTN and DuMont ; the FCC had similarly forced NBC to sell off one of its two radio networks eight years earlier due to concerns about multi @-@ network ownership . Paramount executives , however , denied ever having operated a television network . Evidence presented against Paramount included network affiliation contracts and advertisements for the Paramount Television Network from 1951 . Despite Paramount executives ' testimony , advertisements for the Paramount Television Network ran as late as 1952 . 
 After a grueling 18 @-@ month trial , the federal agency allowed the ABC @-@ UPT merger , but never ruled on Paramount 's partial ownership of a second network ; Paramount was allowed to retain its shares in DuMont . Leo Resnick , hearing examiner for the Commission , concluded that Paramount did not control DuMont , but the FCC rejected this portion of Resnick 's findings , restricting Paramount and DuMont to a total of five stations . The commissioners had not forgotten Paramount 's previous anti @-@ trust violations , and believed Paramount executives were attempting to control television by operating two television networks . According to White , the FCC 's ruling " ensured that television broadcasting would be controlled by the same three companies that had dominated radio broadcasting , thus fostering a lack of diversity in both station and network ownership " . 
 The February 1953 merger of ABC and United Paramount Theatres lead to the divestiture of WBKB ( now WBBM @-@ TV ) , which was sold to CBS . Paramount retained KTLA and applied to the FCC for a new station in Boston , but the construction permit was never granted . By this time , Paramount 's television arm was called Paramount TV Productions , Incorporated ; Paramount ceased using the PTN name . The company continued to distribute programs nationally , however , and continued to sign network affiliation agreements with local television stations . 
 With just one owned @-@ and @-@ operated station , Paramount 's program service never gelled into a true television network ; television historians such as Alex McNeil ( 1996 ) consider Paramount programs syndicated rather than network series . While the Paramount series Hollywood Wrestling and Time For Beany were widely seen on stations across the United States , most other Paramount television programs aired in only a handful of markets ( another exception , Hollywood Reel , aired in fourteen major cities in 1950 ) . 
 Paramount 's revenues were much smaller than those of a true television network , and gradually Paramount began losing program sponsors or ended production on formerly @-@ popular television series . American Vitamin Corporation , Paramount 's sponsor for both The Spade Cooley Show and Frosty Frolics , pulled its $ 25 @,@ 000 weekly sponsorship in October 1951 . In June 1953 , it was announced that Time For Beany and Paramount Television Productions were " calling it a day " . Paramount ended production of its flagship series in October 1953 ; rival Los Angeles station KTTV and independent distributor Consolidated Television respectively took over production and distribution of Time For Beany . Independent distributor Cinema @-@ Vue took over Hollywood Wrestling . By late 1955 , Billboard reported the Paramount Network consisted of just 15 stations airing Bandstand Revue . Billboard called this a " sort of " network . Management changes at KTLA , coupled with low local ratings , caused the cancellation of Bandstand Revue in October 1956 . Klaus Landsberg , who had produced many of the series for KTLA , died in September 1956 and the new station manager made what Billboard called " sweeping changes " at the station . 
 By the autumn of 1955 , Hollywood insiders were predicting that Paramount would launch a major television network using KTLA and the DuMont stations as charters . Articles reported that Paramount was seeking television scripts , and was constructing theaters and studios that rivaled those of ABC , CBS and NBC . In a dramatic move , Paramount 's board of directors seized control of DuMont Laboratories in a boardroom coup in August 1955 . Paramount executives replaced DuMont 's board of directors , Dr. DuMont was removed as president of the company , and DuMont Network operations ceased the following year . However , no combined Paramount @-@ DuMont network ever materialized ; according to television historian Timothy White , by this time " a television network was no longer among Paramount 's plans for exploitation of the small screen " . Paramount sold its interest in DuMont ( by this time renamed as the " Metropolitan Broadcasting Company " ) in 1959 ; the sale ended Paramount 's first ventures into network television . 
 = = Paramount 's later involvement with television = = 
 Despite Paramount 's failure to build a national broadcast television network , the company retained KTLA , and executives at Paramount continued to toy with the idea of entering the television medium once more . Paramount sold its library of shorts and cartoons in separate deals to U.M. & M. TV Corporation , Associated Artists Productions and Harvey Comics ( the Superman cartoons were already sold to National Comics when Paramount 's license to Superman expired ) . In 1957 , Paramount sold most of its pre @-@ 1950 sound live action feature film library to <unk> , Ltd . , a subsidiary of MCA . The live action films would end up with what became Universal Television after MCA bought Universal Pictures in 1962 . KTLA was eventually sold to Golden West Broadcasters , a company owned by actor and singer Gene Autry , for $ 12 million in 1964 . 
 After acquiring Desilu Productions in 1967 , the company continued to produce series for the " big three " broadcast networks . Among them were Here 's Lucy , Mission : Impossible and Mannix for CBS ; The Brady Bunch , The Odd Couple and Happy Days for ABC ; and ( in later years ) Family Ties and Cheers for NBC . 
 In 1978 , Paramount CEO Barry Diller planned to launch the Paramount Television Service , a new " fourth television network " ; its programs would have aired only one night a week . 30 " Movies of the Week " would have followed Star Trek : Phase II on Saturday nights . This plan was aborted when Paramount made the decision to transform Phase II into Star Trek : The Motion Picture . Despite this failure , Diller would eventually launch a successful fourth network , when in late 1986 , he joined the Rupert Murdoch @-@ owned News Corporation to create the Fox network , which went on to be one of the most successful networks in the country . 
 In the 1980s , Paramount became increasingly involved with original syndicated programming in the U.S. , with such successful series being Entertainment Tonight , Star Trek : The Next Generation , Friday the 13th : The Series and The Arsenio Hall Show , all of which were among the most popular syndicated series broadcast during that decade ; with the continuing success of the Star Trek franchise ( notably , Star Trek : Deep Space Nine ) and the purchase of television station owner <unk> Broadcast Group ( which owned independent stations in several large and mid @-@ sized markets ) , the groundwork for a new network venture was laid . 
 On January 16 , 1995 , Paramount launched a new broadcast television network , the United Paramount Network ( UPN ) , in a programming partnership with Chris @-@ Craft Industries ; Viacom ( which acquired Paramount Pictures and its related holdings in 1994 ) would acquire 50 % interest in the network in 1996 and acquire Chris @-@ Craft 's remaining stake in 2000 . During its 11 @-@ year existence , UPN never made a profit ; The New Yorker reported that the network had lost $ 800 million during its first five years of operation . UPN ceased operations in September 2006 , when it merged with the WB Television Network to form The CW Television Network . Today , Paramount 's television division is part of the CBS Corporation subsidiary CBS Television Studios . 
 = Currency war = 
 Currency war , also known as competitive devaluations , is a condition in international affairs where countries seek to gain a trade advantage over other countries by causing the exchange rate of their currency to fall in relation to other currencies . As the exchange rate of a country 's currency falls exports become more competitive in other countries , and imports into the country become more expensive . Both effects benefit the domestic industry , and thus employment , which receives a boost in demand from both domestic and foreign markets . However , the price increases for import goods ( as well as in the cost of foreign travel ) are unpopular as they harm citizens ' purchasing power ; and when all countries adopt a similar strategy , it can lead to a general decline in international trade , harming all countries . 
 Historically , competitive devaluations have been rare as countries have generally preferred to maintain a high value for their currency . Countries have generally allowed market forces to work , or have participated in systems of managed exchanges rates . An exception occurred when a currency war broke out in the 1930s when countries abandoned the gold standard during the Great Depression and used currency devaluations in an attempt to stimulate their economies . Since this effectively pushes unemployment overseas , trading partners quickly retaliated with their own devaluations . The period is considered to have been an adverse situation for all concerned , as unpredictable changes in exchange rates reduced overall international trade . 
 According to Guido Mantega , former Brazilian Minister for Finance , a global currency war broke out in 2010 . This view was echoed by numerous other government officials and financial journalists from around the world . Other senior policy makers and journalists suggested the phrase " currency war " overstated the extent of hostility . With a few exceptions , such as Mantega , even commentators who agreed there had been a currency war in 2010 generally concluded that it had fizzled out by mid @-@ 2011 . 
 States engaging in possible competitive devaluation since 2010 have used a mix of policy tools , including direct government intervention , the imposition of capital controls , and , indirectly , quantitative easing . While many countries experienced undesirable upward pressure on their exchange rates and took part in the ongoing arguments , the most notable dimension of the 2010 – 11 episode was the rhetorical conflict between the United States and China over the valuation of the yuan . In January 2013 , measures announced by Japan which were expected to devalue its currency sparked concern of a possible second 21st century currency war breaking out , this time with the principal source of tension being not China versus the US , but Japan versus the Eurozone . By late February , concerns of a new outbreak of currency war had been mostly allayed , after the G7 and G20 issued statements committing to avoid competitive devaluation . After the European Central Bank launched a fresh programme of quantitative easing in January 2015 , there was once again an intensification of discussion about currency war . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the absence of intervention in the foreign exchange market by national government authorities , the exchange rate of a country 's currency is determined , in general , by market forces of supply and demand at a point in time . Government authorities may intervene in the market from time to time to achieve specific policy objectives , such as maintaining its balance of trade or to give its exporters a competitive advantage in international trade . 
 = = = Reasons for intentional devaluation = = = 
 Devaluation , with its adverse consequences , has historically rarely been a preferred strategy . According to economist Richard N. Cooper , writing in 1971 , a substantial devaluation is one of the most " traumatic " policies a government can adopt – it almost always resulted in cries of outrage and calls for the government to be replaced . Devaluation can lead to a reduction in citizens ' standard of living as their purchasing power is reduced both when they buy imports and when they travel abroad . It also can add to inflationary pressure . Devaluation can make interest payments on international debt more expensive if those debts are denominated in a foreign currency , and it can discourage foreign investors . At least until the 21st century , a strong currency was commonly seen as a mark of prestige , while devaluation was associated with weak governments . 
 However , when a country is suffering from high unemployment or wishes to pursue a policy of export @-@ led growth , a lower exchange rate can be seen as advantageous . From the early 1980s the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) has proposed devaluation as a potential solution for developing nations that are consistently spending more on imports than they earn on exports . A lower value for the home currency will raise the price for imports while making exports cheaper . This tends to encourage more domestic production , which raises employment and gross domestic product ( GDP ) – though the effect may not be immediate due to the Marshall – Lerner condition . Devaluation can be seen as an attractive solution to unemployment when other options , like increased public spending , are ruled out due to high public debt , or when a country has a balance of payments deficit which a devaluation would help correct . A reason for preferring devaluation common among emerging economies is that maintaining a relatively low exchange rate helps them build up foreign exchange reserves , which can protect against future financial crises . 
 = = = Mechanism for devaluation = = = 
 A state wishing to devalue , or at least check the appreciation of its currency , must work within the constraints of the prevailing International monetary system . During the 1930s , countries had relatively more direct control over their exchange rates through the actions of their central banks . Following the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s , markets substantially increased in influence , with market forces largely setting the exchange rates for an increasing number of countries . However , a state 's central bank can still intervene in the markets to effect a devaluation – if it sells its own currency to buy other currencies then this will cause the value of its own currency to fall – a practice common with states that have a managed exchange rate regime . Less directly , quantitative easing ( common in 2009 and 2010 ) , tends to lead to a fall in the value of the currency even if the central bank does not directly buy any foreign assets . 
 A third method is for authorities simply to talk down the value of their currency by hinting at future action to discourage speculators from betting on a future rise , though sometimes this has little discernible effect . Finally , a central bank can effect a devaluation by lowering its base rate of interest ; however this sometimes has limited effect , and , since the end of World War II , most central banks have set their base rate according to the needs of their domestic economy . 
 If a country 's authorities wish to devalue or prevent appreciation against market forces exerting upwards pressure on the currency , and retain control of interest rates , as is usually the case , they will need capital controls in place — due to conditions that arise from the impossible trinity <unk> . 
 = = = Quantitative easing = = = 
 Quantitative easing ( QE ) is the practice in which a central bank tries to mitigate a potential or actual recession by increasing the money supply for its domestic economy . This can be done by printing money and injecting it into the domestic economy via open market operations . There may be a promise to destroy any newly created money once the economy improves in order to avoid inflation . 
 Quantitative easing was widely used as a response to the financial crises that began in 2007 , especially by the United States and the United Kingdom , and , to a lesser extent , the Eurozone . The Bank of Japan was the first central bank to claim to have used such a policy . 
 Although the U.S. administration has denied that devaluing their currency was part of their objectives for implementing quantitative easing , the practice can act to devalue a country 's currency in two indirect ways . Firstly , it can encourage speculators to bet that the currency will decline in value . Secondly , the large increase in the domestic money supply will lower domestic interest rates , often they will become much lower than interest rates in countries not practising quantitative easing . This creates the conditions for a carry trade , where market participants can engage in a form of arbitrage , borrowing in the currency of the country practising quantitative easing , and lending in a country with a relatively high rate of interest . Because they are effectively selling the currency being used for quantitative easing on the international markets , this can increase the supply of the currency and hence push down its value . By October 2010 expectations in the markets were high that the United States , UK , and Japan would soon embark on a second round of QE , with the prospects for the Eurozone to join them less certain . 
 In early November 2010 the United States launched QE2 , the second round of quantitative easing , which had been expected . The Federal Reserve made an additional $ 600 billion available for the purchase of financial assets . This prompted widespread criticism from China , Germany , and Brazil that the United States was using QE2 to try to devalue its currency without consideration to the effect the resulting capital inflows might have on emerging economies . 
 Some leading figures from the critical countries , such as Zhou <unk> , governor of the People 's Bank of China , have said the QE2 is understandable given the challenges facing the United States . Wang Jun , the Chinese Vice Finance Minister suggested QE2 could " help the revival of the global economy tremendously " . President Barack Obama has defended QE2 , saying it would help the U.S. economy to grow , which would be " good for the world as a whole " . Japan also launched a second round of quantitative easing though to a lesser extent than the United States ; Britain and the Eurozone did not launch an additional QE in 2010 . 
 = = = International conditions required for currency war = = = 
 For a widespread currency war to occur a large proportion of significant economies must wish to devalue their currencies at once . This has so far only happened during a global economic downturn . 
 An individual currency devaluation has to involve a corresponding rise in value for at least one other currency . The corresponding rise will generally be spread across all other currencies and so unless the devaluing country has a huge economy and is substantially devaluing , the offsetting rise for any individual currency will tend to be small or even negligible . In normal times other countries are often content to accept a small rise in the value of their own currency or at worst be indifferent to it . However , if much of the world is suffering from a recession , from low growth or are pursuing strategies which depend on a favourable balance of payments , then nations can begin competing with each other to devalue . In such conditions , once a small number of countries begin intervening this can trigger corresponding interventions from others as they strive to prevent further deterioration in their export competitiveness . 
 = = Historical overview = = 
 = = = Up to 1930 = = = 
 For millennia , going back to at least the Classical period , governments have often devalued their currency by reducing its intrinsic value . Methods have included reducing the percentage of gold in coins , or substituting less precious metals for gold . However , until the 19th century , the proportion of the world 's trade that occurred between nations was very low , so exchanges rates were not generally a matter of great concern . Rather than being seen as a means to help exporters , the debasement of currency was motivated by a desire to increase the domestic money supply and the ruling authorities ' wealth through seigniorage , especially when they needed to finance wars or pay debts . A notable example is the substantial devaluations which occurred during the Napoleonic wars . When nations wished to compete economically they typically practiced mercantilism – this still involved attempts to boost exports while limiting imports , but rarely by means of devaluation . A favoured method was to protect home industries using current account controls such as tariffs . From the late 18th century , and especially in Great Britain which for much of the 19th century was the world 's largest economy , mercantilism became increasingly discredited by the rival theory of free trade , which held that the best way to encourage prosperity would be to allow trade to occur free of government imposed controls . The intrinsic value of money became formalised with a gold standard being widely adopted from about 1870 – 1914 , so while the global economy was now becoming sufficiently integrated for competitive devaluation to occur there was little opportunity . Following the end of WWI , many countries other than the US experienced recession and few immediately returned to the gold standard , so several of the conditions for a currency war were in place . However , currency war did not occur as Great Britain was trying to raise the value of its currency back to its pre @-@ war levels , effectively cooperating with the countries that wished to devalue against the market . By the mid @-@ 1920s many former members of the gold standard had rejoined , and while the standard did not work as successfully as it had pre war , there was no widespread competitive devaluation . 
 = = = Currency War in the Great Depression = = = 
 During the Great Depression of the 1930s , most countries abandoned the gold standard . With widespread high unemployment , devaluations became common , a policy that has frequently been described as " beggar thy neighbour " , in which countries purportedly compete to export unemployment . However , because the effects of a devaluation would soon be offset by a corresponding devaluation and in many cases retaliatory tariffs or other barriers by trading partners , few nations would gain an enduring advantage . 
 The exact starting date of the 1930s currency war is open to debate . The three principal parties were Great Britain , France , and the United States . For most of the 1920s the three generally had coinciding interests ; both the US and France supported Britain 's efforts to raise Sterling 's value against market forces . Collaboration was aided by strong personal friendships among the nations ' central bankers , especially between Britain 's Montagu Norman and America 's Benjamin Strong until the latter 's early death in 1928 . Soon after the Wall Street Crash of 1929 , France lost faith in Sterling as a source of value and begun selling it heavily on the markets . From Britain 's perspective both France and the US were no longer playing by the rules of the gold standard . Instead of allowing gold inflows to increase their money supplies ( which would have expanded those economies but reduced their trade surpluses ) France and the US began sterilising the inflows , building up hoards of gold . These factors contributed to the Sterling crises of 1931 ; in September of that year Great Britain substantially devalued and took the pound off the gold standard . For several years after this global trade was disrupted by competitive devaluation and by retaliatory tariffs . The currency war of the 1930s is generally considered to have ended with the Tripartite monetary agreement of 1936 . 
 = = = Bretton Woods era = = = 
 From the end of World War II until about 1971 , the Bretton Woods system of semi @-@ fixed exchange rates meant that competitive devaluation was not an option , which was one of the design objectives of the systems ' architects . Additionally , global growth was generally very high in this period , so there was little incentive for currency war even if it had been possible . 
 = = = 1973 to 2000 = = = 
 While some of the conditions to allow a currency war were in place at various points throughout this period , countries generally had contrasting priorities and at no point were there enough states simultaneously wanting to devalue for a currency war to break out . On several occasions countries were desperately attempting not to cause a devaluation but to prevent one . So states were striving not against other countries but against market forces that were exerting undesirable downwards pressure on their currencies . Examples include Great Britain during Black Wednesday and various tiger economies during the Asian crises of 1997 . During the mid @-@ 1980s the United States did desire to devalue significantly , but were able to secure the cooperation of other major economies with the Plaza Accord . As free market influences approached their zenith during the 1990s , advanced economies and increasingly transition and even emerging economies moved to the view that it was best to leave the running of their economies to the markets and not to intervene even to correct a substantial current account deficit . 
 = = = 2000 to 2008 = = = 
 During the 1997 Asian crisis several Asian economies ran critically low on foreign reserves , leaving them forced to accept harsh terms from the IMF , and often to accept low prices for the forced sale of their assets . This shattered faith in free market thinking among emerging economies , and from about 2000 they generally began intervening to keep the value of their currencies low . This enhanced their ability to pursue export led growth strategies while at the same time building up foreign reserves so they would be better protected against further crises . No currency war resulted because on the whole advanced economies accepted this strategy — in the short term it had some benefits for their citizens , who could buy cheap imports and thus enjoy a higher material standard of living . The current account deficit of the US grew substantially , but until about 2007 , the consensus view among free market economists and policy makers like Alan Greenspan , then Chairman of the Federal Reserve , and Paul O 'Neill , US Treasury secretary , was that the deficit was not a major reason for worry . 
 This is not say there was no popular concern ; by 2005 for example a chorus of US executives along with trade union and mid @-@ ranking government officials had been speaking out about what they perceived to be unfair trade practices by China . These concerns were soon partially allayed . With the global economy doing well , China was able to abandon its dollar peg in 2005 , allowing a substantial appreciation of the Yuan up to 2007 , while still increasing its exports . The dollar peg was later re @-@ established as the financial crises began to reduce China 's export orders . 
 Economists such as Michael P. Dooley , Peter M. Garber , and David <unk> @-@ Landau described the new economic relationship between emerging economies and the US as Bretton Woods II . 
 = = = Competitive devaluation after 2009 = = = 
 By 2009 some of the conditions required for a currency war had returned , with a severe economic downturn seeing global trade in that year decline by about 12 % . There was a widespread concern among advanced economies about the size of their deficits ; they increasingly joined emerging economies in viewing export led growth as their ideal strategy . In March 2009 , even before international co @-@ operation reached its peak with the 2009 G @-@ 20 London Summit , economist Ted Truman became one of the first to warn of the dangers of competitive devaluation . He also coined the phrase competitive non @-@ appreciation . 
 On 27 September 2010 , Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega announced that the world is " in the midst of an international currency war . " Numerous financial journalists agreed with Mantega 's view , such as the Financial Times ' Alan Beattie and The Telegraph 's Ambrose Evans @-@ Pritchard . Journalists linked Mantega 's announcement to recent interventions by various countries seeking to devalue their exchange rate including China , Japan , Colombia , Israel and Switzerland . 
 Other analysts such as Goldman Sach 's Jim O 'Neill asserted that fears of a currency war were exaggerated . In September , senior policy makers such as Dominique Strauss @-@ Kahn , then managing director of the IMF , and Tim Geithner , US Secretary of the Treasury , were reported as saying the chances of a genuine currency war breaking out were low ; however by early October , Strauss @-@ Kahn was warning that the risk of a currency war was real . He also suggested the IMF could help resolve the trade imbalances which could be the underlying casus belli for conflicts over currency valuations . Mr Strauss @-@ Kahn said that using currencies as weapons " is not a solution [ and ] it can even lead to a very bad situation . There 's no domestic solution to a global problem . " 
 Considerable attention had been focused on the US , due to its quantitative easing programmes , and on China . For much of 2009 and 2010 , China has been under pressure from the US to allow the yuan to appreciate . Between June and October 2010 , China allowed a 2 % appreciation , but there are concerns from Western observers that China only relaxes its intervention when under heavy pressure . The fixed peg was not abandoned until just before the June G20 meeting , after which the yuan appreciated by about 1 % , only to devalue slowly again , until further US pressure in September when it again appreciated relatively steeply , just prior to the September US Congressional hearings to discuss measures to force a revaluation . 
 Reuters suggested that both China and the United States were " winning " the currency war , holding down their currencies while pushing up the value of the Euro , the Yen , and the currencies of many emerging economies . 
 Martin Wolf , an economics leader writer with the Financial Times , suggested there may be advantages in western economies taking a more confrontational approach against China , which in recent years had been by far the biggest practitioner of competitive devaluation . Though he advised that rather than using protectionist measures which may spark a trade war , a better tactic would be to use targeted capital controls against China to prevent them buying foreign assets in order to further devalue the yuan , as previously suggested by Daniel Gros , Director of the Centre for European Policy Studies . 
 A contrasting view was published on 19 October , with a paper from Chinese economist <unk> Huang arguing that the US did not win the last " currency war " with Japan , and has even less of a chance against China ; but should focus instead on broader " structural adjustments " at the November 2010 G @-@ 20 Seoul summit . 
 Discussion over currency war and imbalances dominated the 2010 G @-@ 20 Seoul summit , but little progress was made in resolving the issue . 
 In the first half of 2011 analysts and the financial press widely reported that the currency war had ended or at least entered a lull , though speaking in July 2011 Guido Mantega told the Financial Times that the conflict was still ongoing . 
 As investor confidence in the global economic outlook fell in early August , Bloomberg suggested the currency war had entered a new phase . This followed renewed talk of a possible third round of quantitative easing by the US and interventions over the first three days of August by Switzerland and Japan to push down the value of their currencies . 
 In September , as part of its opening speech for the 66th United Nations Debate , and also in an article for the Financial Times , Brazilian president Dilma Rousseff called for the currency war to be ended by increased use of floating currencies and greater cooperation and solidarity among major economies , with exchange rate policies set for the good of all rather than having individual nations striving to gain an advantage for themselves . 
 In March 2012 , Rousseff said Brazil was still experiencing undesirable upwards pressure on its currency , with its Finance Minister Guido Mantega saying his country will no longer " play the fool " and allow others to get away with competitive devaluation , announcing new measures aimed at limiting further appreciation for the Real . By June however , the Real had fallen substantially from its peak against the Dollar , and Mantega had been able to begin relaxing his anti @-@ appreciation measures . 
 = = = Currency war in 2013 = = = 
 In mid January 2013 , Japan 's central bank signaled the intention to launch an open ended bond buying programme which would likely devalue the yen . This resulted in short lived but intense period of alarm about the risk of a possible fresh round of currency war . 
 Numerous senior central bankers and finance ministers issued public warnings , the first being Alexei <unk> , the first deputy chairman at Russia 's central bank . He was later joined by many others including Park Jae @-@ wan , the finance minister for South Korea , and by Jens Weidmann , president of the Bundesbank . Weidmann held the view that interventions during the 2009 – 11 period were not intense enough to count as competitive devaluation , but that a genuine currency war is now a real possibility . Japan 's economy minister Akira Amari has said that the Bank of Japan 's bond buying programme is intended to combat deflation , and not to weaken the yen . 
 In early February , ECB president Mario Draghi agreed that expansionary monetary policy like QE have not been undertaken to deliberately cause devaluation . Draghi 's statement did however hint that the ECB may take action if the Euro continues to appreciate , and this saw the value of the European currency fall considerably . A mid February statement from the G7 affirmed the advanced economies commitment to avoid currency war . It was initially read by the markets as an endorsement of Japan 's actions , though later clarification suggested the US would like Japan to tone down some of its language , specifically by not linking policies like QE to an expressed desire to devalue the Yen . Most commentators have asserted that if a new round of competitive devaluation occurs it would be harmful for the global economy . However some analysts have stated that Japan 's planned actions could be in the long term interests of the rest of the world ; just as he did for the 2010 – 11 incident , economist Barry Eichengreen has suggested that even if many other countries start intervening against their currencies it could boost growth world @-@ wide , as the effects would be similar to semi @-@ coordinated global monetary expansion . Other analysts have expressed skepticism about the risk of a war breaking out , with Marc Chandler , chief currency strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman , advising that : " A real currency war remains a remote possibility . " 
 On 15 February , a statement issued from the G20 meeting of finance ministers and central bank governors in Moscow affirmed that Japan would not face high level international criticism for its planned monetary policy . In a remark endorsed by US Fed chairman Ben Bernanke , the IMF 's managing director Christine Lagarde said that recent concerns about a possible currency war had been " overblown " . Paul Krugman has echoed Eichengreen 's view that central bank 's unconventional monetary policy is best understood as a shared concern to boost growth , not as currency war . Goldman Sachs strategist <unk> Trivedi has suggested that rising stock markets imply that market players generally agree that central bank 's actions are best understood as monetary easing and not as competitive devaluation . Other analysts have however continued to assert that ongoing tensions over currency valuation remain , with currency war and even trade war still a significant risk . Central bank officials ranging from New Zealand and Switzerland to China have made fresh statements about possible further interventions against their currencies . 
 Analyses has been published by currency strategists at RBS , scoring countries on their potential to undertake intervention , measuring their relative intention to weaken their currency and their capacity to do so . Ratings are based on the openness of a country 's economy , export growth and real effective exchange rate ( <unk> ) valuation , as well as the scope a country has to weaken its currency without damaging its economy . As of January 2013 , Indonesia , Thailand , Malaysia , Chile and Sweden are the most willing and able to intervene , while the UK and New Zealand are among the least . 
 From March 2013 , concerns over further currency war diminished , though in November several journalists and analysts warned of a possible fresh outbreak . The likely principal source of tension appeared to shift once again , this time not being the U.S. versus China or the Eurozone versus Japan , but the U.S. versus Germany . In late October U.S. treasury officials had criticized Germany for running an excessively large current account surplus , thus acting as a drag on the global economy . 
 = = = Currency war in 2014 = = = 
 Since September 2014 , several journalists , commentators and financial sector insiders have again raised the prospect of further currency war . This time , rather than being intended as a means to boost competitiveness , some states , especially Japan and the Eurozone , may be motivated to devalue their currencies as a means to counter the threat of deflation . ECB President Mario Draghi has however denied any intent to engage in competitive devaluation . 
 = = = Currency war in 2015 = = = 
 A € <unk> per month quantitative easing programme was launched in January 2015 by the European Central Bank . While lowering the value of the Euro was not part of the programme 's official objectives , there was much speculation that the new <unk> represents an escalation of currency war , especially from analysts working in the FX markets . David Woo for example , a managing director at Bank of America Merrill Lynch , stated there was a " growing consensus " among market participants that states are indeed engaging in a stealthy currency war . A Financial Times editorial however claimed that rhetoric about currency war was once again misguided . 
 In August 2015 , China devalued the yuan by just under 3 % , partially due to a weakening export figures of <unk> % in the previous month . The drop in export is caused by the loss of competitiveness against other major export countries including Japan and Germany , where the currency had been drastically devalued during the previous quantitative easing operations . It sparked a new round of devaluation among Asian currencies , including the Vietnam dong and the Kazakhstan <unk> . 
 = = Comparison between 1932 and 21st century currency war = = 
 Both the 1930s episode and the outbreak of competitive devaluation that began in 2009 occurred during global economic downturns . An important difference with the 2010s period is that international traders are much better able to hedge their exposures to exchange rate volatility due to more sophisticated financial markets . A second difference is that during the later period devaluations have invariably been effected by nations expanding their money supplies — either by creating money to buy foreign currency , in the case of direct interventions , or by creating money to inject into their domestic economies , with quantitative easing . If all nations try to devalue at once , the net effect on exchange rates could cancel out leaving them largely unchanged , but the expansionary effect of the interventions would remain . So while there has been no collaborative intent , some economists such as Berkeley 's Barry Eichengreen and Goldman Sachs 's Dominic Wilson have suggested the net effect will be similar to semi @-@ coordinated monetary expansion which will help the global economy . James Zhan of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD ) however warned in October 2010 that the fluctuations in exchange rates were already causing corporations to scale back their international investments . 
 Comparing the situation in 2010 with the currency war of the 1930s , Ambrose Evans @-@ Pritchard of the Daily Telegraph suggested a new currency war may be beneficial for countries suffering from trade deficits , noting that in the 1930s it was the big surplus countries that were severely impacted once competitive devaluation began . He also suggested that overly confrontational tactics may backfire on the US as they may damage the status of the dollar as a global reserve currency . 
 Ben Bernanke , chairman of the US Federal Reserve , also drew a comparison with competitive devaluation in the inter @-@ war period , referring to the sterilisation of gold inflows by France and America which helped them sustain large trade surpluses , but which also caused deflationary pressure on their trading partners , contributing to the Great Depression . Bernanke has stated the example of the 1930s implies that the " pursuit of export @-@ led growth cannot ultimately succeed if the implications of that strategy for global growth and stability are not taken into account . " 
 In February 2013 , Gavyn Davies for The Financial Times emphasized that a key difference between the 1930s and the 21st century outbreaks is that in the thirties some of the retaliations between countries were carried out not by devaluations , but by increases in import tariffs , which tend to be much more disruptive to international trade . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 The term " currency war " is sometimes used with meanings that are not related to competitive devaluation . 
 In the 2007 book , Currency Wars by Chinese economist Song <unk> , the term is sometimes used in a somewhat contrary sense , to refer to an alleged practice where unscrupulous bankers lend to emerging market countries and then speculate against the emerging state 's currency by trying to force it down in value against the wishes of that states ' government . 
 In another book of the same name , John Cooley uses the term to refer to the efforts of a state 's monetary authorities to protect its currency from forgers , whether they are simple criminals or agents of foreign governments trying to devalue a currency and cause excess inflation against the home government 's wishes . 
 Jim Rickards , in his 2011 book " Currency Wars : The Making of the Next Global Crisis , " argues that the consequences of the Fed 's attempts to prop up economic growth could be devastating for American national security . Though Rickard 's book is largely concerned with currency war as competitive devaluation , it uses a broader definition of the term , classing policies that cause inflation as currency war . Such policies can be seen as metaphorical warfare against those who have monetary assets in favor of those who do not , but unless the effects of rising inflation on international trade are offset by a devaluation , inflationary policies tend to make a country 's exports less competitive against foreign countries . In their review of the book , Publishers Weekly said : " Rickards 's first book is an outgrowth of his contributions and a later two @-@ day war game simulation held at the Applied Physics Laboratory 's Warfare Analysis Laboratory . He argues that a financial attack against the U.S. could destroy confidence in the dollar . In Rickards 's view , the Fed 's policy of quantitative easing by lessening confidence in the dollar , may lead to chaos in global financial markets . " Kirkus Reviews said : " In Rickards ’ view , the world is currently going through a third currency war ( " <unk> " ) based on competitive devaluations . <unk> occurred in the 1960s and ’ 70s and culminated in Nixon 's decision to take the dollar off the gold standard . CWI followed WWI and included the 1923 German hyperinflation and Roosevelt 's devaluation of the dollar against gold in 1933 . Rickards demonstrates that competitive devaluations are a race to the bottom , and thus instruments of a sort of warfare . <unk> , he writes , is characterized by the Federal Reserve 's policy of quantitative easing , which he ascribes to what he calls " extensive theoretical work " on depreciation , negative interest rates and stimulation achieved at the expense of other countries . He offers a view of how the continued depreciation and devaluation of the dollar will ultimately lead to a collapse , which he asserts will come about through a widespread abandonment of a worthless inflated instrument . Rickards also provides possible scenarios for the future , including collaboration among a variety of currencies , emergence of a world central bank and a forceful U.S. return to a gold standard through an emergency powers – based legal regime . The author emphasizes that these questions are matters of policy and choice , which can be different . " 
 Historically , the term has been used to refer to the competition between Japan and China for their currencies to be used as the preferred tender in parts of Asia in the years leading up to Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . 
 = Noble gas = 
 The noble gases make a group of chemical elements with similar properties . Under standard conditions , they are all odorless , colorless , monatomic gases with very low chemical reactivity . The six noble gases that occur naturally are helium ( He ) , neon ( Ne ) , argon ( Ar ) , krypton ( Kr ) , xenon ( Xe ) , and the radioactive radon ( Rn ) . Ununoctium ( Uuo ) , which was recognised as an element in December 2015 , is predicted to be a noble gas as well but this theory is not confirmed . 
 For the first six periods of the periodic table , the noble gases are exactly the members of group 18 of the periodic table . It is possible that due to relativistic effects , the group 14 element flerovium exhibits some noble @-@ gas @-@ like properties , instead of the group 18 element ununoctium . Noble gases are typically highly unreactive except when under particular extreme conditions . The inertness of noble gases makes them very suitable in applications where reactions are not wanted . For example , argon is used in light bulbs to prevent the hot tungsten filament from oxidizing ; also , helium is used in breathing gas by deep @-@ sea divers to prevent oxygen and nitrogen toxicity . 
 The properties of the noble gases can be well explained by modern theories of atomic structure : their outer shell of valence electrons is considered to be " full " , giving them little tendency to participate in chemical reactions , and it has been possible to prepare only a few hundred noble gas compounds . The melting and boiling points for a given noble gas are close together , differing by less than 10 ° C ( 18 ° F ) ; that is , they are liquids over only a small temperature range . 
 Neon , argon , krypton , and xenon are obtained from air in an air separation unit using the methods of liquefaction of gases and fractional distillation . Helium is sourced from natural gas fields which have high concentrations of helium in the natural gas , using cryogenic gas separation techniques , and radon is usually isolated from the radioactive decay of dissolved radium , thorium , or uranium compounds ( since those compounds give off alpha particles ) . Noble gases have several important applications in industries such as lighting , welding , and space exploration . A helium @-@ oxygen breathing gas is often used by deep @-@ sea divers at depths of seawater over 55 m ( 180 ft ) to keep the diver from experiencing oxygen toxemia , the lethal effect of high @-@ pressure oxygen , and nitrogen narcosis , the distracting narcotic effect of the nitrogen in air beyond this partial @-@ pressure threshold . After the risks caused by the flammability of hydrogen became apparent , it was replaced with helium in blimps and balloons . 
 = = History = = 
 Noble gas is translated from the German noun <unk> , first used in 1898 by Hugo Erdmann to indicate their extremely low level of reactivity . The name makes an analogy to the term " noble metals " , which also have low reactivity . The noble gases have also been referred to as inert gases , but this label is deprecated as many noble gas compounds are now known . Rare gases is another term that was used , but this is also inaccurate because argon forms a fairly considerable part ( 0 @.@ 94 % by volume , 1 @.@ 3 % by mass ) of the Earth 's atmosphere due to decay of radioactive potassium @-@ 40 . 
 Pierre Janssen and Joseph Norman Lockyer discovered a new element on August 18 , 1868 while looking at the chromosphere of the Sun , and named it helium after the Greek word for the Sun , <unk> ( <unk> or helios ) . No chemical analysis was possible at the time , but helium was later found to be a noble gas . Before them , in 1784 , the English chemist and physicist Henry Cavendish had discovered that air contains a small proportion of a substance less reactive than nitrogen . A century later , in 1895 , Lord Rayleigh discovered that samples of nitrogen from the air were of a different density than nitrogen resulting from chemical reactions . Along with Scottish scientist William Ramsay at University College , London , Lord Rayleigh theorized that the nitrogen extracted from air was mixed with another gas , leading to an experiment that successfully isolated a new element , argon , from the Greek word <unk> ( <unk> , " inactive " ) . With this discovery , they realized an entire class of gases was missing from the periodic table . During his search for argon , Ramsay also managed to isolate helium for the first time while heating cleveite , a mineral . In 1902 , having accepted the evidence for the elements helium and argon , Dmitri Mendeleev included these noble gases as group 0 in his arrangement of the elements , which would later become the periodic table . 
 Ramsay continued to search for these gases using the method of fractional distillation to separate liquid air into several components . In 1898 , he discovered the elements krypton , neon , and xenon , and named them after the Greek words <unk> ( <unk> , " hidden " ) , νέος ( <unk> , " new " ) , and ξένος ( <unk> , " stranger " ) , respectively . Radon was first identified in 1898 by Friedrich Ernst Dorn , and was named radium emanation , but was not considered a noble gas until 1904 when its characteristics were found to be similar to those of other noble gases . Rayleigh and Ramsay received the 1904 Nobel Prizes in Physics and in Chemistry , respectively , for their discovery of the noble gases ; in the words of J. E. <unk> , then president of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences , " the discovery of an entirely new group of elements , of which no single representative had been known with any certainty , is something utterly unique in the history of chemistry , being intrinsically an advance in science of peculiar significance " . 
 The discovery of the noble gases aided in the development of a general understanding of atomic structure . In 1895 , French chemist Henri Moissan attempted to form a reaction between fluorine , the most electronegative element , and argon , one of the noble gases , but failed . Scientists were unable to prepare compounds of argon until the end of the 20th century , but these attempts helped to develop new theories of atomic structure . Learning from these experiments , Danish physicist Niels Bohr proposed in 1913 that the electrons in atoms are arranged in shells surrounding the nucleus , and that for all noble gases except helium the outermost shell always contains eight electrons . In 1916 , Gilbert N. Lewis formulated the octet rule , which concluded an octet of electrons in the outer shell was the most stable arrangement for any atom ; this arrangement caused them to be unreactive with other elements since they did not require any more electrons to complete their outer shell . 
 In 1962 , Neil Bartlett discovered the first chemical compound of a noble gas , xenon hexafluoroplatinate . Compounds of other noble gases were discovered soon after : in 1962 for radon , radon difluoride , which was identified by <unk> techniques and in 1963 for krypton , krypton difluoride ( KrF 
 2 ) . The first stable compound of argon was reported in 2000 when argon fluorohydride ( HArF ) was formed at a temperature of 40 K ( − 233 @.@ 2 ° C ; − 387 @.@ 7 ° F ) . 
 In December 1998 , scientists at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research working in Dubna , Russia bombarded plutonium ( Pu ) with calcium ( Ca ) to produce a single atom of element 114 , flerovium ( Fl ) . Preliminary chemistry experiments have indicated this element may be the first superheavy element to show abnormal noble @-@ gas @-@ like properties , even though it is a member of group 14 on the periodic table . In October 2006 , scientists from the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory successfully created synthetically ununoctium ( Uuo ) , the seventh element in group 18 , by bombarding californium ( Cf ) with calcium ( Ca ) . 
 = = Physical and atomic properties = = 
 The noble gases have weak interatomic force , and consequently have very low melting and boiling points . They are all monatomic gases under standard conditions , including the elements with larger atomic masses than many normally solid elements . Helium has several unique qualities when compared with other elements : its boiling and melting points are lower than those of any other known substance ; it is the only element known to exhibit superfluidity ; it is the only element that cannot be solidified by cooling under standard conditions — a pressure of 25 standard atmospheres ( 2 @,@ 500 kPa ; 370 psi ) must be applied at a temperature of 0 @.@ 95 K ( − 272 @.@ 200 ° C ; − 457 @.@ 960 ° F ) to convert it to a solid . The noble gases up to xenon have multiple stable isotopes . Radon has no stable isotopes ; its longest @-@ lived isotope , 222Rn , has a half @-@ life of 3 @.@ 8 days and decays to form helium and polonium , which ultimately decays to lead . Melting and boiling points generally increase going down the group . 
 The noble gas atoms , like atoms in most groups , increase steadily in atomic radius from one period to the next due to the increasing number of electrons . The size of the atom is related to several properties . For example , the ionization potential decreases with an increasing radius because the valence electrons in the larger noble gases are farther away from the nucleus and are therefore not held as tightly together by the atom . Noble gases have the largest ionization potential among the elements of each period , which reflects the stability of their electron configuration and is related to their relative lack of chemical reactivity . Some of the heavier noble gases , however , have ionization potentials small enough to be comparable to those of other elements and molecules . It was the insight that xenon has an ionization potential similar to that of the oxygen molecule that led Bartlett to attempt oxidizing xenon using platinum hexafluoride , an oxidizing agent known to be strong enough to react with oxygen . Noble gases cannot accept an electron to form stable anions ; that is , they have a negative electron affinity . 
 The macroscopic physical properties of the noble gases are dominated by the weak van der Waals forces between the atoms . The attractive force increases with the size of the atom as a result of the increase in polarizability and the decrease in ionization potential . This results in systematic group trends : as one goes down group 18 , the atomic radius , and with it the interatomic forces , increases , resulting in an increasing melting point , boiling point , enthalpy of vaporization , and solubility . The increase in density is due to the increase in atomic mass . 
 The noble gases are nearly ideal gases under standard conditions , but their deviations from the ideal gas law provided important clues for the study of intermolecular interactions . The Lennard @-@ Jones potential , often used to model intermolecular interactions , was deduced in 1924 by John Lennard @-@ Jones from experimental data on argon before the development of quantum mechanics provided the tools for understanding intermolecular forces from first principles . The theoretical analysis of these interactions became tractable because the noble gases are monatomic and the atoms spherical , which means that the interaction between the atoms is independent of direction , or isotropic . 
 = = Chemical properties = = 
 The noble gases are colorless , odorless , tasteless , and nonflammable under standard conditions . They were once labeled group 0 in the periodic table because it was believed they had a valence of zero , meaning their atoms cannot combine with those of other elements to form compounds . However , it was later discovered some do indeed form compounds , causing this label to fall into disuse . 
 = = = Configuration = = = 
 Like other groups , the members of this family show patterns in its electron configuration , especially the outermost shells resulting in trends in chemical behavior : 
 The noble gases have full valence electron shells . Valence electrons are the outermost electrons of an atom and are normally the only electrons that participate in chemical bonding . Atoms with full valence electron shells are extremely stable and therefore do not tend to form chemical bonds and have little tendency to gain or lose electrons . However , heavier noble gases such as radon are held less firmly together by electromagnetic force than lighter noble gases such as helium , making it easier to remove outer electrons from heavy noble gases . 
 As a result of a full shell , the noble gases can be used in conjunction with the electron configuration notation to form the noble gas notation . To do this , the nearest noble gas that precedes the element in question is written first , and then the electron configuration is continued from that point forward . For example , the electron notation of phosphorus is 1s2 2s2 <unk> <unk> <unk> , while the noble gas notation is [ Ne ] <unk> <unk> . This more compact notation makes it easier to identify elements , and is shorter than writing out the full notation of atomic orbitals . 
 = = = Compounds = = = 
 The noble gases show extremely low chemical reactivity ; consequently , only a few hundred noble gas compounds have been formed . Neutral compounds in which helium and neon are involved in chemical bonds have not been formed ( although there is some theoretical evidence for a few helium compounds ) , while xenon , krypton , and argon have shown only minor reactivity . The reactivity follows the order Ne < He < Ar < Kr < Xe < Rn . 
 In 1933 , Linus Pauling predicted that the heavier noble gases could form compounds with fluorine and oxygen . He predicted the existence of krypton hexafluoride ( KrF 
 6 ) and xenon hexafluoride ( XeF 
 6 ) , speculated that XeF 
 8 might exist as an unstable compound , and suggested <unk> acid could form perxenate salts . These predictions were shown to be generally accurate , except that XeF 
 8 is now thought to be both thermodynamically and kinetically unstable . 
 Xenon compounds are the most numerous of the noble gas compounds that have been formed . Most of them have the xenon atom in the oxidation state of + 2 , + 4 , + 6 , or + 8 bonded to highly electronegative atoms such as fluorine or oxygen , as in xenon difluoride ( XeF 
 2 ) , xenon tetrafluoride ( XeF 
 4 ) , xenon hexafluoride ( XeF 
 6 ) , xenon tetroxide ( XeO 
 4 ) , and sodium perxenate ( Na 
 <unk> 
 6 ) . Xenon reacts with fluorine to form numerous xenon fluorides according to the following equations : 
 Xe + F2 → <unk> 
 Xe + <unk> → <unk> 
 Xe + <unk> → <unk> 
 Some of these compounds have found use in chemical synthesis as oxidizing agents ; XeF 
 2 , in particular , is commercially available and can be used as a <unk> agent . As of 2007 , about five hundred compounds of xenon bonded to other elements have been identified , including <unk> compounds ( containing xenon bonded to carbon ) , and xenon bonded to nitrogen , chlorine , gold , mercury , and xenon itself . Compounds of xenon bound to boron , hydrogen , bromine , iodine , beryllium , sulphur , titanium , copper , and silver have also been observed but only at low temperatures in noble gas matrices , or in supersonic noble gas jets . 
 In theory , radon is more reactive than xenon , and therefore should form chemical bonds more easily than xenon does . However , due to the high radioactivity and short half @-@ life of radon isotopes , only a few fluorides and oxides of radon have been formed in practice . 
 Krypton is less reactive than xenon , but several compounds have been reported with krypton in the oxidation state of + 2 . Krypton difluoride is the most notable and easily characterized . Under extreme conditions , krypton reacts with fluorine to form KrF2 according to the following equation : 
 Kr + F2 → KrF2 
 Compounds in which krypton forms a single bond to nitrogen and oxygen have also been characterized , but are only stable below − 60 ° C ( − 76 ° F ) and − 90 ° C ( − 130 ° F ) respectively . 
 Krypton atoms chemically bound to other nonmetals ( hydrogen , chlorine , carbon ) as well as some late transition metals ( copper , silver , gold ) have also been observed , but only either at low temperatures in noble gas matrices , or in supersonic noble gas jets . Similar conditions were used to obtain the first few compounds of argon in 2000 , such as argon fluorohydride ( HArF ) , and some bound to the late transition metals copper , silver , and gold . As of 2007 , no stable neutral molecules involving covalently bound helium or neon are known . 
 The noble gases — including helium — can form stable molecular ions in the gas phase . The simplest is the helium hydride molecular ion , HeH + , discovered in 1925 . Because it is composed of the two most abundant elements in the universe , hydrogen and helium , it is believed to occur naturally in the interstellar medium , although it has not been detected yet . In addition to these ions , there are many known neutral excimers of the noble gases . These are compounds such as ArF and KrF that are stable only when in an excited electronic state ; some of them find application in excimer lasers . 
 In addition to the compounds where a noble gas atom is involved in a covalent bond , noble gases also form non @-@ covalent compounds . The clathrates , first described in 1949 , consist of a noble gas atom trapped within cavities of crystal lattices of certain organic and inorganic substances . The essential condition for their formation is that the guest ( noble gas ) atoms must be of appropriate size to fit in the cavities of the host crystal lattice . For instance , argon , krypton , and xenon form clathrates with hydroquinone , but helium and neon do not because they are too small or insufficiently polarizable to be retained . Neon , argon , krypton , and xenon also form clathrate hydrates , where the noble gas is trapped in ice . 
 Noble gases can form endohedral fullerene compounds , in which the noble gas atom is trapped inside a fullerene molecule . In 1993 , it was discovered that when C 
 60 , a spherical molecule consisting of 60 carbon atoms , is exposed to noble gases at high pressure , complexes such as He @ C 
 60 can be formed ( the @ notation indicates He is contained inside C 
 60 but not covalently bound to it ) . As of 2008 , endohedral complexes with helium , neon , argon , krypton , and xenon have been obtained . These compounds have found use in the study of the structure and reactivity of fullerenes by means of the nuclear magnetic resonance of the noble gas atom . 
 Noble gas compounds such as xenon difluoride ( XeF 
 2 ) are considered to be hypervalent because they violate the octet rule . Bonding in such compounds can be explained using a three @-@ center four @-@ electron bond model . This model , first proposed in 1951 , considers bonding of three collinear atoms . For example , bonding in XeF 
 2 is described by a set of three molecular orbitals ( MOs ) derived from p @-@ orbitals on each atom . Bonding results from the combination of a filled p @-@ orbital from Xe with one half @-@ filled p @-@ orbital from each F atom , resulting in a filled bonding orbital , a filled non @-@ bonding orbital , and an empty antibonding orbital . The highest occupied molecular orbital is localized on the two terminal atoms . This represents a localization of charge which is facilitated by the high electronegativity of fluorine . 
 The chemistry of heavier noble gases , krypton and xenon , are well established . The chemistry of the lighter ones , argon and helium , is still at an early stage , while a neon compound is yet to be identified . 
 = = Occurrence and production = = 
 The abundances of the noble gases in the universe decrease as their atomic numbers increase . Helium is the most common element in the universe after hydrogen , with a mass fraction of about 24 % . Most of the helium in the universe was formed during Big Bang nucleosynthesis , but the amount of helium is steadily increasing due to the fusion of hydrogen in stellar nucleosynthesis ( and , to a very slight degree , the alpha decay of heavy elements ) . Abundances on Earth follow different trends ; for example , helium is only the third most abundant noble gas in the atmosphere . The reason is that there is no primordial helium in the atmosphere ; due to the small mass of the atom , helium cannot be retained by the Earth 's gravitational field . Helium on Earth comes from the alpha decay of heavy elements such as uranium and thorium found in the Earth 's crust , and tends to accumulate in natural gas deposits . The abundance of argon , on the other hand , is increased as a result of the beta decay of potassium @-@ 40 , also found in the Earth 's crust , to form argon @-@ 40 , which is the most abundant isotope of argon on Earth despite being relatively rare in the Solar System . This process is the base for the potassium @-@ argon dating method . Xenon has an unexpectedly low abundance in the atmosphere , in what has been called the missing xenon problem ; one theory is that the missing xenon may be trapped in minerals inside the Earth 's crust . After the discovery of xenon dioxide , a research showed that Xe can substitute for Si in the quartz . Radon is formed in the lithosphere as from the alpha decay of radium . It can seep into buildings through cracks in their foundation and accumulate in areas that are not well ventilated . Due to its high radioactivity , radon presents a significant health hazard ; it is implicated in an estimated 21 @,@ 000 lung cancer deaths per year in the United States alone . 
 For large @-@ scale use , helium is extracted by fractional distillation from natural gas , which can contain up to 7 % helium . 
 Neon , argon , krypton , and xenon are obtained from air using the methods of liquefaction of gases , to convert elements to a liquid state , and fractional distillation , to separate mixtures into component parts . Helium is typically produced by separating it from natural gas , and radon is isolated from the radioactive decay of radium compounds . The prices of the noble gases are influenced by their natural abundance , with argon being the cheapest and xenon the most expensive . As an example , the table to the right lists the 2004 prices in the United States for laboratory quantities of each gas . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Noble gases have very low boiling and melting points , which makes them useful as cryogenic refrigerants . In particular , liquid helium , which boils at 4 @.@ 2 K ( − 268 @.@ 95 ° C ; − 452 @.@ 11 ° F ) , is used for superconducting magnets , such as those needed in nuclear magnetic resonance imaging and nuclear magnetic resonance . Liquid neon , although it does not reach temperatures as low as liquid helium , also finds use in cryogenics because it has over 40 times more refrigerating capacity than liquid helium and over three times more than liquid hydrogen . 
 Helium is used as a component of breathing gases to replace nitrogen , due its low solubility in fluids , especially in lipids . Gases are absorbed by the blood and body tissues when under pressure like in scuba diving , which causes an anesthetic effect known as nitrogen narcosis . Due to its reduced solubility , little helium is taken into cell membranes , and when helium is used to replace part of the breathing mixtures , such as in trimix or heliox , a decrease in the narcotic effect of the gas at depth is obtained . Helium 's reduced solubility offers further advantages for the condition known as decompression sickness , or the bends . The reduced amount of dissolved gas in the body means that fewer gas bubbles form during the decrease in pressure of the ascent . Another noble gas , argon , is considered the best option for use as a drysuit inflation gas for scuba diving . Helium is also used as filling gas in nuclear fuel rods for nuclear reactors . 
 Since the Hindenburg disaster in 1937 , helium has replaced hydrogen as a lifting gas in blimps and balloons due to its lightness and <unk> , despite an 8 @.@ 6 % decrease in buoyancy . 
 In many applications , the noble gases are used to provide an inert atmosphere . Argon is used in the synthesis of air @-@ sensitive compounds that are sensitive to nitrogen . Solid argon is also used for the study of very unstable compounds , such as reactive intermediates , by trapping them in an inert matrix at very low temperatures . Helium is used as the carrier medium in gas chromatography , as a filler gas for thermometers , and in devices for measuring radiation , such as the Geiger counter and the bubble chamber . Helium and argon are both commonly used to shield welding arcs and the surrounding base metal from the atmosphere during welding and cutting , as well as in other metallurgical processes and in the production of silicon for the semiconductor industry . 
 Noble gases are commonly used in lighting because of their lack of chemical reactivity . Argon , mixed with nitrogen , is used as a filler gas for incandescent light bulbs . Krypton is used in high @-@ performance light bulbs , which have higher color temperatures and greater efficiency , because it reduces the rate of evaporation of the filament more than argon ; halogen lamps , in particular , use krypton mixed with small amounts of compounds of iodine or bromine . The noble gases glow in distinctive colors when used inside gas @-@ discharge lamps , such as " neon lights " . These lights are called after neon but often contain other gases and phosphors , which add various hues to the orange @-@ red color of neon . Xenon is commonly used in xenon arc lamps which , due to their nearly continuous spectrum that resembles daylight , find application in film projectors and as automobile headlamps . 
 The noble gases are used in excimer lasers , which are based on short @-@ lived electronically excited molecules known as excimers . The excimers used for lasers may be noble gas dimers such as <unk> , <unk> or Xe2 , or more commonly , the noble gas is combined with a halogen in excimers such as ArF , KrF , XeF , or XeCl . These lasers produce ultraviolet light which , due to its short wavelength ( 193 nm for ArF and 248 nm for KrF ) , allows for high @-@ precision imaging . <unk> lasers have many industrial , medical , and scientific applications . They are used for <unk> and microfabrication , which are essential for integrated circuit manufacture , and for laser surgery , including laser angioplasty and eye surgery . 
 Some noble gases have direct application in medicine . Helium is sometimes used to improve the ease of breathing of asthma sufferers . Xenon is used as an anesthetic because of its high solubility in lipids , which makes it more potent than the usual nitrous oxide , and because it is readily eliminated from the body , resulting in faster recovery . Xenon finds application in medical imaging of the lungs through hyperpolarized MRI . Radon , which is highly radioactive and is only available in minute amounts , is used in radiotherapy . 
 = = Discharge color = = 
 The color of gas discharge emission depends on several factors , including the following : 
 discharge parameters ( local value of current density and electric field , temperature , etc . – note the color variation along the discharge in the top row ) ; 
 gas purity ( even small fraction of certain gases can affect color ) ; 
 material of the discharge tube envelope – note suppression of the UV and blue components in the bottom @-@ row tubes made of thick household glass . 
 = The Judge ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' The Judge " is the fourth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on November 15 , 1996 . The episode was written by Ted Mann , and directed by Randall Zisk . " The Judge " featured guest appearances by Marshall Bell , John Hawkes and C. C. H. Pounder . 
 Forensic profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group , is asked to investigate a vigilante ( Bell ) who uses newly released convicts to execute those he deems guilty . 
 " The Judge " begins with a quotation from Moby @-@ Dick , a novel that the episode has been compared to thematically . Guest star Pounder would reappear several times in the series , while fellow guest Ellis made the last of his three appearances in this episode . The episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a bowling alley , ex @-@ convict Carl <unk> ( J. R. Bourne ) watches another man eat his meal before following him outside , where he approaches and kills him . Elsewhere , Annie <unk> ( Donna White ) receives a human tongue in a package . The Millennium Group sends offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) and pathologist Cheryl Andrews ( C. C. H. Pounder ) to investigate , as several people have received body parts in the post over the past few years . No connection between the recipients has been found , nor have the bodies the parts have been culled from . 
 Mike Bardale ( John Hawkes ) is a violent recidivist who has recently been released from prison again . He is approached by a man calling himself The Judge ( Marshall Bell ) , who offers Bardale a position in his " court " . The Judge is a vigilante , hiring convicts to mete out his version of justice against those he perceives as criminals . Bardale 's first " execution " is that of his forebear , <unk> . 
 The body of the man killed outside the bowling alley is discovered , missing a tongue . It is identified as a retired police officer , Detective Mellen , who had given false testimony that had sent Annie <unk> 's late husband to prison . Black realizes that the killer is motivated by the need to right wrongs such as this , killing those who have gotten away with crimes . Meanwhile , The Judge passes sentence on another victim — a <unk> whose negligence caused a tenant 's death . Bardale is ordered to cut the landlord 's leg off while he is still alive ; the leg is later found in a postal depot in a package . 
 Forensic evidence on the package eventually leads to Bardale , and then to The Judge . The Judge is arrested for questioning , and knowing that there is not enough evidence to warrant sentencing him , he offers Black a job with him . Black refuses , but The Judge is released . Bardale is incensed that The Judge has manipulated the law to his own ends , and passes sentence on him for hypocrisy . Finding Bardale alone in a farmhouse , Black discovers that the convict had fed The Judge to his pigs . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Judge " is the first of four episodes of Millennium to be written by Ted Mann , who would go on to write " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " , " Powers , Principalities , Thrones and Dominions " and the first season finale " Paper Dove " . The episode marks director Randall Zisk 's only work for the series . 
 The episode features the first appearance by C. C. H. Pounder as Millennium Group pathologist Cheryl Andrews . Pounder would go on to make another four appearances as the character , appearing across all three seasons . " The Judge " also marked the final appearance by Chris Ellis as Group member Jim Penseyres ; Ellis had previously appeared in " Gehenna " and " Dead Letters " . John Hawkes , who portrays killer Mike Bardale in the episode , would later go on to work with Mann again on the series Deadwood , first reuniting on that series ' first season finale " Sold Under Sin " . 
 The episode opens with a quotation from Herman Melville 's 1851 novel Moby @-@ Dick , taken from chapter forty @-@ two , " The Whiteness of the Whale " . Both Millennium and Moby @-@ Dick have been described as " a basic conflict between good and evil " . In addition , both are " focused on a then @-@ modern view of the world " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Judge " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on November 15 , 1996 ; and earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 6 , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . 
 " The Judge " received mixed reviews from critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five , finding its " contrived " plot to be " barely a subtle premise " , and noting that " the script unfortunately elevates the lead villain to high camp " . Shearman and Pearson felt that the subject of vigilantism was a suitable one for the series , and that it had " been bubbling under the surface every since the concept of the Millennium Group ... was first mentioned " ; however , they ultimately felt that the episode contained " very little to engage the brain " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated " The Judge " 4 out of 5 , describing it as being " a fine , moody episode " . However , Gibron felt that Marshall Bell 's character may have been better suited to a recurring role , rather than being killed off during the episode . Writing for The A.V. Club , Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a B- , praising the acting of both Bell and John Hawkes . However , VanDerWerff felt that " The Judge " showed Millennium to be struggling with its own concept , growing " staid " as a result of only having " the one color to play with " . 
 = Grass Fight = 
 The Grass Fight was a small battle during the Texas Revolution , fought between the Mexican Army and the Texan Army . The battle took place on November 26 , 1835 , just south of San Antonio de Béxar in the Mexican region of Texas . The Texas Revolution had officially begun on October 2 and by the end of the month the Texians had initiated a siege of Béxar , home of the largest Mexican garrison in the province . Bored with the inactivity , many of the Texian soldiers returned home ; a smaller number of adventurers from the United States arrived to replace them . After the Texian Army rejected commander @-@ in @-@ chief Stephen F. Austin 's call to launch an assault on Béxar on November 22 , Austin resigned from the army . The men elected Edward Burleson their new commander @-@ in @-@ chief . 
 On November 26 , Texian scout Deaf Smith brought news of a Mexican pack train , accompanied by 50 – 100 soldiers , that was on its way to Bexar . The Texian camp was convinced that the pack train carried silver to pay the Mexican garrison and purchase supplies . Burleson ordered Colonel James Bowie to take 45 – 50 cavalry and intercept the train . An additional 100 infantry followed . On seeing the battle commence , Mexican General Martín Perfecto de Cos sent reinforcements from Bexar . The Texians repulsed several attacks by Mexican soldiers , who finally retreated to Bexar . When the Texians examined the abandoned pack train they discovered that , instead of silver , the mules carried freshly cut grass to feed the Mexican Army horses . Four Texians were injured , and historian Alwyn Barr states that three Mexican soldiers were killed , although Bowie and Burleson initially claimed the number was much higher . 
 = = Background = = 
 On October 2 , 1835 , Texas colonists attacked a Mexican force at the Battle of Gonzales , formally launching the Texas Revolution . After the battle ended , disgruntled colonists continued to assemble in Gonzales , eager to put a decisive end to Mexican control over the area . On October 11 the disorganized volunteers elected Stephen F. Austin , who had settled the first English @-@ speaking colonists in Texas , as their commander @-@ in @-@ chief . Several days later Austin marched his newly created Texian Army towards San Antonio de Béxar , where General Martín Perfecto de Cos , brother @-@ in @-@ law of Mexican president Antonio López de Santa Anna , oversaw the garrison at the Alamo . In late October the Texians initiated a siege of Béxar . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 10 : 00 a.m. on November 26 , Texian scout Erastus " Deaf " Smith rode into camp to report that a pack train of mules and horses , accompanied by 50 – 100 Mexican soldiers , was within 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of Béxar . For several days , the Texians had heard rumors that the Mexican Army was expecting a shipment of silver and gold to pay the troops and purchase additional supplies . The Texians had been fighting without pay , and most wanted to charge from camp and loot the expected riches . Burleson calmed the crowd and then ordered Colonel James Bowie to take 35 – 40 mounted men to investigate , but only attack if necessary . After Bowie recruited the army 's 12 best marksmen for the expedition , there was little doubt that he intended to find a reason to attack . Burleson managed to stop the entire army from following by sending Colonel William Jack with 100 infantry to support Bowie 's men . 
 About 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Béxar , Bowie and his men spotted the Mexican soldiers crossing a dry ravine . This was likely near the confluence of the <unk> , Apache , and San Pedro Creeks . Bowie 's men charged the Mexican party , scattering the mules . The mounted forces briefly exchanged fire , and then both sides dismounted and took cover in dry streambeds . The Mexican forces counterattacked but were repulsed . In Béxar , General Cos saw the battle begin and sent 50 infantry and 1 cannon to provide cover so the cavalry could retreat to town . The Texian infantry also heard the initial shots and rushed toward the battle , at one point wading through waist @-@ deep water . They approached the battlefield during a lull . The lack of noise made it difficult for them to ascertain where the Mexican troops were , and the Texians were surprised to find themselves between the Mexican cavalry and infantry . As the Mexican troops began firing , the Texian infantry troops dropped to the ground . Colonel Thomas Rusk led a group of 15 in an attack on the nearest Mexican cavalry ; as those cavalrymen fled the Texian infantry was able to scramble to cover . 
 The Texian cavalry joined their infantrymen . Burleson 's father , James Burleson , led a cavalry advance on the Mexican position , yelling , " Boys , we have but once to die , they are here in the ditch . Charge them ! " The Mexican artillery fired three times , driving the Texians back . Three times the Mexican cavalry attempted to take a small rise to give the artillery better position ; they were repulsed . The Mexican infantry then attacked . Rusk wrote of the Mexican attack : " These men advanced with great coolness and bravery under a destructive fire from our men , preserving ... strict order and exhibiting no confusion . " The infantry abandoned their charge when they realized that Texian James Swisher had led a band of cavalry to try to take the Mexican cannon . The Mexican forces then withdrew towards Béxar . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Four Texians were wounded in the fighting , and one soldier deserted during the battle . In his reports , Burleson claimed that 15 Mexican soldiers had been killed and 7 wounded , while Bowie claimed that 60 Mexican soldiers had been killed . In his book Texans in Revolt : the Battle for San Antonio , 1835 , historian Alwyn Barr stated that only 3 Mexican soldiers had been killed and 14 wounded ; most of the casualties were from the cavalry companies . Burleson praised all of his officers for their conduct ; Bowie received the most mention . 
 The Texians captured 40 horses and mules . To their surprise , the saddlebags did not contain bullion . Instead , the mules had been carrying freshly cut grass to feed the Mexican horses trapped in Béxar ; this prize gave the battle its name . Although the engagement , which historian J. R. Edmondson termed a " ludicrous affair " , did not yield valuable plunder , it did serve to unite the Texian Army . Days before , the army had been bitterly divided and unwilling to risk a prolonged siege or assault . With their success at the Grass Fight , however , the Texian soldiers began to believe that , although outnumbered , they could prevail over the Béxar garrison . The Texians believed that Cos must have been desperate to send troops outside of the safety of Béxar . 
 Several days later , on December 1 , a handful of Americans in Béxar convinced Cos to allow them free passage from the city . Although they had promised to leave the country , the men , including Samuel Maverick , instead joined the Texian Army and provided information about the Mexican defenses and the low morale within the town . Buoyed by their Grass Fight victory , on December 5 the Texians launched an attack on Béxar ; Cos surrendered on December 9 . As a condition of their parole , the Mexican troops were forced to leave the province , leaving the Texas colonists in full control . 
 = Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident = 
 On November 2 , 2002 , U.S. Marine Corps Major Michael Brown attempted an indecent assault on a Filipina bartender in Okinawa , Japan . The bartender accused Brown of attempting to rape her and of throwing her cell phone into a nearby river ; Brown denied the rape charges . The victim later recanted and attempted to withdraw the accusation , though prosecutors presented evidence that she had received a cash payment just before doing so . 
 The case received extensive attention in the Japanese media , especially in Okinawa , and the crime sparked a public debate over the U.S. military presence in Japan , the privileges of extraterritoriality , as well as the fair trial practices of Japanese legal system and the Japanese police . The case involved the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan and the U.S. – Japan Status of Forces Agreement ( SOFA ) . 
 On July 8 , 2004 , after a 19 @-@ month trial , Brown was convicted by a Japanese court of attempted indecent assault and destruction of private property and received a one @-@ year suspended prison sentence . As a result of this incident and others involving crimes committed by U.S. military personnel in Japan , both countries entered into negotiations aimed at modifying the SOFA in July 2003 ; ultimately , no changes were made to the agreement . In 2005 , Brown was arrested and charged with a separate kidnapping in the United States . He was demoted and involuntarily retired from the military in 2006 and at his trial in 2009 entered a Kennedy plea , receiving probation on the felony conviction . 
 = = Crime and arrest = = 
 Early in the morning of November 2 , 2002 , a female employee of the Camp Courtney officers ' club on Okinawa drove up to the Courtney main gate and reported to base security personnel that a Marine Corps major had just attempted to sexually assault her in her car on a deserted road near the back gate of the base . She identified the Marine as Major Michael Brown and stated that during the assault the major threw her mobile phone into the nearby Tengan River . The woman , later identified with the initials V.N. , who was 40 years old , and originally from the Philippines , had lived in Okinawa for 17 years , and was married to a Japanese citizen of Okinawan descent . She reported that she had picked up Brown in her car about 1 : 30 a.m. after the officers ' club closed and that he directed her to the deserted road behind the base and after parking , Brown tried to rape her and then threw her mobile phone into the river when she tried to call the police . The Camp Courtney security personnel called the Japanese National Police Agency ( NPA ) . Japanese officers came and took V. N. ' s report . 
 Michael Brown was at the time 39 years old , was married , had two small children , and was a 19 @-@ year Marine veteran assigned to the command element of the III Marine Expeditionary Force at Camp Courtney on his second tour on Okinawa . Brown voluntarily underwent several hours of questioning at the JNP station in <unk> . He told Japanese police investigators that V. N. had propositioned him for sex and that , when he refused , a physical altercation ensued . During the altercation , Brown said , V. N. took his wallet and Brown grabbed her mobile phone , which he , " out of frustration " , proceeded to toss into the nearby river . Brown stated that V. N. drove away but returned a few minutes later and gave his wallet back to him . Both Brown 's and V. N. ' s accounts agreed that V. N. had originally picked up Brown in her car after meeting him for the first time at the base officers ' club that evening . Both stated that V. N. had agreed to give Brown , who was intoxicated , a ride home . 
 On December 3 , 2002 , the JNP issued a warrant for Brown 's arrest . The Japanese government asked that Brown be turned over to Japanese authorities immediately . Although the U.S. – Japan Status of Forces Agreement stated that service members would only be turned over to Japanese law enforcement if formally indicted , the U.S. had agreed to give " sympathetic consideration " for serious crimes in response to the 1995 Okinawan rape incident , in which a U.S. Navy sailor and two Marines raped a 12 @-@ year @-@ old Okinawan girl . 
 The United States , in this case , decided not to turn Brown over to the Japanese authorities before he was formally indicted and restricted Brown to base on Camp Courtney . On December 9 , the JNP filed formal charges against Brown and , on December 19 , he was formally indicted on charges of attempted rape and destruction of private property . The next day , Brown , escorted by U.S. Marine Corps military police , was turned over to the custody of Japanese police at the Naha detention center . When asked why they had waited ten days after the formal charges to indict Brown , Japanese Deputy Chief Prosecutor Junichi Okumura stated that they wanted to give Brown a chance to apologize ( called jidan in Japanese ) to the victim . Since that apparently did not occur and V. N. still expressed a desire to press charges , the Japanese authorities went ahead with the indictment . 
 On December 25 , Naha District Court judge Yayoi Ikeda ( <unk> <unk> , Ikeda Yayoi ) denied bail for Brown because , " there was concern that he [ Brown ] might try to destroy evidence or intimidate witnesses if he was set free . " Ikeda also said that she was concerned over the seriousness of the charges and the large discrepancy between the statements of Brown and V. N .. Brown was represented at the hearing by a local Japanese defense attorney , Masayuki Akamine ( <unk> <unk> , Akamine Masayuki ) . Akamine reported that Brown 's family in the United States had begun jidan negotiations with the victim . At this time , Brown 's brother also launched a website to protest Brown 's detention and to complain about what he perceived to be unfair treatment of Brown by the Japanese courts . Brown later reported that Japanese prison officials " admonished " him over the launching of the protest website by his family . 
 On January 9 , 2003 , bail was denied for Brown by the same judge for a second time . Brown then appealed the bail decision to a three @-@ judge panel of the Naha court who upheld the denial of bail on January 16 . The Naha court scheduled Brown 's trial to begin on March 13 , but later changed the date to May 26 because of delays incurred by legal motions filed by Brown 's attorneys . The trial was expected to last for some time because , under the procedures of the Japanese justice system , trial hearings are usually only conducted for one or two days a month . 
 = = Pre @-@ trial = = 
 On January 24 , Brown hired two new defense attorneys , Michael Griffith and Toshimitsu Takaesu . Griffith was a New York attorney who had previously represented Marines in Okinawa . Takaesu was a former Okinawa chief prosecutor . Both were described as " outspoken critics of Japan 's legal system " . The first week of March , another attorney hired by Brown filed a habeas corpus petition with the United States District Court for the District of Columbia claiming that the legality of Brown 's incarceration was open to question due to what Brown claimed was the inherent unfairness of the Japanese judicial system . The U.S. court dismissed the motion on March 12 , citing jurisdictional issues . 
 Throughout the trial , Brown wrote numerous public missives about what he felt was the unfairness and corruption of the Japanese justice system and accusing the local Okinawan government of pursuing a political agenda in the prosecution of his case . Brown 's letters were posted on his family 's website and informally distributed throughout Okinawa 's U.S. military population . Brown and his family also wrote many letters to U.S. politicians and government officials complaining of Brown 's treatment by Japanese authorities and actively encouraged other U.S. military members and U.S. citizens to do the same . 
 On March 13 , an Okinawan newspaper reported that the JNP had matched DNA taken from saliva on the victim 's upper body with DNA in a blood sample obtained from Brown during the investigation . Brown was again denied bail on March 17 . Takaesu blamed the anonymous report about the DNA evidence in the newspaper as the reason for the bail denial and criticized the Naha District Prosecutor 's Office for not including the DNA evidence in the evidence list submitted before the trial was scheduled to begin . In reply , Junichi Okumura , a Naha District deputy chief prosecutor stated , " Here in Japan , unlike the United States , there is no problem if evidence is submitted later " . Brown was granted a ¥ 10 million bail ( approximately US $ 100 @,@ 000 , <unk> ) by the Naha court on May 13 but he was restricted to Camp Courtney for the duration of the trial . 
 Brown 's family hired Gene Warfield , an American ex @-@ special forces soldier who had lived in Okinawa for 17 years , as a consultant to assist them in " looking into the allegations levied against Michael [ Brown ] " . On the evening of May 7 , as Warfield , his Japanese wife , and daughter arrived at a restaurant on Okinawa , a man attacked Warfield with a knife , injuring him slightly . Warfield described the man 's attack as " professional " . The JNP investigated , but no arrests were made . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Brown 's trial began in Naha on May 26 with testimony from V. N .. Over the next three days of testimony , V. N. repeatedly stated that Brown was innocent and that she wanted to withdraw her complaint . She said that any contact between her and Brown on the night in question was consensual and that she allowed Brown to fondle and kiss her breasts . At that point , V. N. said , she began to resist and Brown became angry . V. N. testified that when she threatened to call police , Brown threw her cell phone into the [ Tengan ] river . Angry at the loss of her cell phone , V. N. stated that she then embellished the story when she told it to the guards at the Courtney main gate . V. N. further claimed that she had been coerced by police , prosecutors and her employer , a local agency that provides temporary workers for USMC bases on Okinawa , to file the charges . She said that once the charges were filed , Japanese prosecutors told her she could only withdraw the charges in court . One of the Naha judges then asked V. N. why she was not angry at Brown to which V. N. replied , " Because he didn 't attempt to rape me . Before , I was angry at him for throwing away my cell phone . But not now . " 
 The next trial hearing took place on June 4 . At the hearing , Takaesu stated that Brown had arranged with the Camp Courtney officers ' club manager to have sex with V. N. , but that V. N. resisted Brown 's advances after driving him to the secluded road off base . The Naha prosecutor said during the hearing that V. N. had insisted on pressing charges . 
 The next court session was on July 1 . At this session , Satoshi <unk> , an attorney for the employment agency that V. N. worked for , testified that he had tried to arrange a jidan settlement between Brown and V. N. in December 2002 , but V. N. had insisted on pressing charges . He stated that he informed her that once the charges were filed , she would not be able to withdraw them until the trial began . 
 At the next court session on July 15 , prosecutors submitted evidence that V. N. had received <unk> $ from an unknown source just before she recanted the charges during the May court session . The prosecution submitted the evidence in an attempt to show that V. N. ' s original statements and desire to press the charges were valid , and later attempts to recant were in bad faith . Brown then took the stand but refused to answer questions as to why his initial statements to Japanese police were different from what Takaesu later stated in court had actually happened on the night in question . The prosecutor asked Brown , " Your original statement that she made sexual advances was false ? " Brown replied , " I am not going to answer that . " When asked why he would not answer , Brown replied , " Because I want the opportunity for this court to see publicly the type of corruption and distortion of evidence by the police and the prosecutor . " Takaesu later said that another reason for Brown 's refusal to answer most of the questions was because his answers could be used by the USMC in separate military justice actions against Brown . 
 During a later court session on September 9 , Takaesu attempted to submit medical evidence that Brown had suffered a back injury in 1999 and had a steel collar and bolts inserted around his spine . According to Brown , these injuries made it impossible to for him to assault V. N. as described in the police report . The Naha court panel of three judges agreed to issue a decision as to whether the evidence was <unk> at a later date . 
 During another trial session later in September , the Naha court decided to accept V. N. ' s pre @-@ trial statements and accusations of Brown along with her later attempts to recant . Brown appealed this decision to the Fukuoka High Court 's Naha branch , which dismissed the appeal . Japan 's supreme court upheld the Fukuoka court 's dismissal of the appeal in late November 2003 . In October 2003 , Brown requested that the three Naha court judges assigned to the trial disqualify themselves , stating that they were " prejudiced against him " . The Naha court judges declined to do so , and the trial was set to resume in January 2004 . 
 The trial resumed on January 16 , 2004 , when the Naha court accepted the evidence of Brown 's spinal and neck injuries . Takaesu testified that it would have been physically impossible for Brown to commit a violent sexual assault on V. N .. When Takaesu called for the clothing V. N. wore the night of the alleged assault to be entered as evidence , the prosecutor , Tsuyoshi Satake , refused to present it . During a hearing in March , Brown admitted that he had lied to Japanese police about what had happened on the night in question . Brown stated that he and V. N. had engaged in some " heavy petting " in her car and that she objected when he began to take it " too far " . After Brown said that he insulted her , she threatened to call the police and he grabbed her cell phone and threw it in the river . 
 On April 24 , Takeshi Oda , representing the prosecution , made his closing arguments , describing the alleged crime as " vicious and atrocious " , and calling for a three @-@ year prison sentence for Brown . Oda added that the alleged crime had affected the local community , stating , " There 's a feeling of anxiety among the residents because of this incident . " During the same hearing , Takaesu submitted as evidence a letter Brown wrote to V. N. apologizing for using bad language with her and giving her ¥ 8 @,@ 000 ( about 75 US $ , <unk> ) to replace her cell phone . 
 Following a 19 @-@ month trial , on July 8 , 2004 , Brown was convicted by the Naha District Court of " attempting an indecent act " and " destruction of property " but was acquitted of the rape charge . The court gave Brown a one @-@ year prison sentence , suspended for three years , and fined him 1 @,@ 400 US $ . Chief Judge Nobuyuki Yokota said Brown was given a light sentence because the 21 @-@ year Marine veteran had no prior criminal record . Citing the victim 's stated unwillingness to punish Brown , the prosecution declined to appeal the verdict . Brown appealed the verdict to Japan 's supreme court , which dismissed the appeal in July 2004 . Brown was permanently transferred by the U.S. military to Marine Corps Base Quantico , Virginia in August 2004 . 
 = = SOFA controversy = = 
 The issue of violent crime , especially rape and murder , committed by U.S. servicemembers on Japanese citizens in Okinawa has often strained relations between the U.S. , Japan , and the local Okinawan government . The U.S. has argued that " extraterritoriality " or " <unk> " ( meaning the right of a foreigner charged with a crime to be turned over for trial to his own diplomatic representatives in accordance with his national law ) granted its military members under the SOFA is necessary to afford them the same rights that exist under the U.S. criminal justice system . Since the SOFA also exempts most U.S. military members from Japanese visa and passport laws , past incidents occurred in which U.S. military members charged with crimes by Japanese authorities on Okinawa were transferred back to the U.S. without facing prosecution in Japanese courts . In cases where the charged servicemember remained in Japan , Japanese authorities often did not have access to question or interrogate the U.S. servicemember , making it difficult for Japanese prosecutors to prepare a case for indictment . 
 The issue became central to the demand by many Okinawans and other Japanese citizens for the significant reduction and eventual elimination of U.S. military forces stationed in Okinawa . In the opinion of many Japanese citizens living in Okinawa , the U.S. used the SOFA to shield U.S. servicemembers who committed crimes against Japanese citizens from the Japanese criminal justice system . The September 4 , 1995 , widely reported rape of an Okinawan schoolgirl by three U.S. servicemen caused the U.S. and Japan to revise the SOFA , stating that in the future , the U.S. would give " sympathetic consideration " to the hand @-@ over of U.S. servicemembers accused of violent crimes such as rape or murder to Japanese authorities before indictment . To many in Okinawa , the incident involving Brown appeared to fall under this new provision in the SOFA . After the initial allegations involving Brown were publicized and before charges had even been filed , Okinawa Governor Keiichi <unk> publicly stated , " This is a heinous crime trampling on female human rights . Moreover , this is a crime committed by a marine corps major , a person who should be in a leadership position . " 
 Japan had requested that the U.S. hand over suspects before indictment in three previous cases to which the U.S. had complied . On December 3 , 2002 , Japan 's national government asked that Brown be transferred to Japanese police officials for confinement , but in this case the United States declined to do until an indictment was handed down . The U.S. embassy stated , " The government of the United States has concluded that the circumstances of this case as presented by the government of Japan do not warrant departure from the standard practice as agreed between the United States and Japan . " On December 10 , 2002 , the Okinawa Prefectural Assembly unanimously adopted a resolution calling on the United States to immediately transfer Brown to Japanese authorities and called on the Japanese national government to again demand Brown 's immediate hand @-@ over . The resolution condemned the United States ' refusal to hand over Brown , calling it , " in defiance of our country 's judicial setup and in disregard of its sovereignty " and " intolerable " . Keiichi <unk> added , " I have come to fully realize anew that a thorough review of the Japan – U.S. Status of Forces Agreement is necessary . " 
 Because of this and subsequent incidents by U.S. servicemembers on Okinawa , including another rape of a local woman by a U.S. Marine , the governors of fourteen Japanese prefectures in which U.S. military forces were stationed urged the ruling Liberal Democratic Party " to secure a true Japan – U.S. partnership through a revised Status of Forces Agreement " . On July 2 , 2003 , Japan and the United States opened negotiations into modifying the SOFA , but the negotiations failed to produce any change to the current agreement . 
 = = Subsequent arrest and conviction = = 
 In October 2005 , Brown was arrested and charged with kidnapping an 18 @-@ year @-@ old Vietnamese @-@ American high school student from a flea market in Milton , West Virginia on October 2 , 2005 . According to the police , Brown , allegedly upset that collectible coins he had purchased a few weeks before were worthless , returned to the flea market representing himself as a police officer , handcuffed her , and drove the girl to Kanawha County under the pretense of taking her in for questioning . The girl escaped from Brown 's car a few hours later after realizing he was not an officer , according to West Virginia State Police . After the arrest , the USMC demoted Brown to Captain and involuntarily retired him at that rank on February 1 , 2006 . On August 14 , 2009 Brown entered a Kennedy plea , meaning he did not admit guilt but did not contest that prosecutors had evidence to prove his guilt , and was convicted on a felony charge of attempting to commit kidnapping and a misdemeanor petty larceny charge in Cabell County , West Virginia Circuit Court . Brown was sentenced to three years probation , two years of which were to be spent in home confinement , and agreed to pay restitution and all court costs . 
 = DeKalb County Courthouse ( Illinois ) = 
 The DeKalb County Courthouse is located in the county seat of DeKalb County , Illinois , U.S.A. , the city of Sycamore . The Classical Revival structure sits on a square facing Illinois Route 64 as it passes through the city . The current courthouse was constructed in 1905 amid controversy over where the courthouse and thus , ultimately , the county seat would be located . The current building is the third structure to bear the name " DeKalb County Courthouse . " DeKalb County 's Courthouse still serves as the county 's primary judicial center and is a contributing property to the Sycamore Historic District . The district joined the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 . As the county 's primary courthouse for over 100 years , the site has been host to many trials , including prominent murder cases . 
 The building is cast in the Classical Revival architectural style and contains elements common to that style . Stained glass , columns and a pediment are among the more noticeable features at a glance . The rear facade of the building is designed to resemble a temple and also features stained glass windows . A stone porte @-@ cochere covers the rear driveway . Inside the building 's third floor courtroom is more stained glass , in the form of a skylight . During the early 1980s a made for television movie had scenes filmed in the DeKalb County Courthouse 's courtroom . 
 = = History = = 
 Today 's DeKalb County Courthouse is the third in a line of structures to carry that name . In 1839 a log structure was built and called the county courthouse ; the log building stood across the street from the current courthouse . Ten years later , in 1850 , the second DeKalb County Courthouse was erected . From December 13 , 1902 until April 17 , 1924 , DeKalb @-@ Sycamore Electric Traction Company operated a trolley route between the two cities ( DeKalb and Sycamore ) , which ended at the DeKalb County Courthouse . The current courthouse , which sits on the same site as the 1850 building , was erected in 1905 . 
 = = = First courthouse = = = 
 The DeKalb County Circuit Court came into existence in June 1839 when the first session of court met in Sycamore 's first courthouse building , though the building was somewhat incomplete . At first , it seemed , that Sycamore might not be the location of the DeKalb County Courthouse ; other towns were vying for the county seat title . A now defunct town called Brush Point was the choice of a Dr. Henry Madden and Rufus Colton would have preferred Coltonville , where he made his home . 
 Colton , the Clerk of the Court and <unk> of the writs and process of the court , had set the first session of county court to be held at his home , in Coltonville . In his attempt to make Coltonville the county seat , Colton decided to hold a new election for the status . Colton made sure that Coltonville would win the election by telling only the population of Coltonville about it . His political tactics were eventually cancelled by an act of the Illinois General Assembly , after the DeKalb County court intervened . When court convened the sheriff served a court order declaring a courthouse be built in Sycamore . Afterward , Coltonville eventually suffered the same fate as Brush Point and disappeared from the map . These events seemingly settled the issue of where the courthouse and , in turn , the DeKalb County seat was going to be located . 
 = = = Second courthouse = = = 
 By 1849 growth in DeKalb County necessitated a new courthouse . That year the county commissioners appointed three citizens , Ellzey P. Young , Kimball Dow , and J.C. Kellogg , to contract for a new courthouse building . The courthouse building was to be constructed at the center of the public square ; the location of the 1850 DeKalb County Courthouse . The county commissioners also stipulated the building be brick and 60 by 40 feet ( 12 m ) wide . The cost , as directed by the commissioners , was not to exceed $ 6 @,@ 000 . Twenty five percent of that cost was contributed by private citizens . Young and the other appointees were also authorized , by the county , to sell the old courthouse as well as any town lots owned by the county in order to help raise money for the project . Eventually , William Phelps was contracted for the construction of the two @-@ story brick structure which was topped with a large cupola clock tower . It was completed in 1850 and the county inaugurated the courthouse with Grand Ball in 1851 . 
 = = = Third courthouse = = = 
 The third and current DeKalb County Courthouse was constructed in 1905 at an approximate cost of $ 137 @,@ 000 . The project reignited the debate over the county courthouse 's location and , once again , the debate over which town would hold the coveted title of county seat . The county Board of Supervisors authorized the project in 1901 and appropriated $ 100 @,@ 000 for the new building . The idea for a new courthouse originated as early as 1900 , when the essential design elements of the Lee County courthouse were chosen as the model for the new DeKalb County Courthouse . Though the courthouse was modeled after the Lee County structure it does differ ; the Lee County building , in Dixon , Illinois , has a rooftop dome and also is longer and wider than the DeKalb County building . By 1903 , the appropriation had been upped to $ 140 @,@ 000 and the battle over the county seat had begun . 
 This time , it was the city of DeKalb that sought to wrest the title of county seat away from Sycamore . Two of DeKalb 's most prominent citizens , Jacob Haish and Isaac L. Ellwood , each promised to donate $ 20 @,@ 000 to help absorb some of the new building 's cost ; their donation hinged upon the courthouse being moved to and constructed in DeKalb . The city of Sycamore responded by raising $ 70 @,@ 000 in donations from its citizens and legal wrangling continued , until 1904 . Haish eventually pledged $ 103 @,@ 000 for a DeKalb courthouse but it was decided that the county seat would stay in Sycamore and ground was broken , despite the continuing legal battle , on October 29 , 1903 . The building was completed on March 1 , 1905 and the Crew Brothers Company was hired to demolish the 1850 DeKalb County Courthouse . 
 In recent history the third DeKalb County Courthouse has figured in films , as well as the Global War on Terrorism . Courtroom scenes for the 1982 made for television movie Will , the story of G. Gordon Liddy ( of Watergate infamy ) , were filmed in the courthouse 's third floor courtroom . In 2006 the United States Department of Justice announced it had arrested Derrick Shareef on terrorism related charges . Among the crimes the government accused Shareef of plotting was a plan to assault the DeKalb County Courthouse in order to " smoke a judge . " 
 = = = Circuit court history = = = 
 The DeKalb County Courthouse serves DeKalb County , Illinois as its main judiciary building . As such , it is the location of any trials and court proceedings in the county . The DeKalb County Circuit Court falls under the Illinois 16th Judicial Circuit , along with the circuit courts in Kendall and Kane Counties . Through its 100 @-@ year history prominent criminal trials and other events have occurred at the courthouse . 
 One of the earliest notable cases in the DeKalb County Circuit Court was the murder trial of Henry C. Atwood in 1866 , in the second DeKalb Courthouse building . Atwood , 17 years old at the time , was charged with murdering his wife , Ada , then 15 . The Chicago Tribune called the events " a thrilling tragedy enacted in the little town of DeKalb , in the county of DeKalb . " Prominent DeKalb resident Jacob Haish testified for the prosecution during Atwood 's trial . 
 During the summer of 1966 the trial of Russell Charles Dewey was underway at the courthouse . Dewey was accused of murdering and burning the body of Susan Brady , who disappeared on December 20 , 1965 ; he was arrested in for the crime in February 1966 . Dewey was convicted of the crime on August 21 , 1966 . 
 On March 22 , 1971 a group of Northern Illinois University students were arrested while protesting the clear cutting of a forested area on the DeKalb , Illinois campus . About 150 students blockaded the roads leading to the forested site with debris ; twelve were arrested and the subsequent proceedings at the DeKalb County Courthouse were covered by the Chicago Tribune . All charges were eventually dismissed in the case . 
 During the summer of 1990 an exiting judge , Rex Meilinger , presented an unusual request to the DeKalb County Board . Meilinger announced , partway through his term , that he planned to retire and requested that his retirement dinner be held " at the courthouse " when asked . Meilinger assured the board that the move was legal and preparations began for a catered dinner for more than 200 guests at the DeKalb County Courthouse . Tables were set up in the lobbies on each floor of the building and the circuit clerk 's first floor office was transformed into a bar . The third floor courtroom hosted an after @-@ dinner roast in honor of the exiting judge . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The building faces south , toward Illinois Route 64 and was designed by architect Herbert T. Hazelton , of the Chicago firm Watson & Hazelton . The 128 @-@ foot ( 39 m ) by 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) building stands three stories ; its exterior covered in Bedford Indiana limestone . The courthouse 's setting , on the public square in downtown Sycamore , renders it an impressive structure from most approach angles . Heavily carved stone brackets support a lintel over the main doors on the building 's front facades . The four columns dominating the front extend two stories and blend Ionic and Corinthian elements as they ascend from the second floor to the cornice level of the courthouse . Stone balustrades accent the small balcony on the second floor and the windows on the same floor , in the east and west wings , have a row of six balustrades below their sills , which form a continuous stringcourse around the building . 
 Classical sculpture covers the pediment above the front colonnade , with the seal of the State of Illinois dominating the relief . Stained glass windows can be found topping the third floor windows . The cornice on the roof consists of three rows of eight balustrades and stone blocks . A common decorative ornament in Greek Revival and Classical Revival architecture can be found in an <unk> at the peak of the pediment . The courthouse roof is enclosed in stonework and balustrades . 
 The north side of the DeKalb County Courthouse is not as ornately decorated as the south face but each has its own distinctive qualities . The courthouse drive , entering from Exchange Street , crosses below a stone porte @-@ cochere on the courthouse property . The back side of the building features four pilasters with composite capitals which give the courthouse a temple appearance . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 From November 1984 to June 1987 the DeKalb County Courthouse underwent an interior restoration , which was completed in time for the sesquicentennial celebration for DeKalb County . The restoration , at an approximate cost of $ 100 @,@ 000 , was undertaken by Conrad Schmitt Studios of New Berlin , Wisconsin . The modern front doors to the courthouse hide the original , beveled glass front doors from view . Once inside the modern doors , the nonfunctional original doors can be seen , standing wide open , to be admired ; each door weighs several hundred pounds . Past the doors , in the building 's main lobby , is the large , marble staircase to the second floor . The staircase , as well as the lobby 's wainscoting , is done in gray Tennessee marble . Most of the first floor is original to the building , including the hexagonal marble flooring , stained glass windows and two original , first floor courtrooms . The plasterwork along the walls and ceilings of the lobby is ornately decorated . 
 Ascending the staircase are bronze railings with mahogany banisters . The railings are decorated with the swastika symbol which , whilst mostly associated with Nazi Germany , has been traced back as far as the 3rd millennium B.C.E. in Asia . The stairway 's newel posts , on the landing between the second and third floors , are a pair of bronze ram 's heads , identical newel posts grace the bottom of the stairs as well . The second floor landing offers a view of the stained glass windows , all original , which were fully restored during the 1980s renovation . Elevator access is also located on the second floor landing , the elevator was a 1950s addition to the courthouse . Originally , to access the third floor , the only option was one of two staircases . Both staircases rose from the second floor landing to the third floor , one staircase was located to either side of the stairwell leading to the landing . When the elevator was installed the staircase on the left @-@ hand side of the landing was removed . 
 Inside the ornate building 's third floor courtroom is a stained glass skylight centered by a ten @-@ pointed star . The room is adorned with six brass lamps , and chandeliers , which are clustered with glass globes . In its original state an old @-@ fashioned , four @-@ bladed ceiling fan hung from the courtroom ceiling . The third floor courtroom has been called , " the building 's single most distinctive interior space " by Steve <unk> . The furnishings in the courtroom , including the chandeliers , plasterwork , beveled glass doors and stained glass work are all original . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The courthouse was included in the National Register of Historic Places nomination for the Sycamore Historic District in 1978 . Of the 209 structures contained within the district when it was originally nominated the courthouse is one of 40 possessing " special architectural and / or historical significance , " which strongly contributes to the character of the historic district . The courthouse was one of twenty structures detailed on the 1978 nomination form and was noted as having " architectural significance . " 
 = Hulme Arch Bridge = 
 The Hulme Arch Bridge in Hulme , Manchester , England , supports Stretford Road as it passes over Princess Road , and is located at grid reference <unk> . The construction of the bridge formed part of the regeneration of the Hulme district of Manchester , both by re @-@ establishing the former route of Stretford Road , which had been cut into two halves by the construction of Princess Road in 1969 , and by providing a local landmark . The location was previously occupied by a footbridge . 
 The bridge consists of a deck supported by cables from a single arch that spans the bridge diagonally . The design was selected in June 1995 , with construction running between May 1996 and April 1997 . It was opened on 10 May 1997 by Alex Ferguson . 
 = = History = = 
 Stretford Road was divided into two halves in 1969 by the construction of Princess Road . A footbridge was subsequently constructed , crossing Princess Road at the same place as the road previously ran . As part of the regeneration of the Hulme district , it was decided to construct a new bridge to rejoin the two sections of the road , and also to provide a local landmark . 
 The design of the bridge was selected via a two @-@ staged , closed design competition , commissioned by Hulme Regeneration Ltd and Manchester City Council . The first stage of the competition was held in March 1995 , and had six entries . The winning design was selected in June 1995 , and was from architects Chris Wilkinson Architects , with the structural engineer being Ove Arup & Partners . The reference for the design of the bridge was Eero Saarinen 's Gateway Arch in St. Louis , Missouri , USA . 
 = = Design = = 
 The bridge consists of a 50 metres ( 160 ft ) bridge deck of three 17 by 17 m ( 56 by 56 ft ) steel and concrete decking segments covered with tarmac . The deck is supported by twenty @-@ two 51 mm diameter spiral steel cables originating from both sides of a 25 metres ( 82 ft ) high arch . The parabolic arch is made of six prefabricated trapezoid steel box sections , and spans the bridge diagonally . The bridge is illuminated at night . The arch varies between 1 @.@ 6 metres ( 5 @.@ 2 ft ) wide by 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) deep at the bases to 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) wide and 0 @.@ 7 metres ( 2 @.@ 3 ft ) deep at the top . It is supported by a pair of 8 @.@ 5 by 6 @.@ 5 by 5 @.@ 5 m ( 27 @.@ 9 by 21 @.@ 3 by 18 ft ) concrete blocks , which bear most of the weight of the bridge . The deck is supported by piled abutments , which incorporate areas for bearing and expansion joint inspection and maintenance . The arch is kept in shape by a number of internal stiffeners and diaphragms , with the top section filled with concrete . To minimise internal rust , the lower sections of the arch were coated with a vapour corrosion inhibitor , with portholes with removable covers inserted into the arch so that the inside can have additional coats applied in the future . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The three sections of decking were assembled on the broad central reservation of Princess Road , and were craned into position over a weekend when Princess Road was closed . The decking was temporarily supported by trestles until the arch was ready . The six sections of the arch were welded together on site into two halves before being lifted into position during a second weekend . The cables were connected on third weekend . The bridge was formally opened on 10 May 1997 by Alex Ferguson in a ceremony including the Lord Mayor of Manchester and Tony Wilson . The ceremony was concluded by them being driven over the bridge in a Rolls @-@ Royce Silver Ghost , and was followed by a street festival . 
 The bridge has been described by the structural engineers as " a perfect example of how imaginative design combined with leading @-@ edge engineering technology can be used to create a landmark structure which captures the public 's imagination . " In 1997 the bridge was shortlisted for the British Construction Civil Engineering Award . In 1998 , the bridge received four awards : the RIBA Award for Architecture , a Structural Steel Design Awards Commendation , a Civic Trust Award Commendation and the Institute of Civil Engineers Merit Award . 
 = Michael Boulding = 
 Michael Thomas Boulding ( born 8 February 1976 ) , sometimes referred to as Micky Boulding , is an English former professional footballer who played as a forward and winger from 1998 to 2011 . Prior to his football career , he was a promising young tennis player , ranking among the top 20 players in Britain . 
 Born in Sheffield , England , Boulding excelled at both football and tennis , but chose to adopt the latter after he was spotted by coach Tony Pickard , who trained Boulding for 10 years . However , having continued to train as a footballer and play in the non @-@ league with Hallam , he finished his tennis career in 1999 , when he turned a professional footballer with Mansfield Town . He played for two years in Division Three with Mansfield , before he moved up two divisions to Grimsby Town . After scoring 11 goals in a season with Grimsby , he attracted interest from Premier League @-@ side Aston Villa . However , his stay with Villa was short @-@ lived and his only first team action was in the Intertoto Cup , before he returned to Grimsby . He spent another two years with Grimsby and then another two with Barnsley , before he decided to retire in 2005 . 
 Boulding worked in the family business but returned to football in March 2006 , with Rotherham United . He did not play for Rotherham in two months and instead returned to Mansfield Town , along with his brother , Rory , at the end of the season . Boulding scored just six goals in his first season with Mansfield . However , after he scored 25 in his second season , when the team were relegated from The Football League , he attracted interest from a number of League One and Two clubs . He eventually decided to join Bradford City , again with his brother , but the pair were released early from their contracts after less than two years with the club . The brothers were given trials back at Mansfield Town , but while Rory joined Accrington Stanley , Michael returned to Barnsley on short @-@ term deal and later had a similar contract at Derby County but never featured in either first team . He has also been involved with running the family 's property business . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Michael Boulding was born on 8 February 1976 in Sheffield , England , to Mick and Deirdre Boulding . Boulding has four sisters , Sally , Mary , singer @-@ songwriter Helen , and Laura , who plays rounders for England , and a younger brother , Rory , who is 12 years his junior , and was born after the family moved to Sheffield . Boulding 's family own a property business , Merlin Estates , which he briefly worked for when he decided to retire from football in 2005 . The firm went into compulsory liquidation in 2009 . Boulding lives with his brother , Rory . He also has a helicopter pilot 's licence . 
 = = Tennis career = = 
 Boulding was both a skilled footballer and tennis player as a schoolboy , but he was persuaded to pursue a career in the latter sport when he was talent spotted by coach Tony Pickard at the age of 13 . Boulding was part of the national squad and played in events across the world , including India , South America , the Far East , and also the junior Wimbledon Championships and the qualifying rounds of the main Grand Slam event . During his career he roomed with Tim Henman and was ranked the top 20 players in Britain . He held an ATP singles world ranking between 8 July 1996 and 1 November 1999 , apart from between 25 August 1997 and 24 August 1998 , which peaked at 1 @,@ 119 with four world ranking points on 3 May 1999 . His highest doubles ranking was 964 on 10 February 1997 with 15 ranking points . 
 = = Football career = = 
 = = = Hallam and Mansfield Town = = = 
 Boulding maintained his links with football and trained with Doncaster Rovers , and in 1998 he joined non @-@ league Hallam near his home in Sheffield . His form at Hallam attracted the interest of a number of league clubs , and Boulding was offered a trial by Mansfield Town . He was given a contract by the Division Three side and turned professional in 1999 , which brought an end to his tennis career . He made his debut with Mansfield in a League Cup game against Nottingham Forest on 11 August 1999 as a late substitute for Gary Tallon , before his first league game came three days later against Cheltenham Town . He had to wait until his 12th game as a professional to register his first goal when he scored in a 2 – 1 victory over Shrewsbury Town on 23 October . He eventually finished his first season with six goals with Mansfield coming 17th but 17 points above Carlisle United , the only side to be relegated out of The Football League . 
 During September and October of the 1999 – 2000 season , Boulding scored in four successive league games . However , he could only score another two goals during the rest of the campaign to once again record a tally of six goals . His last goal came only two minutes after he had come on as a substitute during Mansfield 's penultimate game of the season against Scunthorpe United , which helped the team to their fourth successive home victory and a final league position of 13th . Boulding 's two @-@ year contract with Mansfield had finished and he left after playing 74 appearances in all competitions for Mansfield , of which 41 were as a substitute . During his two seasons he scored 12 goals , all in the league . 
 = = = Grimsby Town = = = 
 Having left Mansfield , Boulding joined Division One side Grimsby Town on a free transfer in September 2001 . His debut was as a second @-@ half substitute in a 3 – 3 draw with Stockport County on 22 September 2001 , before he scored his first Grimsby goal a week later away at Bradford City . Boulding was involved in Grimsby 's League Cup upset , when they defeated cup holders Liverpool with a 2 – 1 extra @-@ time victory , but they struggled in the league . Boulding was in and out of the starting eleven , but when he was recalled to the side for the visit of Crystal Palace on 2 March 2002 in place of Martin Pringle , who had broken his leg , Boulding scored in a 5 – 2 victory to ease their relegation worries . He scored again three days later in a defeat , and followed it up with the first hat @-@ trick of his career in a 6 – 2 victory later the same month against Wimbledon , which moved them out of the relegation zone . Grimsby 's survival was ensured before the end of the season , when they defeated Burnley 3 – 1 , with two goals from Boulding . Boulding finished Grimsby 's leading scorer for the 2001 – 02 season with 11 goals in 39 appearances , and with his one @-@ year contract due to expire in the summer , he was offered a new contract by the club . Boulding , however , turned down the offer and instead joined Aston Villa in July 2002 on a Bosman free transfer . 
 = = = Aston Villa and return to Grimsby Town = = = 
 Boulding was immediately involved in Aston Villa 's Intertoto Cup campaign , making his debut against FC Zurich on 21 August 2002 in a 2 – 0 defeat , before he scored the first goal in the second leg as Aston Villa overturned the first leg deficit to win 3 – 2 on aggregate . However , he did not make an appearance in the Premier League and in September 2002 , he joined Sheffield United on a one @-@ month loan with a view to a permanent move . The loan deal was extended for a second month , but an ankle injury restricted his opportunities at Sheffield United and he returned to Aston Villa in November 2002 . He played seven times for United , scoring one goal in a League Cup tie with Wycombe Wanderers . 
 Only six months after joining Aston Villa , Boulding returned to Grimsby Town in January 2003 , initially on a one @-@ month loan , to allow him to play the following day against Wimbledon , and then on an 18 @-@ month contract only days later He opened the scoring on his return in a 3 – 3 with Wimbledon , and added another three goals in his following five games . However , he was unable to add any more goals by the end of the season and Grimsby were relegated from Division One in 24th place . 
 Boulding scored Grimsby 's first goal of the 2003 – 04 season , during the opening day 2 – 2 draw with Plymouth Argyle . He continued to be in the goals at the start of the season and added another five by mid @-@ September , scored in successive games during October to guide Grimsby to back @-@ to @-@ back victories , and had scored 13 goals by the end of 2003 . However , manager Paul Groves was sacked in January 2004 following a run of poor results which culminated in a 6 – 0 defeat to Oldham Athletic , leaving Grimsby one point off the relegation places . Boulding , who said he had previously stayed because of Groves , himself immediately left the club , moving to Barnsley in February 2004 for a fee of £ 50 @,@ 000 , having scored a total of 17 goals from 42 games during his second spell with Grimsby . He later said the decision to leave was the worst of his career and that he had had his happiest times at Grimsby , saying " Grimsby is the club I have been happiest at . Leaving for Barnsley was the biggest mistake I 've made in my football career . " Despite leaving the club early in the season , Boulding finished top @-@ scorer – tied with Phil Jevons – with 13 goals . 
 = = = Barnsley and Rotherham United = = = 
 Barnsley , like Grimsby Town , were in Division Two , but in a mid @-@ table position . Boulding 's first game for his new club was on 14 February 2004 , in a 1 – 0 defeat to Wrexham . Three games after Boulding signed for Barnsley , they sacked manager Gudjon <unk> and replaced him with Paul Hart , who asked Boulding to play at left wing , a position Boulding described as the " graveyard shift " . Boulding played six games in total before the end of the season , which included an early return to Grimsby resulting in a 6 – 1 defeat for Barnsley , but he failed to score a goal . He recorded his first goals for his new club in the third game of the 2004 – 05 season in a 4 – 3 defeat to Luton Town on 14 August 2004 , when he scored twice . He failed to score again until November and only netted one more by the end of 2004 , but in the first four games of the New Year he scored another five goals . He ended up scoring 10 goals for Barnsley from 38 games but he fell out of favour and was sent out on loan to Cardiff City in March 2005 for the rest of the season . He played four games for the Championship @-@ side , all as substitute , without scoring . He returned to Barnsley but was released by manager Andy Ritchie at the end of the season . 
 Boulding was tracked by Bradford City and Crewe Alexandra , with whom he was offered a contract after a successful trial , but instead decided to retire from professional football after being asked to play on the left wing . Crewe manager Dario Gradi said : " He told me he was going to retire because he didn 't want to sit on the bench all season — or drop down the divisions . " His retirement lasted seven months while he worked for his father 's company until he joined Rotherham United in March 2006 following three reserve games . He signed for the rest of the 2005 – 06 season , but did not make any first @-@ team appearances for Rotherham and left the club at the end of the season . 
 = = = Return to Mansfield Town = = = 
 In July 2006 , Boulding returned to League Two side Mansfield Town , and after impressing manager Peter Shirtliff in pre @-@ season training , he was offered a contract . His younger brother Rory Boulding also joined Mansfield at the same time . His first game back at Mansfield was on the opening day of the 2006 – 07 season in a 2 – 2 draw with Shrewsbury Town , before he scored in the following game as Mansfield defeated Milton Keynes Dons 2 – 1 . At the end of September he was sidelined by a knee injury , which kept him out of the side for a month , and in January 2007 he was angry after he was dropped to the substitutes ' bench in favour of fellow strikers Barry Conlon and Martin <unk> for a game against Hereford United . Mansfield won the game 3 – 1 with Boulding coming on to score one of the goals . He finished the season with just six goals from 45 games , as Mansfield finished in 17th position . 
 Boulding 's 2007 – 08 season started in better form , when he scored in a 1 – 1 draw with Brentford on the opening day of the campaign , which was followed up with goals in each of Mansfield 's next three league fixtures . Despite his goals , Mansfield were soon at the bottom of the table . The club found some respite from their league form in the FA Cup ; their run started with a 3 – 0 victory against Conference South side Lewes when both Boulding brothers scored , and was followed with a 3 – 2 defeat of another non @-@ league team , Harrogate Railway Athletic , when Boulding scored twice in a televised game . However , Boulding missed a penalty in Mansfield 's next league game as they remained bottom of the table following a goalless draw with Bradford City , before they were knocked out of the FA Cup by Premier League club Middlesbrough in the fourth round once again live on television . Boulding , who hit the crossbar during the game , was pleased with the side 's performance , saying : " If we can take that sort of performance into the league , we 'll definitely get out of this relegation battle . " While Boulding 's own goalscoring form continued , Mansfield failed to pick up enough points to stay up . He finished the season with 25 goals , including a hat @-@ trick in his penultimate game against Shrewsbury Town . 
 By the end of the season , Boulding had made 92 appearances , scoring 31 goals , in his second spell at Mansfield . After Mansfield 's relegation to the Football Conference , he was out of contract , and as well as being offered new terms by the club , at least four League Two clubs also tried to sign him . In July 2008 , he and his brother both decided to leave Mansfield Town after turning down their offer , with a reported 15 other clubs interested in offering him a contract . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 Boulding 's goals attracted interest from a number of clubs including League One side Cheltenham Town , and League Two teams Bradford City , former clubs Grimsby Town and Rotherham United , and Lincoln City . Boulding and his brother were expected to sign for Cheltenham Town but had a change of heart and instead moved to League Two side Bradford City on a two @-@ year contract in July 2008 , joining the team on their tour of Scotland . Boulding was one of four Bradford players to make his debut on the opening day of the 2008 – 09 season against Notts County . He was a second half substitute replacing fellow striker Barry Conlon , as Bradford won 2 – 1 . His first goal for City came in their third game of the season to open the scoring in a 2 – 0 victory against Rochdale on 23 August 2008 , which put them second in the table . Along with Barry Conlon and Peter Thorne , Boulding was one of three strikers at City who all scored 10 goals by February as City maintained their push for the play @-@ offs . Boulding finished the season with 13 goals , but admitted his performance had been " very average " , and was one player who took a pay cut after the club missed out on promotion . 
 Boulding started the first game of his second season with Bradford City , which ended with City losing 5 – 0 to Notts County , but he soon lost his place to new signings Gareth Evans and James Hanson and so had to wait another seven weeks for his second start which came against Northampton Town because Evans was suspended . He scored his first goal of the season in the game to give City a 2 – 0 lead , but his side conceded twice for the game to finish in a 2 – 2 draw . He scored in the club 's following two games , but was then kept out of the side for two weeks by a virus . Upon his return , he scored his 100th career goal and his fourth goal in five games as a late consolation in an FA Cup defeat to Notts County . However , Boulding continued to struggle to maintain a first @-@ team place and was released early from his contract in March 2010 , along with his brother under mutual consent , after failing to make a single start under new manager Peter Taylor . He had played 71 games at City , although nearly one @-@ third were as substitute , and scored 19 goals . 
 = = = Return to Barnsley and transfer to Derby County = = = 
 Boulding returned on trial to former clubs Mansfield Town , with his brother Rory , and Barnsley . Boulding offered to play for free on a short @-@ term deal at the latter club and started the season with the Championship side , being named on the bench for the club 's opening match away to Queens Park Rangers . He was an unused substitute as his new side lost 4 – 0 . Boulding was limited to reserve team football , which included a goal against Nottingham Forest . He failed to appear for the first @-@ team and in February 2011 , he was given a trial with another Championship club Derby County scoring in a reserve game against Walsall . After his trial , Boulding joined Derby on a non @-@ contract deal until the end of the 2010 – 11 season . He played for the reserves before he earned his first call @-@ up to the Derby team for a game against Crystal Palace . He was an unused substitute in a 2 – 2 draw . Boulding did not feature in the Derby first @-@ team and they did not retain him at the end of the season . He did however train with the club during pre @-@ season ahead of the 2011 – 12 season and played in a friendly against Burton Albion . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Updated to 25 February 2011 . 
 = Caesars Palace 2000 = 
 Caesars Palace 2000 is a gambling simulation video game developed by Runecraft and published by Interplay Entertainment . It was released in North America and Europe in June 2000 for the PlayStation , Dreamcast and Microsoft Windows ' PCs . It is named after the famous Caesars Palace luxury hotel and casino on the Las Vegas Strip in Las Vegas , Nevada . 
 Interplay announced in late 1999 that they were working on a title for the Dreamcast which was known to be a 3D simulation of gambling with traditional casino games . The game was fully licensed by the Caesars Palace casino and features six card games , table games , five slot machine themes , and video game machines . Each game plays by official Caesars Palace rules and uses casino odds and payouts verified by a Ph.D in statistics . The PC version of the game received praise for its graphics and sound , but the Dreamcast version received criticism for its presentation , graphics , and slow pace . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 There are eleven casino games , authentic Caesars Palace cards , chips , rules , and tutorial guides for beginners throughout each game . In the PlayStation version of the game , there are six card games , including variations of poker and blackjack ; table games , including roulette and craps ; video game machines , including video poker and keno ; and five slot machine themes . For each of the various games included , official Caesars Palace tables and equipment are used . Each game plays by official Caesars Palace rules and uses casino odds and payouts confirmed by statistician William Bertram , Ph.D. Tutorials and in @-@ game hints can be shown on each of Caesar 's Palace 2000 : Millennium Gold Edition 's various games . The tutorials and hints are displayed at times when the game notices that the player is making moves considered incorrect by casino standards . For further assistance , Caesar 's Palace 2000 : Millennium Gold Edition also features the Caesars Palace Guide to Gaming Handbook , which details rules and strategies for the included games . 
 In the PC and Dreamcast versions of the game , an initial stake of $ 2 @,@ 000 is given , though more is available through loans at a virtual automated teller machine . Official Caesars Palace rules and tutorials are given for each game , along with genuine cards and chips . Odds and payouts are confirmed by Bertram . The card games include blackjack , Pai <unk> poker , Mini @-@ Baccarat , Red dog , Casino war , and Spanish 21 . The table games include craps and roulette , while machine gambling include video poker , poker challenge , and video Keno . The five slot machine themes include Ancient Egypt , Baseball Challenge , Halloween Spooky , Progressive Fruit , and Wild West . They all have different payouts and odds . The settings can be customized for some games , including the volume , coaching , number of decks , card tracking , bet limits , and animations . 
 = = Development = = 
 In September 1999 , publisher Interplay Entertainment announced the arrival of several Dreamcast titles to be developed by Rage Software . Interplay revealed that they were working on another title , known as Caesars Palace 2000 for the Dreamcast . It was known to be a 3D simulation of gambling , and they promised that it will be " one of the most realistic portrayals of the casino atmosphere ever " . It was going to have traditional casino games , like blackjack , poker , and slots , and was slated for a late fourth @-@ quarter release in 1999 . 
 In May 2000 , developer Runecraft was simultaneously working with publisher Ripcord Games on the Dreamcast port of Spec Ops , while developing Caesars Palace 2000 . It was announced that the game was set for release on the PC , Dreamcast , and PlayStation . They promised to include all the things associated with gambling , and a release in late May 2000 . The game was fully licensed by the Caesars Palace casino , with twenty @-@ three different gambling games and adhering to the Official Caesars Palace Rules . Runecraft promised a title that " reflects the ambiance of Caesars Palace , including dealers with personality " . Players would also be able to track their performance and do some statistical analysis . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Caesars Palace 2000 received mixed reviews from critics , while the PC version received the most positive reaction . It received aggregate scores of 55 % and 45 % from GameRankings for PC and Dreamcast respectively . 
 For the PC version , GameSpot editor Stephen Poole stated " You 'll be better off looking for free online versions of the various games contained in Caesars Palace 2000 " . In contrast , IGN was more favorable to the PC version of the game . Francois <unk> of Allgame praised the game for its " excellent audio @-@ visuals . The 3D accelerated graphics , specifically the tables , the cards and the dealers ' hands , are well modeled and lit , and the playing chips are beautiful . The sound effects are accurate , and the voice actors , competent " . However , he noted that " some of the 3D effects are not particularly <unk> , the menus flicker , it 's often hard to stop the scrolling menus at the right time , and the camera angles switch too fast and frequently to be anything but distracting . The slot machine wheels are a bit on the small side and difficult to read " . <unk> went on to call the game " a competent effort , but is essentially dry and uninspired " . ComputerAndVideoGames.com 's Alex Huhtala criticized the game for its " Poor , vomit @-@ inducing presentation " . 
 For the PlayStation version , IGN 's David Zdyrko cited that " Many of the games are quite enjoyable , but the truth of the matter is that it never quite matches the thrill of the real thing " and criticized on how " the visuals are very bland on the whole . It has low @-@ resolution backgrounds , and pretty much nothing at all to get excited about " . He also called the music " boring and completely uninspiring " . Allgame editor Matt Grandstaff commended the card games , as they " require a fair amount of strategy , and thus remain entertaining " and that " the look and feel of Caesars Palace 2000 recaptures the feel of one of the most successful casinos of all @-@ time " . He stated that the game " is definitely not about the looks " but " does an admirable job recreating the casino experience " . Grandstaff felt that the game " has the sound of a real casino . From background clatter to the voices of the dealer , this is Caesar 's Palace " . He noted that players " will enjoy sitting through hours of card games " but to " Avoid the slots " . Grandstaff also commented that the strategy book that comes with the game " should be packed on any trip to Vegas " . 
 The Dreamcast version was heavily criticized . Ryan Davis of GameSpot stated that " the best bet for all involved would be to take your chips elsewhere " . Similarly , IGN editor Jeremy Dunham noted that " the blandness of the game 's presentation would probably disappoint the most basic of cavemen . Even the graphics are disappointing . True , those card tables can look very realistic , but what else is there to marvel at ? Nothing ! Without any type of exploration feature , or other characters there isn 't anything to render " . Allgame 's Bryan Hightower criticized that " there are not enough games , there are annoying wait times , and the help mode is terrible " . He also complained that " the dealer deals painfully slow and has to say what cards you have twice . You can already read your hand right on the screen , so you don 't need the dealer to waste your time " . Hightower also cited that " when you win at slots , the camera always goes to the bottom of the machine to show you the payout scale " which " becomes frustrating after a few credits because it is so slow . The act of leaving the table or machine is even slower " . He also said that the advice the game gives you is " Perhaps the most irritating ' feature ' of this game " because " Each time you do something the computer wouldn 't have done , a pop @-@ up screen will appear that adds more time to the lengthy procedure of completing a bet " . Hightower commented that " The above @-@ par graphics are quickly negated by the rock @-@ bottom enjoyment factor " and that " this game doesn 't have any of the character the real casino has " . 
 = I Am Furious ( Yellow ) = 
 " I Am Furious ( Yellow ) " is the eighteenth episode of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season . It first aired in the United States on the Fox network on April 28 , 2002 . In the episode , Bart creates a comic book series based on his father Homer 's anger problems , which turns into a popular Internet cartoon series called Angry Dad . Homer finds out about this and is at first outraged , but after talking to his family , he decides to try to become a less angry person . 
 The episode was directed by Chuck Sheetz and written by John Swartzwelder . The idea for the episode was pitched by Matt Selman , and the staff took inspiration for the episode from the Simpsons staff 's own experience with web cartoons , such as Queer Duck and Hard Drinkin ' Lincoln . The episode includes references to the dot @-@ com bubble , Danish physicist Niels Bohr and comic book publishers Marvel Comics and DC Comics . It also features American comic book writer Stan Lee as himself . 
 Before its original broadcast , " I Am Furious ( Yellow ) " faced scrutiny from the series fans , who thought that Homer would literally transform into the Hulk in the episode . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 7 @.@ 8 million viewers , finishing in 26th place in the ratings the week it aired . Following its home video release , the episode received positive reviews from critics , and is often considered a favorite among fans . On February 20 , 2011 , " Angry Dad : The Movie " , an episode in which Bart and Homer make a short film based on the Angry Dad internet cartoon , aired in the United States . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Principal Skinner and Mrs. Krabappel take Lisa 's advice and visit the Springfield Writer 's Forum to find a better speaker . They find Jeff Jenkins , creator of a popular TV cartoon , Danger Dog . He comes to the school to give a presentation on Danger Dog , including showing them a sneak preview for the next Easter special , and fascinates the kids by telling them about the cartoon industry . Much to Skinner 's horror , Jenkins tells the students how easy his job is and how he never needed to work hard to get his job . Panicking , Skinner pulls the fire alarm and interrupts the speech , hoping to keep the students from absorbing Jenkins lazy attitude . Unfortunately , every kid in school creates their own comic book , all of which are actually rip @-@ off versions of Danger Dog . Bart also creates his own comic Danger Dude ( which is actually a dog ) and tries to sell it to Comic Book Guy , who criticizes his work . Stan Lee enters Comic Book Guy 's store and tells Bart that his comic is bad . However , he encourages Bart to keep trying to " find his own voice " . 
 At home , Bart comes up with a character called Angry Dad , based on Homer and his frequent outbursts when he does something stupid . Bart rolls out the first issue of Angry Dad , which becomes a hit with the kids in school . However , Lisa points out that the character is a carbon copy of Homer . Bart responds by deciding to make a supporting character for Angry Dad : a character named Know @-@ it @-@ All Sister based on Lisa 's annoying yet wise personality . Soon , Lisa relents as long she gets a pony and the last line of the comic , allowing Bart to make more issues of Angry Dad . Upon reading Angry Dad comics , Comic Book Guy deems them impressive enough to sell , much to Bart 's delight . 
 During an autograph signing session in the schoolyard , Bart is approached by a spokesman for an Internet entertainment site . He wants to make Angry Dad into an online animated cartoon series , and Bart agrees in exchange for stock . The cartoon becomes an Internet hit , becoming the single most popular non @-@ pornographic website of all time , which according to Lenny makes it " tenth <unk> " overall . The only one still unaware of Angry Dad is Homer , who finds out one day at work when Lenny , Carl , Smithers , and Mr. Burns find it hilarious . At first , Homer finds it very funny , but learns that he looks exactly like Angry Dad and that Bart is the one who created it , much to his anger . He becomes a laughingstock both on the web and in Springfield . While driving home , the humiliated Homer is stopped by various townsfolk , who do what they can to make him all the more angry . As a result , he carelessly slams the car door on his own hand , causing him immense pain . The townspeople respond with even more <unk> as the humiliated Homer flees towards home . Once he arrives , the apoplectic Homer finds Bart and Milhouse laughing at a new Angry Dad cartoon . He strangles Bart for the humiliation the town has given to him through his cartoons . Eventually , Marge and Lisa stop Homer and manage to calm him down . Though Lisa admits to not being a fan of Bart 's comic , she does tell Homer to address his anger management issues once and for all . Homer agrees to try to tame his anger from that point on . However , he refuses Marge 's request to go on a diet while he is dealing with his anger issues . 
 The next day , Homer stays true to his word and remains calm , despite having difficulty maintaining it , as it is evident that whenever aggravating situations occur , Homer tries to suppress his rage , causing lumps to grow on his neck . However , his new calm demeanor has taken away Bart 's inspiration for his cartoon , so Bart and Milhouse set up a prank for Homer to trigger another outburst . Later , they go to the Internet company office , where they find the company has gone bankrupt , due to its poor financial model and devalued stock . Realizing that this means he doesn 't need more material for Angry Dad , Bart and Milhouse rush back to the house to defuse the trap . Homer reaches home and happens upon Bart 's trap , but he keeps his calm throughout its run , causing more lumps to develop on his neck . The trap ends with Homer falling into a pool full of green paint and resembling the Incredible Hulk , finally prompting him to go berserk and storm through town , causing much damage . The police restrain him and Homer is admitted to the hospital . 
 At the hospital , Marge tells Bart she is disappointed in him for aggravating Homer 's rage with his prank , because of the $ 10 million in damages his father has caused with his rage , and she mentions that when they get home , she will punish him for it . However , Dr. Hibbert arrives and disagrees with Marge by telling her that Bart actually saved Homer 's life by enraging him . He explains the lumps on his neck were actually boils caused by suppressed rage and would have otherwise overwhelmed his nervous system if Bart 's prank had not set him off . Hibbert convinces a reluctant Marge that she should go easy on her son for it . Homer thanks Bart by taking him fishing , where he continues to make his father angry , though this time , Homer tries to control it for good . 
 = = Production = = 
 " I Am Furious ( Yellow ) " was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Chuck Sheetz . It was first broadcast on Fox in the United States on April 28 , 2002 . The episode 's storyline was pitched by Simpsons writer Matt Selman . In the DVD audio commentary for the episode , he stated that Matt Groening , the creator of the series , would usually tell the writers about how he was the class clown and did not pay attention in school , and yet grew up to become very successful . After hearing this , Selman thought that if Groening went back to his school to talk about his career , it " [ would be ] the last message that a principal and the teachers would wanna hear . " Selman pitched the story because he thought it would be " humorously infuriating " to teachers . The episode was also partly based on some of the Simpsons staff members ' experience with making internet cartoons , such as Queer Duck and Hard Drinkin ' Lincoln , both of which were created by Mike Reiss . 
 The Angry Dad internet cartoon , as well as the other internet cartoons in the episode , were originally going to be animated using Macromedia Flash , however , the department of Film Roman that handled Flash animation would not be able to complete the scenes in time . Because of this , director Sheetz had to draw the scenes himself , mimicking the look of Flash animation . At the end of Bart 's trap , Homer falls into a pool of green paint , making him resemble the Hulk . Selman originally wanted Homer to fall into blue paint , since the blue paint mixed with his yellow skin would make green , however the idea never came to fruition . 
 The episode features comic book writer Stan Lee as himself . In John Ortved 's book The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History , Lee stated that he attended the episode 's table read , and was impressed with the size and quality of the creative staff , who all sat around the conference table . Lee recalled in 2009 , " Honestly , there was so much genuine talent around that table that you could have cut it with a knife . " Afterward , Lee met the writers of the show , and was pleasantly surprised to find that they were familiar with his work and he was with theirs . Afterward , executive producer Al Jean took Lee out to lunch , who he called " one of the nicest and most unassuming guys you could hope to meet . " Lee continued , " Of course , I probably said something wrong to him , or he didn 't like my table manners , because I haven 't been invited back for another guest shot . But hey one lives in hope . " The voice actor who plays Angry Dad in the episode was portrayed by Dan Castellaneta , who also does the voice for Homer among other characters in the series . The design of the character is also based on Castellaneta . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title of the episode is a parody of 1967 Swedish art house film I Am Curious ( Yellow ) . The episode references the dot @-@ com bubble , a speculative bubble covering roughly 1995 – 2000 . In their article " 15 Simpsons Moments That Perfectly Captured Their Eras " , Genevieve Koski , Josh Modell , Noel Murray , Sean O 'Neal , Kyle Ryan and Scott Tobias of The A.V. Club wrote : " By April 2002 , the dot @-@ com bubble of the late ' 90s had been popped for a couple of years , taking with it myriad Internet start @-@ ups . A sobering soul @-@ searching settled in their place , which The Simpsons captured in this episode about Bart creating a popular Internet cartoon called Angry Dad . Touring the laid @-@ back start @-@ up that hosts the cartoons , Lisa asks head <unk> Todd Linux about their business model . ' How many shares of stock will it take to end this conversation ? ' he retorts . Lisa asks for two million , which Linux grabs from a paper @-@ towel dispenser . When Bart and Lisa return later , the company has gone bust , and Linux is stealing copper wire out of the walls . " 
 When Stan Lee approaches Database , who is playing with a toy Batmobile , he asks him if he would rather prefer a more exciting action figure . Lee then begins shoving a The Thing action figure into the Batmobile , effectively destroying it . This scene pokes fun at the DC vs. Marvel rivalry ( Batman 's Batmobile of DC Comics and The Thing a property of Marvel Comics ) . Another scene in the episode references Danish physicist Niels Bohr . In his book What 's science ever done for us ? : what The Simpsons can teach us about physics , robots , life and the universe , Paul Halpern wrote " In the episode [ ... ] , one of Homer 's favorite TV shows is preempted by the program The Boring World of Niels Bohr . Homer is so upset that he clutches an ice @-@ cream sandwich , aims it at the screen like it 's a remote control , squeezes out its contents , and splatters Bohr 's image . In contrast to Homer 's reaction , most physicists heap nothing but accolades upon Bohr , whose revolutionary ideas shaped the modern concept of the atom . " The line used by Stan Lee is similar to Zim 's line in The Nightmare Begins . 
 The ( fictional ) cartoon series introduced in the first act , " Danger Dog " is a spoof of the popular 80s British cartoon series , Danger Mouse . The hero 's secret headquarters inside a red fire hydrant is conspicuously similar to Danger Mouse 's base being a red mailbox . Milhouse 's character " Trouble Dog " is based off <unk> from Sanrio . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and re @-@ release = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on April 28 , 2002 , " I Am Furious ( Yellow ) " received a 7 @.@ 4 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 7 @.@ 8 million viewers . It finished in 26th place in the ratings for the week of April 22 – 28 , 2002 , making it the most watched program on the network that night . Combined with a new episode of Malcolm in the Middle , The Simpsons beat CBS 's Everybody Loves Raymond special ( " Everybody Loves Raymond : The First Six Years " ) in the ratings , besting the special by a full rating point and a half among adults between ages 18 to 49 . On August 24 , 2010 , the episode was released as part of The Simpsons : The Complete Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray box set . Matt Groening , Al Jean , Matt Selman , Mike Reiss , Chuck Sheetz , Don Payne , Tom Gammill , Max Pross , David Silverman , and Stan Lee participated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Upon the episode 's release , a promotional image of Homer mimicking the Hulk caused some of the series ' internet fans to speculate that the show had jumped the shark . " [ ... ] I still remember the publicity it [ the episode ] got , " Jean said in the DVD commentary for the episode . " The internet people were like , ' They jumped the shark . They 're having Homer turn into The Hulk . ' [ ... ] We clearly did it in a logical fashion . He 's not really super strong . " Following its broadcast , " I Am Furious ( Yellow ) " garnered critical acclaim from reviewers , and is often considered a fan favourite . Colin Jacobsson of DVD Movie Guide called the episode one of the better installments from Season 13 , referring to it as " very good " and saying that " the series has milked Homer 's rage [ as one of its chief sources of humor ] for years , but it does so in creative and satisfying ways here . " R.L. Shaffer of IGN described " I Am Furious ( Yellow ) " , along with " Brawl in the Family " and " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " , as being " cleverly written " and the best episodes of the season . Aaron Peck of High @-@ Def Digest stated that the episode is one of his " personal favourites , " and Ron Martin of 411Mania called it a " standout episode . " Adam Rayner of Obsessed With Film gave the episode a favorable review as well . He wrote that , even though it is not " as rooted in reality as the great episodes , " the episode is " consistently hilarious . " He concluded that the episode is " great comedy from start to finish . " 
 Blu @-@ ray.com 's Casey Broadwater called it a " strong character @-@ centric episode , " and added that the episode 's title is one of his " favourites . " Writing for Project @-@ Blu , Nate Boss wrote " Just when you think The Simpsons is broke , we get Angry Dad . To quote Stan Lee : ' Broke ? Or made it <unk> ? ' That 's right . Stan ' the man ' Lee . " Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict gave the episode a B + , describing " Homer 's random exclamation while running around on fire , ' Oh , I hope no one 's drawing this ! ' " as the episode 's " highlight . " Ryan Keefer of DVD Talk described the episode as being " flat out funny . " Lee 's appearance in the episode was also praised . Rayner called his performance " one of the all time great cameos , " and Jacobson called it " fun . " Broadwater considered Lee 's appearance to be one of the season 's " highlights , " and Total Film 's Nathan Ditum ranked Lee 's performance as the 12th best guest appearance in the show 's history , describing it as " a deranged , childish and brilliant version of himself . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The episode has been used as an indicator to the growth of internet companies . In his article " Best Indicator Ever : The Simpsons Foreclosure " , Jonathan Hoenig of <unk> wrote that the twentieth season episode " No Loan Again , Naturally " , an episode in which the Simpsons are foreclosed from their house , could have indicated that " the worst of the housing crisis " at the time the article was written , was over . Hoenig based this theory on the fact that shortly after " I Am Furious ( Yellow ) " , which satirizes the dot @-@ com bubble , aired , the <unk> stocks " began a massive rebound from bear @-@ market lows . " 
 " I Am Furious ( Yellow ) " inspired the idea for the twenty @-@ second season episode " Angry Dad : The Movie " , which originally aired on February 20 , 2011 in the United States . In " Angry Dad : The Movie " , Bart and Homer create a short film based on the Angry Dad cartoon seen in " I Am Furious ( Yellow ) " , but after the film wins a myriad of prizes , the two start fighting over who created the series . 
 = New York State Route 311 = 
 New York State Route 311 ( NY 311 ) is a state highway located entirely within Putnam County , New York , in the United States . The highway begins at NY 52 in Lake Carmel , and intersects Interstate 84 ( I @-@ 84 ) shortly thereafter . It crosses NY 164 and NY 292 as it heads into the northeastern part of the county , finally curving east to reach its northern terminus at NY 22 just south of the Dutchess County line . The route passes several historical sites . 
 Part of modern @-@ day Route 311 was originally the Philipstown Turnpike , a road built in 1815 to overcome a lack of transportation when the Hudson River froze during the winter months . The turnpike was a large business center for the county , though it was abandoned due to insufficient tolls to maintain it . Another section was constructed in the early 1900s , from the Patterson Baptist Church near the modern @-@ day intersection of Route 311 and Route 164 to the Village of Patterson , by a group of Italian immigrants . 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the segment of former NY 39 east of West Patterson was renumbered to NY 311 . NY 52 was realigned c . 1937 to follow its current alignment between Stormville and Lake Carmel . The former routing of NY 52 from West Patterson to Lake Carmel became part of an extended NY 311 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 311 begins at NY 52 in the Kent hamlet of Lake Carmel . It heads northeast , crossing over the northernmost portion of Lake Carmel on a short causeway . The lake has a surface area of about 200 acres ( 81 ha ) , and it sits at 618 feet ( 188 m ) in elevation . It was created by developers in the early 20th century by damming the Middle Branch of the Croton River , and is one of the few large bodies of water in Putnam County not used as a reservoir by New York City . The road then crosses into the town of Patterson and meets I @-@ 84 by way of an interchange . Construction is planned to start in summer 2012 for general bridge rehabilitation of the I @-@ 84 interchange . Proceeding eastward , it follows an erratic path , turning in different directions due to the hilly terrain of the area . It passes by a Christian youth camp and intersects with NY 164 . 
 NY 311 curves gradually northeast before turning almost due north to an intersection with NY 292 in the community of West Patterson . Past NY 292 , NY 311 parallels the Putnam – Dutchess county line east into the hamlet of Patterson , serving as the main street of the community . After crossing the Harlem Line tracks , NY 311 crosses the East Branch Croton River at the north end of the wetland area known as the Great Swamp . At nearly 6 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 400 ha ) , the Great Swamp is the second largest wetland in New York , extending as far north as Dover in Dutchess County . Continuing eastward , NY 311 passes the Patterson Fire Department , and terminates at NY 22 at a junction known as Akins Corners . In the hamlet of Patterson , an historic district exists along the route . A number of historic sites are located on NY 311 , including the Patterson Presbyterian Church , the Fellowship Hall , Christ Episcopal Church , the Maple Avenue Cemetery and the Grange Hall . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ designation history = = = 
 Part of modern @-@ day NY 311 from the NY 292 intersection to the route 's ending terminus was once part of the Philipstown Turnpike . Initially , the county 's proximity to the Hudson River supplied cheap means of transporting goods to Albany and New York City , though in the winter months , the river froze over . To resolve the issue , in 1815 , the Philipstown Turnpike Company was organized to improve upon a toll road from Cold Spring to the Connecticut border . On April 15 , 1815 , " an act to incorporate the Philipstown turnpike company in the county of Putnam " was passed . East of the Connecticut border , the turnpike continued as the New Milford and Sherman Turnpike . On the turnpike , wagons transported manufactures inland , and carried produce from the eastern part of the county . Before the advent of the railroad , the road was a business center for much of the county . One of the intentions of the turnpike was to " greatly promote the public good , as well contribute to their individual interest " . However , the turnpike was eventually abandoned , because the tolls received were not sufficient to defray the expense of maintaining the road and associated bridges . The tolls were also inadequate for investors in the Philipstown Turnpike Company to make a profit . 
 In November 1901 , the Putnam County 's Board of Supervisors hired an engineer to create plans for a new road that would run from the Westchester – Putnam County border into Dutchess County . By early the next year , a group of engineers led by H. W. <unk> surveyed the region , with the goal of constructing a 16 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) wide road . In October 1902 , the Board of Supervisors was informed that the engineers planned to build the new road along a path similar to an existing road . Surveys were completed in 1907 , resulting in the elimination of a dangerous railroad crossing via a trestle . Actual construction began on the Patterson portion of the state road in April 1909 , beginning from the Patterson Baptist Church near the modern @-@ day intersection of NY 311 and NY 164 . The working crew was composed of Italian immigrants , some of whom were given temporary residence within the Putnam Cigar Factory . By June , the construction had reached the Village of Patterson , and was thus completed . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 The portion of modern NY 311 from NY 292 in West Patterson and NY 22 in Patterson was designated in the mid @-@ 1920s as part of NY 39 , an east – west route extending from Poughkeepsie to Patterson via East Fishkill and West Pawling . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the segment of NY 39 east of West Patterson was renumbered to NY 311 while the portion of 1920s NY 39 from East Fishkill to West Patterson became part of NY 52 . NY 52 also continued south from West Patterson through what is now Lake Carmel to Carmel , where it continued east on an overlap with U.S. Route 6 ( US 6 ) . 
 In March 1936 , a " great and unusual ice flood " caused local water levels to rise . The bridge carrying the highway over the Great Swamp received cracks in its foundation due to the pressure of the water and melting ice , and was lifted off its foundation and swept into the swamp . NY 52 was realigned c . 1937 to follow its current alignment between Stormville and Lake Carmel . The former routing of NY 52 from West Patterson to Lake Carmel became part of an extended NY 311 . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 In June 1960 , the Presbyterian Men 's Club produced a film called Our Town , part of which was filmed on the Main Street portion of NY 311 at Boot Hill , a replica western frontier town . Children were asked to participate in the filming by dressing in western or American Indian apparel ; girls dressed as frontier women . The film debuted at the Patterson Town Hall on September 24 , 1960 . 
 By 1966 , Putnam County 's men began drafting into the armed forces to fight in the Vietnam War . In November of that year , Local Board No. 14 announced that 21 local men would be drafted into the military , the highest total to be called since the Korean War . Of the 21 , two were residents of Patterson . To honor the Patterson veterans who lost their lives , a plaque commemorating the Vietnam War was added to the War Memorial by the American Legion at the intersection of NY 311 and Maple Avenue . 
 The Patterson Post Office underwent several re @-@ locations throughout the years . After the Lloyd Lumber Company moved to a larger building along NY 311 , the post office occupied the smaller structure ; both were situated on the east side of the New York Central tracks . Residents complained that the new location was inadequate , claiming that parking was insufficient at nearby companies , and that walking along a busy road to reach the post office was dangerous . After a bidding process to determine the future location , the office was again moved to a former car service station along Front Street . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Putnam County . 
 = He Could Be the One = 
 " He Could Be the One " is a pop song by American recording artist and actress Miley Cyrus , performing as Hannah Montana – the alter ego of Miley Stewart – a character she played on the Disney Channel television series Hannah Montana . The song was co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Kara DioGuardi and Mitch Allan . " He Could Be the One " was released to Radio Disney on June 12 , 2009 as promotion for an episode of the same title and the series ' third soundtrack , Hannah Montana 3 . A karaoke version is available in Disney 's Karaoke Series : Hannah Montana 3 . The song contains country pop elements in its music . 
 The song became Cyrus ' best @-@ charting song as Montana , reaching the top twenty in Norway and the United States . " He Could Be the One " peaked at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 , thus becoming Cyrus ' first top ten single as Montana . The song 's accompanying music video was arranged from clips from various Hannah Montana episodes . 
 = = Background = = 
 " He Could Be the One " was co @-@ written by Kara DioGuardi , who composed a total of four songs on Hannah Montana 3 , and Mitch Allan , who composed a total of two songs on the album . A karaoke version is available in Disney 's Karaoke Series : Hannah Montana 3 . The song premiered on Radio Disney on June 12 , 2009 in order to promote the soundtrack and an episode from Hannah Montana of the same title . 
 " He Could Be the One " is pop song with a length of three minutes . According to Allmusic , its genre has some teen pop influences , while Warren Truitt of About.com noted its country music elements with " fizzy " pop rock . The song is set in common time and has a moderate tempo of 132 beats per minute . It is written in the key of E major and Cyrus ' vocals span two octaves , from B3 to D6 . Truitt described Cyrus ' vocals to be with a slight twang and husky . The lyrics of " He Could Be the One " , according to him , about a special crush . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Warren Truitt of About.com was immediately reminded of Shania Twain after listening to " He Could Be the One " due to its music and Cyrus ' voice in the track . " Throw in a little Gwen Stefani , Joan Jett , and Avril Lavigne , produce it with some [ ... ] Radio Disney " , Truitt added about the song 's influences . Truitt later listed the song as the seventh best song by Hannah Montana . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 As it was not released as a single , " He Could Be the One " received exclusive airplay on Radio Disney , thus its chart appearances consisted mainly of digital downloads . It soon peaked at number two on the Top 30 Countdown , behind " Here We Go Again " by Demi Lovato . The song debuted at number two on Billboard 's Hot Digital Songs Chart , selling 150 @,@ 000 copies , which led to an appearance on the Billboard Hot 100 , on the week ending July 25 , 2009 . " He Could Be the One " debuted and peaked at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 , thus making the song Montana 's highest @-@ charting effort , surpassing her previous best @-@ charting effort " Life 's What You Make It " , which peaked at number twenty @-@ five in July 2007 . It became Cyrus ' first and only song to chart in the top ten of the Billboard Hot 100 as Hannah Montana . It spent a total of five weeks on the chart . The song debuted and peaked at number ninety @-@ seven on the Canadian Hot 100 , spending one week on the chart . 
 " He Could Be the One " peaked at number sixty @-@ four on the Australian Singles Chart , becoming Cyrus ' best @-@ charting effort as Hannah Montana in Australia . On the week ending January 5 , 2010 , " He Could Be the One " debuted and peaked at number thirteen on the Norwegian Singles Chart , becoming Cyrus ' first entry as Montana in the country . It fell from the Norwegian Singles Chart in the following week . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's accompanying music video premiered on June 12 , 2009 on Disney Channel . The video begins with a narrator speaking , who says , " Boyfriends , one 's a heartbreaker . One 's got a lot of heart . Miley Stewart wants to know who could be the one " , as American actors Cody Linley and Drew Roy are introduced . In the episode " He Could Be the One " , Linley portrays Jake Ryan , Stewart 's longtime love interest and ex @-@ boyfriend , and Roy portrays Jesse , a guitar player who she eventually becomes attracted to . Stewart is then seen holding a pair of photographs of the two , in confusion . Throughout the remainder of the video , clips from numerous episodes from Hannah Montana are integrated . The video concludes with a scene of Stewart grunting as she again holds the photographs and slams herself against a bed . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Khaplu Palace = 
 Khaplu Palace ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> ; Balti : <unk> <unk> ) , locally known as Yabgo Khar ( meaning " The fort on the roof " ) , is an old fort and palace located in Khaplu , in the Baltistan region of Gilgit @-@ Baltistan Province in Northern Pakistan . The palace , considered an architectural heritage and a tourist attraction , was built in the mid @-@ 19th century , replacing an earlier fort located nearby . It served as a royal residence for the Raja of Khaplu . 
 From 2005 to 2011 the palace , having earlier stood in vulnerable conditions , underwent a restoration project carried out by the Aga Khan Trust for Culture under the Aga Khan Historic Cities Programme . The palace now houses a hotel operated by Serena and a museum depicting the history and culture of Baltistan . 
 = = Location = = 
 The town of Khaplu is located in the eastern part of Baltistan , at an altitude of 2 @,@ 600 metres ( 8 @,@ 500 ft ) above sea level and is the administrative capital of the <unk> District . River <unk> a tributary of River Indus , passes through the town , along which is the ancient trade route to Ladakh . Khaplu Palace is located north of the Khaplu town and south of the <unk> river in front of the high mountains of Karakoram range . A trek behind the palace in a ravine leads to the village of Pari in Skardu District . 
 = = History = = 
 Khaplu Palace was built in 1840 by the Yabgo Raja Daulat Ali Khan of Khaplu after the Dogra of Kashmir who captured the region decided to move the seat of government from the old fort . The site of the palace was chosen by rolling a large stone down from a nearby cliff ; it stopped at the <unk> village , and the palace was built there . The earlier fort was located near the location of the present @-@ day palace . Khaplu Palace replaced the former fort as the royal residence after its completion . According to Jane E. Duncan , the people of Khaplu used to live inside this fort and were not allowed to build their homes outside its premises . This practice was changed after Maharaja of Kashmir took control of the area , resulting in a cessation of conflict among neighbouring rulers . 
 The former fort was captured by Murad Khan of <unk> Dynasty , the ruler of Baltistan , in the Conquest of Khaplu in the 1590s by cutting off the water and other supplies to the fort . The troops of Murad besieged the fort for three months , resulting in the surrender of Rahim Khan , the 62nd Yabgo dynasty ruler of Khaplu . The fort again fell to invaders in the 1660s and 1674 . 
 The Yabgo descendants continued to live there even after their kingdom was abolished in 1972 . The last Raja of Khaplu who lived in the house was Raja Fatah Ali Khan , who died in 1983 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The palace was constructed with the help of Kashmiri and Balti craftsmen . Being on the border of multiple regions , the structure of the palace has Tibetan , Kashmiri , <unk> , Balti , and Central Asian influences . 
 The palace building consists of four floors built with timber , mud bricks , clay , and soil mortar . A carved wooden gate that Yabgo Raja Hatim Khan took from a fort in Skardu after conquering most of the Baltistan was erected at the entrance of the palace . The passage beyond the main gate , which formerly housed a stable , leads to the front lawn of the palace , which was used by the musical band during festivities in the reign of Yabgo Rajas . The wooden ceiling of the palace is crafted with designs using chisel and paint , without the use of nail . A hall at the top floor that was used as a leisure room overlooks the Karakoram mountain range and the lawns around the palace . Other notable rooms of the palace include the Royal meeting room ( <unk> ) , Royal balcony ( <unk> ) , Princess dressing room ( <unk> ) , and Queen room . 
 Following the renovation of the palace , a section of residential area is being used as a hotel , operated by Serena Hotels and employing people from 35 local households . The hotel has 21 rooms , six of which are located inside the palace building and utilise its 70 percent of income for the development of the Khaplu region , while another area serves as a museum . 
 = = Renovation = = 
 Khaplu Palace is the second fort in Baltistan to be renovated by the Aga Khan Trust for Culture . Renovation started in 2005 and was completed in 2011 . The project was funded by the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs via its embassy in Islamabad . USAID helped fund an exhibition centre for Balti culture inside the fort . The exhibition centre takes up two @-@ thirds of the site . The renovation work was carried out with the help of people from 400 local families employed as an initiative towards community building . The survey encompassing the topographical features of the renovation <unk> begun in 2005 , used Electronic Distance Measurement ( EDM ) devices . The survey helped in finding the original state of a number of decrepit portions of the palace . The renovation project was carried out following the Venice Charter 's standards for restoration . The material procured for the restoration amounted to thirty million rupees ( Rs 30 m ) , while the wages of the labourers aggregated to about twenty five million rupees ( Rs 25 m ) . 
 = = Shooting and <unk> = = 
 In 2014 , <unk> <unk> , senior producer of channel Hum TV and Haseeb Hassan one of TV directors choose Khaplu Palace for shooting of their TV Series , " <unk> @-@ e @-@ Dil " the series was the hence first show to be shot in <unk> and was shot in scenic areas of northern region . Khaplu Palace was set as one of the Protagonist Agha Jan 's ( played by Abid Ali ) Haveli . Shooting / filming was started in late August 2014 and ended in April 2015 , It took <unk> months for shooting , Khaplu Palace gave a vast popularity catch towards the series the show was seen by several viewers in 2015 and northern beauty gave series a higher rating . The show parodies the culture of the northern society and filmed a Persian song fort the series . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The rescue and renovation work of the palace was commended by Virgin Holidays for having social and economic effects on the locals of the area . The palace won the Virgin Holidays Responsible Tourism Award as the best project in the " Poverty Reduction " category in 2012 . In 2013 the palace was awarded the Award for Distinction by UNESCO Asia Pacific Heritage Awards , along with Lal Chimney Compound in India and The Great Serai in Afghanistan . 
 The famous drama serial <unk> @-@ e @-@ Dil was shot at Khaplu fort . 
 = Bryan Gunn = 
 Bryan James Gunn ( born 22 December 1963 ) is a Scottish former professional goalkeeper and football manager . After learning his trade with Aberdeen in the early 1980s , he spent most of his playing career at Norwich City , the club with which he came to be most closely associated . This was followed by a brief spell back in Scotland with Hibernian before his retirement as a player in 1998 . 
 Gunn feels the peak of his playing career was making what he calls the save of his life in the UEFA Cup match against Bayern Munich in 1993 . This event was called the summit of Norwich City 's history by The Independent . He is one of only nine Norwich players to win the club 's Player of the Year award twice . He was made an inaugural member of Norwich City 's Hall of Fame . He was a member of the Scotland national football team , making six appearances for his country in the early 1990s . 
 Gunn worked for years behind the scenes at Norwich in a variety of roles , from matchday hosting to coaching . He was appointed temporary manager towards the end of the 2008 – 09 season and then confirmed as permanent manager during the summer . However , after a 7 – 1 home defeat in the opening game to local rivals Colchester United , he lost his job a week into the 2009 – 10 Football League One season . 
 Since the death of his young daughter from leukaemia in 1992 , Gunn has been extensively involved in fundraising to combat the disease and its effects . As of 2011 he has raised more than £ 1 million for research into childhood leukaemia . The money has been used to fund projects to improve the lives of children with leukaemia and their families , notably a national telephone support line . The city of Norwich recognised Gunn 's charity work and his long association with the city 's football club by naming him Sheriff for 2002 . Published in 2006 , his autobiography , In Where it Hurts : My Autobiography , includes a foreword by his former manager Alex Ferguson . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gunn was born on 22 December 1963 in Thurso , Scotland , " twenty miles from John o ’ Groats " . His parents were James Gunn , a long @-@ distance lorry driver , and Jessie Sinclair , a canteen worker at the Dounreay nuclear power plant ; the pair had married despite being on opposite sides of a family feud stretching back to the 16th century . James was an amateur sportsman , playing football on the right wing for local team Invergordon F.C. and winning medals at highland games events . 
 The Gunn family home in Thurso was a farm , and the young Bryan would often pester the farmhands to play football with him . They would use a turnip if no ball was available . By the age of four he was keen on goalkeeping ; he was fearless of injury and enjoyed diving on the ball . When Bryan was four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half , the family moved to Invergordon , 20 miles from Inverness . He attended Park Primary School in the town and joined the school football team . Future professional Bobby Geddes was favoured over him as first @-@ choice goalkeeper for the team ; Gunn played as an outfield player until Geddes moved on to secondary school . 
 Gunn attended secondary school at Invergordon Academy from 1975 to 1980 , and gained O Levels in a variety of subjects , including English , maths , history and chemistry . He failed his French exam after taking it while " on the road " with Scotland under @-@ 15s . At the age of 13 , he was invited to play for the under @-@ 15 Invergordon F.C. team by one of his school teachers , who managed the team . The team was beaten 9 – 0 in Gunn 's debut , but his subsequent performances attracted the attention of national selectors , and he joined the Scotland under @-@ 15 squad around the same time he signed for Aberdeen at age 14 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Aberdeen = = = 
 Gunn commenced his professional career with Aberdeen in 1980 , and forged a good relationship with then @-@ Aberdeen manager Alex Ferguson — evidenced by the fact that in 1997 Ferguson brought Manchester United to Carrow Road for Gunn 's testimonial match . While an apprentice at Aberdeen , Gunn was a frequent babysitter for Ferguson 's children . He later said , " I probably babysat more than I played " . Gunn portrays the relationship as warm , but businesslike : 
 I 'd stay over and we 'd read the Sunday papers together . He was good to me . I was struggling for cash once and went in and told him I was going on holiday and was there any chance of an advance . He got on the phone and said : " Big Bryan Gunn 's coming down to sign a new contract . " It wasn 't what I meant . I got my holiday money but he got another year out of me , too . 
 As a youngster , Gunn did not always play in goal and he was viewed as a handy outfield player in his early years at Aberdeen . Ferguson recalls , " He could strike a ball as well as anyone , so well in fact that I once played him at centre @-@ forward in a reserve match ... He scored a brilliant goal ... It was a marvellous moment . " However , as a professional , and at his adult height of 6 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) , Gunn settled into playing in goal . 
 Gunn ascribes much of his goalkeeping success to the support of Belgian Marc De Clerck , a specialist goalkeeping coach at Aberdeen . At a time when few British teams provided such training , De Clerck introduced Gunn and Scottish international keeper Jim Leighton to what were then innovative training techniques . The goalkeepers would participate in special drills whilst training with the rest of the squad . Gunn also notes the influence of Aberdeen coach Teddy Scott , who taught the value of hard work and dedication ; Gunn also served as a boot boy for Alex McLeish . Leighton 's presence meant that Gunn played only 21 games for Aberdeen . He made his debut against Hibernian at Pittodrie on 30 October 1982 , and went on to keep four clean sheets for the club . Despite being rivals for a first @-@ team place , Gunn had an excellent relationship with Leighton that included joining Leighton 's family for a meal once a week . 
