 Assigned to the Home Squadron as flagship , Roanoke transported the American filibuster and former President of Nicaragua , William Walker , and his men back to the United States from Aspinwall , Colombia , ( now called Colón , Panamá ) . Roanoke arrived on 4 August and the ship was decommissioned at the Boston Navy Yard on 24 September 1857 . Recommissioned on almost a year later on 18 August 1858 , Roanoke resumed her duties as flagship of the Home Squadron . For over a year , she was stationed at Aspinwall awaiting the arrival of the first Japanese embassy to the United States to ratify the 1858 Treaty of Amity and Commerce . They reached Aspinwall on 25 April 1860 and Roanoke reached Hampton Roads on 12 May 1860 with the delegation and was again decommissioned . 
 After the start of the Civil War , Roanoke recommissioned on 20 June 1861 and was assigned to the North Atlantic Blockading Squadron . She destroyed the schooner Mary off Lockwood Folly Inlet , North Carolina , on 13 July 1861 . The ship subsequently helped to capture the schooners Albion and Alert and the ship Thomas Watson off Charleston , South Carolina , on 15 October 1861 . 
 Roanoke 's deep draft prevented her from engaging the Confederate casemate ironclad CSS Virginia ( her former sister USS Merrimack ) during the Battle of Hampton Roads on 8 – 9 March 1862 . The ship ferried north survivors from the sailing frigates USS Congress and USS Cumberland which Virginia had sunk . She arrived at New York City on 25 March , and decommissioned the same day to begin reconstruction as a monitor . 
 = = = Ironclad reconstruction = = = 
 On 19 March 1862 , 10 days after the Battle of Hampton Roads where the Monitor fought the Confederate ironclad Virginia to a standstill , John Lenthall , Chief of the Bureau of Construction and Repair , and the Chief of Steam Engineering , Benjamin F. Isherwood , wrote a letter to Gideon Welles , the Secretary of the Navy recommending that Roanoke be converted into a seagoing ironclad as that would be cheaper and faster than new construction . They suggested that the ship be cut down to the top of her gun deck , armoring her sides and deck and mounting four revolving Ericsson gun turrets , each mounting two 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) or 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) guns . This scheme would give her an ample 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of freeboard . Aside from reinforcing her hull to carry the weight of the turrets , the only other changes that they recommended were the elimination of the hoisting screw , replacement by a propeller smaller in diameter , and the addition of a ram . The wrought iron side armor would be a maximum of 6 inches ( 152 mm ) in thickness with a taper down to 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) at its bottom edge , about 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) below the waterline . The deck armor was to be 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 64 mm ) thick and an additional steam engine would be necessary to rotate the turrets and run the ventilation fans . They estimated that this conversion would take three and a half months and cost $ 495 @,@ 000 . 
 Welles accepted their recommendation and Roanoke began her reconstruction at the Brooklyn Navy Yard when she arrived in New York City on 25 March . The navy yard removed her masts , rigging and everything above the upper deck except her funnel while the Novelty Iron Works received a contract in early April to shape and mount all of her metal work . To save weight the number of turrets was reduced to three and her deck armor to 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . Each turret was virtually identical to those of the Passaic @-@ class monitors and consisted of eleven layers of 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) plates . The forward two turrets were surmounted by a stationary pilothouse with armor nine inches thick . Novelty was given a choice in protecting Roanoke 's sides , it could either with six layers of 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) plates or a single plate 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick that reduced to 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 89 mm ) inches below the waterline . It chose the latter and delays in their delivery were largely responsible for drawing out the reconstruction time to around a year . The plates were manufactured by the " Franklin Forge " of <unk> , Dally & Co . 
 An auxiliary boiler was added to provide steam for the engines that powered the turrets , fans and steering and little to nothing was done to reinforce the hull to withstand the weight of her armor and turrets . The deck beneath each 125 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 127 t ) turret was reinforced by a series of stanchions that transferred their weight to the ship 's bottom , which was not reinforced to handle their weight . The stress caused Roanoke to leak around 1 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 5 m ) per day by the end of the war . In her new configuration , her crew numbered 347 officers and men . 
 Roanoke was armed with two muzzle @-@ loading smoothbore 15 @-@ inch Dahlgren guns , two 11 in ( 279 mm ) Dahlgren guns and a pair of eight @-@ inch , 150 @-@ pounder Parrott rifles . The forward turret mounted one 15 @-@ inch Dahlgren and a 150 @-@ pounder Parrot rifle , the middle turret was fitted with 15- and 11 @-@ inch Dahlgrens and the aft turret with one 11 @-@ inch Dahlgren and a 150 @-@ pounder rifle . Shortages of the 15 @-@ inch Dahlgren forced the substitution of two 11 @-@ inch Dahlgrens . Each of the former guns weighed approximately 43 @,@ 000 pounds ( 20 @,@ 000 kg ) . They could fire a 350 @-@ pound ( 158 @.@ 8 kg ) shell up to a range of 2 @,@ 100 yards ( 1 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of + 7 ° . The 11 @-@ inch Dahlgren weighed 16 @,@ 000 pounds ( 7 @,@ 300 kg ) and could fire a 136 @-@ pound ( 61 @.@ 7 kg ) shell up to a range of 1 @,@ 710 yards ( 1 @,@ 560 m ) at + 5 ° elevation . The 150 @-@ pounder Parrot rifle weighed 16 @,@ 300 pounds ( 7 @,@ 400 kg ) and fired eight @-@ inch shells that weighed 132 to 175 pounds ( 60 to 79 kg ) . 
 Roanoke was also fitted with an ax @-@ shaped ram . It was formed from two 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch plates that projected past her bow and presumably was the height of a single plate , 24 inches ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) . 
 = = = Ironclad service = = = 
 The ship was accepted by the Navy on 16 April 1863 although she was not recommissioned until 29 June , the first warship with more than two turrets in history . Ignoring pressure by local politicians to keep Roanoke in New York , the Navy ordered her to Hampton Roads , Virginia , to join the blockading squadron there . On the voyage south , the ship reached a maximum speed of 8 @.@ 5 knots ( 15 @.@ 7 km / h ; 9 @.@ 8 mph ) and averaged 7 knots ( 13 km / h ; 8 @.@ 1 mph ) . Captain Benjamin F. Sands reported that the ship 's roll was so great that it would " preclude the possibility of fighting her guns at sea , and I was obliged to secure them with pieces of timber to prevent them fetching away " . Roanoke was assigned as harbor defense ship at Hampton Roads where she remained through the end of the war . On 14 July , Sands test @-@ fired his guns for the first time and both of the 15 @-@ inch Dahlgrens and one 150 @-@ pounder Parrott rifle dismounted themselves by their violent recoil . Her rear turret required nearly 5 minutes to make a full rotation . Captain <unk> Gansevoort replaced Sands in command of the ship later in 1863 . He was succeeded by Captain Augustus Kilty . 
 Roanoke arrived back in New York on 27 April 1865 . She was decommissioned and placed in reserve on 20 June at New York Navy Yard . The ship 's only postwar service was as flagship of the Port Admiral at New York . She was recommissioned on 13 January 1874 until reduced to reserve again on 12 June 1875 . On 5 August 1882 , Roanoke was struck from the Navy List and later sold for scrap on 27 September 1883 . 
 = Tom Wills = 
 Thomas Wentworth " Tom " Wills ( 19 August 1835 – 2 May 1880 ) was an Australian sportsman who is credited with being his country 's first cricketer of significance and a pioneer of Australian rules football . 
 Born in the British colony of New South Wales to a wealthy family descended from convicts , Wills grew up in the bush on properties owned by his father , the pastoralist and politician Horatio Wills , in what is now the Australian state of Victoria . He befriended local Aborigines , learning their language and customs . At the age of 14 , Wills was sent to England to attend Rugby School , where he became captain of its cricket team , and played an early version of rugby football . After Rugby , Wills represented the Cambridge University Cricket Club in the annual match against Oxford , and played in first @-@ class matches for Kent and the Marylebone Cricket Club . An athletic all @-@ rounder with devastating bowling analyses , he was regarded as one of the finest young cricketers in England . 
 Returning to Victoria in 1856 , Wills achieved Australia @-@ wide stardom as a cricketer , captaining the Victorian team to repeated victories in intercolonial matches . He played for many clubs , most notably the Melbourne Cricket Club , with which he had a fraught and complex relationship . In 1858 he called for the formation of a " foot @-@ ball club " with a " code of laws " to keep cricketers fit during the off @-@ season . After founding the Melbourne Football Club the following year , Wills and three other members codified the first laws of Australian rules football . He and his cousin H. C. A. Harrison spearheaded the sport as team captains and administrators . 
 In 1861 , at the height of his fame , Wills joined his father on an eight @-@ month trek into the Queensland outback to establish a family property . Two weeks after their arrival , Wills ' father and 18 others were murdered in the largest massacre of settlers by Aborigines in Australian history . Wills survived and returned to Victoria in 1864 . He continued to play football and cricket , and , in 1866 – 67 , coached and captained an Aboriginal XI — the first Australian cricket team to tour England . In a career marked by controversy , Wills challenged cricket 's amateur @-@ professional divide , and was frequently accused of bending rules to the point of cheating . Called for throwing in 1872 , he mounted a failed comeback four years later on the eve of the first Test cricket match , by which time his sporting glory belonged to a colonial past that seemed " like a distant land " . Psychological trauma from the massacre was worsened by his alcoholism . Now destitute , Wills was admitted to the Melbourne Hospital in 1880 , suffering from delirium tremens , but shortly afterwards escaped and returned to his home on the city 's margins , where he committed suicide by stabbing himself in the heart . 
 Wills fell into obscurity after his death , but has undergone a resurgence in Australian culture since the 1990s . He was an inaugural inductee into the Australian Football Hall of Fame , and is the subject of a statue outside the Melbourne Cricket Ground . Today he is characterised as an archetype of the tragic sports hero , and as a symbol of reconciliation between Indigenous and non @-@ Indigenous Australians . The theory that he incorporated features of an Aboriginal game into Australian football has been hotly debated . According to biographer Greg de Moore , Wills " stands alone in all his absurdity , his cracked egalitarian heroism and his fatal self @-@ destructiveness — the finest cricketer and footballer of the age . " 
 = = Family and early years = = 
 Tom Wills was born on 19 August 1835 on the Molonglo Plain near modern @-@ day Canberra , in what was the British penal colony of New South Wales , as the elder child of Horatio and Elizabeth ( née McGuire ) Wills . Tom was a third @-@ generation Australian of convict descent : his mother was born to convicts from Ireland , and his paternal grandfather was Edward Wills , an English highwayman whose death sentence was commuted to transportation , arriving in Botany Bay aboard the " hell ship " Hillsborough in 1799 . After receiving a conditional pardon in 1803 , Edward amassed immense wealth through mercantile activity in Sydney with his free wife Sarah ( née Harding ) . He died in 1811 , five months before Horatio 's birth , and Sarah remarried to convict George Howe , owner of Australia 's first newspaper , the Sydney Gazette . During his tenure as the newspaper 's editor , Horatio met Elizabeth , an orphan from Parramatta . They married in December 1833 . Seventeen months after his birth , Tom was baptised Thomas Wentworth Wills in the parish of St Andrew 's , Sydney , in honour of statesman William Charles Wentworth . Drawing on Wentworth 's pro @-@ Currency rhetoric and the <unk> cause , Horatio set forth a strident nationalist agenda in his journal The Currency Lad ( 1832 – 33 ) , the first publication to call for an Australian republic . 
 Horatio took up pastoral pursuits in the mid @-@ 1830s and moved with his family to the sheep run " Burra Burra " on the Molonglo River . Although athletic from an early age , Tom was prone to illness , and at one stage in 1839 his parents " almost despaired of his recovery " . In November 1840 , in light of Thomas Mitchell 's discovery of " Australia Felix " , they <unk> south to the Grampians in the colony 's Port Phillip District ( now the state of Victoria ) ; and , after establishing a run on Mount William , moved a few miles north through the foothills of Mount Ararat , named so by Horatio because " like the Ark , we rested there " . Horatio went through a period of intense religiosity while in the Grampians ; at times his diary descends into incantation , " perhaps even madness " . He implored himself and Tom to base their lives upon the New Testament . 
 Living under canvas , the Wills family settled on a large property named " Lexington " ( near present @-@ day <unk> ) in an area inhabited by Djab wurrung Aboriginal clans . Tom , as an only child , " was thrown much into the companionship of aborigines " . In an account of <unk> from childhood , his cousin H. C. A. Harrison remembered Tom 's ability to learn Aboriginal songs , mimic their voice and gestures , and " speak their language as fluently as they did themselves , much to their delight . " It is speculated that Tom may have also played Aboriginal sports . Horatio wrote fondly of his son 's kinship with Aborigines , and allowed local clans to live and hunt on Lexington . However , like many frontiersmen in the area , Horatio was implicated in deadly conflict with Aborigines , the occurrence of which he blamed on " distant predatory tribes " . 
 Tom 's first sibling , Emily , was born on Christmas Day 1842 . In 1846 Wills began attendance at William <unk> 's School in Melbourne . There he was looked after by Horatio 's brother Thomas ( Tom 's namesake ) , a Victorian separatist and son @-@ in @-@ law of the Wills family 's partner in the shipping trade , convict Mary Reibey . Tom played in his first cricket matches at school , and he came in contact with the Melbourne Cricket Club through <unk> , the club 's vice @-@ president . Wills returned to Lexington in 1849 where the family had grown to include siblings Cedric , Horace and Egbert . Mainly self @-@ educated , Horatio had ambitious plans for the education of his children , especially Tom : 
 I now deeply vainly deplore my want of a mathematical and classical education . Vain regret ! ... But my son ! May he prove worthy of my experience ! May I be spared for him — that he may be useful to his country — I never knew a father 's care . 
 = = England = = 
 = = = Rugby School = = = 
 Wills ' father sent him to England in February 1850 , aged fourteen , to attend Rugby School , the most prestigious school in the country . Horatio wanted Tom to study law and return to Australia as a " professional man of eminence " . He arrived in London after a five @-@ month sea voyage . There , during school holidays , he stayed with his paternal aunt Sarah , who moved from Sydney after the death of her first husband , convict William Redfern . 
 The reforms enacted by famed headmaster Thomas Arnold made Rugby the crucible of muscular Christianity , a " cult of athleticism " into which Wills was inculcated . Wills took up cricket within a week of entering Evans House . At first he bowled underhand , but it was considered outdated , so he tried roundarm bowling . He clean bowled a batsman with his first ball using this style and declared : " I felt I was a bowler . " Wills soon topped all of his house 's cricket statistics . At bat he was a " punisher " with a sound defence ; however , in an era when graceful stroke @-@ play was expected of a gentleman cricketer , he was deemed to have no style at all . In April 1852 , aged sixteen , Wills joined the Rugby School XI , and on his debut at Lord 's a few months later , against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) , he took a match @-@ high 12 wickets . That year he formed one half of a bowling attack that established Rugby as the greatest public school in English cricket . In a prelude to his colonial career , he was accused of throwing by critics in the national media . Rugby coach John Lillywhite , himself a key campaigner against throwing , defended his protégé . Wills survived the scandal . He won fame for his performances and played with the leading cricketers of the age , as well as royalty . William Clarke , his hero , invited him to join the touring All @-@ England Eleven , but he remained at Rugby . Then in 1855 he took over as Rugby XI captain , the most revered position within the school . 
 Rugby , like other English public schools , had evolved its own variant of football . The game in Wills ' era — a rough and highly defensive struggle involving hundreds of boys — was confined to a competition amongst the houses . Spanning the years he played , Wills is pivotal to any of the brief match reports in Bell 's Life in London . His creative play and " eel @-@ like agility " baffled the opposition , and his penchant for theatrics endeared him to the crowds . One journalist noted his use of " slimy tricks " , a possible early reference to his gamesmanship . As a " dodger " in the forward line , he was a long and accurate shot at goal and served as his house 's kicker . Wills also shone in the school 's annual athletics carnival and his long @-@ distance running ability in Hare and Hounds was unparalleled . 
 Wills cut a dashing figure with " impossibly wavy " hair and blue , almond @-@ shaped eyes that " [ burnt ] with a pale light " . By age 16 at 5 ' 8 " he was already taller than his father . In Lillywhite 's Guide a few years later he measured in at 5 ' 10 " and it was written that " few athletes can boast of a more muscular and well @-@ developed frame " . 
 Consumed by sport , Wills , to his father 's chagrin , showed little interest in academics . It was said that he " could not bring himself to study for professional work " after " having led a sort of nomadic life when a youth in Australia " . Suffering from homesickness , he decorated his study with objects to remind him of Lexington , including Aboriginal weapons . Horatio wrote to remind him of his childhood friends , the Djab wurrung : " They told me to send you up to them as soon as you came back . " 
 = = = Libertine cricketer = = = 
 Wills had built a reputation as " one of the most promising cricketers in the kingdom " . Held aloft as Rugby 's exemplar sportsman , his status as a cricketer came to define him . In June 1855 , nearing his 20th birthday , Wills finished his schooling . In a farewell note from his fellow students he was simply called " the school bowler " . 
 After leaving Rugby , and with a steady supply of money from his father , Wills wandered throughout Britain in pursuit of cricketing pleasure . He made first @-@ class appearances for the MCC , Kent , and various Gentlemen sides , and also fell in with the I Zingari — the " gypsy lords of English cricket " — an amateur club known for its exotic costumes and hedonistic lifestyle . Against Horatio 's wishes , Tom did not continue his studies at Cambridge , but did play cricket for the university 's team ( as well as Magdalene College ) , most notably when rules were passed over to allow him to compete against Oxford in the 1856 University Match , Cambridge being " one man short " . In June , Wills played cricket at Rugby School for the last time , representing the MCC alongside Lord Guernsey , the Earl of Winterton , and Charles du Cane , governor @-@ to @-@ be of Tasmania . Following a cricketing sojourn in Ireland , Wills , at the behest of Horatio , returned to England to prepare for his journey home . 
 The last eighteen months had exposed Wills to " the richest sporting experience on earth " . His six years in England charted a way of life — one of drinking , profligate spending and playing games — that he would continue to lead until his death . 
 = = Colonial hero = = 
 Wills returned to Australia aboard the Oneida steamship , arriving in Melbourne on 23 December 1856 . The minor port city of his youth had risen to world renown as the booming financial centre of the Victorian gold rush . Horatio , now a member of the Legislative Assembly in the Victorian Parliament , was living on " Belle Vue " , a farm at Point Henry near Geelong , the Wills ' family home since 1853 . In his first summer back in Melbourne , Wills stayed with his extended family , the Harrisons , at their home on Victoria Parade , and entered a Collins Street law firm to appease his father , but he seems never to have practiced ; the few comments he made about law suggest it meant little to him . " Tom was no dunce " , writes Greg de Moore . He was " negotiating a path to greatness . " 
 The Australian colonies were described as " cricket mad " in the 1850s , and Victorians , in particular , were said to live " in an atmosphere of cricket " . Intercolonial contests , first held in 1851 , provided an outlet for the at times intense rivalry between Victoria and New South Wales . With his reputation preceding him , Wills became the bearer of Victoria 's hopes of winning its first match against the elder colony . Victorian captain William Hammersley recalled the moment Wills first graced the Melbourne Cricket Ground ( MCG ) for a trial match , staged one week after his return : 
 ... the observed of all observers , with his Zingari stripe and somewhat flashy get up , fresh from Rugby and college , with the polish of the old country upon him . He was then a model of muscular Christianity . 
 Wills ' batting style amused the crowd , but he still top scored with 57 not out . In January , he travelled as part of the Victoria cricket team to Sydney to play against New South Wales on the Domain . Wills was the leading wicket @-@ taker with 10 victims . Bowling fast round @-@ arm , the Victorians regarded themselves as superior to their opponents , who used an " antiquated " underhand action . The latter style proved effective , giving New South Wales a 65 @-@ run win . Wills spent the rest of the season playing for numerous clubs , most notably the Melbourne Cricket Club ( MCC ) . 
 Parliament and business came to a standstill in Melbourne for the January 1858 intercolonial match between Victoria and New South Wales , held at the MCG . Captaining Victoria , Wills took 8 wickets , the most of his side , and on the second day , batting in the middle order , a ball hit an imperfection in the pitch and knocked him unconscious . He recovered , played on for two hours , and won the match at day 's end with a top score of 49 * . The crowd rushed the field and chaired Wills off in triumph , and victory celebrations lasted for several days throughout the colony . Now a household name and the darling of Melbourne 's elite , Wills was proclaimed " the greatest cricketer in the land " . 
 Although Wills enjoyed his lofty amateur status , he liked to socialise with and support working class professional cricketers — an egalitarian attitude that sometimes led to conflict with sporting officialdom but endeared him to the common man . Wills ' allegiance to professionals was highlighted by an incident in Tasmania in February 1858 when the Launceston Cricket Club shunned professional members of his touring Victorian side . Infuriated , he spoke out against being " forsaken " in a " strange land " . One week later , during a game in Hobart , Wills earned the locals ' ire as he " [ jumped ] about exultantly " after maiming a Tasmanian batsman with a spell of hostile fast bowling . 
 Wills was elected secretary of the MCC during the 1857 – 58 season . It was a role in which he proved to be chaotic and disorganised . MCC delegates took issue with Wills ' " continued non @-@ attendance " at meetings , and when the club fell into debt , his poor administrative skills were blamed . He acted on year @-@ long threats in mid @-@ 1858 and deserted the MCC , leaving its records and amenities in a mess ; to this day , the only minutes that cannot be found are from his secretaryship . A lasting tension existed between Wills and the MCC 's inner circle . According to Martin Flanagan , " It was a relationship which couldn 't last as Wills only knew one way — his own . " 
 = = Football pioneer = = 
 Wills was a compulsive writer to the press on cricketing matters and in the late 1850s his letters sometimes appeared on a daily basis . An agitator like his father , he used language " in the manner of a speaker declaiming forcefully from a platform " . On 10 July 1858 , the Melbourne @-@ based Bell 's Life in Victoria and Sporting Chronicle published a letter by Wills that is regarded as a catalyst for a new style of football , known today as Australian rules football . Titled " Winter Practice " , it begins : 
 Now that cricket has been put aside for some few months to come , and cricketers have assumed somewhat of the chrysalis nature ( for a time only ' tis true ) , but at length will again burst forth in all their varied hues , rather than allow this state of torpor to creep over them , and stifle their new supple limbs , why can they not , I say , form a foot @-@ ball club , and form a committee of three or more to draw up a code of laws ? 
 In endeavouring to bring his English sporting experience to Melbourne , Wills made the first public declaration of its kind in Australia : that football should be a regular and organised activity . He went on to help foster football in Melbourne 's schools . The local headmasters , his collaborators , were inspired in large part by Thomas Hughes ' novel Tom Brown 's School Days ( 1857 ) , an account of life at Rugby School under the headship of Thomas Arnold . Due to similarities between their sporting careers at Rugby , Wills has been called the " real @-@ life embodiment " of fictitious hero Tom Brown . 
 Wills ' letter was alluded to two weeks later in an advertisement posted by his friend , professional cricketer and publican Jerry Bryant , for a " scratch match " held adjacent to the MCG at the Richmond Paddock . It was the first of several <unk> held that year involving Wills , Bryant and other local cricketers . One participant called the affair " football Babel " ; a " short code of rules " were to be drawn up afterwards , however this does not seem to have occurred . Another landmark game , played without fixed rules over three consecutive Saturdays and co @-@ umpired by Wills and John Macadam , began on the same site on 7 August between forty Scotch College students and a like number from Melbourne Grammar . The two schools have since competed annually . Wills emerged as the standout figure in accounts of Melbourne football in 1858 . These early experimental games were more rugby @-@ like than anything else — low @-@ scoring , low @-@ to @-@ the @-@ ground " gladiatorial " tussles . The last recorded match of the year is the subject of the first known Australian football poem , published in Punch . Wills , the only player named , is <unk> as " the Melbourne chief " , leading his men to victory against a side from South Yarra . 
 Following a scratch match at the start of the 1859 football season , the Melbourne Football Club officially came into being on 14 May . Three days later , Wills and three other members — journalists Hammersley and J. B. Thompson and teacher Thomas H. Smith — met at Bryant 's Parade Hotel near the MCG to pen the club 's rules . Wills heads the list of signatories . The men went over the rules of four English schools ; Hammersley recalled Wills ' preference for the Rugby game , but it was found to be confusing and too violent . Subsequently , they rejected common features such as " hacking " ( shin @-@ kicking ) and devised a simple code of ten rules suited to grown men and Australian conditions . Wills , too , saw the need for compromise . He wrote to his brother Horace : " Rugby was not a game for us , we wanted a winter pastime but men could be harmed if thrown on the ground so we thought differently . " Thompson and Hammersley 's promotion of the new code , together with Wills ' star power , encouraged the spread of football throughout Victoria . 
 = = Height of celebrity = = 
 After falling out with the MCC , Wills moved freely about the colony , playing for any club of his choosing . He joined Richmond , serving as vice @-@ president and raising the standard of its play to make it the premier Victorian club . His presence greatly distorted the outcome of and betting on games , and his lack of loyalty to any one club was regarded with contempt by the MCC . 
 Victoria reappointed Wills as captain for the January 1859 intercolonial match against New South Wales , held at the Domain . On the first day he broke his right middle finger while attempting a catch . Undeterred , he top scored in the first innings with 15 * and took 5 / 24 and 6 / 25 , carrying Victoria to an upset win . He resigned from the intercolonial match committee in protest after Thompson assailed him for not turning up to practice ahead of the next match against New South Wales . During a follow @-@ up practice game , players struggled in the day 's heat , and ignoring calls to retire , Wills suffered from a near @-@ fatal sunstroke . Hammersley wrote that Wills felt obliged to perform for the large crowd that had gathered to watch him . Over 25 @,@ 000 people attended the MCG in February 1860 to watch Victoria , captained by Wills , play New South Wales . Wills bowled unchanged in both innings , taking 6 / 23 and 3 / 16 , and top scored with 20 * . Victoria won by 69 runs . The Melbourne media gave Wills the sobriquet " Great Gun of the Colony " . The Victorian Cricketers ' Guide called him the ideal all @-@ rounder . The Sydney press , championing Wills as a native New South Welshman , agreed : 
 Tall , muscular , and slender , Mr. Wills seems moulded by nature to excel in every branch of the noble game , ... on the field we find him the admiration of the ground , while in the combination of his successes , [ his teammates ] recognise with pride the still more arduous duties of an unwearied and most discreet captain . 
 Wills remained an influential figure in Australian football from 1859 to 1860 . While he fought for the adoption of many Rugby School customs — such as a free kick for marking , the use of an oval @-@ shaped ball , and ( unsuccessfully ) a crossbar — he improvised on the field and devised innovative tactics and strategies , pushing the game in new directions . His exploitation of the code 's lack of an offside law in 1860 has been cited as the point at which " the full potential of the sport started to be realised " . 
 At Wills ' invitation , his cousin Harrison joined the footballing scene in 1859 , quickly becoming a leading player and captain . He looked up to Wills , terming him " the beau @-@ ideal of an athlete " — high praise given that Harrison was the champion runner of Victoria . Their presence in Geelong fuelled a local craze for football and ensured the Geelong Football Club 's supremacy in the early 1860s . In an era when players moved freely amongst clubs , Wills still represented Melbourne , and was the first captain and secretary of the Richmond Football Club ( no connection with the AFL club ) in 1860 . The code underwent revisions around this time , principally in response to the on @-@ field actions of dominant players . " And there were none more dominant than Wills and Harrison " , writes James Coventry . 
 = = Queensland = = 
 With plans underway for the first tour of Australia by an English cricket team , Wills announced his retirement from sport . At the beckoning of his father , Wills agreed to leave Victoria to found a new family property , Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo , on the Nogoa River in outback Queensland . He prepared for six months in country Victoria where learnt the crafts of a squatter . In his will , Horatio — showing a " deep understanding " of Tom 's personality — wrote that his son would be removed from the station and receive a diminished inheritance in the event of " <unk> himself " as manager . 
 In January 1861 , Tom , Horatio and a party of employees and their families travelled by steamer to Brisbane , disembarked in Moreton Bay , and then , with livestock and supplies , set out on an eight @-@ month trek through Queensland 's rugged interior . Food was scarce and Tom hunted native game to fend off starvation . They suffered many other hardships and even death when , in Toowoomba , one of Horatio 's men drowned . On the Darling Downs over 10 @,@ 000 sheep were collected . The size of the Wills party attracted the attention of local Aborigines , and the two groups engaged in games of mimicry . Wary of entering the region 's frontier war , Horatio maintained a conciliatory attitude to the Aborigines . The party reached Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo , situated on Kairi Aboriginal land , in early October , and proceeded to set up camp . 
 = = = Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo massacre = = = 
 On the afternoon of 17 October , two weeks after their arrival , Horatio and eighteen of his party were murdered in the deadliest massacre of settlers by Aborigines in Australian history . Tom was away from the property at the time , having been sent with two stockmen to collect supplies left en route to Cullin @-@ la @-@ Ringo . He returned several days later to a scene of devastation . Despairing and in shock , Wills immediately wrote to H. C. A. Harrison in Melbourne : " ... all our party except I have been slaughtered by the black 's on the 17th . I am in a great fix no men . " Police , native police and vigilante groups from neighbouring stations swiftly tracked down and killed at least 70 local Aborigines ; the total may have been 300 . Wills took refuge near Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo , and though he desired to avenge his father 's death , there is no evidence that he joined the reprisal raids . 
 Conflicting reports reached the outside world and for a time it was feared that Tom had died . In the press , Horatio was accused of ignoring warnings and allowing Aborigines to encroach on his property . The retribution was also called excessive . Tom vehemently defended his father against any perceived criticism . Privately , in his first letter to Harrison , he admitted , " if we had used common precaution all would have been well " . It was later revealed that , prior to leaving the camp , Tom advised Horatio to be watchful of the local Aborigines , but according to Hammersley , " the old man prided himself on being able to manage the blacks ... and said they would never harm him . " The Queensland press , still in the wake of the massacre , suggested that Wills , " now a Queenslander " , be approached to captain the colony 's cricket team . 
 Different reasons were put forward at the time to account for the Wills tragedy . For many colonists , it confirmed the popular belief that Aborigines were bloodthirsty savages . Tom never articulated his version of events in writing , but Cedric Wills wrote years later that it was an act of revenge for an attack made on local Aborigines by squatter Jesse Gregson . He quoted Tom as saying , " If the truth is ever known , you will find that it was through Gregson shooting those blacks ; that was the cause of the murder . " 
 In the years following the massacre , Wills experienced flashbacks , nightmares and an irritable heart — features of what is now known as post @-@ traumatic stress disorder . Having immersed himself in the drinking culture of colonial sport , he increased his alcohol consumption in a likely attempt to blot out memories and alleviate sleep disturbance . Wills ' sister Emily wrote of him two months after the massacre : " He says he never felt so changed in the whole course of his life " . 
 = = = Riot and expulsion = = = 
 Wills vowed to stay on Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo and fulfill his father 's agrarian dream — words that , according to de Moore , " enshrined and imprisoned " Tom as the new head of the family . <unk> , he slept only three hours a night with a rifle beside his bed and watched for signs of another attack . He began to rebuild the station pending the arrival of his uncle , William Roope , who took control of Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo in December 1861 , but soon left as a result of Wills acting " exceedingly ill " to him . Wills struggled to cope with the harsh conditions and isolation of the outback . He went blind for weeks after contracting " sandy blight " . 
 He went to Sydney in January 1863 to captain Victoria against New South Wales on the Domain . The match turned into a riot when the crowd invaded the field during a dispute over the Victorian umpire 's impartiality . Wills , leading his men from the Domain , was struck in the face by a stone , and professionals George Marshall and William Greaves fled the city , reducing the Victorian side to nine players . Wills took eight wickets and top scored in both innings ( 25 * and 17 * ) , but Victoria lost by 84 runs . The Melbourne media castigated Wills for allowing the game to continue and called him a traitor when evidence surfaced that he agreed to play for New South Wales in the weeks prior to the match . He denied all accusations and wrote in an angry letter to The Sydney Morning Herald : " I for one do not think that Victoria will ever send an Eleven up here again . " Back in Victoria , he became engaged to Julie Anderson , a farmer 's daughter from Skipton and friend of the Wills family . Her name does not appear in any of Wills ' surviving letters ; he rarely mentioned the women he courted , let alone his feelings towards them . Wills stayed in Geelong for the start of the 1863 football season , breaking his promise of an early return to Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo , much to the dismay of his mother and the holding 's trustees . 
 Wills finally returned to Queensland in May and was sworn in as a Justice of the Peace upon arrival in Brisbane . Over the next few months , he reported at least three murders of local settlers by Aborigines , including that of a shepherd on Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo . He accosted government officials over the lack of protection against Aboriginal attacks and scorned " Brisbane saints " for sympathising with the plight of Aborigines in the Nogoa region . With the cricket season approaching , Wills agreed to captain Queensland against New South Wales , and then left the station to lead a Victoria XXII at the MCG against George Parr 's All @-@ England Eleven . In awe of his cross @-@ continental dash to play cricket , the English thought it a madman 's journey . Wills arrived on the final day of the match to a thunderous reception , and joined the visitors on their Victorian tour . 
 During the 1863 – 64 season , Wills ' engagement to Anderson broke off , possibly due to his womanising , and it was revealed that he had been squandering family finances on alcohol while claiming it as station expenditure . The trustees demanded that he stay in Victoria to answer for the property 's runaway debt . In response , Wills joined Parr 's XI on a month @-@ long tour New Zealand . He captained local teams against the English and filled the same role for Victoria at the tour 's end in Melbourne . He faced the trustees soon after . His mother struggled to condemn him but ultimately approved his dismissal from Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo , thus fulfilling the premonition in Horatio 's will . 
 = = Return to Victoria = = 
 Wills stayed at the family home in Geelong . Always a black sheep of sorts , he now became increasingly estranged from his mother and sister Emily . Family letters from mid @-@ 1864 reveal that Wills had a " wife " — a " bad woman " according to Emily . It is likely a reference to the already @-@ married Sarah Barbor ( née Duff ) . Born in Dublin , she is a mysterious figure , but is known to have remained Wills ' lifelong partner . The de facto nature of their relationship , and even Barbor 's existence , were probably kept secret from Wills ' mother for a number of years . 
 Throughout the 1865 football season , Wills played for and often captained Melbourne and Geelong , two of the game 's most powerful clubs . At the end of a winter beset with public brawls over which team " owned " him , Wills moved to Geelong for the remainder of his career , prompting Bell 's Life in Victoria to report that Melbourne had lost " the finest leader of men on the football field " . The following year , when the running bounce and other rules were formalised at a meeting of club delegates under Harrison 's chairmanship , Wills was not present ; his move to Geelong had rendered him peripheral to the process of rule @-@ making in Melbourne . 
 <unk> between Victoria and New South Wales resumed at the MCG on Boxing Day 1865 , nearly three years since the Sydney riot . Sam <unk> , William <unk> and other Victorian professionals defected to the rival colony due to pay disputes with the MCC . Wills , leading the weakened Victorian side to an against @-@ the @-@ odds win , took 6 wickets and contributed 58 — the first half century in Australian first @-@ class cricket — to 285 , a record intercolonial total . Cheating allegations against Wills failed to endanger his status as a folk hero and " a source of eternal hope " for Victoria . 
 = = Aboriginal cricket team = = 
 In May 1866 , the MCC 's minute book featured an unusual request : Roland Newbury , the club 's pavilion keeper , wanted " use of the ground for two days ... for purpose of a match with the native black eleven " . It was the first intimation of a cricket match between the MCC and an Aboriginal team from Victoria 's Western District . The motive behind the match , scheduled for late December , was a financial one , and in August , Wills agreed to coach the Aborigines . Wills ' reasons for accepting the role remain a mystery , but his need for money was likely a factor . This was to mark the beginning of his transition from amateur to professional sportsman . 
 Wills travelled inland in November to <unk> and Harrow to convene the players from local pastoral properties , where they worked as station hands . One of their employers , William Hayman , acted as the team 's manager and " protector " . They were mostly Jardwadjali men who shared common vocabulary with the neighbouring Djab wurrung people , which enabled Wills to use the Aboriginal language he learnt as a child . From their training ground at Lake Wallace , Wills , in a " tactical strike " , boasted to the Melbourne press of the Aborigines ' powers , especially the batsmanship of Mullagh , spurring an anxious MCC to strengthen its ranks with players from outside the club . Public sympathy was with the Aborigines when they arrived in Melbourne and over 10 @,@ 000 spectators attended the MCG on Boxing Day to witness the match . Wills captained the team in a losing struggle and afterwards spoke defiantly against the MCC 's " treachery " . 
 It is unknown what Wills and the Aborigines made of the broader social and political dimensions of the enterprise . Some of Wills ' contemporaries were shocked that he would associate with Aborigines in the shadow of his father 's death . Others , such as this writer in The Empire , called him a hero : 
 Although you may not be fully aware of the fact , allow me to tell you that you have rendered a greater service to the aboriginal races of this country and to humanity , than any man who has hitherto attempted to uphold the title of the blacks to rank amongst men . 
 While <unk> were enthralled by the Aborigines , the annual intercolonial contest between Victoria and New South Wales — usually the highlight of the season — failed to excite public interest , and Victoria 's loss in Sydney was put down to Wills ' absence . The Aboriginal team embarked on a tour of Victoria , improving as it went . After an easy win in Geelong , Wills , without warning his mother , took the players to meet her at " Belle Vue " . Back in Melbourne in mid @-@ January , two of the Aborigines , <unk> and <unk> , joined Wills in representing Victoria against a Tasmanian XVI . The team 's successes provoked a public discourse over past mistreatment of Aboriginal people and future relations between the races . As the only white member , Wills ' role took on a symbolic significance . His status as a ' native ' ( a native @-@ born Australian ) blurred the distinction between him and his ' native ' teammates , and he was also noted for speaking in " their own lingo " . The " team jester " <unk> teased Wills : " He too much along of us . He speak nothing now but <unk> talk . " 
 They went to Sydney in February to begin a planned tour of the colonies and overseas . Aware of the tour 's lucrative potential , Englishman Charles Lawrence , captain of New South Wales , invited the team to stay at his hotel on Manly Beach . The first match against his club at the Albert Ground in Redfern came to a dramatic halt when Wills was arrested and briefly gaoled for a breach of contract . He and W. E. B. <unk> , the tour 's promoter , had been competing to take over as manager . <unk> , a con artist , left the team stranded and broke , dashing any hope of a trip abroad . Lawrence set up a " benefit " match , and by the end of the tour 's New South Wales leg , had worked his way into the team to usurp Wills as captain . No longer feted by the media , they returned to Victoria in May , and Wills was playing football within two weeks of reaching Geelong . It has been said that he exercised a " bad influence " upon the Aborigines with his drinking habit . Four players died over the course of the tour ; at least one death , that of Watty , was officially linked to alcohol . 
 The surviving members formed part of the Aboriginal team which Lawrence took to England in 1868 , ten years before the first Australian XI classed as representative went overseas . Wills resented Lawrence for reviving the team without him ; his exclusion has been called the tragedy of his sporting career . 
 = = <unk> professional = = 
 Without career prospects outside of sport , Wills joined the MCC as a professional at the start of the 1867 – 68 season ; however , he wasn 't openly referred to as such . Instead , the club devised the title of ' tutor ' in order that he maintain the prestige of his amateur background . 
 Played on the MCG , the December 1867 intercolonial between Victoria and New South Wales ended in a sound victory for the former , principally due to Wills ' nine @-@ wicket haul and Richard Wardill 's century . Wills had been Victoria 's preferred captain for over a decade . Writing in his sports column , Hammersley claimed that , as a paid cricketer , Wills lacked " moral ascendancy " over amateurs . When he lost the captaincy to Wardill , an amateur , on the eve of the March 1869 match against New South Wales , he refused to play under him , or , indeed , anyone else . The Victorians condemned Wills and resolved to go on without him , after which he retracted his decision not to play . This was the last intercolonial played on the Domain and Victoria recovered from Wardill 's diamond duck to win by 78 runs . Wills scalped 7 wickets in a single innings . 
 Wills announced in early 1869 that he would not play for Victoria again , even if the colony wanted him . He planned to leave for Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo , but his mother , still " very dissatisfied " with him , requested that he stay away from the property . The MCC took him back and he continued to act as a tutor with the club . Members of the recently returned Aboriginal XI , Mullagh and <unk> , joined him as paid bowlers . Barred from having Wills in matches against the MCC , Geelong was allowed to field an extra five men to make up for his loss . 
 Wills ' appearance had deteriorated ; gaining weight , balding and generally unkempt , with " an alcoholic blush of his cheeks " , he looked older than his years . Describing his body as " stiff " during a cricket match in 1870 , he hinted , for the first time , that his talent was fading . 
 = = No @-@ ball plot and downfall = = 
 For Mr. Wills to no @-@ ball Mr. Wardill for throwing is like Satan reproving sin . 
 Hardly a year had passed since Wills ' return to Australia in 1856 without public comment on his suspect bowling action . Australia 's most famous and outspoken bowler to be accused of throwing , Wills became a " convenient caricature " upon which to cast blame for cheating in cricket . His amateur status had protected him , as had the collusion between newspapers , spectators and clubs when he was a certain match @-@ winner , but as his skills faded with age , the campaign against his throwing gathered strength . 
 In February 1870 , Wills captained Victoria to a 265 @-@ run win over New South Wales at the MCG . The match featured Twopenny , an Aboriginal paceman who was said to have been recruited by opposing captain Lawrence as a foil to Wills ' " chucks " . Comparing the two , the Melbourne press surmised : " Undoubtedly Wills throws sometimes , but there is some decency about it , some disguise . " In March , Victoria trounced a Tasmanian XVI in Launceston under Wills ' leadership , though not without criticism of his bowling action . The accusations of Wills ' throwing were growing louder , and one @-@ time ally Hammersley emerged as his most severe critic . In the face of a looming crisis in his career , Wills openly admitted to throwing in his 1870 – 71 Australian Cricketers ' Guide , and in so doing taunted his enemies to stop him . 
 A villainous Wills was held as inciting a plague of throwing and corrupting younger bowlers . Throwing allowed him to increase pace , and he was criticised for introducing a style of fast bowling designed to injure and intimidate batsmen . Nonetheless , the Victorian team reappointed him as captain for the March 1871 intercolonial match against New South Wales , held at the Albert Ground in Sydney . Wills ' first innings top score of 39 * was offset by his drunkenness on the field and a reluctance to bowl for fear of being called . Victoria won by 48 runs . Not long after , Wills was no @-@ balled for throwing for the first time in a club match . Rumour spread that it was the result of a conspiracy against him . 
 A series of superb club cricket performances removed any doubt that Wills would play for Victoria in the next intercolonial against New South Wales , scheduled for March 1872 on the MCG . Before the game , representatives from both colonies met and signed a bilateral agreement designed to call Wills . When he opened the bowling , Wills became the first cricketer to be called for throwing in a major Australian match . Two more balls were ruled as throws in two overs , and Wills did not bowl again . He was again no @-@ balled when a Victorian side under his captaincy played and lost to a combined XIII from New South Wales , Tasmania and South Australia late in 1872 . 
 Hammersley had seemingly succeeded in his campaign to see Wills banished from intercolonial cricket . In an exchange of personal attacks in the press , Wills implied that Hammersley was an architect of the no @-@ ball plot , and protested that he and other English colonists were out to oppress native @-@ born Australians . Hammersley closed : 
 You are played out now , the cricketing machine is rusty and useless , all respect for it is gone . You will never be captain of a Victorian Eleven again , ... <unk> colonial beer , and take the pledge , and in time your failings may be forgotten , and only your talents as a cricketer remembered . Farewell , Tommy Wills . 
 = = Grace and comeback attempt = = 
 W. G. Grace , the Victorian era 's most famous cricketer , brought an English team to Australia in 1873 – 74 . Wills was desperate to play for Victoria against Grace and rival cricketing factions fought over his possible inclusion . Hammersley , a selector , ensured his omission . Wills toured with the team , playing for country sides . <unk> by Wills ' constant presence , Grace remarked that he seemed to regard himself as a representative of the whole of Australia . It was assumed that , on his homeward journey , Grace would play a final match in the South Australian capital of Adelaide , but he bypassed the city when Kadina , a remote mining town in the Copper Triangle , offered him more money . Wills coached the locals . Played in an open , rock @-@ strewn plain of baked earth , the game was deemed a farce . Wills made a pair and Grace later wrote derisively of the " old Rugbeian " as a has @-@ been . Grace neglected to mention that Wills bowled him , ending with 6 / 28 . 
 In Geelong , Wills was still idolised , though he seemed discontented , seeking any chance to earn money through cricket in the major cities . He maintained an interest in the development of football , what he called " the king of games " . He continued to suggest rule changes , such as the push in the back rule to curb injuries , and , as captain of Geelong , had shaped the sport 's playing style . Utilising the young squad 's speed and skill , Wills devised a revolutionary game plan — what he called " scientific football " — based on passing and running into open space . He pioneered another tactical manoeuvre in Ballarat by ordering his players to flood the backline to prevent the home side from scoring . Having <unk> the crowd , he and his men wasted time and deliberately kicking the ball out of bounds , inflaming the situation . A few years later , in a rare act of diplomacy , Wills quelled tensions after a rival club used his " <unk> tactics " against Geelong . He played his last football game in 1874 . 
 In his 1874 – 75 Australian Cricketers ' Guide , Wills argued that the ailing Victoria XI needed a new captain . " No one reading his words could mistake its intent — what Victoria needed was Tom Wills " , writes de Moore . For the first time since his demise , selectors considered Wills for the next intercolonial against New South Wales . Noting his faded skills and tendency to throw , the Melbourne press lamented , " there is some sentimental notion afloat that as a captain he is peerless . " <unk> gave way to hope as Wills promised a victory , and in February 1876 he led the Victorians onto the Albert Ground . He went for 0 and 4 and failed to pick up a wicket despite keeping himself on longer than any other Victorian bowler . He was blamed for Victoria 's 195 @-@ run loss . In turn , he laid the blame on his team @-@ mates . 
 By 1877 , Wills ' cricket career " had become a series of petty disputes in petty games " of " ever @-@ deteriorating standards . " In a brief postscript to one of several rejected applications for employment at the MCC , Wills gave voice to professionals " left in the cold " . It has been interpreted as " an unmistakable <unk> for the club . To see Wills simply as a beggar would be to misunderstand him . " 
 = = Final years = = 
 Following his retirement as a footballer , Wills turned to umpiring and committee work , and despite his continued slide into debt , donated money and trophies for football competitions . He served as Geelong 's vice @-@ president from 1873 to 1876 , and was one of three delegates appointed by the club after the 1877 formation of the Victorian Football Association ( VFA ) , but was dropped soon after for unknown reasons . During the 1878 VFA season , he acted as central umpire , and defended his adjudication of a June match between Carlton and Albert Park in what would be his last public letter . That year , Wills , broke and hounded by creditors , began selling his land in Geelong to help clear his debt , and moved with Sarah Barbor to South Melbourne . 
 Wills held no positions of power at the South Melbourne Cricket Club and only occasionally appeared in local team lists . He convinced the club to open its ground to football in winter . Other clubs followed , and football adapted to an oval @-@ shaped field . By now , the sport had spread throughout Australasia , and Melbourne matches were attracting the world 's largest football crowds yet seen . In late 1878 , the MCC rejected his last overture to the club , and his dwindling income from cricket was " finally asphyxiated " . 
 From February 1879 onwards , Wills lived with his de facto in Heidelberg , a small village on the outskirts of Melbourne . He rarely left it for the remainder of his life . His alcoholism worsened , as did Sarah 's , also a heavy drinker . He coached the local cricket team , and , on 13 March 1880 , played for the side in his last recorded game . His " chucks " were still noted . In his last surviving letters , sent two days later to his brothers on Cullin @-@ la @-@ ringo , he wrote of Heidelberg as a place of exile — " I 'm out of the world here " — and fantasised about escaping to Tasmania . Begging for money to help pay off debts , he promised , " I will not trouble any of you again " . 
 = = = Suicide = = = 
 Isolated and disowned by most of his family , Wills had become , in the words of cricket historian David Frith , " a complete and dangerous and apparently incurable alcoholic " . Contrary to legend , Wills was never incarcerated in a lunatic asylum . He started to show signs of delirium tremens in late April , including paranoid delusions , and Sarah , fearing that a calamity was at hand , admitted him to the Melbourne Hospital on 1 May to be kept under restraint . Wills absconded soon after , returned home and the next day committed suicide by stabbing a pair of scissors into his heart three times . The inquest , on 3 May , presided over by coroner Richard <unk> , found that Wills " killed himself when of unsound mind from excessive drinking " . Wills was buried the next day in an unmarked grave in Heidelberg Cemetery at a private funeral attended by only six people : his brother Egbert , sister Emily and cousin Harrison ; Harrison 's sister Adela and her son Amos ; and cricketer Verney Cameron . His death certificate declared that his parents were unknown . When asked by a journalist about her late son , Elizabeth Wills is reported to have denied that Tom ever existed . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Wills struck his contemporaries as peculiar and at times narcissistic , with a prickly temperament , but also kind , charismatic and companionable . Often embroiled in controversy , he seemed to lack an understanding of how his words and actions could repeatedly get him into trouble . His obsession with sport was such that he showed little interest in anything else . Through his research , journalist Martin Flanagan concluded that Wills was " utterly bereft of insight into himself " , and football historian Gillian Hibbins described Wills as " an overbearing and undisciplined young man who tended to blame others for his troubles and was more interested in winning a game than in respecting sporting rules . " Wills ' family and peers , though angered by his misbehaviour , frequently forgave him . It is unlikely that he sought popular favour , but his strong egalitarian streak helped solidify his folk hero status . This affection for him , coupled with an understanding of his waywardness , found expression in the public motto : " With all thy faults I love thee still , Tommy Wills " . 
 As a young adult back in Australia , Wills developed a peculiar stream of consciousness style of writing that sometimes defied syntax and grammar . His letters are laced with puns , oblique classical and Shakespearean allusions , and droll asides , such as this one about Melbourne in a letter to his brother Cedric : " Everything is dull here , but people are kept alive by people getting shot at in the streets " . The overall effect is one of " a mind full of energy and histrionic ideas without a centre " . 
 He could be dismissive , triumphant and brazen all within a single sentence . Whatever his inner world was , he rarely let it be known . Lines of argument or considered opinion were not developed . His stream of thought was in rapid flux and a string of defiant jabs . To give emphasis he underlined his words with a flourish . His punctuation was idiosyncratic . Language was breathless and explosive and he revelled in presenting himself and his motives as mysterious . 
 Unlike his provocative written language , Wills spoke in a breezy and laconic manner . In one of his borderline " thought disordered " letters , it is evident that at times he entered a state of <unk> : " I do not know what I am standing on ... when anyone speaks to me I cannot for the life of me make out what they are talking about — everything seems so curious . " In 1884 , Hammersley compared Wills ' incipient madness and fiery glare to that of Adam Lindsay Gordon , the Australian bush poet . Wills ' mental instability is a source for speculation : epilepsy has been suggested as a possible cause of his perplexed mental state , and a variant of bipolar illness may account for his disjointed thinking and flowery , confused writings . 
 In 1923 , the MCC discovered Tom 's old cricket cap and put it on display in the Block Arcade , prompting Horace Wills to reflect : " My brother was the nicest man I ever met . Though his nature was care @-@ free , amounting almost to wildness , he had the sweetest temper I have seen in a man , and was essentially a sportsman . " 
 = = Playing style and captaincy = = 
 <unk> ' athletes seem to be anointed every day ; far rarer are those entitled to be considered ' original ' . Tom Wills is such a figure in every respect . 
 Wills was the greatest Australian all @-@ round cricketer of his era and " almost , if not quite , equal " to the best all @-@ rounders of early Test cricket . " The picture of the athlete " in his prime , " full to overflowing with animal vigor " , Wills seemed indestructible . Intensely competitive , Wills ' win @-@ at @-@ all @-@ costs mentality , his intimidation of opponents , and his bending and breaking of rules undermined the amateur ideal of friendly competition . A natural born leader , he emboldened the less gifted on his team with his supreme confidence . Even in the face of imminent defeat , he never appeared to despair the fortunes of his side . On the off @-@ chance that he sought another player 's opinion , he invariably followed his own mind , and his resources at any critical juncture in a match were said to be always clever , and sometimes unique . " As a judge of the game he never had a superior " , wrote Britain 's The Sportsman . The rarity of Wills ' genius was compared to William Shakespeare 's . 
 As a bowler , Wills varied his pace and style considerably , and was quick to work out a batsman 's weak points . He had in his repertoire " sparklers , <unk> , <unk> , trimmers and shooters . " Noted for his deceptive slow deliveries , dropping mid @-@ flight and big on break , Wills ' fast round arm balls sometimes reared head @-@ high from the pitch , terrorising his opponent . English batsman Sir David Serjeant said that Wills was the only bowler he ever feared . Wills was a " peculiarly ugly " batsman with a dogged defence and a capacity for explosive hitting . His characteristic shots — cuts and to the leg side — ensured the primacy of defence . He explained his stonewalling thus : " The ball can 't get through the bat . " An outstanding fieldsman anywhere , Wills excelled in the slips and ran out batsmen with deadly accurate throwing . 
 Wills was a " tear away " Australian rules footballer whose " pluck and skill " , it was said , only George O <unk> matched . As at Rugby , he won praise as an elusive dodger and unrivalled drop kick , and excelled in different positions , moving from a follower and goal @-@ scorer in the ruck to full back . Of the early footballers , Wills was appraised as the greatest , most astute captain , and is credited with opening up the game to new tactics and skills and a more free @-@ flowing style of play . In July 1860 — in what the press called a " coup de main " , and what has since been recognised as a " tactical leap " that foreshadowed modern football — Wills breached the era 's notional offside line by positioning his Richmond men down the field from defence to attack , who , by a series of short kick passes towards goal , succeeded in scoring . That same month , captaining Melbourne to victory , he pioneered a rudimentary form of flooding ; and in another win for the club , exploited the low player turnout by instructing his men to dart with the ball in open spaces . Historian Bernard Whimpress called Wills an innovator who " would fit easily into today 's game " . Historian Geoffrey Blainey writes : " How many of the tricks and stratagems of the early years came from this clever tactician we will never know . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Australia 's first celebrity sportsman , Wills began to fade from public consciousness within his own lifetime . His dark reputation and suicide , and his links to <unk> and frontier violence — sources of cultural cringe — have been posited as reasons for his descent into obscurity . Academic Barry Judd called him " a ghost inhabiting the margins of written history " . Coinciding with a revival of interest in Australia 's colonial past , Wills has risen " almost to a vogue " , and is seen as a forerunner of today 's self @-@ destructive star athletes , some of those qualities that alienated his peers " being less shocking to a generation that likes its heroes flawed " . The subject of works in the arts , his story has been likened to Ned Kelly 's as an epic and quintessentially Australian narrative . After several attempts by different authors since the 1930s , a definitive biography was published in 2008 , Greg de Moore 's Tom Wills : First Wild Man of Australian Sport . 
 Wills ' unmarked gravesite was restored in 1980 with a headstone erected by the MCC and by public subscription . He was inducted into the Sport Australia Hall of Fame in 1989 and was made an inaugural member of the Australian Football Hall of Fame in 1996 . The Tom Wills Room in the MCG 's Great Southern Stand serves as a venue for corporate functions . A statue outside the MCG , sculpted by Louis <unk> and erected in 2001 , depicts Wills umpiring the famous 1858 football match between Melbourne Grammar and Scotch College . The AFL commemorated the 150th anniversary of the match by staging the Tom Wills Round during the 2008 AFL Season . The two schools played in a curtain raiser at the MCG ahead of the round opener between Melbourne and Geelong . That same year , Victoria 's busiest freeway interchange , the Monash – <unk> interchange in Dandenong North , was named the Tom Wills Interchange . Tom Wills Oval , inaugurated in 2013 at Sydney Olympic Park , serves as the training base for the Greater Western Sydney Giants of the AFL . 
 = = = Marngrook theory = = = 
 Since the 1980s , it has been suggested that Wills played or observed an Aboriginal football game , Marngrook , as a child growing up in the Grampians among the Djab wurrung , and incorporated features of this game into early Australian football . The theory has provoked intense debate , amounting to a controversy dubbed " football 's history wars " . In her essay " A Seductive Myth " , published in the AFL 's The Australian Game of Football Since 1858 ( 2008 ) , Hibbins calls the proposed link an " emotional belief " lacking " any intellectual credibility " . She points out that neither Wills nor any of his fellow football founders mention Aboriginal games in existing documents , and states that there is no evidence of Marngrook being played in the vicinity where Wills grew up . Since then , among the personal papers of ethnographer Alfred William Howitt , an interview has been found with a <unk> man who recalls playing Marngrook in the Grampians . Also , in his first @-@ hand account of Aboriginal games , James Dawson , an Aboriginal rights activist , records the Djab wurrung word for football as " Min <unk> " . De Moore therefore argues that Marngrook was likely played around where Wills lived as a boy , " or , at the very least , that the local Aboriginal people knew of such a game " . That Wills knew of Marngrook , he adds , is speculative at best . 
 Proponents of a link point to similarities between the two games , such as drop punting the ball into the air and leaping , catching feats . Jenny Hocking and Nell Reidy write that Wills , in adapting football to Melbourne 's parklands , wanted a game that kept the players off the ground and the ball in the air . " It is here " , they argue , " in the interstices between rugby and Australian football , that the influence of [ Marngrook ] can be seen most clearly " . Others have countered that until the 1870s , Australian football was aligned with rugby @-@ style roots , and bore little resemblance to Marngrook . According to de Moore , Wills was " almost solely influenced " by Rugby School football , with local conditions also having an effect . 
 Flanagan promoted the Marngrook theory in his novel The Call ( 1996 ) , a fictionalised account of Wills ' life , and argued in an essay addressed to Wills that he must have known Aboriginal games as it was in his nature to play : " There 's two things about you everybody seems to have agreed on — you 'd drink with anyone and you 'd play with anyone . " He quotes Lawton Wills Cooke , a Wills family descendent , who said there was a story in the family 's oral history about Tom playing Marngrook as a boy . This claim was disputed by family historian T. S. Wills Cooke . Despite the contentious nature of the Wills @-@ Marngrook tradition , it has become part of football folklore , and in <unk> , the self @-@ proclaimed " Birthplace of Australian Football " , stands a monument commemorating Wills ' upbringing in the area playing Marngrook . 
 = = = Father of football ? = = = 
 The role of Wills and others in pioneering Australian football went largely unrecognised in their lifetimes as the sport had yet to develop a historical perspective . By 1908 , the year of football 's jubilee celebrations , Wills ' cousin Harrison was proclaimed " the father of football " for his reputation as a player , rule @-@ maker and administrator . Wills was the next most often recalled pioneer during this period , and it was Harrison who said that his cousin initiated the sport when he " recommended that we Australians should work out a game of our own . " 
 It has been said that , due to his suicide , Wills was written out of the game 's history , or at the very least downplayed as a significant figure . One sportswriter opined in the 1980s that Wills had " received very little credit due to him in originating the game ... somehow he is forgotten today . " More recent <unk> has elevated Wills to a position of pre @-@ eminence . Hibbins questions the significance of Wills ' off @-@ field contributions , such as his 1858 letter . Echoing Hibbins ' arguments , Roy Hay writes that Wills , while the sport 's " catalyst " , was " much more interested in playing and performing than in organising . " British historian Tony Collins even compared Wills to William Webb Ellis and Abner Doubleday , the apocryphal inventors of rugby and baseball respectively . In response to Collins ' suggestion that Wills " quickly faded from the footballing scene " , ABC journalist James Coventry drew attention to his seventeen @-@ year playing career ( by far the longest of the pioneers ) , the influence he wielded as captain of various clubs for much of that time , and his administrative work . He concludes that Collins and other scholars have " perversely " devalued Wills ' real contributions " in their rush to discredit [ the Marngrook theory ] " . Blainey said of Wills : " It is far too much to say that he founded the game , but it would be too little to say that he was simply one among many founders . " 
 = Hurricane Gladys ( 1964 ) = 
 Hurricane Gladys was a tropical cyclone that caused minor impact along the East Coast of the United States and in Bermuda and Atlantic Canada . The ninth named storm and fifth hurricane of the 1964 Atlantic hurricane season , Gladys developed from a tropical wave located east of the Lesser Antilles on September 13 . Shortly thereafter , it strengthened into a tropical storm . On September 14 , Gladys abruptly intensified into a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . However , early on the following day , Gladys weakened slightly to a Category 1 hurricane . Between late on September 16 and late on September 17 , the storm rapidly strengthened , peaking as a 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane on the latter . Gladys began weakening on the following day and curved northward on September 19 . 
 The storm turned northwestward on September 22 and briefly threatened the East Coast of the United States . However , it veered northeastward on September 23 and moved rapidly toward Atlantic Canada . By 0000 UTC on September 25 , Gladys became extratropical while centered between Sable Island and Nova Scotia . Along the East Coast of the United States , Gladys produced light rainfall , gusty winds , and storm surge . Coastal flooding was reported in North Carolina and Virginia . In the former , high tides inundated homes and buildings with 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of water in two small villages on the Outer Banks and flooded a highway to Manteo . In the state of Virginia , one death occurred when a man was fatally struck in the throat by debris . Tides also effected the Mid @-@ Atlantic , New England , and Atlantic Canada . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave was first observed over western Africa on September 8 and moved offshore in the vicinity of Dakar , Senegal on the following day . At 0600 UTC on September 13 , a tropical depression developed while centered about halfway between Cape Verde and the Lesser Antilles . Later that day , the S.S. <unk> reported heavy rain and winds of 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) , confirming the existence of Tropical Storm Gladys at 1200 UTC on September 13 . Four hours later , the Weather Bureau Office in San Juan , Puerto Rico initiated advisories on Gladys . A hurricane hunter plane flew into Gladys on the afternoon of September 13 was unable to obtain wind data due to darkness . A reconnaissance flight into the storm on September 14 noted that it had strengthened into a hurricane , while moving west @-@ northwestward at about 18 mph ( 29 km / h ) . HURDAT records indicate that around that time , Gladys became a Category 2 hurricane as winds reached 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . However , early on September 15 , Gladys weakened slightly to a Category 1 hurricane . 
 Early on September 17 , the storm began to rapidly intensify . By 1800 UTC , Gladys attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 945 mbar ( 27 @.@ 9 inHg ) . The storm later began to weaken and fell to a Category 3 hurricane early on September 19 . Around that time , Gladys curved northward in response to a weak trough in the westerlies . Early on September 20 , it further weakened to a Category 2 hurricane . Rising atmospheric pressures to the north forced the storm to curve northwestward on September 21 . Later that day , Gladys weakened to a Category 1 hurricane . The storm posed a threat to the East Coast of the United States , and passed about 140 miles ( 230 km ) east of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina , before a deepening low pressure area over the Great Lakes region caused it to veer northeastward . Gladys then accelerated and approached Atlantic Canada , before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone at 0000 UTC on September 25 , while located between Nova Scotia and Sable Island . The extratropical remnants continued northeastward into Newfoundland and dissipated later on September 25 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 As Gladys strengthened in the Atlantic Ocean , forecasters at the United State Weather Bureau predicted that the storm would bring high surf to areas as far north as North Carolina . Additionally , it was suggested that Gladys could have threatened northern Florida , as the storm was on a similar path as Hurricane Dora . As a result , residents along the coast of the Southeastern United States were advised to remain alert and small craft advisories were issued . On September 20 , small craft advisories were issued for The Bahamas . After Gladys turned northwestward on September 21 , forecasters at the United State Weather Bureau issued hurricane watches for North Carolina , Virginia , and some Mid @-@ Atlantic states . Gale warnings and small craft advisories were issued on September 23 from Massachusetts to Rhode Island . In Rhode Island , ships of the United States Navy were diverted to Narragansett Bay as a precaution . At 0400 UTC on September 24 , the gale warnings for New England were lowered as Gladys turned northeastward away from the coast however , small water craft were advised to remain in port until the seas subsided . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = United States = = = 
 In the United States , Gladys produced high tides as far south as Florida and Georgia . Hurricane Gladys ' effects on South Carolina was minimal as the center of the hurricane was a considerable distance from the coastline . The only effects Gladys was minor rainfall , peaking at 1 inch ( 25 @.@ 4 mm ) in Myrtle Beach , as well as storm tides of 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) above normal along the upper coast of South Carolina . 
 In North Carolina , the large wind field of Gladys produced tropical storm force winds near Manteo . Waves produced by the strong winds flooded a highway leading away from Manteo . Between Kill Devil Hills and Nags Head , U.S. Route 158 was inundated by 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of water . Near Cape Hatteras , a weather station recorded sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and gusts up to 41 mph ( 66 km / h ) . Additionally , tides in the area ranged from 2 – 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 @-@ 0 @.@ 76 m ) above normal . The abnormal tides and heavy wave action flooded two small villages , leaving many homes and buildings under 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) of water and washed away grasses that were planted to stabilize the sand dunes . In Wilmington , sustained winds of 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) and gusts of 28 mph ( 45 km / h ) were reported , as well as tides 2 – 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 @-@ 0 @.@ 9 m ) above normal . Elsewhere in the Outer Banks , high winds caused a mobile home to fall off its foundations and blew down two television antennas . 
 A weather station in Norfolk , Virginia recorded gusts of 38 – 44 mph ( 61 – 71 km / h ) and 0 @.@ 17 inches ( 4 @.@ 31 mm ) of rainfall . In Cape Henry , sustained winds of 42 mph ( 68 km / h ) and a precipitation total of 0 @.@ 02 inches ( 0 @.@ 5 mm ) were reported . Coastal sections of southeastern Virginia experienced tides 2 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 1 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 8 m ) above normal , resulting in minor tidal flooding . One indirect fatality was attributed from Gladys when a man suffered fatal wounds to his throat due to flying debris . High winds and strong ocean currents from Gladys produced beach erosion in New Jersey , New York and Massachusetts . In Rhode Island , the outer bands of Gladys produced light rainfall , peaking at 0 @.@ 38 inches ( 9 @.@ 6 mm ) . A boy was washed into the sea by the waves offshore Narragansett and was rescued by United States Coast Guard servicemen , who dove into the water after two previous attempts to rescue him failed . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Hurricane Gladys produced rough seas that affected Puerto Rico , the Virgin Islands , the northern Leeward Islands and the northern Bahamas . The outer bands of Gladys also lashed Bermuda with winds but little damage if any was reported . In Atlantic Canada , Gladys passed over Newfoundland as a 70 mph ( 120 km / h ) extratropical storm but no damage was reported . At St. John 's Harbor , 65 ships took shelter as a precaution . Some ships suffered damage , including two foreign freighters . 
 = Students ' Building ( Vassar College ) = 
 The Students ' Building on the campus of Vassar College in the town of Poughkeepsie , New York , U.S. , houses the school 's All Campus Dining Center ( ACDC or <unk> ) as well as additional multifunctional student space on its second floor . Designed by Joseph <unk> Clark of McKim , Mead & White and built in 1913 , the structure originally housed a variety of different student organizations and school functions . In 1973 , it was converted into a campuswide dining hall ; it underwent a second renovation in 2003 that returned multipurpose student functionalities to its upper floors . 
 = = History = = 
 James Monroe Taylor , fourth president of Vassar College in the town of Poughkeepsie , New York , wrote in 1901 of a dearth of a dedicated social space on campus " not devoted to college work but to college recreation . " He envisioned a building akin to Harvard 's University Club and the University of Pennsylvania 's Houston Club ; with a swelling student body size and rapid decentralization of the campus over the course of the first decade of the 1900s , the need for such a structure become even more crucial . 
 The Students ' Building was erected in 1913 after its cornerstone was laid on September 25 , 1912 . Funding for its construction came from an anonymous donor who sought to provide for the " exclusive needs and interests of student organizations " with the gift and who specified the name Students ' Building for the structure . Mary <unk> Ladd of the Vassar class of 1908 was later identified as that donor . 
 Until World War II , dining at Vassar was an elegant affair with table linens and serving maids , but after the war was over , these features were never brought back to student life . In 1973 , the All Campus Dining Center , also called the ACDC or the <unk> , opened within the building , serving as a replacement to individual dining rooms in each of the college 's dormitories . The old system had proved too costly and overcrowded , necessitating the ACDC 's creation . The $ 3 @.@ 5 million renovation was conducted by Walker O. Cain and Associates , with over $ 1 million of the funds coming from friends and family of <unk> Ladd . An $ 11 million renovation in 2003 was designed by Finegold Alexander + Associates Inc . 
 = = Architecture and uses = = 
 The Students ' Building was designed by the New York City architecture firm of McKim , Mead & White , representing their only project at Vassar College . The plans were drawn up by young architect Joseph <unk> Clark , a recent graduate of the Columbia School of Architecture who , upon hearing the requirement that the structure be made from brick with white trim and a slate roof , recalled Christ Church in Alexandria , Virginia . Clark had studied Christ Church , which George Washington attended , during his days at Columbia . He trekked to Alexandria to study the interior and exterior of the church and ultimately the designs for the Students ' Building , his first public plan , were inspired by its architecture and features . Bishop and Company were contracted to construct the Students ' Building , an example of the Southern colonial revival style . It sits on the north edge of campus due south of the college 's North Gate and southeast of residential quad dorms like Lathrop House . Noyes House was built in 1958 and rests immediately to the southeast of the Students ' Building . 
 When the Students ' Building opened , it stood two stories tall with a basement , as well as wooden pillars on its facade supporting a pediment . A cupola topped the structure and stairs beneath the pediment led to a three sets of double doors — one large , the others smaller but otherwise identical . Above each set of doors was a single large window . In the 1973 renovation , two red brick wings were added to the east and west sides of the building to accommodate numerous dining rooms . Featuring large windows , the new wings were more modern in their style than the old central portion of the building . 
 The first floor of the building was built as a grand 1 @,@ 200 @-@ seat auditorium with a proscenium stage , and meeting rooms dedicated to student organizations . The second floor consisted of a U @-@ shaped balcony and the Old Council Room , a gathering space for smaller organizations . The Old Council Room was repainted in 1945 as part of a minor renovation of the building that also included the opening of a student eatery called The Hoot on the west side . The ceiling was made from decorated plaster and dentils evoked the exterior neoclassical architectural style . The basement housed several offices and later a bicycle exchange , used bookshop , and student storage space . After the 1973 renovation , dishwashing equipment for the ACDC was housed upstairs , along with staff offices . The 2003 renovation saw the removal of this dishwashing equipment ; instead , the second upstairs was repurposed as a multifunctional student space , in line with the original intentions for the building . The second story — called <unk> — is now an open space capable of seating 600 people when chairs are added ; it also features multimedia equipment and a third @-@ floor mezzanine that , until 2015 , housed the <unk> Cafe . 
 Historically , the structure was used by and for student organizations . Formerly housed in the <unk> and Riding Academy and later the Alumnae Gymnasium , the Philaletheis Society moved into the Students ' Building upon its opening and began to use the space for its theatrical performances . The junior prom , lectures from a wide array of speakers , and faculty @-@ led skits all took place beneath the building 's roof . Vassar 's yearbook , the <unk> , as well as its weekly newspaper , The Miscellany News , were also headquartered in the Students ' Building . An annual Christmas party , complete with students clad as reindeer pulling a sled on which sat political science professor Charles Gordon Post dressed as Santa Claus , once occurred within the building as well . 
 = Be Here Now ( song ) = 
 " Be Here Now " is a song by English musician George Harrison released on his 1973 album Living in the Material World . The recording features a sparse musical arrangement and recalls Harrison 's work with the Beatles during 1966 – 68 , through its Indian @-@ inspired mood and use of drone @-@ like sitar . Part of Harrison 's inspiration for the composition was the popular book Be Here Now by spiritual teacher Ram Dass – specifically , a story discussing the author 's change in identity from a Western academic to a guru in the Hindu faith . Harrison biographers interpret " Be Here Now " as a comment from him on the public 's nostalgia for the past following the Beatles ' break @-@ up . 
 Harrison wrote the song in Los Angeles in 1971 , while working on the soundtrack to the Ravi Shankar documentary Raga , and shortly before organising the Concert for Bangladesh . The recording took place in late 1972 at his Friar Park home , with musical contributions from Klaus Voormann , Nicky Hopkins , Gary Wright and Jim Keltner . Contrary to the song 's message , its release coincided with heightened speculation regarding a possible Beatles reunion , following Harrison , Ringo Starr and John Lennon recording together in Los Angeles in March 1973 . 
 " Be Here Now " has received critical attention for its dreamlike sound and the quality of Harrison 's acoustic guitar playing . Stephen Holden of Rolling Stone described the track as a " meltingly lovely meditation @-@ prayer " , while author Ian Inglis views it as a musical expression of " the spiritual , scientific , and metaphysical implications of time " . Singers Robyn Hitchcock and Ian Astbury have each covered the song . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , George Harrison recalls coming up with the tune for " Be Here Now " while staying in Nichols Canyon , Los Angeles , in the spring of 1971 . At the time , Harrison was in Los Angeles producing the soundtrack to Raga , an Apple Films documentary about Indian sitarist Ravi Shankar . The same visit led to Harrison staging the Concert for Bangladesh in New York that summer , following a plea from Shankar , a Bengali Hindu , that something be done to raise international awareness for refugees of the Bangladesh Liberation War . 
 In his autobiography , Harrison says of writing the song : " I was almost falling asleep . I had the guitar in bed and the melody came fast . " In keeping with this description , " Be Here Now " is noted for its meditative and dreamlike qualities . 
 The song is in the musical key of A , with a time signature of 4 / 4 throughout . According to his handwritten note on the lyrics reproduced in I , Me , Mine , Harrison played the guitar part in open G tuning – which would typically require the placing of a capo on the guitar 's second fret , to attain an open chord of A major . Author and music journalist Paul Trynka writes of " Be Here Now " containing " modal folk riffs " . 
 Harrison drew inspiration for his lyrics from " The Transformation : Dr. Richard Alpert , PhD. into Baba Ram Dass " . A humorous story , " The Transformation " was the first of four sections in Ram Dass 's book Be Here Now , a popular introductory text to Hindu spirituality . As Richard Alpert , Dass had been a Harvard academic and an associate of Timothy Leary during the early 1960s , before embracing Hinduism – like Harrison in 1966 , via experimentation with hallucinogenic drugs – and changing his name . Before the book 's publication in 1971 , according to musicologist Ian MacDonald , the phrase " Be here now " had become a " hippie maxim " , reflecting a fundamental contention of Hindu philosophy regarding the all @-@ importance of the present moment . For Harrison , the present meant his identity outside the public 's perception of him as a Beatle , a role he had already tired of in 1965 – 66 , during the height of the band 's fame . 
 Author Ian Inglis writes of the parallels between " Be Here Now " and one of Harrison 's 1968 compositions for the Beatles , " Long , Long , Long " , due to the two songs ' " common subject matter : time " . In " Be Here Now " , Harrison delivers his message in simple terms , stating that " The past was " , whereas " Now is " . 
 According to theologian Dale Allison , the song also addresses the Hindu concept of maya , whereby the physical world is an illusion and the only truth is to realise the divine nature of one 's soul . Harrison warns against what Allison terms " <unk> [ ing ] the material world , which is only a grand illusion , for the real world " , particularly in the lyrics to the song 's middle eight : 
 Why try to live a life 
 That isn 't real 
 No how ? 
 A mind that wants to wander 
 <unk> a corner 
 Is an unwise mind . 
 Harrison 's musical biographer , Simon Leng , views " Be Here Now " as the singer questioning the validity of his role as a world @-@ famous musician . Leng writes of Harrison yearning to escape " a Fab Four prehistory that so obsessed the media and his fans " , and draws parallels between the former Beatle 's predicament and a comedy sketch by Monty Python , featuring the character Arthur " Two Sheds " Jackson . In the sketch , Jackson is a composer of modern symphonies , yet the interviewer fixates on the trivial detail of how he acquired his unusual nickname . 
 In his book discussing the religious themes in Harrison 's songwriting , Allison qualifies the literal message of " Be Here Now " by stating , " this song must be understood as an endorsement [ of Dass 's book ] " , yet it is " hardly the typical George " . Allison cites a number of compositions from throughout Harrison 's career , all covering issues of karma and reincarnation , as evidence that Harrison " encourages all of us to ponder our inescapable end and so imagine the future " , rather than focusing only on the here and now . Harrison would return to the specific theme of " Be Here Now " in later songs such as " Flying Hour " and " Just for Today " , the last of which adopts the here @-@ and @-@ now message as an inspirational statement for members of Alcoholics Anonymous . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Harrison recorded " Be Here Now " for his second post @-@ Beatles solo album , Living in the Material World , sessions for which began in October 1972 . With Phil McDonald serving as engineer , the recording took place at Apple Studio in London , according to the album credits . Bassist Klaus Voormann has stated that Harrison 's Friar Park home studio in Oxfordshire was the true location , however , a contention supported by Jim Keltner , the drummer at the sessions . Harrison self @-@ produced Material World and deliberately pared down the sound , keen to avoid the big production employed by Phil Spector on All Things Must Pass , his acclaimed 1970 triple album . Author Robert Rodriguez writes that as a producer Harrison " gave the tunes breathing space , allowing the instruments to sparkle " , which included " a nearly imperceptible undercurrent of sitar " on " Be Here Now " . Inglis views the recording as " musically evoking the mystery and profundity of time " , as a complement to the song 's lyrics . 
 Besides Harrison , the musicians on the song were his fellow Hindu convert Gary Wright ( on organ ) , Nicky Hopkins ( piano ) , and the rhythm section of Voormann and Keltner – all of whom served as the core band on Material World . Behind Harrison 's acoustic guitar and the sitar drone , the sparse instrumentation provides what author Elliot Huntley terms " a lesson in understatement " . In the search for a good sound , Voormann recorded his part , on standup bass , in one of the bathrooms at Friar Park ; he remembers being interrupted during a take by longtime Beatles aide Mal Evans flushing the toilet . 
 In his book The Beatles Forever , Nicholas Schaffner describes Harrison 's use of Indian instrumentation on " Be Here Now " and " Living in the Material World " as marking " a return to the quasi @-@ Indian mode " of his work with the Beatles during 1966 – 68 , following which , Harrison admitted , he had rarely played the sitar . Although Schaffner credits the part as a tambura , other commentators describe the instrument as a sitar . 
 Among the other tracks recorded for the album , " The Light That Has Lighted the World " and " Who Can See It " similarly reflect Harrison 's desire to escape his Beatles past . In March 1973 , following the completion of Material World , Harrison recorded " I 'm the Greatest " in Los Angeles with former bandmates Ringo Starr and John Lennon , for inclusion on Starr 's first rock solo album , Ringo . The session immediately led to rumours of a possible Beatles reunion , partly encouraged by the three musicians having severed ties with manager Allen Klein . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Apple Records released Living in the Material World on 30 May 1973 . " Be Here Now " appeared as the second track on side two of the original LP format , following what Rodriguez describes as the " funky uptempo " " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " . It marked the first of four consecutive ballads on that side , which some music critics objected to at the time . Never a fan of Harrison 's solo work , Robert Christgau would comment on the album : " Harrison sings as if he 's doing sitar impressions , and four different people , including a little man in my head who I never noticed before , have expressed intense gratitude when I turned the damned thing off during ' Be Here Now ' . " 
 By contrast , Rolling Stone 's Stephen Holden admired Material World as " a pop religious ceremony for all seasons " and described the song as " a meltingly lovely meditation @-@ prayer , the ultimate aural refinement of ' Blue Jay Way ' " . In his review for Melody Maker , Michael Watts wrote of " Be Here Now " ' s middle eight providing a " Confucius @-@ like ' truth ' " and commented that reading the album 's lyric sheet was " rather like finding yourself at the feet of some Tibetan [ lama ] " . 
 = = Retrospective appraisal and legacy = = 
 = = = Cultural influence and 2006 reissue = = = 
 The phrase " Be Here Now " was used by the English band Oasis for the title of their third album , issued in 1997 . Further to the group naming their hit song " Wonderwall " after Harrison 's 1968 solo album , as well as their appropriation of various musical influences from his work , Harrison was not flattered by the apparent compliment , and was outspoken in his criticism of the band following the release of Be Here Now . 
 Living in the Material World was reissued in remastered form in 2006 , five years after Harrison 's death from cancer at the age of 58 . Among reviews at that time , Music Box editor John Metzger wrote that the " meditative fragility " of " Be Here Now " contributes to " the Zen @-@ like beauty that emanates from Harrison 's hymns to a higher power " on the album , while two years before , in The Rolling Stone Album Guide , Mac Randall described the tune as " rank [ ing ] among Harrison 's prettiest " . In his 2006 album review , for Mojo , Mat Snow considered it a " wonderful song " that " blends two of George 's Beatle peaks , ' Blue Jay Way ' and ' Long , Long , Long ' , to movingly transcendental effect " . Less impressed , PopMatters ' Zeth Lundy bemoaned the stripped @-@ down sound of Living in the Material World after the " thunderous extravagance " of All Things Must Pass , such that " Be Here Now " was rendered " a little too slow @-@ moving and dramatically anaemic " . 
 Writing for The Huffington Post in 2011 , Steve Rabey cited Harrison 's drawing of inspiration from Dass 's book , as from the Tao Te Ching and Autobiography of a Yogi in other songs , as an example of his standing as both a " cafeteria Hindu " and " perhaps the most explicitly and consistently theological rock star of the last half @-@ century " . Rabey concludes : " While he failed to convert everyone to his beliefs , he nudged his [ former ] bandmates – and his listener fans – a bit further to the East , encouraging audiences to open themselves to new ( or very old ) spiritual influences . " 
 = = = Biographers ' assessment = = = 
 Among Beatles and Harrison biographers , Chip Madinger and Mark Easter admire the " hypnotic , droning effect " on " Be Here Now " , which they describe as " a lovely track " ; Elliot Huntley views the arrangement as a " masterpiece " ; and Alan Clayson praises the production and Harrison 's " decorative fingering and harmonics " on guitar , which he rates " on a par with the acoustic virtuosity of John Renbourn " . In The Rough Guide to the Beatles , Chris Ingham cites " the graceful ' Be Here Now ' " as an example of how Harrison 's " melodious gifts and distinctive ear for a harmony are in evidence throughout [ Material World ] " . 
 Ian Inglis admires the song as " one of Harrison 's most haunting and mysterious compositions " , and writes of the recording : " The gentle , largely acoustic backing , and Harrison 's achingly beautiful vocal give the song a nebulous , yearning quality , almost as if something barely understood is slipping out of sight . " Inglis likens " Be Here Now " to the performance monologue " Time " by English actress and author Joyce Grenfell , whose conclusion that " there is no such thing as time – only this very minute , and I am in it " he finds echoed in Harrison 's " sense of wonder and helplessness in the face of the spiritual , scientific , and metaphysical implications of time " . 
 = = = 2014 appraisal = = = 
 The song continues to receive attention following the 2014 Apple Years Harrison reissues . In Mojo , Tom Doyle writes of Living in the Material World " spot [ lighting ] the spirituality and the dreaminess " in Harrison 's songwriting , through " the gentle , non @-@ preachy ' The Light That Has Lighted the World ' and ' Be Here Now ' , both great works of look @-@ around @-@ you wonder " . In a review for Blogcritics , Chaz Lipp views the production on the album as " meticulous " and superior to All Things Must Pass , such that " [ t ] he delicate melodies of songs like ' The Day the World Gets ' Round ' and ' Be Here Now ' are never lost in bombast . " Writing for PopMatters , Scot Elingburg pairs " Be Here Now " with " Don 't Let Me Wait Too Long " as Material World tracks that " offer much more than just Harrison 's Hindu @-@ inspired teachings ; they also offer up the chance for larger dialogue within music . " 
 Nick DeRiso , co @-@ founder of the music website Something Else ! , includes " Be Here Now " among the highlights of Harrison 's solo career on Apple Records , and describes the track as " [ a ] n enveloping moment of wonder " . New Zealand Herald music critic Graham Reid has similarly written of " Be Here Now " belonging among Harrison 's " finest work " , and he finds the song " every bit as emotionally revealing as anything by Lennon " . 
 In his review for Classic Rock magazine , Paul Trynka writes : 
 The towering achievement of this album is , you might say , the <unk> song , ' Be Here Now ' . A straightforward evocation of Buddhist philosophy , its modal folk riffs and wavering melody are enchanting . Writer Ian MacDonald suggested that Nick Drake 's ' River Man ' was based on this same Buddhist notion of mindfulness , and there 's a similar combination of dreaminess and fierce intensity in this song , which is a masterpiece . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Singer Robyn Hitchcock recorded the track , along with covers of songs by Johnny Cash , Bob Dylan , David Bowie and others , for a download @-@ only album released in December 2010 . Described by the website <unk> Up <unk> as a " pristine acoustic take " , Hitchcock 's version of " Be Here Now " appeared as the opening track on the collection . 
 Coinciding with the release of The Apple Years , " Be Here Now " was one of 27 Harrison songs played at George Fest , an all @-@ star concert organised by his son Dhani and held at the Fonda Theatre , Los Angeles , on 28 September 2014 . The song was performed by Cult vocalist Ian Astbury . In a review of the concert , for No Depression magazine , C.J. <unk> described Astbury 's performance as " my favorite part of the night " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to Simon Leng : 
 George Harrison – vocals , acoustic guitar , sitar , backing vocals 
 Nicky Hopkins – piano 
 Gary Wright – organ 
 Klaus Voormann – standup bass 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 = Devil May Cry ( video game ) = 
 Devil May Cry ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Debiru Mei <unk> ) is an hack and slash action @-@ adventure video game developed and published by Capcom , released in 2001 for the PlayStation 2 . While the game primarily focuses on sword fighting , the player gains new weapons after beating the game 's bosses resulting in a variety of combos to perform . 
 Set in modern times on the fictional Mallet Island , the story centers on Dante , a demon hunter who uses his business to get his revenge on the demons after losing his brother and mother . He meets a woman named Trish who takes him on a journey to defeat the demon lord Mundus . The story is told primarily through a mixture of cutscenes , which use the game 's engine and several pre @-@ rendered full motion videos . 
 The game was originally conceived in 1999 as Resident Evil 4 . Due to the staff feeling it would not fit the Resident Evil franchise , the project dropped its ties to Resident Evil and was made into its own story instead . Devil May Cry received prominent coverage in the video game media due to the impact it had in the action game genre , its high difficulty and the high overall scores which many professional reviewers concluded to be one of the best and most innovative video games of all time . The game has sold more than two million copies , and spawned multiple Capcom @-@ developed sequels and prequels . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay consists of levels called " missions " , where players must fight numerous enemies , perform platforming tasks , and occasionally solve puzzles to progress through the story . The player 's performance in each mission is given a letter grade of A , B , C , or D , with an additional top grade of S. Grades are based on the time taken to complete the mission , the amount of " red orbs " gathered ( the in @-@ game currency obtained from defeated enemies ) , how " stylish " their combat was , item usage , and damage taken . 
 " Stylish " combat is defined as performing an unbroken series of attacks while avoiding damage , with player performance tracked by an on @-@ screen gauge . The more hits the player makes , the higher the gauge rises . The gauge starts at " Dull " ; progresses through " Cool " , " Bravo " , and " Absolute " ; and peaks at " Stylish " . The gauge terms are similar to the grades given at the end of the missions . When Dante receives damage , the style rating resets back to " Dull " . Players can also maintain their style grade by taunting enemies at close range . 
 The player can temporarily transform Dante into a more powerful demonic creature by using the " Devil Trigger " ability . Doing so adds powers based on the current weapon and changes Dante 's appearance . The transformations typically increase strength and defense , slowly restore health , and grant special attacks . It is governed by the Devil Trigger gauge , which depletes as the ability is used , and is refilled by attacking enemies or taunting in normal form . 
 Devil May Cry contains puzzles and other challenges besides regular combat gameplay . The main storyline often requires the player to find key items to advance , in a manner similar to puzzles in the Resident Evil games , as well as optional platforming and exploration tasks to find hidden caches of " orbs " . Side quests , called " Secret Missions " in the game , are located in hidden or out @-@ of @-@ the @-@ way areas and are not required for completion , but provide permanent power @-@ ups . They typically challenge the player to defeat a group of enemies in a specific manner or within a time limit . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Devil May Cry begins with Dante being attacked in his office by a mysterious woman named Trish . He impresses her by easily brushing off her assault , and tells her that he hunts demons in pursuit of those who killed his mother and brother . She says the attack was a test , and that the demon emperor Mundus , whom Dante holds responsible for the deaths of his family , is planning a return . The scene jumps to their arrival at an immense castle , whereupon Trish abruptly leaps and vanishes over a high wall . 
 Dante explores the castle and encounters the game 's stock enemies , demonic marionettes . He also finds a new sword called Alastor , and battles the first boss , a giant spider / scorpion demon named Phantom . Dante wins the battle , but in what becomes a recurring theme , the defeated boss monster reappears a short time later in a corridor , forcing Dante to choose a narrow escape or to fight in the tight confines . After further exploration and combat , Dante battles a demon named Nelo Angelo who impresses Dante with his confidence . Dante manages to defeat Nelo Angelo and is about to deliver the final blow - but unfortunately , Nelo Angelo evades him , and counterattacks Dante furiously with a series of punches and kicks . The demon prepares to kill Dante , but suddenly flees upon seeing the half @-@ amulet Dante wears , which contains a picture of his mother . The demon attacks twice more in later missions , and is eventually revealed to be Dante 's identical twin brother , Vergil . After Angelo / Vergil 's death , his amulet joins with his brother 's half , and " Force Edge " , the game 's default sword , which had belonged to the twins ' father , changes into its true form and becomes the Sparda sword . 
 When Dante next meets Trish , she betrays him and reveals that she too is working for Mundus , but when her life is endangered , Dante chooses to save her . Claiming he did so only because of her resemblance to his mother , he warns her to stay away . Yet when he finally confronts Mundus , who is about to kill Trish , Dante again chooses to save her and is injured . Mundus tries to finish him off , but Trish takes the attack instead . This unleashes Dante 's full power , thus allowing him to take on the form of Sparda . Dante and Mundus then battle on another plane of existence . 
 Dante is victorious , and leaves the amulet and sword with Trish 's immobile body before departing . Mundus returns and corners Dante , who is now back to his regular strength , before he can flee the island ; Trish also returns and lends Dante her power . Dante defeats Mundus , who vows to return and rule the human world . When Trish tries to apologize she begins to cry , and Dante tells her it means she has become human and not just a devil , because " devils never cry " . Dante and Trish escape on a plane as the island collapses . After the credits , it is revealed that Dante and Trish are working together as partners , and have renamed the shop " Devil Never Cry " . 
 = = Development = = 
 First hinted at in early December 1999 , Devil May Cry started out as the earliest incarnation of Resident Evil 4 . Initially developed for the PlayStation 2 , the game was directed by Hideki Kamiya after producer Shinji Mikami requested him to create a new entry in the Resident Evil series . Around the turn of the millennium , regular series writer Noboru Sugimura created a scenario for the title , based on Kamiya 's idea to make a very cool and stylized action game . The story was based on unraveling the mystery surrounding the body of protagonist Tony , an invincible man with skills and an intellect exceeding that of normal people , his superhuman abilities explained with biotechnology . As Kamiya felt the playable character did not look brave and heroic enough in battles from a fixed angle , he decided to drop the prerendered backgrounds from previous Resident Evil installments and instead opted for a dynamic camera system . This new direction required the team to make a trip to Europe where they spent eleven days in the United Kingdom and Spain photographing things like Gothic statues , bricks , and stone pavements for use in textures . Though the developers tried to make the " coolness " theme fit into the world of Resident Evil , Mikami felt it strayed too far from the series ' survival horror roots and gradually convinced all of the staff members to make the game independent from it . Kamiya eventually rewrote the story to be set in a world full of demons and changed the hero 's name to " Dante " . The cast of characters remained largely identical to that in Sugimura 's scenario , although appearances of the hero 's mother and father were written out of the story . The game 's new title was revealed as Devil May Cry in November 2000 . 
 The game was developed by Team Little Devils , a group of staff members within Capcom Production Studio 4 . Some of the major gameplay elements were partially inspired by a bug found in Onimusha : Warlords . During a test @-@ play , Kamiya discovered that enemies could be kept in the air by slashing them repeatedly , which led to the inclusion of juggles by gunfire and sword strikes in Devil May Cry . According to the director , Devil May Cry was designed from the ground up around Dante 's acrobatics and combat abilities . The decision was made late in the development process to change the game to a more mission @-@ based advancement , instead of the more open @-@ ended structure of the Resident Evil games . Devil May Cry 's difficulty was intentional , according to Kamiya , who called it his " challenge to those who played light , casual games . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was critically acclaimed , with reviews from video game news websites typically praising its gameplay innovations , action , visuals , camera control , and gothic ambience . The game also received positive reviews from video game print publications for similar reasons . Game Informer summarized their review by saying the game " makes Resident Evil look like a slow zombie " . Devil May Cry also frequents several Top Video Games of All Time lists . <unk> , for instance , listed Devil May Cry at # 31 in their Top 40 Console Games of All Time feature . In 2010 , IGN listed it at # 42 in their " Top 100 PlayStation 2 Games " . Dante also received noteworthy praise to the point of becoming one of the most famous characters in gaming . 
 The game was also subject to criticism , however . Next Generation objected to the difficulty level , wondering if the challenge was added to prolong the gameplay . The Electric Playground pointed to the unusual control scheme and lack of configuration options . GameSpy cited the camera 's behavior , the learning curve for the controls , and graphical shortcomings such as flickering and <unk> . GameSpot criticized the game 's conclusion for its dramatic change in gameplay to a rail shooter @-@ like style at the story 's climax , as well as a leveling @-@ off of the difficulty . Lastly , <unk> felt that the story was overly short and the characters were underdeveloped . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Devil May Cry has spawned a sequel , Devil May Cry 2 and a prequel , Devil May Cry 3 ; both of which have sold more than one million copies . A fourth game , Devil May Cry 4 , was released on February 5 , 2008 in the United States for PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 and PC . Total sales for all versions as of February 10 , 2009 is approximately 2 @.@ 48 million copies . The game has likewise resulted in the release of two novels by Shinya Goikeda , and an anime series . On October 15 , 2004 , three years after the game 's release , a soundtrack containing the game 's music was released alongside the soundtrack to Devil May Cry 2 . Plans for a PlayStation Portable installment , tentatively titled Devil May Cry Series , and a live action film adaptation have been announced , although it was later confirmed in 2009 that the PSP adaptation of Devil May Cry was officially cancelled . A reboot titled DmC : Devil May Cry was released in 2013 by Ninja Theory and Capcom . Kamiya considers his 2009 video game Bayonetta to have evolved from Devil May Cry although he played the sequel Devil May Cry 4 when developing it . 
 Devil May Cry has been cited as the beginning of a subgenre of action games called " Extreme Combat " , which focus on powerful heroes fighting hordes of foes with a focus on stylish action . The game has also been described as being the first game that " successfully captured the twitch @-@ based , relentlessly free @-@ flowing gameplay style of so many classic 2D action games " . The series has become the standard against which other 3D action games are measured , with comparisons in reviews of games including God of War , Chaos Legion , and Blood Will Tell . 
 = The Best Man Wins ( 1910 film ) = 
 The Best Man Wins is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film features Thanhouser 's leading players Anna Rosemond , Martin Faust , Frank H. Crane and Marie Eline in a drama about morality . Two suitors are vying for the hand of Julia Seaton and propose to her on the same day , but she asks for a month to decide between them . In the time the caliber of both men are tested when asked by a young girl , named May , to help her dying mother . The doctor refuses to help and the lawyer offers his assistance , but her mother soon dies . The orphan is taken in by the Seaton family and personally attests to the character of both men when Julia Seaton has to choose between her suitors . The writer , director and cameraman are unknown . Released on May 14 , 1910 , the film was met with mostly positive reviews by critics . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a surviving synopsis was published in The Moving Picture World . It states : " Julia Seaton , a rich heiress , has two suitors , Dr. John Seymour , a wealthy physician , and Richard Calhoun , a poor lawyer . They both propose in the same evening , but while inclined to prefer John , Julia has not yet made a definite choice , and tells both to come back in a month for their answer . The scene shifts to the squalid home of the charwoman , Mrs. Smith , who , ill in bed and unable to earn the rent money , is about to be evicted with her tiny daughter May . The mother faints from weakness , and May rushes for a doctor . She sees Seymour 's sign in a window , and asks him to help her mother . Then the man shows his caliber . Because she has no money , he turns her away . Calhoun , the lawyer , meets May , learns of her plight , and , although poor , pays the overdue rent , and the family moved back in the house . But the privation she has suffered proved fatal to the mother and tiny May is left an orphan . On her death bed , Mrs. Smith is found by Miss Seaton , who is visiting the poor quarters on charity work , and on the charwoman 's passing , society girl adopts poor little May . The child becomes a happy member of the Seaton family and at the end of the month is a fast friend of the kind @-@ hearted Julia . At the end of a month , too , Julia prepares to decide who shall be her life partner , as promised . But it is little May who really decides . At sight of Seymour , she recalls the physician who turned her away , and denounces him to his own and Miss Julia 's face . May recognizes Calhoun as the friend in need , and tells Miss Julia so . The latter feels that Calhoun is a real man and would make a splendid husband , so it 's a cinch that ' the best man wins . ' " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Anna Rosemond as Julia Seaton , the rich heiress 
 Martin Faust as Dr. John Seymour , the wealthy physician 
 Frank H. Crane as Richard Calhoun , the poor lawyer 
 Marie Eline as May , the young daughter 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it may have been Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman still employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . While the director of the film is not known , two Thanhouser directors are possible . Barry O 'Neil was the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy , who would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . Lloyd B. Carleton was the stage name of Carleton B. Little , a director who would stay with the Thanhouser Company for a short time , moving to Biograph Company by the summer of 1910 . Bowers does not attribute either as the director for this particular production nor does Bowers credit a cameraman . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . 
 The leading lady , Anna Rosemond , was one of two leading ladies that Thanhouser would have in its first year of productions . Martin J. Faust and Frank H. Crane , both which were leading men in numerous productions . Frank H. Crane was involved in the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company from 1909 . Crane 's was the first leading man of the company and acted in numerous productions before becoming a director at Thanhouser . The two suitors vying for her hand in marriage is Bowers credits Martin J. Faust as one of the most important actors in for Thanhouser in 1910 and 1911 , but Faust 's role in productions were often went uncredited . The role of a young daughter was Marie Eline , soon to be known and famous as the " Thanhouser Kid " . A possible film still exists for the work and the identity of the actors are complimentary in between two identical stills in the Jonathan Silent Film Collection . The description of T @-@ 151 , identifies the man in the center as Martin Faust and notes the possibility that the still comes from this work . However , the description for T @-@ 176 identifies two actors as Harry Benham and Frank Crane , but asserts that the two only worked together in 1911 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , 957 feet long , was released on May 13 , 1910 . Whether the film is 957 feet or 950 feet long is subject to debate . Bowers notes that some sources state the film is 950 feet long , one such example is the advertising for the film which lists it as being approximately this length . Advertising for the film recognized negativity of Friday the 13th and used it to promote the film to redefine the date to instead bring joy . The film was shown across the United States , advertisements for the showing included theaters in Kansas , Texas , and Pennsylvania . Identifying the theaters showing this work is complicated by the identically named The Best Man Wins by Vitagraph . The silent western produced in 1909 was still being shown and advertised in theaters at the time of the release of Thanhouser 's film . An ambiguous advertisement , but most likely Vitagraph reference , is seen in The Hawaiian Star of Hawaii was published on the same day of the Thanhouser release . 
 Reviews for the film were generally positive . The Moving Picture World found the story to be interesting and well acted , giving no criticism of the production . The New York Dramatic Mirror 's review criticized the weak plot and the satisfactory acting which was diminished by camera consciousness . The review also found that , " [ i ] n the scene where the child is taken from her mother 's death bed too little attention is paid to the corpse . " The Leavenworth Times included a review that was favorable and praised the film 's photography . The Arkansas City Daily Traveler had an advertisement from the Lotus Theater that stated Thanhouser films were rivaling Independent Moving Pictures . No known existing copies , complete or partial , are known to exist . 
 = June 2011 Christchurch earthquake = 
 The June 2011 Christchurch earthquake was a shallow magnitude 6 @.@ 3 ML earthquake that occurred on 13 June 2011 at 14 : 20 <unk> ( 02 : 20 UTC ) . It was centred at a depth of 6 km ( 3 @.@ 8 mi ) , about 10 km ( 6 mi ) from Christchurch , which had previously been devastated by another magnitude 6 @.@ 3 ML earthquake in February 2011 . The June quake was preceded by a magnitude 5 @.@ 9 ML tremor that struck the region at a slightly deeper 8 @.@ 9 km ( 5 @.@ 5 mi ) . The United States Geological Survey reported a magnitude of 6 @.@ 0 Mw at a depth of about 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) . 
 The earthquake produced severe shaking that registered VIII on the Mercalli scale in and around the city of Christchurch , destroying some buildings and causing additional damage to many structures affected by previous earthquakes . The damaged tower of the historic Lyttelton <unk> Station collapsed before dismantling work could be completed . The earthquake downed phone lines and triggered widespread outages , which left around 54 @,@ 000 households without power . Rebuilding costs in Christchurch increased by NZ $ 6 billion ( US $ 4 @.@ 8 billion ) owing to the additional damage from the quake . Forty @-@ six people suffered injuries , and one elderly man died after being knocked unconscious . 
 = = Background = = 
 New Zealand in its entirety , particularly the North Island , is located along the seismically volatile Pacific Ring of Fire , and has a long history of earthquakes . Since the European settlement , the largest on record was a magnitude 8 @.@ 2 ML major earthquake that occurred on 23 January 1855 near the Wairarapa plains of the North Island . Another destructive magnitude 7 @.@ 8 ML earthquake struck the region near Hawke 's Bay on 3 February 1931 ; it is the deadliest earthquake recorded on the island to date , greatly affecting much of Napier and Hastings . 
 In comparison , the South Island has experienced fewer large earthquakes . The magnitude 7 @.@ 1 Mw event of 4 September 2010 produced by far the strongest ground motions ever recorded in the Canterbury Region , triggering a large number of aftershocks . Although similar aftershock sequences have historically occurred around the world , such occurrences were extremely unusual in the region , which had shown low levels of seismic activity for thousands of years . The event has led to the discovery of previously dormant geological faults across central @-@ eastern South Island , in particular beneath regional plains and the adjacent seabed . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The magnitude 6 @.@ 3 ML earthquake occurred inland on 13 June 2011 at 14 : 20 <unk> , ( 02 : 20 UTC ) at a shallow depth of 6 @.@ 0 km ( 4 mi ) , about 10 km ( 6 mi ) to the east @-@ southeast of Christchurch , New Zealand . Owing to the interaction of the major Pacific and Australia Plates , much of the regional plate boundary along central South Island is characterised by land deformation . The earthquake was a direct result of strike @-@ slip faulting at the eastern end of the rupture zone of another strong magnitude 6 @.@ 3 ML earthquake , which occurred on 22 February 2011 along the Port Hills Fault . The June earthquake was preceded by a magnitude 5 @.@ 9 ML tremor with a similar focal mechanism that struck 1 hour and 20 minutes earlier . Experts believe the quakes were triggered by a previously undiscovered fault in the region , located several kilometres south of the Port Hills Fault . The United States Geological Survey reported a magnitude of 6 @.@ 0 Mw and a focal depth of 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) for the earthquake , while the precursor tremor was assigned a magnitude of 5 @.@ 2 Mw at a similar depth . 
 <unk> reported that the earthquakes were part of a prolonged aftershock sequence associated with the major magnitude 7 @.@ 1 earthquake of September 2010 , which includes the February 2011 event . They were succeeded by multiple lighter aftershocks ; the strongest , a moderate magnitude 5 @.@ 1 <unk> a minute after the <unk> another tremor 5 @.@ 0 ML struck the region two days later . Despite significant energy release , the earthquakes were believed to have increased the risk of an additional aftershock of similar magnitude ; calculations from <unk> Science indicated a 23 percent probability of a magnitude 6 @.@ 0 – 6 @.@ 9 ML earthquake occurring in the Canterbury aftershock zone within the 12 months following the event . Weeks later , a magnitude 5 @.@ 4 ML tremor jolted Christchurch overnight on 22 June , causing additional damage and prompting evacuations . 
 Focused only several kilometres below the surface , the earthquake resulted in significant shaking over a large portion of central @-@ eastern South Island . Maximum ground motions registered at VIII ( severe ) on the Mercalli intensity scale in Christchurch , while strong shaking ( MM VI ) was felt in adjacent populated areas such as Rolleston and Lincoln . The landforms of Sumner recorded intensified shaking due to the effects of its topographic setting . Widespread lighter motions were observed throughout much of the remaining region , with slight property damage reported from as far afield as Dunedin . The earthquake was felt as far away as New Plymouth and Invercargill . 
 = = Damage , casualties and effects = = 
 The earthquake and its precursor tremor struck during the afternoon near an extremely populated area , with most buildings in the area already left in precarious conditions by previous earthquakes . It affected roughly 400 @,@ 000 people directly , most of which were estimated to have experienced at least strong ( MM VI ) shaking . Hospital officials confirmed at least 46 injuries after its occurrence ; falling debris struck several people , while two others were left in critical condition . In the city centre , two workers had to be rescued from a collapsed church and were promptly hospitalised . The morning after , officials confirmed an elderly man had died after being knocked unconscious in a rest home when the earthquake struck . Mass casualties were avoided owing to a combination of building evacuations prompted by the weaker shock and an epicentre removed from populous areas . 
 In the wake of the earthquake , multiple phone lines were down , and scattered power outages affected about 54 @,@ 000 households . Moreover , at least 70 underground 11 @,@ 000 volt cables sustained some degree of damage , contributing to the outages . The shaking ruptured local water mains , resulting in widespread flooding that affected several streets . Furthermore , officials ordered the closure of bridges in the area as a precautionary measure ; one bridge was reported to have succumbed to the strong ground motions . Days after its occurrence , a small electrical fire ignited in a control panel at Christchurch Hospital due to dislodged wiring as a result of ongoing aftershocks . 
 Strong ground motions caused many secondary effects , including gas leaks and widespread soil liquefaction . Consequently , sand boils emerged from asphalt roads , toppling a few cars and sinking another . Several houses in the hill suburbs of Sumner and <unk> were affected by falling boulders from hillsides . Following its occurrence , much of Christchurch lost water pressure ; residents were thus urged to conserve water use . In some parts of the Heathcote Valley , previously dormant or non @-@ existent natural springs surfaced as a consequence of the sudden rise in the water table , flooding some properties . 
 = = = Socioeconomic impact = = = 
 The <unk> 50 Index fell by 0 @.@ 4 percent to its lowest level since 20 April ; within the index , a total of 24 stocks fell , while six rose and 20 remained unchanged . In addition , the New Zealand dollar declined in the wake of the disaster , reportedly dropping by nearly 0 @.@ 01 US dollar , or about 1 @.@ 3 percent . Following a dramatic decline in event numbers , <unk> , a council @-@ owned venue management company , announced the <unk> of 151 of its full @-@ time staff workers . Nationwide , building consents tumbled considerably , dropping by 4 @.@ 5 percent in the wake of the aftershock . The disaster 's impact extended beyond national grounds ; in light of its occurrence , Insurance Australia Group reported an estimated net claim loss of A $ 65 million ( US $ 61 @.@ 5 million ) . 
 = = = Damage evaluation = = = 
 Though the exact extent of losses was unclear , the earthquake caused further damage to many structures in Christchurch ; approximately half of the buildings in the centre of the city were already damaged or destroyed by previous strong earthquakes . Preliminary assessments indicate over 100 additional buildings were rendered beyond repair in the area . Despite its moderate magnitude , the preceding magnitude 5 @.@ 6 ML tremor caused several two @-@ story buildings at a road intersection in the city to collapse . Multiple hospitals and residential care facilities in Christchurch were left without essential services , and some reported considerable damage to infrastructure . 
 In spite of earlier renovation attempts , authorities were considering the complete demolition of the 130 @-@ year @-@ old Christchurch Cathedral . The building had become structurally compromised due to the collapse of its western wall , and the strong vibration had shattered its stained glass rose window . Similar damage was inflicted to the Christchurch Arts Centre , although it had been in a precarious state prior to the event . A three @-@ month reconstruction project was scheduled to take place starting in October 2011 , with associated costs estimated at NZ $ 30 million ( US $ 24 million ) . The tower of the historic Lyttelton <unk> Station , which sustained damage from the February 2011 earthquake , collapsed after plans to dismantle the building had been initiated . Lyttelton Port , a major harbour in the region , suffered additional damage from the tremors and opted to initiate full engineering assessments . The multi @-@ story HSBC Tower shook considerably during the quake , though damage was limited to cracks and broken roof tiles . Artifacts from the Canterbury Museum collection were thrown into disorder by the aftershocks , several days after reordering work had been completed since the February 2011 earthquake . In all , experts believed the earthquake would increase reconstruction costs in Christchurch by approximately NZ $ 6 billion ( US $ 4 @.@ 83 billion ) . 
 = = Response = = 
 In light of the possibility of aftershocks , police evacuated shopping malls and office buildings around the city . Essential organisations in the area were evacuated as a safety precaution , including the police headquarters and offices of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority . At Christchurch International Airport , officials halted operations after the earthquake , but all flights resumed later that day . Months before the event , a severe magnitude 6 @.@ 3 earthquake occurred in a similar area adjacent to Christchurch , causing widespread destruction and fatalities in the city . Concerns arose about the condition of previously damaged structures , and the 13 June earthquakes caused further distress among many victims . Dozens of dissatisfied residents were expected to move out of the city , and many others sought professional help for anxiety and depression @-@ related issues . 
 = = = Relief efforts = = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the earthquakes , the National Crisis Management Centre was activated through The Ministry of Civil Defence and Emergency Management to manage public response to the disaster ; hundreds of police officers were accordingly dispatched to patrol the city streets . Authorities proposed to set up an outdoors emergency operations centre , as well as a public welfare centre to provide shelter to victims overnight . The Student Volunteer Army — which partook in silt shifting after the February 2011 quake — again prepared the recruitment of participants to initiate street clearing actions . A total of NZ $ 285 @,@ 000 ( US $ 230 @,@ 000 ) was allocated for donations to nine charities , including NZ $ 40 @,@ 000 ( US $ 32 @,@ 000 ) to both the Red Cross Christchurch earthquake appeal and the Canterbury Earthquake Appeal Salvation Army funds . At Westpac Bank , a public donation account was opened in order to provide financial assistance for earthquake victims . Chief executives from the Commonwealth Bank sponsored an exclusive dinner in Sydney to raise money for rebuilding costs ; an initial A $ 700 @,@ 000 ( US $ 660 @,@ 000 ) was allocated prior to the event , with entry costs of A $ 10 @,@ 000 ( US $ 9 @,@ 500 ) per ticket . 
 = Petition of Right = 
 The Petition of Right is a major English constitutional document that sets out specific liberties of the subject that the king is prohibited from infringing . Passed on 7 June 1628 , the Petition contains restrictions on non @-@ Parliamentary taxation , forced billeting of soldiers , imprisonment without cause , and the use of martial law . Following disputes between Parliament and King Charles I over the execution of the Thirty Years ' War , Parliament refused to grant subsidies to support the war effort , leading to Charles gathering " forced loans " without Parliamentary approval and arbitrarily imprisoning those who refused to pay . Moreover , the war footing of the nation led to the forced billeting of soldiers within the homes of private citizens , and the declaration of martial law over large swathes of the country . 
 In response , the House of Commons prepared a set of four Resolutions , decrying these actions and restating the validity of Magna Carta and the legal requirement of habeas corpus . These were rejected by Charles , who also announced that Parliament would be dissolved ; in response , the Commons met on 6 May to discuss alternatives , and concluded that a petition of right was the way forward . Accordingly , a committee under Sir Edward Coke drafted such a petition , and it was passed by the Commons on 8 May and sent to the House of Lords . After three weeks of debates and conferences between the two chambers , the Petition of Right was ratified by both houses on the 26th and 27 May . Following additional debates in which the King restricted the right of the Commons to freely speak , he bowed to the pressure ; in need of Parliamentary support for the war effort , the Petition was accepted on 2 June . Unhappy with the method chosen , both houses joined together and demanded the King fully ratify the Petition , which he did on 7 June . 
 Despite debates over its legal status , the Petition of Right was highly influential . Domestically , the Petition is seen as " one of England 's most famous constitutional documents " , of equal value to the Magna Carta and Bill of Rights 1689 . In a period in which Charles 's main protection from the Commons was the House of Lords , the willingness of both chambers to work together marked a new stage in the constitutional crisis that would eventually lead to the English Civil War . The Petition remains in force in the United Kingdom and , thanks to Imperial legislation , many parts of the Commonwealth of Nations including Australia and New Zealand . Internationally , it helped influence the Massachusetts Body of Liberties , and is seen as a predecessor to the Third , Fifth , Sixth and Seventh amendments to the Constitution of the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Charles I = = = 
 On 27 March 1625 , King James I of England died , and was succeeded by his son , who became Charles I. Along with the throne , Charles inherited the Thirty Years ' War , in which Christian IV of Denmark and Frederick V , Elector Palatine , who was married to Charles 's sister Elizabeth , were attempting to take back their hereditary lands and titles from the Habsburg Monarchy . James had caused significant financial problems with his attempts to support Christian and Frederick , and it was expected that Charles would be more amenable to prosecuting the war responsibly . After he summoned a new Parliament to meet in April 1625 , it became clear that he was not ; he demanded over £ 700 @,@ 000 to assist in prosecuting the war . The House of Commons refused , and instead passed two bills granting him only £ 112 @,@ 000 . In addition , rather than renewing the customs due from Tonnage and <unk> for the entire life of the monarch , which was traditional , the Commons only voted them in for one year . Because of this , the House of Lords rejected the bill , leaving Charles without any money to provide for the war effort . 
 Displeased with this , Charles adjourned it on 11 July , but finding himself in need of money recalled the Members on 1 August , when they met in Oxford . Not only did the Commons continue to refuse to provide money , led by Robert Phelips and Sir Edward Coke they began investigating the Duke of Buckingham . Buckingham , Charles 's favourite , was in charge of prosecuting the war , and with it going badly the Commons inquired into Buckingham 's use of previous grants , and various controversies within the admiralty . This was a pretext to impeachment , and Charles reacted by dissolving Parliament less than two weeks later on 12 August . By 1627 , with England still at war , Charles decided to raise " forced loans " ; taxes not authorised by Parliament . Anyone who refused to pay would be imprisoned without trial , and if they resisted , sent before the Privy Council . Although the judiciary initially refused to endorse these loans , they succumbed to pressure after the Chief Justice of the King 's Bench , Sir Randolph Crewe , was dismissed . 
 For refusing to contribute to the forced loan , over 70 gentlemen were arbitrarily jailed , without trial or charges brought against them . Five of them , Sir Thomas Darnell , Sir John Corbet , Sir Walter Erle , Sir John <unk> and Sir Edmund Hampden , attempted to gain their freedom , petitioning the Court of King 's Bench for a writ of habeas corpus . These were awarded on 3 November 1627 , with the court ordering the bailiffs to present these prisoners to the King 's Bench for examination by 8 November . None of the prisoners were presented , because the bailiffs were unable to determine what they were charged with ; in an attempt to get a test case to decide on the legality of the forced loans , the Attorney General Sir Robert Heath secured a writ for Darnell . This led to the Five Knights ' Case , known as Darnell 's Case . Darnell , unnerved by the situation , ceased pursuing his freedom , and the other four secured writs instead , represented by John Bramston , Henry <unk> and John Selden . 
 The judges denied the defendants bail , concluding that if no charges had been brought , " the [ prisoners ] could not be freed as the offence was probably too dangerous for public discussion " . This was merely a ruling on bail , not on the legality of the loans , and Charles decided not to pursue the charges against the knights , fearing that , if asked to rule on the loans themselves , the judges would find them illegal . An unforeseen side effect was that although Charles continued to demand the loans , more and more wealthy landowners refused to pay , reducing the income from the loans and necessitating a new Parliament being called in March 1627 . With widespread public opposition to Charles , Buckingham and the war , this resulted in the election of " a preponderance of MPs opposed to the King " , including Selden , Coke , John Pym and a young Oliver Cromwell . 
 = = = Martial law and the Parliamentary response = = = 
 To cope with the ongoing war situation , Charles had introduced martial law to large swathes of the country ; he extended this during 1626 and 1627 , as the financial constraints imposed by Parliament began to cut into pay , leading to soldiers rioting . Under the law of the time , martial law was declared by the local military commander , at which point a group of Commissioners would be empowered to decide on the facts of offences , before passing the case to the commander , who would pass judgment . In practice , things worked completely differently . In Dover , the forces were commanded by Lord Conway , who declared martial law . Not only were commissioners authorised to decide on the facts , they were also permitted to authorise summary judgments , including the execution of people they deemed to be guilty . In addition , the commissioners were given the power not only to resolve billeting disputes between soldiers and civilians , but to order civilians to provide quarters for the troops . A later declaration of martial law in Portsmouth extended the commission 's remit yet again , allowing for civilians to be tried under martial law and , if necessary , sentenced to death . Even this did not solve the problems , as soldiers would often wander outside the jurisdiction of the commissioners ; to deal with this , February 1627 saw a Provost Marshal introduced to each county , bringing the entire nation under martial law . 
 Crucially , martial law as then understood was not a form of substantive law , but instead a suspension of the rule of law ; it was the replacement of normal statutes with a law based on the whims of the local military commander . It was , however , based on certain firm rules , primarily that it should only be used " in time of war or open rebellion in the realm " . In previous reigns , this had not been a problem , with monarchs such as Elizabeth I instituting martial law without issues . Charles , however , lacked both the public popularity of Elizabeth and the support within Parliament , and his justification for martial law was not as sound . As a result , the opposition in Parliament , already aggrieved with his behaviour , was further inflamed . 
 All of those imprisoned for failing to pay the loans were released in December 1627 , and although martial law remained in force , Charles decided that the only way to prosecute the war was to again ask Parliament for money . Accordingly , Parliament began meeting on 17 March 1628 , and " immediately became locked into debates on English liberties " , specifically relating to the forced loans , the trial of the five knights , the billeting of soldiers and martial law . Members of Parliament , already angry with Charles , were further enraged when Selden discovered that Heath had attempted to have the decision in the five knights case enrolled as binding precedent on the legality of the forced loans , pressuring the clerk of the King 's Bench to do so ; MPs reacted by declaring the judgment illegal . 
 Coke , not satisfied by this , immediately began preparing the Resolutions on 1 April , a series of Parliamentary declarations . The four resolutions were that imprisonment was illegal , except under law , that habeas corpus should be granted to anyone , whether they are imprisoned by the King or the Privy Council , that defendants could not be remanded in custody until the crime they were charged with was shown , and that non @-@ Parliamentary taxation such as the forced loans was illegal . This was " a dogmatic summary of subjects ' rights as enshrined in English ' due process ' legislation since 1225 " , and the first three later became the foundations of the Habeas Corpus Act 1679 . The Resolutions were unanimously accepted by the Commons on 3 April , and Coke , Selden , Dudley Digges and Thomas Littleton presented them to the House of Lords . There , the Resolutions met a mixed reception – something rendered moot when Charles refused to accept them , since resolutions of the Commons had no power outside the chamber . 
 = = Passage = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 With the Resolutions rejected , Charles presented the Commons with an alternative ; he was willing to allow them to pass a bill confirming Magna Carta and six other liberty @-@ related statutes , on the condition that such a bill contained " no enlargement of former bills " . A majority of MPs , however , rejected this offer ; although they did not necessarily distrust Charles , the illegal acts committed by his ministers , both in the war and in relation to the five knights ' case , left them loathe to accept a state of affairs which would leave the government with the right to interpret the law . Instead , on 3 May , they approved a formal reply to Charles , which assured him that the Commons was " as full of trust and confidence in your royal word as ever House of Commons reposed in any of their best kings " but that , because of the illegal acts publicly committed by his ministers , nothing except a public remedy would " raise the dejected hearts of your loving subjects to a cheerful supply of your Majesty " . 
 Charles conferred with the House of Lords , and then had Lord Coventry deliver his reply ; that if the Commons did indeed trust the King , they should not request a public bill , and that Parliament would be prorogued on 13 May . With this , the Commons gave up on pursuing a public bill against Charles 's wishes , since it would require his assent to be made law , and on 6 May turned to what to do next . A number of possible alternatives were debated . John Coke and a number of " courtiers " suggested simply trusting Charles , while William Coryton continued to push for an explanatory bill – precisely what Charles had rejected . Nathaniel Rich suggested asking Charles to explain his understanding of the law and declare certain acts illegal . Finally , Sir Edward Coke made a speech suggesting that the Commons join with the House of Lords , and pass their four resolutions as a petition of right . He was not the first to do so – Digges had suggested such a move as early as 26 April – but his proposal on 6 May was the one to be adopted , and he is thus normally seen as the originator of the Petition of Right . 
 The idea of a petition of right was an established element of Parliamentary procedure , and in addition , had not been expressly prohibited by Charles , allowing the Commons to evade the restrictions placed upon them while still acting legitimately . Once the Commons agreed to move forward with a petition of right , and on its contents , Coke moved that the Commons " join with the Lords " in the petition and then have it " exemplified under the great seal " . This was accepted by the Commons almost unanimously , and they formed a drafting committee led by Coke . The committee produced a petition containing the same elements as the Resolutions , covering discretionary imprisonment , non @-@ Parliamentary taxation , martial law and forced billeting , and had its recommendations accepted by the Commons on 8 May . 
 = = = House of Lords = = = 
 On 8 May , the Petition was formally presented to the Lords by Coke , accompanied by a bill for subsidies for the King to encourage them to accept the Petition . It was read to the House , and debated on 9 and 10 May . The Lords approved the substance of the petition , but were worried it would be distasteful to Charles and attempted to " sweeten " the wording . On 12 May , before a resolution had been reached , the Lords were presented with a message from Charles , expressing his reservations over the clause on imprisonment . He wrote that although he had attempted to " satisfy all moderate minds , and free them from all just fears on this matter " , he insisted that if Parliament accepted that " in no case whatsoever ( though they should never so nearly concern matters of state or government ) we , or our Privy Council , have power to commit any man without the cause shown " , then this " would soon dissolve the foundation and frame of our monarchy [ and ] without overthrow of our sovereignty ... we cannot suffer this power to be impeached " . 
 This message was read to the Commons later in the morning , and the MPs decided to simply ignore it , not even bothering to reply . In response to the message , the Lords proposed eight alterations to the petition and the modification of the imprisonment clause to appease the king . When these changes were debated on 13 May , they were all rejected except for one minor change in wording . The Lords still favoured a compromise , and suggested the addition of a paragraph to the petition reading " We humbly present this petition to your majesty , not only with a care of preserving our own liberties , but with due regard to leave entire that sovereign power , wherewith your majesty is trusted , for the protection , safety , and happiness of your people " . By 20 May the Commons had agreed to one more minor alteration , but had not decided whether to accept the new paragraph . Coke made a speech urging them to reject all of it , saying that to use the phrase " sovereign power " would mean admitting that the King had the power to destroy any limitations the Petition might place on his power " . 
 After further debate , the Commons informed the Lords that they would not accept the addition . The Lords attempted to rebut the arguments at a conference on 21 May , but were unsuccessful , and then proposed a joint conference of 23 members from each house to find some middle ground . When this was rejected on 24 May , the Lords abandoned any attempt to accommodate the King . Instead , they unanimously voted to join with the Commons on the Petition of Right , while passing their own resolution on 26 May insisting that their intention was " not to lessen or impeach any thing which by the oath of supremacy [ we had ] sworn to assist and defend " , assuring the King of their loyalty . With this , the amended Petition was quickly approved by the Lords on 26 May , the Commons on 27 May , and transmitted back to the Lords , who would present it to Charles . 
 = = = Acceptance by Charles = = = 
 Following the acceptance of the Petition by the House of Lords , Charles sent a message to the Commons " forbidding them to meddle with affairs of state " , something that produced a furious debate . John Finch , the Speaker of the House of Commons , announced that he had been commanded to interrupt any Member of Parliament who should insult or cast <unk> on a Minister of State , such as the Duke of Buckingham . This produced a " spectacle of passions " in the House ; the tradition of free speech within the Commons was a long one , and many MPs found themselves " unable to speak for tears running down their faces at the thought of the destruction of the liberties of Parliament " . Coke , although crying , declared that he did not know whether he would be allowed to speak in Parliament again , but named Buckingham anyway , saying that " the Duke of Buckingham is the cause of all our miseries , and till the King be informed thereof we shall never go out with honour , or sit with honour here ; that man is the grievance of grievances ; let us set down the cause of all our disasters and they will reflect upon him " . 
 Selden immediately moved that the commons produce " The Common Remonstrance against the Duke " , which demanded his removal from office . Faced with both the Petition of Right and a demand to remove his favourite , while requiring Parliament to provide subsidies for the war effort , Charles accepted defeat . After he gave a grudging assurance that the petition would be accepted on 2 June , saying : 
 The King <unk> that right be done according to the laws and customs of the realm ; and that the statutes be put in due execution , that the subject may have no just cause of complaint for any wrong or oppression , contrary to their just rights and liberties , to the preservation <unk> he holds himself in conscience as well obliged of his just prerogative . 
 Unsatisfied , with this vague answer , the Commons and the Lords banded together and demanded " that a clear and satisfactory answer be given by His Majesty in full Parliament " . On 7 June , Charles capitulated , appearing within Parliament at 4pm and , following a reading of the full Petition , saying " soit droit fait comme est desire " – the phrase normally used in the acceptance of a Parliamentary bill . This was met with widespread adulation ; contemporary accounts report the ringing of church bells and the lighting of bonfires throughout the country . As a symbolic admission of defeat , Charles also picked 7 June to restore to favour all peers in opposition to him , a list that " read like the leadership of the pro @-@ Petition forces in the Lords " . After setting out a list of individual grievances and statutes that had been broken , the Petition of Right declares that Englishmen have various " rights and liberties " , and provides that no person should be forced to provide a gift , loan or tax without an Act of Parliament , that no free individual should be imprisoned or detained unless a cause has been shown , and that soldiers or members of the Royal Navy should not be billeted in private houses without the free consent of the owner . In relation to martial law , the Petition first repeated the due process chapter of Magna Carta , and then provided that : 
 Nevertheless , of late divers commissions under Your Majesty 's great seal have issued forth , by which certain powers have been assigned and appointed commissioners , with power and authority to proceed within the land according to the justice of martial law against such soldiers and marines or other dissolute persons going with them as should commit robbery murder , etc ... and by such summary course and order as is used by armies in time of war , to proceed to the trial and condemnation of such offenders , and to cause them to be executed and put to death according to the law martial ... We do humbly pray , Your most excellent Majesty ... that the aforesaid commissions ... may be revoked and <unk> ; and that hereafter no commission of like nature may issue forth to any person or persons whatsoever to be executed as aforesaid , lest by color of them any of Your Majesty 's be destroyed or put to death contrary to the laws or practises of the land . 
 This clause was directly addressed to the various commissions issued by Charles and his military commanders , restricting the use of martial law except in war or direct rebellion and prohibiting the formation of commissions . A state of war automatically activated martial law ; as such , the only purpose for commissions , in their view , was to unjustly permit martial law in circumstances that did not require it . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Significance = = = 
 Historians have traditionally considered the passage of the Petition of Right an important moment in the Stuart period . Whig historians such as Samuel Rawson Gardiner described it as the founding of the United Kingdom 's modern constitutional monarchy , and although revisionists have " virtually abolished " Gardiner 's works , the Petition of Right is still considered an important moment , with Conrad Russell arguing that it was the " culmination of a national war crisis [ and ] an ideological watershed " . In its own right , the Petition has been described as " one of England 's most famous constitutional documents " , with writers considering it of equal standing to the Magna Carta and the 1689 Bill of Rights . Within what is now the Commonwealth of Nations , the Petition was also heavily influential ; through the various statutes which enforced Imperial law , it remains in force in both New Zealand and Australia , as well as the United Kingdom itself . 
 The Petition profoundly influenced the rights contained by the Constitution of the United States . The clauses relating to the billeting of troops later helped form the Third Amendment to the United States Constitution , which states that " No soldier shall , in time of peace be quartered in any house , without the consent of the owner , nor in time of war , but in a manner to be prescribed by law " . Steve Bachmann , writing in the Quinnipiac Law Review , goes further ; he says that the Criminal Trials Clause of the Sixth Amendment , the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment and the Civil Jury Trial Clause of the Seventh Amendment all are influenced by the Petition of Right , primarily through the Massachusetts Body of Liberties . 
 Domestically , the Petition marked " a major step on the way to the English Civil War of the 1640s " . Although Parliament lacked what would be considered political parties , and would continue to do so until the 18th century , the Petition of Right marked a substantial cooperative work between individual parliamentarians and between the Commons and Lords , something that had previously been lacking . Moreover , it saw Charles lose the " precious initiative in policy direction " ; the Commons had only previously been prevented from twisting the King 's intentions and policies due to the presence of the Lords , which acted as a buffer . With the Lords now indicating a willingness to work with the lower house , " the Crown 's most important protection within Parliament had been shaken as never before and the constitutional crisis between the Stuarts and their Parliaments had entered a new stage of development " . 
 = = = Legal status = = = 
 Clashes over the interpretation and legality of the Petition began almost immediately , with the Lords and Commons arguing with the King as early as 20 June 1628 , leading to the prorogation of Parliament on the 26th . The Petition of Right was not a formal statute , and despite it being reaffirmed as a bill by the Long Parliament in 1641 , the legal status of the initial Petition has been debated . It has been considered a declaratory act , a private bill , or simply a petition , which permitted an individual harmed by the government to take action against the crown . A petition is the oldest form of Parliamentary proceeding , and the one through which most early statutes were originally passed ; the King would be petitioned to take action by Members of Parliament , and would assent to their request ; laws passed in this way include Magna Carta and the Statute of Westminster . Whether or not this made it legally binding was debated . F.H. Relf argued that the recognition of the Petition was a judicial matter and at best a private bill , and as such it was not binding on the King or on Parliament . L.J. Reeve , on the other hand , considers it to have had the strength of a public bill ; it was a legislative act , and as such legally binding . 
 Reeve bases this argument on several things . Firstly , the judiciary of the time were asked by Charles what standing they would give to the Petition were it passed ; they concluded that it was a potentially legislative act . Charles 's assent to the Petition was also made in Parliament , not in Whitehall , something normally done with statutes , and Henry <unk> , the Clerk of the House of Commons , had the Petition placed on the statute rolls as if it were an Act of Parliament . It was later enforced by the courts ; when Selden and other Members of Parliament were imprisoned , they cited the Petition as a reason to grant habeas corpus , something the judges accepted , and the ship money case , although a victory for Charles , was a victory in spite of the Petition rather than because of it ; the judgment concluded that Charles 's actions were acceptable under the Royal Prerogative , but would otherwise be in violation of the Petition . Stephen D. White simply says that " it seems impossible to establish conclusively which of these interpretations of the petition is correct . The Petition of Right of 1628 was a unique parliamentary act . It was interpreted differently by different people . And there are probably no absolute criteria by which its true nature can be determined " . 
 = Architecture of Scotland in the Roman era = 
 The architecture of Scotland in the Roman era includes all building within the modern borders of Scotland , from the arrival of the Romans in northern Britain in the first century BCE , until their departure in the fifth century . Although Ptolemy indicated that there were 19 " towns " in Caledonia , north of the Roman province of Britannia , no clear evidence of urban settlements has been found and these were probably hillforts . There is evidence of over 1 @,@ 000 such forts , most below the Clyde @-@ Forth line , but the majority seem to have been abandoned in the Roman period . There is also evidence of distinctive stone wheelhouses and small underground souterrains . 
 From about 71 CE the Romans began military expeditions into what is now Scotland , building forts , like that at Trimontium , and probably pushing north as far as the River Tay where they created more fortifications , like those at Inchtuthil . These were soon abandoned , and the Romans settled for the occupation of the Southern Uplands by the end of the first century , below a line drawn between the Tyne and Solway Firth . This resulted in more fortifications and the building of Hadrian 's Wall across what is now northern England . Around 141 CE they moved up to construct a new limes , a sward @-@ covered wall made of turf known as the Antonine Wall , the largest Roman structure in modern Scotland . They soon retreated to Hadrian 's Wall , with occasional expeditions that involved the building and reoccupation of forts , until the collapse of Roman power in the early fifth century . 
 = = Caledonia = = 
 Caledonia was the name that the Romans gave to the land north of their province of Britannia . In his Geographia , Ptolemy , possibly drawing on earlier sources of information as well as more contemporary accounts from the Agricolan invasion , identified 19 " towns " in Caledonia . No archaeological evidence of any truly urban places has been found from this time , and the names may have indicated hill forts , temporary markets or meeting places . Most of the names are obscure : <unk> may be the modern Banchory , Alauna ( meaning " the rock " ) in the west is probably Dumbarton Rock and the place of the same name in the east of the Lowlands may be the site of Edinburgh Castle . Lindon may be Balloch on Loch Lomond side . There is evidence for about 1 @,@ 000 Iron Age hillforts in Scotland , most located below the Clyde @-@ Forth line . The majority are circular , with a single palisade around an enclosure . However , they appear to have been largely abandoned in the Roman period . There are also numerous vitrified forts , whose walls have been subjected to fire , which may date to this period , but an accurate chronology has not been created . Extensive studies of this type of fort at Finavon Hill near Forfar in Angus , suggest dates for the destruction of the site in either the last two centuries BCE , or the mid @-@ first millennium CE . Many of these forts would be reoccupied after the Roman departure . 
 Beyond the area of Roman occupation , in the west and north , there are over 60 sites identified of wheelhouses . Perhaps a development of earlier Atlantic roundhouses , these have a characteristic outer wall surrounding a circle of stone piers ( bearing a resemblance to the spokes of a wheel ) . Over 400 souterrains , small underground constructions , have been discovered in Scotland , many of them in the south @-@ east , and although few have been dated , those that have suggest a construction date in the second or third centuries CE . They are usually found close to settlements ( whose timber frames are much less well @-@ preserved ) and may have been for storing perishable agricultural products . 
 = = Early Roman constructions = = 
 The Romans began military expeditions into what is now Scotland from about 71 CE . In 78 CE Gnaeus Julius Agricola arrived in Britain to take up his appointment as the new governor and began a series of major incursions . Two years later his legions constructed a substantial fort at Trimontium near Melrose . He is said to have pushed his armies to the estuary of the " River Taus " ( usually assumed to be the River Tay ) and established forts there , including a legionary fortress at Inchtuthil . After his victory over the northern tribes at Mons Graupius in 84 CE , a series of forts and towers were established along the Gask Ridge , which marked the boundary between the Lowland and Highland zones , probably forming the first Roman limes or frontier in Scotland . 
 Agricola 's successors were unable or unwilling to further subdue the far north . The fortress at Inchtuthil was dismantled before its completion , and the other fortifications of the Gask Ridge were abandoned within the space of a few years . By CE 87 the occupation was limited to the Southern Uplands , and by the end of the first century the northern limit of Roman expansion was a line drawn between the Tyne and Solway Firth . Elginhaugh fort , in Midlothian , dates to about this period , as may Castle Greg in West Lothian . The Romans eventually withdrew to a line in what is now northern England , building the fortification known as Hadrian 's Wall from coast to coast . 
 = = The Antonine Wall and later invasions = = 
 Around 141 CE the Romans undertook a reoccupation of southern Scotland , moving up to construct a new limes between the Firth of Forth and the Firth of Clyde . The resulting Antonine Wall is the largest Roman construction inside Scotland . It is a sward @-@ covered wall made of turf , around 20 feet ( 6 m ) high , with nineteen forts and extending for 37 miles ( 60 km ) . The stone foundations and wing walls of the original forts demonstrate that the intention was to build a stone wall similar to Hadrian 's Wall , but this was quickly amended . There is a wide ditch on the north side , and a military way on the south . The Romans initially planned to build forts every 6 miles ( 10 km ) , but this was soon revised to every 2 miles ( 3 km ) . One of the best preserved forts , but also one of the smallest , is Rough Castle Fort . In addition to the forts , there are at least nine smaller fortlets , probably on Roman mile spacings , which formed part of the original scheme , some of which were later replaced by forts . The most visible fortlet is Kinneil , at the eastern end of the Wall , near Bo 'ness . Having taken twelve years to build , the wall was overrun and abandoned soon after CE 160 . The Romans retreated to the line of Hadrian 's Wall . 
 Roman troops penetrated far into the north of modern Scotland several more times , with at least four major campaigns . The Antonine Wall was occupied again for a brief period after 197 CE . The most notable invasion was in 209 when the emperor Septimius Severus led a major campaign . A string of forts was constructed in the north @-@ east ( some of which may have been begun in the earlier Antonine campaign ) . These include camps associated with the Elsick Mounth , such as <unk> , <unk> Wells , <unk> Den and <unk> . However , only two forts in Scotland , at Cramond and Carpow ( in the Tay valley ) are definitely known to have been permanently occupied during this incursion . There is evidence that these campaigns are coincident with the wholesale destruction and abandonment of souterrains in southern Scotland . This may have been due either to Roman military aggression or the collapse of local grain markets in the wake of Roman withdrawal . After the death of Severus in 210 the Romans withdrew back to Hadrian 's Wall , which would be the frontier until Roman authority in Britain collapsed in the fifth century . 
 = Saving Mr. Banks = 
 Saving Mr. Banks is a 2013 period drama film directed by John Lee Hancock from a screenplay written by Kelly Marcel and Sue Smith . Centered on the development of the 1964 film Mary Poppins , the film stars Emma Thompson as author P. L. Travers and Tom Hanks as filmmaker Walt Disney , with supporting performances by Paul Giamatti , Jason Schwartzman , Bradley Whitford , and Colin Farrell . Named after the father in Travers ' story , Saving Mr. Banks depicts the author 's fortnight @-@ long meetings during 1961 in Los Angeles , during which Disney attempts to obtain the screen rights to her novels . 
 Essential Media Entertainment and BBC Films initially developed Saving Mr. Banks as an independent production until 2011 , when producer Alison Owen approached Walt Disney Pictures for permission to use copyrighted elements . The film 's subject matter piqued Disney 's interest , leading the studio to acquire the screenplay and produce the film . Principal photography commenced the following year in September before wrapping in November 2012 ; the film was shot entirely in the Southern California area , primarily at the Walt Disney Studios in Burbank , where a majority of the film 's narrative takes place . 
 Saving Mr. Banks premiered at the London Film Festival on October 20 , 2013 , and was released theatrically that same year in the United Kingdom on November 29 and in the United States on December 13 . Upon release , the film received positive reviews , with praise directed towards the acting , screenplay , and musical score . Thompson 's performance garnered a BAFTA Award , Golden Globe Award , Screen Actors Guild Award , and Critic 's Choice Award nominations for Best Actress , while composer Thomas Newman earned an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Score . The film was also commercially successful , grossing $ 118 million at the worldwide box office . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1961 , the financially strapped author Pamela " P. L. " Travers reluctantly travels from her home in London to Los Angeles to work with Walt Disney at the urging of her agent , Diarmuid Russell . Disney has pursued the film rights to her Mary Poppins stories for twenty years , having promised his daughters that he would produce a film based on them . Travers has steadfastly resisted Disney 's efforts because she fears what he would do to her character . However , she has not written anything in a while and her book royalties have dwindled to nothing , so she risks losing her house . Still , Russell has to remind her that Disney has agreed to two major stipulations — no animation and unprecedented script approval — before she agrees to go . 
 Travers ' difficult childhood in Allora , Queensland , Australia , is depicted through flashbacks , and is the inspiration for much of Mary Poppins . Travers idolized her loving , imaginative father , Travers Robert Goff , but his chronic alcoholism resulted in his repeated firings , strained her parents ' marriage , and caused her distressed mother to attempt suicide . Goff died at an early age from tuberculosis when Travers was seven years old . 
 In Los Angeles , Travers is irritated by what she perceives as the city 's unreality and the inhabitants ' intrusive friendliness , personified by her limousine driver , Ralph . At the Walt Disney Studios in Burbank , Travers meets the creative team that are developing Mary Poppins for the screen : screenwriter Don DaGradi , and music composers Richard and Robert Sherman . She finds their presumptions and casual manners highly improper , a view she also holds of the jocular Disney . 
 Travers ' working relationship with Disney and his team is difficult from the outset , with her insistence that Mary Poppins is the enemy of sentiment and whimsy . Disney and his people are puzzled by Travers ' disdain for fantasy , given the nature of the Mary Poppins story , as well as Travers ' own rich imagination . She particularly objects to how the character George Banks , the estranged father of the children in Mary Poppins ' charge , is depicted , insisting that he is neither cold nor cruel . Gradually , they grasp how deeply personal the Mary Poppins stories are to her and how many of the characters were inspired by her past . 
 The team realize Travers has valid criticisms and make changes , though she becomes increasingly disengaged as painful childhood memories resurface . Seeking to understand what troubles her , Disney invites Travers to Disneyland , which , along with her developing friendship with Ralph , the creative team 's revisions to the George Banks character , and the addition of a new song and a different ending , help dissolve Travers ' opposition . Her creativity reawakens , and she begins working with the team ; however , when Travers discovers that there is to be an animation sequence , she confronts Disney over his broken promise and returns home . 
 Disney learns that Travers is actually her pen name , taken from her father 's given name . Her real name is Helen Goff , and she 's actually Australian , not British . This gives Disney new insight into Travers , and he follows her to London . Arriving unexpectedly at her door , Disney tells her that he also had a less @-@ than @-@ ideal childhood , but stresses the healing value of his art . He urges Travers to not let deeply @-@ rooted past disappointments dictate the present . Travers relents and grants Disney the film rights . 
 Three years later , in 1964 , Mary Poppins is to have its world premiere at Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood . Disney has not invited Travers , fearing how she might react with the press watching . Prompted by Russell , Travers shows up unannounced at Disney 's office ; he reluctantly issues her an invitation . Initially , she watches Mary Poppins with a lack of enthusiasm , particularly during the animated sequences . She gradually warms to the rest of the film ; however , becoming deeply moved by the depiction of George Banks ' personal crisis and redemption . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Emma Thompson as Pamela " P. L. " Travers , birth name Helen Goff . 
 Annie Rose Buckley as seven @-@ year @-@ old Helen 
 Tom Hanks as Walt Disney 
 Colin Farrell as Travers Robert Goff , Helen 's father 
 Ruth Wilson as Margaret Goff , Helen 's mother 
 Paul Giamatti as Ralph , Travers ' chauffeur 
 Bradley Whitford as Don DaGradi , co @-@ writer of the screenplay for Mary Poppins 
 B. J. Novak as Robert B. Sherman , composer and lyricist who co @-@ wrote the film 's songs with his brother Richard 
 Jason Schwartzman as Richard M. Sherman , composer and lyricist 
 Kathy Baker as Tommie , Disney 's executive assistant 
 Melanie Paxson as Dolly , Disney 's secretary 
 Rachel Griffiths as Ellie , Helen 's aunt , who serves as the model for Mary Poppins 
 Ronan Vibert as Diarmuid Russell 
 Kristopher <unk> as Dick Van Dyke 
 Victoria Summer as Julie Andrews 
 Credits adapted from The New York Times . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 2002 , Australian producer Ian Collie produced a documentary film on P. L. Travers titled The Shadow of " Mary Poppins " . During the documentary 's production , Collie noticed that there was " an obvious biopic there " and convinced Essential Media and Entertainment to develop a feature film with Sue Smith writing the screenplay . The project attracted the attention of BBC Films , which decided to finance the project , and Ruby Films ' Alison Owen , who subsequently hired Kelly Marcel to co @-@ write the screenplay with Smith . Marcel 's drafts removed a subplot involving Travers and her son , and divided the story into a two @-@ part narrative : the creative conflict between Travers and Walt Disney , and her dealings with her childhood issues , describing it as " a story about the pain of a little girl who suffered , and the grown woman who allowed herself to let go " . Marcel 's version , however , featured certain intellectual property rights of music and imagery which would be impossible to use without permission from The Walt Disney Company . " There was always that elephant in the room , which is Disney , " Collie recalled . " We knew Walt Disney was a key character in the film and we wanted to use quite a bit of the music . We knew we 'd eventually have to show Disney . " In early 2010 , Robert B. Sherman provided producer Alison Owen with an advance copy of a salient chapter from his then upcoming book release , Moose : Chapters From My Life . The chapter entitled , " ' Tween Pavement and Stars " contained characterizations and anecdotes which proved seminal to Marcel 's script rewrite , in particular , the anecdote about there not being the color red in London . In July 2011 , while attending the Ischia Film Festival , Owen met with Corky Hale , who offered to present the screenplay to Richard M. Sherman . Sherman read the screenplay and gave the producers his support . Later that year , Marcel and Smith 's screenplay was listed in Franklin Leonard 's The Black List , voted by producers as one of the best screenplays that were not in production . 
 In November 2011 , Walt Disney Pictures ' president of production , Sean Bailey , was informed of Marcel 's existing script . Realizing that the screenplay included a depiction of the studio 's namesake , Bailey conferred with Disney CEO Bob Iger and Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn , the latter of whom referred to the film as a " brand deposit , " a term adopted from Steve Jobs . Together , the executives discussed the studio 's potential choices ; purchase the script and shut the project down , put the film in turnaround , or co @-@ produce the film themselves . With executive approval , the studio acquired the screenplay in February 2012 and joined the production with Owen , Collie and Philip <unk> as producers , and Christine Langan , Troy Lum , Andrew Mason , and Paul <unk> serving as executive producers . John Lee Hancock was hired to direct the film later that same month . 
 Iger subsequently contacted Tom Hanks to consider playing the role of Walt Disney , which would become the first @-@ ever depiction of Disney in a mainstream film . Hanks accepted the role , viewing it as " an opportunity to play somebody as world @-@ shifting as Picasso or Chaplin " . Hanks made several visits to the Walt Disney Family Museum and interviewed some of Disney 's former employees and family relatives , including his daughter Diane Disney Miller . The film was subsequently dedicated to Disney Miller , who died shortly before it was released . In April 2012 , Emma Thompson entered final negotiations to star as P. L. Travers , after the studio was unable to secure Meryl Streep for the part . Thompson said that the role was the most difficult one that she has played , describing Travers as " a woman of quite eye @-@ watering complexity and contradiction . " " She wrote a very good essay on sadness , because she was , in fact , a very sad woman . She 'd had a very rough childhood , the alcoholism of her father being part of it and the attempted suicide of her mother being another part of it . I think that she spent her whole life in a state of fundamental <unk> and hence got a lot done . " Colin Farrell , Paul Giamatti , Jason Schwartzman , Bradley Whitford , B. J. Novak , and Ruth Wilson were cast in July 2012 . 
 With Disney 's backing , the production team was given access to 36 hours of Travers ' audio recordings of herself , the Shermans , and co @-@ writer Don DaGradi that were produced during the development of Mary Poppins , in addition to letters written between Disney and Travers from the 1940s through the 1960s . Richard M. Sherman also worked on the film as a music supervisor and shared his side of his experiences working with Travers on Mary Poppins . Initially , Hancock had reservations about Disney 's involvement with the film , believing that the studio would edit the screenplay in their co @-@ founder 's favor . However , Marcel admitted that the studio " specifically didn 't want to come in and sanitize it or change Walt in any way . " Hancock elaborated , " I was still worried that they might want to chip away at Walt a little bit ... I thought the portrayal of Walt was fair and human so I came in and they said , ‘ No , we like it . ’ But still , every step of the way , I had my fist balled up behind my back ready to fight in case it happened , but it didn ’ t . " Although the filmmakers did not receive any creative interference from Disney regarding Walt Disney 's depiction , the studio did request that they omit any onscreen inhalation of cigarettes due to the company 's policy of not directly depicting smoking in films released under the Walt Disney Pictures banner , and to avoid receiving an R @-@ rating from the Motion Picture Association of America . Instead , Disney is shown extinguishing a lit cigarette in one scene , and his notorious smoker 's cough is heard off @-@ screen several times throughout the film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began in September 2012 in Los Angeles . Although some scenes were originally planned to be shot in Queensland , Australia , all filming took place in the Southern California area , including the Walt Disney Studios lot in Burbank , Disneyland Park in Anaheim , Big Sky Ranch in Simi Valley , the Los Angeles County Arboretum and Botanic Garden in Arcadia , Heritage Square Museum in Montecito Heights , Ontario International Airport in San Bernardino , Courthouse Square at Universal Studios , and the TCL Chinese Theatre in Hollywood . The largest set built for the film was the interior of the Walt Disney Studios ' Animation Building , which production designer Michael Corenblith referred to as " a character in the story " . The exterior of the Beverly Hills Hotel and Disney 's personal office were also recreated , with the Langham Huntington in Pasadena acting as an interior double for the Beverly Hills Hotel . To ensure authenticity , Corenblith used photographs and a furniture display from the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library as references for Disney 's office ; the set was also adorned with Disney 's personal Academy Awards loaned from a Walt Disney World Resort exhibit . For the Disneyland sequences , scenes were shot during the early morning with certain areas cordoned off during the park 's operation , including the park 's entrance courtyard , Main Street U.S.A. , Sleeping Beauty Castle , Fantasyland , and the King Arthur Carrousel attraction . Extra roles were filled by Disneyland Resort cast members . In order for the park to be portrayed accurately in the story 's time period , Corenblith had the Main Street storefronts redressed to reflect their 1961 appearance ; post @-@ 1961 attractions were kept obstructed so they would not show up on camera . To recreate the original film 's premiere at the Chinese Theatre , set designers closed Hollywood Boulevard and recreated the street and theater to resemble their 1964 appearances . After scheduled filming in Australia had been scrapped , such cinematographer John Schwartzman compared the landscape of Queensland with that of rural Southern California , and realized that both had similar traits in natural lighting . 
 Emma Thompson prepared for her role by studying Travers ' own recordings conducted during the development of Mary Poppins , and also styled her natural hair after Travers ' , due to the actress 's disdain for wigs . To accurately convey Walt Disney 's midwestern dialect , Tom Hanks listened to archival recordings of Disney and practiced the voice while reading newspapers . Hanks also grew his own mustache for the role , which underwent heavy scrutiny , with the filmmakers going so far as to match the dimensions of Hanks ' mustache to that of Disney 's . Jason Schwartzman and B. J. Novak worked closely with Richard M. Sherman during pre @-@ production and filming . Sherman described the actors as " perfect talents " for their roles as himself and his brother , Robert . Costume designer Daniel <unk> had Thompson wear authentic jewelry borrowed from the Walt Disney Family Museum , and ensured that Hanks ' wardrobe included the Smoke Tree Ranch emblem from the Palm Springs property embroidered on his neckties , which Disney always wore . The design department also had to recreate several of the costumed Disney characters as they appeared in the 1960s . Filming lasted nine weeks and was completed on November 22 , 2012 . Walt Disney Animation Studios reproduced an animation of Tinker Bell for the scene that recreates an opening segment from an episode of Walt Disney Presents . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Thomas Newman composed the film 's original score . In regards to incorporating his own musical style to the film 's period setting , Newman stated that " there was room for a real tune @-@ based score here that could reflect the basic joy in that kind of writing that the Sherman Brothers brought to Mary Poppins . Newman , however , refrained from creating an " adaptation score " of the Shermans ' music from the original film . Newman 's process of scoring the film included playing themes to filmed scenes , so that he could " listen to what the music does to an image " , and not wanting to " clutter the proceedings with music . " The flashback sequences to Travers ' childhood provided the most work for Newman . He explains that , " You had to turn on a dime to make the transition back to the ' present , ' when Travers and the Sherman brothers are working on the script for Mary Poppins . And that was fun , but also musically challenging . ” For the score 's instrumentation , Newman primarily employed a string orchestra with some woodwinds and brass , as well as including piano and hammered instruments that were " appropriate to the time period " , such as dulcimers . The film 's score was recorded at the Newman Scoring Stage in Los Angeles , while the cast recorded several of the Shermans ' songs at Capitol Studios for use as playback during the film 's diegetic music scenes , including " Chim Chim Cher @-@ ee " , " <unk> " , " A Spoonful of Sugar " , " Fidelity <unk> Bank " , " Feed the Birds " , and Let 's Go Fly a Kite " . Walt Disney Records released two editions of the soundtrack on December 10 , 2013 : a single @-@ disc and a two @-@ disc digipak deluxe edition , containing original demo recordings by the Shermans and selected songs from Mary Poppins . 
 = = Historical accuracy = = 
 Saving Mr. Banks depicts several events that differ from recorded accounts . The premise of the script — that Walt Disney had to convince P.L. Travers to hand over the film rights , including the scene when he finally persuades her — is fictionalized , as Disney had already secured the film rights ( subject to Travers ' approval of the script ) when Travers arrived to consult with the Disney staff . Disney , in fact , left Burbank to vacation in Palm Springs a few days into Travers ' visit and was not present at the studio when several of the film 's scenes depicting him to be present actually took place . Therefore , many of the dialogue scenes between Travers and Disney are adapted from letters , telegrams , and telephone correspondence between the two . Although Travers was assigned a limousine driver , the character of Ralph is fictionalized and intended to be an amalgamation of the studio 's drivers . In real life , Disney story editor Bill Dover was assigned as Travers ' guide and companion during her time in Los Angeles . 
 The film also depicts Travers coming to amicable terms with Disney , implying her approval of his changes to the story . In reality , she never approved of softening the harsher aspects of Mary Poppins ' character , remained ambivalent about the music , and never came around to the use of animation . Disney overruled her objections to portions of the final film , citing contract stipulations that he had final cut privilege . Travers had initially not been invited to the film 's premiere , until she " embarrassed " a Disney executive into extending her an invitation ; this is depicted in the film as coaxing Disney himself . After the premiere , she reportedly approached Disney and told him that the animated sequences had to be removed . Disney dismissed her request , saying , " Pamela , the ship has sailed . " 
 Although the film portrays Travers as being emotionally moved during the premiere of Mary Poppins — overlaid with images of her childhood , which is implied to be attributed to her feelings about her father — co @-@ screenwriter Kelly Marcel and several critics note that in real life , Travers ' show of emotion was actually a result of anger and frustration over the final product . Reportedly , Travers felt that in the end , the film betrayed the artistic integrity of her work and story 's characters . Resentful over what she considered poor treatment at the hands of Walt Disney , Travers vowed to never permit Disney to adapt her other novels for any purpose . Travers ' last will bans all American adaptation of her works to any form of media . According to the Chicago Tribune , Disney was " indulging in a little revisionist history with an upbeat spin " , adding , " the truth was always complicated " and that Travers subsequently viewed the film multiple times . 
 English writer Brian Sibley found Travers still gun @-@ shy from her experiences with Disney when he was hired in the 1980s to write a possible Mary Poppins sequel . Sibley reported that Travers told him , " I could only agree if I could do it on my own terms . I 'd have to work with someone I trust . " Regardless , while watching the original film together — the first time Travers had seen it since the premiere — she became excited at times and thought certain aspects were excellent , while others were unappealing . The sequel never went to production , and when approached to do a stage adaptation in the 1990s , she only acquiesced on the condition that English @-@ born writers and no one from the film production were to be directly involved with the musical 's development . 
 The film also depicts Travers ' Aunt Ellie ( her mother 's sister ) , who comes to help the family when her father becomes terminally ill , as Travers ' model for Mary Poppins , with her even using several of Poppins ' catchphrases from the film . In fact , Travers identified her great aunt Helen Morehead ( her mother 's aunt ) , as the model for Poppins . 
 = = Release = = 
 Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures released a trailer for the film on July 10 , 2013 . Saving Mr. Banks held its world premiere at the London Film Festival on October 20 , 2013 . On November 7 , 2013 , Walt Disney Pictures held the film 's U.S. premiere at the TCL Chinese Theatre during the opening night of the 2013 AFI Film Festival , the same location where Mary Poppins premiered . The original film was also screened for its 50th anniversary . 
 Saving Mr. Banks also served as the Gala Presentation at the 2013 Napa Valley Film Festival on November 13 , and was screened at the AARP Film Festival in Los Angeles on November 17 , as Disney heavily campaigned Saving Mr. Banks for Academy Awards consideration . On December 9 , 2013 , the film was given an exclusive corporate premiere in the Main Theater of the Walt Disney Studios lot in Burbank . The film was released theatrically in the United States on December 13 , 2013 , and in general theatrical release on December 20 . 
 Saving Mr. Banks grossed $ 83 @.@ 3 million in North America and $ 34 @.@ 6 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 117 @.@ 9 million , against a budget of $ 35 million . The film grossed $ 9 @.@ 3 million in its opening weekend in the United States , finishing 5th at the box office behind The Hobbit : The Desolation of Smaug ( $ 31 @.@ 5 million ) , Anchorman 2 : The Legend Continues ( $ 26 @.@ 2 million ) , Frozen ( $ 19 @.@ 6 million ) , and American Hustle ( $ 19 @.@ 1 million ) . 
 Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Saving Mr. Banks on Blu @-@ ray , DVD , and digital download on March 18 , 2014 . The film debuted at No. 2 in Blu @-@ ray and DVD sales in the United States according to Nielsen 's sales chart . The home media release included three deleted scenes that were cut from the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Saving Mr. Banks received positive reviews from film critics , with major praise directed to the acting ; particularly Thompson , Hanks , and Farrell 's performances . Film review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 79 % " Certified Fresh " approval rating from critics , based on 231 reviews with an average score of 7 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads : " Aggressively likable and sentimental to a fault , Saving Mr. Banks pays tribute to the Disney legacy with excellent performances and sweet , high @-@ spirited charm . " Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 65 ( out of 100 ) based on 46 reviews from mainstream critics , considered to be " generally favorable " . 
 Leslie <unk> of The Hollywood Reporter praised the film as an " affecting if somewhat soft @-@ <unk> comedy drama , elevated by excellent performances . " The Reporter wrote that " Emma Thompson takes charge of the central role of P. L. Travers with an authority that makes you wonder how anybody else could ever have been considered . " Scott Foundas of Variety wrote that the film " has all the makings of an irresistible backstage tale , and it 's been brought to the screen with a surplus of old @-@ fashioned Disney showmanship ... " , and that Tom Hanks 's portrayal captured Walt Disney 's " folksy charisma and canny powers of persuasion — at once father , confessor and the shrewdest of businessmen . " Overall , he praised the film as " very rich in its sense of creative people and their spirit of self @-@ reinvention . " 
 The Washington Post 's Ann Hornaday rated the film three out of four stars , writing : " Saving Mr. Banks doesn 't always straddle its stories and time periods with the utmost grace . But the film — which John Lee Hancock directed from a script by Kelly Marcel and Sue Smith — more than makes up for its occasionally unwieldy structure in telling a fascinating and ultimately deeply affecting story , along the way giving viewers tantalizing glimpses of the beloved 1964 movie musical , in both its creation and final form . " The New York Times ' A. O. Scott gave a positive review , declaring the film as " an embellished , tidied @-@ up but nonetheless reasonably authentic glimpse of the Disney entertainment machine at work . " 
 Mark Kermode writing for The Observer awarded the film four out of five stars , lauding Thompson 's performance as " impeccable " , elaborating that " Thompson dances her way through Travers ' conflicting emotions , giving us a fully rounded portrait of a person who is hard to like but impossible not to love . " Michael Phillips of Chicago Tribune felt similarly , writing : " Thompson 's the show . Each withering put @-@ down , every jaundiced utterance , lands with a little ping . " In regard to the screenplay , he wrote that " screenwriters Kelly Marcel and Sue Smith treat everyone gently and with the utmost respect . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone also gave the film three out of four stars and equally commended the performances of the cast . 
 Alonso Duralde of TheWrap described the film as a " whimsical , moving and occasionally insightful tale ... director John Lee Hancock luxuriates in the period detail of early- ’ 60s Disney @-@ ana " . Entertainment Weekly gave the film a " B + " grade , explaining that " the trick here is how perfectly Thompson and Hanks portray the gradual thaw in their characters ' frosty alliance , empathizing with each other 's equally miserable upbringings in a beautiful three @-@ <unk> scene late in the film . " Kenneth Turan of Los Angeles Times wrote that the film " does not strictly hew to the historical record where the eventual resolution of this conflict is concerned , " but admitted that it " is easy to accept this fictionalizing as part of the price to be paid for Thompson 's engaging performance . " 
 David Gritten of The Daily Telegraph described the confrontational interaction between Thompson and Hanks as " terrific " , singling out Thompson 's " bravura performance " , and calling the film itself " smart , witty entertainment " . Kate Muir of The Times spoke highly of Thompson and Hanks 's performances . Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal , however , considered Colin Farrell to be the film 's " standout performance " . IndieWire 's Ashley Clark wrote that the film " is witty , well @-@ crafted and well @-@ performed mainstream entertainment which , perhaps unavoidably , cleaves to a well @-@ worn Disney template stating that all problems — however psychologically deep @-@ rooted — can be overcome . " Another staff writer labeled Thompson 's performance as her best since Sense and Sensibility , and stated that " she makes the Australian @-@ born British transplant a curmudgeonly delight . " Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian enjoyed Hanks ' role as Disney , suggesting that , despite its brevity , the film would have been largely " bland " without it . 
 The film did receive some criticism . Geoffrey Macnab of The Independent gave the film a mixed review , writing : " On the one hand , Saving Mr. Banks ( which was developed by BBC Films and has a British producer ) is a probing , insightful character study with a very dark undertow . On the other , it is a cheery , upbeat marketing exercise in which the Disney organization is re @-@ promoting one of its most popular film characters . " Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle concluded that if the film " " were 100 percent false and yet felt true , that would be fine . But this has the self @-@ conscious whiff , if not of mendacity , then of public relations . " Lou Lumenick of The New York Post criticized the accuracy of the film 's events , concluding that " Saving Mr. Banks is ultimately much less about magic than making the sale , in more ways than one . " American history lecturer John Wills praised the film 's attention to detail , such as the inclusion of Travers ' original recordings , but doubted that the interpersonal relations between Travers and Disney were as amicable as portrayed in the film . Landon Palmer of Film School Rejects also described several moments where the film had a " shrewd consumption of [ the company 's ] own criticisms " , only to later negate them and Disney @-@ fy Travers as a character . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Saving Mr. Banks was nominated for several awards and earned accolades from various organizations , critics ' groups and circles , particularly in recognition of Emma Thompson . The film received five nominations at the 67th British Academy Film Awards , including Best British Film , Best Actress in a Leading Role , Outstanding Debut by a British Writer , Director or Producer , Best Film Music , and Best Costume Design . 
 The film received a Best Original Score nomination at the 86th Academy Awards , where — despite not earning a nomination — the film was widely considered by pundits to be a front @-@ runner for Best Picture . The film also received single nominations at the 71st Golden Globe Awards and 20th Screen Actors Guild Awards , where Thompson was nominated for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama and Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role , respectively . Additionally , Thompson won both the Empire Award for Best Actress and the National Board of Review Award for Best Actress for her performance , while the film itself was selected by the National Board of Review as one of the year 's top 10 films . Saving Mr. Banks was named by the American Film Institute as one of the top ten films of 2013 . 
 = Sudan women 's national football team = 
 The Sudan women 's national football team is an unofficial , non @-@ Fédération Internationale de Football Association ( FIFA ) recognised team called The Challenge that plays in a domestic competition in Khartoum against teams wearing traditional Muslim garb . It played its first competitive match in 2006 . No FIFA recognised senior national team has played a single FIFA @-@ recognised game . The development of a national team faces several challenges common to much of Africa , along with Sudan @-@ specific issues such as religion . There is an additional problem of a fatwa banning the creation of women 's teams . 
 = = The team = = 
 In 1985 , few countries in the world had a women 's national football team , including Sudan . A FIFA recognised Sudanese national team has never participated in a major regional and international event . As of June 2012 , the team has not played a single FIFA sanctioned game . The country has never entered the Women 's World Cup , competed in the 2010 African Women 's Championships , or participated in the 2011 All @-@ Africa Games . As of March 2012 , no team from the country appears on FIFA 's worldwide ranking , and a national team did not officially exist . 
 Sudan is one of the only two Muslim countries in the region to have a women 's league . According to <unk> and Bailey in Fundamentalism in the Modern World Vol 2 : Fundamentalism and Communication : Culture , Media and the Public Sphere , the fact that Sudan has a women 's league could be critical for the development of a national team . An informal national team called " The Challenge " has been created inside the league . This team refuses to wear the hijab or wear traditional Muslim clothing while playing and is based in Khartoum . The unofficial national team is not recognised by , nor receives support , from the Sudan Football Association . In 2006 , the team played its first competitive match . The team was captained by Sara Edward and played against a side from Sudan University that wore traditional garb . The quality of play was not high and the game ended in a 2 @-@ 0 win for the Challenge team . 
 The national team continues to lack FIFA recognition . In 2012 , the " Islamic Fiqh Council in Sudan issued a fatwa ( religious order ) saying that it is forbidden for the country to create a women 's soccer team , deeming it an immoral act " , in response to a question from FIFA regarding the feasibility of creating a team . The fatwah suggested that football is a men 's sport and women should not participate in it because it challenges the differences between men and women . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Women 's football in Africa in general faces many challenges , including limited access to education , poverty amongst women in the wider society , and fundamental inequality that occasionally allows for female specific human rights abuses . At the same time , if quality female players in Africa are developed , many leave their home countries to seek greater football opportunities in places such as Northern Europe or the United States . Funding for women 's football in Africa is also an issue ; most of the funding for women 's football and for the women 's national teams comes from FIFA , not the national football association . 
 Inside the Sudan , religion is an issue with growing the game . Most footballers wanting to play are required to wear the hijab and play while fully covered . While football was organised inside the country with 440 men 's clubs in 2006 , and the first ever women 's game being played in the country that year in February between <unk> and Sudan University at Sports ’ City , Sudan University , development was hindered because a fatwa by the Fiqh Council of Islamic in 2006 condemning the creation of a women 's league in Sudan . Still , in the South Sudan in 2006 , the local government was indicating their support of women 's football . By 2009 , women 's football programmes had been established in the Sudan . That year , there were ten senior women 's teams , a school @-@ based competition and a regional competition established . Young girls informally play the game in refugee camps in the Darfur region . Rights to broadcast the 2011 Women 's World Cup in the country were bought by Al Jazeera . 
 The Sudan Football Association , which was founded in 1946 , and FIFA affiliated in 1948 , was one of the founding members of Confederation of African Football , and continues to be a member of the Confederation . In November 2011 , a female association member , Laila Khalid , attended a meeting in South Africa where women 's football was discussed , specifically mentioning the problems faced in growing the game in Africa . 
 = Congo Crisis = 
 The Congo Crisis ( French : <unk> congolaise ) was a period of political upheaval and conflict in the Republic of the Congo ( today the Democratic Republic of the Congo ) between 1960 and 1965 . It began almost immediately after the Congo became independent from Belgium and ended , unofficially , with the entire country under the rule of Joseph @-@ Désiré Mobutu . Constituting a series of civil wars , the Congo Crisis was also a proxy conflict in the Cold War in which the Soviet Union and United States supported opposing factions . Around 100 @,@ 000 people are believed to have been killed during the crisis . 
 A nationalist movement in the Belgian Congo demanding the end of colonial rule led to the country 's independence on 30 June 1960 . Minimal preparations had been made and many issues , such as the questions of federalism and ethnicity , remained unresolved . In the first week of July , a mutiny broke out in the army and violence erupted between black and white civilians . Belgium sent troops to protect fleeing whites and two areas of the country , Katanga and South Kasai , seceded , with Belgian support . Amid continuing unrest and violence , the United Nations deployed peacekeepers , but the UN Secretary @-@ General Dag Hammarskjöld refused to use these troops to help the central government in Léopoldville fight the secessionists . Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba , the charismatic leader of the largest nationalist faction , reacted by calling for assistance from the Soviet Union , which promptly sent military advisors and other support . 
 The involvement of the Soviets split the Congolese government and led to impasse between Lumumba and the President , Joseph Kasa @-@ Vubu . Mobutu , in command of the army , broke this deadlock with a coup d 'état , expelled the Soviet advisors and established a new government effectively under his control . Lumumba was placed in captivity and subsequently executed in 1961 . A rival government , founded by Antoine Gizenga and Lumumba supporters in the eastern city of Stanleyville , gained Soviet support but was crushed in 1962 . Meanwhile , the UN took a more aggressive stance towards the secessionists after Hammarskjöld was killed in a plane crash in late 1961 . Supported by UN troops , Léopoldville defeated the secessionist movements in Katanga and South Kasai by the start of 1963 . 
 With Katanga and South Kasai back under the government 's control , a reconciliatory compromise constitution was adopted and the exiled Katangese leader , Moise Tshombe , was recalled to head an interim administration while fresh elections were organised . Before these could be held , however , Maoist @-@ inspired militants calling themselves the " Simbas " rose up in the east of the country . The Simbas took control of a significant amount of territory and proclaimed a communist " People 's Republic of the Congo " in Stanleyville . Government forces gradually retook territory and , in November 1964 , Belgium and the United States intervened militarily in Stanleyville to recover hostages from Simba captivity . The Simbas were defeated and collapsed soon after . Following the elections in March 1965 , a new political stalemate developed between Tshombe and Kasa @-@ Vubu , forcing the government into near @-@ paralysis . Mobutu mounted a second coup d 'état in November 1965 , now taking personal control . Under Mobutu 's rule , the Congo ( renamed Zaire in 1971 ) was transformed into a dictatorship which would endure until his deposition in 1997 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Belgian rule = = = 
 Colonial rule in the Congo began in the late 19th century . King Leopold II of Belgium , frustrated by Belgium 's lack of international power and prestige , attempted to persuade the Belgian government to support colonial expansion around the then @-@ largely unexplored Congo Basin . The Belgian government 's ambivalence about the idea led Leopold to eventually create the colony on his own account . With support from a number of Western countries , who viewed Leopold as a useful buffer between rival colonial powers , Leopold achieved international recognition for a personal colony , the Congo Free State , in 1885 . By the turn of the century , however , the violence of Free State officials against indigenous Congolese and the ruthless system of economic extraction had led to intense diplomatic pressure on Belgium to take official control of the country , which it did in 1908 , creating the Belgian Congo . 
 Belgian rule in the Congo was based around the " colonial trinity " ( trinité coloniale ) of state , missionary and private company interests . The privileging of Belgian commercial interests meant that large amounts of capital flowed into the Congo and that individual regions became specialised . On many occasions , the interests of the government and private enterprise became closely tied and the state helped companies break strikes and remove other barriers imposed by the indigenous population . The country was split into nesting , hierarchically organised administrative subdivisions , and run uniformly according to a set " native policy " ( politique indigène ) — in contrast to the British and the French , who generally favoured the system of indirect rule whereby traditional leaders were retained in positions of authority under colonial oversight . There was also a high degree of racial segregation . Large numbers of white immigrants who moved to the Congo after the end of World War II came from across the social spectrum , but were nonetheless always treated as superior to blacks . 
 During the 1940s and 1950s , the Congo experienced an unprecedented level of urbanisation and the colonial administration began various development programmes aimed at making the territory into a " model colony " . One of the results of the measures was the development of a new middle class of Europeanised African " évolués " in the cities . By the 1950s the Congo had a wage labour force twice as large as that in any other African colony . The Congo 's rich natural resources , including uranium — much of the uranium used by the U.S. nuclear programme during World War II was Congolese — led to substantial interest in the region from both the Soviet Union and the United States as the Cold War developed . 
 = = = Politics and radicalisation = = = 
 An African nationalist movement developed in the Belgian Congo during the 1950s , primarily among the évolués . The movement was divided into a number of parties and groups which were broadly divided on ethnic and geographical lines and opposed to one another . The largest , the Mouvement National Congolais ( MNC ) , was a united front organisation dedicated to achieving independence " within a reasonable " time . It was created around a charter which was signed by , among others , Patrice Lumumba , Cyrille Adoula and Joseph <unk> , but others accused the party of being too moderate . Lumumba became a leading figure within the MNC , and by the end of 1959 , the party claimed to have 58 @,@ 000 members . 
 The MNC 's main rival was the Alliance des Bakongo ( ABAKO ) , led by Joseph Kasa @-@ Vubu , who advocated a more radical ideology than the MNC , based around calls for immediate independence and the promotion of regional identity . ABAKO 's stance was more ethnic nationalist than the MNC 's ; it argued that an independent Congo should be run by the Bakongo as inheritors of the pre @-@ colonial Kingdom of the Kongo . The Confédération des Associations <unk> du Katanga ( CONAKAT ) , a localist party led by Moise Tshombe , was the third major organisation ; it advocated federalism and primarily represented the southern province of Katanga . These were joined by a number of smaller parties which emerged as the nationalist movement developed , including the radical Parti Solidaire Africain ( PSA ) , and factions representing the interests of minor ethnic groups like the Alliance des <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 Although it was the largest of the African nationalist parties , the MNC had many different factions within it that took differing stances on a number of issues . It was increasingly polarised between moderate évolués and the more radical mass membership . A radical faction headed by <unk> and Albert Kalonji split away in July 1959 , but failed to induce mass defections by other MNC members . The dissident faction became known as the MNC @-@ Kalonji ( MNC @-@ K ) , while the majority group became the MNC @-@ Lumumba ( MNC @-@ L ) . The split divided the party 's support base into those who endured with Lumumba , chiefly in the Stanleyville region in the north @-@ east , and those who backed the MNC @-@ K , which became most popular around the southern city of Élisabethville and among the Luba ethnic group . 
 Major riots broke out in Léopoldville , the Congolese capital , on 4 January 1959 after a political demonstration turned violent . The Force Publique , the colonial gendarmerie , used force against the rioters — at least 49 people were killed , and total casualties may have been as high as 500 . The nationalist parties ' influence expanded outside the major cities for the first time , and nationalist demonstrations and riots became a regular occurrence over the next year , bringing large numbers of black people from outside the évolué class into the independence movement . Many blacks began to test the boundaries of the colonial system by refusing to pay taxes or abide by minor colonial regulations . The bulk of the ABAKO leadership was arrested , leaving the MNC in an advantageous position . 
 These developments led to the white community also becoming increasing radicalised . Some whites planned to attempt a coup d 'état if a black majority government took power . As law and order began to break down , white civilians formed militia groups known as Corps de <unk> <unk> ( " European Volunteer Corps " ) to police their neighbourhoods . These militias frequently attacked blacks . 
 = = = Independence = = = 
 In the fallout from the Léopoldville riots , the report of a Belgian parliamentary working group on the future of the Congo was published in which a strong demand for " internal autonomy " was noted . August de <unk> , the Minister of the Colonies , launched a high @-@ profile Round Table Conference in Brussels in January 1960 , with the leaders of all the major Congolese parties in attendance . Lumumba , who had been arrested following riots in Stanleyville , was released in the run @-@ up to the conference and headed the MNC @-@ L delegation . The Belgian government had hoped for a period of at least 30 years before independence , but Congolese pressure at the conference led to 30 June 1960 being set as the date . Issues including federalism , ethnicity and the future role of Belgium in Congolese affairs were left unresolved after the delegates failed to reach agreement . 
 Belgians began campaigning against Lumumba , whom they wanted to marginalise ; they accused him of being a communist and , hoping to fragment the nationalist movement , supported rival , ethnic @-@ based parties like CONAKAT . Many Belgians hoped that an independent Congo would form part of a federation , like the French Community or British Commonwealth of Nations , and that close economic and political association with Belgium would continue . As independence approached , the Belgian government organised Congolese elections in May 1960 . These resulted in a broad MNC majority . 
 The proclamation of the independent Republic of the Congo , and the end of colonial rule , occurred as planned on 30 June 1960 . In a ceremony at the Palais de la Nation in Léopoldville , King Baudouin gave a speech in which he presented the end of colonial rule in the Congo as the culmination of the Belgian " civilising mission " begun by Leopold II . After the King 's address , Lumumba gave an unscheduled speech in which he angrily attacked colonialism and described independence as the crowning success of the nationalist movement . Although Lumumba 's address was acclaimed by figures such as Malcolm X , it nearly provoked a diplomatic incident with Belgium ; even some Congolese politicians perceived it as unnecessarily provocative . Nevertheless , independence was celebrated across the Congo . 
 Politically , the new state had semi @-@ presidential constitution , known as the loi fondamentale , in which executive power was shared between President and Prime Minister in a system known as <unk> . Kasa @-@ Vubu was proclaimed President , and Lumumba Prime Minister , of the Republic of the Congo . Despite the objections of CONAKAT and others , the constitution was largely centralist , concentrating power in the central government in Léopoldville , and did not devolve significant powers to provincial level . 
 = = Beginning of the crisis = = 
 = = = Force Publique mutiny , racial violence and Belgian intervention = = = 
 Despite the proclamation of independence , neither the Belgian nor the Congolese government intended the colonial social order to end immediately . The Belgian government hoped that whites might keep their position indefinitely . The Republic of the Congo was still reliant on colonial institutions like the Force Publique to function from day to day , and white technical experts , installed by the Belgians , were retained in the broad absence of suitably qualified black Congolese replacements ( partly the result of colonial restrictions regarding higher education ) . Many Congolese people had assumed that independence would produce tangible and immediate social change , so the retention of whites in positions of importance was widely resented . 
 Lieutenant @-@ General Émile Janssens , the Belgian commander of the Force Publique , refused to see Congolese independence as marking a change in the nature of command . The day after the independence festivities , he gathered the black non @-@ commissioned officers of his Léopoldville garrison and told them that things under his command would stay the same , summarising the point by writing " Before Independence = After Independence " on a blackboard . This message was hugely unpopular among the rank and file — many of the men had expected rapid promotions and increases in pay to accompany independence . On 5 July , several units mutinied against their white officers at Camp Hardy near Thysville . The insurrection spread to Léopoldville the next day and later to garrisons across the country . 
 Rather than deploying Belgian troops against the mutineers as Janssens had wished , Lumumba dismissed him and renamed the Force Publique the Armée Nationale Congolaise ( ANC ) . All black soldiers were promoted by at least one rank . Victor Lundula was promoted directly from sergeant @-@ major to major @-@ general and head of the army , replacing Janssens . At the same time , Joseph @-@ Désiré Mobutu , an ex @-@ sergeant @-@ major and close personal aide of Lumumba , became Lundula 's deputy as army chief of staff . The government attempted to stop the revolt — Lumumba and Kasa @-@ Vubu intervened personally at Léopoldville and Thysville and persuaded the mutineers to lay down their arms — but in most of the country the mutiny intensified . White officers and civilians were attacked , white @-@ owned properties were looted and white women were raped . The Belgian government became deeply concerned by the situation , particularly when white civilians began entering neighbouring countries as refugees . 
 Lumumba 's stance appeared to many Belgians to justify their prior concerns about his radicalism . On 9 July , Belgium deployed paratroopers , without the Congolese state 's permission , in <unk> and elsewhere to protect fleeing white civilians . The Belgian intervention divided Lumumba and Kasa @-@ Vubu ; while Kasa @-@ Vubu accepted the Belgian operation , Lumumba denounced it and called for " all Congolese to defend our republic against those who menace it . " At Lumumba 's request , white civilians from the port city of Matadi were evacuated by the Belgian Navy on 11 July . Belgian ships then bombarded the city ; at least 19 civilians were killed . This action prompted renewed attacks on whites across the country , while Belgian forces entered other towns and cities , including Léopoldville , and clashed with Congolese troops . 
 = = = Katanga and South Kasai secessions = = = 
 On 11 July 1960 , Moise Tshombe , the leader of CONAKAT , declared the Congo 's southern province of Katanga independent as the State of Katanga , with Élisabethville as its capital and himself as President . The mineral @-@ rich Katanga region had traditionally shared closer economic ties with the Copperbelt of neighbouring Northern Rhodesia ( then part of the Central African Federation ) than with the rest of the Congo , and because of its economic importance it had been administered separately from the rest of the country under the Belgians . CONAKAT furthermore contended that Katangese people were ethnically distinct from other Congolese . The secession was partly motivated by the Katangese separatists ' desire to keep more of the wealth generated by the province 's mining operations and to avoid sharing it with the rest of the Congo . Another major factor was what CONAKAT held to be the disintegration of law in order in the central and north @-@ eastern Congo . Announcing Katanga 's breakaway , Tshombe said " We are seceding from chaos . " 
 The major mining company in Katanga , the Union Minière du Haut Katanga ( UMHK ) , had begun supporting CONAKAT during the latter days of Belgian rule amid worries that the MNC might seek to nationalise the company 's assets after independence . UMHK was largely owned by the Société Générale de Belgique , a prominent holding company based in Brussels that had close ties to the Belgian government . Encouraged by the UMHK , the Belgian government provided military support to Katanga and ordered its civil servants in the region to remain in their posts . Tshombe also engaged mercenaries , mainly whites from South Africa and the Rhodesias , to supplement and command Katangese troops . Although supported by the Belgians , Katanga never received formal diplomatic recognition from any country . The Katangese secession highlighted the " fundamental weakness " of the central government in Léopoldville which had been the chief advocate of a unified state . 
 Less than a month after the Katangese secession , on 8 August , a section of the region of Kasai situated slightly to the north of Katanga also declared its autonomy from the central government as the Mining State of South Kasai ( Sud @-@ Kasaï ) based around the city of Bakwanga . South Kasai was much smaller than Katanga , but was also a mining region . It was largely populated by the Luba ethnic group , and its President , Albert Kalonji , claimed that the secession was largely sparked by persecution of the Baluba in the rest of the Congo . The South Kasai government was supported by Forminière , another Belgian mining company , which received concessions from the new state in return for financial support . 
 = = = Foreign reaction and UN intervention = = = 
 <unk> about Belgium 's support for the secessionist states led to calls within the United Nations ( UN ) to remove all Belgian troops from the country . The Secretary General of the UN , Dag Hammarskjöld , believed that the crisis would provide the organisation with a chance to demonstrate its potential as a major peacekeeping force and encouraged the sending of a multinational contingent of peacekeepers to the Congo under UN command . On 14 July , the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 143 , calling for total Belgian withdrawal from the Congo and their replacement with a UN @-@ commanded force . 
 The arrival of the United Nations Operation in the Congo ( ONUC ) was initially welcomed by Lumumba and the central government who believed the UN would help suppress the secessionist states . ONUC 's initial mandate , however , only covered peacekeeping . Viewing the secessions as an internal political matter , Hammarskjöld refused to use UN troops to assist the central Congolese government against them ; he argued that doing so would represent a loss of impartiality and breach Congolese sovereignty . Frustrated , Lumumba turned to the Soviet Union , which agreed to provide weapons , logistical and material support . Around 1 @,@ 000 Soviet military advisors soon landed in the Congo . Lumumba 's actions distanced him from the rest of the government , especially Kasa @-@ Vubu , who feared the implications of Soviet intervention . The Americans also feared that a Soviet @-@ aligned Congo could form the basis of a major expansion of communism into central Africa . 
 With Soviet support , 2 @,@ 000 ANC troops launched a major offensive against South Kasai . The attack was extremely successful , but during the course of the offensive , the ANC became involved in infighting between the Baluba and Bena Lulua ethnic groups . As a result , the ANC perpetrated a number of large massacres of Luba civilians . Around 3 @,@ 000 were killed . The violence of the advance caused an exodus of thousands of Baluba civilians who fled their homes to flee the fighting . 
 The involvement of the Soviet Union alarmed the United States . The American government of Dwight D. Eisenhower , in line with Belgian criticism , had long believed that Lumumba was communist and that the Congo could be on track to become a strategically placed Soviet client state . In August 1960 , Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) agents in the region reported to their agency that " Congo [ is ] experiencing [ a ] classic communist ... takeover " and warned that the Congo might follow the same path as Cuba . 
 = = Political disintegration = = 
 = = = Central government split and first Mobutu coup = = = 
 Lumumba 's appeal for Soviet support split the government and led to mounting pressure from Western countries to remove him from power . In addition , both Tshombe and Kalonji appealed to Kasa @-@ Vubu , who they believed to be both a moderate and federalist , to move against Lumumba 's centralism and resolve the secession issue . Meanwhile , Mobutu took effective control of the army , routing foreign aid and promotions to specific units and officers to secure their allegiance . 
 On 5 September 1960 , Kasa @-@ Vubu announced that he had unilaterally dismissed Lumumba on national radio using the massacres in South Kasai as a pretext and with the promise of American backing . Andrew Cordier , the American UN representative in the Congo , used his position to block communications by Lumumba 's faction and to prevent a coordinated MNC @-@ L reaction to the news . Both chambers of parliament , however , supported Lumumba and denounced Kasa @-@ Vubu . Lumumba attempted to dismiss Kasa @-@ Vubu from his position , but could not get support for this , precipitating a constitutional crisis . Ostensibly in order to resolve the deadlock , Joseph @-@ Désiré Mobutu launched a bloodless coup and replaced both Kasa @-@ Vubu and Lumumba with a College of Commissionaires ( Collège des <unk> ) consisting of a panel of university graduates , led by Justin <unk> . Soviet military advisors were ordered to leave . Allegedly , the coup was intended to force the politicians to take cooling @-@ off period before they could resume control . In practice , however , Mobutu sided with Kasa @-@ Vubu against Lumumba , who was placed under house arrest , guarded by Ghanaian UN troops and an outer ring of ANC soldiers . Kasa @-@ Vubu was re @-@ appointed President by Mobutu in February 1961 . From the coup onwards , Mobutu was able to exert considerable power in Congolese politics behind the scenes . 
 Following Kasa @-@ Vubu 's reinstatement , there was an attempted rapprochement between the Congolese factions . Tshombe began negotiations for the end of the secession and the formation of a confederal Congo . Although a compromise agreement was reached , it was prevented from taking effect as negotiations broke down amid personal animosity between Kasa @-@ Vubu and Tshombe . An attempted reconciliation in July 1961 led to the formation of a new government , led by Cyrille Adoula , which brought together deputies from both <unk> and South Kasai factions but also failed to bring a reconciliation with Katanga . 
 Rebel members of the MNC @-@ L fled to Stanleyville where , led by Antoine Gizenga , they formed a rebel government in November 1960 in opposition to the central government in Léopoldville . The Gizenga government was recognised by some states , including the Soviet Union and China , as the official government of the Congo and could call on approximate 5 @,@ 500 troops compared to the central government 's 7 @,@ 000 . Faced with UN pressure , the Gizenga government however collapsed in January 1962 after Gizenga was arrested . 
 = = = Killing of Lumumba = = = 
 Lumumba escaped house arrest and fled eastwards towards Stanleyville where he believed he could rally support . Pursued by troops loyal to Mobutu , he was captured at Port Francqui on 1 December 1960 and flown back to Léopoldville with his hands bound . Despite UN appeals to Kasa @-@ Vubu for due legal process , the Soviet Union denounced the UN as responsible for the arrest and demanded his release . A meeting of the UN Security Council was called on 7 December 1960 to consider Soviet demands that the UN seek Lumumba 's immediate release , his restoration to the head of the Congolese government and the disarming of Mobutu 's forces . The pro @-@ Lumumba resolution was defeated on 14 December 1960 by a vote of 8 – 2 . Still in captivity , Lumumba was tortured and transported to Thysville and later to Katanga where he was handed over to forces loyal to Tshombe . On 17 January 1961 , Lumumba was executed by Katangese troops near Élisabethville . 
 News of the execution , released on 13 February , provoked international outrage . The Belgian Embassy in Yugoslavia was attacked by protesters in Belgrade , and violent demonstrations occurred in London and New York . 
 = = = United Nations escalation and the end of the Katangese secession = = = 
 Since its initial resolution of July 1960 , the UN had issued further resolutions calling for the total withdrawal of Belgian and mercenary forces from Katanga in progressively stronger terms . By 1961 , ONUC comprised nearly 20 @,@ 000 men . Although their mandate prevented them from taking sides , ONUC had a mandate to arrest foreign mercenaries wherever they encountered them . In September 1961 , an attempt to detain a group of Katangese mercenaries without violence during Operation <unk> went wrong and turned into a fire @-@ fight . ONUC 's claim to impartiality was undermined in mid @-@ September when a company of Irish UN troops were captured by numerically superior Katangese forces following a six @-@ day siege in Jadotville . Katanga proceeded to hold the Irishmen as prisoners of war , a development that deeply embarrassed the UN mission and its proponents . 
 On 18 September 1961 Hammarskjöld flew to Ndola , just across the border in Northern Rhodesia , to attempt to broker a cease @-@ fire between UN and Katangese forces . His aircraft crashed while attempting to land at Ndola Airport , killing him and everybody else on board . In stark contrast to Hammarskjöld 's attempts to pursue a moderate policy in the Congo , his successor U Thant supported a more radical policy of direct involvement in the conflict . Katanga released the captured Irish soldiers in mid @-@ October as part of a cease @-@ fire deal in which ONUC agreed to pull its troops back — a propaganda coup for Tshombe . Restated American support for the UN mission , and the murder of ten Italian UN pilots in Port @-@ <unk> in November 1961 , strengthened international demands to resolve the situation . In December 1961 , South Kasai was finally overrun by ANC troops and Kalonji was arrested , ending the South Kasai secession . 
 Resolution 169 , issued in November 1961 , called for ONUC to respond to the deteriorating human rights situation and prevent the outbreak of full @-@ scale civil war . The resolution " completely rejected " Katanga 's claim to statehood and authorised ONUC troops to use all necessary force to " assist the Central Government of the Congo in the restoration and maintenance of law and order " . The Katangese made further provocations and , in response , ONUC launched Operation <unk> to dismantle Katangese roadblocks and seize strategic positions around Élisabethville . Faced with international pressure , Tshombe signed the Kitona Declaration in December 1962 in which he agreed in principle to accept the authority of the central government and state constitution and to abandon any claim to Katangese independence . Following the declaration , however , talks between Tshombe and <unk> reached a deadlock , while Katangese troops continued to harass UN troops . <unk> support and Belgium 's increasing reluctance to support Katanga demonstrated that the state could not survive indefinitely . 
 On 24 December 1962 , UN troops and Katangese gendarmes clashed near Élisabethville and fighting broke out . After attempts to reach a ceasefire failed , UN troops occupied Élisabethville , prompting Tshombe to leave the country . A ceasefire was agreed soon thereafter . Indian UN troops , acting against their orders , then occupied Jadotville , preventing Katangese loyalists from regrouping . Gradually , the UN overran the rest of the Katanga and , on 21 January 1963 , Tshombe surrendered his final stronghold of Kolwezi , effectively ending the Katangese secession . 
 = = = Attempted political reconciliation = = = 
 Following the end of the Katanga secession , political negotiations began to reconcile the disparate political factions . The negotiations coincided with the formation of an émigré political group , the Conseil National de Libération ( <unk> ) , by dissident Lumumbists and others in neighbouring Congo @-@ Brazzaville . The negotiations culminated in the creation of a new , revised constitution , known as the Constitution of Luluabourg , after the city in which it was written , to create a compromise balance of power . The new constitution increased the power of the presidency , ending the system of joint consultation between President and Prime Minister , and appeased federalists by increasing the number of provinces from six to 21 while increasing their autonomy . The constitution also changed the name of the state from the Republic of the Congo to Democratic Republic of the Congo . The constitution was passed in a constitutional referendum in June 1964 and parliament was dissolved to await new elections . Kasa @-@ Vubu appointed Tshombe , the exiled Katangese leader , as interim Prime Minister . Although personally capable , and supported as an anti @-@ communist by Western powers , Tshombe was denounced by other African leaders such as King Hassan II of Morocco as an imperialist puppet for his role in the Katangese secession . 
 Under Tshombe 's interim government , fresh elections were scheduled for 30 March and the rebellion broke out in the central and eastern parts of the Congo . 
 = = Kwilu and Simba rebellions = = 
 The period of political crisis had led to widespread disenchantment with the central government brought in by independence . Demands for a " second independence " from kleptocracy and political infighting in the capital grew . The " second independence " slogan was taken up by Maoist @-@ inspired Congolese revolutionaries , including Pierre Mulele who had served in a junior capacity in the Lumumba government . The political instability of the Congo helped to channel wider discontentment into outright revolt . 
 Disruption in the rural Congo begun with agitation by Lumumbists , led by Mulele , among the <unk> and <unk> peoples . By the end of 1963 , there was unrest in regions of the central and eastern Congo . The Kwilu Rebellion broke out on 16 January 1964 in the cities of <unk> and <unk> in Kwilu Province . Further disruption and uprisings then spread to Kivu in the east and later to Albertville , sparking further insurrection elsewhere in the Congo and the outbreak of the larger Simba Rebellion . The rebels began to expand their territory and rapidly advances northwards , capturing Port @-@ <unk> , Stanleyville , <unk> and Lisala between July and August . 
 The rebels , who called themselves " Simbas " ( from the Kiswahili for " lion " ) , had a populist but vague ideology , loosely based on communism , which prioritised equality and aimed to increase overall wealth . Most of the active revolutionaries were young men who hoped that the rebellion would provide them with opportunities which the government had not . The Simbas used magic to initiate members and believed that , by following a moral code , they could become invulnerable to bullets . Magic was also very important to the rebels who also made extensive use of witchcraft to protect themselves and also demoralise their ANC opponents . As they advanced , the rebels perpetrated numerous massacres in the territory they captured in order to remove political opposition and terrorise the population . 
 The rebels founded a state , the People 's Republic of the Congo ( République populaire du Congo ) , with its capital at Stanleyville and Christophe Gbenye as President . The new state was supported by the Soviet Union and China , which supplied it with arms , and various African states , notably Tanzania . It was also supported by Cuba , which sent a team of over 100 advisors led by Che Guevara to advise the Simbas on tactics and doctrine . The Simba rebellion coincided with a wide escalation of the Cold War amid the Tonkin Gulf Incident and it has been speculated that , had the rebellion not been rapidly defeated , a full @-@ scale American military intervention could have occurred as in Vietnam . 
 = = = Suppression and Belgian and American intervention = = = 
 From the end of August 1964 the rebels began to lose ground to the ANC . Albertville and Lisala were recaptured in late August and early September . Tshombe , backed by Mobutu , recalled many of his former mercenaries from the Katangese secession to oppose the Simba . The mercenaries , led by " Mad Mike " Hoare and mostly whites from central and southern Africa , were formed into a unit known as 5 Commando ANC . 5 Commando served as the spearhead of the ANC , but were known for widespread unsanctioned killing , torture , looting and mass rapes in recaptured rebel areas . In a press interview , Hoare himself described his men as " appalling thugs " . The mercenaries were also materially supported by the CIA . 
 In November 1964 , the Simbas rounded up the remaining white population of Stanleyville and its environs . The whites were held hostage in the Victoria Hotel in the city to use as bargaining tools with the ANC . In order to recover the hostages , Belgian parachute troops were flown to the Congo in American aircraft to intervene . On 24 November , as part of Operation Dragon Rouge , Belgian paratroopers landed in Stanleyville and quickly secured the hostages . In total , around 70 hostages and 1 @,@ 000 Congolese civilians were killed but the vast majority were evacuated . The Belgian troops were only under orders to liberate the hostages , rather than push the Simbas out of the city , but the attack nevertheless " broke the back of the eastern insurrection , which never recovered . " The paratroopers and the civilians then returned to Belgium . In the aftermath of the intervention , Belgium itself was publicly accused of neocolonialism . 
 As a result of the intervention , Tshombe lost the support of Kasa @-@ Vubu and Mobutu and was dismissed from his post as prime minister in October 1965 . Soon after Dragon Rouge , ANC and mercenary troops captured Stanleyville putting an end to the Simba rebellion . Pockets of Simba resistance continued to hold out in the eastern Congo , most notably in South Kivu where Laurent @-@ Désiré Kabila led a Maoist cross @-@ border insurgency which lasted until the 1980s . 
 = = Second Mobutu coup d 'état = = 
 In the scheduled March 1965 elections , Tshombe 's Convention Nationale Congolaise ( <unk> ) won a large majority of the seats , but a large part of his party soon defected to form the new Front Démocratique Congolais ( FDC ) making the overall result unclear as <unk> controlled the Chamber of Deputies while the FDC controlled the Senate . Kasa @-@ Vubu , attempting to use the situation to block Tshombe , appointed an anti @-@ Tshombe leader , Évariste Kimba of the FDC , to be prime minister @-@ designate in November 1965 but the largely pro @-@ Tshombe Parliament refused to ratify the appointment . Instead of seeking a compromise candidate , Kasa @-@ Vubu again unilaterally declared Kimba to be Prime Minister , which was again rejected , creating a political deadlock . With the government in near @-@ paralysis , Mobutu seized power in a bloodless coup , ostensibly to stop the political deadlock , on 25 November 1965 . 
 Under the auspices of a régime d <unk> ( the equivalent of a state of emergency ) , Mobutu assumed sweeping , almost absolute , power for five years after which , he claimed , democracy would be restored . Mobutu 's coup , which promised both economic and political stability , was supported by the United States and other Western governments . Initially , his rule met widespread popularity . He increasingly took other powers , abolishing the post of Prime Minister in 1966 and dissolving parliament in 1967 . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 Once established as the sole source of political power , Mobutu gradually consolidated his control in the Congo . The number of provinces was reduced , and their autonomy curtailed , resulting in a highly centralised state . Mobutu increasingly placed his supporters in the remaining positions of importance . In 1967 , to demonstrate his legitimacy , he created a party , the Mouvement Populaire de la Révolution ( MPR ) , which until 1990 , was the nation 's only legal political party under Mobutu 's new constitution . In 1971 , the state was renamed Zaire and efforts were made to remove all colonial influences . He also nationalised the remaining foreign @-@ owned economic assets in the country , including the UMHK which became <unk> . Despite initial successes , by the time of its disestablishment Mobutu 's rule was characterised by widespread <unk> , corruption and economic mismanagement . 
 In the years after the Congo Crisis , Mobutu was able to remove many opposition figures from the crisis who might threaten his control . Tshombe was sent into a second exile in 1965 after being accused of treason . Between 1966 and 1967 , two mutinies in Stanleyville broke out involving up to 800 Katangese gendarmes and former mercenaries of Tshombe . The mutinies were eventually repressed . In 1967 , Tshombe was sentenced to death in absentia and the same year was kidnapped in a hijack and held under arrest in Algeria . His death in 1969 , allegedly from natural causes , has provoked speculation that the Mobutu government may have been involved . Mulele was also lured back to the Congo from exile by the promise of an amnesty but was tortured and murdered . 
 = = = Political legacy = = = 
 The issues of federalism , ethnicity in politics and state centralisation were not resolved by the crisis and partly contributed to a decline in support for the concept of the state among Congolese people . Mobutu was strongly in favour of centralisation and one of his first acts , in 1965 , were to reunify provinces and abolish much of their independent legislative capacity . Subsequent loss of faith in central government is one of the reasons that the Congo has been labeled as a failed state , and has contributed violence by factions advocating ethnic and localised federalism . Local insurgencies continued in the eastern Congo into the 1980s left a legacy of instability along the Congo 's eastern borders . 
 Laurent @-@ Désiré Kabila , who had led an anti @-@ Mobutu insurrection during the crisis succeeded in deposing Mobutu in 1997 . His son , Joseph Kabila , is the incumbent president of the restored Democratic Republic of the Congo . Following the fall of Mobutu , Antoine Gizenga founded a political party , the Parti <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , and was elected Prime Minister in 2006 . 
 = = = Historical controversy = = = 
 The presentation of the Congo Crisis , and particularly the role of American and Western intervention , has been controversial and academics have accused various governments of distortion . In Belgium , allegations of Belgian complicity in the killing of Lumumba led to a state @-@ backed enquiry and subsequent official apology for " moral responsibility " , though not direct involvement , in the assassination in 2001 . In the United States , the multi @-@ volume official history of the American foreign service , Foreign Relations of the United States , was accused by academics of being deliberately misleading about American involvement in the crisis and in the installation of Mobutu . 
 = = International importance = = 
 The turmoil of the Congo Crisis destabilised Central Africa and helped to ignite the Portuguese Colonial War , especially the war of independence in neighbouring Angola . Angolan nationalists had long had close ties with the Congo where many had lived as exiles . The União dos <unk> de Angola ( UPA ) , an Angolan nationalist organisation which drew support from the Angolan Bakongo , was supported ABAKO politicians who had hopes of rebuilding the Kingdom of Kongo , altering the borders established during the colonial period . Believing that the independence of Congo was the first stage in this process , the UPA launched the Baixa de <unk> revolt in 1961 , igniting the conflict in Angola that would last until 1974 . The Congolese , later Zairian , governments continued to provide support to Angolan rebels and even participated directly in the subsequent Angolan Civil War . 
 The Crisis caused the newly independent African states to reconsider their allegiances and internal ties . In particular , it led to the division of African states into factions . Moderate @-@ leaning states joined the Brazzaville Group , which called for a degree of unity between Francophone African states and the maintenance of ties with France . Radical states joined the Casablanca Group which called for a Pan @-@ African federation . The chaotic violence of the crisis and the fate of the country 's whites , many of whom entered Northern and Southern Rhodesia as refugees , contributed to the widespread belief among whites there that black nationalist politicians were not ready to govern , and prompted fears that immediate majority rule in Rhodesia might lead to a similar situation . After negotiations with Britain repeatedly broke down , Southern Rhodesia 's predominantly white government declared independence unilaterally in 1965 . 
 The Katangese secession would prove to be politically influential in Africa . During the Chadian Civil War between 1965 and 1979 , the Front de Libération Nationale du Tchad ( FROLINAT ) explicitly rejected secessionism in its bid to remove the southern @-@ backed government of François Tombalbaye following the experience of the Katanga secession , officially stating that " there will be no Katanga in Chad " . In the Nigerian Civil War , between 1967 and 1970 , the ethnically Igbo region of Biafra seceded from Nigeria which it accused of privileging the interests of northern ethnic groups and discriminating against the Igbo . The secessions of Biafra and Katanga have frequently been compared in academic writing . Unlike Katanga , Biafra achieved limited official international recognition and rejected the support of Western multinational companies involved in the local oil industry . Biafra was defeated in 1970 and re @-@ integrated into Nigeria . 
 = Stephen Colbert ( character ) = 
 Dr. Stephen T. Colbert is the fictionalized persona of political satirist Stephen Colbert , as portrayed on the Comedy Central series The Colbert Report . Described as a " well @-@ intentioned , poorly informed high @-@ status idiot " and a " self @-@ important right @-@ wing commentator , " the character incorporates aspects of the real Colbert 's life and interests but is primarily a parody of cable news pundits , particularly Fox News commentator Bill O 'Reilly . 
 Colbert first appeared as a correspondent on Comedy Central 's news parody series The Daily Show in 1997 and remained a regular contributor until 2005 , when he left to host The Colbert Report , a spin @-@ off show satirizing personality @-@ driven political pundit programs . He has also been featured in a number of other public performances , most notably at the 2006 White House Correspondents ' Association Dinner , and as the author of the books I Am America ( And So Can You ! ) , I Am a Pole ( And So Can You ! ) , and America Again : Re @-@ Becoming the Greatness We Never Weren 't . 
 Colbert 's performance attracted widespread critical attention and acclaim , with a reviewer writing for Time magazine calling it " one of the greatest sustained performances in pop culture , TV or otherwise . " 
 On April 23 , 2014 , the character appeared on The Daily Show to announce that he had clearly " won television " and would be ending The Colbert Report because he had met his goal . This came after the real Colbert announced he would not be using the character when he replaced David Letterman as the host of Late Show on CBS in 2015 . The final episode of The Colbert Report aired on December 18 , 2014 . 
 The character has made a few media appearances following the conclusion of The Colbert Report . He made a cameo appearance in the House of Cards season three episode " Chapter 27 " , which was released on February 27 , 2015 . He returned for the August 6 , 2015 episode of The Daily Show to honor Jon Stewart during his final episode as host of the series . He appeared on the July 18 , 2016 episode The Late Show with Stephen Colbert to do a special segment of " The Wørd " , during the show 's coverage of the 2016 Republican National Convention . 
 = = Development and inspirations = = 
 = = = The Dana Carvey Show = = = 
 Colbert 's earliest mainstream exposure came in the prime time sketch comedy program The Dana Carvey Show . While only lasting seven episodes in early 1996 , it provided Colbert with roles that would help forge his future onscreen persona . This was largely due to its format of delivering sketch performances directly to the camera . Although they did not air , several sketches inspired by The Onion also had Colbert playing a deadpan anchor delivering the news . In an interview with The New York Times regarding The Dana Carvey Show , Colbert noted , " If you have an opportunity to give it right to the audience , there ’ s a special connection that you make by looking at the camera . " 
 Upon the show 's cancellation , Colbert was cast for The Daily Show by co @-@ creator Madeleine Smithberg . This was thanks to his performance as a nauseated waiter on The Dana Carvey Show . 
 = = = The Daily Show = = = 
 Colbert appeared as a correspondent on The Daily Show between 1997 and 2005 . During this time , the comedian developed the character that would later form the basis for his Colbert Report persona , one that its creator calls a " fool who has spent a lot of his life playing not the fool . " Colbert frequently cites Stone Phillips — whom he describes as having " the greatest neck in journalism " — as a source of inspiration for the character , as well as Geraldo Rivera , " because he 's got this great sense of mission ... He just thinks he 's gonna change the world with this report . " As a correspondent , Colbert was regularly pitted against knowledgeable interview subjects , fellow correspondent Steve Carell , or host Jon Stewart in scripted exchanges which typically revealed the character 's lack of knowledge of whatever subject he was discussing . Other Daily Show correspondents have since adopted a similar style ; former correspondent Rob Corddry recalls that when he and Ed Helms first joined the show 's cast in 2002 , they " just imitated Stephen Colbert for a year or two " . 
 = = = The Colbert Report = = = 
 In 2005 , Colbert left The Daily Show to host a spin @-@ off series entitled The Colbert Report , a parody of personality @-@ driven political pundit programs such as Fox News 's The O 'Reilly Factor that center largely on the personal views of their hosts . Because of this enlarged role , the personality and beliefs of the Stephen Colbert character have become more clearly defined over the course of the show , complete with a fictitious backstory that has been revealed piecemeal in short monologues accompanying a part of the program . 
 The character Colbert portrays in Report originated as an amplification of his self @-@ important Daily Show correspondent . As they developed the character and the show Colbert and his staff began to look at some more specific models . Bill O 'Reilly , whom the character affectionately nicknames " Papa Bear " , is the most commonly cited point of reference . In a 2006 episode of The Colbert Report , Colbert remarked that , " if it wasn 't for [ O 'Reilly ] , this show wouldn ’ t exist " . In adapting the character for the Report , Colbert has also mentioned Aaron Brown , Anderson Cooper , Sean Hannity , Lou Dobbs and Joe Scarborough as having an influence over his performance . References to the character 's abuse of prescription drugs are believed to be an allusion to Rush Limbaugh 's addiction to painkillers . 
 The nightly in @-@ character guest interviews were initially of concern to Colbert , who worried his character 's belligerent nature would be off @-@ putting to guests . However , since the show 's debut , he says he has found he is able to " slide the intensity " of his behavior depending on his interviewee 's ability to respond to his aggressive approach . Colbert now often cites the interview segment as his favorite part of the show , because it allows him to improvise . Colbert advises his guests to disabuse the character of his ignorance . " Don 't let me get away with anything . Don 't try to play my game . Be real . Be passionate . Hold your ideas . Give me resistance . Give me traction I can work against . " 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Colbert is the central character in the 2007 book I Am America ( And So Can You ! ) . Co @-@ written with Paul Dinello and the writers of The Colbert Report , I Am America delves into what the character considers to be the most pressing issues facing America . The book takes influence from the literary endeavors of the character 's pundit models , such as O 'Reilly 's The O 'Reilly Factor ( 2000 ) and Hannity 's Deliver Us From Evil ( 2004 ) , which Colbert says he " forced " himself to read as a reference . I Am America is considered a pure extension of the Report ; the written medium allowed the writers to employ different styles , such as long @-@ format arguments , that they could not have used on television . " You can actually spend 20 pages talking about religion whereas in the show , two pages is about as long as we hold any one idea " , Colbert explains . In doing this , the writers " discovered things that [ the character ] cared about that ... they didn 't know he cared about before " . 
 A character similar to Colbert 's Daily Show persona featured in the 2003 book Wigfield : The Can Do Town That Just May Not by Colbert , Paul Dinello and Amy Sedaris . Russell <unk> , a self @-@ aggrandizing journalist , was voiced by Colbert in both stage performances of the text and the audiobook . Colbert likens <unk> to his self @-@ important correspondent character , but " more extreme , more self @-@ involved " . 
 = = Non @-@ fictional elements = = 
 Certain elements of the character are drawn from the real Colbert 's personal life . Both the real Colbert and the character were raised in Charleston , South Carolina ; both are the youngest of 11 children ; both played Dungeons & Dragons as teenagers ; and both are practicing Roman Catholics . Colbert 's own interest in and knowledge of religion , science fiction , and J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings story will often show through in the Report . His character has a chocolate portrait of Viggo Mortensen ( who portrayed Aragorn in Peter Jackson 's The Lord of the Rings films ) in a place of honor on his shelf ; Mortensen briefly reprised the role of Aragorn in the Report 's September 13 , 2007 episode . He also owns a Sting sword presented to him by Peter Jackson . 
 Occasionally , Colbert will mention his real @-@ life siblings on the show . In one episode , he placed his brother Ed , a lawyer who advises the International Olympic Committee , " on notice " for refusing to grant the show the rights to air footage of a dispute between two American speed skaters . Ed later appeared at the start of the February 22 , 2010 edition advising Stephen on how to cover the Vancouver Winter Olympics since his character does not have the television rights to the games . Footage from the Richmond Olympic Oval was used after Stephen was named a special advisor to USA Speedskating . Generally , journalists covering the Olympics do not have access to the venues unless their employer has the rights to Olympic TV coverage , and cannot show moving video coverage of any official Olympic event unless they have permission from the rights holder . When his sister Elizabeth Colbert Busch declared her intention to run for congress , he mentioned the event . Later , when she was nominated to run against Mark Sanford and the MSNBC show Morning Joe declared their support for Sanford and mentioned Colbert , he defended his sister 's campaign . 
 In an appearance at Harvard University in 2006 , Colbert revealed that his character 's fear of bears was in part inspired by a recurring nightmare he has had , in which a bear is standing between him and his goal . The character 's phobia , which was initially referenced in the show 's first " <unk> " skit , was originally slated to be a fear of alligators . By the time the Report went to air , the alligator story was several weeks old , and the writers chose to use a more recent news item involving a bear in its place . 
 After Colbert received an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts from Knox College , the show began listing his name in the ending credits as " Dr. Stephen T. Colbert , D.F.A. " even though using both the honorific prefix and post @-@ nominal letters is incorrect . During the show , the character will sometimes refer to the degree and the qualifications he mistakenly believes it bestows upon him . 
 In May 2007 , Colbert was voted the " second most influential person in the world " by a Time magazine online poll . The first spot was taken by Rain , a young Korean pop star with a large following in Asia and the United States . Colbert then declared Rain his " arch @-@ nemesis " and began mentioning him frequently on the Report . Colbert filmed a satirical music video poking fun at Rain 's popular single " How to Avoid the Sun " and referencing several stereotypical South Korean dishes and products . The one @-@ sided feud eventually culminated in Colbert challenging Rain to a competition on air . After telling Colbert " not to quit his day job , " Rain appeared in a short segment on the show and competed ( and won ) a DDR dance @-@ off with Colbert . Both have been defeated by Shigeru Miyamoto in recent polls , though they still continue to be strong contenders . 
 On June 21 , 2007 , Colbert broke his left wrist on the set of the Report while performing his warm @-@ up for the show . This quickly became a regular source of comedy on the show as the self @-@ absorbed character requested his audience send flowers , launched a campaign against Hollywood 's supposed glorification of " wrist violence " , and began a " wrist awareness " campaign with " <unk> " silicone bracelets . Although his wrist has healed , he continues to wear and promote his " <unk> " bracelets . On August 23 , 2007 , the cast was removed on air and was put up for auction to the general public , complete with celebrity signatures , on eBay , where it achieved a winning bid of $ 17 @,@ 200 . All of the proceeds from both the cast and the bracelets were donated to the Yellow Ribbon Fund . 
 Colbert occasionally makes comments that he would also make were he not in character . In an interview with The Buffalo News , Colbert said " The weird thing about my character , even on the show , is sometimes I say what I mean . It doesn 't matter to me that the audience doesn 't know when that is . " 
 On June 19 , 2013 , Colbert returned from an unplanned break of several days following the passing of his 92 @-@ year @-@ old mother , Lorna Colbert . The emotional Colbert started the show with a tribute to his mother , in which he presented a brief biography of her life in photos , accompanied by his eulogy of her . 
 = = Titles and styling = = 
 The titles and styling of Her Excellency The Rev. Sir Doctor Stephen Tyrone Mos Def Colbert , D.F.A. , Heavyweight Champion of the World <unk> <unk> featuring Flo Rida La Premiere Dame De France are mostly for comedic reasons . Colbert became ordained minister on June 2 , 2011 , granting himself the title of Reverend . Colbert was mock @-@ knighted by Queen Noor of Jordan on April 7 , 2009 , bestowing him with the title of Sir . He was granted an honorary doctorate of fine arts by Knox College in 2006 , giving him the title of Doctor and use of the suffix D.F.A. ( Doctor of Fine Arts ) . This title is featured regularly during his segments Cheating Death with Dr. Stephen T. Colbert , DFA . <unk> Bey gave Colbert the use of his stage name Mos Def on October 5 , 2011 . Colbert was set to interview Mike Tyson on July 23 , 2013 . Tyson did not appear which led Colbert to declare himself Heavy Weight Champion of the World and grant himself use of the title . The large asterisk in the title is to denote that he did not defeat Tyson in a boxing match . The suffix featuring Flo Rida was added during the segment I tried to sign up for Obamacare on October 23 , 2013 , where his name on the ACA form said featuring Flo Rida . Her Excellency was added to the title as Colbert was seated next to Michelle Obama at the White House state dinner in February 2014 , in which the President of France François Hollande was not accompanied by a partner . Because it is customary that the first lady of a visiting nation is seated next to the First Lady of the United States , Colbert proclaimed himself First Lady of France on February 12 , 2014 . 
 = = Fictional biography = = 
 Colbert 's fictional history is not always rigidly adhered to by the show 's writers . The comedian himself says that , " My character 's history may not always be perfectly consistent ... There 's my bio and there 's my character 's bio , and then there 's my character 's history , which is slightly different than my character 's bio . " His early life , prior to becoming host of The Colbert Report , is expanded upon in I Am America ( And So Can You ! ) . 
 Like the actor who portrays him , Stephen T. Colbert is the youngest of 11 children , born into a devout Roman Catholic family — the character 's family was so devout , in fact , they sent their teenage son to an " exorcism day camp located in Canton , Ohio " when they discovered he liked Dungeons & Dragons . In his in @-@ character appearance on The O 'Reilly Factor , Colbert stated that he is of Irish descent and only adopted the French pronunciation of his surname to " get the cultural elites " on his side . Colbert has made conflicting statements regarding his middle name , which he has at different times stated to be Tyrone ( Colbert 's actual middle name ) , Tiberius ( like that of Captain James T. Kirk ) , Lee @-@ Harvey , and <unk> . The character has said he was regularly beaten up in high school , and by the time he left for college he was determined never to be a victim again . As such , on the first day of his freshman year he walked into class and punched the first person he saw ( unfortunately , this happened to be his ethics professor ) . He attended Dartmouth College ( instead of his first pick , Hogwarts , claiming that his white owl led them to reject him ) , and was a member of the <unk> fraternity , although his acceptance into the college appears to have been largely influenced by a claimed familial relationship with a wealthy donor , and graduated in the top 47 percent of his class with a major in history . He has also referred to Bob Jones University as an alma mater . 
 Prior to embarking on a career in journalism , Colbert worked as a carnival roustabout and a construction worker . During the 1980s , he was the lead singer and guitarist of an ABC @-@ like new wave band called " Stephen and the <unk> . " The comedian portrays his character 's younger self in the band 's music video , wearing worn jeans , cowboy boots and a spiky hair style . Their only revealed song to date is entitled " Charlene ( I 'm Right Behind You ) " , one of numerous references to an ex @-@ girlfriend ( and cousin ) whom he continues to stalk despite numerous restraining orders . This song has been made available for download for free in the video game Rock Band . On the May 14 , 2008 episode , Colbert claimed to have been the " totalitarian ruler of Malawi from 1982 to 1984 " . He mentions that his wife 's first name is Lorraine . 
 Colbert later moved into reporting , working in TV news for several stations in Virginia and North Carolina . Occasionally he will show footage of himself as a " young man " ( portrayed by Colbert , wearing a false moustache ) working as an anchor at a local news station ( <unk> ) in Patterson Springs , North Carolina , still displaying his trademark outrage over minor municipal issues in the manner of 20 / 20 correspondent John Stossel . In 1997 , Colbert was promoted to anchor of the Channel 7 News on <unk> Patterson Springs after outing the previous anchor , Wayne Colt , for his cocaine addiction . His ensuing investigative reports into Colt 's downfall earned him a local Emmy , and eventually a correspondent position at The Daily Show . This corresponds with the year the comedian joined the cast of the show . 
 Colbert often makes digs at the expense of Daily Show host Jon Stewart . He has implied a strained relationship with Stewart , in contrast with the real Colbert 's admiration for the comedian , and suggests that his departure from The Daily Show occurred under dubious circumstances . The character has described Stewart as a sexual predator and has been known to become tearful when his name is brought up . On the other hand , Colbert has also implied that he only got his own show by blackmailing Stewart with incriminating photographs . 
 Colbert is described in America ( The Book ) : A Citizen 's Guide to Democracy Inaction , to which he was a contributor while serving as a ' Daily Show ' correspondent , as holding the positions of the Arthur Schlesinger Professor of American Studies at Harvard University , and of Chief Defender of International War Crimes at the World Court in the Hague . The book also states that he is the seven @-@ time recipient of the Werner Heisenberg Prize for Excellence in Theoretical Mathematics . Paradoxically , Colbert is described as being barely capable of feeding himself as well as being " personally unpleasant " . 
 Colbert was mock @-@ knighted by Queen Noor of Jordan with a prop sword from The Lord of the Rings films , on his April 7 , 2009 show in exchange for leading the " Colbert Nation " in signing the Global Zero declaration . 
 = = = Retirement from television = = = 
 On April 10 , 2014 it was announced that the real @-@ life Colbert will be replacing David Letterman as the host of CBS 's The Late Show in 2015 . It was also announced that The Colbert Report will be ending and Colbert will not be using the character on CBS show . Following the announcement , the character made a special surprise appearance on the April 23 , 2014 episode of The Daily Show to report that it has become clear to him that he has " won television " and changed the world , the goal he originally set out to do , and thus no longer feels the need to continue . He expressed interest in taking over The Late Show after Letterman retires but could not because " they already gave it to some fat guy " . 
 During the final episode , Colbert accidentally kills " lifelong friend and colleague " <unk> in the final segment of " Cheating Death " , after which he becomes immortal and uses his powers to fuel a star @-@ studded celebrity singalong of " We 'll Meet Again " , before boarding a sleigh driven by Santa Claus , Abraham Lincoln , and " the man with all the answers " . At the end of the show , Colbert tosses back to Stewart at The Daily Show , implying that the show 's existence was just an extended correspondent report for the program . 
 On the July 18 , 2016 of The Late Show with Stephen Colbert , Colbert is revealed to have been living with a now @-@ retired Stewart in a remote cabin in a forest . In the skit , the real Colbert visited Stewart , asking him to explain how Donald Trump became the 2016 Republican nominee for president . Perplexed , Stewart turned to Colbert the character , who briefly returned to television to deliver an edition of " The Word " explaining Trump 's appeal , before turning the show back to " that other guy , " the real Colbert . 
 = = Presidential campaigns = = 
 = = = Colbert ' 08 = = = 
 Colbert dropped hints of a potential presidential run throughout 2007 , with speculation intensifying following the release of his book , I Am America ( And So Can You ! ) , which was rumored ( invariably by Colbert himself ) to be a sign that he was indeed testing the waters for a future bid for the White House . Colbert staunchly refused to confirm or deny his candidacy , stating he had not yet made up his mind and must first talk the possibility over with his family . 
 Colbert confirmed his presidential ambitions on his October 16 , 2007 show , stating his intention to run both on the Republican and Democratic platforms , but only as a favorite son in his native South Carolina . In an interview with Larry King he revealed that , as his running mate , he would consider Mike Huckabee ( who himself jokingly offered Colbert the vice presidential position ) . He also speculated on the possibility of a Colbert @-@ Putin or Colbert @-@ Colbert ticket . Colbert abandoned plans to run as a Republican due to the $ 35 @,@ 000 fee required to file for the South Carolina primary . On November 1 , 2007 , it was announced that he would not appear on the Democratic primary ballot either , after being deemed ineligible by the South Carolina Democratic Party executive committee . Several days later he announced that he was withdrawing from the race , saying that he did not wish to put the country through an agonizing Supreme Court battle . 
 The show went on hiatus immediately after this as a result of the Writers Guild of America Strike . When it returned to air on January 7 , 2008 without a writing staff , the character justified his absence by stating that he had taken some time off to have " a good cry " about his failed presidential attempt . He said that he had returned to air in celebration of Huckabee 's success in the Iowa Caucus , something for which he considers himself personally responsible as Huckabee has appeared on the Report on numerous occasions to invite Colbert to be his running mate . 
 Despite having withdrawn from the presidential race , Colbert continued to be referred to as an active candidate in the Marvel Universe . Colbert ' 08 paraphernalia appeared in the artwork of various Marvel comics , and Colbert himself teamed up with Spider @-@ Man in the October 2008 comic Amazing Spider @-@ Man # 573 . On November 5 , 2008 , Marvel announced that its fictional newspaper The Daily Bugle was reporting Colbert 's victory over both John McCain and Barack Obama . Several hours later Marvel released a second Daily Bugle article correcting its initial reports , stating that while Colbert had won the popular vote Obama had secured more electoral votes , thus winning the presidency . " Oops , our bad " , said Marvel editor @-@ in @-@ chief Joe Quesada of the confusion . " We completely forgot the Marvel Universe reflects what happens in the real world . " 
 = = = 2012 exploration for " President of the United States of South Carolina " = = = 
 During the September 28 , 2011 episode of The Colbert Report , Colbert consulted his lawyer and they set up his own 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organization , similar to American Crossroads . As a super PAC the organization can raise unlimited sums of money from corporations , unions and other groups , as well as wealthy individuals . With Colbert as president of the Colbert Super PAC , the PAC ran several political ads prior to the Ames Straw Poll . The first ad , titled " Episode IV : A New Hope " , told Iowans to write @-@ in " Rick Parry " instead of Rick Perry , and the second ad , " Behind the Green Corn " , supported " Parry " as well . 
 During the January 12 , 2012 episode of The Colbert Report , Colbert announced his plans to form an exploratory committee to lay the groundwork for his possible candidacy for " President of the United States of South Carolina " . In the process , he transferred control of the Super PAC to Jon Stewart , renaming it The Definitely Not Coordinating With Stephen Colbert Super PAC , since , according to Colbert 's lawyer , Trevor Potter , it would definitely be illegal for Colbert and Stewart to coordinate their efforts in super PAC activities . A CBS news report called Colbert 's run " essentially a joke " , saying , " The real significance of Colbert 's announcement may be the spotlight it puts on super PACs , into which donors can pour unlimited money in order to support or attack candidates , and thus influence election outcomes . Super PACs were made possible by the 2010 " Citizens United " Supreme Court decision that effectively classified money as speech " . 
 Colbert 's timing was too late for his name to be added the South Carolina primary ballot , and South Carolina law would not allow for write @-@ in candidates . Polling showed that 21 % of the potential Republican primary electorate reported they would be " more likely " to vote for former candidate Herman Cain , who remained on the ballot , if that vote served as encouragement for Colbert . Herman Cain received 6 @,@ 338 votes in the South Carolina Republican Primary , which was more than all the other withdrawn candidates received combined . On the next episode of The Colbert Report broadcast on January 23 , 2012 , Colbert boasted about passing the 1 % threshold and for Cain receiving many more votes in South Carolina than in Iowa and New Hampshire . Colbert then announced that he would no longer be exploring a run for President of the United States of South Carolina . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Described as a " caustic right @-@ wing bully , " an " arch @-@ conservative blowhard , " and by his creator and namesake as a " well @-@ intentioned , poorly informed , high status idiot , " Colbert is <unk> , xenophobic and fiercely anti @-@ intellectual . He claims to be politically independent , like his idol Bill " Papa Bear " O 'Reilly ; although in fact the character fawns over the Bush administration and the Republican Party , and frequently asks his guests , " George Bush : Great president , or the greatest president ? " Following the election of Barack Obama in 2008 , Colbert continued his right @-@ wing views , but stated he would " support our new President as long as [ he ] remains popular . " Colbert emphasizes that his character is genuinely well @-@ meaning and wants to do the right thing , but does not have the tools to achieve it " because he has no curiosity , he doesn 't like to read and he won 't listen to anybody except the voices in his head . " 
 Colbert is deeply self @-@ centered and takes everything personally , a trait which is reflected in his discussion of the news and current events . According to the comedian , " There 's nothing too large that doesn 't involve him . Every news story is really about him ... Everything he cares about is a news story because he cares about it . " This is expressed in his frequent attacks on and feuds with well @-@ known figures such as The Decemberists , Sean Penn , Conan O 'Brien , Rain , Barry Manilow , Tony Bennett , and Don Rickles ( the latter three of whom beat out Colbert for Best Individual in a Variety or Music Program at the Emmys ) . The comedian equates these feuds with Bill O 'Reilly 's culture wars . 
 Central to Colbert 's personality is his rigid belief that " what I say is right , and [ nothing ] anyone else says could possibly be true , " regardless of any evidence to the contrary . He discussed this in the Report 's first Wørd segment , using the term " truthiness " as he explained what he perceives to be the difference between " those who think with their head and those who know with their heart . " He has further gone on to ascribe " truthiness " to other institutions including Wikipedia , which he believes upholds his view that reality can be determined by consensus opinion , and often encourages viewers to use Wikipedia to " change reality . " Colbert believes that if a majority of people want something to be true , that thing therefore must become the truth . For instance , after months of scoffing at global warming , Colbert suddenly reversed his position , conceding its existence only due to the box office success of An Inconvenient Truth , a sign that " the free market has spoken . " 
 Colbert describes himself as racially color @-@ blind and unable to visually identify a person 's race , explaining , " Now , I don 't see race ... People tell me I 'm white , and I believe them , because I own a lot of Jimmy Buffett albums . " His race @-@ blindness is a recurring joke , and this statement is often repeated on the show with different punch lines . For this same reason he believed that he was black when he had an emotional breakdown after watching Obama 's inauguration video . He later qualified these statements in his book , stating , " When I say I don 't see race , I mean I don 't see Black people . But I can spot a Mexican at a hundred paces . " Despite all these claims , Colbert often boasts that he has a large number of token minority friends ( including Jon Stewart as " [ his ] Jewish friend " and Oprah Winfrey as " [ his ] black friend " ) , although in the photos shown these friends appear decidedly uninterested in him . He has stated a similar inability to distinguish between the sexes , claiming to only " see an American . " This comes in contradiction of his at times sexist behavior , for instance , calling only on men during an open discussion with his audience on women 's issues . 
 The comedian has said that he likes playing weak characters , and particularly revealing weaknesses in high status figures . During the course of the show , he will frequently peel back the Colbert character 's apparent bravado to expose a very weak inner core . In one instance , Colbert demands one of his staff members subject him to simulated waterboarding , only to break down into pleas for mercy upon hearing a water bottle cap popped . In another episode , he criticizes The Today Show cohost Matt Lauer for saying that it 's unacceptable for men to cry , only to sob hysterically upon learning that Katie Couric has left the show . These status shifts occur commonly , and constitute a central component of the show 's comedy . 
 Colbert frequently uses his show as a platform for promoting his own fictional merchandise , including <unk> , science fiction novels , medication , and his own sperm . 
 = = 2009 visit to Baghdad , Iraq = = 
 Colbert arrived in Baghdad , Iraq on June 5 , 2009 , to film a week of shows called " Operation Iraqi Stephen : Going Commando " . The episodes were filmed June 7 – 9 , 2009 , which was sponsored by the USO ( United Service Organizations ) . Al @-@ Faw Palace 's rotunda was used for the filming of Operation Iraqi Stephen . <unk> had a suit tailored for him in the Army Combat Uniform pattern and went through an abbreviated version of the Army 's basic training regimen . The suit was specially tailored by Brooks Brothers . As a tribute to Bob Hope , Colbert brought a golf club on stage , a Hope trademark . 
 The first episode included an interview with Multinational Force - Iraq commander General Ray Odierno , which was interrupted by U.S. President Barack Obama . Obama stated that if Colbert really wanted to be a soldier , along with his attendance to Basic Combat Training , he needed to have his hair shaved off . Obama then ordered General Odierno to " shave that man 's head " . General Odierno then began to shave Colbert 's head ; the job was finished during the commercial break by one of Colbert 's staff members . One Army major said that " shaving of the hair is an amazing show of support " that was " very touching . " The episode also featured a message to the troops from U.S. Senator John McCain with a friendly reminder to " always remember to clean your muskets " , a lesson he claimed to have learned at Valley Forge , as a reference to old age jokes that he faced during the 2008 Presidential Election . Several other prominent politicians , including former presidents Bill Clinton , George H. W. Bush , and George W. Bush , along with Vice President Joe Biden and then Alaska governor Sarah Palin recorded messages for the troops that were aired in the following episodes . 
 = = Other appearances = = 
 White House Correspondents ' Association Dinner April 29 , 2006 
 58th Primetime Emmy Awards , presenter , August 27 , 2006 
 Night of Too Many Stars : An Overbooked Benefit for Autism , October 15 , 2006 
 Friendly Neighborhood Spider @-@ Man # 15 , December 20 , 2006 
 The O 'Reilly Factor , in @-@ character interview , January 18 , 2007 
 59th Primetime Emmy Awards , presenter , September 16 , 2007 
 Meet the Press , in @-@ character interview as presidential candidate , October 21 , 2007 
 60th Primetime Emmy Awards , presenter , September 21 , 2008 
 The Amazing Spider @-@ Man # 573 , October 15 , 2008 
 Late Night with Conan O 'Brien , February 4 , 2008 and February 17 , 2009 
 United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement , September 24 , 2010 . However , Colbert did break character when he responded to questions by Congresswoman Judy Chu about the plight of immigrant workers . 
 Rally to Restore Sanity and / or Fear , Co @-@ organizer October 30 , 2010 
 This Week with George Stephanopoulos , January 15 , 2012 
 A White House state dinner in honor of French president , Francois Hollande , February 11 , 2014 . Colbert was seated at the head table , in a seat which would have gone to Hollande 's guest had he brought one . The following night , Colbert referenced on his show his seating assignment at the head table , calling himself the " First Lady of France " . 
 In 2014 the character was used in an ad campaign for Wonderful Pistachios , which launched with a Super Bowl commercial that aired during Super Bowl XLVIII 
 The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon , February 17 , 2014 , the first episode . Fallon had several celebrities come on stage and give him $ 100 bills paying off bets that they lost because he got to host The Tonight Show . Colbert was the last celebrity and he came with $ 100 in a bucket of pennies , pouring them down Fallon 's clothes . 
 2014 RSA Conference 
 2014 Comic @-@ con : appeared both as a panel moderator as well as in costume portraying a character called " Prince <unk> " which is supposed to be " Half Hawk . Half Cat . Whole Prince " . The attendance in costume was not revealed until two months after the event . 
 October 2014 Apple Inc. press event : Colbert participated in the event via phone where he asked to be given the title " Supreme Allied Commander of Super Secrecy " 
 Colbert appeared in the November 6 , 2014 episode of @ midnight to announce the " <unk> Wars " for the episode . 
 = = = After the conclusion of The Colbert Report = = = 
 Colbert made an appearance in the House of Cards season three episode " Chapter 27 " . The segment was taped before The Colbert Report set was transformed into the set for The Nightly Show with Larry Wilmore . It was first released on February 27 , 2015 , two months after the final episode of The Colbert Report aired . 
 On August 6 , 2015 , Colbert ( both in and out of character ) returned for Jon Stewart 's last night on The Daily Show , along with many other correspondents to serve under his tenure , to pay tribute to the departing host . 
 On July 18 , 2016 , Colbert reprised the character on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert . The character appeared with Jon Stewart and Colbert ( as himself , in his capacity as host ) , before the character hosted the Colbert Report segment , " The Wørd . " 
 = Russian battleship Tri Sviatitelia = 
 Tri Sviatitelia ( Russian : <unk> <unk> meaning the Three Holy Hierarchs ) was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Imperial Russian Navy during the 1890s . She served with the Black Sea Fleet and was flagship of the forces pursuing the mutinous battleship Potemkin in June 1905 . During World War I the ship encountered the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben ( formally Yavuz Sultan Selim ) twice , but never hit the German ship , nor was she damaged by her . From 1915 onward she was relegated to the coast bombardment role as she was the oldest battleship in the Black Sea Fleet . Tri Sviatitelia was refitting in Sevastopol when the February Revolution of 1917 began and she was never operational afterwards . 
 Tri Sviatitelia was captured when the Germans took the city in May 1918 and was turned over to the Allies after the Armistice in November 1918 . Her engines were destroyed in 1919 by the British when they withdrew from Sevastopol to prevent the advancing Bolsheviks from using her against the White Russians . She was abandoned when the Whites evacuated the Crimea in 1920 and was scrapped in 1923 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Tri Sviatitelia 's design was based on an enlarged version of the Baltic Fleet battleship Navarin with some improvements in armour and armament . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Tri Sviatitelia was 371 feet ( 113 @.@ 1 m ) long at the waterline and 378 feet ( 115 @.@ 2 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 73 feet 3 inches ( 22 @.@ 3 m ) and a draught of 28 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 7 m ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 415 long tons ( 13 @,@ 630 t ) , over 800 long tons ( 810 t ) more than her designed displacement of 12 @,@ 480 long tons ( 12 @,@ 680 t ) . Tri Sviatitelia was considerably larger than Navarin , being 23 feet 6 inches ( 7 @.@ 2 m ) longer , 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) wider and displacing 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 000 t ) more . She had a metacentric height of 5 @.@ 58 feet ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Tri Sviatitelia had two three @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines built by the British firm of Humphreys & Tennant that had a total designed output of 10 @,@ 600 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 900 kW ) . 14 cylindrical fire @-@ tube boilers provided steam to the engines at a pressure of 128 psi ( 883 kPa ; 9 kgf / cm2 ) , which drove two four @-@ bladed screw propellers . On sea trials , the powerplant produced a total of 11 @,@ 308 ihp ( 8 @,@ 432 kW ) and a top speed of 16 @.@ 5 knots ( 30 @.@ 6 km / h ; 19 @.@ 0 mph ) . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 000 t ) of coal at full load that provided a range of 2 @,@ 250 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 170 km ; 2 @,@ 590 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Tri Sviatitelia had three dynamos with a total output of 305 kW , but these were too small and could not supply full power to all the electrical equipment simultaneously . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Her main armament consisted of two pairs of 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Obukhov Model 1895 40 @-@ calibre guns mounted in hydraulically powered twin turrets fore and aft . Each turret had a firing arc of 270 ° . The guns had a rate of fire of 105 seconds between rounds . These guns had a maximum elevation of 15 degrees and could depress to − 5 degrees . They fired a 731 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 331 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 598 ft / s ( 792 m / s ) to a range of 12 @,@ 010 yards ( 10 @,@ 980 m ) at an elevation of 10 ° . 75 rounds per gun were carried . 
 All eight 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Canet Pattern 1892 45 @-@ caliber guns were mounted in casemates on the upper deck . The guns could elevate to a maximum of 20 degrees and depress to − 5 degrees . They fired shells that weighed 91 @.@ 27 lb ( 41 @.@ 40 kg ) with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ( 790 m / s ) . They had a maximum range of 12 @,@ 600 yards ( 11 @,@ 500 m ) when fired at maximum elevation . 
 The anti @-@ torpedo boat armament consisted of a large number of different guns . Four 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 119 mm ) Canet Pattern 1892 45 @-@ calibre guns were mounted at the corners of the superstructure . The gun fired 45 @.@ 15 @-@ pound ( 20 @.@ 48 kg ) shells to a range of about 11 @,@ 000 yards ( 10 @,@ 000 m ) at 18 degrees elevation with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ( 820 m / s ) . The rate of fire was between twelve and fifteen rounds per minute . A total of 10 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns were carried : six between the 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns , two at the forward end of the superstructure and two in embrasures in the aft hull . They fired a 3 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 476 ft / s ( 450 m / s ) at a rate of 20 rounds per minute to a range of 2 @,@ 020 yards ( 1 @,@ 850 m ) . A total of 40 37 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss guns were mounted ; eight in each of the fighting tops , eight on top of the superstructure , twelve in small hull embrasures fore and aft and the locations of the remaining four are uncertain . They fired a 1 @.@ 1 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 50 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 450 ft / s ( 440 m / s ) at a rate of 20 rounds per minute to a range of 3 @,@ 038 yards ( 2 @,@ 778 m ) . 
 Tri Sviatitelia carried six 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes . The forward broadside tubes were underwater , but the other four tubes were above water , one each in the bow and stern and the aft pair of broadside tubes . The Type L torpedo carried a 141 @-@ pound ( 64 kg ) warhead of TNT . It had two speed settings which gave it a maximum range of 980 yards ( 900 m ) at 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) or 660 yards ( 600 m ) at 29 knots ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 Tri Sviatitelia was the first Russian ship to use Harvey armour . The armour was made by Vickers in Britain as well as the French firms of Schneider et Cie and Saint Chamond . The maximum thickness of the waterline belt was 18 inches ( 457 mm ) which reduced to 16 inches ( 406 mm ) abreast the magazines . This was the thickest armour ever carried by a Russian battleship . It covered 246 feet ( 75 @.@ 0 m ) of the ship 's length . The belt was 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high , and tapered down to a thickness of 9 inches ( 229 mm ) at the bottom edge . The upper 18 inches ( 457 @.@ 2 mm ) of the belt was intended to be above the waterline , but the ship was overweight and much of the belt was submerged . The belt terminated in 14 – 16 @-@ inch ( 356 – 406 mm ) transverse bulkheads . 
 The lower casemate was above the belt , 218 feet ( 66 @.@ 4 m ) long and eight feet high , and was intended to protect the bases of the turrets . It had 16 @-@ inch sides and was closed off by 16 @-@ inch transverse bulkheads fore and aft . The upper casemate protected the six @-@ inch guns and was 5 inches ( 127 mm ) thick on all sides . The sides of the turrets were 16 inches ( 406 mm ) thick and the conning tower 's sides were 12 inches ( 305 mm ) in thickness . The nickel steel armor deck was 2 inches ( 51 mm ) thick over the lower casemate , but 3 inches ( 76 mm ) thick forward and aft of the main armor belt to the bow and stern . 
 = = = Major refit in 1911 – 12 = = = 
 Tri Sviatitelia was reconstructed between November 1911 and August 1912 . A number of different proposals had been considered earlier , including one to replace all of her obsolete Harvey armour with modern Krupp armour and others to replace her main guns or turrets , but these were rejected as too expensive . Her masts and fighting tops were replaced by pole masts and all of her light guns and torpedo tubes were removed with the exception of two 47 @-@ millimetre guns retained for use as saluting guns . Her 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns were replaced by four shielded 6 @-@ inch guns on the roof of the upper casemate . The upper casemate was modified to accommodate two extra 6 @-@ inch guns and her superstructure was reduced in size . The maximum elevation of her main guns was increased to 25 ° and their breeches and loading mechanisms were upgraded to increase their rate of fire to one round every 40 seconds . These modifications had the effect of reducing her displacement by almost 100 long tons ( 102 t ) and she was capable of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) on her post @-@ reconstruction sea trials . 
 = = Service = = 
 Tri Sviatitelia was named after the Three Holy Hierarchs of the Orthodox Church . She was built by Nikolayev Dockyard and laid down 15 August 1891 , although actual construction had begun about January 1891 . The ship was launched 12 November 1893 and transferred to Sevastopol for completion the following year . Officially she entered service in 1895 with the Black Sea Fleet , but her sea trials did not begin until September – October 1896 . In 1899 Tri Sviatitelia became the first ship in the world to be fitted with a radio , an installation designed by the Russian physicist Alexander Stepanovich Popov that had a range of about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . The ship was flagship of Rear Admiral F. F. <unk> during the failed attempt to recapture the mutinous battleship Potemkin on 30 June [ O.S. 17 June ] 1905 . Her forward fighting top was removed about 1908 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Tri Sviatitelia , accompanied by the pre @-@ dreadnoughts Evstafi ( flagship ) , Ioann Zlatoust , Panteleimon ( the former Potemkin ) , Rostislav , bombarded Trebizond on the morning of 17 November 1914 and was intercepted by the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben and the light cruiser SMS Breslau the following day on their return voyage to Sevastopol in what came to be known as the Battle of Cape Sarych . Despite the noon hour the conditions were foggy and the capital ships initially did not spot each other . The Black Sea Fleet had experimented on concentrating fire from several ships under the control of a " master ship " before the war and Evstafi held her fire until Ioann Zlatoust , the master ship , could see Goeben . When the gunnery commands were finally received they showed a range 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) in excess of Evstafi 's own estimate of 8 @,@ 000 yards ( 7 @,@ 300 m ) , so Evstafi opened fire using her own data before the Goeben turned to unmask its broadside . However the Tri Sviatitelia used Ioann Zlatoust 's inaccurate range data and failed to register any hits on the German ship . 
 Tri Sviatitelia and Rostislav bombarded Ottoman fortifications at the mouth of the Bosphorus on 18 March 1915 , but only fired 105 rounds before sailing north to rejoin the covering force . Tri Sviatitelia and Rostislav were to have repeated the bombardment the following day , but heavy fog prevented the operation . On 3 April , Goeben and several ships of the Turkish navy raided the Russian port at Odessa ; the Russian battleship squadron sortied to intercept them . The battleships chased Goeben the entire day , but were unable to reach effective gunnery range and were forced to break off the chase . On 25 April Tri Sviatitelia and Rostislav repeated their bombardment of the Bosporus forts . Sviatitelia , Rostislav and Panteleimon bombarded the forts again on 2 and 3 May . However , this time a total of 337 main gun rounds were fired in addition to a total of 528 six @-@ inch shells between the three battleships . 
 On 9 May 1915 , Tri Sviatitelia and Panteleimon returned to bombard the Bosphorus forts , covered by the remaining pre @-@ dreadnoughts . Goeben intercepted the three ships of the covering force , although no damage was inflicted by either side . Tri Sviatitelia and Pantelimon rejoined their consorts and the latter scored two hits on Goeben before she broke off the action . The Russian ships pursued her for six hours before giving up the chase . Tri Sviatitelia was fitted with a pair of 63 @.@ 5 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 50 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns on top of each of her turrets during 1915 and screens were added on top of her funnels to keep out light bombs . On 12 August 1915 she , and all the other pre @-@ dreadnoughts , were transferred to the 2nd Battleship Brigade , after the dreadnought Imperatritsa Mariya had entered service . During 1916 she conducted coast bombardment and anti @-@ shipping missions off the Anatolian coast . 
 Tri Sviatitelia was refitting in Sevastopol during the February Revolution of 1917 . Immobile , she was captured by the Germans in Sevastopol in May 1918 and handed over to the Allies in December 1918 after the Armistice . The British wrecked her engines on 24 April 1919 when they left the Crimea to prevent the advancing Bolsheviks from using her against the White Russians . The ship was captured by both sides during the Russian Civil War , but was abandoned by the White Russians when they evacuated the Crimea in November 1920 . Tri Sviatitelia was scrapped in 1923 , although she was not stricken from the Navy List until 21 November 1925 . 
 = Akane Tsunemori = 
 Akane Tsunemori ( <unk> <unk> , Tsunemori Akane ) is a fictional female character in the anime television series Psycho @-@ Pass , which was produced by Production I.G. Akane is a young adult who has just graduated from college ; she is a new member of Unit One of the Public Safety Bureau 's Criminal Investigation Division , which follows several crime investigations . Akane befriends the unit 's Enforcers and becomes involved in several crime scenes , which makes her question her views on society and causes her to become a strong detective . Akane has also appeared in manga and novel adaptations of the series . In the animated series , she is voiced by Kana Hanazawa in Japanese and by Kate Oxley in English . 
 Akane was created to be a relatable character who would question the setting and answer the viewer 's questions . Early in the show 's development , the production staff planned the way Akane would mature throughout the story . Early critical reception to Akane has been mixed . Some critics saw her as typical new cop often seen in dramas ; others criticized her as uninteresting . However , her growth in the story earned praise for becoming a highly appealing protagonist . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Akane is the 20 @-@ year @-@ old main female protagonist of Psycho @-@ Pass . Akane is the newly assigned Inspector of Unit One of the Public Safety Bureau 's Criminal Investigation Division . She passes the exams with the highest score for employment on several public sectors and private corporations . Of more than 500 students , Akane was the only one to get an " A " ranking for the Public Safety Bureau and decided to join it because she thought she would be able to accomplish something that only she could do and find her purpose in life . She is initially uncomfortable with her job because it involved attacking and subduing potentially violent criminals before they can act . Enforcer Shinya Kogami 's recognizes and is curious by Akane 's views on these criminals . Akane befriends Kogami and Enforcer Tomomi Masaoka , which makes the veteran Inspector Nobuchika Ginoza — with whom Akane often argues — angry . In one case , Akane 's best friend is murdered by criminal mastermind Shogo Makishima . However , her acceptance of society and will to fight to against conflicts prevent her from becoming a latent criminal , despite the trauma of seeing her best friend 's death . Akane then resolves to arrest Makishima . 
 Akane and Kogami arrest Makishima but he escapes . Akane is disappointed when Kogami leaves the police force to hunt him alone . Akane soon discovers that members of the Sibyl System , a private organization that manages the Psycho @-@ Pass technology , want to use her to capture Makishima alive . Akane agrees on the condition they rescind their orders to kill the defecting Kogami . Despite her efforts , Akane fails to stop Kogami from killing Makishima . The Sibyl System members allow her to live on condition she does not reveal the truth about them . In the epilogue , Akane becomes the de facto leader of Unit One ; she is seen briefing a newly recruited Inspector in the finale of season one . 
 Akane returns as the leading character from Psycho @-@ Pass 2 working with Inspector Mika Shimotsuki to arrest a criminal named Kirito Kamui . After a betraying Enforcer Sakuya <unk> attempts to raise her Crime Coefficient , Kamui calms Akane down before sacrificing himself in order to shoot Togane as he is intent in lowering people 's Crime Coefficients . 
 Akane also appears in the printed adaptations of the series , which include a manga in which she is the titular character . Additionally , a novel expands on the ending and Akane starts having hallucinations of the people who died during the story . In the audio drama After Stories , she contacts Kogami after the events of the series and promises to meet him again as equals . 
 = = Creation and design = = 
 Akane Tsunemori was created by the Production I.G staff to be the most relatable character in the series . She would question the setting from the audience 's point of view and have it explained to them . She was written as the heroine , who would come between Shinya Kogami and Shogo Makishima and see their conflict from her own viewpoint . One of the staff 's main objectives was Akane 's growth . Akane appears at the start of the first season as an innocent rookie who matures through her experiences . This was affirmed by Japanese female actor Kana Hanazawa , who voices Akane in Japanese . Hanazawa said one of the focal points of the series after the third episode was the changes Akane would undergo ; she would be influenced by many unfamiliar , traumatic experience she must endure as part of her policing role . 
 Akane was designed by manga artist Akira Amano . The series is " anti @-@ moe " , so the production team decided to avoid having the Akane remove her clothes during episodes and instead had Kogami remove his . Akane is voiced in the English @-@ dubbed version by Kate Oxley . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Initial reactions to Akane were mixed . Hiroko Yamamura from Japanator liked the way the first episode focused on Akane 's first day as a police officer and her opinions of it . Thomas Zoth from The Fandom Post said Akane 's personality is typical of those in dramas ; he called her a " naive waif who gets over her head with her first case " . Zoth said that in later episodes , he liked the relationship Akane established with Masaoka and Ginoza , which resulted in several interesting scenes . Zoth said he grew to care about Akane during the first half of the series in " a somewhat ironically ' moe ' way , as she 's grown as a character " . In a similar review , Rebecca Silverman from Anime News Network said Akane 's actions in the first episode " [ set ] her up as the clear @-@ eyed , albeit naïve , outsider of the story , willing to look at things differently " . 
 Bamboo Dong from Anime News Network was more critical of the character , calling her " a blank slate " . She said Akane is " uninteresting and forgettable , and her previous role in the show as the moral compass seems to have waned as well " . Chris Beveridge from The Fandom Post was more optimistic ; he said , " Akane provides a good voice for this , since she ’ s new to it all and wants to bring nuance to the numbers and the situations , but we see how experience plays out against her at times , but also that she does have something to offer with it " . 
 Despite mixed reactions to the character , her growth during the series earned praise . Silverman said that ever since her best friend 's death at Shogo Makishima 's hands , Akane underwent major character development as she " further distances herself from the bright @-@ eyed rookie she began as , recognizing the flaws in the system while not being entirely certain that she can be the force for change in it " . Silverman also praised the impact Akane brought to the climax and her relationship with Shinya Kogami . In a later review , Dong said the character 's uninteresting traits stop appearing in the second half of the series . 
 Zoth said episode 20 , in which " Akane finally snaps " , was one of his most expected parts from the story . Zoth also said , " Akane has grown as a character , and a detective , and in a bit of a heavy @-@ handed move , she ’ s shown transforming into Kogami in Ginoza 's eyes " . Similarly , Bamboo Dong said , " No longer the dull and meek woman she was for over half the series , [ Akane 's ] now confident and capable , doling out commands that are instantly followed and respected by her comrades " . Dong said Akane is an appealing main character who is " worth paying attention to , and her presence on screen is the perfect complement to the much more complex side characters that populate the show " . Richard Eisenbeis from Kotaku said he found Akane more interesting than Kogami because her overall development . Akane also won the " Miss Noitamina " award in an official poll involving characters that appeared in <unk> television series . In the 2013 Newtype anime awards , Akane was voted the third @-@ best female character . In 2015 , she once again took that place . The same year , a Charapedia poll , which asked fans to list their favourite " cool " women in anime , had Akane placed 10th with 257 votes . 
 = The Boat Race 1908 = 
 The 65th Boat Race took place on 4 April 1908 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Cambridge were reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race . In a race umpired by Frederick I. Pitman , Cambridge won by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 20 seconds . It was their third consecutive victory and their sixth win in seven races , taking the overall record in the event to 34 – 30 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2015 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1907 race by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , while Oxford led overall with 34 victories to Cambridge 's 29 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge 's coaches were L. H. K. Bushe @-@ Fox , Francis Escombe ( for the fifth consecutive year ) , Stanley Muttlebury , five @-@ time Blue between 1886 and 1890 , and David Alexander Wauchope ( who had rowed in the 1895 race ) . Oxford were coached by Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) and R. P. P. Rowe , who had rowed four times between 1889 and 1892 . For the fifth year the umpire was old Etonian Frederick I. Pitman who rowed for Cambridge in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 3 @.@ 25 lb ( 77 @.@ 5 kg ) , 3 @.@ 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 6 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained four members with previous Boat Race experience , including Alister Kirby and Albert Gladstone who were rowing in their third race . Six of the Dark Blue crew were educated at Eton College . Cambridge also saw four members return , with Douglas Stuart and Eric Powell making their third appearances in the event . Light Blue number two George Eric Fairbairn was following in his uncle 's footsteps : Steve Fairbairn rowed for Cambridge four times in the 1880s . Oxford 's number three , Australian Collier Cudmore , was the only non @-@ British participant registered in the race . 
 Former Oxford rower and author George Drinkwater assessed the Cambridge crew as " better and stronger than in the previous year " . Conversely , " misfortune dogged the [ Oxford ] crew " : firstly their number five of 1907 , James Angus Gillan was available but forbidden to row by his doctors . Influenza then swept through the crew , before Kirby was struck down by jaundice ; despite not fully recovering , he took part in the race . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . In a strong head @-@ wind , umpire Pitman started the race at 3 : 30 p.m. The Light Blues made the better start , and slightly out @-@ rating Oxford , began to pull away . Rough water favoured Cambridge 's style of rowing , and they were clear of Oxford by the time they passed the Mile Post . The crews passed Harrods Furniture Depository with the Light Blues two lengths ahead and although the Dark Blues spurted again and again , they failed to make any inroads in the Cambridge lead , who began to pull away once again after passing under Barnes Bridge . They passed the finishing post leading by two and a half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 20 seconds . It was Cambridge 's third consecutive victory , and their sixth in seven years , and took the overall record to 34 – 30 in Oxford 's favour . The winning time was the fastest since the 1902 race and it was the narrowest margin of victory since the 1901 race . Drinkwater described the race as " a much finer struggle than those of the two previous years " . 
 = Life on the Fast Lane = 
 " Life on the Fast Lane " , also known as " Jacques to Be Wild " , is the ninth episode of The Simpsons ' first season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 18 , 1990 . It was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by David Silverman . Albert Brooks guest starred as Jacques , a French bowling instructor , with him being credited as " A. Brooks " . 
 The episode deals with how Homer 's thoughtlessness precipitates Marge 's infatuation with her bowling instructor Jacques , leading to a marriage crisis between her and Homer . In the original plan for the episode , Brooks ( who improvised much of his dialogue ) was to voice a Swedish tennis coach called Björn , with the episode to be titled " Björn To Be Wild " . The episode features a parody of the film An Officer and a Gentleman and won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) in 1990 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer , unaware that it is Marge 's birthday , rushes out to buy her a present at the Springfield Mall . He finds a bowling ball and decides to buy it for her . During the night of her birthday dinner at Singing Sirloin , Marge is happy with the kids ' presents of French perfume from Bart and a macaroni and glue card of her as the Mona Lisa from Lisa . However , she is deeply offended by Homer 's gift as it is another demonstration of his thoughtless gift giving history , and her sisters , Patty and Selma sit by smugly . To make matters worse , as he presents his ' gift ' , it falls out of his hands and squashes Marge 's birthday cake . Deeply resentful with Homer for ruining her birthday again , Marge reminds him that not only has she never gone bowling in her life , but the ball is also inscribed with his name on it . 
 Realizing that Homer only bought the ball so that he could use it himself , she is determined to learn how to bowl to spite him and heads to Barney 's Bowl @-@ a @-@ Rama . But Marge has trouble how to until she meets a French bowling instructor named Jacques , who offers to give her lessons . Jacques proves to be a patient and charming instructor - the opposite of Homer in every way . When he asks about the name inscribed on her ball , she tells him that Homer is actually the ball 's name , neglecting to mention that she is married . Homer is faintly aware that something is wrong , but is unsure what is happening . After having passed several bowling lessons , Jacques and Marge agree to meet each other for brunch . 
 Their brunch goes well until they run into Helen Lovejoy , who seems delighted to not find Marge with Homer . After deflecting Helen 's interest by pretending to discuss bowling theory , Jacques asks Marge to meet him the next day away from the gossips of the world at his apartment , causing Marge to faint . In her dream , she imagines a romantic fantasy where she dances with Jacques in his luxurious , bowling @-@ themed apartment . When she comes to , she accepts the invitation . 
 At home , Homer finds the personalized bowling glove given to Marge by Jacques and realizes he may be losing her . It is not long until Bart realizes that Lisa 's suspicions are proving to be true about their parents drifting apart and offers Homer some advice in keeping his mouth shut so it does not get worse . At work the next day , he cannot bring himself to eat the sandwich she made for him , saying that it is all he has left of her . Marge leaves for her meeting with Jacques , but finds herself reminded of lifetime commitment throughout the drive . She comes to a fork in the road , one way leading to the nuclear plant , the other to Jacques ' apartment . After an agonized hesitation at the crux of the decision , she surprises Homer at the plant and kisses him warmly . An ecstatic Homer abandons his work post to carry Marge away in his arms . His co @-@ workers want to know what to tell the boss . To the sound of their cheers , he says to say that they are going to the backseat of his car and will not be back for ten minutes . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by David Silverman . When the episode was originally planned , it called for Albert Brooks to voice " Björn " , a Swedish tennis instructor , but Brooks thought it would be funnier to make the character French and so the change was made . The title was originally to be " Bjorn to Be Wild " , thus accounting for the episode 's alternate title " Jacques to Be Wild " . Brooks improvised almost all of his dialogue , producing over three hours of material . Marge 's laugh during her bowling lesson was an ad @-@ libbed , natural laugh by Julie Kavner , who was laughing at something Albert Brooks has just said . The line " four onion rings ! " was one of the many lines that Brooks ad @-@ libbed and when saying it , Jacques loses his French accent . An extended audio clip of Albert Brooks ' unused dialogue was made available on Disc Three of The Simpsons The Complete First Season DVD . 
 The episode features the first appearance of the bowling alley Barney 's Bowlarama . The original backstory for Barney 's Bowlarama was that it was owned by Barney Gumble . Over time it changed to Barney just being an employee , as the writers could not imagine Barney owning anything . It was later revealed that Barney 's uncle was the owner . The exterior of the Bowlarama was designed by No Doubt member Eric Stefani . The episode also marks the first appearances of Lenny Leonard and Helen Lovejoy . 
 The sequence in which the family throws the pizza box away was specifically designed by John Swartzwelder to look surreal , with the family panning into each other . The moon was designed to resemble a bowling ball in the scene in which Jacques drops Marge home . The restaurant that Jacques and Marge attend is called " Shorty 's " ; it was originally intended that a chef 's hat would be shown moving around in the background , implying that the owner was short , but the concept was dropped as it seemed to be too much of a silly idea . The episode 's conclusion is a reference to An Officer and a Gentleman , which David Silverman had to watch first , so that he knew how to set the scene out . Homer 's line , " too exciting " , when he sees the lingerie store was written by James L. Brooks . During Marge 's phone conversation with Patty and Selma , Maggie can be seen sucking her pacifier repeatedly , a concept dropped in later episodes as it was deemed too much of a distraction from the dialogue . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Marge 's dream resembles a dance number from The Gay Divorcee . The end scene , in which Marge walks into the power plant , and Homer carries her away , is a reference to the film An Officer and a Gentleman , and features the same music , " Up Where We Belong " . 
 The title is taken from the song form the Eagles song " Life in the Fast Lane " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Life on the Fast Lane " finished 11th in ratings for the week of March 12 – 19 , 1990 , with a Nielsen rating of 17 @.@ 5 , equivalent to approximately 16 @.@ 1 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating Married ... with Children . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , called it " A very good , very assured episode that has seen some viewers ( particularly female ones ) tearing out their hair at the conclusion . " Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club praised the episode , stating : " There would be many funnier and faster episodes of The Simpsons but few can match " Life on the Fast Lane " for emotional depth and characterization . " IGN.com named Albert Brooks ' guest performance in this episode , along with his four other appearances , the best guest appearance in the show 's history . In a DVD review of the first season David B. Grelck gave the episode a rating of 4 / 5 , placing it as , along with " Homer 's Night Out " , his favorite of the season . Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in a review that it was " another good but not great episode " and added that " Albert Brooks seriously enlivened " Life [ on the Fast Lane ] " ... Jacques becomes funny not so much due to the lines themselves ; it ’ s Brooks ’ readings that make them work . " Another DVD review from The Digital Bits called it " one of the first season 's best loved episodes " . 
 This episode won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming One Hour or Less ) in 1990 , defeating fellow Simpsons episode " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , and becoming the first The Simpsons episode to win the award . In a 2000 Entertainment Weekly article , Matt Groening ranked this episode as his second favorite episode of all time , behind " Bart the Daredevil " . Entertainment Weekly placed the episode twenty @-@ first on their top 25 The Simpsons episode list , calling it " a showcase for the series ' bedrock of character and heart . " The Orlando Sentinel 's Gregory Hardy named it the fifteenth best episode of the show with a sports theme . The episode 's reference to An Officer and a Gentleman was named the 23rd greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The March 15 , 2004 edition of the Dear Abby column was pulled , as it had emerged that one of the letters was a fake . A newspaper editor noticed that the problem cited in the letter was identical to the plot of " Life on the Fast Lane " . Kathie Kerr , a spokeswoman for the Universal Press Syndicate stated that " It did sound too similar not to be a hoax " . 
 = 2011 Kobalt Tools 400 = 
 The 2011 Kobalt Tools 400 was a NASCAR Sprint Cup Series stock car race that was held on March 6 , 2011 at Las Vegas Motor Speedway in Clark County , Nevada . Contested over 267 laps , it was the third race of the 2011 season . Carl Edwards , driving for Roush Fenway Racing , won the race . Tony Stewart finished second and Juan Pablo Montoya finished third . 
 <unk> Matt Kenseth maintained his lead on the first lap to begin the race , as Greg Biffle , who started in the fourth position on the grid , remained behind him . On the 8th lap , the first caution was given because Robby Gordon spun sideways . Following the second caution , Stewart became the leader , and increased his lead to 6 @.@ 5 seconds by lap 95 . Late in the race , Stewart was given a penalty for speeding on pit road , giving the lead to Edwards . Edwards remained the leader to win for the second time at Las Vegas Motor Speedway . 
 There were seven cautions and 22 lead changes among 15 different drivers throughout the course of the race . It was Edwards ' first win in the 2011 season and the 20th of his career . The result moved Edwards up to the third position in the Drivers ' Championship , seven points behind Stewart while being tied with Montoya . Ford maintained its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , three points ahead of Chevrolet and five ahead of Toyota , with 33 races remaining in the season . A total of 152 @,@ 000 people attended the race , while 10 @.@ 1 million watched it on television . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Las Vegas Motor Speedway is one of ten intermediate tracks to hold NASCAR races . The race was scheduled to be held on the standard track at Las Vegas Motor Speedway ; a four @-@ turn D @-@ shaped oval track that is 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at 20 degrees , while the front stretch , the location of the finish line , and the back stretch on the opposite side of the track are banked at nine degrees . The racetrack has seats for 142 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 Before the race , Kyle Busch was leading the Drivers ' Championship with 80 points , and Kurt Busch stood in second with 77 points . Tony Stewart and A. J. Allmendinger followed tied for third and fourth with 69 points , four ahead of Jeff Gordon and Mark Martin , who were tied for fifth . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Ford , Toyota and Chevrolet were leading with twelve points , four points ahead of Dodge . Jimmie Johnson was the race 's defending winner from 2010 . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Two practice sessions were held in <unk> for the race ; one on Friday and the other on Saturday . The first session lasted 90 minutes long , while the second was 75 minutes long . Matt Kenseth was quickest with a time of 28 @.@ 939 seconds in the first session , 0 @.@ 047 seconds faster than David Ragan . Montoya was just off Ragan 's pace , followed by Carl Edwards , Greg Biffle , and Marcos Ambrose . Stewart was seventh , still within a second of Kenseth 's time . Also in the first practice session , Jeff Gordon spun sideways after the fourth turn . 
 Forty @-@ four cars were entered for qualifying ; however , only forty @-@ three could qualify for the race because of NASCAR 's qualifying procedure . Kenseth clinched the fifth pole position of his career , with a time of 28 @.@ 589 seconds . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Ambrose . Edwards qualified third , Biffle took fourth , and Kyle Busch started fifth . Joey Logano , Allmendinger , Newman , Martin Truex , Jr. and Martin rounded out the top ten . The only driver that failed to qualify for the race was Brian Keselowski . Once the qualifying session completed , Kenseth commented , " Qualifying is not my strong suit , but I knew we had a really fast car today when we did our last qualifying run [ in practice ] . Honestly , this is the most nervous I 've been before qualifying in probably five years at least , because I knew we had a shot at the pole , and I knew last week we really messed up . I didn 't want to mess up a fast car today , so I was really happy with that . " 
 In the second and final practice , Kenseth remained quickest with a time of 29 @.@ 330 seconds . Kyle Busch followed in second , ahead of Newman and Edwards . Biffle was fifth quickest , with a time of 29 @.@ 393 seconds . David Reutimann , Truex , Stewart , Logano , and Denny Hamlin rounded out the top ten positions . Ragan , who was second in the first session , could only manage 12th . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race , the third in the season , began at 3 : 00 p.m. EST and was televised live in the United States on Fox . The conditions on the grid were dry before the race with the air temperature at 60 ° F ( 16 ° C ) . Las Vegas Motor Speedway Chaplain Joe Freiburger began pre @-@ race ceremonies , by giving the invocation . Next , Kristen <unk> , from Phantom @-@ Las Vegas Spectacular , performed the national anthem , and Gray Abercrombie , Lowe 's sports marketing manager , gave the command for drivers to start their engines . During the pace laps , Hamlin had to move to the rear of the grid because of him changing his engine . 
 Kenseth retained his pole position lead into the first corner , followed by Biffle , who started fourth . Over the following two laps , Edwards fell to the fourth position , while Biffle passed Kenseth for the lead . After starting 16th on the grid , Trevor Bayne moved up to 11th by the fifth lap . On the following lap , Truex fell three positions to ninth . At lap eight , the first caution was given after Robby Gordon spun sideways . Most of the front runners made pit stops during the caution , while Jeff Gordon stayed out to become the leader . During the lap 12 restart , Jeff Gordon was the leader ahead of Stewart and Montoya . However , Stewart passed Gordon to become the leader on the next lap . Also on the same lap , Kenseth drove to pit road after having a flat tire . On the 14th lap , Stewart remained the leader , while Kurt Busch moved to the second position ahead of Jeff Gordon . Afterward , Andy Lally spun sideways , prompting the second caution . Few drivers made pit stops during the caution . At the lap 18 restart , Stewart was first , followed by Busch , Gordon , and Montoya . By the 20th lap , Reutimann , who started 25th on the grid , had moved up 18 positions . 
 By lap 24 , Stewart maintained a 1 @.@ 7 second lead over Busch , as Gordon fell to sixth . Stewart continued to increase his lead over the next ten laps , while Busch remained in the second position . On the 35th lap , Reutimann moved up to the sixth position . Seven laps later , Jamie McMurray and Keselowski made contact with each other . On the following lap , Paul Menard moved up to 12th . At the 45th lap , Stewart had a 3 @.@ 6 second lead over Busch , as Johnson fell to 23rd . On the next lap , Biffle claimed second away from Busch . During lap 49 , green flag pit stops began with Kurt Busch and Reutimann . On lap 51 , Gordon , Montoya , made pit stops , as Biffle became the leader . Once green flag pit stops concluded on lap 62 , Stewart reclaimed the first position ahead of Kyle Busch . Two laps later , Biffle claimed moved up to the fourth position . On the next lap , Bill Elliott claimed the fifth position . Stewart increased his lead to 1 @.@ 6 seconds by the 67th lap . At lap 74 , Gordon moved up into the tenth position after passing Logano . Four laps later , Kevin Harvick moved up to the 14th position . On lap 81 , Harvick claimed the 13th position . 
 During lap 87 , Gordon moved up to the tenth position . By the 95th lap , Stewart had increased his lead to 6 @.@ 5 seconds over second place . On the next lap , the third caution was given after Kyle Busch collided into the wall because of a flat tire . Most of the frontrunners made pit stops during the caution . At the 101 restart , Stewart was the leader . On the following lap , Kurt Busch and Kahne spun sideways , prompting the fourth caution to be given . On the lap 106 restart , Stewart remained the leader ahead of Edwards and Biffle in second and third . On the 107th lap , Biffle passed Edwards for the second position . Afterward , Kyle Busch 's engine failed , causing the fifth caution to come out . At lap 115 , Stewart led Biffle on the restart . During lap 121 , Edwards passed Biffle to claim second , as Stewart increased his lead . Ten laps later , Harvick moved up to the sixth position . On lap 138 , Dale Earnhardt , Jr. claimed the seventh position , while Truex fell to sixth . Eleven laps later , the sixth caution was given because Gilliland collided into the wall after having a flat tire . During the caution , most of the teams made pit stops . Also on the same lap , Stewart and Harvick received a penalty after having speeding on pit road . 
 At the lap 156 restart , Edwards became the leader ahead of Truex . Edwards maintained the lead on the next lap , as Montoya moved up into third . By lap 159 , Edwards had a 1 @.@ 25 second lead over Truex . Five laps later , Johnson passed Gordon for the ninth position . Edwards continued to increase his lead to 2 @.@ 6 seconds by lap 171 . After having a speed penalty , Stewart had moved up to 18th by the 178th lap . On lap 185 , Clint Bowyer moved up to 16th , while Edwards increased his lead to 2 @.@ 9 seconds . Nine laps later , the seventh caution was given after Gordon collided into the wall after having a flat tire . Most of the drivers made pit stops during the caution , as Stewart reclaimed the first position at the lap 202 restart . By the 214th lap , Stewart had a lead of 2 @.@ 45 seconds . Four laps later , Menard moved up to the tenth position after passing Brian Vickers . On lap 220 , Edwards passed Truex to claim third , as Stewart increased his lead to 3 seconds . Five laps later , Hamlin moved up to the seventh position . On lap 234 , green flag pit stops began with Stewart and Montoya . Two laps later , Harvick and Johnson made pit stops , five laps before Edwards and Truex . 
 Once the green flag pit stops concluded , Edwards was the leader , 1 @.@ 1 seconds ahead of Montoya . By the 250th lap , Edwards increased his lead to 1 @.@ 6 seconds . On the following lap , Kurt Busch moved into the tenth position , as Newman moved up to fifth . With four laps remaining , Stewart passed Montoya for the second position . Edwards maintained the lead to win his first race of the 2011 season . Stewart finished second , ahead of Montoya in third and Ambrose in fourth . Newman clinched the fifth position , after starting eighth . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Edwards appeared in victory lane after his victory lap to start celebrating his first win of the season , in front of a crowd of 152 @,@ 000 people . " These guys are unbelievable . It means a lot coming off Phoenix . I went home last week and didn ’ t know how things were going to go . You don ’ t get a good race car like that often . We had another one today , " said Edwards of his triumph . 
 Although Stewart was leading the race near the end , Edwards passed him after the final pit stops . Stewart , who finished second , said , " I don 't know what happened on the pit stop there , but we had a miscue and had a penalty and had to go to the back , and unfortunately it kind of dealt our cards for us . [ Crew chief ] Darian Grubb made a good call getting us the track position back , but it also showed everybody else that they could do it , too , and we couldn 't run two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half runs on a set of left @-@ side tires . " In the subsequent press conference , Kyle Busch stated his frustration from his accident , " On the restart there [ on Lap 107 ] , I was going to bide my time and try to get back through traffic with plenty of time to go , and ' <unk> ' – it just broke . " Doug Yates , the engine builder for Roush Fenway Racing , expressed his enjoyment of winning the race : 
 " This is an exciting win for Roush Yates Engines . We ran great all week long . I think this says a lot about our program and how we plan to run at 1 @.@ 5 mile tracks throughout the 2011 season . I want to thank Ford again for their support as we continue to excel with the <unk> engine . " 
 Stewart also commented , " It kills me to throw a race away like that , especially at a place we haven 't won at yet . This was a big deal [ Sunday ] , and when you lead that many laps and have a car that 's that fast and you lose it ... I 'm sure [ Monday ] when the emotion dies down we 'll look back and say it was a great weekend . But , man , it does not sit good right now . " The race result moved Stewart into the first position in the Driver 's Championship with 113 points , tied with Kurt Busch in second . Edwards , the winner of the race , and Montoya followed in third and fourth on 106 , three points ahead of Newman in fifth . Ford maintained their lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship with 21 points . Chevrolet and Toyota placed second and third with 18 and 16 points , while Dodge was fourth with 11 . 10 @.@ 1 million people watched the race on television . The race took two hours , fifty @-@ seven minutes and twenty seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 1 @.@ 246 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Tyrone Wheatley = 
