 The Quran is the central religious text of Islam . Muslims believe it represents the words of God revealed by the archangel Gabriel to Muhammad . 
 Although it mentions Muhammad directly only four times , [ Quran 3 : 144 ] [ Quran 33 : 40 ] [ Quran 47 : 2 ] [ Quran 48 : 29 ] there are verses which can be interpreted as allusions to Muhammad 's life . The Quran , however , provides minimal assistance for Muhammad 's chronological biography ; most Quranic verses do not provide significant historical context . 
 = = = Early biographies = = = 
 An important source may be found in the historic works by writers of the 2nd and 3rd centuries of the Muslim era ( AH – 8th and 9th century CE ) . These include the traditional Muslim biographies of Muhammad ( the sira literature ) , which provide additional information about Muhammad 's life . 
 The earliest surviving written sira ( biographies of Muhammad and quotes attributed to him ) is Ibn Ishaq 's Life of God 's Messenger written c . 767 CE ( 150 AH ) . Although the work was lost , this sira was used verbatim at great length by Ibn Hisham and Al @-@ Tabari . Another early history source is the history of Muhammad 's campaigns by al @-@ Waqidi ( death 207 of Muslim era ) , and the work of his secretary Ibn Sa 'd al @-@ Baghdadi ( death 230 of Muslim era ) . 
 Many scholars accept the earliest biographies as accurate , though their accuracy is <unk> . Recent studies have led scholars to distinguish between the traditions touching legal matters and purely historical ones . In the former sphere , traditions could have been subject to invention while in the latter sphere , aside from exceptional cases , the material may have been only subject to " <unk> shaping " . 
 = = = Hadith = = = 
 Another important source may be found in hadith collections , accounts of the verbal and physical teachings and traditions of Muhammad . <unk> were compiled several generations after his death by notable individuals such as Muhammad al @-@ Bukhari , Muslim ibn al @-@ Hajjaj , Muhammad ibn Isa at @-@ <unk> , Abd ar @-@ Rahman al @-@ <unk> , Abu Dawood , Ibn <unk> , Malik bin Anas , al @-@ <unk> etc . 
 Some Western academics cautiously view the hadith collections as accurate historical sources . Scholars such as Madelung do not reject the narrations which have been compiled in later periods , but judge them in the context of history and on the basis of their compatibility with the events and figures . 
 = = Pre @-@ Islamic Arabia = = 
 The Arabian Peninsula was largely arid and volcanic , making agriculture difficult except near oases or springs . The landscape was dotted with towns and cities ; two of the most prominent being Mecca and Medina . Medina was a large flourishing agricultural settlement , while Mecca was an important financial center for many surrounding tribes . Communal life was essential for survival in the desert conditions , supporting indigenous tribes against the harsh environment and lifestyle . Tribal grouping was encouraged with unity being based on blood relations . Indigenous Arabs were either nomadic or sedentary , the former constantly travelling from one place to another seeking water and pasture for their flocks , while the latter settled and focused on trade and agriculture . Nomadic survival also depended on raiding caravans or oases ; nomads did not view this as a crime . 
 Byzantine and Sassanian empires dominated the pre @-@ Islamic Middle East region . The Roman @-@ Persian Wars between the two had devastated the region , making the empires unpopular amongst local tribes . Politically Arabia at the time was divided between two tribal confederations , the Banu Qais , loosely allied with Byzantium and who were originally powerful in Northern and Western Arabia , and the Banu Kalb , who had originally come from Yemen , and were loosely allied with Sassanid Persia . 
 In pre @-@ Islamic Arabia , gods or goddesses were viewed as protectors of individual tribes , their spirits being associated with sacred trees , stones , springs and wells . As well as being the site of an annual pilgrimage , the Kaaba shrine in Mecca housed 360 idols of tribal patron deities . Three goddesses were associated with Allah as his daughters : <unk> , <unk> and al- ‘ <unk> . <unk> communities existed in Arabia , including Christians and Jews . <unk> – native pre @-@ Islamic Arabs who " professed a rigid monotheism " – are also sometimes listed alongside Jews and Christians in pre @-@ Islamic Arabia , although their historicity is disputed among scholars . According to Muslim tradition , Muhammad himself was a Hanif and one of the descendants of Ishmael , son of Abraham . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = In Mecca = = = 
 Muhammad was born in Mecca and lived there for roughly the first 52 years of his life ( c . 570 – 622 ) . This period is generally divided into two phases , before and after declaring his prophetic visions . 
 = = = = Childhood and early life = = = = 
 Muhammad was born about the year 570 and his birthday is believed to be in the month of Rabi ' al @-@ <unk> . He belonged to the Banu Hashim clan , part of the Quraysh tribe , and was one of Mecca 's prominent families , although it appears less prosperous during Muhammad 's early lifetime . Tradition places the year of Muhammad 's birth as corresponding with the Year of the Elephant , which is named after the failed destruction of Mecca that year by the <unk> , Yemen 's king , who supplemented his army with elephants . Alternatively some 20th century scholars have suggested different years , such as 568 or 569 . 
 <unk> ' father , Abdullah , died almost six months before he was born . According to Islamic tradition , soon after birth he was sent to live with a Bedouin family in the desert , as desert life was considered healthier for infants ; some western scholars reject this tradition 's historicity . Muhammad stayed with his foster @-@ mother , <unk> bint Abi <unk> , and her husband until he was two years old . At the age of six , Muhammad lost his biological mother Amina to illness and became an orphan . For the next two years , he was under the guardianship of his paternal grandfather Abd al @-@ <unk> , of the Banu Hashim clan until his death ; Muhammad was eight years old . He then came under the care of his uncle Abu Talib , the new leader of Banu Hashim . According to Islamic historian William Montgomery Watt there was a general disregard by guardians in taking care of weaker members of the tribes in Mecca during the 6th century , " Muhammad 's guardians saw that he did not starve to death , but it was hard for them to do more for him , especially as the fortunes of the clan of Hashim seem to have been declining at that time . " 
 In his teens , Muhammad accompanied his uncle on Syrian trading journeys to gain experience in commercial trade . Islamic tradition states that when Muhammad was either nine or twelve while accompanying the Meccans ' caravan to Syria , he met a Christian monk or hermit named Bahira who is said to have foreseen Muhammad 's career as a prophet of God . 
 Little is known of Muhammad during his later youth , available information is fragmented , causing difficulty to separate history from legend . It is known that he became a merchant and " was involved in trade between the Indian ocean and the Mediterranean Sea . " Due to his upright character he acquired the nickname " al @-@ Amin " ( Arabic : <unk> ) , meaning " faithful , trustworthy " and " al @-@ Sadiq " meaning " truthful " and was sought out as an impartial arbitrator . His reputation attracted a proposal in 595 from Khadijah , a 40 @-@ year @-@ old widow . Muhammad consented to the marriage , which by all accounts was a happy one . 
 Several years later , according to a narration collected by historian Ibn Ishaq , Muhammad was involved with a well @-@ known story about setting the Black Stone in place in the wall of the Kaaba in 605 CE . The Black Stone , a sacred object , was removed to facilitate renovations to the Kaaba . The Meccan leaders could not agree which clan should return the Black Stone to its place . They decided to ask the next man who comes through the gate to make that decision . That man was the 35 @-@ year @-@ old Muhammad ; this event happened five years before the first revelation by Gabriel to him . He asked for a cloth and laid the Black Stone in its center . The clan leaders held the corners of the cloth and together carried the Black Stone to the right spot , then Muhammad laid the stone , satisfying the honour of all . 
 = = = Beginnings of the Quran = = = 
 Muhammad began to pray alone in a cave named Hira on Mount Jabal al @-@ Nour , near Mecca for several weeks every year . Islamic tradition holds that during one of his visits to that cave , in the year 610 the angel Gabriel appeared to him and commanded Muhammad to recite verses that would be included in the Quran . Consensus exists that the first Quranic words revealed were the beginning of Surah 96 : 1 . Muhammad was deeply distressed upon receiving his first revelations . After returning home , Muhammad was consoled and reassured by Khadijah and her Christian cousin , <unk> ibn Nawfal . <unk> is variously described as an Ebionite priest ( possibly of Mecca ) or Nestorian . He also feared that others would dismiss his claims as being possessed . Shi 'a tradition states Muhammad was not surprised or frightened at Gabriel 's appearance ; rather he welcomed the angel , as if he was expected . The initial revelation was followed by a three @-@ year pause ( a period known as <unk> ) during which Muhammad felt depressed and further gave himself to prayers and spiritual practices . When the revelations resumed he was reassured and commanded to begin preaching : " Thy Guardian @-@ Lord hath not forsaken thee , nor is He displeased . " 
 Sahih Bukhari narrates Muhammad describing his revelations as " sometimes it is ( revealed ) like the ringing of a bell " . Aisha reported , " I saw the Prophet being inspired Divinely on a very cold day and noticed the sweat dropping from his forehead ( as the Inspiration was over ) " . According to Welch these descriptions may be considered genuine , since they are unlikely to have been forged by later Muslims . Muhammad was confident that he could distinguish his own thoughts from these messages . According to the Quran , one of the main roles of Muhammad is to warn the unbelievers of their eschatological punishment ( Quran 38 : 70 , Quran 6 : 19 ) . Occasionally the Quran did not explicitly refer to Judgment day but provided examples from the history of extinct communities and warns Muhammad 's contemporaries of similar calamities ( Quran 41 : 13 – 16 ) . Muhammad did not only warn those who rejected God 's revelation , but also dispensed good news for those who abandoned evil , listening to the divine words and serving God . Muhammad 's mission also involves preaching monotheism : The Quran commands Muhammad to proclaim and praise the name of his Lord and instructs him not to worship idols or associate other deities with God . 
 The key themes of the early Quranic verses included the responsibility of man towards his creator ; the resurrection of the dead , God 's final judgment followed by vivid descriptions of the tortures in Hell and pleasures in Paradise , and the signs of God in all aspects of life . Religious duties required of the believers at this time were few : belief in God , asking for forgiveness of sins , offering frequent prayers , assisting others particularly those in need , rejecting cheating and the love of wealth ( considered to be significant in the commercial life of Mecca ) , being chaste and not killing newborn girls . 
 = = = Opposition = = = 
 According to Muslim tradition , Muhammad 's wife <unk> was the first to believe he was a prophet . She was followed by Muhammad 's ten @-@ year @-@ old cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib , close friend Abu Bakr , and adopted son Zaid . Around 613 , Muhammad began to preach to the public ( Quran 26 : 214 ) . Most Meccans ignored him and mocked him , though a few became his followers . There were three main groups of early converts to Islam : younger brothers and sons of great merchants ; people who had fallen out of the first rank in their tribe or failed to attain it ; and the weak , mostly unprotected foreigners . 
 According to Ibn Saad , opposition in Mecca started when Muhammad delivered verses that condemned idol worship and the polytheism practiced by the Meccan forefathers . However , the Quranic exegesis maintains that it began as Muhammad started public preaching . As his followers increased , Muhammad became a threat to the local tribes and rulers of the city , whose wealth rested upon the Ka 'aba , the focal point of Meccan religious life that Muhammad threatened to overthrow . Muhammad 's denunciation of the Meccan traditional religion was especially offensive to his own tribe , the Quraysh , as they were the guardians of the Ka 'aba . Powerful merchants attempted to convince Muhammad to abandon his preaching ; he was offered admission to the inner circle of merchants , as well as an advantageous marriage . He refused both of these offers . 
 Tradition records at great length the persecution and ill @-@ treatment towards Muhammad and his followers . <unk> bint <unk> , a slave of a prominent Meccan leader Abu Jahl , is famous as the first martyr of Islam ; killed with a spear by her master when she refused to give up her faith . Bilal , another Muslim slave , was tortured by <unk> ibn Khalaf who placed a heavy rock on his chest to force his conversion . 
 In 615 , some of Muhammad 's followers emigrated to the Ethiopian Aksumite Empire and founded a small colony under the protection of the Christian Ethiopian emperor <unk> ibn <unk> . Ibn Sa 'ad mentions two separate migrations . According to him , most of the Muslims returned to Mecca prior to Hijra , while a second group rejoined them in Medina . Ibn Hisham and Tabari , however , only talk about one migration to Ethiopia . These accounts agree that Meccan persecution played a major role in Muḥammad 's decision to suggest that a number of his followers seek refuge among the Christians in Abyssinia . According to the famous letter of <unk> preserved in al @-@ Tabari , the majority of Muslims returned to their native town as Islam gained strength and high ranking Meccans , such as Umar and Hamzah converted . 
 However , there is a completely different story on the reason why the Muslims returned from Ethiopia to Mecca . According to this account – initially mentioned by Al @-@ Waqidi then rehashed by Ibn Sa 'ad and Tabari , but not by Ibn Hisham and not by Ibn Ishaq – Muhammad , desperately hoping for an accommodation with his tribe , pronounced a verse acknowledging the existence of three Meccan goddesses considered to be the daughters of Allah . Muhammad retracted the verses the next day at the behest of Gabriel , claiming that the verses were whispered by the devil himself . Instead , a ridicule of these gods was offered . This episode known as " The Story of the Cranes " ( translation : <unk> <unk> , transliteration : <unk> al <unk> ) is also known as " Satanic Verses " . According to the story this led to a general reconciliation between Muḥammad and the Meccans , and the Abyssinia Muslims began to return home . When they arrived Gabriel had informed Muḥammad the two verses were not part of the revelation , but had been inserted by Satan . Notable scholars at the time argued against the historic authenticity of these verses and the story itself on various grounds . Later , the incident received some acceptance , though strong objections to it arose from the 10th century onwards , on theological grounds . The objections continued until rejection of these verses and the story itself eventually became the only acceptable orthodox Muslim position . 
 In 617 , the leaders of Makhzum and Banu Abd @-@ Shams , two important Quraysh clans , declared a public boycott against Banu Hashim , their commercial rival , to pressure it into withdrawing its protection of Muhammad . The boycott lasted three years but eventually collapsed as it failed in its objective . During this , Muhammad was only able to preach during the holy pilgrimage months in which all hostilities between Arabs was suspended . 
 = = = Isra and Mi 'raj = = = 
 Islamic tradition states that in 620 , Muhammad experienced the Isra and Mi 'raj , a miraculous night @-@ long journey said to have occurred with the angel Gabriel . At the journey 's beginning , the Isra , he is said to have travelled from Mecca on a winged steed ( Buraq ) to " the farthest mosque " ( in Arabic : masjid al @-@ <unk> ) . Later , during the Mi 'raj , Muhammad is said to have toured heaven and hell , and spoke with earlier prophets , such as Abraham , Moses , and Jesus . Ibn Ishaq , author of the first biography of Muhammad , presents the event as a spiritual experience ; later historians , such as Al @-@ Tabari and Ibn Kathir , present it as a physical journey . 
 Some western scholars hold that the Isra and Mi 'raj journey traveled through the heavens from the sacred enclosure at Mecca to the celestial al @-@ <unk> l @-@ <unk> ( heavenly prototype of the Kaaba ) ; later traditions indicate Muhammad 's journey as having been from Mecca to Jerusalem . 
 = = = Last years in Mecca before Hijra = = = 
 Muhammad 's wife Khadijah and uncle Abu Talib both died in 619 , the year thus being known as the " year of sorrow " . With the death of Abu Talib , leadership of the Banu Hashim clan passed to Abu <unk> , a tenacious enemy of Muhammad . Soon afterwards , Abu <unk> withdrew the clan 's protection over Muhammad . This placed Muhammad in danger ; the withdrawal of clan protection implied that blood revenge for his killing would not be exacted . Muhammad then visited Ta 'if , another important city in Arabia , and tried to find a protector , but his effort failed and further brought him into physical danger . Muhammad was forced to return to Mecca . A Meccan man named Mut 'im ibn Adi ( and the protection of the tribe of Banu Nawfal ) made it possible for him to safely re @-@ enter his native city . 
 Many people were visiting Mecca on business or as pilgrims to the Kaaba . Muhammad took this opportunity to look for a new home for himself and his followers . After several unsuccessful negotiations , he found hope with some men from Yathrib ( later called Medina ) . The Arab population of Yathrib were familiar with monotheism and were prepared for the appearance of a prophet because a Jewish community existed there . They also hoped , by the means of Muhammad and the new faith , to gain supremacy over Mecca ; the Yathrib were jealous of its importance as the place of pilgrimage . Converts to Islam came from nearly all Arab tribes in Medina ; by June of the subsequent year , seventy @-@ five Muslims came to Mecca for pilgrimage and to meet Muhammad . Meeting him secretly by night , the group made what is known as the " Second Pledge of <unk> " , or , in Orientalists ' view , the " Pledge of War " . Following the pledges at Aqabah , Muhammad encouraged his followers to emigrate to Yathrib . As with the migration to Abyssinia , the Quraysh attempted to stop the emigration . However , almost all Muslims managed to leave . 
 = = = Hijra = = = 
 The Hijra is the migration of Muhammad and his followers from Mecca to Medina in 622 CE . In June 622 , warned of a plot to assassinate him , Muhammad secretly slipped out of Mecca and moved his followers to Medina , 450 kilometres ( 280 miles ) north of Mecca . 
 = = = = Migration to Medina = = = = 
 A delegation , consisting of the representatives of the twelve important clans of Medina , invited Muhammad to serve as chief arbitrator for the entire community ; due to his status as a neutral outsider . There was fighting in Yathrib : primarily the dispute involved its Arab and Jewish inhabitants , and was estimated to have lasted for around a hundred years before 620 . The recurring slaughters and disagreements over the resulting claims , especially after the Battle of Bu 'ath in which all clans were involved , made it obvious to them that the tribal concept of blood @-@ feud and an eye for an eye were no longer workable unless there was one man with authority to adjudicate in disputed cases . The delegation from Medina pledged themselves and their fellow @-@ citizens to accept Muhammad into their community and physically protect him as one of themselves . 
 Muhammad instructed his followers to emigrate to Medina , until nearly all his followers left Mecca . Being alarmed at the departure , according to tradition , the Meccans plotted to assassinate Muhammad . With the help of Ali , Muhammad fooled the Meccans watching him , and secretly slipped away from the town with Abu Bakr . By 622 , Muhammad emigrated to Medina , a large agricultural oasis . Those who migrated from Mecca along with Muhammad became known as <unk> ( emigrants ) . 
 = = = = Establishment of a new polity = = = = 
 Among the first things Muhammad did to ease the longstanding grievances among the tribes of Medina was to draft a document known as the Constitution of Medina , " establishing a kind of alliance or federation " among the eight Medinan tribes and Muslim emigrants from Mecca ; this specified rights and duties of all citizens , and the relationship of the different communities in Medina ( including the Muslim community to other communities , specifically the Jews and other " Peoples of the Book " ) . The community defined in the Constitution of Medina , Ummah , had a religious outlook , also shaped by practical considerations and substantially preserved the legal forms of the old Arab tribes . 
 Several ordinances were proclaimed to win over the numerous and wealthy Jewish population . These were soon rescinded as the Jews insisted on preserving the entire Mosaic law , and did not recognize him as a prophet because he was not of the race of David . 
 The first group of converts to Islam in Medina were the clans without great leaders ; these clans had been subjugated by hostile leaders from outside . This was followed by the general acceptance of Islam by the pagan population of Medina , with some exceptions . According to Ibn Ishaq , this was influenced by the conversion of Sa 'd ibn Mu 'adh ( a prominent Medinan leader ) to Islam . Medinans who converted to Islam and helped the Muslim emigrants find shelter became known as the <unk> ( supporters ) . Then Muhammad instituted brotherhood between the emigrants and the supporters and he chose Ali as his own brother . 
 = = = = Beginning of armed conflict = = = = 
 Following the emigration , the people of Mecca seized property of Muslim emigrants to Medina . Armed conflict would later break out between the Meccan pagans and the Muslims . Muhammad delivered Quranic verses permitting Muslims to fight the Meccans ( see sura Al @-@ Hajj , Quran 22 : 39 – 40 ) . According to the traditional account , on 11 February 624 , while praying in the Masjid al @-@ Qiblatayn in Medina , Muhammad received revelations from God that he should be facing Mecca rather than Jerusalem during prayer . Muhammad adjusted to the new direction , and his companions praying with him followed his lead , beginning the tradition of facing Mecca during prayer . 
 In March 624 , Muhammad led some three hundred warriors in a raid on a Meccan merchant caravan . The Muslims set an ambush for the caravan at Badr . Aware of the plan , the Meccan caravan eluded the Muslims . A Meccan force was sent to protect the caravan , and went on to confront the Muslims upon receiving word that the caravan was safe . The Battle of Badr commenced . Though outnumbered more than three to one , the Muslims won the battle , killing at least forty @-@ five Meccans with fourteen Muslims dead . They also succeeded in killing many Meccan leaders , including Abu Jahl . Seventy prisoners had been acquired , many of whom were ransomed in return for wealth or freed . Muhammad and his followers saw the victory as confirmation of their faith and Muhammad ascribed the victory as assisted from an invisible host of angels . The Quranic verses of this period , unlike the Meccan verses , dealt with practical problems of government and issues like the distribution of spoils . 
 The victory strengthened Muhammad 's position in Medina and dispelled earlier doubts among his followers . As a result , the opposition to him became less vocal . Pagans who had not yet converted were very bitter about the advance of Islam . Two pagans , Asma bint Marwan of the <unk> <unk> tribe and Abu ' <unk> of the ' Amr b . ' Awf tribe , had composed verses taunting and insulting the Muslims . They were killed by people belonging to their own or related clans , and Muhammad did not disapprove of the killings . This report however is considered by some to be a fabrication . Most members of those tribes converted to Islam and there was hardly any opposition from the pagans left . 
 Muhammad expelled from Medina the Banu Qaynuqa , one of three main Jewish tribes , but some historians contend that the expulsion happened after Muhammad 's death . According to al @-@ Waqidi , after Abd @-@ Allah ibn <unk> spoke for them , Muhammad refrained from executing them and commanded that they be exiled from Medina . Following the Battle of Badr , Muhammad also made mutual @-@ aid alliances with a number of Bedouin tribes to protect his community from attacks from the northern part of Hejaz . 
 = = = = Conflict with Mecca = = = = 
 The Meccans were eager to avenge their defeat . To maintain economic prosperity , the Meccans needed to restore their prestige , which had been reduced at Badr . In the ensuing months , the Meccans sent ambush parties to Medina while Muhammad led expeditions against tribes allied with Mecca and sent raiders onto a Meccan caravan . Abu Sufyan gathered an army of three thousand men and set out for an attack on Medina . 
 A scout alerted Muhammad of the Meccan army 's presence and numbers a day later . The next morning , at the Muslim conference of war , dispute arose over how best to repel the Meccans . Muhammad and many senior figures suggested it would be safer to fight within Medina and take advantage of the heavily fortified strongholds . Younger Muslims argued that the Meccans were destroying crops , and huddling in the strongholds would destroy Muslim prestige . Muhammad eventually conceded to the younger Muslims and readied the Muslim force for battle . Muhammad led his force outside to the mountain of Uhud ( the location of the Meccans camp ) and fought the Battle of Uhud on 23 March 625 . Although the Muslim army had the advantage in early encounters , lack of discipline on the part of strategically placed archers led to a Muslim defeat ; 75 Muslims were killed including Hamza , Muhammad 's uncle who became one of the best known martyrs in the Muslim tradition . The Meccans did not pursue the Muslims , instead they marched back to Mecca declaring victory . The announcement is probably because Muhammad was wounded and thought dead . When they discovered that Muhammad lived , the Meccans did not return due to false information about new forces coming to his aid . The attack had failed to achieve their aim of completely destroying the Muslims . The Muslims buried the dead , and returned to Medina that evening . Questions accumulated about the reasons for the loss ; Muhammad delivered Quranic verses 3 : 152 indicating that the defeat was twofold : partly a punishment for disobedience , partly a test for steadfastness . 
 Abu Sufyan directed his effort towards another attack on Medina . He gained support from the nomadic tribes to the north and east of Medina ; using propaganda about Muhammad 's weakness , promises of booty , memories of Quraysh prestige and through bribery . Muhammad 's new policy was to prevent alliances against him . Whenever alliances against Medina were formed , he sent out expeditions to break them up . Muhammad heard of men massing with hostile intentions against Medina , and reacted in a severe manner . One example is the assassination of Ka 'b ibn al @-@ Ashraf , a chieftain of the Jewish tribe of Banu Nadir . Al @-@ Ashraf went to Mecca and wrote poems that roused the Meccans ' grief , anger and desire for revenge after the Battle of Badr . Around a year later , Muhammad expelled the Banu Nadir from Medina forcing their emigration to Syria ; he allowed them to take some possessions , as he was unable to subdue the Banu Nadir in their strongholds . The rest of their property was claimed by Muhammad in the name of God as it was not gained with bloodshed . Muhammad surprised various Arab tribes , individually , with overwhelming force , causing his enemies to unite to annihilate him . Muhammad 's attempts to prevent a confederation against him were unsuccessful , though he was able to increase his own forces and stopped many potential tribes from joining his enemies . 
 = = = = Siege of Medina = = = = 
 With the help of the exiled Banu Nadir , the Quraysh military leader Abu Sufyan mustered a force of 10 @,@ 000 men . Muhammad prepared a force of about 3 @,@ 000 men and adopted a form of defense unknown in Arabia at that time ; the Muslims dug a trench wherever Medina lay open to cavalry attack . The idea is credited to a Persian convert to Islam , Salman the Persian . The siege of Medina began on 31 March 627 and lasted two weeks . Abu Sufyan 's troops were unprepared for the fortifications , and after an ineffectual siege , the coalition decided to return home . The Quran discusses this battle in sura Al @-@ Ahzab , in verses 33 : 9 – 27 . During the battle , the Jewish tribe of Banu Qurayza , located to the south of Medina , entered into negotiations with Meccan forces to revolt against Muhammad . Although the Meccan forces were swayed by suggestions that Muhammad was sure to be overwhelmed , they desired reassurance in case the confederacy was unable to destroy him . No agreement was reached after prolonged negotiations , partly due to sabotage attempts by Muhammad 's scouts . After the coalition 's retreat , the Muslims accused the Banu Qurayza of treachery and besieged them in their forts for 25 days . The Banu Qurayza eventually surrendered ; according to Ibn Ishaq , all the men apart from a few converts to Islam were beheaded , while the women and children were enslaved . Walid N. Arafat and Barakat Ahmad have disputed the accuracy of Ibn Ishaq 's narrative . Arafat believes that Ibn Ishaq 's Jewish sources , speaking over 100 years after the event , conflated this account with memories of earlier massacres in Jewish history ; he notes that Ibn Ishaq was considered an unreliable historian by his contemporary Malik ibn Anas , and a transmitter of " odd tales " by the later Ibn Hajar . Ahmad argues that only some of the tribe was killed , while some of the fighters were merely enslaved . Watt finds Arafat 's arguments " not entirely convincing " , while Meir J. Kister has contradicted the arguments of Arafat and Ahmad . 
 In the siege of Medina , the Meccans exerted the available strength to destroy the Muslim community . The failure resulted in a significant loss of prestige ; their trade with Syria vanished . Following the Battle of the Trench , Muhammad made two expeditions to the north , both ended without any fighting . While returning from one of these journeys ( or some years earlier according to other early accounts ) , an accusation of adultery was made against Aisha , Muhammad 's wife . Aisha was exonerated from accusations when Muhammad announced he had received a revelation confirming Aisha 's innocence and directing that charges of adultery be supported by four eyewitnesses ( sura 24 , An @-@ Nur ) . 
 = = = = Truce of Hudaybiyyah = = = = 
 Although Muhammad had delivered Quranic verses commanding the Hajj , the Muslims had not performed it due to Quraysh enmity . In the month of Shawwal 628 , Muhammad ordered his followers to obtain sacrificial animals and to prepare for a pilgrimage ( <unk> ) to Mecca , saying that God had promised him the fulfillment of this goal in a vision when he was shaving his head after completion of the Hajj . Upon hearing of the approaching 1 @,@ 400 Muslims , the Quraysh dispatched 200 cavalry to halt them . Muhammad evaded them by taking a more difficult route , enabling his followers to reach al @-@ Hudaybiyya just outside Mecca . According to Watt , although Muhammad 's decision to make the pilgrimage was based on his dream , he was also demonstrating to the pagan Meccans that Islam did not threaten the prestige of the sanctuaries , that Islam was an Arabian religion . 
 Negotiations commenced with emissaries travelling to and from Mecca . While these continued , rumors spread that one of the Muslim negotiators , Uthman bin al @-@ Affan , had been killed by the Quraysh . Muhammad called upon the pilgrims to make a pledge not to flee ( or to stick with Muhammad , whatever decision he made ) if the situation descended into war with Mecca . This pledge became known as the " Pledge of Acceptance " ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> , bay 'at al @-@ <unk> ) or the " Pledge under the Tree " . News of Uthman 's safety allowed for negotiations to continue , and a treaty scheduled to last ten years was eventually signed between the Muslims and Quraysh . The main points of the treaty included : cessation of hostilities , the deferral of Muhammad 's pilgrimage to the following year , and agreement to send back any Meccan who emigrated to Medina without permission from their protector . 
 Many Muslims were not satisfied with the treaty . However , the Quranic sura " Al @-@ Fath " ( The Victory ) ( Quran 48 : 1 – 29 ) assured them that the expedition must be considered a victorious one . It was later that Muhammad 's followers realized the benefit behind the treaty . These benefits included the requirement of the Meccans to identify Muhammad as an equal , cessation of military activity allowing Medina to gain strength , and the admiration of Meccans who were impressed by the pilgrimage rituals . 
 After signing the truce , Muhammad assembled an expedition against the Jewish oasis of Khaybar , known as the Battle of Khaybar . This was possibly due to housing the Banu Nadir who were inciting hostilities against Muhammad , or to regain prestige from what appeared as the inconclusive result of the truce of Hudaybiyya . According to Muslim tradition , Muhammad also sent letters to many rulers , asking them to convert to Islam ( the exact date is given variously in the sources ) . He sent messengers ( with letters ) to Heraclius of the Byzantine Empire ( the eastern Roman Empire ) , Khosrau of Persia , the chief of Yemen and to some others . In the years following the truce of Hudaybiyya , Muhammad directed his forces against the Arabs on Transjordanian Byzantine soil in the Battle of Mu 'tah . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 = = = = Conquest of Mecca = = = = 
 The truce of Hudaybiyyah had been enforced for two years . The tribe of Banu Khuza 'a had good relations with Muhammad , whereas their enemies , the Banu Bakr , had allied with the Meccans . A clan of the Bakr made a night raid against the Khuza 'a , killing a few of them . The Meccans helped the Banu Bakr with weapons and , according to some sources , a few Meccans also took part in the fighting . After this event , Muhammad sent a message to Mecca with three conditions , asking them to accept one of them . These were : either the Meccans would pay blood money for the slain among the Khuza 'ah tribe , they disavow themselves of the Banu Bakr , or they should declare the truce of Hudaybiyyah null . 
 The Meccans replied that they accepted the last condition . Soon they realized their mistake and sent Abu Sufyan to renew the Hudaybiyyah treaty , a request that was declined by Muhammad . 
 Muhammad began to prepare for a campaign . In 630 , Muhammad marched on Mecca with 10 @,@ 000 Muslim converts . With minimal casualties , Muhammad seized control of Mecca . He declared an amnesty for past offences , except for ten men and women who were " guilty of murder or other offences or had sparked off the war and disrupted the peace " . Some of these were later pardoned . Most Meccans converted to Islam and Muhammad proceeded to destroy all the statues of Arabian gods in and around the Kaaba . According to reports collected by Ibn Ishaq and al @-@ <unk> , Muhammad personally spared paintings or frescos of Mary and Jesus , but other traditions suggest that all pictures were erased . The Quran discusses the conquest of Mecca . 
 = = = = Conquest of Arabia = = = = 
 Following the conquest of Mecca , Muhammad was alarmed by a military threat from the confederate tribes of Hawazin who were raising an army twice Muhammad 's size . The Banu Hawazin were old enemies of the Meccans . They were joined by the Banu Thaqif ( inhabiting the city of Ta 'if ) who adopted an anti @-@ Meccan policy due to the decline of the prestige of Meccans . Muhammad defeated the Hawazin and Thaqif tribes in the Battle of Hunayn . 
 In the same year , Muhammad organized an attack against northern Arabia because of their previous defeat at the Battle of Mu 'tah and reports of hostility adopted against Muslims . With great difficulty he assembled thirty thousand men ; half of whom on the second day returned with Abd @-@ Allah ibn Ubayy , untroubled by the damning verses which Muhammad hurled at them . Although Muhammad did not engage with hostile forces at Tabuk , he received the submission of some local chiefs of the region . 
 He also ordered destruction of any remaining pagan idols in Eastern Arabia . The last city to hold out against the Muslims in Western Arabia was Taif . Muhammad refused to accept the city 's surrender until they agreed to convert to Islam and allowed men to destroy the statue of their goddess Allat . 
 A year after the Battle of Tabuk , the Banu Thaqif sent emissaries to surrender to Muhammad and adopt Islam . Many bedouins submitted to Muhammad to safeguard against his attacks and to benefit from the spoils of war . However , the bedouins were alien to the system of Islam and wanted to maintain independence : namely their code of virtue and ancestral traditions . Muhammad required a military and political agreement according to which they " acknowledge the suzerainty of Medina , to refrain from attack on the Muslims and their allies , and to pay the <unk> , the Muslim religious levy . " 
 = = = = Farewell pilgrimage = = = = 
 In 632 , at the end of the tenth year after migration to Medina , Muhammad completed his first truly Islamic pilgrimage , thereby teaching his followers the rites of the annual Great Pilgrimage , known as Hajj . After completing the pilgrimage , Muhammad delivered a famous speech , known as the Farewell Sermon , at Mount Arafat east of Mecca . In this sermon , Muhammad advised his followers not to follow certain pre @-@ Islamic customs . For instance , he said a white has no superiority over a black , nor a black has any superiority over a white except by piety and good action . He abolished old blood feuds and disputes based on the former tribal system and asked for old pledges to be returned as implications of the creation of the new Islamic community . Commenting on the vulnerability of women in his society , Muhammad asked his male followers to " be good to women , for they are powerless captives ( <unk> ) in your households . You took them in God 's trust , and legitimated your sexual relations with the Word of God , so come to your senses people , and hear my words ... " He told them that they were entitled to discipline their wives but should do so with kindness . He addressed the issue of inheritance by forbidding false claims of paternity or of a client relationship to the deceased , and forbade his followers to leave their wealth to a testamentary heir . He also upheld the sacredness of four lunar months in each year . According to Sunni tafsir , the following Quranic verse was delivered during this event : " Today I have perfected your religion , and completed my favours for you and chosen Islam as a religion for you " ( Quran 5 : 3 ) . According to Shia tafsir , it refers to the appointment of Ali ibn Abi Talib at the pond of Khumm as Muhammad 's successor , this occurring a few days later when Muslims were returning from Mecca to Medina . 
 = = = = Death and tomb = = = = 
 A few months after the farewell pilgrimage , Muhammad fell ill and suffered for several days with fever , head pain , and weakness . He died on Monday , 8 June 632 , in Medina , at the age of 62 or 63 , in the house of his wife Aisha . With his head resting on Aisha 's lap , he asked her to dispose of his last worldly goods ( seven coins ) , then spoke his final words : 
 O Allah , to Ar @-@ Rafiq Al @-@ A 'la ( exalted friend , highest abode or the uppermost , highest company in heaven ) . 
 Ar @-@ Rafiq Al @-@ A 'la may be referring to God . He was buried where he died in Aisha 's house . During the reign of the Umayyad caliph al @-@ Walid I , al @-@ Masjid an @-@ Nabawi ( the Mosque of the Prophet ) was expanded to include the site of Muhammad 's tomb . The Green Dome above the tomb was built by the Mamluk sultan Al Mansur Qalawun in the 13th century , although the green color was added in the 16th century , under the reign of Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent . Among tombs adjacent to that of Muhammad are those of his companions ( Sahabah ) , the first two Muslim caliphs Abu Bakr and Umar , and an empty one that Muslims believe awaits Jesus . When bin Saud took Medina in 1805 , Muhammad 's tomb was stripped of its gold and jewel ornaments . Adherents to Wahhabism , bin <unk> ' followers destroyed nearly every tomb dome in Medina in order to prevent their veneration , and the one of Muhammad is said to have narrowly escaped . Similar events took place in 1925 when the Saudi militias retook — and this time managed to keep — the city . In the Wahhabi interpretation of Islam , burial is to take place in unmarked graves . Although frowned upon by the Saudis , many pilgrims continue to practice a <unk> — a ritual visit — to the tomb . 
 = = = After Muhammad = = = 
 Muhammad united several of the tribes of Arabia into a single Arab Muslim religious polity in the last years of his life . With Muhammad 's death , disagreement broke out over who his successor would be . Umar ibn al @-@ Khattab , a prominent companion of Muhammad , nominated Abu Bakr , Muhammad 's friend and collaborator . With additional support Abu Bakr was confirmed as the first caliph . This choice was disputed by some of Muhammad 's companions , who held that Ali ibn Abi Talib , his cousin and son @-@ in @-@ law , had been designated the successor by Muhammad at <unk> Khumm . Abu Bakr immediately moved to strike against the Byzantine ( or Eastern Roman Empire ) forces because of the previous defeat , although he first had to put down a rebellion by Arab tribes in an event that Muslim historians later referred to as the Ridda wars , or " Wars of Apostasy " . 
 The pre @-@ Islamic Middle East was dominated by the Byzantine and Sassanian empires . The Roman @-@ Persian Wars between the two had devastated the region , making the empires unpopular amongst local tribes . Furthermore , in the lands that would be conquered by Muslims many Christians ( Nestorians , Monophysites , Jacobites and Copts ) were disaffected from the Eastern Orthodox Church which deemed them heretics . Within a decade Muslims conquered Mesopotamia , Byzantine Syria , Byzantine Egypt , large parts of Persia , and established the Rashidun Caliphate . 
 = = Early social changes under Islam = = 
 According to William Montgomery Watt religion , for Muhammad , was not a private and individual matter but " the total response of his personality to the total situation in which he found himself . He was responding [ not only ] ... to the religious and intellectual aspects of the situation but also to the economic , social , and political pressures to which contemporary Mecca was subject . " Bernard Lewis says there are two important political traditions in Islam – Muhammad as a statesman in Medina , and Muhammad as a rebel in Mecca . His view believed Islam as a great change , akin to a revolution , when introduced to new societies . 
 Historians generally agree that Islamic social changes in areas such as social security , family structure , slavery and the rights of women and children improved on the status quo of Arab society . For example , according to Lewis , Islam " from the first denounced aristocratic privilege , rejected hierarchy , and adopted a formula of the career open to the talents " . Muhammad 's message transformed society and moral orders of life in the Arabian Peninsula ; society focused on the changes to perceived identity , world view , and the hierarchy of values . Economic reforms addressed the plight of the poor , which was becoming an issue in pre @-@ Islamic Mecca . The Quran requires payment of an alms tax ( zakat ) for the benefit of the poor ; as Muhammad 's power grew he demanded that tribes who wished to ally with him implement the zakat in particular . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 The description given in Muhammad ibn Isa at @-@ <unk> 's book Shama 'il al @-@ Mustafa , attributed to Ali ibn Abi Talib is as followed : 
 Muhammad was middle @-@ sized , did not have lank or crisp hair , was not fat , had a white circular face , wide black eyes , and long eye @-@ lashes . When he walked , he walked as though he went down a declivity . He had the " seal of prophecy " between his shoulder blades ... He was bulky . His face shone like the moon . He was taller than middling stature but shorter than conspicuous tallness . He had thick , curly hair . The plaits of his hair were parted . His hair reached beyond the lobe of his ear . His complexion was <unk> [ bright , luminous ] . Muhammad had a wide forehead , and fine , long , arched eyebrows which did not meet . Between his eyebrows there was a vein which distended when he was angry . The upper part of his nose was hooked ; he was thick bearded , had smooth cheeks , a strong mouth , and his teeth were set apart . He had thin hair on his chest . His neck was like the neck of an ivory statue , with the purity of silver . Muhammad was proportionate , stout , firm @-@ gripped , even of belly and chest , broad @-@ chested and broad @-@ shouldered . 
 The " seal of prophecy " between Muhammad 's shoulders is generally described as having been a type of raised mole the size of a pigeon 's egg . Another description of Muhammad was provided by Umm Ma <unk> , a woman he met on his journey to Medina : 
 I saw a man , pure and clean , with a handsome face and a fine figure . He was not marred by a skinny body , nor was he overly small in the head and neck . He was graceful and elegant , with intensely black eyes and thick eyelashes . There was a huskiness in his voice , and his neck was long . His beard was thick , and his eyebrows were finely arched and joined together . 
 When silent , he was grave and dignified , and when he spoke , glory rose up and overcame him . He was from afar the most beautiful of men and the most glorious , and close up he was the sweetest and the loveliest . He was sweet of speech and articulate , but not petty or trifling . His speech was a string of cascading pearls , measured so that none despaired of its length , and no eye challenged him because of brevity . In company he is like a branch between two other branches , but he is the most flourishing of the three in appearance , and the loveliest in power . He has friends surrounding him , who listen to his words . If he commands , they obey implicitly , with eagerness and haste , without frown or complaint . 
 Descriptions like these were often reproduced in calligraphic panels ( <unk> or , in Turkish , <unk> ) , which in the 17th century developed into an art form of their own in the Ottoman Empire . 
 = = Household = = 
 Muhammad 's life is traditionally defined into two periods : pre @-@ hijra ( emigration ) in Mecca ( from 570 to 622 ) , and post @-@ hijra in Medina ( from 622 until 632 ) . Muhammad is said to have had thirteen wives in total ( although two have ambiguous accounts , <unk> bint Zayd and Maria al @-@ <unk> , as wife or concubine . ) Eleven of the thirteen marriages occurred after the migration to Medina . 
 At the age of 25 , Muhammad married the wealthy Khadijah bint <unk> who was 40 years old . The marriage lasted for 25 years and was a happy one . Muhammad did not enter into marriage with another woman during this marriage . After <unk> 's death , Khawla bint Hakim suggested to Muhammad that he should marry <unk> bint Zama , a Muslim widow , or Aisha , daughter of Um <unk> and Abu Bakr of Mecca . Muhammad is said to have asked for arrangements to marry both . <unk> marriages after the death of <unk> were contracted mostly for political or humanitarian reasons . The women were either widows of Muslims killed in battle and had been left without a protector , or belonged to important families or clans whom it was necessary to honor and strengthen alliances with . 
 According to traditional sources Aisha was six or seven years old when betrothed to Muhammad , with the marriage not being consummated until she had reached puberty at the age of nine or ten years old . She was therefore a virgin at marriage . Muslim authors who calculate Aisha 's age based on other sources of information , such that available about her sister Asma about whom more is known , estimate that she was over thirteen and perhaps in her late teens at the time of her marriage . 
 After migration to Medina , Muhammad ( now in his fifties ) married several more women . 
 Muhammad did household chores and helped with housework such as preparing food , sewing clothes , and repairing shoes . He is also said to have had accustomed his wives to dialogue ; he listened to their advice , and the wives debated and even argued with him . 
 Khadijah is said to have had four daughters with Muhammad ( <unk> bint Muhammad , Umm Kulthum bint Muhammad , Zainab bint Muhammad , Fatimah Zahra ) and two sons ( Abd @-@ Allah ibn Muhammad and Qasim ibn Muhammad , who both died in childhood ) . All but one of his daughters , Fatimah , died before him . Some Shi 'a scholars contend that Fatimah was Muhammad 's only daughter . Maria al @-@ <unk> bore him a son named Ibrahim ibn Muhammad , but the child died when he was two years old . 
 Nine of Muhammad 's wives survived him . Aisha , who became known as Muhammad 's favourite wife in Sunni tradition , survived him by decades and was instrumental in helping assemble the scattered sayings of Muhammad that form the Hadith literature for the Sunni branch of Islam . 
 Muhammad 's descendants through Fatimah are known as sharifs , <unk> or <unk> . These are honorific titles in Arabic , sharif meaning ' noble ' and sayed or sayyid meaning ' lord ' or ' sir ' . As Muhammad 's only descendants , they are respected by both Sunni and Shi 'a , though the Shi 'a place much more emphasis and value on their distinction . 
 Zayd ibn Harith was a slave that Muhammad bought , freed , and then adopted as his son . He also had a <unk> . According to a BBC summary , " the Prophet Muhammad did not try to abolish slavery , and bought , sold , captured , and owned slaves himself . But he insisted that slave owners treat their slaves well and stressed the virtue of freeing slaves . Muhammad treated slaves as human beings and clearly held some in the highest esteem " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Muslim views = = = 
 Following the attestation to the oneness of God , the belief in Muhammad 's prophethood is the main aspect of the Islamic faith . Every Muslim proclaims in Shahadah that " I testify that there is no god but God , and I testify that Muhammad is a Messenger of God " . The Shahadah is the basic creed or tenet of Islam . Islamic belief is that ideally the Shahadah is the first words a newborn will hear ; children are taught it immediately and it will be recited upon death . Muslims repeat the <unk> in the call to prayer ( adhan ) and the prayer itself . Non @-@ Muslims wishing to convert to Islam are required to recite the creed . 
 In Islamic belief , Muhammad is regarded as the last prophet sent by God for the benefit of mankind . Quran 10 : 37 states that " ... it ( the Quran ) is a confirmation of ( revelations ) that went before it , and a fuller explanation of the Book – wherein there is no doubt – from The Lord of the Worlds . " . Similarly Quran 46 : 12 states " ... And before this was the book of Moses , as a guide and a mercy . And this Book confirms ( it ) ... " , while 2 : 136 commands the believers of Islam to " Say : we believe in God and that which is revealed unto us , and that which was revealed unto Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes , and that which Moses and Jesus received , and which the prophets received from their Lord . We make no distinction between any of them , and unto Him we have surrendered . " 
 Muslim tradition credits Muhammad with several miracles or supernatural events . For example , many Muslim commentators and some Western scholars have interpreted the Surah 54 : 1 – 2 as referring to Muhammad splitting the Moon in view of the Quraysh when they began persecuting his followers . Islamic historian Denis <unk> believes the Quran does not overtly describe Muhammad performing miracles , and the supreme miracle of Muhammad is identified with the Quran itself . 
 According to Islamic tradition , Muhammad was attacked by the people of Ta 'if and was badly injured . The tradition also describes an angel appearing to him and offering retribution against the assailants . It is said that Muhammad rejected the offer and prayed for the people of Ta 'if . 
 The Sunnah represents actions and sayings of Muhammad ( preserved in reports known as Hadith ) , and covers a broad array of activities and beliefs ranging from religious rituals , personal hygiene , burial of the dead to the mystical questions involving the love between humans and God . The Sunnah is considered a model of emulation for pious Muslims and has to a great degree influenced the Muslim culture . The greeting that Muhammad taught Muslims to offer each other , " may peace be upon you " ( Arabic : as @-@ <unk> <unk> ) is used by Muslims throughout the world . Many details of major Islamic rituals such as daily prayers , the fasting and the annual pilgrimage are only found in the Sunnah and not the Quran . 
 The Sunnah contributed much to the development of Islamic law , particularly from the end of the first Islamic century . Muslim mystics , known as <unk> , who were seeking for the inner meaning of the Quran and the inner nature of Muhammad , viewed the prophet of Islam not only as a prophet but also as a perfect human @-@ being . All Sufi orders trace their chain of spiritual descent back to Muhammad . 
 Muslims have traditionally expressed love and veneration for Muhammad . Stories of Muhammad 's life , his intercession and of his miracles ( particularly " Splitting of the moon " ) have permeated popular Muslim thought and poetry . Among Arabic odes to Muhammad , <unk> al @-@ Burda ( " Poem of the Mantle " ) by the Egyptian Sufi al @-@ <unk> ( 1211 – 1294 ) is particularly well known , and widely held to possess a healing , spiritual power . The Quran refers to Muhammad as " a mercy ( <unk> ) to the worlds " ( Quran 21 : 107 ) . The association of rain with mercy in Oriental countries has led to imagining Muhammad as a rain cloud dispensing blessings and stretching over lands , reviving the dead hearts , just as rain revives the seemingly dead earth ( see , for example , the Sindhi poem of Shah ʿAbd al @-@ Latif ) . Muhammad 's birthday is celebrated as a major feast throughout the Islamic world , excluding Wahhabi @-@ dominated Saudi Arabia where these public celebrations are discouraged . When Muslims say or write the name of Muhammad , they usually follow it with Peace be upon him ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> wa <unk> ) . In casual writing , this is sometimes abbreviated as <unk> or SAW ; in printed matter , a small calligraphic rendition is commonly used ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = = Islamic depictions = = = = 
 In line with the hadith prohibition against creating images of sentient living beings , which is particularly strictly observed with respect to God and Muhammad , Islamic religious art is focused on the word . Muslims generally avoid depictions of Muhammad , and mosques are decorated with calligraphy and Quranic inscriptions or geometrical designs , not images or sculptures . Today , the interdiction against images of Muhammad – designed to prevent worship of Muhammad , rather than God – is much more strictly observed in Sunni Islam ( 85 % – 90 % of Muslims ) and Ahmadiyya Islam ( 1 % ) than among Shias ( 10 % – 15 % ) . While both Sunnis and Shias have created images of Muhammad in the past , Islamic depictions of Muhammad are rare . They have , until recently , mostly been limited to the private and elite medium of the miniature , and since about 1500 most depictions show Muhammad with his face veiled , or symbolically represent him as a flame . 
 The earliest extant depictions come from 13th century Anatolian Seljuk and Ilkhanid Persian miniatures , typically in literary genres describing the life and deeds of Muhammad . During the Ilkhanid period , when Persia 's Mongol rulers converted to Islam , competing Sunni and Shi 'a groups used visual imagery , including images of Muhammad , to promote their particular interpretation of Islam 's key events . Influenced by the Buddhist tradition of representational religious art predating the Mongol elite 's conversion , this innovation was unprecedented in the Islamic world , and accompanied by a " broader shift in Islamic artistic culture away from abstraction toward representation " in " mosques , on tapestries , silks , ceramics , and in glass and metalwork " besides books . In the Persian lands , this tradition of realistic depictions lasted through the Timurid dynasty until the Safavids took power in the early 16th century . The <unk> , who made Shi 'i Islam the state religion , initiated a departure from the traditional Ilkhanid and Timurid artistic style by covering Muhammad 's face with a veil to obscure his features and at the same time represent his luminous essence . Concomitantly , some of the unveiled images from earlier periods were defaced . Later images were produced in Ottoman Turkey and elsewhere , but mosques were never decorated with images of Muhammad . Illustrated accounts of the night journey ( mi 'raj ) were particularly popular from the Ilkhanid period through the Safavid era . During the 19th century , Iran saw a boom of printed and illustrated mi 'raj books , with Muhammad 's face veiled , aimed in particular at illiterates and children in the manner of graphic novels . Reproduced through lithography , these were essentially " printed manuscripts " . Today , millions of historical reproductions and modern images are available in some Muslim countries , especially Turkey and Iran , on posters , postcards , and even in coffee @-@ table books , but are unknown in most other parts of the Islamic world , and when encountered by Muslims from other countries , they can cause considerable consternation and offense . 
 = = = = Medieval Christian views = = = = 
 The earliest documented Christian knowledge of Muhammad stems from Byzantine sources . They indicate that both Jews and Christians saw Muhammad as a false prophet . Another Greek source for Muhammad is Theophanes the Confessor , a 9th @-@ century writer . The earliest Syriac source is the 7th @-@ century writer John bar <unk> . 
 According to Hossein Nasr , the earliest European literature often refers to Muhammad unfavorably . A few learned circles of Middle Ages Europe – primarily Latin @-@ literate scholars – had access to fairly extensive biographical material about Muhammad . They interpreted the biography through a Christian religious filter ; one that viewed Muhammad as a person who seduced the Saracens into his submission under religious guise . Popular European literature of the time portrayed Muhammad as though he were worshipped by Muslims , similar to an idol or a heathen god . 
 In later ages , Muhammad came to be seen as a schismatic : <unk> Latini 's 13th century Li livres dou <unk> represents him as a former monk and cardinal , and Dante 's Divine Comedy ( Inferno , Canto 28 ) , written in the early 1300s , puts Muhammad and his son @-@ in @-@ law , Ali , in Hell " among the <unk> of discord and the schismatics , being lacerated by devils again and again . " 
 = = = = Emergence of positive views in Europe = = = = 
 After the Reformation , Muhammad was often portrayed in a similar way . Guillaume Postel was among the first to present a more positive view of Muhammad . Gottfried Leibniz praised Muhammad because " he did not deviate from the natural religion " . Henri de <unk> , in his Vie de Mahomed which was published posthumously in 1730 , described Muhammad as a gifted political leader and a just lawmaker . He presents him as a divinely inspired messenger whom God employed to confound the bickering Oriental Christians , to liberate the Orient from the despotic rule of the Romans and Persians , and to spread the knowledge of the unity of God from India to Spain . Voltaire had both a positive and negative opinion on Muhammad : in his play Le <unk> , ou Mahomet le <unk> he vilifies Muhammad as a symbol of fanaticism , and in a published essay in 1748 he calls him " a sublime and hearty charlatan " , but in his historical survey Essai sur les mœurs , he presents him as legislator and a conqueror and calls him an " enthusiast " , not an imposter . Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , in his Social Contract ( 1762 ) , brushing aside hostile legends of Muhammad as a trickster and impostor , presents him as a sage legislator who wisely fused religious and political powers . Emmanuel <unk> published in 1787 his Zoroaster , Confucius and Muhammad , in which he presents the lives of these three " great men " , " the greatest legislators of the universe " , and compares their careers as religious reformers and lawgivers . He rejects the common view that Muhammad is an impostor and argues that the Quran proffers " the most sublime truths of cult and morals " ; it defines the unity of God with an " admirable concision . " <unk> writes that the common accusations of his immorality are unfounded : on the contrary , his law enjoins sobriety , generosity , and compassion on his followers : the " legislator of Arabia " was " a great man . " Napoleon Bonaparte admired Muhammad and Islam , and described him as a model lawmaker and a great man . Thomas Carlyle in his book Heroes and Hero Worship and the Heroic in History ( 1840 ) describes Muhammad as " [ a ] silent great soul ; [ ... ] one of those who cannot but be in earnest " . Carlyle 's interpretation has been widely cited by Muslim scholars as a demonstration that Western scholarship validates Muhammad 's status as a great man in history . 
 = = = = Views by modern historians = = = = 
 According to William Montgomery Watt and Richard Bell , recent writers generally dismiss the idea that Muhammad deliberately deceived his followers , arguing that Muhammad " was absolutely sincere and acted in complete good faith " and Muhammad 's readiness to endure hardship for his cause , with what seemed to be no rational basis for hope , shows his sincerity . Watt says that sincerity does not directly imply correctness : In contemporary terms , Muhammad might have mistaken his subconscious for divine revelation . Watt and Bernard Lewis argue that viewing Muhammad as a self @-@ seeking impostor makes it impossible to understand Islam 's development . Alford T. Welch holds that Muhammad was able to be so influential and successful because of his firm belief in his vocation . 
 = = = = Other religious views = = = = 
 Bahá 'ís venerate Muhammad as one of a number of prophets or " Manifestations of God " . He is thought to be the final manifestation , or seal of the <unk> cycle , but consider his teachings to have been superseded by those of Bahá 'u'lláh , the founder of the <unk> faith , and the first of Manifestation of the current cycle . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 As early as the 7th century Muhammad was attacked by non @-@ Muslim Arab contemporaries for preaching monotheism . In modern times , criticism has also dealt with Muhammad 's sincerity in claiming to be a prophet , his morality , warfare , and his marriages . 
 = = = Praise and veneration = = = 
 Praise and veneration of Muhammad have been expressed throughout the life of Muhammad , where from an early age , he was referred to as al @-@ Amin ( faithful , trustworthy ) and as @-@ Sadiq ( truthful ) . Muslim scholars , thinkers , mystics and other religious scholars have expressed praise and veneration of Muhammad throughout history and it remains an integral part of the Islamic tradition . Topics of the praise and veneration of Muhammad include the personality , character , teachings , morality , conduct , actions , and way of life . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = Alcoholism = 
 Alcoholism , also known as alcohol use disorder ( AUD ) , is a broad term for any drinking of alcohol that results in problems . It was previously divided into two types : alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence . In a medical context , alcoholism is said to exist when two or more of the following conditions is present : a person drinks large amounts over a long time period , has difficulty cutting down , acquiring and drinking alcohol takes up a great deal of time , alcohol is strongly desired , usage results in not fulfilling responsibilities , usage results in social problems , usage results in health problems , usage results in risky situations , withdrawal occurs when stopping , and alcohol tolerance has occurred with use . Risky situations include drinking and driving or having unsafe sex among others . Alcohol use can affect all parts of the body but particularly affects the brain , heart , liver , pancreas , and immune system . This can result in mental illness , Wernicke – Korsakoff syndrome , an irregular heart beat , liver failure , and an increase in the risk of cancer , among other diseases . Drinking during pregnancy can cause damage to the baby resulting in fetal alcohol spectrum disorders . Generally women are more sensitive to alcohol 's harmful physical and mental effects than men . 
 Both environmental factors and genetics are associated with alcoholism with about half the risk attributed to each . A person with a parent or sibling with alcoholism is three to four times more likely to be alcoholic themselves . Environmental factors include social , cultural , and behavioral influences . High stress levels , anxiety , as well as inexpensive easily accessible alcohol increases risk . People may continue to drink partly to prevent or improve symptoms of withdrawal . A low level of withdrawal may last for months following stopping . Medically , alcoholism is considered both a physical and mental illness . Both questionnaires and certain blood tests may detect people with possible alcoholism . Further information is then collected to confirm the diagnosis . 
 Prevention of alcoholism is possible by regulating and limiting the sale of alcohol , taxing alcohol to increase its cost , and providing inexpensive treatment . Treatment may take several steps . Because of the medical problems that can occur during withdrawal , alcohol detoxification should be carefully controlled . One common method involves the use of benzodiazepine medications , such as diazepam . This can be either given while admitted to a health care institution or occasionally while a person remains in the community with close supervision . Other addictions or mental illness may complicate treatment . After detoxification support such as group therapy or support groups are used to help keep a person from returning to drinking . One commonly used form of support is the group Alcoholics Anonymous . The medications acamprosate , disulfiram , or naltrexone may also be used to help prevent further drinking . 
 The World Health Organization estimates that as of 2010 there were 208 million people with alcoholism worldwide ( 4 @.@ 1 % of the population over 15 years of age ) . In the United States about 17 million ( 7 % ) of adults and 0 @.@ 7 million ( 2 @.@ 8 % ) of those age 12 to 17 years of age are affected . It is more common among males and young adults , becoming less common in middle and old age . It is the least common in Africa at 1 @.@ 1 % and has the highest rates in Eastern Europe at 11 % . Alcoholism directly resulted in 139 @,@ 000 deaths in 2013 up from 112 @,@ 000 deaths in 1990 . A total of 3 @.@ 3 million deaths ( 5 @.@ 9 % of all deaths ) are believed to be due to alcohol . It often reduces a person 's life expectancy by around ten years . In the United States it resulted in economic costs of $ 224 billion USD in 2006 . Many terms , some insulting and others informal , have been used to refer to people affected by alcoholism including : tippler , drunkard , <unk> , and <unk> . In 1979 , the World Health Organization discouraged the use of " alcoholism " due to its inexact meaning , preferring " alcohol dependence syndrome " . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 = = = Early signs = = = 
 The risk of alcohol dependence begins at low levels of drinking and increases directly with both the volume of alcohol consumed and a pattern of drinking larger amounts on an occasion . Young adults are particularly at risk . 
 = = = Long @-@ term misuse = = = 
 Alcoholism is characterised by an increased tolerance to and physical dependence on alcohol , affecting an individual 's ability to control consumption . These characteristics play a role decreasing an alcoholic 's ability to stop drinking . Alcoholism can have adverse effects on mental health , causing psychiatric disorders and increasing the risk of suicide . A depressed mood is a common symptom . 
 = = = Warning signs = = = 
 Warning signs of alcoholism include the consumption of increasing amounts of alcohol and frequent intoxication , preoccupation with drinking to the exclusion of other activities , promises to quit and failure to keep them , the inability to remember what was said or done while drinking , personality changes , denial or the making of excuses for drinking , the refusal to admit excessive drinking , dysfunction at work , the loss of interest in personal appearance or hygiene , marital and economic hardships , and the complaint of poor health , with loss of appetite , respiratory infections , or anxiety . 
 = = = = Physical = = = = 
 = = = = = Short @-@ term effects = = = = = 
 Drinking enough to cause a blood alcohol concentration ( BAC ) of 0 @.@ 03 – 0 @.@ 12 % typically causes an overall improvement in mood and possible euphoria , increased self @-@ confidence and sociability , decreased anxiety , a flushed , red appearance in the face and impaired judgment and fine muscle coordination . A BAC of 0 @.@ 09 % to 0 @.@ 25 % causes lethargy , sedation , balance problems and blurred vision . A BAC from 0 @.@ 18 % to 0 @.@ 30 % causes profound confusion , impaired speech ( e.g. , slurred speech ) , staggering , dizziness and vomiting . A BAC from 0 @.@ 25 % to 0 @.@ 40 % causes stupor , unconsciousness , anterograde amnesia , vomiting ( death may occur due to inhalation of vomit ( pulmonary aspiration ) while unconscious and respiratory depression ( potentially life @-@ threatening ) . A BAC from 0 @.@ 35 % to 0 @.@ 80 % causes a coma ( unconsciousness ) , life @-@ threatening respiratory depression and possibly fatal alcohol poisoning . As with all alcoholic beverages , drinking while driving , operating an aircraft or heavy machinery increases the risk of an accident ; many countries have penalties against drunk driving . 
 = = = = = Long @-@ term effects = = = = = 
 Drinking more than one drink a day for women or two drinks for men increases the risk of heart disease , high blood pressure , atrial fibrillation , and stroke . Risk is greater in younger people due to binge drinking which may result in violence or accidents . About 3 @.@ 3 million deaths ( 5 @.@ 9 % of all deaths ) are believed to be due to alcohol each year . Alcoholism reduces a person 's life expectancy by around ten years and alcohol use is the third leading cause of early death in the United States . No professional medical association recommends that people who are <unk> should start drinking wine . 
 Long @-@ term alcohol abuse can cause a number of physical symptoms , including cirrhosis of the liver , pancreatitis , epilepsy , polyneuropathy , alcoholic dementia , heart disease , nutritional deficiencies , peptic ulcers and sexual dysfunction , and can eventually be fatal . Other physical effects include an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease , malabsorption , alcoholic liver disease , and cancer . Damage to the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system can occur from sustained alcohol consumption . A wide range of immunologic defects can result and there may be a generalized skeletal fragility , in addition to a recognized tendency to accidental injury , resulting a propensity to bone fractures . 
 Women develop long @-@ term complications of alcohol dependence more rapidly than do men . Additionally , women have a higher mortality rate from alcoholism than men . Examples of long @-@ term complications include brain , heart , and liver damage and an increased risk of breast cancer . Additionally , heavy drinking over time has been found to have a negative effect on reproductive functioning in women . This results in reproductive dysfunction such as anovulation , decreased ovarian mass , problems or irregularity of the menstrual cycle , and early menopause . Alcoholic ketoacidosis can occur in individuals who chronically abuse alcohol and have a recent history of binge drinking . 
 The amount of alcohol that can be biologically processed and its effects differ between sexes . Equal dosages of alcohol consumed by men and women generally result in women having higher blood alcohol concentrations ( <unk> ) , since women generally have a higher percentage of body fat and therefore a lower volume of distribution for alcohol than men , and because the stomachs of men tend to metabolize alcohol more quickly . 
 = = = = Psychiatric = = = = 
 Long @-@ term misuse of alcohol can cause a wide range of mental health problems . Severe cognitive problems are common ; approximately 10 percent of all dementia cases are related to alcohol consumption , making it the second leading cause of dementia . Excessive alcohol use causes damage to brain function , and psychological health can be increasingly affected over time . 
 Social skills are significantly impaired in people suffering from alcoholism due to the neurotoxic effects of alcohol on the brain , especially the prefrontal cortex area of the brain . The social skills that are impaired by alcohol abuse include impairments in perceiving facial emotions , prosody perception problems and theory of mind deficits ; the ability to understand humour is also impaired in alcohol abusers . 
 Psychiatric disorders are common in alcoholics , with as many as 25 percent suffering severe psychiatric disturbances . The most prevalent psychiatric symptoms are anxiety and depression disorders . Psychiatric symptoms usually initially worsen during alcohol withdrawal , but typically improve or disappear with continued abstinence . Psychosis , confusion , and organic brain syndrome may be caused by alcohol misuse , which can lead to a misdiagnosis such as schizophrenia . Panic disorder can develop or worsen as a direct result of long @-@ term alcohol misuse . 
 The co @-@ occurrence of major depressive disorder and alcoholism is well documented . Among those with comorbid occurrences , a distinction is commonly made between depressive episodes that remit with alcohol abstinence ( " substance @-@ induced " ) , and depressive episodes that are primary and do not remit with abstinence ( " independent " episodes ) . Additional use of other drugs may increase the risk of depression . 
 Psychiatric disorders differ depending on gender . Women who have alcohol @-@ use disorders often have a co @-@ occurring psychiatric diagnosis such as major depression , anxiety , panic disorder , bulimia , post @-@ traumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) , or borderline personality disorder . Men with alcohol @-@ use disorders more often have a co @-@ occurring diagnosis of narcissistic or antisocial personality disorder , bipolar disorder , schizophrenia , impulse disorders or attention deficit / hyperactivity disorder . Women with alcoholism are more likely to have a history of physical or sexual assault , abuse and domestic violence than those in the general population , which can lead to higher instances of psychiatric disorders and greater dependence on alcohol . 
 = = = = Social effects = = = = 
 The social problems arising from alcoholism are serious , caused by the pathological changes in the brain and the intoxicating effects of alcohol . Alcohol abuse is associated with an increased risk of committing criminal offences , including child abuse , domestic violence , rape , burglary and assault . Alcoholism is associated with loss of employment , which can lead to financial problems . Drinking at inappropriate times , and behavior caused by reduced judgment , can lead to legal consequences , such as criminal charges for drunk driving or public disorder , or civil penalties for tortious behavior , and may lead to a criminal sentence . 
 An alcoholic 's behavior and mental impairment , while drunk , can profoundly affect those surrounding them and lead to isolation from family and friends . This isolation can lead to marital conflict and divorce , or contribute to domestic violence . Alcoholism can also lead to child neglect , with subsequent lasting damage to the emotional development of the alcoholic 's children . For this reason , children of alcoholic parents can develop a number of emotional problems . For example , they can become afraid of their parents , because of their unstable mood behaviors . In addition , they can develop considerable amount of shame over their inadequacy to liberate their parents from alcoholism . As a result of this failure , they develop wretched self @-@ images , which can lead to depression . 
 = = = Alcohol withdrawal = = = 
 As with similar substances with a sedative @-@ hypnotic mechanism , such as barbiturates and benzodiazepines , withdrawal from alcohol dependence can be fatal if it is not properly managed . Alcohol 's primary effect is the increase in stimulation of the GABAA receptor , promoting central nervous system depression . With repeated heavy consumption of alcohol , these receptors are desensitized and reduced in number , resulting in tolerance and physical dependence . When alcohol consumption is stopped too abruptly , the person 's nervous system suffers from uncontrolled synapse firing . This can result in symptoms that include anxiety , life @-@ threatening seizures , delirium tremens , hallucinations , shakes and possible heart failure . Other neurotransmitter systems are also involved , especially dopamine , NMDA and glutamate . 
 Severe acute withdrawal symptoms such as delirium tremens and seizures rarely occur after 1 week post cessation of alcohol . The acute withdrawal phase can be defined as lasting between one and three weeks . In the period of 3 – 6 weeks following cessation increased anxiety , depression as well as sleep disturbance is common ; fatigue and tension can persist for up to 5 weeks as part of the post @-@ acute withdrawal syndrome ; about a quarter of alcoholics experience anxiety and depression for up to 2 years . These post @-@ acute withdrawal symptoms have also been demonstrated in animal models of alcohol dependence and withdrawal . A kindling effect also occurs in alcoholics whereby each subsequent withdrawal syndrome is more severe than the previous withdrawal episode ; this is due to <unk> which occur as a result of periods of abstinence followed by re @-@ exposure to alcohol . Individuals who have had multiple withdrawal episodes are more likely to develop seizures and experience more severe anxiety during withdrawal from alcohol than alcohol dependent individuals without a history of past alcohol withdrawal episodes . The kindling effect leads to persistent functional changes in brain neural circuits as well as to gene expression . Kindling also results in the intensification of psychological symptoms of alcohol withdrawal . 
 There are decision tools and questionnaires which help guide physicians in evaluating alcohol withdrawal . For example , the <unk> @-@ Ar objectifies alcohol withdrawal symptoms in order to guide therapy decisions which allows for an efficient interview while at the same time retaining clinical usefulness , validity and reliability , ensuring proper care for withdrawal patients , who can be in danger of death . 
 = = Causes = = 
 A complex mixture of genetic and environmental factors influences the risk of the development of alcoholism . Genes that influence the metabolism of alcohol also influence the risk of alcoholism , and may be indicated by a family history of alcoholism . One paper has found that alcohol use at an early age may influence the expression of genes which increase the risk of alcohol dependence . Individuals who have a genetic disposition to alcoholism are also more likely to begin drinking at an earlier age than average . 
 Also , a younger age of onset of drinking is associated with an increased risk of the development of alcoholism , and about 40 percent of alcoholics will drink excessively by their late adolescence . It is not entirely clear whether this association is causal , and some researchers have been known to disagree with this view . 
 Severe childhood trauma is also associated with a general increase in the risk of drug dependency . Lack of peer and family support is associated with an increased risk of alcoholism developing . Genetics and adolescence are associated with an increased sensitivity to the neurotoxic effects of chronic alcohol abuse . Cortical degeneration due to the neurotoxic effects increases impulsive behaviour , which may contribute to the development , persistence and severity of alcohol use disorders . There is evidence that with abstinence , there is a reversal of at least some of the alcohol induced central nervous system damage . 
 The use of cannabis was associated with later problems with alcohol use . Alcohol use was associated with an increased probability of later use of tobacco , cannabis , and other illegal drugs . 
 = = = Alcohol availability = = = 
 Alcohol is the most available and widely abused substance . Beer alone is the world 's most widely consumed alcoholic beverage ; it is the third @-@ most popular drink overall , after water and tea . It is thought by some to be the oldest fermented beverage . 
 = = = Gender difference = = = 
 Based on combined data from SAMHSA 's 2004 – 2005 National Surveys on Drug Use & Health , the rate of past year alcohol dependence or abuse among persons aged 12 or older varied by level of alcohol use : 44 @.@ 7 % of past month heavy drinkers , 18 @.@ 5 % binge drinkers , 3 @.@ 8 % past month non @-@ binge drinkers , and 1 @.@ 3 % of those who did not drink alcohol in the past month met the criteria for alcohol dependence or abuse in the past year . Males had higher rates than females for all measures of drinking in the past month : any alcohol use ( 57 @.@ 5 % vs. 45 % ) , binge drinking ( 30 @.@ 8 % vs. 15 @.@ 1 % ) , and heavy alcohol use ( 10 @.@ 5 % vs. 3 @.@ 3 % ) , and males were twice as likely as females to have met the criteria for alcohol dependence or abuse in the past year ( 10 @.@ 5 % vs. 5 @.@ 1 % ) . 
 = = = Genetic variation = = = 
 Genetic differences exist between different racial groups which affect the risk of developing alcohol dependence . For example , there are differences between African , East Asian and Indo @-@ racial groups in how they metabolize alcohol . These genetic factors are believed to , in part , explain the differing rates of alcohol dependence among racial groups . The alcohol dehydrogenase allele <unk> B * 3 causes a more rapid metabolism of alcohol . The allele <unk> B * 3 is only found in those of African descent and certain Native American tribes . African Americans and Native Americans with this allele have a reduced risk of developing alcoholism . Native Americans however , have a significantly higher rate of alcoholism than average ; it is unclear why this is the case . Other risk factors such as cultural environmental effects e.g. trauma have been proposed to explain the higher rates of alcoholism among Native Americans compared to alcoholism levels in caucasians . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 = = = Definition = = = 
 Misuse , problem use , abuse , and heavy use refer to improper use of alcohol which may cause physical , social , or moral harm to the drinker . Moderate use is defined by The Dietary Guidelines for Americans as no more than two alcoholic beverages a day for men and no more than one alcoholic beverage a day for women . Some drinkers may drink more than 600 ml of alcohol per day during a heavy drinking period . 
 The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism ( NIAAA ) defines binge drinking as the amount of alcohol leading to a blood alcohol content ( BAC ) of 0 @.@ 08 , which , for most adults , would be reached by consuming five drinks for men or four for women over a 2 @-@ hour period . According to the NIAAA , men may be at risk for alcohol @-@ related problems if their alcohol consumption exceeds 14 standard drinks per week or 4 drinks per day , and women may be at risk if they have more than 7 standard drinks per week or 3 drinks per day . It defines a standard drink as one 12 @-@ ounce bottle of beer , one 5 @-@ ounce glass of wine , or 1 @.@ 5 ounces of distilled spirits . Despite this risk , a 2014 report in the National Survey on Drug Use and Health found that only 10 % of either " heavy drinkers " or " binge drinkers " defined according to the above <unk> also met the criteria for alcohol dependence , while only 1 @.@ 3 % of non @-@ binge drinkers met this criteria . An inference drawn from this study is that evidence @-@ based policy strategies and clinical preventive services may effectively reduce binge drinking without requiring addiction treatment in most cases . 
 The term " alcoholism " is commonly used , but poorly defined . The WHO calls alcoholism " a term of long @-@ standing use and variable meaning " , and use of the term was disfavored by a 1979 WHO Expert Committee . The Big Book ( from Alcoholics Anonymous ) states that once a person is an alcoholic , they are always an alcoholic , but does not define what is meant by the term " alcoholic " in this context . In 1960 , Bill W. , co @-@ founder of Alcoholics Anonymous ( AA ) , said : 
 We have never called alcoholism a disease because , technically speaking , it is not a disease entity . For example , there is no such thing as heart disease . Instead there are many separate heart ailments , or combinations of them . It is something like that with alcoholism . Therefore we did not wish to get in wrong with the medical profession by pronouncing alcoholism a disease entity . Therefore we always called it an illness , or a malady — a far safer term for us to use . 
 In professional and research contexts , the term " alcoholism " sometimes encompasses both alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence , and sometimes is considered equivalent to alcohol dependence . Talbot ( 1989 ) observes that alcoholism in the classical disease model follows a progressive course : if a person continues to drink , their condition will worsen . This will lead to harmful consequences in their life , physically , mentally , emotionally and socially . 
 Johnson ( 1980 ) explores the emotional progression of the addict ’ s response to alcohol . He looks at this in four phases . The first two are considered “ normal ” drinking and the last two are viewed as " typical " alcoholic drinking . Johnson 's four phases consist of : 
 Learning the mood swing . A person is introduced to alcohol ( in some cultures this can happen at a relatively young age ) , and the person enjoys the happy feeling it produces . At this stage there is no emotional cost . 
 Seeking the mood swing . A person will drink to regain that feeling of euphoria experienced in phase 1 ; the drinking will increase as more intoxication is required to achieve the same effect . Again at this stage , there are no significant consequences . 
 At the third stage there are physical and social consequences , i.e. , hangovers , family problems , work problems , etc . A person will continue to drink excessively , disregarding the problems . 
 The fourth stage can be detrimental , as Johnson cites it as a risk for premature death . As a person now drinks to feel normal , they block out the feelings of overwhelming guilt , remorse , anxiety , and shame they experience when sober . 
 Other theorists such as Milam & Ketcham ( 1983 ) focus on the physical deterioration of alcohol . They describe the process in three stages : 
 Adaptive stage – The person will not experience any negative symptoms , and believe they have capacity for alcohol . Physiological changes are happening with the increase in tolerance , but this will not be noticeable to the drinker or others . 
 Dependent stage – At this stage , symptoms build gradually . Hangover symptoms may be confused with withdrawal symptoms . Many addicts will maintain their drinking to avoid withdrawal sickness , drinking small amounts frequently . They will try to hide their problem from others , and will avoid gross intoxication . 
 Deterioration stage – Various organs are damaged due to long @-@ term drinking . Medical treatment will be required ; otherwise the pathological changes will cause death . 
 In psychology and psychiatry , the DSM is the most common global standard , while in medicine , the standard is ICD . The terms they recommend are similar but not identical . 
 The DSM @-@ IV diagnosis of alcohol dependence represents one approach to the definition of alcoholism . In part this is to assist in the development of research protocols in which findings can be compared to one another . According to the DSM @-@ IV , an alcohol dependence diagnosis is : " maladaptive alcohol use with clinically significant impairment as manifested by at least three of the following within any one @-@ year period : tolerance ; withdrawal ; taken in greater amounts or over longer time course than intended ; desire or unsuccessful attempts to cut down or control use ; great deal of time spent obtaining , using , or recovering from use ; social , occupational , or recreational activities given up or reduced ; continued use despite knowledge of physical or psychological sequelae . " 
 Despite the imprecision inherent in the term , there have been attempts to define how the word " alcoholism " should be interpreted when encountered . In 1992 , it was defined by the <unk> and <unk> as " a primary , chronic disease characterized by impaired control over drinking , preoccupation with the drug alcohol , use of alcohol despite adverse consequences , and distortions in thinking . " <unk> has had an entry for " alcoholism " since 1999 , and references the 1992 definition . 
 AA describes alcoholism as an illness that involves a physical allergy ( where " allergy " has a different meaning than that used in modern medicine . ) and a mental obsession . The doctor and addiction specialist Dr. William D. Silkworth M.D. writes on behalf of AA that " Alcoholics suffer from a " ( physical ) craving beyond mental control " . 
 A 1960 study by E. Morton Jellinek is considered the foundation of the modern disease theory of alcoholism . Jellinek 's definition restricted the use of the word " alcoholism " to those showing a particular natural history . The modern medical definition of alcoholism has been revised numerous times since then . The American Medical Association currently uses the word alcoholism to refer to a particular chronic primary disease . 
 = = = Social barriers = = = 
 Attitudes and social stereotypes can create barriers to the detection and treatment of alcohol abuse . This is more of a barrier for women than men . Fear of stigmatization may lead women to deny that they are suffering from a medical condition , to hide their drinking , and to drink alone . This pattern , in turn , leads family , physicians , and others to be less likely to suspect that a woman they know is an alcoholic . In contrast , reduced fear of stigma may lead men to admit that they are suffering from a medical condition , to display their drinking publicly , and to drink in groups . This pattern , in turn , leads family , physicians , and others to be more likely to suspect that a man they know is an alcoholic . 
 = = = Screening = = = 
 Several tools may be used to detect a loss of control of alcohol use . These tools are mostly self @-@ reports in questionnaire form . Another common theme is a score or tally that sums up the general severity of alcohol use . 
 The CAGE questionnaire , named for its four questions , is one such example that may be used to screen patients quickly in a doctor 's office . 
 Two " yes " responses indicate that the respondent should be investigated further . 
 The questionnaire asks the following questions : 
 Have you ever felt you needed to Cut down on your drinking ? 
 Have people Annoyed you by criticizing your drinking ? 
 Have you ever felt Guilty about drinking ? 
 Have you ever felt you needed a drink first thing in the morning ( Eye @-@ opener ) to steady your nerves or to get rid of a hangover ? 
 The CAGE questionnaire has demonstrated a high effectiveness in detecting alcohol @-@ related problems ; however , it has limitations in people with less severe alcohol @-@ related problems , white women and college students . 
 Other tests are sometimes used for the detection of alcohol dependence , such as the Alcohol Dependence Data Questionnaire , which is a more sensitive diagnostic test than the CAGE questionnaire . It helps distinguish a diagnosis of alcohol dependence from one of heavy alcohol use . The Michigan Alcohol Screening Test ( MAST ) is a screening tool for alcoholism widely used by courts to determine the appropriate sentencing for people convicted of alcohol @-@ related offenses , driving under the influence being the most common . The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test ( <unk> ) , a screening questionnaire developed by the World Health Organization , is unique in that it has been validated in six countries and is used internationally . Like the CAGE questionnaire , it uses a simple set of questions – a high score earning a deeper investigation . The Paddington Alcohol Test ( PAT ) was designed to screen for alcohol @-@ related problems amongst those attending Accident and Emergency departments . It concords well with the <unk> questionnaire but is administered in a fifth of the time . Certain blood tests may also indicate possible alcoholism . 
 = = = Genetic predisposition testing = = = 
 Psychiatric geneticists John I. <unk> , Jr . , and Laura Jean Bierut suggest that alcoholism does not have a single cause — including genetic — but that genes do play an important role " by affecting processes in the body and brain that interact with one another and with an individual 's life experiences to produce protection or susceptibility " . They also report that fewer than a dozen alcoholism @-@ related genes have been identified , but that more likely await discovery . 
 At least one genetic test exists for an allele that is correlated to alcoholism and opiate addiction . Human dopamine receptor genes have a detectable variation referred to as the DRD2 <unk> polymorphism . Those who possess the A1 allele ( variation ) of this polymorphism have a small but significant tendency towards addiction to opiates and <unk> @-@ releasing drugs like alcohol . Although this allele is slightly more common in alcoholics and opiate addicts , it is not by itself an adequate predictor of alcoholism , and some researchers argue that evidence for DRD2 is contradictory . 
 = = = Urine and blood tests = = = 
 There are reliable tests for the actual use of alcohol , one common test being that of blood alcohol content ( BAC ) . These tests do not differentiate alcoholics from non @-@ alcoholics ; however , long @-@ term heavy drinking does have a few recognizable effects on the body , including : 
 <unk> ( enlarged MCV ) 
 Elevated <unk> 
 Moderate elevation of AST and ALT and an AST : ALT ratio of 2 : 1 
 High carbohydrate deficient transferrin ( CDT ) 
 With regard to alcoholism , BAC is useful to judge alcohol tolerance , which in turn is sign of alcoholism . 
 However , none of these blood tests for biological markers is as sensitive as screening questionnaires . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 The World Health Organization , the European Union and other regional bodies , national governments and parliaments have formed alcohol policies in order to reduce the harm of alcoholism . Targeting adolescents and young adults is regarded as an important step to reduce the harm of alcohol abuse . Increasing the age at which licit drugs of abuse such as alcohol can be purchased , the banning or restricting advertising of alcohol has been recommended as additional ways of reducing the harm of alcohol dependence and abuse . Credible , evidence based educational campaigns in the mass media about the consequences of alcohol abuse have been recommended . Guidelines for parents to prevent alcohol abuse amongst adolescents , and for helping young people with mental health problems have also been suggested . 
 = = Management = = 
 Treatments are varied because there are multiple perspectives of alcoholism . Those who approach alcoholism as a medical condition or disease recommend differing treatments from , for instance , those who approach the condition as one of social choice . Most treatments focus on helping people discontinue their alcohol intake , followed up with life training and / or social support to help them resist a return to alcohol use . Since alcoholism involves multiple factors which encourage a person to continue drinking , they must all be addressed to successfully prevent a relapse . An example of this kind of treatment is detoxification followed by a combination of supportive therapy , attendance at self @-@ help groups , and ongoing development of coping mechanisms . The treatment community for alcoholism typically supports an abstinence @-@ based zero tolerance approach ; however , some prefer a harm @-@ reduction approach . 
 = = = Detoxification = = = 
 Alcohol detoxification or ' detox ' for alcoholics is an abrupt stop of alcohol drinking coupled with the substitution of drugs , such as benzodiazepines , that have similar effects to prevent alcohol withdrawal . Individuals who are only at risk of mild to moderate withdrawal symptoms can be detoxified as outpatients . Individuals at risk of a severe withdrawal syndrome as well as those who have significant or acute comorbid conditions are generally treated as inpatients . Detoxification does not actually treat alcoholism , and it is necessary to follow @-@ up detoxification with an appropriate treatment program for alcohol dependence or abuse to reduce the risk of relapse . Some symptoms of alcohol withdrawal such as depressed mood and anxiety typically take weeks or months to abate while other symptoms persist longer due to persisting <unk> . Alcoholism has serious adverse effects on brain function ; on average it takes one year of abstinence to recover from the cognitive deficits incurred by chronic alcohol abuse . 
 = = = Psychological = = = 
 Various forms of group therapy or psychotherapy can be used to deal with underlying psychological issues that are related to alcohol addiction , as well as provide relapse prevention skills . The mutual @-@ help group @-@ counseling approach is one of the most common ways of helping alcoholics maintain sobriety . Alcoholics Anonymous was one of the first organizations formed to provide mutual , nonprofessional counseling , and it is still the largest . Others include <unk> Secular Recovery , SMART Recovery , Women For Sobriety , and Secular Organizations for Sobriety . 
 Rationing and moderation programs such as Moderation Management and <unk> do not mandate complete abstinence . While most alcoholics are unable to limit their drinking in this way , some return to moderate drinking . A 2002 US study by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism ( NIAAA ) showed that 17 @.@ 7 percent of individuals diagnosed as alcohol dependent more than one year prior returned to low @-@ risk drinking . This group , however , showed fewer initial symptoms of dependency . A follow @-@ up study , using the same subjects that were judged to be in remission in 2001 – 2002 , examined the rates of return to problem drinking in 2004 – 2005 . The study found abstinence from alcohol was the most stable form of remission for recovering alcoholics . A long @-@ term ( 60 year ) follow @-@ up of two groups of alcoholic men concluded that " return to controlled drinking rarely persisted for much more than a decade without relapse or evolution into abstinence . " 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 In the United States there are four currently approved medications for alcoholism : disulfiram , two forms of naltrexone , and acamprosate . Several other drugs are also used and many are under investigation . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) may stabilise the brain chemistry that is altered due to alcohol dependence via antagonising the actions of glutamate , a neurotransmitter which is hyperactive in the post @-@ withdrawal phase . By reducing excessive NMDA activity which occurs at the onset of alcohol withdrawal , acamprosate can reduce or prevent alcohol withdrawal related neurotoxicity . <unk> reduces the risk of relapse amongst alcohol dependent persons . 
 Benzodiazepines , while useful in the management of acute alcohol withdrawal , if used long @-@ term can cause a worse outcome in alcoholism . Alcoholics on chronic benzodiazepines have a lower rate of achieving abstinence from alcohol than those not taking benzodiazepines . This class of drugs is commonly prescribed to alcoholics for insomnia or anxiety management . Initiating prescriptions of benzodiazepines or sedative @-@ hypnotics in individuals in recovery has a high rate of relapse with one author reporting more than a quarter of people relapsed after being prescribed sedative @-@ hypnotics . Those who are long @-@ term users of benzodiazepines should not be withdrawn rapidly , as severe anxiety and panic may develop , which are known risk factors for relapse into alcohol abuse . Taper regimes of 6 – 12 months have been found to be the most successful , with reduced intensity of withdrawal . 
 Calcium <unk> ( <unk> ) works in the same way as disulfiram ; it has an advantage in that the occasional adverse effects of disulfiram , hepatotoxicity and drowsiness , do not occur with calcium <unk> . 
 <unk> ( Antabuse ) prevents the elimination of acetaldehyde , a chemical the body produces when breaking down ethanol . Acetaldehyde itself is the cause of many hangover symptoms from alcohol use . The overall effect is severe discomfort when alcohol is ingested : an extremely fast @-@ acting and long @-@ lasting uncomfortable hangover . This discourages an alcoholic from drinking in significant amounts while they take the medicine . 
 <unk> is a competitive antagonist for opioid receptors , effectively blocking the effects of endorphins and opiates . <unk> is used to decrease cravings for alcohol and encourage abstinence . Alcohol causes the body to release endorphins , which in turn release dopamine and activate the reward pathways ; hence when naltrexone is in the body there is a reduction in the pleasurable effects from consuming alcohol . Evidence supports a reduced risk of relapse among alcohol dependent persons and a decrease in excessive drinking . <unk> also appears effective and works by a similar manner . 
 Evidence does not support the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ( SSRIs ) , tricyclic antidepressants ( <unk> ) , antipsychotics , or gabapentin . 
 = = = Dual addictions and <unk> = = = 
 Alcoholics may also require treatment for other psychotropic drug addictions and drug <unk> . The most common dual dependence syndrome with alcohol dependence is benzodiazepine dependence , with studies showing 10 – 20 percent of alcohol @-@ dependent individuals had problems of dependence and / or misuse problems of benzodiazepines . Benzodiazepines increase cravings for alcohol and the volume of alcohol consumed by problem drinkers . Benzodiazepine dependency requires careful reduction in dosage to avoid benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome and other health consequences . 
 Dependence on other sedative hypnotics such as zolpidem and <unk> as well as opiates and illegal drugs is common in alcoholics . 
 Alcohol itself is a sedative @-@ hypnotic and is cross @-@ tolerant with other sedative @-@ hypnotics such as barbiturates , benzodiazepines and nonbenzodiazepines . Dependence upon and withdrawal from sedative hypnotics can be medically severe and , as with alcohol withdrawal , there is a risk of psychosis or seizures if not managed properly . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The World Health Organization estimates that as of 2010 there are 208 million people with alcoholism worldwide ( 4 @.@ 1 % of the population over 15 years of age ) . 
 Substance use disorders are a major public health problem facing many countries . " The most common substance of abuse / dependence in patients presenting for treatment is alcohol . " In the United Kingdom , the number of ' dependent drinkers ' was calculated as over 2 @.@ 8 million in 2001 . About 12 % of American adults have had an alcohol dependence problem at some time in their life . In the United States and Western Europe , 10 to 20 percent of men and 5 to 10 percent of women at some point in their lives will meet criteria for alcoholism . 
 Within the medical and scientific communities , there is broad consensus regarding alcoholism as a disease state . For example , the American Medical Association considers alcohol a drug and states that " drug addiction is a chronic , relapsing brain disease characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite often devastating consequences . It results from a complex interplay of biological vulnerability , environmental exposure , and developmental factors ( e.g. , stage of brain maturity ) . " 
 Alcoholism has a higher prevalence among men , though in recent decades , the proportion of female alcoholics has increased . Current evidence indicates that in both men and women , alcoholism is 50 – 60 percent genetically determined , leaving 40 – 50 percent for environmental influences . Most alcoholics develop alcoholism during adolescence or young adulthood . 31 percent of college students show signs of alcohol abuse , while six percent are dependent on alcohol . Under the DSM 's new definition of alcoholics , that means about 37 percent of college students may meet the criteria . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Alcoholism often reduces a person 's life expectancy by around ten years . The most common cause of death in alcoholics is from cardiovascular complications . 
 There is a high rate of suicide in chronic alcoholics , which increases the longer a person drinks . Approximately 3 – 15 percent of alcoholics commit suicide , and research has found that over 50 percent of all suicides are associated with alcohol or drug dependence . This is believed to be due to alcohol causing physiological distortion of brain chemistry , as well as social isolation . Suicide is also very common in adolescent alcohol abusers , with 25 percent of suicides in adolescents being related to alcohol abuse . 
 Among those with alcohol dependence after one year , some met the criteria for low @-@ risk drinking , even though only 25 @.@ 5 percent of the group received any treatment , with the breakdown as follows : 25 percent were found to be still dependent , 27 @.@ 3 percent were in partial remission ( some symptoms persist ) , 11 @.@ 8 percent asymptomatic drinkers ( consumption increases chances of relapse ) and 35 @.@ 9 percent were fully recovered — made up of 17 @.@ 7 percent low @-@ risk drinkers plus 18 @.@ 2 percent abstainers . 
 In contrast , however , the results of a long @-@ term ( 60 @-@ year ) follow @-@ up of two groups of alcoholic men indicated that " return to controlled drinking rarely persisted for much more than a decade without relapse or evolution into abstinence . " There was also " return @-@ to @-@ controlled drinking , as reported in short @-@ term studies , is often a mirage . " 
 = = History = = 
 Historically the name " <unk> " was coined by German physician Dr. C. W. <unk> in 1819 before it was superseded by " alcoholism " . That term now has a more specific meaning . The term " alcoholism " was first used in 1849 by the Swedish physician Magnus Huss to describe the systematic adverse effects of alcohol . 
 Alcohol has a long history of use and misuse throughout recorded history . Biblical , Egyptian and Babylonian sources record the history of abuse and dependence on alcohol . In some ancient cultures alcohol was worshiped and in others its abuse was condemned . Excessive alcohol misuse and drunkenness were recognised as causing social problems even thousands of years ago . However , the defining of habitual drunkenness as it was then known as and its adverse consequences were not well established medically until the 18th century . In 1647 a Greek monk named <unk> was the first to document that chronic alcohol misuse was associated with toxicity to the nervous system and body which resulted in a range of medical disorders such as seizures , paralysis and internal bleeding . In 1920 the effects of alcohol abuse and chronic drunkenness led to the failed prohibition of alcohol being considered and eventually enforced briefly in America . In 2005 the cost of alcohol dependence and abuse was estimated to cost the US economy approximately 220 billion dollars per year , more than cancer and obesity . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 The various health problems associated with long @-@ term alcohol consumption are generally perceived as detrimental to society , for example , money due to lost labor @-@ hours , medical costs , and secondary treatment costs . Alcohol use is a major contributing factor for head injuries , motor vehicle accidents , violence , and assaults . Beyond money , there are also significant social costs to both the alcoholic and their family and friends . For instance , alcohol consumption by a pregnant woman can lead to fetal alcohol syndrome , an incurable and damaging condition . 
 Estimates of the economic costs of alcohol abuse , collected by the World Health Organization , vary from one to six percent of a country 's GDP . One Australian estimate pegged alcohol 's social costs at 24 % of all drug abuse costs ; a similar Canadian study concluded alcohol 's share was 41 % . One study quantified the cost to the UK of all forms of alcohol misuse in 2001 as £ 18 @.@ 5 – 20 billion . All economic costs in the United States in 2006 have been estimated at $ 223 @.@ 5 billion . 
 Stereotypes of alcoholics are often found in fiction and popular culture . The " town drunk " is a stock character in Western popular culture . Stereotypes of drunkenness may be based on racism or xenophobia , as in the depiction of the Irish as heavy drinkers . Studies by social psychologists Stivers and Greeley attempt to document the perceived prevalence of high alcohol consumption amongst the Irish in America . 
 Alcohol consumption is relatively similar between many European cultures , the United States , and Australia . In Asian countries that have a high gross domestic product , there is heightened drinking compared to other Asian countries , but it is nowhere near as high as it is in other countries like the United States . It is also inversely seen , with countries that have very low gross domestic product showing high alcohol consumption . 
 In a study done on Korean immigrants in Canada , they reported alcohol was even an integral part of their meal , and is the only time solo drinking should occur . They also believe alcohol is necessary at any social event as it helps conversations start . 
 Caucasians have a much lower abstinence rate ( 11 @.@ 8 % ) and much higher tolerance to symptoms ( 3 @.@ 4 ± 2 @.@ 45 drinks ) of alcohol than Chinese ( 33 @.@ 4 % and 2 @.@ 2 ± 1 @.@ 78 drinks respectively ) . Also , the more acculturation there is between cultures , the more influenced the culture is to adopt Caucasians drinking practices . 
 Peyote , a psychoactive agent , has even shown promise in treating alcoholism . Alcohol had actually replaced peyote as Native Americans ’ psychoactive agent of choice in rituals when peyote was outlawed . 
 = = Research = = 
 Topiramate , a derivative of the naturally occurring sugar monosaccharide D @-@ fructose , has been found effective in helping alcoholics quit or cut back on the amount they drink . Evidence suggests that topiramate antagonizes excitatory glutamate receptors , inhibits dopamine release , and enhances inhibitory gamma @-@ aminobutyric acid function . A 2008 review of the effectiveness of topiramate concluded that the results of published trials are promising , however as of 2008 , data was insufficient to support using topiramate in conjunction with brief weekly compliance counseling as a first @-@ line agent for alcohol dependence . A 2010 review found that topiramate may be superior to existing alcohol <unk> options . Topiramate effectively reduces craving and alcohol withdrawal severity as well as improving quality @-@ of @-@ life @-@ ratings . 
 <unk> , a <unk> receptor agonist , is under study for the treatment of alcoholism . A 2015 systematic review concluded that there is insufficient evidence for the use of baclofen for withdrawal symptoms in alcoholism . There is tentative data supporting baclofen in alcohol dependence however further trials are needed as of 2013 . 
 <unk> , a <unk> antagonist , appears promising . 
 = Attack on Cloudbase = 
 " Attack on Cloudbase " is the 31st episode of the 1960s Supermarionation television series Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons . The penultimate episode of the series , it first aired in the United Kingdom on ATV Midlands on 7 May 1968 . In this episode , Symphony Angel ejects from her damaged interceptor into the Sahara Desert ; before she is located , Mysteron spacecraft enter Earth 's atmosphere and launch a devastating assault on Cloudbase . Executive producer Gerry Anderson selected Ken Turner to direct Tony Barwick 's script on account of the episode 's " bizarre " quality . 
 Filmed in October 1967 , " Attack on Cloudbase " underwent several scripting changes prior to shooting . Challenges facing the Century 21 production team 's special effects department included a complex shot of an Angel aircraft scale model overflying the Symphony Angel puppet , and the extended sequence presenting the attack on Cloudbase itself . The department built only a limited number of saucer @-@ shaped spacecraft models , opting to increase the apparent size of the Mysteron attack force at low cost by attaching flashing light bulbs to the backdrop of the model set . 
 Composer Barry Gray devised a unique score at the request of Anderson , who judged the series ' archived incidental music unsuited to the episode 's tone . Voice actress Liz Morgan remembers the emotion of the script , while Anderson praises Barwick for his " humanised " writing of the series ' regular characters , considering the nature of the plot to be mainly " dark humour " . In 1980 , the New York offices of Century 21 's distributor , ITC Entertainment , re @-@ edited " Attack on Cloudbase " into a segment of the Captain Scarlet compilation film Captain Scarlet vs the Mysterons . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While on regular patrol , Symphony Angel is forced to eject into the Sahara Desert following an explosion to the rear of her interceptor 's cockpit . Suffering from sunstroke , she quickly falls unconscious . After the Mysterons warn of its imminent destruction , Spectrum 's airborne headquarters , Cloudbase , is placed on red alert and sealed from all external contact . Destiny Angel is launched to search for her comrade , but in the light of the Mysterons ' threat is recalled on the orders of Spectrum 's commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Colonel White . This decision provokes a heated argument between White and Captain Blue , who confesses that he and Symphony are romantically involved . White refuses to allow Blue to join the ground forces that are being mobilised to locate Symphony . 
 Night falls , and Captain Magenta detects an unusual signal in the Cloudbase Radar Room . Rhapsody Angel is launched to investigate and finds that the readings are emanating from a spinning Mysteron spacecraft , which obliterates her interceptor in mid @-@ air . To prevent civilian casualties on the ground , Cloudbase is moved into Himalayan airspace on its horizontal thrusters , while its personnel prepare for the inevitable final confrontation . When more spacecraft appear on the radar , Captain Scarlet volunteers to challenge the Mysterons in Destiny 's place , but crash @-@ lands on the Cloudbase flight deck after his interceptor is damaged . 
 As the Mysterons start to fire on Cloudbase , Dr Fawn is killed . Posing as his assistant , Mysteron intermediary Captain Black reports that Scarlet is dead with no possibility of recovery , his retro @-@ metabolic ability being too weak to heal such extensive injuries . The Mysteron assault intensifies , resulting in the deaths of Magenta and the remaining Angels , until only White , Blue and Lieutenant Green are left alive in the Control Room . As the stricken Cloudbase loses altitude , Green is killed by another explosion , which also cripples Blue and leaves him unable to save himself . White resolves to go down with his command , and is seen standing to attention and saluting in a spiralling freeze frame shot , accompanied by the sounds of Cloudbase crashing to Earth . 
 Immediately after Cloudbase 's apparent destruction , Symphony wakes up in the desert ; she is face @-@ to @-@ face with Scarlet and Blue , who are part of the ground forces that have been dispatched to rescue her . In the final scene , it is explained that Symphony dreamt the attack on Cloudbase in a nightmare brought on by the heat of the desert sun . 
 = = Production = = 
 One of the last episodes of Captain Scarlet to be produced , filming for " Attack on Cloudbase " commenced towards the end of October 1967 . In Tony Barwick 's original script for this episode , the role of Captain Magenta was filled by a previously unseen Spectrum officer , Captain Sienna . However , the lines passed to Magenta after the production staff determined that the costs of making a new Spectrum puppet uniform would be too high . The director role was given to Ken Turner , executive producer Gerry Anderson believing that his style of direction best suited the episode 's " more bizarre " tone . Unique among Captain Scarlet episodes , " Attack on Cloudbase " contains no guest characters ; additionally , it is one of only two episodes ( the other being " Flight to Atlantica " ) in which all the regular Spectrum characters appear , although not all are given dialogue . 
 The stranding of Symphony Angel in the desert and the Mysteron assault on Cloudbase posed several technical challenges to the special effects department , under the supervision of Derek Meddings . A shot depicting the jet of Destiny Angel shooting past the grounded Symphony required close collaboration between the puppet operators and the effects technicians ( the former controlling the wired Symphony marionette , the latter staging the flyby of the scale model interceptor ) . The Mysteron spacecraft design was based on the appearance of conventional , " saucer @-@ shaped " UFOs as reported during the 1960s . To make it appear that the objects are spinning in mid @-@ air , Meddings added " veins " to each model to reflect light directed onto the set . Only the foreground of the high @-@ altitude attack sequence was populated by scale models ; since the department lacked the necessary number of operators , small light bulbs were fitted to the backdrop to give the impression of a larger fleet . 
 Immediately before Cloudbase crashes to Earth off @-@ screen , a still frame depicts Colonel White giving a salute from behind his Control Room desk . Anderson , who attributes this creative decision to maritime tradition , specifically remembered suggesting " Let 's make sure [ Colonel White ] goes down like the captain of a big ship . " Liz Morgan , who provided the voices of Destiny and Rhapsody Angels , has discussed how the emotion of the script manifested itself at the recording session : " It was a moment when Destiny was very worried about Captain Scarlet and she was making impassioned pleas for him . Well , I started to cry , and immediately a voice came down from the recording booth and [ producer ] Reg Hill , who was directing that particular week , said , ' No , Liz , love . Do it again , love . Puppets don 't cry ! ' " 
 " Attack on Cloudbase " is one of a minority of Captain Scarlet episodes whose incidental music was scored especially , as opposed to being recycled from the series ' audio library . Composer Barry Gray devised the unique score following Anderson 's determination that none of the used tracks fitted the episode 's unusual tone . The recording was conducted on 3 December 1967 , four months after Gray 's last contribution to the series , with an orchestra of 14 instrumentalists . The new tracks were titled " Desert Symphony " and " The Mysterons Attack ! " Music for " Expo 2068 " originated from the same studio session . It is also one of four episodes where members of Spectrum come face to face with Captain Black , the other three episodes being " Manhunt " , " Spectrum Strikes Back " and " Flight to Atlantica " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 James Stansfield of the entertainment website Den of Geek considers " Attack on Cloudbase " the best episode of Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons , ranking it first in his " Top 10 " list . Describing the instalment as highly entertaining , even if " shocking and surprisingly bleak " , he praises the characterisation and Tony Barwick 's writing in general , and in particular the shocking killing of Rhapsody Angel and the conflict between Captain Blue and Colonel White . Stansfield 's review is not without criticism , conveying disappointment with the plot twist conclusion and also questioning a minor plot hole : why Symphony Angel discards her helmet after crash @-@ landing , thereby breaking off radio communication with Cloudbase . He suggests that the unreality of the main plot is inferred some time before it is confirmed in dialogue , with the demise of the normally " indestructible " Captain Scarlet and the presence of Captain Black – whose appearance does not in any way astonish Blue – serving as " hints ... that all might not be quite as it seems " . 
 Morgan Jeffery of Digital Spy describes " Attack on Cloudbase " as " thrilling " , opining that it is " perhaps the highlight " of the series . Like Stansfield , he is critical of what he refers to as the " lame , ' it was all a dream ' ending " , judging it to be rendered more frustrating by the fact that the series ' final episode , " The Inquisition " , is a clip show that ends ambiguously with regard to the fates of Spectrum and the Mysterons : " Cut the final few minutes from ' Attack on Cloudbase ' and imagine what a finale that would have been ! " 
 In a DVD audio commentary for the episode , Gerry Anderson remembered that the writing of " Attack on Cloudbase " set out to strike a purely comic note ; he suggested that the nature the finished product was more typical of black comedy . While admitting that the dream sequence and reset button technique were arguably uninspiring clichés , in the case of " Attack on Cloudbase " he defended the use of such plot devices for their suitability in both initially alarming viewers ( with the apparent deaths of the main characters ) and ultimately reassuring them ( with the revelation that the attack on Cloudbase was , in the end , " all a dream " ) . Anderson praised Tony Barwick 's script , citing Blue and Symphony 's romantic relationship and the underlying tension between Blue and Colonel White as examples of Barwick 's " humanisation " of the puppet characters . Captain Magenta 's comic quality as the herald of the attack is , similarly , another " wonderful example of ' <unk> ' " . 
 Chris Drake and Graeme Bassett describe " Attack on Cloudbase " as " tense and exciting " , adding that it is " guaranteed to keep the viewer guessing " . The British Board of Film Classification ( BBFC ) has passed the episode with a U certificate , while also noting that " Attack on Cloudbase " contains " very mild , fantasy " violence . Anderson argues that the weight of the episode 's dark and violent tone is lessened by the relaxed closing scene , whose writing was inspired by the reasoning that there should be " a sequence where everyone was happy together , and clearly no one had come to any grief " , thus creating the " inevitable happy ending " to an otherwise tragic plot . 
 = = 1980 re @-@ edit = = 
 Footage from " Attack on Cloudbase " was re @-@ edited to form part of Captain Scarlet vs the Mysterons , a compilation film released in 1980 . A new ending , specially filmed by ITC Entertainment New York , comprises a CGI " pyramid " with an accompanying Mysteron voice @-@ over ( provided by an American actor ) , implying that the attack on Cloudbase was in fact real , and not the product of a nightmare . The Mysterons use their powers to reverse time , aborting the timeline in which Cloudbase was destroyed and its personnel killed . The re @-@ writing of the ending was received negatively by fans of the original , uncut episode . 
 = Scarborough Historic District = 
 The Scarborough Historic District is a national historic district located in the suburban community of Scarborough @-@ on @-@ Hudson , in Briarcliff Manor , New York . The 376 @-@ acre ( 152 ha ) district was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1984 , and contains seven historically and architecturally significant properties dating from the late 18th century to the early 20th century . Most of the properties are domestic , or used for education or religion . The most common architectural styles within the district are Mid @-@ 19th Century Revival and Late Victorian . 
 = = Profile = = 
 The 376 @-@ acre ( 152 ha ) district contains 26 contributing buildings , two contributing sites , and one contributing structure . They are associated with three estates : Beechwood , Rosemont , and Woodlea ( now Sleepy Hollow Country Club ) ; The Clear View School , a school complex ; two religious properties : Saint Mary 's Episcopal Church and Scarborough Presbyterian Church ; and Sparta Cemetery , which dates back to before the Revolutionary War . All properties stand in much the same condition as when first nominated , except Rosemont , which was demolished in the mid- to late @-@ 1980s . 
 Several properties within the district exemplify Mid @-@ 19th Century Revival architectures , including Greek , Gothic , Renaissance , and Neoclassical styles ; their formal landscaping exemplifies estate landscaping at the turn of the 19th century . Most of the properties were established by wealthy landowners , ranging from the late 18th century to the early 20th century . The district , which remains generally rural and sparsely developed , borders the Hudson River and lies within the towns of Ossining and Mount Pleasant , between the villages of Ossining and Sleepy Hollow . 
 Most of the district 's buildings are set on large parcels of land , and many are clearly visible from U.S. Route 9 ( the former Albany Post Road ) , the district 's major thoroughfare . Stone and brick walls line Route 9 within the boundaries of the district . The district achieved State Register status on August 6 , 1984 , National Register district status on September 7 , 1984 , and local landmark status on January 5 , 1988 . 
 = = Beechwood = = 
 Beechwood is an estate built in 1780 ; it was most notably the home of National City Bank president Frank A. Vanderlip and his family . The mansion has gone through a number of expansions and renovations ; the most recent involved dividing the mansion into three segments for use as condominiums . Beechwood was a filming location of the 1970 film House of Dark Shadows , and a filming location and the primary setting of Savages , a 1972 Merchant Ivory film . 
 In the 1890s , Henry Walter Webb substantially added to the estate from numerous properties , including an earlier estate named Beechwood . Webb also renovated and expanded the mansion , hiring R. H. Robertson to double the size of the house . Robertson designed the expansion in the Colonial Revival style , to be compatible with the neoclassical Federal style of the original but more ornate . 
 = = The Clear View School = = 
 The Clear View School was built in 1917 by Frank Vanderlip on his Beechwood property as the Scarborough School , the first Montessori school in the United States . In 1978 , the school closed ; The Clear View School purchased the property in 1980 and opened in 1981 . It runs a day treatment program for 83 students with mental disorders . 
 = = Rosemont = = 
 Rosemont , also known by the names Scarborough House and Hillside , was a Greek Revival mansion built around 1840 . The house was John Lorimer Worden 's birthplace . It became headquarters to Stein and Day in 1973 , and was known at that time as Scarborough House . The house was demolished in February 1990 . 
 The mansion was used by Frank Vanderlip as a dormitory for Scarborough School boarding students . Rosemont stood opposite Vanderlip 's Beechwood , at the corner of Route 9 and Scarborough Road . 
 = = Saint Mary 's Episcopal Church = = 
 Saint Mary 's Episcopal Church , founded in 1839 by William Creighton and incorporated in 1883 as Saint Mary 's Church , Beechwood , is Briarcliff Manor 's oldest church ; it was reincorporated in 1945 as Saint Mary 's Church of Scarborough . Its first service was in 1839 in a small schoolhouse on an acre of Creighton 's Beechwood property , at the corner of Albany Post and Sleepy Hollow Roads . The service was led by Creighton 's son @-@ in @-@ law Reverend Edward Nathaniel Meade . 
 The granite church was built in 1850 by local stonemasons and paid for primarily by Creighton and Meade , but also by Creighton 's wealthy neighbors , including US Navy Commodore Matthew C. Perry , James Watson Webb , William Aspinwall , and Ambrose Kingsland . The first services there were held on September 21 , 1851 . The church is in near @-@ original condition , with a design based on the 14th @-@ century Gothic St. Mary 's parish church in Scarborough , England and is the only church with a complete set of John Bolton ( brother of William Jay Bolton ) stained @-@ glass windows . 
 The church 's rectory was built in 1931 as a memorial to its first two rectors Creighton and Meade . Notable parishioners included Commodore Matthew Perry , Viola Allen , and Washington Irving . Irving , the author of " Rip Van Winkle " and " The Legend of Sleepy Hollow " , brought and planted the ivy surrounding the church . He had received it from Walter Scott , from Abbotsford . The ivy of the parish house was brought from the Argonne battlefield , after World War I , by Narcissa Vanderlip . The 200 @-@ acre @-@ plus ( 81 ha ) Sleepy Hollow Country Club surrounds the church grounds on three sides . 
 During World War I , the New York Guard 's First Provisional Regiment was stationed at the former Holbrook Military Academy , guarding the Croton Aqueduct . The regiment held a service at Saint Mary 's in 1918 , as described in a contemporary regimental history : 
 On Sept . 29th , Supply Company trucks , sector cars , and auxiliary motor service brought from every unit of the regiment on the east side of the Hudson River details to the stated regimental service held at St. Mary 's Church , Scarborough , as a tribute from the men of the regiment to Captain Baldwin . 
 It was a beautiful bright Sunday morning and the men of the various companies , clad in their Sunday best , made a splendid appearance . As each company arrived , it was formed along the side of the Albany Post Road facing the church , and at 11 o 'clock , while the church bells rang a final call to worship , <unk> . Bugler Corrie and the headquarters field @-@ music sounded church call . This was immediately followed by assembly , and then , headed by the field @-@ music , the staff , non @-@ commissioned staff , Headquarters Company , Supply Company and the company details of the two battalions marched up through the church grounds to the church itself . At the entrance the field @-@ music swung out of line and played the remainder of the column into the church , where the organist took up the processional . 
 With the entire church filled with soldiers , it was impossible to seat the civilian congregation and all of the detachments of the National League for Women 's Service , the Motor Corps ' of America and the Red Cross Motor Corps who marched in the column . Many found seats in the cloister , and others sat on chairs outside the doors of the church . 
 On July 5 , 2015 , Saint Mary 's Episcopal Church closed after 175 years in operation . 
 = = Scarborough Presbyterian Church = = 
 The church has its origins with Elliott Fitch Shepard and his wife Margaret Louisa Vanderbilt Shepard purchasing a roadhouse on the Albany Post Road . In 1892 , after enlarging and remodeling the store , adding diamond @-@ paned windows and replacing the floors and porches , the building was first used as a church . The church 's organization meeting was held with nineteen charter members . 
 After Elliott Fitch Shepard 's death in March 1893 , Margaret donated the present church building and manse . The Spanish Renaissance @-@ style church was designed by Augustus Haydel ( a nephew of Stanford White ) and August D. Shepard ( a nephew of Elliott Shepard and of William Rutherford Mead ) . The two nephews later designed the 1899 Fabbri Mansion in Manhattan . The church 's cornerstone was laid on October 13 , 1893 , and the completed church was dedicated on May 11 , 1895 in memory of Elliott Fitch Shepard . It was built of pink granite rubble with limestone trim , with a steeple supported by flying buttresses . The interior has fluted pilasters with gilded capitals , a coffered ceiling made of redwood , and stained @-@ glass windows . The church 's 1 @,@ 498 @-@ pipe organ was constructed around 1894 ; it was the first all @-@ electric action organ in the world . The 3 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 2 ha ) church property also contains the church 's carriage house , used for offices , and the parish house , designed by Augustus D. Shepard and completed in 1908 . 
 Since around 1995 , the church has run the Scarborough Presbyterian Children ’ s Center , a non @-@ denominational preschool housed in a building next door to the church , with an outdoor playground nearby . The preschool serves families in Briarcliff Manor and Scarborough , Ossining , Tarrytown , Sleepy Hollow , Pocantico Hills , and Pleasantville . 
 = = Sleepy Hollow Country Club = = 
 Sleepy Hollow Country Club was founded in 1911 . The main building of Sleepy Hollow Country Club was known as Woodlea , the 140 @-@ room $ 2 million ( $ 52 @.@ 7 million in 2015 ) mansion built in 1895 for Elliott Fitch Shepard and his family . The building , with Beaux @-@ Arts and Georgian Revival features , was designed by McKim , Mead & White and built from 1892 to 1895 . In 1910 , Margaret Louisa Vanderbilt Shepard sold the estate to Frank A. Vanderlip and William Rockefeller , who converted it into a country club . Current members include Bill Murray , James Patterson , and several members of the Rockefeller family . 
 = = Sparta Cemetery = = 
 Sparta Cemetery , or the Presbyterian Burying Ground at Sparta , is a two @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) burying ground dating to 1764 , making it the oldest cemetery in Westchester County . It is the only contributing property outside Briarcliff Manor ; the Ossining Historical Society has maintained the cemetery since 1984 . As of 1984 , the cemetery is still owned by the First Presbyterian Church of Ossining ; its original church building was built c . 1768 and was moved towards the center of Ossining in 1800 . The grounds hold 34 known Revolutionary War veterans . Many of the area 's earliest residents are buried in the cemetery . 
 In September 1780 , HMS Vulture fired a cannonball into the gravestone of Abraham <unk> , Jr . , who died in 1774 , at the age of 7 years . The Vulture was traveling south from Croton Point to pick up Major John André , a rendezvous that never occurred ; Andre was captured in Tarrytown on his way to the vessel . 
 = = = Gallery = = = 
 = Phoenix , Arizona = 
 Phoenix ( / <unk> / ) is the capital and largest city of the U.S. state of Arizona . With 1 @,@ 563 @,@ 025 people ( as of 2015 ) , Phoenix is the sixth most populous city nationwide , the most populous state capital in the United States , and the only state capital with a population of more than 1 million residents . 
 Phoenix is the anchor of the Phoenix metropolitan area , also known as the Valley of the Sun , which in turn is a part of the Salt River Valley . The metropolitan area is the 12th largest by population in the United States , with approximately 4 @.@ 3 million people as of 2010 . In addition , Phoenix is the county seat of Maricopa County and is one of the largest cities in the United States by land area . 
 Settled in 1867 as an agricultural community near the confluence of the Salt and Gila Rivers , Phoenix incorporated as a city in 1881 . Located in the northeastern reaches of the Sonoran Desert , Phoenix has a subtropical desert climate . Despite this , its canal system led to a thriving farming community , many of the original crops remaining important parts of the Phoenix economy for decades , such as alfalfa , cotton , citrus , and hay ( which was important for the cattle industry ) . In fact , the " Five C 's " ( Cotton , Cattle , Citrus , Climate , and Copper ) , remained the driving forces of Phoenix 's economy until after World War II , when high @-@ tech industries began to move into the valley and air conditioning made residences much more comfortable in the very hot summers . 
 The city averaged a 4 percent annual population growth rate over a 40 @-@ year period from the mid @-@ 1960s to the mid @-@ 2000s . This growth rate slowed during the Great Recession of 2007 – 09 , and has rebounded slowly . Phoenix is the cultural center of the Valley of the Sun , as well as the entire state . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 For more than 2 @,@ 000 years , the Hohokam peoples occupied the land that would become Phoenix . The Hohokam created roughly 135 miles ( 217 km ) of irrigation canals , making the desert land arable . Paths of these canals would later become used for the modern Arizona Canal , Central Arizona Project Canal , and the Hayden @-@ Rhodes Aqueduct . The Hohokam also carried out extensive trade with the nearby Anasazi , Mogollon and <unk> , as well as with the more distant Mesoamerican civilizations . It is believed that between 1300 and 1450 , periods of drought and severe floods led to the Hohokam civilization 's abandonment of the area . 
 After the departure of the Hohokam , groups of Akimel O 'odham ( commonly known as Pima ) , Tohono O ’ <unk> and Maricopa tribes began to use the area , as well as segments of the Yavapai and Apache . The O 'odham were offshoots of the <unk> tribe , who in turn were thought to be the descendants of the formerly urbanized Hohokam . 
 The Akimel O ’ <unk> were the major Indian group in the area , and lived in small villages , with well @-@ defined irrigation systems , which spread over the entire Gila River Valley , from Florence in the east to the Estrellas in the west . Their crops included corn , beans and squash for food , while cotton and tobacco were also cultivated . Mostly a peaceful group , they did band together with the Maricopa for their mutual protection against incursions by both the Yuma and Apache tribes . The Maricopa are part of the larger Yuma people , however they migrated east from the lower Colorado and Gila Rivers in the early 1800s , when they began to be enemies with their Yuma brethren , settling amongst the existing communities of the Akimel O 'odham . 
 The Tohono O 'odham lived in the region as well , but their main concentration was to the south , and stretched all the way to the Mexican border . Living in small settlements , the O 'odham were seasonal farmers who took advantage of the rains , rather than the large @-@ scale irrigation of the Akimel . They grew crops such as sweet Indian corn , <unk> beans , squash , lentils sugar cane and melons , as well as taking advantage of native plants , such as saguaro fruits , cholla buds , mesquite tree beans , and mesquite candy ( sap from the mesquite tree ) . They also hunted local game such as deer , rabbit and <unk> for meat . 
 When the Mexican – American War ended in 1848 , Mexico sold its northern zone to the United States and residents became U.S. citizens . The Phoenix area became part of the New Mexico Territory . In 1863 the mining town of Wickenburg was the first to be established in what is now Maricopa County , to the northwest of modern Phoenix . At the time Maricopa County had not yet been incorporated : the land was within Yavapai County , which included the major town of Prescott to the north of Wickenburg . 
 The U.S. Army created Fort McDowell on the Verde River in 1865 to forestall Native American uprisings . The fort established a camp on the south side of the Salt River by 1866 , which was the first non @-@ native settlement in the valley after the decline of the Hohokam . In later years , other nearby settlements would form and merge to become the city of Tempe , but this community was incorporated after Phoenix . 
 = = = Founding and incorporation = = = 
 The history of the city of Phoenix begins with Jack Swilling , a Confederate veteran of the Civil War . In 1867 , while traveling through the Salt River Valley , he saw a potential for farming , much like the military had already cultivated further east , near Fort McDowell . He formed a small community that same year about 4 miles ( 6 km ) east of the present city . Lord Darrell <unk> , one of the original settlers in Swilling 's party , suggested the name " Phoenix " , as it described a city born from the ruins of a former civilization . 
 The Board of Supervisors in Yavapai County , which at the time encompassed Phoenix , officially recognized the new town on May 4 , 1868 , and the first post office was established the following month , with Swilling as the postmaster . On February 12 , 1871 , the territorial legislature created Maricopa County , the sixth one formed in the Arizona Territory , by dividing Yavapai County . The first election for county office was held in 1871 , when Tom Barnum was elected the first sheriff , running unopposed when the other two candidates , John A. <unk> and Jim Favorite , fought a duel wherein <unk> killed Favorite , and then was forced to withdraw from the race . 
 The town grew during the 1870s , and President Ulysses S. Grant issued a land patent for the present site of Phoenix on April 10 , 1874 . By 1875 , the town had a telegraph office , sixteen saloons , and four dance halls , but the " townsite @-@ commissioner form of government " needed an overhaul , so that year an election was held in which three village trustees , as well as several other officials , were elected . By 1880 , the town 's population stood at 2 @,@ 453 . 
 By 1881 , Phoenix 's continued growth made the existing village structure with a board of trustees obsolete . The Territorial Legislature passed " The Phoenix Charter Bill " , incorporating Phoenix and providing for a mayor @-@ council government , and became official on February 25 , 1881 when it was signed by Governor John C. Fremont , officially incorporating Phoenix as a city with an approximate population of 2 @,@ 500 . 
 In the 1880s , the arrival of the railroad in the valley was the first of several key events that altered the economy of Phoenix . Phoenix became a trade center , with its products reaching eastern and western markets . In response , the Phoenix Chamber of Commerce was organized on November 4 , 1888 . Earlier in 1888 the city offices were moved into the new City Hall , at Washington and Central . When the territorial capital was moved from Prescott to Phoenix in 1889 the temporary territorial offices were also located in City Hall . With the arrival of the Santa Fe , Prescott and Phoenix Railroad in 1895 , Phoenix was connected to Prescott , Flagstaff and other northern state communities . The increased access to commerce expedited the city 's economic rise . The year 1895 also saw the establishment of Phoenix Union High School , with an enrollment of 90 . 
 = = = 1900 to World War II = = = 
 On February 25 , 1901 , Governor Murphy dedicated the permanent Capitol building , and the Carnegie Free Library opened seven years later , on February 18 , 1908 , dedicated by Benjamin Fowler . The National Reclamation Act was signed by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1902 , which allowed for dams to be built on waterways in the west for reclamation purposes . The first dam constructed under the act , the Theodore Roosevelt Dam began in 1903 . It supplied both water and electricity , becoming the first multi @-@ purpose dam , and Roosevelt himself attended the official dedication on May 18 , 1911 . At the time , it was the largest masonry dam in the world , forming Theodore Roosevelt Lake in the mountain east of Phoenix . 
 On February 14 , 1912 , under President William Howard Taft , Phoenix became the capital of the newly formed state of Arizona . This occurred just six months after Taft had vetoed a joint congressional resolution granting statehood to Arizona , due to his disapproval of the state constitution 's position regarding the recall of judges . In 1913 Phoenix adopted a new form of government , changing from a mayor @-@ council system to council @-@ manager , making it one of the first cities in the United States with this form of city government . After statehood , Phoenix 's growth started to accelerate , and eight years later , its population had reached 29 @,@ 053 . In 1920 Phoenix would see its first skyscraper , the Heard Building . In 1929 Sky Harbor was officially opened , at the time owned by Scenic Airways . It would later be purchased by the city in 1935 , who operates it to this day . 
 On March 4 , 1930 , former U.S. President Calvin Coolidge dedicated a dam on the Gila River named in his honor . However , the state had just been through a long drought , and the reservoir which was supposed to be behind the dam was virtually dry . The humorist Will Rogers , who was also on hand as a guest speaker joked , " If that was my lake I 'd mow it . " Phoenix 's population had more than doubled during the 1920s , and now stood at 48 @,@ 118 . It was also during the 1930s that Phoenix and its surrounding area began to be called " The Valley of the Sun " , which was an advertising slogan invented to boost tourism . 
 During World War II , Phoenix 's economy shifted to that of a distribution center , transforming into an " embryonic industrial city " with the mass production of military supplies . There were three air force fields in the area : Luke Field , Williams Field , and Falcon Field , as well as two large pilot training camps , Thunderbird Field No. 1 in Glendale and Thunderbird Field No. 2 in Scottsdale . 
 = = = Post @-@ World War II explosive growth = = = 
 A town that had just over sixty @-@ five thousand residents in 1940 became America 's sixth largest city by 2010 , with a population of nearly 1 @.@ 5 million , and millions more in nearby suburbs . When the war ended , many of the men who had undergone their training in Arizona returned bringing their new families . Learning of this large untapped labor pool enticed many large industries to move their operations to the area . In 1948 high @-@ tech industry , which would become a staple of the state 's economy , arrived in Phoenix when Motorola chose Phoenix for the site of its new research and development center for military electronics . Seeing the same advantages as Motorola , other high @-@ tech companies such as Intel and McDonnell Douglas would also move into the valley and open manufacturing operations . 
 By 1950 , over 105 @,@ 000 people resided in the city and thousands more in surrounding communities . The 1950s growth was spurred on by advances in air conditioning , which allowed both homes and businesses to offset the extreme heat experienced in Phoenix and the surrounding areas during its long summers . There was more new construction in Phoenix in 1959 alone than during the period of more than thirty years from 1914 to 1946 . 
 Like many emerging American cities at the time , Phoenix 's spectacular growth did not occur evenly . It largely took place on the city 's north side , a region that was nearly all Caucasian . In 1962 , one local activist testified at a US Commission on Civil Rights hearing that of 31 @,@ 000 homes that had recently sprung up in this neighborhood , not a single one had been sold to an African @-@ American . Phoenix 's African @-@ American and Mexican @-@ American communities remained largely sequestered on the town 's south side . The color lines were so rigid that no one north of Van Buren Street would rent to the African @-@ American baseball star Willie Mays , in town for spring training in the 1960s . In 1964 , a reporter from the New Republic wrote of segregation in these terms : " Apartheid is complete . The two cities look at each other across a golf course . " 
 = = = 1960s to present = = = 
 The continued rapid population growth led more businesses to the valley to take advantage of the labor pool , and manufacturing , particularly in the electronics sector , continued to grow . The convention and tourism industries saw rapid expansion during the 1960s , with tourism becoming the third largest industry by the end of the decade . In 1960 the Phoenix Corporate Center opened ; at the time it was the tallest building in Arizona , topping off at 341 feet . The 1960s saw many other buildings constructed as the city expanded rapidly , including the Rosenzweig Center ( 1964 ) , today called Phoenix City Square , the landmark Phoenix Financial Center ( 1964 ) , as well as many of Phoenix 's residential high @-@ rises . In 1965 the Arizona Veterans Memorial Coliseum was opened at the Arizona State Fairgrounds , west of downtown . When Phoenix was awarded a NBA franchise in 1968 , which would be called the Phoenix Suns , they played their home games at the Coliseum until 1992 , after which they moved to Talking Stick Resort Arena . In 1968 , the Central Arizona Project was approved by President Lyndon B. Johnson , assuring future water supplies for Phoenix , Tucson , and the agricultural corridor in between . The following year , Pope Paul VI created the Diocese of Phoenix on December 2 , by splitting the Archdiocese of Tucson , with Edward A. McCarthy as the first Bishop . 
 In the 1970s the downtown area experienced a resurgence , with a level of construction activity not seen again until the urban real estate boom of the 2000s . By the end of the decade , Phoenix adopted the Phoenix Concept 2000 plan which split the city into urban villages , each with its own village core where greater height and density was permitted , further shaping the free @-@ market development culture . Originally , there were 9 villages , but this has been expanded to 15 over the years ( see Cityscape below ) . This officially turned Phoenix into a city of many nodes , which would later be connected by freeways . 1972 would see the opening of the Phoenix Symphony Hall , Other major structures which saw construction downtown during this decade were the Wells Fargo Plaza , the Chase Tower ( the tallest building in both Phoenix and Arizona ) and the U.S. Bank Center . 
 Nominated by President Reagan , on September 25 , 1981 Phoenix resident Sandra Day O 'Connor broke the gender barrier on the U.S. Supreme Court , when she was sworn in as the first female judge . 1985 saw the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station , the nation 's largest nuclear power plant , begin electrical production . 1987 was marked by visits by both Pope John Paul II and Mother Teresa . 
 There was an influx of refugees due to low @-@ cost housing in the Sunnyslope area in the 1990s , resulting in 43 different languages being spoken in local schools by the year 2000 . The new 20 @-@ story City Hall opened in 1992 , and 1993 saw the creation of " Tent City " by Sheriff Joe <unk> , using inmate labor , to alleviate overcrowding in the Maricopa County Jail system , the fourth @-@ largest in the world . The famous " Phoenix Lights " UFO sightings took place in March 1997 . 
 Phoenix has maintained a growth streak in recent years , growing by 24 @.@ 2 % before 2007 . This made it the second @-@ fastest @-@ growing metropolitan area in the United States , surpassed only by Las Vegas . In 2008 , Squaw Peak , the second tallest mountain in the city , was renamed Piestewa Peak after Army Specialist Lori Ann Piestewa , an Arizonan and the first Native American woman to die in combat while serving in the U.S. military , as well as being the first American female casualty of the 2003 Iraq War . 2008 also saw Phoenix as one of the cities hardest hit by the subprime mortgage crisis , and by early 2009 the median home price was $ 150 @,@ 000 , down from its $ 262 @,@ 000 peak in 2007 . Crime rates in Phoenix have gone down in recent years , and once troubled , decaying neighborhoods such as South Mountain , Alhambra , and Maryvale have recovered and stabilized . Recently , downtown Phoenix and the central core have experienced renewed interest and growth , resulting in numerous restaurants , stores , and businesses opening or relocating to central Phoenix . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Phoenix is in the southwestern United States , in the south @-@ central portion of Arizona , and about halfway between Tucson to the south and Flagstaff to the north . The metropolitan area is known as the " Valley of the Sun " , due to its location in the Salt River Valley . It lies at a mean elevation of 1 @,@ 086 feet ( 331 m ) , in the northern reaches of the Sonoran Desert . 
 Other than the mountains in and around the city , the topography of Phoenix is generally flat , allowing the city 's main streets to run on a precise grid with wide , open @-@ spaced roadways . Scattered , low mountain ranges surround the valley : McDowell Mountains to the northeast , the White Tank Mountains to the west , the Superstition Mountains far to the east , and the Sierra Estrella to the southwest . On the outskirts of Phoenix are large fields of irrigated cropland and several Indian reservations . The Salt River runs westward through the city of Phoenix , and the riverbed is often dry or contains a little water due to large irrigation diversions . The community of Ahwatukee is separated from the rest of the city by South Mountain . 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 517 @.@ 9 square miles ( 1 @,@ 341 km2 ) ; 516 @.@ 7 square miles ( 1 @,@ 338 km2 ) of it is land and 1 @.@ 2 square miles ( 0 @.@ 6 km ² , or 0 @.@ 2 % ) of it is water . Even though it is the 6th most populated city , the large area gives it a low density rate of approximately 2 @,@ 797 people per square mile . In comparison , Philadelphia , the 5th most populous city has a density of over 11 @,@ 000 . 
 As with most of Arizona , Phoenix does not observe daylight saving time . In 1973 , Gov. Jack Williams argued to the U.S. Congress that due to air conditioning units not being used as often in the morning on standard time , energy use would increase in the evening . He went on to say that energy use would rise " because there would be more lights on in the early morning . " He was also concerned that daylight savings time would cause children to go to school in the dark . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 = = = = Neighborhoods = = = = 
 Since 1979 , the City of Phoenix has been divided into urban villages , many of which are based upon historically significant neighborhoods and communities that have since been annexed into Phoenix . Each village has a planning committee that is appointed directly by the city council . According to the village planning handbook issued by the city , the purpose of the village planning committees is to " work with the city 's planning commission to ensure a balance of housing and employment in each village , concentrate development at identified village cores , and to promote the unique character and identity of the villages . " There are 15 urban villages : Ahwatukee Foothills , Alhambra , Camelback East , Central City , Deer Valley , Desert View , Encanto , Estrella , <unk> , Maryvale , North Gateway , North Mountain , Paradise Valley , Rio Vista , and South Mountain . 
 The urban village of Paradise Valley is different than the nearby town of Paradise Valley . Although the urban village is part of Phoenix City , the town is independent . 
 In addition to the above urban villages , Phoenix has a variety of commonly referred @-@ to regions and districts , such as Downtown , Midtown , West Phoenix , North Phoenix , South Phoenix , Biltmore , Arcadia , and Sunnyslope . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Phoenix has a hot desert climate ( Köppen climate classification BWh ) , typical of the Sonoran Desert in which it lies . Phoenix has long , very hot summers and short , mild winters . The climate is arid , with plenty of sunshine and clear skies . Average high temperatures in summer are the hottest of any major city in the United States , and the city has more days when the temperature exceeds 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) than any other city in the United States . On average ( 1981 – 2010 ) , there were 107 days annually with a high of at least 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) , including most days from late May through early October . Highs top 110 ° F ( 43 ° C ) an average of 18 days during the year . Every day from June 10 through August 24 , 1993 , the temperature in Phoenix reached 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) or more , the longest continuous number of days ( 76 ) in the city 's history . Officially , the number of days with a high of at least 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) has historically ranged from 48 in 1913 to 143 in 1989 . For comparison , From 1870 through 2012 , New York City has seen a temperature of 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) or more a total of only 61 days . On June 26 , 1990 , the temperature reached an all @-@ time recorded high of 122 ° F ( 50 ° C ) . However , despite Phoenix 's claim to the most extreme temperatures , it does not have the highest average temperature . In that respect it comes in second to Miami , with an average daily temperature of 75 ° F ( 24 ° C ) , compared to Miami 's 77 ° F ( 25 ° C ) . 
 Most deserts undergo drastic fluctuations between day and nighttime temperatures , but not Phoenix due to the urban heat island effect . As the city has expanded , average summer low temps have been rising steadily . The daily heat of the sun is stored in pavement , sidewalks and buildings , and is radiated back out at night . During the summer , overnight lows greater than 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) are commonplace , as the daily normal low remains at or above 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) from June 22 to September 8 . On average , 67 days throughout the year will see the nighttime low at or above 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) . On July 15 , 2003 Phoenix set their record for the warmest minimum daily temperature , at 96 ° F ( 36 ° C ) . 
 The city averages approximately 300 days of sunshine , or over 85 % of daylight hours per year , and receives scant rainfall , the average annual total at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport from 1933 – 2015 being 7 @.@ 46 in ( 189 mm ) . Precipitation is sparse during most of the year , but the monsoon brings an influx of moisture . Historically , the monsoon officially started when the average Dew point was 55 ° F ( 13 ° C ) for three days in a row ; on average this event occurred around July 7 ; however , in 2008 the National Weather Service decreed that from that point forward , June 15 would be the official first day of the monsoon , and it would end on September 30 . The monsoon raises humidity levels and can cause heavy localized precipitation , occasional flooding , large hail , strong winds , the rare tornado , and dust storms , which can rise to the level of a haboob in some years . 
 July is the wettest month of the year ( 1 @.@ 05 in ( 27 mm ) ) , while June is the driest ( 0 @.@ 02 in ( 0 @.@ 51 mm ) ) . On September 8 , 2014 , the city of Phoenix recorded its single highest rainfall total by the National Weather Service with a total of 3 @.@ 30 in ( 84 mm ) . This total rainfall on this day measured more than Phoenix 's annual rainfall average and broke a 75 @-@ year @-@ old previous record of 2 @.@ 91 in ( 74 mm ) , set back on September 4 , 1939 . This storm was created from the remnants of Hurricane Norbert that had moved up from the Gulf of California and turned the city 's major interstates and low @-@ lying roadways into flood plains , stranding hundreds of motorists . Dewpoints range from 39 @.@ 0 ° F ( 4 ° C ) in June to 58 @.@ 2 ° F ( 15 ° C ) in August . 
 On average , Phoenix has only one day per year where the temperature drops to or below freezing . However , the frequency of freezes increases the further one moves outward from the urban heat island . Frequently , outlying areas of Phoenix see frost . Officially , the earliest freeze on record occurred on November 4 , 1956 , and the latest occurred on March 31 , 1987 . The all @-@ time lowest recorded temperature in Phoenix was 16 ° F ( − 9 ° C ) on January 7 , 1913 , while the coldest daily high temperature ever recorded was 36 ° F ( 2 ° C ) on December 10 , 1898 . The longest continuous stretch without a day of frost in Phoenix was over 5 years , from November 23 , 1979 , to January 31 , 1985 . Snow is a very rare occurrence for the city of Phoenix . Snowfall was first officially recorded in 1898 , and since then , accumulations of 0 @.@ 1 inches ( 0 @.@ 25 cm ) or greater have occurred only eight times . The heaviest snowstorm on record dates to January 21 – 22 , 1937 , when 1 to 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 5 to 10 @.@ 2 cm ) fell in parts of the city and did not melt entirely for three days . The most recent snow of significance fell on December 6 , 1998 , across the northwest portions of the valley that are below 2 @,@ 000 feet . During the 1998 event , Sky Harbor reported a dusting of snow . On December 30 , 2010 and February 20 , 2013 , graupel fell , although it was widely believed to be snow . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
 Due to its location in the Sonoran Desert , nearly all of the native desert fauna are occasionally found within Phoenix boundaries , but mostly in the suburbs and the remaining desert areas around the city . Mammal species found around the Phoenix area include coyote , <unk> , bobcat , occasionally jaguar , mountain lion , desert cottontail rabbit , jackrabbit , antelope ground squirrel , mule deer , and a few species of bats that roost in and around the city . There are many species of native birds , including <unk> 's quail , Gila woodpecker , mourning dove , white @-@ winged dove , the <unk> , the state bird , the cactus wren , and many species of raptors , including falcons , hawks , owls , vultures , such as the turkey vulture and black vulture , and eagles , including the golden and the bald eagle . The suburbs and surrounding areas of Phoenix are also home to a plethora of native reptile species , including the Western diamondback rattlesnake , Sonoran sidewinder , several other types of rattlesnakes , Sonoran coral snake , dozens of species of non @-@ venomous snakes , including the Sonoran gopher snake , and the California kingsnake , the <unk> monster , desert spiny lizard , several types of whiptail lizards , the <unk> , desert horned lizard , Western banded gecko , Sonora mud turtle , and the desert tortoise . Native amphibian species , include the Couch 's spadefoot toad , Chiricahua leopard frog , and the Sonoran desert toad . Phoenix and the surrounding areas are also home to a wide variety of native invertebrates , including the Arizona bark scorpion , giant desert hairy scorpion , Arizona blond tarantula , Sonoran Desert centipede , tarantula hawk wasp , camel spider , and tailless whip scorpion . 
 The Arizona Upland subdivision of the Sonoran Desert ( of which Phoenix is a part ) has " the most structurally diverse flora in the United States . " One of the most well @-@ known types of succulents , the giant saguaro cactus , is found throughout the city and its neighboring environs . Other native species are the <unk> , <unk> , barrel , prickly pear and cholla cacti , Palo Verde trees , various types of palm trees , <unk> , foothill and blue <unk> , ironwood , mesquite and the creosote bush . 
 The Greater Phoenix region is home to the only thriving feral population of rosy @-@ faced lovebirds in the U.S. This bird is a popular birdcage pet , native to southwestern Africa . Feral birds were first observed living outdoors in 1987 , probably escaped or released pets , and by 2010 the Greater Phoenix population had grown to about 950 birds . These lovebirds prefer older neighborhoods where they nest under untrimmed dead palm tree fronds . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Phoenix is the sixth most populous city in the United States according to the 2010 United States Census , with a population of 1 @,@ 445 @,@ 632 , making it the most populous state capital in the United States . Phoenix 's ranking as the sixth most populous city was a drop from the number five position it had held since the U. S. Census Bureau released population estimates on June 28 , 2007 . Those statistics used data from 2006 , which showed Phoenix 's population at 1 @,@ 512 @,@ 986 , which put it just ahead of Philadelphia . 
 After leading the nation in population growth for over a decade , the sub @-@ prime mortgage crisis , followed by the recession , led to a slowing in the growth of Phoenix . There were approximately 77 @,@ 000 people added to the population of the Phoenix metropolitan area in 2009 , which was down significantly from its peak in 2006 of 162 @,@ 000 . Despite this slowing , Phoenix 's population grew by 9 @.@ 4 % since the 2000 census ( a total of 124 @,@ 000 people ) , while the entire Phoenix metropolitan area grew by 28 @.@ 9 % during the same period . This compares with an overall growth rate nationally during the same time frame of 9 @.@ 7 % . Not since 1940 – 50 , when the city had a population of 107 @,@ 000 , had the city gained less than 124 @,@ 000 in a decade . Phoenix 's recent growth rate of 9 @.@ 4 % from the 2010 census is the first time it has recorded a growth rate under 24 % in a census decade . 
 The Phoenix Metropolitan Statistical Area ( MSA ) ( officially known as the Phoenix @-@ Mesa @-@ Glendale MSA ) , is one of 10 MSAs in Arizona , and was the 14th largest in the United States , with a total population of 4 @,@ 192 @,@ 887 as of the 2010 Census . Consisting of parts of both Pinal and Maricopa counties , the MSA accounts for 65 @.@ 5 % of the total population of the state of Arizona . Phoenix only contributed 13 % to the total growth rate of the MSA , down significantly from its 33 % share during the prior decade . Phoenix is also part of the Arizona Sun Corridor <unk> ( MR ) , which is the 10th most populous of the 11 <unk> , and the 8th largest by area . It had the 2nd largest growth by percentage of the <unk> ( behind only the Gulf Coast MR ) between 2000 and 2010 . 
 The population is almost equally split between men and women , with men making up 50 @.@ 2 % of city 's citizens . The population density is 2 @,@ 797 @.@ 8 people per square mile , and the median age of the city is 32 @.@ 2 years , with only 10 @.@ 9 of the population being over 62 . 98 @.@ 5 % of Phoenix 's population lives in households with an average household size of 2 @.@ 77 people . There were 514 @,@ 806 total households , with 64 @.@ 2 % of those households consisting of families : 42 @.@ 3 % married couples , 7 % with an unmarried male as head of household , and 14 @.@ 9 % with an unmarried female as head of household . 33 @.@ 6 % of those households have children below the age of 18 . Of the 35 @.@ 8 % of non @-@ family households , 27 @.@ 1 % of them have a householder living alone , almost evenly split between men and women , with women having 13 @.@ 7 % and men occupying 13 @.@ 5 % . Phoenix has 590 @,@ 149 housing units , with an occupancy rate of 87 @.@ 2 % . The largest segment of vacancies is in the rental market , where the vacancy rate is 14 @.@ 9 % , and 51 % of all vacancies are in rentals . Vacant houses for sale only make up 17 @.@ 7 % of the vacancies , with the rest being split among vacation properties and other various reasons . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 47 @,@ 866 , and the median income for a family was $ 54 @,@ 804 . Males had a median income of $ 32 @,@ 820 versus $ 27 @,@ 466 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 24 @,@ 110 . 21 @.@ 8 % of the population and 17 @.@ 1 % of families were below the poverty line . Out of the total population , 31 @.@ 4 % of those under the age of 18 and 10 @.@ 5 % of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line . 
 According to the 2010 Census , the racial breakdown of Phoenix was as follows : 
 White : 65 @.@ 9 % ( 46 @.@ 5 % non @-@ Hispanic ) 
 Black or African American : 6 @.@ 5 % ( 6 @.@ 0 % non @-@ Hispanic ) 
 Native American : 2 @.@ 6 % 
 Asian : 3 @.@ 2 % ( 0 @.@ 8 % Indian , 0 @.@ 5 % Filipino , 0 @.@ 5 % Korean , 0 @.@ 4 % Chinese , 0 @.@ 4 % Vietnamese , 0 @.@ 2 % Japanese , 0 @.@ 2 % Thai , 0 @.@ 1 % Burmese ) 
 Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander : 0 @.@ 1 % 
 Other race : 0 @.@ 1 % 
 Two or more races : 1 @.@ 7 % 
 Phoenix 's population has historically been predominantly white . From 1890 to 1970 , over 90 % of the citizens were white . In recent years , this percentage has dropped , reaching 65 % In 2010 . However , a significant portion of this decrease can be attributed to new guidelines put out by the U.S. Census Bureau in 1980 , when a question regarding Hispanic origin was added to the census questionnaire . This has led to an increasing tendency for some groups to no longer self @-@ identify as white , and instead categorize themselves as " other races " . 20 @.@ 6 % of the population of the city was foreign born in 2010 . Of the 1 @,@ 342 @,@ 803 residents over 5 years of age , 63 @.@ 5 % spoke only English , 30 @.@ 6 % spoke Spanish at home , 2 @.@ 5 % spoke another Indo @-@ European language , 2 @.@ 1 % spoke Asian or Islander languages , with the remaining 1 @.@ 4 % speaking other languages . About 15 @.@ 7 % of non @-@ English speakers reported speaking English less than " very well " . The largest national ancestries reported were Mexican ( 35 @.@ 9 % ) , German ( 15 @.@ 3 % ) , Irish ( 10 @.@ 3 % ) , English ( 9 @.@ 4 % ) , Black ( 6 @.@ 5 % ) , Italian ( 4 @.@ 5 % ) , French ( 2 @.@ 7 % ) , Polish ( 2 @.@ 5 % ) , American Indian ( 2 @.@ 2 % ) , and Scottish ( 2 @.@ 0 % ) . Hispanics or Latinos of any race make up 40 @.@ 8 % of the population . Of these the largest groups are at 35 @.@ 9 % Mexican , 0 @.@ 6 % Puerto Rican , 0 @.@ 5 % Guatemalan , 0 @.@ 3 % Salvadoran , 0 @.@ 3 % Cuban . 
 According to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center , 66 % of the population of the city identified themselves as Christians , while 26 % claimed no religious affiliation . The same study says that other religions ( including Judaism , Buddhism , Islam , and Hinduism ) collectively make up about 7 % of the population . In 2010 , according to the Association of Religion Data Archives , which conducts religious census each ten years , 39 % of those polled in Maricopa county considered themselves a member of a religious group . Of those who expressed a religious affiliation , the area 's religious composition was reported as 35 % Catholic , 22 % to Evangelical Protestant denominations , 16 % Latter @-@ Day Saints ( LDS ) , 14 % to nondenominational congregations , 7 % to Mainline Protestant denominations , and 2 % Hindu . The remaining 4 % belong to other religions , such as Buddhism , and Judaism . While there was an overall increase in the number of religious adherents over the decade of 103 @,@ 000 , that did not keep pace with the overall population increase in the country during the same period , which increased by almost three @-@ quarters of million individuals , resulting in the percentage drop . The largest aggregate increases were in the LDS ( a 58 % increase ) and Evangelical Protestant churches ( 14 % increase ) , while all other categories saw their numbers drop slightly , or remain static . Overall , the Catholic Church had an 8 % drop , while Mainline Protestant groups saw a 28 % decline . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The early economy of Phoenix was focused primarily on agriculture and natural resources , dependent on the " <unk> " of copper , cattle , climate , cotton , and citrus . With the establishment of the Southern Pacific rail line in 1926 , the opening of the Union Station in 1923 , and the creation of Sky Harbor airport by the end of the decade , the city became more easily accessible . The Great Depression affected Phoenix , but Phoenix had a diverse economy and by 1934 the recovery was underway . At the conclusion of World War II , the valley 's economy surged , as many men who had undergone their military training at the various bases in and around Phoenix returned with their families . The construction industry , spurred on by the city 's growth , further expanded with the development of Sun City . It became the template for suburban development in post @-@ WWII America , and Sun City became the template for retirement communities when it opened in 1960 . The city averaged a 4 percent annual growth rate over a 40 @-@ year period from the mid @-@ 1960s to the mid @-@ 2000s . 
 As the national financial crisis of 2007 – 10 began , construction in Phoenix collapsed and housing prices plunged . Arizona jobs declined by 11 @.@ 8 % from peak to trough ; in 2007 Phoenix had 1 @,@ 918 @,@ 100 employed individuals , by 2010 that number had shrunk by 226 @,@ 500 to 1 @,@ 691 @,@ 600 . By the end of 2015 , the employment number in Phoenix had risen to 1 @.@ 97 million , finally regaining its pre @-@ recession levels , with job growth occurring across the board . 
 As of 2014 , the Phoenix MSA had a Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) of just over $ 215 billion . The top five industries were : real estate ( $ <unk> ) , Finance and insurance ( $ <unk> ) , manufacturing ( $ <unk> ) , Retail trade ( $ <unk> ) , and health care ( $ <unk> ) . Government , if it had been a private industry , would have been ranked third on the list , generating $ 18 @.@ 9 billion . 
 In Phoenix , real estate developers face few constraints when planning and developing new projects . Accordingly , the city is prone to <unk> during times of economic prosperity . This explains the city 's higher @-@ than @-@ average vacancy rates . 
 As of 2010 , the top five employment categories were office and administrative support ( 17 @.@ 8 % ) , sales ( 11 @.@ 6 % ) , food preparation and serving ( 9 % ) , transportation and material moving ( 6 @.@ 1 % ) , and management ( 5 @.@ 8 % ) . The single largest occupation is retail <unk> , which account for 3 @.@ 7 % of the workforce . As of January 2016 , 10 @.@ 5 % of the workforce were government employees , a high number because the city is both the county seat and state capitol . The civilian labor force was 2 @,@ 200 @,@ 900 , and the unemployment rate stood at 4 @.@ 6 % . 
 Phoenix is currently home to four Fortune 500 companies : electronics corporation Avnet , mining company Freeport @-@ <unk> , retailer <unk> , and waste hauler Republic Services . Honeywell 's Aerospace division is headquartered in Phoenix , and the valley hosts many of their avionics and mechanical facilities . Intel has one of their largest sites in the area , employing about 12 @,@ 000 employees , the second largest Intel location in the country . The city is also home to : the headquarters of U @-@ <unk> International ; Best Western ; and Apollo Group , parent of the University of Phoenix . US Air / American Airlines is the largest carrier at Sky Harbor International Airport in Phoenix . Mesa Air Group , a regional airline group , is headquartered in Phoenix . 
 The military has a significant presence in Phoenix , with Luke Air Force Base located in the western suburbs . The city was severely impacted by the effects of the sub @-@ prime mortgage crash . However , Phoenix has recovered 83 % of the jobs lost due to the recession . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Performing arts = = = 
 The city has numerous performing arts venues , most of which are located in and around downtown Phoenix or Scottsdale . The Phoenix Symphony Hall is home to the Phoenix Symphony Orchestra , the Arizona Opera and Ballet Arizona . The Arizona Opera company also has intimate performances at its new Arizona Opera Center , which opened in March 2013 . Another venue is the Orpheum Theatre , which is home to the Phoenix Opera . Ballet Arizona , in addition to the Symphony Hall , also has performances at the Orpheum Theatre as well at the Dorrance Theater . Concerts also regularly make stops in the area . The largest downtown performing art venue is the Herberger Theater Center , which houses three performance spaces and is home to two resident companies , the Arizona Theatre Company and the Centre Dance Ensemble . Three other groups also use the facility : Valley Youth Theatre , <unk> Collaborative and Actors Theater . 
 Concerts can be attended at Talking Stick Resort Arena and Comerica Theatre in downtown Phoenix , Ak @-@ Chin Pavilion in Maryvale , Gila River Arena in Glendale , and Gammage Auditorium in Tempe ( the last public building designed by Frank Lloyd Wright ) . Several smaller theaters including Trunk Space , the Mesa Arts Center , the Crescent Ballroom , Celebrity Theatre , and Modified Arts support regular independent musical and theater performances . Music can also be seen in some of the venues usually reserved for sports , such as the Wells Fargo Arena and the University of Phoenix Stadium . 
 Several television series have been set in Phoenix , including Alice ( 1976 – 85 ) , the 2000s paranormal drama Medium , the 1960 – 61 syndicated crime drama The Brothers <unk> , and The New Dick Van Dyke Show from 1971 to 1974 . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 Dozens of museums exist throughout the valley . They include the Phoenix Art Museum , Arizona Capitol Museum , Arizona Military Museum , Hall of Flame Firefighting Museum , the Pueblo Grande Museum and Cultural Park , Children 's Museum of Phoenix , Arizona Science Center , and the Heard Museum . In 2010 the Musical Instrument Museum opened their doors , featuring the biggest musical instrument collection in the world . 
 Designed by Alden B. Dow , a student of Frank Lloyd Wright , the Phoenix Art Museum was constructed in a single year , opening in November 1959 . The Phoenix Art Museum has the southwest 's largest collection of visual art , containing more than 17 @,@ 000 works of contemporary and modern art from around the world . Interactive exhibits can be found in nearby Peoria 's Challenger Space Center , where individuals learn about space , renewable energies , and meet astronauts . 
 The Heard Museum has over 130 @,@ 000 square feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m ² ) of gallery , classroom and performance space . Some of the signature exhibits include a full Navajo <unk> , the Mareen Allen Nichols Collection containing 260 pieces of contemporary jewelry , the Barry Goldwater Collection of 437 historic Hopi <unk> dolls , and an exhibit on the 19th @-@ century boarding school experiences of Native Americans . The Heard Museum attracts about 250 @,@ 000 visitors a year . 
 = = = Fine arts = = = 
 The downtown Phoenix art scene has developed in the past decade . The <unk> organization and the galleries downtown have successfully launched a First Friday cross @-@ Phoenix gallery opening . In April 2009 , artist Janet <unk> inaugurated her monumental sculpture , Her Secret Is Patience , a civic icon suspended above the new Phoenix Civic Space Park , a two @-@ city @-@ block park in the middle of downtown . This netted sculpture makes the invisible patterns of desert wind visible to the human eye . During the day , the 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) -tall sculpture hovers high above heads , treetops , and buildings , the sculpture creates what the artist calls " shadow drawings " , which she says are inspired by Phoenix 's cloud shadows . At night , the illumination changes color gradually through the seasons . Author Prof. Patrick Frank writes of the sculpture that " ... most <unk> look on the work with pride : this unique visual delight will forever mark the city of Phoenix just as the Eiffel Tower marks Paris . " 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Phoenix is the home of a unique architectural tradition and community . Frank Lloyd Wright moved to Phoenix in 1937 and built his winter home , Taliesin West , and the main campus for The Frank Lloyd Wright School of Architecture . Over the years , Phoenix has attracted notable architects who have made it their home and have grown successful practices . These architectural studios embrace the desert climate , and are unconventional in their approach to the practice of design . They include the Paolo <unk> ( who created <unk> ) , Al Beadle , Will Bruder , Wendell Burnette , and Blank Studio architectural design studios . Another major force in architectural landscape of the city was Ralph Haver whose firm , Haver & Nunn , designed commercial , industrial and residential structures throughout the valley . Of particular note was his trademark , " Haver Home " , which were affordable contemporary @-@ style tract houses . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 The tourist industry is the longest running of today 's top industries in Phoenix . Starting with promotions back in the 1920s , the industry has grown into one of the top 10 in the city . Due to its climate , Phoenix and its neighbors have consistently ranked among the nation 's top destinations in the number of Five Diamond / Five Star resorts . With more than 62 @,@ 000 hotel rooms in over 500 hotels and 40 resorts , greater Phoenix sees over 16 million visitors each year , the majority of whom are leisure ( as opposed to business ) travelers . Sky Harbor Airport , which serves the Greater Phoenix area , serves about 40 million passengers a year , ranking it among the 10 busiest airports in the nation . 
 One of the biggest attractions of the Phoenix area is golf , with over 200 golf courses . In addition to the sites of interest in the city , there are many attractions near Phoenix , such as : Agua Fria National Monument , <unk> , Casa Grande Ruins National Monument , Lost Dutchman State Park , Montezuma 's Castle , Montezuma 's Well , and Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument . Phoenix also serves as a central point to many of the sights around the state of Arizona , such as the Grand Canyon , Lake Havasu ( where the London Bridge is located ) , Meteor Crater , the Painted Desert , the Petrified Forest , Tombstone , <unk> Caverns , Sedona and Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff . 
 = = = Other attractions and annual events = = = 
 Due to its natural beauty and climate , Phoenix has a plethora of outdoor attractions and recreational activities . The Phoenix Zoo is the largest privately owned , non @-@ profit zoo in the United States . Since opening in 1962 , the zoo has developed an international reputation for its efforts on animal conservation , including breeding and reintroducing endangered species back into the wild . Right next to the zoo , the Phoenix Botanical Gardens were opened in 1939 , and are acclaimed worldwide for their exhibits and educational programs , featuring the largest collection of arid plants in the U.S. South Mountain Park , the largest municipal park in the U.S. , is also the highest desert mountain preserve in the world . 
 Other popular sites in the city are : Japanese Friendship Garden , Historic Heritage Square , Phoenix Mountains Park , Pueblo Grande Museum , <unk> Castle , Camelback Mountain , Hole in the Rock , Mystery Castle , St. Mary 's Basilica , Taliesin West , and the Wrigley Mansion . 
 There is long list of annual events in and near Phoenix which celebrate the heritage of the city , as well as its diversity . Some of those are : the Scottsdale Arabian Horse Show , the largest horse show in the world ; Matsuri , a celebration of Japanese culture ; Pueblo Grande Indian Market , an event highlighting Native American arts and crafts ; Grand Menorah Lighting , an annual December event celebrating Hanukah ; <unk> , an annual December evening event at the Phoenix Zoo , featuring millions of lights ; the Arizona State Fair , begun in 1884 , an annual fair ; Scottish Gathering & Highland Games , an annual event celebrating Scottish heritage ; Estrella War , an annual event celebrating medieval life ; Tohono O 'odham Nation Rodeo & Fair , Oldest Indian rodeo in Arizona ; and the Chinese Week & Culture & Cuisine Festival , an annual celebration of Chinese culture . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Like many other western towns , the earliest restaurants in Phoenix were often steakhouses . Today , Phoenix is also renowned for its Mexican food , thanks to both its large Hispanic population and its proximity to Mexico . Some of Phoenix 's restaurants have a long history . The Stockyards steakhouse dates to 1947 , while Monti 's La Casa Vieja ( Spanish for " The Old House " ) was in operation as a restaurant since the 1890s , but closed its doors November 17 , 2014 . <unk> 's ( a Mexican restaurant chain ) was established in Phoenix in 1946 , and other major Mexican restaurants include Garcia 's ( 1956 ) and Manuel 's ( 1964 ) . The recent population boom has brought people from all over the nation , and to a lesser extent from other countries , and has since influenced the local cuisine . Phoenix currently boasts cuisines from all over the world , such as Korean , barbecue , Cajun / Creole , Greek , Hawaiian , Irish , Japanese , sushi , Italian , fusion , Persian , Indian , Spanish , Thai , Chinese , southwestern , Tex @-@ Mex , Vietnamese , Brazilian , and French . 
 The first McDonald 's franchise was sold by the McDonald brothers to a Phoenix entrepreneur in 1952 . Neil Fox paid $ 1 @,@ 000 for the rights to open an establishment based on the McDonald brothers ' restaurant . The hamburger stand opened in 1953 on the southwest corner of Central Avenue and Indian School Road on the growing north side of Phoenix , and was the first location to sport the now internationally known " golden arches " , which were initially twice the height of the building . Three other franchise locations opened that year , a full two years before Kroc purchased McDonald 's and opened his first franchise in Illinois . 
 = = Sports = = 
 = = = Major league = = = 
 Phoenix is home to several professional sports franchises , and is one of only 13 U.S. cities to have representatives of all four major professional sports leagues , although only one of these teams actually carry the city name and two of them play within the city limits . 
 The Phoenix Suns were the first major sports team in Phoenix , being granted a National Basketball Association ( NBA ) franchise in 1968 . They had originally played at the Arizona Veterans Memorial Coliseum before moving to America West Arena ( now Talking Stick Resort Arena ) in 1992 . The year following their move to the new arena , the Suns made it to the NBA finals for the second time in franchise history , losing to Michael Jordan 's Chicago Bulls , 4 games to 2 . The U.S. Airways Center hosted both the 1995 and the 2009 NBA All @-@ Star Games . 
 In 1997 , the Phoenix Mercury were one of the original eight teams to launch the Women 's National Basketball Association ( WNBA ) . They also play at Talking Stick Resorts Arena . They have won the WNBA championship three times : first in 2007 when they defeated the Detroit Shock , again in 2009 when they defeated the Indiana Fever , and in 2014 when they swept the Chicago Sky . 
 The Arizona Diamondbacks of Major League Baseball began play as an expansion team in 1998 . The team has played all of its home games in the same downtown park , now known as Chase Field . It is the second highest stadium in the U.S. ( after Coors Field in Denver ) , and is known for its swimming pool beyond the outfield fence . In 2001 , the Diamondbacks defeated the New York Yankees 4 games to 3 in the World Series , becoming the city 's first professional sports franchise to win a national championship while located in Arizona . The win was also the fastest an expansion team had ever won the World Series , surpassing the old mark of the Florida Marlins of 5 years , set in 1997 . 
 The Arizona Cardinals are the oldest continuously run professional football franchise in the nation . Founded in 1898 in Chicago , they moved to Phoenix from St. Louis in 1988 and currently play in the Western Division of the National Football League 's National Football Conference . Upon their move to Phoenix , the Cardinals originally played their home games at Sun Devil Stadium on the campus of Arizona State University in nearby Tempe . In 2006 they moved to the newly constructed University of Phoenix Stadium in suburban Glendale . Since moving to Phoenix , the Cardinals have made one championship appearance , Super Bowl XLIII in 2009 , where they lost 27 – 23 to the Pittsburgh Steelers . 
 Sun Devil Stadium held Super Bowl XXX in 1996 . The University of Phoenix Stadium hosted Super Bowl XLII in 2008 , and Super Bowl XLIX in 2015 . 
 The Arizona Coyotes of the National Hockey League moved to the area in 1996 , formerly known as the Winnipeg Jets . They originally played their home games at America West Arena in downtown Phoenix before moving in December 2003 to the Jobing.com Arena ( now named the Gila River Arena ) in Glendale . 
 * Note : The Cardinals won 2 of their championships while in Chicago , pre @-@ modern era . 
 = = = Other sports = = = 
 The Phoenix area hosts two annual college football bowl games : the Fiesta Bowl , played at the University of Phoenix Stadium , and the Motel 6 Cactus Bowl , which is held at Chase Field . 
 Phoenix has an arena football team , the Arizona Rattlers of the Arena Football League . Their games are also played at Talking Stick Resort Arena . They won their first of five AFL championships in 1994 ; in 2014 they won their third championship in a row . 
 The Greater Phoenix area is home to the Cactus League , one of two spring training leagues for Major League Baseball . With the move by the Colorado Rockies and the Arizona Diamondbacks to their new facility in Scottsdale , the league is entirely based in the Greater Phoenix area . With the Cincinnati Reds ' move to Goodyear , fifteen of MLB 's thirty teams are now included in the Cactus League . 
 The Phoenix International Raceway was built in 1964 with a one @-@ mile oval , with a one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind design , as well as a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile road course . It currently hosts several NASCAR events per season , and the annual Fall NASCAR weekend , which includes events from four different NASCAR classes , is a huge event . After thirty years of hosting various events , especially NHRA drag racing events , Firebird International Raceway ( FIR ) closed operations in 2013 , but the NHRA re @-@ opened the venue to NHRA events in 2014 under the new name , " Wild Horse Pass Motorsports Park " . 
 The city is also host to several major professional golf events , including the LPGA 's Founder 's Cup and , since 1932 , The Phoenix Open of the PGA . The Phoenix Marathon is a new addition to the city 's sports scene , and is a qualifier for the Boston Marathon . The Rock ' n ' Roll Marathon series has held an event in Phoenix every January since 2004 . 
 = = Parks and recreation = = 
 Phoenix is home to a large number of parks and recreation areas . The city of Phoenix includes national parks , county ( Maricopa County ) parks and city parks . Tonto National Forest forms part of the northeast boundary of the city , while the county has the largest park system in the country . The city park system was established to preserve the desert landscape in areas that would otherwise have succumbed to development and includes South Mountain Park , the world 's largest municipal park with 16 @,@ 500 acres ( 67 km2 ) . The city park system has 182 parks which contain over 41 @,@ 900 acres ( 16 @,@ 956 ha ) , making it the largest municipal park system in the country . The park system has facilities for hiking , camping , swimming , horseback riding , cycling , and climbing . Some of the other notable parks in the system are Camelback Mountain , Encanto Park ( another large urban park ) and Sunnyslope Mountain , also known as " S " Mountain . Papago Park in east Phoenix is home to both the Desert Botanical Garden and the Phoenix Zoo , in addition to several golf courses and the Hole @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Rock geological formation . The Desert Botanical Garden , which opened in 1939 , is one of the few public gardens in the country dedicated to desert plants , and displays desert plant life from all over the world . The Phoenix Zoo is the largest privately owned non @-@ profit zoo in the United States and is internationally known for its programs devoted to saving endangered species . 
 = = Government = = 
 In 1913 , Phoenix adopted a new form of government , switching from the mayor @-@ council system to the council @-@ manager system , making it one of the first cities in the United States with this form of city government , where a city manager supervises all city departments and executes the policies adopted by the Council . Today , Phoenix represents the largest municipal government of this type in the country . 
 The city council consists of a mayor and eight city council members . While the mayor is elected in a citywide election , Phoenix City Council members are elected by votes only in the districts they represent , with both the Mayor and the Council members serving four @-@ year terms . The current mayor of Phoenix is Greg Stanton , a Democrat who was elected in 2011 , and re @-@ elected in 2015 . The mayor and city council members each have equal voting power in regards to setting city policy and passing rules and regulations . The city 's website was given a " Sunny Award " by Sunshine Review for its transparency efforts . 
 = = = State government facilities = = = 
 As the capital of Arizona , Phoenix houses the state legislature , along with numerous state government agencies , many of which are located in the State Capitol district immediately west of downtown . The Arizona Department of Juvenile Corrections operates the Adobe Mountain and Black Canyon Schools in Phoenix . Another major state government facility is the Arizona State Hospital , operated by the Arizona Department of Health Services . This is a mental health center which is the only medical facility run by the state government . The headquarters of numerous Arizona state government agencies are in Phoenix , with many located in the State Capitol district . 
 = = = Federal government facilities = = = 
 The Federal Bureau of Prisons operates the Federal Correctional Institution ( FCI ) Phoenix which is within the city limits , near its northern boundary . 
 The Sandra Day O 'Connor U.S. Courthouse , the U.S. District Court of Arizona , is located on Washington Street downtown . It is named in honor of retired U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O 'Connor , who was raised in Arizona . 
 The Federal Building is at the intersection of Van Buren Road and First Avenue downtown , and contains various federal field offices and the local division of the U.S. Bankruptcy Court . This building formerly housed the U.S. District Court offices and courtrooms , but these were moved in 2001 to the new Sandra Day O 'Connor U.S. Courthouse . Before the construction of this building in 1961 , federal government offices were housed in the historic U.S. Post Office on Central Avenue , completed in the 1930s . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 By the 1960s crime was becoming a significant problem in Phoenix , and by the 1970s crime continued to increase in the city at a faster rate than almost anywhere else in the country . It was during this time frame when an incident occurred in Phoenix which would have national implications . On March 16 , 1963 , Ernesto Miranda was arrested and charged with rape . The subsequent Supreme Court ruling on June 13 , 1966 , Miranda v. Arizona , has led to practice in the United States of issuing a Miranda Warning to all suspected criminals . 
 With Phoenix 's rapid growth , one of the prime areas of criminal activity was land fraud . The practice became so widespread that newspapers would refer to Phoenix as the Tainted Desert . These land frauds led to one of the more infamous murders in the history of the valley , when Arizona Republic writer Don Bolles was murdered by a car bomb in 1976 . It was believed that his investigative reporting on organized crime and land fraud in Phoenix made him a target . Bolles was the only reporter from a major U.S. newspaper to be murdered on U.S. soil due to his coverage of a story . Max Dunlap was convicted of first @-@ degree murder in the case . 
 Street gangs and the drug trade had turned into public safety issues by the 1980s , and the crime rate in Phoenix continued to grow . After seeing a peak in the early and mid @-@ 1990s , the city has seen a general decrease in crime rates . The Maricopa County Jail system is the fourth @-@ largest in the world . The violent crime rate peaked in 1993 at 1146 crimes per 100 @,@ 000 people , while the property crime rate peaked a few years earlier , in 1989 , at 9 @,@ 966 crimes per 100 @,@ 000 . 
 In the most recent numbers from the FBI ( 2012 ) , those rates currently stand at 637 and <unk> , respectively . Since their peak in 2003 , murders have dropped from 241 to 114 in 2014 . 
 In 2001 and 2002 Phoenix ranked first in the nation in vehicle thefts , with over 22 @,@ 000 and 25 @,@ 000 cars stolen each year respectively . It has declined every year since then , stood at 7200 in 2014 , a drop of almost 70 % during that timeframe . The Phoenix MSA has dropped to 70th in the nation in terms of car thefts in 2012 . 
 As the first decade of the new century came to a close , Arizona had become the gateway to the U.S. for drug trafficking . Another crime issue related to the drug trade are kidnappings . In the late 2000s , Phoenix earned the title " Kidnapping capital of the USA " . The majority of the kidnapped are believed to be victims of human smuggling , or related to illegal drug trade , while the kidnappers are believed to be part of Mexican drug cartels . 
 = = Education = = 
 Public education in the Phoenix area is provided by 33 school districts . There are 21 elementary school districts , which contain over 215 elementary schools , and they are paired with 4 high school districts , which have a total of 31 high schools serving Phoenix . Three of the high school districts ( Glendale Union , Tempe Union and Tolleson Union ) only partially serve Phoenix . With over 27 @,@ 000 students , and spread over 220 square miles , The Phoenix Union High School District is one of the largest high school districts in the country , containing 16 schools and nearly 3 @,@ 000 employees . In addition , there are 4 unified districts , which cover grades K @-@ 12 , which add an additional 58 elementary schools and 4 high schools to Phoenix 's educational system . Of those four , only the Paradise Valley district completely serves Phoenix . Phoenix is also served by an expanding number of charter schools , with well over 100 currently operating in the city . 
 = = = Post @-@ secondary education = = = 
 Arizona State University is the main institution of higher education in the region . Its main campus is in Tempe . ASU also has campuses in northwest Phoenix ( ASU West Campus ) , downtown Phoenix ( ASU Downtown Campus ) , Mesa ( ASU Polytechnic Campus ) , and Glendale ( Thunderbird School of Global Management ) . ASU is one of the largest public universities in the U.S. , with a 2012 student enrollment of 72 @,@ 254 . 
 A branch of the University of Arizona College of Medicine is located near ASU 's downtown Phoenix campus . There is also a small satellite campus for Northern Arizona University ( based in Flagstaff ) located in Phoenix . 
 The Maricopa County Community College District includes ten community colleges and two skills centers throughout Maricopa County , providing adult education and job training . Phoenix College , part of the district , was founded in 1920 and is the oldest community college in Arizona and one of the oldest in the country . 
 The city is also home to numerous other institutions of higher learning . Notable institutions include : Barrow Neurological Institute , the world 's largest neurological disease treatment and research institution ; Grand Canyon University , a private Christian university initially founded in 1949 as a non @-@ profit school , it now operates as a for @-@ profit institution ; the University of Phoenix is the nation 's largest for @-@ profit university with over 300 @,@ 000 students at campuses throughout North America , as well as online ; and the Arizona Summit Law School , a private , for @-@ profit law school located in downtown Phoenix . 
 = = Media = = 
 The first newspaper in Phoenix was the weekly Salt River Valley Herald , established in 1878 , which would change its name the following year to the Phoenix Herald . The paper would go through several additional name changes in its early years before finally settling on the Phoenix Herald , which still exists today in an on @-@ line form . Today , the city is served by two major daily newspapers : The Arizona Republic , which along with its online entity , <unk> , serves the greater metropolitan area ; and the East Valley Tribune , which primarily serves the cities of the East Valley . The Jewish News of Greater Phoenix is an independent weekly newspaper established in 1948 . In addition , the city is also served by numerous free neighborhood papers and weeklies such as the Phoenix New Times , and Arizona State University 's The State Press . 
 The Phoenix metro area is served by many local television stations and is the largest designated market area ( DMA ) in the Southwest , and the 12th largest in the U.S. , with over 1 @.@ 8 million homes ( 1 @.@ 6 % of the total U.S. ) . The major network television affiliates are <unk> 15 ( ABC ) , KPHO 5 ( CBS ) , <unk> 12 ( NBC ) , <unk> 10 ( Fox ) , KASW 61 ( The CW ) , <unk> 45 ( MyNetworkTV ) , and <unk> 8 ( PBS , operated by Arizona State University ) . Other network television affiliates operating in the area include <unk> 21 ( TBN ) , <unk> @-@ DT 33 ( Univision ) , KFPH @-@ DT ( <unk> ) , <unk> 39 ( Telemundo ) , <unk> 48 ( <unk> ) , and <unk> @-@ TV 51 ( ION ) . KTVK 3 ( <unk> ) and <unk> 7 ( AZ @-@ TV ) are independent television stations operating in the metro area . <unk> @-@ TV , <unk> , <unk> @-@ TV , <unk> @-@ DT , KFPH @-@ DT , <unk> , <unk> @-@ LP , and <unk> @-@ TV are network owned @-@ and @-@ operated stations . 
 Many major feature films and television programs have been filmed in the city . From the opening sequences in Psycho , to the night attack by the aliens in 1953 's The War of the Worlds , to freeway scenes in Little Miss Sunshine , Phoenix has been the location for numerous major feature films . Other notable pictures filmed at least partially in Phoenix include Raising Arizona , A Home at the End of the World , Bill & Ted 's Excellent Adventure , Days of Thunder , The Gauntlet , The Grifters , Waiting to Exhale and Bus Stop . 
 The radio airwaves in Phoenix cater to a wide variety of musical and talk radio interests . Stations include classic rock formats of <unk> @-@ FM and <unk> @-@ FM , to pop stations like <unk> @-@ FM and alternative stations like <unk> @-@ FM , to the talk radio of <unk> @-@ AM , the Christian programming of <unk> @-@ FM and <unk> @-@ FM , and the country sounds of <unk> @-@ FM . With its large Hispanic population there are numerous Spanish stations , such as <unk> @-@ FM , <unk> @-@ FM , and <unk> @-@ FM . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 = = = = Air = = = = 
 Phoenix is served by Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport ( IATA : PHX , ICAO : <unk> ) , one of the ten busiest airports in the United States , serving over 110 @,@ 000 people on over 1000 flights per day . The airport is centrally located in the metro area near several major freeway interchanges east of downtown Phoenix . The airport serves more than 100 cities with non @-@ stop flights . 
 <unk> , Air Canada , British Airways , and WestJet are among several international carriers as well as American carrier American Airlines ( which maintains a hub at the airport ) providing flights to destinations such as Canada , Costa Rica , Mexico , and London . 
 The Phoenix @-@ Mesa Gateway Airport ( IATA : AZA , ICAO : <unk> ) in neighboring Mesa also serves the area 's commercial air traffic . It was converted from Williams Air Force Base , which closed in 1993 . The airport has recently received substantial commercial service with Allegiant Air opening a hub operation at the airport with non @-@ stop service to over a dozen destinations . 
 Smaller airports that primarily handle private and corporate jets include Phoenix Deer Valley Airport , located in the Deer Valley district of north Phoenix , and Scottsdale Airport , located just east of the Phoenix / Scottsdale border . There are also other municipal airports including Glendale Municipal Airport , Falcon Field Airport in Mesa , and Phoenix Goodyear Airport . 
 = = = = Rail and bus = = = = 
 Amtrak served Phoenix Union Station until 1996 when the Union Pacific Railroad ( UP ) threatened to abandon the route between Yuma , Arizona and Phoenix . Amtrak rerouted trains to Maricopa , 30 miles south of downtown Phoenix , where passengers can board the Texas Eagle ( Los Angeles @-@ San Antonio @-@ Chicago ) and Sunset Limited ( Los Angeles @-@ New Orleans ) . Though UP ultimately retained the trackage , Amtrak did not return , although the station remains . 
 Amtrak Thruway buses connect Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport to Flagstaff , Arizona for connection with the Los Angeles @-@ Chicago Southwest Chief . Phoenix is also served by Greyhound bus service , which stops at 24th Street near the airport . 
 Valley Metro provides public transportation throughout the metropolitan area , with its trains , buses , and a ride @-@ share program . 3 @.@ 38 % of workers commute by public transit . Valley Metro 's 20 @-@ mile ( 32 km ) light rail project , called Valley Metro Rail , through north @-@ central Phoenix , downtown , and eastward through Tempe and Mesa , opened December 27 , 2008 . Future rail segments of more than 30 miles ( 48 km ) are planned to open by 2030 . 
 = = = = Roads and freeways = = = = 
 Phoenix auto traffic depends on both surface streets and freeways . Freeways fall under the auspices of the Arizona Department of Transportation ( ADOT ) . Phoenix ranks first in the nation in the quality of its urban freeways , and the state as a whole ranks first in the nation in the quality of bridges . While being the sixth most populous city in the nation , Phoenix 's freeways do not suffer from the same type of congestion seen in other large cities . In fact , in a recent study , there is not a single stretch of freeway in Phoenix ranked in the 100 worst freeways for either congestion or unreliability . 
 Part of the reason for this is the extensive freeway system in the city , due to the majority of that system being funded by local , rather than federal funds , through a ½ cent general sales tax measure approved by voters in 1985 . Another offshoot of this local funding is that Phoenix is the largest city in the United States to have two Interstate Highways and no 3 @-@ digit interstates . 
 As of 2005 , the metropolitan area of Phoenix contains one of the nation 's largest and fastest growing freeway systems , consisting of over 1 @,@ 405 lane miles . The freeway system is a mix of Interstate , U.S. , and State highways which include Interstate 10 , Interstate 17 , US 60 , SR 51 , Loop 101 , Loop 202 , SR 51 , SR 143 , and SR 30 . There are still major additions to routes 101 , 202 and 303 underway , as well as several other smaller projects around the valley . State Routes 30 , 87 , 85 , and 74 connect Phoenix with other areas of the Valley and Arizona . 
 The street system in Phoenix ( and some of its suburbs ) is laid out in a grid system , with most roads oriented either north @-@ south or east @-@ west , and the zero point of the grid being the intersection of Central Avenue and Washington Street . The original plan was for the east @-@ west streets to be named after presidents , with the north @-@ south streets named after Indians , however the north @-@ south streets were quickly changed to numbers , with avenues running to the west of Central , and streets to its east . Major arterial streets are spaced one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) apart , divided into smaller blocks approximately every ⅛ of a mile . For example , Scottsdale Road , being the 7200 block , lies 9 miles to the east of Central Avenue ( 72 / 8 ) . 
 Freeways and state highways in Phoenix : 
 = = = = Alternate forms of transportation = = = = 
 The Maricopa Association of Governments has a bicycle advisory committee working to improve conditions for bicycling on city streets and off @-@ road paths . Bicycling Magazine ranked Phoenix the 15th most bicycle friendly city of fifty cities in the United States with a population greater than 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 Being located in the desert , Phoenix relies on a water supply delivered to the city via a system of canals which divert water from the region 's rivers and lakes , with the largest portion of the city 's water coming from the Colorado River through the Central Arizona Project 's canal . The city 's electrical needs are served primarily by Arizona Public Service , although some customers receive their electricity from the Salt River Project ( SRP ) . The main sources of electrical generation are nuclear , and coal power plants . Arizona is home to the Palo Verde Nuclear Power Station , the largest nuclear @-@ generating facility in the United States . SRP is also the largest water provider in Phoenix . 
 = = = Health care = = = 
 In 2011 ( the last year for which information is available ) , Phoenix had a slightly younger population than the country as a whole . While the United States had 13 @.@ 3 % of its population over the age of 65 , Phoenix 's percentage stood significantly lower , at 8 @.@ 1 % . Phoenix 's percentage of 18 @.@ 8 % in the next age group , 45 – 64 was also a great deal lower than the national average of 26 @.@ 6 % . This results in 73 % of Phoenix 's population being 44 or younger , as compared to the national percentage of 60 . 
 In 2010 ( the last year for nationally reported figures ) , Phoenix was at or below national levels for most reportable diseases , with the exception of both hepatitis A and B , where they were slightly over the national average ( 0 @.@ 8 and 1 @.@ 8 to 0 @.@ 5 and 1 @.@ 1 % , respectively ) . 
 In most major categories , Phoenix had a lower incidence of death than the rest of the nation . Only deaths due to Alzheimer 's ( 29 @.@ 7 to 27 @.@ 2 deaths per 100 @,@ 000 ) and pre @-@ natal conditions ( 5 @.@ 3 to 3 @.@ 8 deaths per 100 @,@ 000 ) were slightly above the national average . Deaths due to HIV and liver disease were exactly at the national average of 2 @.@ 5 and 10 @.@ 8 respectively . However , in several major categories , Phoenix had significantly lower indices of death : deaths by cancer stood at only 57 % ( 106 ) of the national average of 184 @.@ 6 deaths per 100 @,@ 000 ; deaths due to heart disease , 56 @.@ 1 % of the national rate of 249 @.@ 8 per 100 @,@ 000 . Cancer and heart disease were the two top causes of death in the country . 
 Low @-@ weight births ( 7 @.@ 5 % ) were below the national average of 8 @.@ 1 % , yet infant mortality ( 7 @.@ 2 % ) was higher than the rest of the U.S. ( 6 @.@ 1 % ) . Births to teen mothers were significantly higher than the rest of the country , sitting at 12 @.@ 2 % as compared to 8 @.@ 4 % nationally . 
 The Phoenix metropolitan area is serviced by 56 hospitals and medical centers . The Mayo Clinic , a not @-@ for @-@ profit medical practice and medical research group based in Rochester , Minnesota . Phoenix is one of two other locations with Mayo Clinics ( the other being Jacksonville , Florida ) . It is the first and largest integrated not @-@ for @-@ profit medical group practice in the world ; Mayo Clinic has been near or at the top of the U.S. News & World Report List of " Best Hospitals " for more than 20 years . St. Joseph 's Hospital and Medical Center is part of Dignity Health ( formerly Catholic Healthcare West ) , one of the largest healthcare systems in the western United States . St. Joseph 's is a not @-@ for @-@ profit hospital with special advocacy for the poor and underserved . John C. Lincoln North Mountain Hospital is a general medical and surgical hospital , which performed nearly at the level of nationally ranked U.S. News Best Hospitals in 4 adult specialties . Phoenix Children 's Hospital in Phoenix , AZ is nationally ranked in 5 pediatric specialties according to U.S. News & World Report . It is a 425 @-@ bed children 's teaching hospital . Arizona Heart Institute , opened in 1971 , is known internationally as one of the first freestanding outpatient clinics dedicated exclusively to cardiovascular health . Banner Health is a non @-@ profit health system in the United States , based in Phoenix . It operates 23 hospitals as well as specialized facilities . The health system is the 2nd largest employer in Arizona , behind Walmart , employing more than 35 @,@ 000 . Banner Health was created in 1999 through a merger of Lutheran Health Systems , based in North Dakota , and Samaritan Health System , based in Phoenix . Of the top 10 rated hospitals in the city ( top 12 in the state ) , 4 are Banner hospitals . Barrow Neurological Institute ( BNI ) at St. Joseph 's Hospital and Medical Center is the world 's largest dedicated neurosurgical center and a leader in neurosurgical training , research , and patient care . More operative neurosurgical procedures take place at BNI than at any other institution in the United States . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 With the creation of the Phoenix Sister Cities ( PSC ) organization in 1972 , Phoenix became a member of the international Sister City movement . It would take the organization several years to become official , not filing for Articles of Incorporation until 1975 , and not entering into their first Sister City agreement until 1976 , with Hermosillo , Mexico . The organization 's mission statement states their purpose is to " ... create people @-@ to @-@ people relationships between the residents of Phoenix and its sister cities through commercial , educational , cultural and artistic exchange programs and events that create and sustain global , long @-@ term , international partnerships and business opportunities for the citizens of Phoenix . " Currently , Phoenix has ten sister cities , as designated by the Phoenix Sister Cities Commission and Sister Cities International , shown in the table below . Phoenix and Prague have shared a Capital Cities relationship since May 1991 , which was expanded to Sister City Status in 2013 . 
 = Fast Five = 
 Fast Five ( alternatively known as Fast & Furious 5 or Fast & Furious 5 : Rio Heist ) is a 2011 American action film directed by Justin Lin and written by Chris Morgan . It is the fifth installment in The Fast and the Furious franchise . It was released first in Australia on April 20 , 2011 , and then in the United States on April 29 , 2011 . Fast Five follows Dominic Toretto ( Vin Diesel ) , Brian O 'Conner ( Paul Walker ) , and Mia Toretto ( Jordana Brewster ) as they plan a heist to steal $ 100 million from corrupt businessman Hernan Reyes ( Joaquim de Almeida ) while being pursued for arrest by U.S. Diplomatic Security Service ( DSS ) agent Luke Hobbs ( Dwayne Johnson ) . 
 When developing Fast Five , Universal Studios deliberately departed from the street racing theme prevalent in previous films in the series , to transform the franchise into a heist action series involving cars . By doing so , they hoped to attract wider audiences that might otherwise be put off by a heavy emphasis on cars and car culture . Fast Five is considered the transitional film in the series , featuring only one car race and giving more attention to action set pieces such as gun fights , brawls , and the heist of $ 100 million . The production mounted a comprehensive marketing campaign , marketing the film through social media , virtual games , cinema chains , automobile manufacturers , and at NASCAR races . 
 Fast Five achieved financial success , breaking box office records for the highest @-@ grossing April opening weekend and the second @-@ highest spring opening weekend , and surpassing Fast & Furious ( 2009 ) to become the highest @-@ grossing film in the franchise . Fast Five has grossed over $ 625 million worldwide , making it number 66 on the all @-@ time worldwide list of highest @-@ grossing films , in unadjusted dollars , and the seventh @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2011 . 
 Fast Five received mostly positive reviews , with critics praising the combination of comedy and " action sequences that toy idly with the laws of physics " ; some labeled it the best film in the series . Johnson was singled out for praise in numerous reviews for his performance , with critics calling him " the best thing , by far , in Fast Five " and remarking that scenes shared by Johnson and Diesel were often the " best moments " . Despite the positive response , many were critical of the film 's running time , considering it too long , and others criticized the treatment of women , stating " [ Females ] cameo strikingly in buttock form . Others actually have first names . " South American reviewers were critical of the film 's portrayal of Rio de Janeiro as a haven for drug trafficking and corruption , labeling it a " stereotype " . A sequel , Fast & Furious 6 , was released in May 2013 to box office success , surpassing Fast Five as the highest @-@ grossing film in the franchise . Another sequel , Furious 7 , released in April 2015 , soon surpassed Fast & Furious 6 , grossing over $ 1 @.@ 5 billion worldwide . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Dominic " Dom " Toretto is being transported to <unk> Prison by bus , his sister Mia Toretto and friend Brian O 'Conner lead an assault on the bus , causing it to crash and freeing Dom . While the authorities search for them , the trio escapes to Rio de Janeiro . Awaiting Dom 's arrival , Mia and Brian join their friend Vince and other participants on a job to steal three cars from a train . Brian and Mia discover that agents from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) are also on the train and that the cars are seized property . When Dom arrives with the rest of the participants , he realizes that one of them , Zizi , is only interested in stealing one car , a Ford GT40 . Dom has Mia steal the car herself before he and Brian fight Zizi and his henchmen , during which Zizi kills the DEA agents assigned to the vehicles . Dom and Brian are captured and brought to crime lord Hernan Reyes , the owner of the cars and Zizi 's boss . Reyes orders the pair be interrogated to discover the location of the car , but they manage to escape and retreat to their safehouse . 
 While Brian , Dom , and Mia examine the car to discover its importance , Vince arrives and is caught trying to remove a computer chip from it . He admits he was planning to sell the chip to Reyes on his own , and Dom forces him to leave . Brian investigates the chip and discovers it contains details of Reyes ' criminal empire , including the locations of US $ 100 million in cash . 
 Diplomatic Security Service agent Luke Hobbs and his team arrive in Rio to arrest Dom and Brian . With the help of local officer Elena Neves , they travel to Dom 's safehouse , but find it under assault by Reyes ' men . Brian , Dom and Mia escape ; Dom suggests they split up and leave Rio , but Mia announces she is pregnant with Brian 's child . Dom agrees to stick together and suggests they steal the money from Reyes to start a new life . They organize a team to perform the heist : Han , Roman , Tej , Gisele , Leo , and Santos . Vince later joins the team after saving Mia from being captured by Reyes ' men . 
 Hobbs and his team eventually find and arrest Dom , Mia , Brian , and Vince . While transporting them to the airport for extradition to the United States , the convoy is attacked by Reyes ' men , who kill Hobbs ' team . Hobbs and Elena are saved by Dom , Brian , Mia , and Vince as they fight back and escape , but Vince is shot in the process and dies . Wanting to avenge his murdered team , Hobbs and Elena agree to help with the heist . The gang breaks into the police station and tear the vault holding Reyes ' money from the building using their cars , dragging it through the city . After an extensive police chase , Dom makes Brian continue without him while he attacks the police and the pursuing Reyes , using the vault attached to his car to smash their vehicles . Brian returns and kills Zizi while Reyes is badly injured by Dom 's assault . Hobbs arrives on the scene and kills Reyes . Though Hobbs refuses to let Dom and Brian go free , he gives them a 24 @-@ hour head start to escape on the condition they leave the vault as it is . However , the vault is empty as it had been switched during the chase . After splitting the cash ( Vince 's share is given to his family ) , they go their separate ways . 
 On a tropical beach , Brian and a visibly pregnant Mia relax . They are met by Dom and Elena . Brian challenges Dom to a final , no @-@ stakes race to prove who is the better driver . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Hobbs is given a file by Monica Fuentes concerning the hijack of a military convoy in Berlin , where he discovers a recent photo of Dom 's former girlfriend Letty , who had been presumed dead . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Vin Diesel as Dominic Toretto 
 A professional criminal , street racer , and fugitive . Diesel was reportedly paid $ 15 million to star in and produce the film . 
 Paul Walker as Brian O 'Conner 
 A former FBI agent turned criminal . He is in a relationship with Mia Toretto . Walker did many of his own stunts for the film , training with parkour professional Paul Darnell to improve his movement . 
 Jordana Brewster as Mia Toretto 
 Dominic 's sister and the girlfriend of Brian O 'Conner . 
 Tyrese Gibson as Roman Pearce 
 Brian 's childhood friend . Gibson 's involvement was confirmed on June 30 , 2010 . Gibson was committed to Transformers : Dark of the Moon at the time he signed on to Fast Five , so he flew between Puerto Rico and Atlanta to accommodate both films . 
 Chris Bridges as Tej Parker 
 Brian 's and Roman 's friend from Miami . Ludacris confirmed his involvement in the film on July 12 , 2010 , when he stated he had arrived in Puerto Rico to begin filming . 
 Matt Schulze as Vince 
 Dominic 's childhood friend . Schulze had appeared in the first film , and it was confirmed on July 16 , 2010 , that he would be returning . 
 Sung Kang as Han Seoul @-@ Oh 
 A street racer who was Dominic 's business partner in the Dominican Republic . 
 Dwayne Johnson as Luke Hobbs 
 A Diplomatic Security Service agent . According to producer Vin Diesel , the role of Hobbs was originally developed with Tommy Lee Jones in mind . However , when reading feedback on his Facebook page , Diesel noted a fan stating a desire to see Diesel and Johnson in a film together . Diesel and Lin then redesigned the role for Johnson . Johnson wanted to work with Universal Studios , citing their support for him during his transition from wrestling to acting . He described the role as a former bounty hunter turned US Marshal and as " the government 's version of the best bounty hunter on the planet " . He undertook an extensive daily workout regime to enlarge his physique , wanting his character to appear as a " hunter " and to be formidable enough to present a credible threat to the protagonists . 
 Gal Gadot as Gisele 
 A former Mossad agent . Although Gadot had prior experience handling motorbikes , she was required to learn how to ride the larger , more powerful Ducati <unk> for the film . 
 Joaquim de Almeida as Hernan Reyes 
 A ruthless drug lord posing as a legitimate business man . It was confirmed on July 16 , 2010 , that Almeida would play Reyes . Having previously played several antagonists , he hesitated to take this role , but accepted it after speaking with Lin and hearing his take on the character . 
 Elsa Pataky as Elena Neves 
 A Rio police officer who works with Hobbs ' team and becomes Dominic 's love interest . It was confirmed on July 16 , 2010 , that Pataky would take this role . She underwent several days of tactical training with a police / military technical advisor and was required to learn how to handle her gun in a variety of situations to portray Elena believably . 
 The central cast is rounded out by Puerto Rican singers Tego Calderón and Don Omar as Leo and Santos respectively , members of the heist team . Michael Irby plays Reyes ' right @-@ hand man Zizi . Alimi Ballard , Fernando Chien , Yorgo Constantine , and Geoff <unk> portray Hobbs ' team members Fusco , Wilkes , Chato , and <unk> . Michelle Rodriguez appears in photographs as Letty Ortiz , Dominic 's girlfriend who is presumed dead following the events of Fast & Furious . Eva Mendes appears in an uncredited cameo as agent Monica Fuentes , reprising her role from 2 Fast 2 Furious . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 By February 3 , 2010 , it was confirmed that a fifth film , referred to as Fast Five , was going into production in the Fast and Furious series , and that a sixth film was being planned . It was also confirmed that Diesel , Walker , writer Chris Morgan and producer Neal H. Moritz would all return to their roles for the new installment . Moritz said that , following the success of Fast & Furious ( 2009 ) , which had reunited Diesel , Brewster , Walker and Rodriguez from the original film , the production wanted to bring them back again for the next one . Diesel felt that the story between the characters portrayed by himself and Walker should continue , envisioning it as three chapters , of which Fast Five would be the last . Diesel also wanted to bring back a variety of characters that had been in previous films without interacting , put them together and " have a lot of fun " . 
 The production had originally intended to film on location in Rio de Janeiro . However , the Puerto Rican government offered tax incentives totaling nearly $ 11 million , influencing the decision to film there , using Puerto Rico to represent Rio de Janeiro . 
 Universal intended to transform the series from street @-@ racing action into a series of heist films with car chases in the vein of The Italian Job ( 1969 ) and The French Connection ( 1971 ) , with Fast Five as the transitional movie . In April 2011 , Universal chairman Adam Fogelson said : 
 The question putting Fast Five and Fast Six together for us was : Can we take it out of being a pure car culture movie and into being a true action franchise in the spirit of those great heist films made 10 or 15 years ago ? 
 Fogelson said that the racing aspect had put a " ceiling " on the number of people willing to see films in the series , and that , by turning it into a series where car driving ability is just one aspect of the film , he hoped to increase the series ' audience . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Lin wanted to explore the elements of " freedom and family " in the film and collaborated with Morgan towards that ideal , both having worked together on previous installments of the franchise . Morgan worked with Diesel to produce a story arc that would further explore and develop Diesel 's character . An idea involving <unk> a large safe had been conceived by Morgan during the production of Fast & Furious , but that film 's premise did not work with how Morgan envisioned it . He later incorporated it into Fast Five . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 On a budget of $ 125 million , the shooting of Fast Five was scheduled for July and August 2010 . Shooting had started by July 14 , 2010 , but it took longer than forecast : the film was still being shot in early November 2010 . 
 Three film units worked simultaneously . The main cast were required to travel to Rio at the behest of Lin , who felt it important to understand the area and its culture to give the film a good sense of place . Diesel agreed that it was important to shoot key scenes in Brazil , commenting " we were able to shoot where other productions might not be able to shoot because our franchise has such good street cred . " 
 The Rio film unit captured aerial shots of the city including Sugarloaf Mountain , Fort Copacabana , Ipanema Beach , the Dona Marta lookout point and the Christ the Redeemer statue . Establishing shots of the heist team members were taken as each arrived in Rio . Gibson was filmed arriving in character at Galeão International Airport but , when it became publicly known that a scene was being shot at the airport , the cast and crew were mobbed . A similar situation occurred while Ludacris was shooting a scene in which his character buys a car to drive around the city . A scene where the completed heist team walk down a beach was filmed in Copacabana . 
 The rooftop chase across favelas was filmed in Puerto Rico , where the production could have more control over the area . The main and second filming units began filming in and around the capital , San Juan . The island 's mixture of tropical greenery and wide streets allowed the production to re @-@ create the densely populated favelas of Rio while completing the larger action and external scenes without incident . Production designer Peter Wenham had the task of transforming Puerto Rico and Atlanta into the previously scouted Rio locations in four weeks , as the production deemed Rio unsuitable for filming many of the larger scenes . Wenham had to reinforce buildings to support the heavy camera equipment , and to alter the colors of more than 30 buildings in the city to make them suitable for filming . His team needed to alter the buildings and strew debris to make the area look disheveled and appear as a Rio shantytown . Wenham remarked that , though the development was difficult , in part due to the heat , it was " a walk in the park " compared with filming in the Rio favelas themselves . Wenham aimed to maintain a monochromatic color scheme for the film , with muted blacks and grays , including his choice of colors for the cars used . He only chose to add a multitude of colors in the favela set . The Teodoro <unk> bridge connecting San Juan to neighboring Isla Verde was used to film the final showdown between Dom and Reyes , while a U.S. Navy base pier 60 miles outside San Juan stood in for the bridge for scenes involving the vault smashing cars . Action scenes were also filmed in the Hato Rey and Río Piedras districts of San Juan . 
 A foot pursuit in which Diesel , Brewster and Walker are chased across favela rooftops by Johnson and his team was filmed over the course of a week in the small hillside town of Naranjito , Puerto Rico . The scene was considered difficult to shoot , as pathways were slippery from moist tropical heat and the scene involved actors and stunt doubles running while avoiding dogs , chickens and other stray animals loose in the area . To capture the scene , a 420 @-@ foot cable @-@ camera rig was used to allow for a fast moving , birds @-@ eye view of the action , and cameras on cranes were set up on rooftops and in alleyways . Walker and Brewster made multiple takes of the conclusion of the scene , requiring them to jump nearly 30 feet from a building onto a waiting safety mat . In total the production employed 236 technicians , 13 @,@ 145 extras , and generated 16 @,@ 824 room nights at hotels , contributing $ 27 million to the Puerto Rican community . 
 Filming moved to Atlanta , Georgia for the final phase . Wenham and his team transformed a defunct train yard into an abandoned auto plant used by the protagonists as their headquarters . <unk> the train yard took place over several months . It was required to allow enough space for stunt drivers to drive into the building , and it had to include an integrated lighting system . The design team removed walls , hauled out old railway cars , suspended rusted car parts and auto @-@ plant car rails , and constructed smaller buildings within the main building to transform the site . With twenty @-@ five pages of script to shoot in a limited time , cinematographer Stephen Windon and his team spent three weeks setting up a series of high @-@ powered , motorized lights in the rafters of the building , that could be controlled remotely to allow lighting to be altered quickly while fully illuminating the set . An exterior scene involving Diesel and Walker attending a car party , involving several high @-@ performance cars , was filmed near the Georgia Dome . The train heist scene was filmed in Rice , California over three weeks . 
 A brawl scene between Johnson 's and Diesel 's characters was considered difficult to choreograph . The characters were written to be equally formidable , so the fight was punctuated with moments of character development , as Moritz felt this made the fight more exciting . The scene required several weeks of rehearsal and more than a week of filming by the actors and their stunt doubles , who incurred several minor injuries . 
 = = = Vehicle stunts = = = 
 The climatic vault heist required four weeks of preparation with every scene and camera angle determined in advance . The filmmakers hired stunt director Spiro Razatos and stunt coordinator Jack Gill to direct the second @-@ unit action filming . The pair initially began research for the stunt by testing the capabilities of the prop vaults and the Dodge Chargers driven by Diesel and Walker . Filmed on the streets of Hato Rey , the chaotic scene demanded specific timing that had to be synchronized with the various character interactions also occurring during the scene . Razatos chose to use a series of camera cars including a crane @-@ mounted camera atop a Porsche Cayenne , which allowed him to film from a variety of angles and heights while the vehicles were in motion , and a Subaru STI with a steel cage built around it that allowed for tracking shots . The Subaru 's driver Allen Padelford would occasionally accidentally collide with the vault creating a shower of sparks that inadvertently became useful footage . Padelford also developed a top @-@ mount dual @-@ drive system for the Chargers that allowed a stunt driver to control the vehicle from the roof , while the actor focused on their performance inside the car . 
 Six versions of the 8 @-@ foot high vault were built , each with specific uses . One of the vaults was a façade built onto the front of a <unk> and was used for filming close shots of the vault destroying street cars . Another vault was a reinforced , four @-@ wheel self @-@ drive vehicle that was connected to 30 @-@ foot cables and dragged through the streets of San Juan by the two stunt Dodge Chargers . The four @-@ ton vault was driven by stunt driver Henry <unk> , who had to wear a temperature controlled suit to compensate for the temperatures within that could exceed 100 degrees . A scene where the vault tumbled as the cars rounded a corner was a practical effect , and the result was more violent than the filmmakers had anticipated . Over 200 vehicles were destroyed by the vault during filming . Several stunts had to be cut including a final scene that would have seen the vault hanging over the edge of the Teodoro Moscoso Bridge . This stunt was abandoned when it was determined that even the powerful Chargers would not be able to support the vault 's weight . 
 The train heist presented several challenges . The filmmakers were required to effectively purchase a length of working railroad for filming and the trains necessary to ride the tracks . Then trucks had to be built that could race the train and meet the needs of the heist itself . Lin also required that the cars being carried on the train be able to jump out of the train at full speed . The scene took precise execution . The filmmakers chose to use cars they could cheaply replicate for the train heist — a 1972 De Tomaso Pantera , a 2007 Corvette GS Roadster , and a Ford GT40 — to avoid the expense of replacing a genuine $ 2 million Ford GT40 . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The first trailer for Fast Five was released on Diesel 's Facebook page on December 14 , 2010 , in what was believed to be the first ever use of this marketing approach . At the time , Diesel 's page had over 20 million subscribers ( one of the top five personal sites of celebrities ) , providing a wide audience for the trailer . Following this debut , other members of the cast with personal social media platforms released the teaser trailer to their own fans . 
 The Facebook game Car Town by Cie Games and the theater chain Regal Entertainment Group ( REG ) collaborated with Universal in a cross @-@ media marketing promotion . Car Town allowed players to view the trailer for the film in an REG @-@ branded , in @-@ game drive @-@ in theater and race around a virtual Rio de Janeiro . The game also featured missions and locations based on the plot of the film , while allowing players to race against Fast Five characters and take part in a bank heist . REG offered players of Car Town the ability to purchase tickets in @-@ game via Fandango for films at REG theaters . By buying these tickets in @-@ game , players were given promotional codes which in turn allowed them to unlock a virtual 1970s Dodge Charger , used by Diesel 's character in the original film . REG promoted the partnership between the film and the game in their theaters across 37 states , online and through social media , while Universal promoted it via their own Facebook , Twitter and YouTube sites . In October 2011 , it was claimed that over 200 million races had taken place within the virtual Rio de Janeiro environment in the six months since the campaign 's April launch . 
 Automobile manufacturer Dodge collaborated with Universal in marketing the film , supplying several Dodge Chargers to use in it . The partnership with Dodge included the " Fast Five " Dodge Charger driven by Robby Gordon in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series throughout April 2011 – the opening month of Fast Five . Dodge also sponsored the world premiere of the film in Rio de Janeiro . 
 = = Release = = 
 The premiere of Fast Five took place on April 15 , 2011 , at the Cinépolis Lagoon theater in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil . It was hosted by actress Susie Castillo and sponsored by car manufacturer Dodge . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Fast Five accrued $ 209 @,@ 837 @,@ 675 ( 33 @.@ 5 % ) in the United States and Canada and a further $ 416 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 ( 66 @.@ 5 % ) elsewhere – a total of $ 626 @,@ 137 @,@ 675 . Worldwide , it is the seventy @-@ first highest @-@ grossing film , the seventh highest @-@ grossing 2011 film , the third highest @-@ grossing film in the Fast & Furious series ( behind Fast Six and Furious 7 ) , and the fifth highest @-@ grossing Universal film . It achieved a worldwide opening weekend of $ 109 @.@ 6 million . The film reached a peak of number 55 on the list of all @-@ time highest @-@ grossing films worldwide in October 2011 . It became the highest @-@ grossing film of the series in worldwide grosses ( as well as separately in the US and Canada , and outside the US and Canada ) but was out @-@ grossed in all three cases by Fast & Furious 6 . 
 Outside the United States and Canada 
 Fast Five is the ninth highest @-@ grossing 2011 film , the third highest @-@ grossing film of the Fast and Furious franchise ( behind Fast 6 and Furious 7 ) and the fifth highest @-@ grossing Universal film . It was initially released in Australia on Wednesday , April 20 , 2011 – nine days before the release date in North America – followed by releases in the UK , South Korea and New Zealand . The earlier start in these countries was timed to coincide with their Easter holidays and avoided competition from forthcoming summer films , although this placed it in direct competition with Thor in some countries . By the end of its opening weekend , the film had accrued a total of $ 23 @.@ 4 million from these countries . On its second weekend , Fast Five earned $ 46 @.@ 3 million across 3 @,@ 139 theaters in 14 countries , ranking first at the box office in each of its ten new markets . For the overall weekend , it ranked second behind Thor . In the third weekend of release , Fast Five topped the box office in a further 44 countries , playing in a total of 6 @,@ 979 theaters across 58 countries . It ranked first during the weekend with $ 85 @.@ 8 million . It set an opening @-@ weekend record in the United Arab Emirates ( $ 1 @.@ 65 million ) , holding this record for two weeks before being out @-@ grossed by Pirates of the Caribbean : On Stranger Tides ( $ 2 @.@ 24 million ) . 
 Across all markets , the film scored Universal 's highest @-@ grossing opening weekend in Russia , Spain , Turkey , Argentina , Brazil , Chile , France , India , Italy , Malaysia , Mexico , the Netherlands , Thailand , the United Arab Emirates and Vietnam . 
 United States and Canada 
 Fast Five is the third highest @-@ grossing film in the Fast and Furious franchise ( behind Fast 6 and Furious 7 ) , the sixteenth highest @-@ grossing Universal film , the sixth highest @-@ grossing 2011 film , the second highest @-@ grossing heist / caper film , behind Inception , and the second highest @-@ grossing car @-@ racing film , behind Cars . According to Box Office Mojo , Fast Five is one of the most successful sequels of 2011 , when taking into account that it is one of few to have outperformed the immediately @-@ preceding instalment of its franchise in the US and Canada . 
 Fast Five opened on April 29 , 2011 , in 3 @,@ 644 theaters , It took $ 3 @.@ 8 million in midnight showings , setting new records for the Fast and the Furious series and Universal ( both records overtaken by Fast 6 ) . By the end of its opening day , it had accrued a total of $ 34 @.@ 4 million ( including midnight earnings ) , setting an April opening @-@ day record , replacing Fast & Furious ( $ 30 @.@ 1 million ) , and marking the third largest Friday outside of the summer and holiday period , behind The Hunger Games and Alice in Wonderland . In total , Fast Five earned $ 86 @.@ 2 million during its opening weekend , an average of $ 23 @,@ 655 per theater , with IMAX showings contributing over $ 8 million . It thus set an opening @-@ weekend record for the Fast and Furious series , for Universal , ( both records overtaken by Fast 6 ) and for films released in April ( the record was surpassed in 2014 by Captain America : The Winter Soldier ) . It also achieved the third @-@ largest spring opening , behind The Hunger Games and Alice in Wonderland . The film also set an opening @-@ weekend record among films starring Diesel , Walker , Brewster , Johnson , Moritz and Lin , records overtaken in all cases by Fast 6 . 
 The film opened dropped 62 % on its second weekend , earning $ 32 @.@ 4 million , and ranking second behind Thor . This result was partially attributed to the reduction in IMAX and large @-@ format screens showing the film ( reduced from 244 to 20 ) , since IMAX only contributed $ 510 @,@ 000 to the film 's second @-@ weekend gross . On June 4 , 2011 , 37 days after release in the US , the film became the first of 2011 to accrue more than $ 200 million . The film received a one @-@ week re @-@ release in IMAX theaters on September 30 , 2011 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Fast Five received positive reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 78 % , based on 192 reviews , with an average rating of 6 @.@ 4 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " <unk> , loud , and over the top , Fast Five proudly embraces its brainless action thrills and injects new life into the franchise . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 67 out of 100 , based on 29 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Roger Ebert gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , praising it as " a skillfully assembled 130 minutes at the movies , with actors capable of doing absurd things with straight faces , and action sequences that toy idly with the laws of physics " , while Richard Corliss of Time considered it " maybe the first great film of the post @-@ human era " . The New York Times said it deftly combined action and humor , stating " The only time you won 't be watching the screen is when your eyes have squeezed shut because you 're laughing so hard . " The Telegraph appreciated the presence of Johnson and Diesel together , calling it a " cosmic event " , and added that director Lin had revitalized the series , saying " the start and finish here , defying every imaginable law of physics , are series highs . " Empire also heaped praise on Johnson , saying " How to re @-@ ignite an ageing franchise ? Drop [ Johnson ] on it . The best thing , by far , in Fast Five ... Dwayne Johnson hulks through the movie leaving testosterone trails in his wake . " However , Empire took the view that the film itself was " not , by any normal criteria , a good film " , arguing that it was too long , although conceding that the action scenes , in particular the final car chase , made the film " the most entertaining in the series . " Anna Smith of Time Out London also commented that the film was too long and criticized the simplistic characters and dialog , but she called the film " slick " and stated that these criticisms could be overlooked because " it doesn 't take itself too seriously . " Variety focused on the roles of Johnson and Diesel , lamenting the current lack of 1980s @-@ style " brawny " leading men and of the " manly men " typical of the 1950s and 1960s , and calling their pairing " a welcome injection of tough @-@ guy vigor " . Variety commented that , based on Fast Five , a " sixth entry could be something worth waiting for " . The New Yorker called the action scenes " spectacular " , praising director Lin by saying his " direction and the sharp editing never confuse or lose momentum " , but also found the film too long and criticized the dialog , labeling it " subpar Ocean 's Eleven @-@ style banter " . On the characters , The New Yorker considered Walker and Diesel " serviceable " , but singled out Johnson for praise for bringing a " hip , comic knowingness to his role ... his enjoyment is infectious and keeps the movie speeding along . " 
 Total Film welcomed the return of Ludacris and Tyrese Gibson to " [ inject ] the film with much @-@ needed laughs " and felt that Johnson fit into the established cast with ease , though it believed the film itself was " no mould @-@ breaker . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone , who disliked the previous movies , gave the film 2 @.@ 5 stars out of 4 , praising the transformation of the series into a heist film ( " Damn it , it works " ) , commenting favorably on scenes between Johnson and Diesel , and judging that " Fast Five will push all your action buttons , and some you haven 't thought of . " The Los Angeles Times felt that scenes shared by Diesel and Johnson were the " best moments " and appreciated the humor , but considered the pacing a " strange mix " , switching between exposition , comedy scenes and then sudden action . The reviewer echoed other critics ' sentiments concerning the running time of the film , but concluded that " the sheer audacity of " Fast Five " is kind of breathtaking in a metal @-@ twisting , death @-@ defying , mission @-@ implausible , B @-@ movie @-@ on @-@ steroids kind of way " , labeling it the " best " of the series . 
 Both Empire and Variety noted that the final chase scene of Fast Five contained allusions to Bad Boys II ( 2003 ) : Variety stated that the scene " seems inspired in part by a similarly spectacular scene in Bad Boys II " ; Empire said that it " nearly out @-@ Bad @-@ Boys @-@ 2s Bad Boys 2 " . 
 Not all reviews were positive , however . Film4 criticized both the film 's long running time and its treatment of female characters , remarking " [ Females ] cameo strikingly in buttock form . Others actually have first names " . But Film4 praised Johnson 's role as DSS agent Luke Hobbs , saying he " provides a more credible anti @-@ antagonist to our anti @-@ heroes than the straight up villains can manage " . The Boston Herald gave a more mixed reaction : it derided the lack of realism as removing any sense of threat to the protagonists , but conceded that " these films may be robustly anti @-@ intellectual and deplorably commercialized , but they are the envy of the rest of the world . " Despite giving the film a positive review and praising the action , The Hollywood Reporter was critical of its stars , saying " it 's clear the budget wasn 't used on acting lessons for the cast . " The New York Post 's Kyle Smith gave the film a negative review , criticizing the shortage of car @-@ related action before the finale and calling it less a " <unk> " and more a " knucklehead Ocean 's Eleven " . Smith went on to call the film 's villain Reyes ( Almeida ) " unforgivably dull " and considered the long running time a result of taking " that long to read every item in the cliché dictionary . " Time Out New York stated that " The Fast and the Furious movies haven 't exactly gotten better as they 've gone along " but gave the director a backhanded compliment , saying " Justin Lin , taking his third turn behind the franchise 's wheel , is at least a competent hack . " Ebert was more complimentary , saying " Justin Lin is emerging as a first @-@ rate director in this second @-@ rate genre " and Rolling Stone managed " Justin Lin , who misdirected the last two sequels , finds his pace this time , staging dynamite action . " 
 = = = Brazilian critics = = = 
 Brazilian reviewers criticized the use of Rio de Janeiro in the film , claiming it was stereotyped as " dominated by heavily armed drug traffickers , corrupt police , and sexy women " . O Globo accused the producers of using " aerial shots and quick editing " to " deceive the viewer " into believing that the criminal acts take place in Rio . Globo also reacted negatively to the use of " foreigners " to represent Brazilians , " speaking Portuguese with laughable accents " . Veja agreed with O Globo , saying , " The city of Rio and the Rio Film Commission supported the production . But the image that will spread across the world is exactly what the city doesn 't want . " 
 = = = Accolades and recognition = = = 
 Tyler 's score for Fast Five earned him an award at the 2011 BMI Film Music Awards . The marketing components of Fast Five were nominated for three Golden Trailer Awards , winning one for Best Summer Blockbuster 2011 TV Spot . For the 2011 Teen Choice Awards , Fast Five received five nominations , including Choice Action Movie and Choice Action Movie Actress . Three of the five available nomination slots for Choice Action Movie Actor were taken by actors from Fast Five : Vin Diesel , Dwayne Johnson and Paul Walker . The film ultimately received one Teen Choice Award , for Choice Action Movie . The film received two nominations for the 2011 People 's Choice Awards for Favorite Action Movie , and Favorite Action Movie Star for Diesel . Diesel was nominated for an NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actor in a Motion Picture . The film 's sound and music editing was nominated for a Golden Reel Award for Sound Effects and Foley in a Feature Film by the Motion Picture Sound Editors society . The film also received two Saturn Award nominations from the Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films for Best Action / Adventure Film and Best Editing for Kelly Matsumoto , Fred Raskin , and Christian <unk> . 
 In December , 2011 , Richard Corliss ranked the film number 10 on his list of the Top 10 Best Movies of 2011 , saying , " A carnival of roguish heroes and pretty girls , car chases and cliffhangers , Fast Five is as much a tribute as The Artist or Hugo to the cinema 's primal thrills . " Empire placed the film number 20 on its list of the Top 20 Films of 2011 , while IGN named it the " Best Action Movie " of 2011 . Fast Five was listed as the number 1 most illegally downloaded film of 2011 on BitTorrent with approximately 9 @.@ 3 million downloads . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 On August 2 , 2011 , USA Network purchased the rights to the United States network premiere of Fast Five . The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in the United Kingdom on September 5 , 2011 , and in the United States on October 4 , 2011 , in 2 @.@ 35 : 1 aspect ratio with DTS HD Master Audio 5 @.@ 1 sound . A triple pack was also released containing a Blu @-@ ray , DVD , and digital copy of the film in either Blu @-@ ray or DVD packaging . The Blu @-@ ray versions contains several exclusive additional features , including behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage , cast and crew interviews , a " virtual car garage " that provides further details on the vehicles used in the production , and music tracks from the film . Both the DVD and the Blu @-@ ray contain a theatrical and extended cut of the film , director commentary , deleted scenes , a gag reel and features on the three central characters . Commenting on the extended cut , Lin said " this is the version that I prefer . " During first week sales in the United States the DVD was the number 1 selling DVD , the number 1 rental DVD , and the number 2 selling Blu @-@ ray disc behind the Blu @-@ ray re @-@ release of The Lion King . 57 % of the total first week disc sales of Fast Five were the Blu @-@ ray disc version . 
 To promote the release of the DVD and Blu @-@ ray , Universal Studios Home Entertainment sponsored the first race of the NASCAR Camping World Truck Series , at the Chicagoland Speedway . The event , renamed as the " Fast Five 225 " , took place on September 16 , 2011 , with Gibson and Brewster as Grand Marshals ; Gibson sang the American national anthem for the event and Brewster acted as honorary starter . The event served as the first race in the Chase for the Sprint Cup and was won by Austin Dillon . The deal marked the first time that a film promotion had been allowed to take over a NASCAR race as a title sponsor . Continuing the partnership with Car Town , the game was used as the exclusive means of pre @-@ ordering the Blu @-@ ray / DVD combo release at Walmart , via players clicking on a Walmart @-@ themed truck , which in turn provided the player with Fast Five branded in @-@ game rewards . 
 = = Music = = 
 Fast Five ( Original Motion Picture Soundtrack ) was released on iTunes on April 25 , 2011 , and on CD on May 3 , 2011 , by ABKCO Records . It features many reggaeton and rhythmic Latin tracks , including songs by Don Omar , Busta Rhymes and many others , with three pieces from Tyler 's original score for the film : " Assembling the Team " , " Mad Skills " and " Fast Five Suite " . Music guide AllMusic awarded the album 3 stars out of 5 , commenting that " The goal here is to accompany a picture that , as usual , is packed with driving sequences involving flashy cars , beautiful , scantily clad women , and muscled men . That goal is accomplished with this beat @-@ heavy music and the gruff , aggressive Latin rapping . " Ludacris collaborated with Slaughterhouse and Claret Jai for the soundtrack 's lead single , " <unk> Dangerous " . 
 The film score was released on May 3 , 2011 , by Varèse Sarabande . The release has 25 tracks and plays for 78 minutes . The score spent four weeks on the Billboard 200 , peaking as high as number 60 and reaching number 24 on the digital albums chart and number 5 on the soundtrack @-@ only chart . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sixth film in The Fast and the Furious series was planned in February 2010 as development on Fast Five began , and in April 2011 , it was confirmed that Morgan had begun work on a script for the potential sixth film . Diesel and Moritz returned as producers for the film and Lin would return to direct . Fast & Furious 6 was released on May 24 , 2013 . 
 = Cornell Plantations = 
 The Cornell Plantations botanical gardens located adjacent to the Cornell University campus in Ithaca , New York . The Plantations proper consist of 25 acres ( 10 ha ) of botanical gardens and 150 acres ( 61 ha ) of the F.R. Newman Arboretum . The greater Plantations includes 40 different nature areas around Cornell and Ithaca , covering 4 @,@ 300 acres ( 1 @,@ 700 ha ) . 
 The origin of the Plantations dates back to Cornell 's beginning in the mid @-@ 19th century and are part of the university 's longtime interest in agriculture , forestry , and the natural sciences . The Plantations saw a major planting effort during the 1930s and assumed their present name in 1944 . Gardens and facilities have continually expanded , including a construction program at the start of the 21st century . The Plantations also maintains four gardens on Cornell 's central campus . The Plantations offers three courses for academic credit , are used as a resource by other classes , host a number of informal lectures and tours , and have played a part in many scholarly papers . As of 2009 , the Plantations had a $ 2 @.@ 9 million annual operating budget . 
 The botanical gardens at the Plantations specialize in trees and shrubs native to New York State . The themed herb garden is especially noted . The Plantations have been the subject of several books and films over the years , are open daily without charge , and have been recommended as a visitation site by a number of travel books and newspaper travel sections . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the founding of Cornell University , Ezra Cornell had a large farm on the East Hill above Ithaca , New York . As part of locating New York State 's land @-@ grant college in Ithaca , Cornell offered to donate the farm for use as a campus . In 1862 , Cornell 's first president , Andrew Dickson White , wrote a colleague that a great university should include a botanical garden : “ It must have the best of Libraries – collections in different departments – Laboratory – Observatory – Botanical Garden perhaps … ” At the university 's opening ceremony in 1868 , Louis Agassiz , an internationally @-@ known naturalist , remarked that no other area could compete with Cornell 's surroundings in the opportunities offered for the study of natural history . From its inception , Cornell formed a reputation for creative means of research into the natural sciences , including the establishment of the pioneering College of Agriculture . 
 When the university built its first women 's dormitory in 1875 , it included a conservatory for growing plants and a specimen tree collection . Separately , the College of Veterinary Medicine started a specialized garden of plants that are poisonous to livestock . Cornell 's farm included two deep gorges which flanked both sides of the early campus , and as the campus developed the gorges remained undeveloped and filled with native plants and wildlife . These became the start of the on @-@ campus gardens and arboretum . A goal of creating an explicit arboretum was proposed in various university reports to trustees and other publications in 1877 , 1883 , 1908 , and 1914 . 
 Cornell 's acquisition of off @-@ campus forest land dates to 1898 and the founding of the New York State College of Forestry , which was the first forestry college in North America . As a part of establishing that school , Cornell acquired a demonstration forest near Saranac Lake in the Adirondack Mountains . The harvesting of trees from that forest drew heated opposition from neighboring land owners . Although political opposition caused Cornell to transfer the forest lands under the " forever wild " protection of the Adirondack Forest Preserve and to transfer Cornell 's forestry education programs to its College of Agriculture , Cornell continued to acquire forest land remote from its main campus . In 1935 , the decision to create an arboretum was finally made and the university established the Arboretum as a separate department . From 1935 to 1940 , the federal government 's Civilian Conservation Corps Camp SP 48 devoted 170 to 200 workers to planting trees , constructing dikes , and building trails in order to develop the Arboretum . 
 In 1944 , Liberty Hyde Bailey , the Dean emeritus of the College of Agriculture and a horticulturalist highly regarded around the world , proposed the present name " Cornell Plantations " for an expanded department in a report that reflected the work of a number of botany and horticulture professors . By 1948 , the Plantations numbered 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 ha ) and the first Director was named , John F. <unk> . During a 1949 broadcast on widely heard radio station WGY , Cornell emeritus professor Bristow Adams reflected upon the now five @-@ year @-@ old Plantations , and stated that the relationship between humans and things that grow were of utmost importance and that gardens , forests , and parks were everlasting collections that " have the care and <unk> of generation after generation . " 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , the sculpture garden was constructed in the middle of the Arboretum as a project of the College of Architecture Art and Planning . By 1965 , the Plantations consisted of 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 610 ha ) . By 1970 , the university was issuing a publication called The Cornell Plantations , which contained general articles on nature and environmental topics . Beginning in the early 1970s , the Arboretum was upgraded with new roads and plantings funded by major gifts from oil industry figure Floyd R. Newman , and in 1982 the Arboretum was formally named in his honor ( as were several other buildings and facilities at Cornell over the years ) . 
 During the 1980s , the Plantations experienced people stealing pines and firs for Christmas trees , with in some cases trees being taken that were worth several thousand dollars . A successful countermeasure created by Gerardo <unk> at the Plantations was covering the trees with a harmless yet visually unpleasant " Ugly Mix " spray that included hydrated limestone , an anti @-@ desiccant , and water . The technique was subsequently recommended to others worried about tree theft . In 2009 , the Plantations suffered from a series of thefts of new or rare plants . A director at the Plantations , which had no security in place , said that the thieves must have been experienced horticulturalists and that the loss of research and species had been a demoralizing experience . 
 At the start of the 21st century , the Plantations embarked on a construction program which included : Arboretum Center ( 2000 ) , Horticultural Center ( 2001 ) , <unk> Winter Garden ( 2002 ) , Ramin Administration Building ( 2003 ) , Rowley Carpenter Shop ( 2004 ) , Plant Production Facility ( 2007 ) , and Lewis Education Center ( 2008 ) . The new $ 7 @.@ 5 million Brian C. Nevin Welcome Center was dedicated on October 28 , 2010 . Five years in the designing and building , the new facility was built to LEED gold standards and won a 2010 Award of Excellence from Canadian Architect magazine . 
 = = Current extent = = 
 = = = F.R. Newman Arboretum = = = 
 The F.R. Newman arboretum contains the following collections on 150 acres ( 61 ha ) : 
 Chestnut Collection 
 Established in 2000 with 5 transplanted , grafted chestnut trees for each of 5 cultivars . At present 4 trees remain , representing 3 of the 5 cultivars . Eventually 25 cultivars will be represented . 
 Conifer Collection 
 Several sites with 21 taxa of firs ( excluding dwarf forms ) , 39 of pines , and 25 of spruces . 
 Flowering Crabapple Collection 
 83 cultivars in a new collection ; many trees are quite small . 
 Maple Collection 
 One of the core collections . One site contains Red Maple ( Acer rubrum ) , Sugar Maple ( Acer saccharum ) , Silver Maple ( Acer saccharinum ) , and Striped Maple ( Acer <unk> ) . Another contains an <unk> of Acer x <unk> with an understory of shade @-@ loving maples , including <unk> maples ( Acer <unk> and Acer <unk> ) and small trees similar to the Japanese maple , such as Acer <unk> and Acer <unk> . A third site consists primarily of small Asian Maples . 
 Oak Collection 
 50 oak taxa in a fairly young collection , with a goal of acquiring all species hardy in Zone 5 . 
 Urban Tree Collection 
 Planted throughout the arboretum . 
 Walnut Collection 
 The oldest collection , planted in the early 1960s . 20 cultivars , representing Black Walnut ( Juglans nigra ) , Butternut ( Juglans cinerea ) and <unk> ( Juglans <unk> ) . 
 In addition , the arboretum features an extensive set of trails . 
 = = = Botanical gardens = = = 
 The botanical gardens specialize in trees and shrubs native to New York State . Overall , they contain a wide variety of ornamental , useful , and native plants on 25 acres ( 10 ha ) , arranged into gardens as follows : 
 Container Gardens 
 Ornamental plants suitable for growing in containers , such as <unk> <unk> , Agave , <unk> esculenta , Amaranthus , Canna × generalis , <unk> , Coleus , <unk> , Cordyline , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> erecta , Eucalyptus cinerea , <unk> , Hibiscus <unk> , <unk> , Lantana camara , <unk> major , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . 
 Deans Garden 
 Herbaceous and woody plants , many uncommon in the Ithaca area , such as <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 Decorative Arts Flower Garden 
 A wide variety of flowers including sunflower , carnation , rose , poppy , peony , iris , lily , chrysanthemum , daisy , and tulip . 
 Flowering Shrub and Ornamental Grass Garden 
 Flowering shrubs , ornamental grasses , and perennials including <unk> . Shrubs include Hypericum , Hydrangea , and Potentilla ; grasses include Calamagrostis , <unk> latifolium , Festuca , Miscanthus , Molinia , Panicum <unk> , Pennisetum <unk> , and Saccharum <unk> . 
 <unk> Garden 
 <unk> including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> orientalis , Hosta , Lysimachia , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 Robison Herb Garden 
 Opened in 1974 after 20 years of being envisioned and 2 years of construction , it consists of 17 raised beds of herbs , arranged by theme as follows : Ornamental Herbs ; Herbs of the Ancients ; Herbs in Literature ; Bee Herbs ; Salads and <unk> ; Edible flowers ; Herbs of the Native Americans ; Medicinal Herbs ; Culinary Herbs ; Economic Herbs ; Dye Herbs ; Tea Herbs ; Fragrant Herbs ; Sacred Herbs ; Scented <unk> ; Savory Seed Herbs ; and <unk> @-@ <unk> and <unk> . The sources to begin the garden came from around the world , with some species linked to cultures from antiquity . More than 500 plants are included . The design inspired plans for a similar herb garden in New London , Connecticut in 1980 . 
 Heritage Vegetable Garden 
 Four beds , representing typical vegetables grown in the northeastern United States in the 18th century , the late 19th century , World Wars I and II , and today 's gardens . Such gardens are not common . The gardener in charge of it has been mentioned in newspaper columns as an expert in growing tomatoes . 
 International Crop and Weed Garden 
 Crop plants and economically important plants from around the world , including bananas , sugar cane , coffee , tea , sorghum , cotton , grasses , and forbs ( non @-@ grass plants eaten by livestock ) ; also a collection of weeds arranged in an attractive agricultural setting . 
 Peony and Sun Perennial Garden 
 Over 90 cultivars of peonies , as well as a display of recent perennial cultivars suitable for sunny locations . 
 Poisonous Plants Garden 
 Plants poisonous to livestock , including Atropa , <unk> , Cicuta , Digitalis , Lobelia , <unk> , and <unk> . ( Although Cannabis was included in the garden for many years , it was removed by the early 1970s . ) 
 Rhododendron and Woodland Perennial Garden 
 Hundreds of rhododendrons and azaleas , set among white pines , ferns , <unk> , etc . 
 Rock Garden 
 Rock garden , including <unk> , Arenaria , <unk> , <unk> , Dianthus , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Linaria , Penstemon , <unk> , Sedum , Silene , Veronica , etc . 
 Wildflower Garden 
 Wildflowers including skunk cabbage , trout lily , marsh marigold , and trillium . 
 Winter Garden 
 Plants interesting in all seasons , including dogwood , willow , birch , hawthorn , and dwarf to midsize conifers . 
 Woodland <unk> Garden 
 A boardwalk through a boggy areas including royal ferns , blue and yellow flag iris , and Japanese primrose . 
 = = = Nature areas = = = 
 In addition to the gardens and arboretum , Cornell Plantations also manages an additional 3 @,@ 500 acres ( 1 @,@ 400 ha ) of biologically diverse natural areas , including bogs , fens , gorges , glens , meadows , and woodlands . These areas contain some 9 miles ( 14 km ) of walking trails . 
 Bald Hill – Mountain laurel ( Kalmia latifolia ) is abundant in this area . 
 Beebe Lake and Woods – In 1828 , to capture the waterpower of Fall Creek , Ezra Cornell help construct Beebe Dam on Fall Creek . The dam and Lake have since been upgraded . 
 Bluegrass Lane Natural Areas – located near the Robert Trent Jones Golf Course . 
 Brooktondale Meadow 
 Carter Creek Preserve – 244 acres ( 99 ha ) of woodlands about 14 miles ( 23 km ) southwest of Cornell . 
 Cascadilla Gorge – a gorge formed as Cascadilla Creek drops 400 feet ( 120 m ) from the campus to downtown Ithaca , with a walking trail and many waterfalls . 
 Cascadilla Meadows – Cascadilla Creek was channelized when the Wilson Lab was constructed in this meadow flood plain . 
 Cayuga Marsh – a low @-@ lying wetland of cattails ( Typha latifolia ) at the north end of Lake Cayuga . 
 Cayuga Lake – 95 acres ( 38 ha ) on northeast shore . 
 Etna Fringed Gentian Area 
 Fall Creek Valley North 
 Fall Creek Valley South 
 Fischer Old @-@ Growth Forest – a 42 @-@ acre ( 17 ha ) preserve containing rare examples of yellow oak ( Quercus <unk> ) . 
 Hertel Bowl 
 Lick Brook 
 Lighthouse Point – a biological station located a bit over 3 miles ( 5 km ) from campus on the eastern shore of Lake Cayuga . 
 McDaniel Meadow , Woods and Swamp – 60 @-@ acre ( 24 ha ) former farm about 7 miles ( 11 km ) north of campus . 
 McGowan Woods and Meadow 
 Mitchell Street Natural Areas – examples of abandoned agricultural land . 
 Monkey Run 
 Mount Pleasant 
 Mundy Wildflower Garden 
 North Campus Natural Areas 
 Park Park – Forest Home Drive near New York Route 366 
 Polson Natural Area 
 Purvis Road Natural Areas – 43 acres ( 17 ha ) 
 Renwick Slope 
 Slaterville 600 – 600 acres ( 240 ha ) that includes the Slaterville Wildflower Preserve and old growth forest , given to the university by the Lloyd Library and Museum under condition that it remain forever wild . 
 Slim Jim Woods – borders the arboretum . 
 Steep Hollow Creek 
 The Tarr @-@ Young Preserve 
 Turkey Hill Road Meadow 
 Upper Cascadilla 
 Warren Woods – 37 acres ( 15 ha ) 
 = = Academic role = = 
 The Plantations ' Director is funded as a professor of Horticulture in the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences , although 85 percent of the Plantations ' budget comes from gifts . The Plantations continue to grow as it receives donations of environmentally @-@ sensitive land throughout New York State . As of 2009 , the Plantations had a $ 2 @.@ 9 million annual operating budget . 
 In conjunction with the Department of Horticulture in the College of Agriculture , the Plantations sponsors a Graduate Fellowship in Public Garden Leadership , where students earn a Master of Professional Studies degree after a four @-@ semester program . The program of study requires an internship , selection of a particular topic of interest , and completion of an action project . Numerous scientific papers have been published that relate to work done at the Plantations or written by academics affiliated with the Plantations . The Plantations offers three courses for academic credit and a number of informal lectures and tours . Lab work is done at the Plantations by students taking other courses in various subjects , including geology courses in the interdisciplinary Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences . Indeed , the greater Plantations has a connection of some kind to over a hundred courses at Cornell . The Plantations ' Director has also been responsible for summer session courses at the Plantations aimed towards alumni and horticultural enthusiasts . 
 The Plantations operate side @-@ by @-@ side with Cornell 's other programs . Cornell 's academic buildings , which are owned by either the university or New York State ( for statutory college buildings ) , are on a landscaped campus with Plantations ' gardens interspersed among them ; the Plantations maintains four such gardens on Cornell 's central campus . In addition , the College of Agriculture operates the Arnot Woods as a teaching forest , about 15 miles ( 24 km ) southwest of Ithaca ; it was given to the university in 1927 . Near the Plantations , the College operates the Dilmun Hill Student Farm , which practices sustainable agriculture . The College operates Campus Area Farms that comprise 11 different farms and 325 acres ( 132 ha ) on campus and nearby . The difference between the Plantations and these other adjacent properties is that the Plantations are open to the public and are designed for both instruction as well as leisure , while the other properties are closed to the general public and focused upon teaching and research . Aside from physical proximity , the Plantations has affiliations with a number of Cornell academic departments . In fact , during the latter part of the 20th century , public gardens attached to colleges and universities such as the Plantations became a popular trend , due to the beneficial effects they had on campus unity and recruitment of students , creating bonds with and outreach to the local community , and providing a basis for ongoing research as well as establishing a living museum . 
 The Plantations earned a relatively brief mention as a campus diversion in the 112 @-@ page Cornell Desk Book publication of 1972 aimed at incoming students . The Cornell Daily Sun listed it in 2010 as one of the natural wonders of the Cornell and Ithaca areas that students frequently went past , or lived near to , without noticing . 
 A 1973 New York Times survey of public arboreta listed the Plantations as one of the 17 best in the Eastern U.S. for educational value . The same paper characterized the Robison Herb Garden as " a student 's living reference library " when it opened in 1974 . 
 The 200 @-@ page volume The Cornell Plantations , written by Ralph S. Hosmer , was published by the university in 1947 , shortly after the gardens were so named . A film Cornell Plantations was made during 1974 – 1975 and shown on PBS in Connecticut and elsewhere . In 1987 , the Plantations released a VHS video entitled A Year in the Garden , which showed seasonal changes in the F. R. Newman Arboretum and along the trails . The New York Times called the effort " thin " and best suited for Cornell alumni . The university published the volume Cornell Plantations Path Guide : The Gardens , Gorges , Landscapes , and Lore of Cornell in 1995 , and a 172 @-@ page second edition was published with a slightly altered title in 2002 . 
