 Todo a Su Tiempo ( English : All in Due Time ) is the second studio album by American recording artist Marc Anthony , released by RMM Records on May 30 , 1995 . The album was produced by Sergio George , who was also involved with production of Anthony 's debut studio album , Otra Nota . The album comprises five new compositions , three of which were written by Omar Alfanno , and four cover versions . Eight singles were released from the album , all of which topped the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . 
 Todo a Su Tiempo peaked at number six on the Billboard Latin Albums chart and debuted at number one on the Billboard Tropical Albums chart . The album garnered critical praise as a major improvement over his first album and for revolutionizing the salsa music genre . It received a Grammy nomination , a Billboard Latin Music award , and a Lo Nuestro award . Two years later , the album made history as the first salsa disc to be certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Since the album 's release , it has sold over 800 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release of his debut album , Otra Nota , in 1993 , Anthony continued to work with producer Sergio George for the recording of Todo a Su Tiempo . Recording for the album took place at the Sound on Sound Studios and the Quad Recording Studios in New York City . According to George , Otra Nota was an experimental album and was on a low budget . George allowed Anthony to choose his own material and described the recording as more " mixed and aggressive " . Anthony described naming the album : 
 The album took awhile , but I learned that you can 't be afraid of time , waiting . I also learned there is a right time for everything which is why I named the album " Todo a Su Tiempo " 
 = = Composition and covers = = 
 The album comprises nine tracks , four of which are covers of songs previously recorded by several performers . Panamanian songwriter Omar Alfanno composed three tracks from the album : " Te Conozco Bien " ( " I Know You Well " ) , " Nadie Como Ella " ( " Nobody Like Her " ) , and " Llegaste a Mi " ( " You Came to Me " ) . The ballad " Y <unk> Siendo Tu " ( " And You Still Being You " ) was composed by Puerto Rican composers Eduardo Reyes , Laura Reyes , and Guadalupe Garcia . " Vieja Mesa " ( " Old Table " ) was composed by Dominican musician Víctor Víctor . The song incorporates the sound of bachata @-@ influenced bolero . " Se Me Sigue Olvidando " ( " I 'm Still Forgetting " ) was first performed by José Feliciano on his 1986 album , Te Amaré . " Por Amar Se da Todo " ( " To Love Gives Everything " ) was performed by Danny Rivera on the 1993 album of the same name . Manny Delgado wrote the song " Hasta Ayer " ( " Until Yesterday " ) for the Venezuelan pop band Los <unk> in 1979 . In the album , Anthony recorded the song as a bolero . " Te Amaré " ( " I Will Love You " ) was written by The Barrio Boyzz member Angel Ramirez Jr. for their 1993 album , Donde Quiera Donde Estes . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 Todo a Su Tiempo was released on May 30 , 1995 , in the United States and was distributed by Sony Music until 1996 , when it was distributed by Universal Music Group . The album debuted at number six on the Billboard Latin Albums chart for the week of June 17 , 1995 . The same week , the album debuted at number one on the Billboard Tropical Albums and remained in that position for five consecutive weeks . A year later , the album returned to number one on the chart , and held the position for a total of six non @-@ consecutive weeks . It was third @-@ best @-@ selling tropical album of 1996 in the United States . During the week of April 12 , 1997 , the album once again reached number one the chart and held the position for four weeks . Two years after the album was released , it became the first salsa disc to receive a gold certification by the RIAA for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 units . The album has sold over 800 @,@ 000 copies as of 2001 . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Te Conozco Bien " was the lead single from the album . It peaked at number seven on the Billboard Latin Song chart and became his first number @-@ one single on the Billboard Tropical Song chart . The song spent eight weeks on top of the chart and was named the best @-@ performing tropical song of the year . The second single , " Se Me Sigue Olvidando " , reached number six on the Billboard Latin Songs chart . It became his second number @-@ one single on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart ; it spent six weeks on top of the chart . The third single , " Nadie Como Ella " , peaked at number thirteen on the Billboard Latin songs and became his third number @-@ one on the Tropical Songs chart . The fourth single , " Te Amaré " , reached number six on the Billboard Latin Songs chart and became his fourth single to reach number one on the Tropical Songs chart . The fifth single , " Llegaste a Mi " , reached number eleven on the Billboard Latin Songs chart and spent two weeks number one on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . " Hasta Ayer " was the sixth single to be released from the album . It peaked at number six on the Billboard Latin Songs chart and was number one on the Billboard Tropical Songs for three weeks . As the song was a bolero , RMM executive Ralph Mercado responded to the success of the song by stating that Anthony was no longer just a salsa musician . The seventh single , " Por Amar Se da Todo " , peaked at number seventeen on the Billboard Latin Songs and at number one on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . The last single , " Vieja Mesa " , peaked at number seven on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Todo a Su Tiempo received praise from music critics . Evan Gutierrez of Allmusic gave the album a 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , praising the album as a step forward over Otra nota . He described Anthony 's voice as " soaring " and " luminescent " . He cited the album as setting the bar for salsa music and closed the review by it calling the album " without question one of the finest salsa records of the ' 90s " . David Wilson of Wilson and Alroy 's Record Review felt the album was an improvement from his last album , and commended the George 's arrangements as " varied and interesting " . He referred " Por Amar Se da Todo " as a song that " doesn 't let up " and " Nadie Como Ella " as " obvious , but catchy " . Of the song " Y <unk> Siendo Tu " , Wilson said that Anthony is " one of the few current male singers who can really make you believe in a sappy ballad " . Achy Obejas of the Chicago Tribune gave the album a four @-@ star rating and enjoyed how Anthony put a variety of sounds , including hip @-@ hop and R & B , to " good use " . She referred to " Hasta Ayer " as " an oldie but goodie totally transformed by soulful crooning " . Billboard 's mentioned Anthony as " grafting his <unk> soulful baritone onto vivid romantic narratives " and acknowledged " Nadie Como Ella " and " Se Me Sigue Olvidando " as " upbeat " . A writer for the Village Voice penned that the tracks were " nine swirling , complex dance tunes " . In 2015 , Billboard listed Todo a Su Tiempo as one of the Essential Latin Albums of Past 50 Year stating that the album " launched Anthony to fame as an instant salsa superstar and it wasn ’ t long before he was a household name " . 
 At the 38th Grammy Awards , the album received a nomination for " Best Tropical Latin Performance " , which was awarded to Gloria Estefan 's <unk> <unk> . Anthony received two Billboard Latin Music Awards , including " Tropical / Salsa Album of the Year " and " Tropical / Salsa Hot Latin Track of the Year " for the song " Te Conozco Bien " . In 1996 , the album received a Lo Nuestro Award nomination for " Tropical Album of the Year " which it won the following year . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are from Allmusic and from Todo a Su Tiempo liner notes . 
 = = = Performance credits = = = 
 = = = Technical credits = = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Certification = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hurricane Kristy ( 2006 ) = 
 Hurricane Kristy in 2006 was a relatively long @-@ lived tropical cyclone in the 2006 Pacific hurricane season . It developed on August 30 from a tropical wave off the southwest coast of Mexico , and quickly intensified to attain hurricane status , reaching peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Subsequently , Kristy weakened from cooler waters and increased wind shear from Hurricane John to its northeast . Steering currents weakened , and turning to a southerly drift , it weakened to a tropical depression by September 2 . The next day it briefly regained tropical storm status , only to again deteriorate to depression status . After turning to the west , Kristy encountered marginally favorable conditions and attained tropical storm status for a third time , though unfavorable conditions caused it to dissipate on September 9 . The storm never affected land , although initially there was a slight threat to Clarion Island . Within the National Hurricane Center area of warning responsibility east of 140 ° W , Hurricane Kristy was the longest @-@ lasting tropical cyclone of the season . 
 = = Genesis = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the west coast of Africa on August 13 . With a large swirl of low clouds and little convection , the system tracked westward for two weeks across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea , before crossing Central America on August 22 . On August 29 , the system became better organized , consisting of a broad low pressure area and thunderstorm activity . The convection persisted and organized further , and at 0000 UTC on August 30 it developed into Tropical Depression Twelve @-@ E about 600 mi ( 970 km ) southwest of the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula . 
 Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression was experiencing slight easterly wind shear , which distorted the convection to the west of the circulation . However , favorable conditions for strengthening were expected , and the depression was forecast to reach peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) before weakening . It tracked slowly northwestward along the southern periphery of a ridge , and quickly intensified into Tropical Storm Kristy after convection increased over its circulation center . By that time , wind shear had decreased to very low levels , and with very warm waters , the storm was expected to quickly intensify to reach hurricane status . By late on August 30 , the convection was wrapping into the center while an eye feature became intermittent . Organization continued , and Kristy attained hurricane status early on August 31 , about 30 hours after forming . Six hours after attaining hurricane status , an eye @-@ like featured was evident on satellite imagery , and it is estimated Kristy attained peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) about 550 mi ( 880 km ) southwest of the southern tip of the Baja California . However , satellite @-@ derived intensity estimates suggested the hurricane could have been as strong as 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) , or as weak as a tropical storm . 
 = = Weakening and demise = = 
 Subsequently , wind shear increased , caused by the outflow of powerful Hurricane John to its east . Additionally , the hurricane moved into an area of cooler water temperatures , and as a result its appearance became ragged and amorphous . At the same time , steering currents weakened , and the future of Kristy was uncertain ; the NHC forecast the hurricane to continue slowly westward , dissipating within four days . However , other hurricane models suggested a motion to the southwest , and two models predicted a Fujiwhara effect , or an orbiting of two tropical cyclones , which would eventually result in Kristy being absorbed by Hurricane John . On September 1 , Kristy weakened to tropical storm status , and it weakened faster as dry air encroached the storm . It turned southeastward as the ridge to its north strengthened . On September 2 , the circulation became exposed from the convection , and it was forecast to degenerate into a remnant low within 24 hours . Later that day , Kristy weakened to tropical depression status . 
 By September 3 , Tropical Depression Kristy was without persistent deep convection for about 18 hours . However , thunderstorms increased around the center later that day , developing a shallow eye @-@ like feature . The convection persisted along the western periphery of the circulation , and it is estimated Kristy re @-@ attained tropical storm status about 24 hours after it was first downgraded to depression status . Around the same time , the cyclone began a steady motion to the southwest . Its re @-@ intensification was short @-@ lived , as continued wind shear weakened the convection and left the center devoid of any thunderstorms . On September 4 , Kristy weakened to tropical depression status , and though quick dissipation was predicted , officials noted that intermittent convection flares could develop . One such convection flare occurred on September 5 , which persisted around the center and warranted Kristy being upgraded to tropical storm status . By that time , wind shear had decreased somewhat and the storm had turned westward , and with a track through warm water temperatures , Kristy was forecast to maintain tropical storm status for five days . 
 At one point as a tropical storm , the thunderstorm activity around Kristy appeared to be organizing into hooking bands , and further intensification was considered likely , potentially as strong as 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . However , the thunderstorm activity decreased markedly on September 6 , primarily from dry air entrainment , and it weakened to tropical depression status for the last time . In one forecast , Kristy was predicted to move into the area of warning responsibility of the Central Pacific Hurricane Center , or west of 140 ° W. However , the depression was unable to maintain organized convection around its center for a few days , and Kristy degenerated into a remnant low on September 8 . The low turned to the southwest , degenerating into a tropical wave on September 9 about 1500 miles ( 2400 km ) southeast of the island of Hawaii , or about 1600 miles ( 2600 km ) southwest of the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula . The remnant disturbance continued westward , and initially Kristy was believed to have developed into Tropical Depression Two @-@ C in the central Pacific Ocean ; however , post @-@ season analysis concluded the systems were separate . 
 = Baden @-@ Powell House = 
 Baden @-@ Powell House , colloquially known as B @-@ P House , is a Scouting hostel and conference centre in South Kensington , London , which was built as a tribute to Lord Baden @-@ Powell , the founder of Scouting . The house , owned by The Scout Association , hosts a small exhibition relating to Scouting in its current form and a granite statue by Don Potter . 
 The building committee , chaired by Sir Harold Gillett , Lord Mayor of London , purchased the site in 1956 , and assigned Ralph Tubbs to design the house in the modern architectural style . The foundation stone was laid in 1959 by World Chief Guide Olave , Lady Baden @-@ Powell , and it was opened in 1961 by Queen Elizabeth II . The largest part of the £ 400 @,@ 000 cost was provided by the Scout Movement itself . Over the years , the house has been refurbished several times , so that it now provides modern and affordable lodging for Scouts , Guides , their families and the general public staying in London . The building also hosts conference and event space for hire . 
 = = History = = 
 Acting on a 1942 initiative by Chief Scout Lord Somers , a formal Baden @-@ Powell House Committee was established by The Scout Association in 1953 under the direction of Sir Harold Gillett , later Lord Mayor of London . The committee 's directive was to build a hostel to provide Scouts a place to stay at reasonable cost while visiting London . For this purpose , in 1956 the committee purchased a bombed @-@ out property at the intersection of Cromwell Road and Queen 's Gate at a cost of £ 39 @,@ 000 . 
 The Scout Movement raised the major part of the funding of £ 400 @,@ 000 for building and furnishing the building between 1957 and 1959 . Scouts throughout the Country collected ' ship ' <unk> , and this raised the bulk of the money for the building . Money was also raised through public appeals supported by publication in Scout Movement magazines , a collection of donations in 15 @,@ 000 brick @-@ shaped boxes , and 5 @,@ 000 appeal letters signed personally by then Chief Scout Lord Rowallan . Scouts representing every county were present at the opening . 
 In a celebration on 17 October 1959 the foundation stone was laid by the World Chief Guide ( Olave Baden @-@ Powell ) , in the presence of Lord Mayor Sir Harold Gillett , the new Chief Scout Sir Charles Maclean , and 400 other guests . A casket was buried under the foundation stone which held 1959 Scout mementoes , stamps , coins , photographs , etc . , and a programme of the ceremony . 
 With 142 Queen 's Scouts as Guard of Honour , and live broadcast by the BBC ( commentator Richard Dimbleby ) , Baden @-@ Powell House was opened on 12 July 1961 by Queen Elizabeth II . Afterwards , she toured the house with the Chief Scout and the president of The Scout Association , her uncle Prince Henry , Duke of Gloucester . A black marble panel with gold lettering was put on the balcony in the hall to commemorate the event . 
 = = Modern architecture = = 
 The house was designed by the architect Ralph Tubbs in 1956 , whose works included the Dome of Discovery , the highlight of the 1951 Festival of Britain . Tubbs ' floor plans and a model of his design were displayed during a fundraising campaign and exhibition on 21 February 1957 in the Egyptian Hall of the Mansion House . 
 The six storied Baden @-@ Powell House is designed in the modern architectural style , as pioneered by the Swiss architect Le Corbusier from the late 1920s onwards , and predominating in the 1950s . At Baden @-@ Powell House , Tubbs made the first floor overhang the ground floor , a Le Corbusier architectural design choice to free the building from the ground , such as seen in his Pavillon Suisse at the Cité Internationale Universitaire in Paris . Additionally , Le Corbusier 's Sainte Marie de La Tourette priory in Lyon shows two floors of monk 's cells with small windows , cantilevered over the more open floors below , another design choice used by Tubbs in the facade of Baden @-@ Powell House . While Tubbs created Baden @-@ Powell House in the modern architectural style of Le Corbusier , he used more architectural restraint in his own design choices . For example , he made the main visible building component brick rather than concrete . This heavier evolution of Le Corbusier 's style was popular in England throughout the post @-@ war years until replaced by the Brutalist style in the later 1960s . 
 Baden @-@ Powell House was built to Tubbs ' design by Harry Neal Ltd , for which they received the 1961 Gold Medal of the Worshipful Company of Tylers and Bricklayers . At the opening , the house received the building design award for ' The building of most merit in <unk> 
 Thirty @-@ five years after its opening , Baden @-@ Powell House was refurbished in a six @-@ month £ 2 million programme , providing all modern amenities such as private facilities for all rooms , double glazing , and air conditioning , as well as enhancing conference facilities for large and small events . Upon completion of the programme , the house was opened by the president of The Scout Association , Prince Edward , Duke of Kent on 5 June 1997 . In 2002 a Starbucks coffee ( discontinued before 2015 ) and sandwich bar was opened , as well as an outdoor roof garden adjacent to the meeting conference rooms on the second floor . 
 = = Baden @-@ Powell collection = = 
 Although it has since been replaced with a number of smaller displays available to the public in the reception area showing some traditional Scouting skills , a notable collection of Baden @-@ Powell memorabilia has been on display in the past for visitors in ' The story of B @-@ P ' exhibition . This included many drawings and letters by Baden @-@ Powell himself , such as the original of his Last Message to Scouts , Laws for me when I am old and several first editions of his books . The former exhibition also displayed the original painting by David Jagger , as presented to Baden @-@ Powell on 29 August 1929 at the ' Coming of Age ' 3rd World Scout Jamboree . This painting , a personal favourite of Baden @-@ Powell , is often used in publications throughout the Scout movement . The Baden @-@ Powell memorabilia has since been moved to the headquarters for Scouting in the UK , Gilwell Park . 
 As an introductory part of the collection , a nearly 3 meter high statue of Baden @-@ Powell has been erected in front of Baden @-@ Powell House , the only granite statue in London . The sculptor was Baden @-@ Powell 's personal friend Don Potter . It was unveiled on 12 July 1961 by the Duke of Gloucester , as part of the official opening of the house . 
 = = 21st century : Hostel and Conference centre = = 
 From 1974 to 2001 , Baden @-@ Powell House was the headquarters of The Scout Association , for which a dedicated extension to the house was completed in 1976 . In April 2001 , the headquarters formally moved to new accommodation at Gilwell Park . As the owner of Baden @-@ Powell House , The Scout Association receives a net income out of the revenues of approximately £ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 Baden @-@ Powell House provides a hostel for people visiting London . In the period 2004 – 2006 the hostel participated in the Youth Hostel Association , after which the Scout Association entered into an agreement with German company <unk> City Hostels . The building is still owned by The Scout Association , but it is run by <unk> . As part of the arrangement with this company Scout members from the UK and abroad are able to stay at a reduced rate . It is also a conference and event space . Baden @-@ Powell House is rated Four Star by the Visit Britain Quality Assurance , and Mobility Level 1 ; also recent visitors rate it on average 4 out of 5 . 
 The hostel and conference centre is entered through a wide glazed atrium which serves as a large foyer containing the cafe and some Scouting displays . From the atrium the large hall is reached which can serve as an auditorium with seating for up to 300 people . The first floor has a restaurant seating 100 guests ; the second floor has meeting rooms , and conference facilities for groups up to 80 delegates per room . The upper floors contain 180 hostel bedrooms . In an average year , 30 thousand people spend the night , and 100 thousand meals are served in the restaurant . 
 = Botany = 
 Botany , also called plant science ( s ) , plant biology or <unk> , is the science of plant life and a branch of biology . A botanist or plant scientist is a scientist who specializes in this field . The term " botany " comes from the Ancient Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " pasture " , " grass " , or " fodder " ; <unk> is in turn derived from <unk> ( <unk> ) , " to feed " or " to graze " . Traditionally , botany has also included the study of fungi and algae by mycologists and <unk> respectively , with the study of these three groups of organisms remaining within the sphere of interest of the International Botanical Congress . Nowadays , botanists study approximately 400 @,@ 000 species of living organisms of which some 260 @,@ 000 species are vascular plants and about 248 @,@ 000 are flowering plants . 
 Botany originated in prehistory as herbalism with the efforts of early humans to identify – and later cultivate – edible , medicinal and poisonous plants , making it one of the oldest branches of science . Medieval physic gardens , often attached to monasteries , contained plants of medical importance . They were forerunners of the first botanical gardens attached to universities , founded from the 1540s onwards . One of the earliest was the Padua botanical garden . These gardens facilitated the academic study of plants . Efforts to catalogue and describe their collections were the beginnings of plant taxonomy , and led in 1753 to the binomial system of Carl Linnaeus that remains in use to this day . 
 In the 19th and 20th centuries , new techniques were developed for the study of plants , including methods of optical microscopy and live cell imaging , electron microscopy , analysis of chromosome number , plant chemistry and the structure and function of enzymes and other proteins . In the last two decades of the 20th century , botanists exploited the techniques of molecular genetic analysis , including genomics and proteomics and DNA sequences to classify plants more accurately . 
 Modern botany is a broad , multidisciplinary subject with inputs from most other areas of science and technology . Research topics include the study of plant structure , growth and differentiation , reproduction , biochemistry and primary metabolism , chemical products , development , diseases , evolutionary relationships , systematics , and plant taxonomy . Dominant themes in 21st century plant science are molecular genetics and epigenetics , which are the mechanisms and control of gene expression during differentiation of plant cells and tissues . Botanical research has diverse applications in providing staple foods , materials such as timber , oil , rubber , fibre and drugs , in modern horticulture , agriculture and forestry , plant propagation , breeding and genetic modification , in the synthesis of chemicals and raw materials for construction and energy production , in environmental management , and the maintenance of biodiversity . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early botany = = = 
 Botany originated as herbalism , the study and use of plants for their medicinal properties . Many records of the Holocene period date early botanical knowledge as far back as 10 @,@ 000 years ago . This early unrecorded knowledge of plants was discovered in ancient sites of human occupation within Tennessee , which make up much of the Cherokee land today . The early recorded history of botany includes many ancient writings and plant classifications . Examples of early botanical works have been found in ancient texts from India dating back to before 1100 BC , in archaic Avestan writings , and in works from China before it was unified in 221 BC . 
 Modern botany traces its roots back to Ancient Greece , specifically to Theophrastus ( c . 371 – 287 BC ) , a student of Aristotle who invented and described many of its principles and is widely regarded in the scientific community as the " Father of Botany " . His major works , Enquiry into Plants and On the Causes of Plants , constitute the most important contributions to botanical science until the Middle Ages , almost seventeen centuries later . 
 Another work from Ancient Greece that made an early impact on botany is De Materia Medica , a five @-@ volume encyclopedia about herbal medicine written in the middle of the first century by Greek physician and pharmacologist Pedanius Dioscorides . De Materia Medica was widely read for more than 1 @,@ 500 years . Important contributions from the medieval Muslim world include Ibn Wahshiyya 's Nabatean Agriculture , Abū <unk> Dīnawarī 's ( 828 – 896 ) the Book of Plants , and Ibn Bassal 's The Classification of Soils . In the early 13th century , Abu al @-@ Abbas al @-@ Nabati , and Ibn al @-@ <unk> ( d . 1248 ) wrote on botany in a systematic and scientific manner . 
 In the mid @-@ 16th century , " botanical gardens " were founded in a number of Italian universities – the Padua botanical garden in 1545 is usually considered to be the first which is still in its original location . These gardens continued the practical value of earlier " physic gardens " , often associated with monasteries , in which plants were cultivated for medical use . They supported the growth of botany as an academic subject . Lectures were given about the plants grown in the gardens and their medical uses demonstrated . Botanical gardens came much later to northern Europe ; the first in England was the University of Oxford Botanic Garden in 1621 . Throughout this period , botany remained firmly subordinate to medicine . 
 German physician Leonhart Fuchs ( 1501 – 1566 ) was one of " the three German fathers of botany " , along with theologian Otto Brunfels ( 1489 – 1534 ) and physician Hieronymus Bock ( 1498 – 1554 ) ( also called Hieronymus Tragus ) . Fuchs and Brunfels broke away from the tradition of copying earlier works to make original observations of their own . Bock created his own system of plant classification . 
 Physician Valerius Cordus ( 1515 – 1544 ) authored a botanically and pharmacologically important herbal Historia Plantarum in 1544 and a pharmacopoeia of lasting importance , the <unk> in 1546 . Naturalist Conrad von Gesner ( 1516 – 1565 ) and herbalist John Gerard ( 1545 – c . 1611 ) published herbals covering the medicinal uses of plants . Naturalist Ulisse Aldrovandi ( 1522 – 1605 ) was considered the father of natural history , which included the study of plants . In 1665 , using an early microscope , Polymath Robert Hooke discovered cells , a term he coined , in cork , and a short time later in living plant tissue . 
 = = = Early modern botany = = = 
 During the 18th century , systems of plant identification were developed comparable to dichotomous keys , where unidentified plants are placed into taxonomic groups ( e.g. family , genus and species ) by making a series of choices between pairs of characters . The choice and sequence of the characters may be artificial in keys designed purely for identification ( diagnostic keys ) or more closely related to the natural or phyletic order of the taxa in synoptic keys . By the 18th century , new plants for study were arriving in Europe in increasing numbers from newly discovered countries and the European colonies worldwide . In 1753 Carl von Linné ( Carl Linnaeus ) published his Species Plantarum , a hierarchical classification of plant species that remains the reference point for modern botanical nomenclature . This established a standardised binomial or two @-@ part naming scheme where the first name represented the genus and the second identified the species within the genus . For the purposes of identification , Linnaeus 's Systema <unk> classified plants into 24 groups according to the number of their male sexual organs . The 24th group , <unk> , included all plants with concealed reproductive parts , mosses , liverworts , ferns , algae and fungi . 
 Increasing knowledge of plant anatomy , morphology and life cycles led to the realisation that there were more natural affinities between plants than the artificial sexual system of Linnaeus had indicated . Adanson ( 1763 ) , de Jussieu ( 1789 ) , and Candolle ( 1819 ) all proposed various alternative natural systems of classification that grouped plants using a wider range of shared characters and were widely followed . The <unk> system reflected his ideas of the progression of morphological complexity and the later classification by Bentham and Hooker , which was influential until the mid @-@ 19th century , was influenced by Candolle 's approach . Darwin 's publication of the Origin of Species in 1859 and his concept of common descent required modifications to the <unk> system to reflect evolutionary relationships as distinct from mere morphological similarity . 
 Botany was greatly stimulated by the appearance of the first " modern " textbook , Matthias Schleiden 's Grundzüge der <unk> <unk> , published in English in 1849 as Principles of Scientific Botany . Schleiden was a microscopist and an early plant anatomist who co @-@ founded the cell theory with Theodor Schwann and Rudolf Virchow and was among the first to grasp the significance of the cell nucleus that had been described by Robert Brown in 1831 . In 1855 , Adolf Fick formulated Fick 's laws that enabled the calculation of the rates of molecular diffusion in biological systems . 
 = = = Modern botany = = = 
 Building upon the gene @-@ chromosome theory of heredity that originated with Gregor Mendel ( 1822 – 1884 ) , August Weismann ( 1834 – 1914 ) proved that inheritance only takes place through gametes . No other cells can pass on inherited characters . The work of Katherine Esau ( 1898 – 1997 ) on plant anatomy is still a major foundation of modern botany . Her books Plant Anatomy and Anatomy of Seed Plants have been key plant structural biology texts for more than half a century . 
 The discipline of plant ecology was pioneered in the late 19th century by botanists such as Eugenius Warming , who produced the hypothesis that plants form communities , and his mentor and successor Christen C. <unk> whose system for describing plant life forms is still in use today . The concept that the composition of plant communities such as temperate broadleaf forest changes by a process of ecological succession was developed by Henry Chandler Cowles , Arthur Tansley and Frederic Clements . Clements is credited with the idea of climax vegetation as the most complex vegetation that an environment can support and Tansley introduced the concept of ecosystems to biology . Building on the extensive earlier work of Alphonse de Candolle , Nikolai Vavilov ( 1887 – 1943 ) produced accounts of the biogeography , centres of origin , and evolutionary history of economic plants . 
 Particularly since the mid @-@ 1960s there have been advances in understanding of the physics of plant physiological processes such as transpiration ( the transport of water within plant tissues ) , the temperature dependence of rates of water evaporation from the leaf surface and the molecular diffusion of water vapour and carbon dioxide through stomatal apertures . These developments , coupled with new methods for measuring the size of stomatal apertures , and the rate of photosynthesis have enabled precise description of the rates of gas exchange between plants and the atmosphere . Innovations in statistical analysis by Ronald Fisher , Frank Yates and others at Rothamsted Experimental Station facilitated rational experimental design and data analysis in botanical research . The discovery and identification of the auxin plant hormones by Kenneth V. Thimann in 1948 enabled regulation of plant growth by externally applied chemicals . Frederick Campion Steward pioneered techniques of micropropagation and plant tissue culture controlled by plant hormones . The synthetic auxin 2 @,@ 4 @-@ <unk> acid or 2 @,@ 4 @-@ D was one of the first commercial synthetic herbicides . 
 20th century developments in plant biochemistry have been driven by modern techniques of organic chemical analysis , such as spectroscopy , chromatography and electrophoresis . With the rise of the related molecular @-@ scale biological approaches of molecular biology , genomics , proteomics and <unk> , the relationship between the plant genome and most aspects of the biochemistry , physiology , morphology and behaviour of plants can be subjected to detailed experimental analysis . The concept originally stated by Gottlieb <unk> in 1902 that all plant cells are totipotent and can be grown in vitro ultimately enabled the use of genetic engineering experimentally to knock out a gene or genes responsible for a specific trait , or to add genes such as GFP that report when a gene of interest is being expressed . These technologies enable the biotechnological use of whole plants or plant cell cultures grown in bioreactors to synthesise pesticides , antibiotics or other pharmaceuticals , as well as the practical application of genetically modified crops designed for traits such as improved yield . 
 Modern morphology recognizes a continuum between the major morphological categories of root , stem ( <unk> ) , leaf ( <unk> ) and trichome . Furthermore , it emphasizes structural dynamics . Modern systematics aims to reflect and discover phylogenetic relationships between plants . Modern Molecular phylogenetics largely ignores morphological characters , relying on DNA sequences as data . Molecular analysis of DNA sequences from most families of flowering plants enabled the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group to publish in 1998 a phylogeny of flowering plants , answering many of the questions about relationships among angiosperm families and species . The theoretical possibility of a practical method for identification of plant species and commercial varieties by DNA barcoding is the subject of active current research . 
 = = Scope and importance = = 
 The study of plants is vital because they underpin almost all animal life on Earth by generating a large proportion of the oxygen and food that provide humans and other organisms with aerobic respiration with the chemical energy they need to exist . Plants , algae and cyanobacteria are the major groups of organisms that carry out photosynthesis , a process that uses the energy of sunlight to convert water and carbon dioxide into sugars that can be used both as a source of chemical energy and of organic molecules that are used in the structural components of cells . As a by @-@ product of photosynthesis , plants release oxygen into the atmosphere , a gas that is required by nearly all living things to carry out cellular respiration . In addition , they are influential in the global carbon and water cycles and plant roots bind and stabilise soils , preventing soil erosion . Plants are crucial to the future of human society as they provide food , oxygen , medicine , and products for people , as well as creating and preserving soil . 
 Historically , all living things were classified as either animals or plants and botany covered the study of all organisms not considered animals . Botanists examine both the internal functions and processes within plant organelles , cells , tissues , whole plants , plant populations and plant communities . At each of these levels , a botanist may be concerned with the classification ( taxonomy ) , phylogeny and evolution , structure ( anatomy and morphology ) , or function ( physiology ) of plant life . 
 The strictest definition of " plant " includes only the " land plants " or embryophytes , which include seed plants ( gymnosperms , including the pines , and flowering plants ) and the free @-@ <unk> <unk> including ferns , clubmosses , liverworts , hornworts and mosses . <unk> are multicellular eukaryotes descended from an ancestor that obtained its energy from sunlight by photosynthesis . They have life cycles with alternating haploid and diploid phases . The sexual haploid phase of embryophytes , known as the gametophyte , nurtures the developing diploid embryo sporophyte within its tissues for at least part of its life , even in the seed plants , where the gametophyte itself is nurtured by its parent sporophyte . Other groups of organisms that were previously studied by botanists include bacteria ( now studied in bacteriology ) , fungi ( mycology ) – including lichen @-@ forming fungi ( <unk> ) , non @-@ <unk> algae ( <unk> ) , and viruses ( virology ) . However , attention is still given to these groups by botanists , and fungi ( including lichens ) and photosynthetic protists are usually covered in introductory botany courses . 
 <unk> study ancient plants in the fossil record to provide information about the evolutionary history of plants . Cyanobacteria , the first oxygen @-@ releasing photosynthetic organisms on Earth , are thought to have given rise to the ancestor of plants by entering into an endosymbiotic relationship with an early eukaryote , ultimately becoming the chloroplasts in plant cells . The new photosynthetic plants ( along with their algal relatives ) accelerated the rise in atmospheric oxygen started by the cyanobacteria , changing the ancient oxygen @-@ free , reducing , atmosphere to one in which free oxygen has been abundant for more than 2 billion years . 
 Among the important botanical questions of the 21st century are the role of plants as primary producers in the global cycling of life 's basic ingredients : energy , carbon , oxygen , nitrogen and water , and ways that our plant stewardship can help address the global environmental issues of resource management , conservation , human food security , biologically invasive organisms , carbon sequestration , climate change , and sustainability . 
 = = = Human nutrition = = = 
 Virtually all staple foods come either directly from primary production by plants , or indirectly from animals that eat them . Plants and other photosynthetic organisms are at the base of most food chains because they use the energy from the sun and nutrients from the soil and atmosphere , converting them into a form that can be used by animals . This is what ecologists call the first trophic level . The modern forms of the major staple foods , such as maize , rice , wheat and other cereal grasses , pulses , bananas and plantains , as well as flax and cotton grown for their fibres , are the outcome of prehistoric selection over thousands of years from among wild ancestral plants with the most desirable characteristics . Botanists study how plants produce food and how to increase yields , for example through plant breeding , making their work important to mankind 's ability to feed the world and provide food security for future generations . Botanists also study weeds , which are a considerable problem in agriculture , and the biology and control of plant pathogens in agriculture and natural ecosystems . <unk> is the study of the relationships between plants and people . When applied to the investigation of historical plant – people relationships ethnobotany may be referred to as <unk> or <unk> . Some of the earliest plant @-@ people relationships arose between the indigenous people of Canada in identifying edible plants from inedible plants . This relationship the indigenous people had with plants was recorded by ethnobotanists . 
 = = Plant biochemistry = = 
 Plant biochemistry is the study of the chemical processes used by plants . Some of these processes are used in their primary metabolism like the photosynthetic Calvin cycle and crassulacean acid metabolism . Others make specialized materials like the cellulose and lignin used to build their bodies , and secondary products like resins and aroma compounds . 
 Plants and various other groups of photosynthetic eukaryotes collectively known as " algae " have unique organelles known as chloroplasts . Chloroplasts are thought to be descended from cyanobacteria that formed endosymbiotic relationships with ancient plant and algal ancestors . Chloroplasts and cyanobacteria contain the blue @-@ green pigment chlorophyll a . Chlorophyll a ( as well as its plant and green algal @-@ specific cousin chlorophyll b ) absorbs light in the blue @-@ violet and orange / red parts of the spectrum while reflecting and transmitting the green light that we see as the characteristic colour of these organisms . The energy in the red and blue light that these pigments absorb is used by chloroplasts to make energy @-@ rich carbon compounds from carbon dioxide and water by oxygenic photosynthesis , a process that generates molecular oxygen ( O2 ) as a by @-@ product . 
 The light energy captured by chlorophyll a is initially in the form of electrons ( and later a proton gradient ) that 's used to make molecules of ATP and NADPH which temporarily store and transport energy . Their energy is used in the light @-@ independent reactions of the Calvin cycle by the enzyme <unk> to produce molecules of the 3 @-@ carbon sugar glyceraldehyde 3 @-@ phosphate ( <unk> ) . <unk> 3 @-@ phosphate is the first product of photosynthesis and the raw material from which glucose and almost all other organic molecules of biological origin are synthesized . Some of the glucose is converted to starch which is stored in the chloroplast . Starch is the characteristic energy store of most land plants and algae , while <unk> , a polymer of fructose is used for the same purpose in the sunflower family Asteraceae . Some of the glucose is converted to sucrose ( common table sugar ) for export to the rest of the plant . 
 Unlike in animals ( which lack chloroplasts ) , plants and their eukaryote relatives have delegated many biochemical roles to their chloroplasts , including synthesizing all their fatty acids , and most amino acids . The fatty acids that chloroplasts make are used for many things , such as providing material to build cell membranes out of and making the polymer <unk> which is found in the plant cuticle that protects land plants from drying out . 
 Plants synthesize a number of unique polymers like the polysaccharide molecules cellulose , pectin and <unk> from which the land plant cell wall is constructed . Vascular land plants make lignin , a polymer used to strengthen the secondary cell walls of xylem <unk> and vessels to keep them from collapsing when a plant sucks water through them under water stress . <unk> is also used in other cell types like sclerenchyma fibers that provide structural support for a plant and is a major constituent of wood . <unk> is a chemically resistant polymer found in the outer cell walls of spores and pollen of land plants responsible for the survival of early land plant spores and the pollen of seed plants in the fossil record . It is widely regarded as a marker for the start of land plant evolution during the Ordovician period . The concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere today is much lower than it was when plants emerged onto land during the Ordovician and Silurian periods . Many monocots like maize and the pineapple and some dicots like the Asteraceae have since independently evolved pathways like <unk> acid metabolism and the C4 carbon fixation pathway for photosynthesis which avoid the losses resulting from <unk> in the more common C3 carbon fixation pathway . These biochemical strategies are unique to land plants . 
 = = = Medicine and materials = = = 
 Phytochemistry is a branch of plant biochemistry primarily concerned with the chemical substances produced by plants during secondary metabolism . Some of these compounds are toxins such as the alkaloid <unk> from hemlock . Others , such as the essential oils peppermint oil and lemon oil are useful for their aroma , as flavourings and spices ( e.g. , capsaicin ) , and in medicine as pharmaceuticals as in opium from opium poppies . Many medicinal and recreational drugs , such as <unk> ( active ingredient in cannabis ) , caffeine , morphine and nicotine come directly from plants . Others are simple derivatives of botanical natural products . For example , the pain killer aspirin is the acetyl ester of salicylic acid , originally isolated from the bark of willow trees , and a wide range of opiate painkillers like heroin are obtained by chemical modification of morphine obtained from the opium poppy . Popular stimulants come from plants , such as caffeine from coffee , tea and chocolate , and nicotine from tobacco . Most alcoholic beverages come from fermentation of carbohydrate @-@ rich plant products such as barley ( beer ) , rice ( sake ) and grapes ( wine ) . Native Americans have used various plants as ways of treating illness or disease for thousands of years . This knowledge Native Americans have on plants has been recorded by <unk> and then in turn has been used by pharmaceutical companies as a way of drug discovery . 
 Plants can synthesise useful coloured dyes and pigments such as the anthocyanins responsible for the red colour of red wine , yellow weld and blue woad used together to produce Lincoln green , <unk> , source of the blue dye indigo traditionally used to dye denim and the artist 's pigments <unk> and rose madder . 
 Sugar , starch , cotton , linen , hemp , some types of rope , wood and particle boards , papyrus and paper , vegetable oils , wax , and natural rubber are examples of commercially important materials made from plant tissues or their secondary products . Charcoal , a pure form of carbon made by pyrolysis of wood , has a long history as a metal @-@ smelting fuel , as a filter material and adsorbent and as an artist 's material and is one of the three ingredients of gunpowder . Cellulose , the world 's most abundant organic polymer , can be converted into energy , fuels , materials and chemical feedstock . Products made from cellulose include rayon and cellophane , wallpaper paste , biobutanol and gun cotton . Sugarcane , rapeseed and soy are some of the plants with a highly fermentable sugar or oil content that are used as sources of biofuels , important alternatives to fossil fuels , such as biodiesel . <unk> was used by <unk> to ward of bugs like mosquitoes . These bug repelling properties of sweetgrass were later found by the American Chemical Society in the molecules <unk> and coumarin . 
 = = Plant ecology = = 
 Plant ecology is the science of the functional relationships between plants and their habitats — the environments where they complete their life cycles . Plant ecologists study the composition of local and regional floras , their biodiversity , genetic diversity and fitness , the adaptation of plants to their environment , and their competitive or mutualistic interactions with other species . Some ecologists even rely on empirical data from indigenous people that is gathered by ethnobotanists . This information can relay a great deal of information on how the land once was thousands of years ago and how it has changed over that time . The goals of plant ecology are to understand the causes of their distribution patterns , productivity , environmental impact , evolution , and responses to environmental change . 
 Plants depend on certain edaphic ( soil ) and climatic factors in their environment but can modify these factors too . For example , they can change their environment 's albedo , increase runoff interception , stabilize mineral soils and develop their organic content , and affect local temperature . Plants compete with other organisms in their ecosystem for resources . They interact with their neighbours at a variety of spatial scales in groups , populations and communities that collectively constitute vegetation . Regions with characteristic vegetation types and dominant plants as well as similar abiotic and biotic factors , climate , and geography make up biomes like tundra or tropical rainforest . 
 Herbivores eat plants , but plants can defend themselves and some species are parasitic or even carnivorous . Other organisms form mutually beneficial relationships with plants . For example , mycorrhizal fungi and rhizobia provide plants with nutrients in exchange for food , ants are recruited by ant plants to provide protection , honey bees , bats and other animals pollinate flowers and humans and other animals act as dispersal vectors to spread spores and seeds . 
 = = = Plants , climate and environmental change = = = 
 Plant responses to climate and other environmental changes can inform our understanding of how these changes affect ecosystem function and productivity . For example , plant phenology can be a useful proxy for temperature in historical climatology , and the biological impact of climate change and global warming . <unk> , the analysis of fossil pollen deposits in sediments from thousands or millions of years ago allows the reconstruction of past climates . Estimates of atmospheric CO2 concentrations since the Palaeozoic have been obtained from stomatal densities and the leaf shapes and sizes of ancient land plants . Ozone depletion can expose plants to higher levels of ultraviolet radiation @-@ B ( UV @-@ B ) , resulting in lower growth rates . Moreover , information from studies of community ecology , plant systematics , and taxonomy is essential to understanding vegetation change , habitat destruction and species extinction . 
 = = Genetics = = 
 Inheritance in plants follows the same fundamental principles of genetics as in other multicellular organisms . Gregor Mendel discovered the genetic laws of inheritance by studying inherited traits such as shape in Pisum sativum ( peas ) . What Mendel learned from studying plants has had far reaching benefits outside of botany . Similarly , " jumping genes " were discovered by Barbara McClintock while she was studying maize . Nevertheless , there are some distinctive genetic differences between plants and other organisms . 
 Species boundaries in plants may be weaker than in animals , and cross species hybrids are often possible . A familiar example is peppermint , Mentha × piperita , a sterile hybrid between Mentha aquatica and spearmint , Mentha spicata . The many cultivated varieties of wheat are the result of multiple inter- and intra @-@ specific crosses between wild species and their hybrids . Angiosperms with monoecious flowers often have self @-@ incompatibility mechanisms that operate between the pollen and stigma so that the pollen either fails to reach the stigma or fails to germinate and produce male gametes . This is one of several methods used by plants to promote outcrossing . In many land plants the male and female gametes are produced by separate individuals . These species are said to be dioecious when referring to vascular plant sporophytes and dioicous when referring to bryophyte gametophytes . 
 Unlike in higher animals , where parthenogenesis is rare , asexual reproduction may occur in plants by several different mechanisms . The formation of stem tubers in potato is one example . Particularly in arctic or alpine habitats , where opportunities for fertilisation of flowers by animals are rare , plantlets or bulbs , may develop instead of flowers , replacing sexual reproduction with asexual reproduction and giving rise to clonal populations genetically identical to the parent . This is one of several types of apomixis that occur in plants . <unk> can also happen in a seed , producing a seed that contains an embryo genetically identical to the parent . 
 Most sexually reproducing organisms are diploid , with paired chromosomes , but doubling of their chromosome number may occur due to errors in cytokinesis . This can occur early in development to produce an autopolyploid or partly autopolyploid organism , or during normal processes of cellular differentiation to produce some cell types that are polyploid ( <unk> ) , or during gamete formation . An allopolyploid plant may result from a hybridisation event between two different species . Both autopolyploid and allopolyploid plants can often reproduce normally , but may be unable to cross @-@ breed successfully with the parent population because there is a mismatch in chromosome numbers . These plants that are reproductively isolated from the parent species but live within the same geographical area , may be sufficiently successful to form a new species . Some otherwise sterile plant polyploids can still reproduce vegetatively or by seed apomixis , forming clonal populations of identical individuals . <unk> wheat is a fertile tetraploid allopolyploid , while bread wheat is a fertile <unk> . The commercial banana is an example of a sterile , seedless triploid hybrid . Common dandelion is a triploid that produces viable seeds by <unk> seed . 
 As in other eukaryotes , the inheritance of endosymbiotic organelles like mitochondria and chloroplasts in plants is non @-@ Mendelian . Chloroplasts are inherited through the male parent in gymnosperms but often through the female parent in flowering plants . 
 = = = Molecular genetics = = = 
 A considerable amount of new knowledge about plant function comes from studies of the molecular genetics of model plants such as the <unk> cress , Arabidopsis thaliana , a weedy species in the mustard family ( Brassicaceae ) . The genome or hereditary information contained in the genes of this species is encoded by about 135 million base pairs of DNA , forming one of the smallest genomes among flowering plants . Arabidopsis was the first plant to have its genome sequenced , in 2000 . The sequencing of some other relatively small genomes , of rice ( Oryza sativa ) and Brachypodium <unk> , has made them important model species for understanding the genetics , cellular and molecular biology of cereals , grasses and monocots generally . 
 Model plants such as Arabidopsis thaliana are used for studying the molecular biology of plant cells and the chloroplast . Ideally , these organisms have small genomes that are well known or completely sequenced , small stature and short generation times . Corn has been used to study mechanisms of photosynthesis and phloem loading of sugar in C4 plants . The single celled green alga <unk> <unk> , while not an <unk> itself , contains a green @-@ pigmented chloroplast related to that of land plants , making it useful for study . A red alga <unk> <unk> has also been used to study some basic chloroplast functions . <unk> , peas , soybeans and a moss <unk> patens are commonly used to study plant cell biology . 
 Agrobacterium <unk> , a soil rhizosphere bacterium , can attach to plant cells and infect them with a callus @-@ inducing Ti plasmid by horizontal gene transfer , causing a callus infection called crown gall disease . Schell and Van Montagu ( 1977 ) hypothesised that the Ti plasmid could be a natural vector for introducing the <unk> gene responsible for nitrogen fixation in the root nodules of legumes and other plant species . Today , genetic modification of the Ti plasmid is one of the main techniques for introduction of transgenes to plants and the creation of genetically modified crops . 
 = = = Epigenetics = = = 
 Epigenetics is the study of heritable changes in gene function that cannot be explained by changes in the underlying DNA sequence but cause the organism 's genes to behave ( or " express themselves " ) differently . One example of epigenetic change is the marking of the genes by DNA methylation which determines whether they will be expressed or not . Gene expression can also be controlled by repressor proteins that attach to silencer regions of the DNA and prevent that region of the DNA code from being expressed . Epigenetic marks may be added or removed from the DNA during programmed stages of development of the plant , and are responsible , for example , for the differences between anthers , petals and normal leaves , despite the fact that they all have the same underlying genetic code . Epigenetic changes may be temporary or may remain through successive cell divisions for the remainder of the cell 's life . Some epigenetic changes have been shown to be heritable , while others are reset in the germ cells . 
 Epigenetic changes in eukaryotic biology serve to regulate the process of cellular differentiation . During morphogenesis , totipotent stem cells become the various pluripotent cell lines of the embryo , which in turn become fully differentiated cells . A single fertilized egg cell , the zygote , gives rise to the many different plant cell types including parenchyma , xylem vessel elements , phloem sieve tubes , guard cells of the epidermis , etc. as it continues to divide . The process results from the epigenetic activation of some genes and inhibition of others . 
 Unlike animals , many plant cells , particularly those of the parenchyma , do not terminally differentiate , remaining totipotent with the ability to give rise to a new individual plant . Exceptions include highly lignified cells , the sclerenchyma and xylem which are dead at maturity , and the phloem sieve tubes which lack nuclei . While plants use many of the same epigenetic mechanisms as animals , such as chromatin remodeling , an alternative hypothesis is that plants set their gene expression patterns using positional information from the environment and surrounding cells to determine their developmental fate . 
 = = Plant Evolution = = 
 The chloroplasts of plants have a number of biochemical , structural and genetic similarities to cyanobacteria , ( commonly but incorrectly known as " blue @-@ green algae " ) and are thought to be derived from an ancient endosymbiotic relationship between an ancestral eukaryotic cell and a cyanobacterial resident . 
 The algae are a polyphyletic group and are placed in various divisions , some more closely related to plants than others . There are many differences between them in features such as cell wall composition , biochemistry , pigmentation , chloroplast structure and nutrient reserves . The algal division <unk> , sister to the green algal division <unk> , is considered to contain the ancestor of true plants . The <unk> class <unk> and the land plant sub @-@ kingdom <unk> together form the monophyletic group or clade <unk> . 
 <unk> land plants are embryophytes that lack the vascular tissues xylem and phloem . They include mosses , liverworts and hornworts . <unk> vascular plants with true xylem and phloem that reproduced by spores germinating into free @-@ living gametophytes evolved during the Silurian period and diversified into several lineages during the late Silurian and early Devonian . Representatives of the lycopods have survived to the present day . By the end of the Devonian period , several groups , including the lycopods , <unk> and <unk> , had independently evolved " <unk> " – their spores were of two distinct sizes , larger megaspores and smaller microspores . Their reduced gametophytes developed from megaspores retained within the spore @-@ producing organs ( <unk> ) of the sporophyte , a condition known as <unk> . Seeds consist of an <unk> megasporangium surrounded by one or two sheathing layers ( integuments ) . The young sporophyte develops within the seed , which on germination splits to release it . The earliest known seed plants date from the latest Devonian Famennian stage . Following the evolution of the seed habit , seed plants diversified , giving rise to a number of now @-@ extinct groups , including seed ferns , as well as the modern gymnosperms and angiosperms . <unk> produce " naked seeds " not fully enclosed in an ovary ; modern representatives include conifers , cycads , Ginkgo , and <unk> . Angiosperms produce seeds enclosed in a structure such as a carpel or an ovary . Ongoing research on the molecular phylogenetics of living plants appears to show that the angiosperms are a sister clade to the gymnosperms . 
 = = Plant physiology = = 
 Plant physiology encompasses all the internal chemical and physical activities of plants associated with life . Chemicals obtained from the air , soil and water form the basis of all plant metabolism . The energy of sunlight , captured by oxygenic photosynthesis and released by cellular respiration , is the basis of almost all life . <unk> , including all green plants , algae and cyanobacteria gather energy directly from sunlight by photosynthesis . Heterotrophs including all animals , all fungi , all completely parasitic plants , and non @-@ photosynthetic bacteria take in organic molecules produced by photoautotrophs and respire them or use them in the construction of cells and tissues . Respiration is the oxidation of carbon compounds by breaking them down into simpler structures to release the energy they contain , essentially the opposite of photosynthesis . 
 Molecules are moved within plants by transport processes that operate at a variety of spatial scales . <unk> transport of ions , electrons and molecules such as water and enzymes occurs across cell membranes . Minerals and water are transported from roots to other parts of the plant in the transpiration stream . Diffusion , osmosis , and active transport and mass flow are all different ways transport can occur . Examples of elements that plants need to transport are nitrogen , phosphorus , potassium , calcium , magnesium , and sulphur . In vascular plants , these elements are extracted from the soil as soluble ions by the roots and transported throughout the plant in the xylem . Most of the elements required for plant nutrition come from the chemical breakdown of soil minerals . Sucrose produced by photosynthesis is transported from the leaves to other parts of the plant in the phloem and plant hormones are transported by a variety of processes . 
 = = = Plant hormones = = = 
 Plants are not passive , but respond to external signals such as light , touch , and injury by moving or growing towards or away from the stimulus , as appropriate . <unk> evidence of touch sensitivity is the almost instantaneous collapse of leaflets of Mimosa pudica , the insect traps of Venus flytrap and <unk> , and the pollinia of orchids . 
 The hypothesis that plant growth and development is coordinated by plant hormones or plant growth regulators first emerged in the late 19th century . Darwin experimented on the movements of plant shoots and roots towards light and gravity , and concluded " It is hardly an exaggeration to say that the tip of the radicle . . acts like the brain of one of the lower animals . . directing the several movements " . About the same time , the role of auxins ( from the Greek <unk> , to grow ) in control of plant growth was first outlined by the Dutch scientist Frits Went . The first known auxin , indole @-@ 3 @-@ acetic acid ( IAA ) , which promotes cell growth , was only isolated from plants about 50 years later . This compound mediates the tropic responses of shoots and roots towards light and gravity . The finding in 1939 that plant callus could be maintained in culture containing IAA , followed by the observation in 1947 that it could be induced to form roots and shoots by controlling the concentration of growth hormones were key steps in the development of plant biotechnology and genetic modification . 
 <unk> are a class of plant hormones named for their control of cell division or cytokinesis . The natural <unk> <unk> was discovered in corn , Zea <unk> , and is a derivative of the purine adenine . <unk> is produced in roots and transported to shoots in the xylem where it promotes cell division , bud development , and the greening of chloroplasts . The <unk> , such as <unk> acid are <unk> synthesised from acetyl CoA via the mevalonate pathway . They are involved in the promotion of germination and dormancy @-@ breaking in seeds , in regulation of plant height by controlling stem elongation and the control of flowering . <unk> acid ( ABA ) occurs in all land plants except liverworts , and is synthesised from carotenoids in the chloroplasts and other plastids . It inhibits cell division , promotes seed maturation , and dormancy , and promotes stomatal closure . It was so named because it was originally thought to control <unk> . Ethylene is a gaseous hormone that is produced in all higher plant tissues from methionine . It is now known to be the hormone that stimulates or regulates fruit ripening and <unk> , and it , or the synthetic growth regulator <unk> which is rapidly metabolised to produce ethylene , are used on industrial scale to promote ripening of cotton , pineapples and other <unk> crops . 
 Another class of phytohormones is the jasmonates , first isolated from the oil of <unk> grandiflorum which regulates wound responses in plants by unblocking the expression of genes required in the systemic acquired resistance response to pathogen attack . 
 In addition to being the primary energy source for plants , light functions as a signalling device , providing information to the plant , such as how much sunlight the plant receives each day . This can result in adaptive changes in a process known as <unk> . <unk> are the photoreceptors in a plant that are sensitive to light . 
 = = Plant anatomy and morphology = = 
 Plant anatomy is the study of the structure of plant cells and tissues , whereas plant morphology is the study of their external form . All plants are multicellular eukaryotes , their DNA stored in nuclei . The characteristic features of plant cells that distinguish them from those of animals and fungi include a primary cell wall composed of the polysaccharides cellulose , hemicellulose and pectin , larger vacuoles than in animal cells and the presence of plastids with unique photosynthetic and biosynthetic functions as in the chloroplasts . Other plastids contain storage products such as starch ( <unk> ) or lipids ( <unk> ) . Uniquely , <unk> cells and those of the green algal order <unk> divide by construction of a <unk> as a template for building a cell plate late in cell division . 
 The bodies of vascular plants including clubmosses , ferns and seed plants ( gymnosperms and angiosperms ) generally have aerial and subterranean subsystems . The shoots consist of stems bearing green photosynthesising leaves and reproductive structures . The underground vascularised roots bear root hairs at their tips and generally lack chlorophyll . Non @-@ vascular plants , the liverworts , hornworts and mosses do not produce ground @-@ penetrating vascular roots and most of the plant participates in photosynthesis . The sporophyte generation is <unk> in liverworts but may be able to contribute part of its energy needs by photosynthesis in mosses and hornworts . 
 The root system and the shoot system are interdependent – the usually <unk> root system depends on the shoot system for food , and the usually photosynthetic shoot system depends on water and minerals from the root system . Cells in each system are capable of creating cells of the other and producing adventitious shoots or roots . <unk> and tubers are examples of shoots that can grow roots . Roots that spread out close to the surface , such as those of willows , can produce shoots and ultimately new plants . In the event that one of the systems is lost , the other can often regrow it . In fact it is possible to grow an entire plant from a single leaf , as is the case with <unk> , or even a single cell – which can <unk> into a callus ( a mass of unspecialised cells ) that can grow into a new plant . In vascular plants , the xylem and phloem are the conductive tissues that transport resources between shoots and roots . Roots are often adapted to store food such as sugars or starch , as in sugar beets and carrots . 
 Stems mainly provide support to the leaves and reproductive structures , but can store water in succulent plants such as cacti , food as in potato tubers , or reproduce vegetatively as in the stolons of strawberry plants or in the process of layering . Leaves gather sunlight and carry out photosynthesis . Large , flat , flexible , green leaves are called foliage leaves . <unk> , such as conifers , cycads , Ginkgo , and <unk> are seed @-@ producing plants with open seeds . Angiosperms are seed @-@ producing plants that produce flowers and have enclosed seeds . Woody plants , such as azaleas and oaks , undergo a secondary growth phase resulting in two additional types of tissues : wood ( secondary xylem ) and bark ( secondary phloem and cork ) . All gymnosperms and many angiosperms are woody plants . Some plants reproduce sexually , some asexually , and some via both means . 
 Although reference to major morphological categories such as root , stem , leaf , and trichome are useful , one has to keep in mind that these categories are linked through intermediate forms so that a continuum between the categories results . Furthermore , structures can be seen as processes , that is , process combinations . 
 = = Systematic botany = = 
 Systematic botany is part of systematic biology , which is concerned with the range and diversity of organisms and their relationships , particularly as determined by their evolutionary history . It involves , or is related to , biological classification , scientific taxonomy and phylogenetics . Biological classification is the method by which botanists group organisms into categories such as genera or species . Biological classification is a form of scientific taxonomy . Modern taxonomy is rooted in the work of Carl Linnaeus , who grouped species according to shared physical characteristics . These groupings have since been revised to align better with the Darwinian principle of common descent – grouping organisms by ancestry rather than superficial characteristics . While scientists do not always agree on how to classify organisms , molecular phylogenetics , which uses DNA sequences as data , has driven many recent revisions along evolutionary lines and is likely to continue to do so . The dominant classification system is called Linnaean taxonomy . It includes ranks and binomial nomenclature . The nomenclature of botanical organisms is codified in the International Code of Nomenclature for algae , fungi , and plants ( ICN ) and administered by the International Botanical Congress . 
 Kingdom Plantae belongs to Domain Eukarya and is broken down recursively until each species is separately classified . The order is : Kingdom ; Phylum ( or Division ) ; Class ; Order ; Family ; Genus ( plural genera ) ; Species . The scientific name of a plant represents its genus and its species within the genus , resulting in a single world @-@ wide name for each organism . For example , the tiger lily is Lilium columbianum . Lilium is the genus , and columbianum the specific epithet . The combination is the name of the species . When writing the scientific name of an organism , it is proper to capitalise the first letter in the genus and put all of the specific epithet in lowercase . Additionally , the entire term is ordinarily italicised ( or underlined when italics are not available ) . 
 The evolutionary relationships and heredity of a group of organisms is called its phylogeny . Phylogenetic studies attempt to discover phylogenies . The basic approach is to use similarities based on shared inheritance to determine relationships . As an example , species of Pereskia are trees or bushes with prominent leaves . They do not obviously resemble a typical leafless cactus such as an Echinocactus . However , both Pereskia and Echinocactus have spines produced from areoles ( highly specialised pad @-@ like structures ) suggesting that the two genera are indeed related . 
 Judging relationships based on shared characters requires care , since plants may resemble one another through convergent evolution in which characters have arisen independently . Some <unk> have leafless , rounded bodies adapted to water conservation similar to those of globular cacti , but characters such as the structure of their flowers make it clear that the two groups are not closely related . The cladistic method takes a systematic approach to characters , distinguishing between those that carry no information about shared evolutionary history – such as those evolved separately in different groups ( <unk> ) or those left over from ancestors ( <unk> ) – and derived characters , which have been passed down from innovations in a shared ancestor ( apomorphies ) . Only derived characters , such as the spine @-@ producing areoles of cacti , provide evidence for descent from a common ancestor . The results of cladistic analyses are expressed as cladograms : tree @-@ like diagrams showing the pattern of evolutionary branching and descent . 
 From the 1990s onwards , the predominant approach to constructing phylogenies for living plants has been molecular phylogenetics , which uses molecular characters , particularly DNA sequences , rather than morphological characters like the presence or absence of spines and areoles . The difference is that the genetic code itself is used to decide evolutionary relationships , instead of being used indirectly via the characters it gives rise to . Clive Stace describes this as having " direct access to the genetic basis of evolution . " As a simple example , prior to the use of genetic evidence , fungi were thought either to be plants or to be more closely related to plants than animals . Genetic evidence suggests that the true evolutionary relationship of <unk> organisms is as shown in the cladogram below – fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants . 
 In 1998 the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group published a phylogeny for flowering plants based on an analysis of DNA sequences from most families of flowering plants . As a result of this work , many questions , such as which families represent the earliest branches of angiosperms , have now been answered . Investigating how plant species are related to each other allows botanists to better understand the process of evolution in plants . Despite the study of model plants and increasing use of DNA evidence , there is ongoing work and discussion among taxonomists about how best to classify plants into various taxa . Technological developments such as computers and electron microscopes have greatly increased the level of detail studied and speed at which data can be analysed . 
 = Odin @-@ class coastal defense ship = 
 The Odin class was a pair of coastal defense ships built for the German Kaiserliche Marine in the late 19th century . The class comprised two ships : Odin , named after the Norse god Odin , and Ägir , named after the Norse god of the same name . The ships were very similar to the preceding Siegfried @-@ class coastal defense ships , and are sometimes considered to be one class of ships . 
 Like the preceding Siegfried @-@ class ships , Odin and Ägir were obsolete by the time World War I had started . Regardless , they were still used in their primary role until 1915 , at which point they were withdrawn from active service . The ships performed a variety of secondary duties until the end of the war . On 17 June 1919 , both ships were struck from the naval register and sold to the A. Bernstein Company in Hamburg . The shipping company had the ships rebuilt as freighters ; Odin served in this capacity until she was scrapped in 1935 , however Ägir accidentally grounded near the Karlsö lighthouse on the island of Gotland in 1929 and proved to be a total loss . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Odin @-@ class ships were 76 @.@ 40 meters ( 250 @.@ 7 ft ) long at the waterline and 79 m ( 259 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 15 @.@ 20 m ( 49 @.@ 9 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 61 m ( 18 @.@ 4 ft ) forward and 5 @.@ 47 m ( 17 @.@ 9 ft ) aft . Like the preceding Siegfried class , Odin and Ägir were substantially rebuilt between 1901 – 03 and 1903 – 04 , respectively . The hulls were lengthened somewhat , to 84 @.@ 80 m ( 278 @.@ 2 ft ) at the waterline and 86 @.@ 15 m ( 282 @.@ 6 ft ) overall . The beam was also slightly increased , to 15 @.@ 40 m ( 50 @.@ 5 ft ) . Forward draft decreased slightly , to 5 @.@ 59 m ( 18 @.@ 3 ft ) , while the aft draft increased slightly , to 5 @.@ 49 m ( 18 @.@ 0 ft ) . The two ships had a designed displacement of 3 @,@ 550 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 490 long tons ; 3 @,@ 910 short tons ) and a maximum weight of 2 @,@ 754 t ( 2 @,@ 711 long tons ; 3 @,@ 036 short tons ) . After the reconstruction , displacement was increased to 4 @,@ 100 t ( 4 @,@ 000 long tons ; 4 @,@ 500 short tons ) designed , and a maximum of 4 @,@ 376 t ( 4 @,@ 307 long tons ; 4 @,@ 824 short tons ) for Odin and 4 @,@ 292 t ( 4 @,@ 224 long tons ; 4 @,@ 731 short tons ) for Ägir . 
 Odin and Ägir used the same transverse and longitudinal steel frame construction as the Siegfried @-@ class ships . The ships had eight watertight compartments and a double bottom for about 60 % of the length of the hull . As in the <unk> , a ninth watertight compartment was added when the ships were lengthened . The ships were described as good sea boats ; they had gentle motion and were very responsive to commands from the helm . The ships lost significant speed in heavy seas , however . The ships had a crew of 20 officers and 256 enlisted men , with an additional 6 officers and 22 men when serving as a flagship . The refit increased crew requirements , to an additional 31 sailors normally , and the extra flagship crew increased to 9 officers and 34 men . The ships carried a number of smaller boats , including one picket boat , one pinnace , two cutters , one yawl , and one dinghy . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Odin and Ägir were equipped with the same propulsion system that was in Siegfried : two sets of 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines , each in its own engine room . These engines drove a pair of three @-@ bladed screws that were 3 @.@ 50 m ( 11 @.@ 5 ft ) in diameter . Odin had eight marine type boilers , while Ägir 's engines were powered by eight Thornycroft boilers . The ships had similar maximum speeds , with Odin , at 14 @.@ 4 knots ( 26 @.@ 7 km / h ; 16 @.@ 6 mph ) , somewhat slower than her design speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) and Ägir slightly faster at 15 @.@ 1 knots ( 28 @.@ 0 km / h ; 17 @.@ 4 mph ) . Their engines were rated at 4 @,@ 800 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 600 kW ) , though on trials Odin managed only 4 @,@ 650 ihp ( 3 @,@ 470 kW ) while Ägir reached 5 @,@ 129 ihp ( 3 @,@ 825 kW ) . 
 Odin had three electric generators that provided between 29 – 26 kilowatts at 67 volts , while Ägir was equipped with six generators that provided between 243 – 250 kW at 120 V. Because of her increased number of electrical generators , Ägir was nicknamed " <unk> Anna " ( " Electric Anna " ) . The ships stored up to 270 t ( 270 long tons ; 300 short tons ) of coal which enabled a range of 2 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 100 km ; 2 @,@ 500 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . After the refit , fuel bunkerage was increased , to 370 t ( 360 long tons ; 410 short tons ) of coal . This increased the sailing range to 3 @,@ 000 nmi ( 5 @,@ 600 km ; 3 @,@ 500 mi ) at 10 knots . After 1909 , capacity to store 100 t ( 98 long tons ; 110 short tons ) of fuel oil was added . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ships ' primary armament consisted of three 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) SK L / 35 guns . In an arrangement that was very unusual for such large guns , two of the guns were mounted in a pair of MPL C / 88 turrets forward side @-@ by @-@ side , while the third was mounted in a single turret aft . The guns could train 150 degrees to either side of the centerline , and depress to -4 degrees and elevate to 25 degrees . This enabled a maximum range of 13 @,@ 000 m ( 43 @,@ 000 ft ) . The guns had an ammunition storage of 174 rounds , or 58 shells per gun . The guns had a rate of fire of around 2 shells per minute . The 1895 design for the armor @-@ piercing shell weighed 140 kg ( 310 lb ) . 
 The ships also had a secondary battery of ten 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 30 guns with 2 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition . The 8 @.@ 8 cm gun fired a 10 kg ( 22 lb ) projectile at a muzzle velocity of 590 m / s ( 1 @,@ 900 ft / s ) . The guns could sustain a rate of fire of approximately 15 rounds per minute . The ships were also equipped with three 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . Two were placed laterally in above water swivel mounts and the third was submerged in the bow . The torpedo tubes were supplied with a total of 8 torpedoes . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The ships used a similar Krupp compound steel and teak armor protection scheme as in the preceding Siegfried class . The upper section of the main armored belt was 220 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) thick in the central portion of the ships , where the ships ' vitals were located . Behind this was 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) of teak , which gave a total thickness of 400 mm ( 16 in ) . The bow and stern were unprotected . The lower section followed a similar pattern of steel armor distribution , although the thickness of the central portion of the belt was decreased to 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) . The main armored deck was between 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) and 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick ; more important areas of the ships were covered by the thicker armor . The conning tower roof was 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick and the sides were 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) . The barbettes for the main battery and cupolas for the secondary guns ranged in thickness between 30 to 200 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 7 @.@ 9 in ) , backed by 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) of teak . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Odin and Ägir saw only limited service in their intended roles . The revolutions in capital ship building in the first decade of the 20th century rapidly made these ships obsolete . The Second Naval Law , passed on 27 March 1908 , reduced the service life of all capital ships from 25 years to 20 years . This meant that the Odin @-@ class ships , along with a number of other vessels , were to be replaced as soon as possible . Odin and Ägir were replaced by the Kaiser @-@ class battleships König Albert and Prinzregent Luitpold respectively . 
 As the new battleships were intended for offensive operations , the Odin class was still retained for coast defense duties . The ships served in this capacity through the start of World War I , until they were withdrawn from active service in 1915 , along with their half @-@ sisters of the Siegfried class . After she was pulled from combat duties , Odin served as a tender in Wilhelmshaven . She was struck from the naval register on 6 December 1919 and sold to A. Bernstein Co . , a shipping company based in Hamburg . By 1922 , the ship had been rebuilt as a freighter , and she served in this capacity until she was scrapped in 1935 . 
 Ägir was also stationed in Wilhelmshaven after she was withdrawn from her coast defense duties , though she served as a barracks ship there . She was stricken from the navy list on 17 June 1919 , and also sold to A. Bernstein Co. for use as a freighter . On 8 December 1929 , the ship grounded off the Karlsö lighthouse on the Swedish island of Gotland . The situation proved to be unsalvageable . Her bow ornament is now on display at the Laboe Naval Memorial . 
 = Siege of Damascus ( 1148 ) = 
 The Siege of Damascus took place between 24 July and 29 July 1148 , during the Second Crusade . It ended in a decisive crusader defeat and led to the disintegration of the crusade . The two main Christian forces that marched to the Holy Land in response to Pope Eugene III and Bernard of Clairvaux 's call for the Second Crusade were led by Louis VII of France and Conrad III of Germany . Both faced disastrous marches across Anatolia in the months that followed , with most of their armies being destroyed . The original focus of the crusade was Edessa ( Urfa ) , but in Jerusalem , the preferred target of King Baldwin III and the Knights Templar was Damascus . At the Council of Acre , magnates from France , Germany , and the Kingdom of Jerusalem decided to divert the crusade to Damascus . 
 The crusaders decided to attack Damascus from the west , where orchards would provide them with a constant food supply . Having arrived outside the walls of the city , they immediately put it to siege , using wood from the orchards . On 27 July , the crusaders decided to move to the plain on the eastern side of the city , which was less heavily fortified but had much less food and water . Nur ad @-@ Din Zangi arrived with Muslim reinforcements and cut off the crusader 's route to their previous position . The local crusader lords refused to carry on with the siege , and the three kings had no choice but to abandon the city . The entire crusader army retreated back to Jerusalem by 28 July . 
 = = Second Crusade = = 
 The two main Christian forces that marched to the Holy Land in response to Pope Eugene III and Bernard of Clairvaux 's call for the Second Crusade were led by Louis VII of France and Conrad III of Germany . Conrad 's force included Bolesław IV the Curly and Vladislaus II of Bohemia , as well as Frederick of Swabia , his nephew who would become Emperor Frederick I. The crusade had been called after the fall of the County of Edessa on 24 December 1144 . The crusaders marched across Europe and arrived at Constantinople in September and October 1147 . 
 Both faced disastrous marches across Anatolia in the months that followed , and most of their armies were destroyed . Louis abandoned his troops and travelled by ship to the Principality of Antioch , where his wife Eleanor of Aquitaine 's uncle , Raymond , was prince . Raymond expected him to offer military assistance against the Seljuk Turks threatening the principality , but Louis refused and went to Jerusalem to fulfil his crusader vow . Conrad , stricken by illness , had earlier returned to Constantinople , but arrived in Jerusalem a few weeks later in early April 1148 . The original focus of the crusade was Edessa , but in Jerusalem , the preferred target of King Baldwin III and the Knights Templar was Damascus . 
 = = = Council of Acre = = = 
 The Council of Acre was called with the Haute Cour of Jerusalem at Acre on 24 June . This was the most spectacular meeting of the Cour in its existence : Conrad , Otto , Henry II , Duke of Austria , future emperor Frederick , and William V , Marquess of Montferrat represented the Holy Roman Empire . Louis , Thierry of Alsace , and various other ecclesiastical and secular lords represented the French . From Jerusalem King Baldwin , Queen Melisende , Patriarch Fulk , Robert de Craon ( master of the Knights Templar ) , Raymond du Puy de Provence ( master of the Knights Hospitaller ) , Manasses of <unk> ( constable of Jerusalem ) , Humphrey II of Toron , Philip of Milly , Walter I Grenier , and Barisan of Ibelin were among those present . Notably , no one from Antioch , Tripoli , or the former County of Edessa attended . Both Louis and Conrad were persuaded to attack Damascus . 
 Some of the barons native to Jerusalem pointed out that it would be unwise to attack Damascus , as the Burid dynasty , though Muslim , were their allies against the Zengid dynasty . Imad ad @-@ Din Zengi had besieged the city in 1140 , and Mu 'in ad @-@ Din Unur , a Mamluk acting as vizier for the young Mujir ad @-@ Din Abaq , negotiated an alliance with Jerusalem through the chronicler Usama ibn Munqidh . Conrad , Louis , and Baldwin insisted , Damascus was a holy city for Christianity . Like Jerusalem and Antioch , it would be a noteworthy prize in the eyes of European Christians . In July their armies assembled at Tiberias and marched to Damascus , around the Sea of Galilee by way of Baniyas . There were perhaps 50 @,@ 000 troops in total . 
 The general view now appears to be that the decision to attack Damascus was somewhat inevitable . Historians , such as Martin Hoch , regard the decision as the logical outcome of Damascene foreign policy shifting into alignment with the Zengid dynasty . King Baldwin III had previously launched a campaign with the sole objective of capturing the city . This damaged the Burid dynasty 's relations with the Kingdom of Jerusalem . 
 = = = Fiasco at Damascus = = = 
 The crusaders decided to attack Damascus from the west , where orchards would provide them with a constant food supply . They arrived at <unk> on 23 July , with the army of Jerusalem in the vanguard , followed by Louis and then Conrad in the rearguard . The densely cultivated gardens and orchards would prove to be a serious obstacle for the Crusaders . According to William of Tyre , the crusader army was prepared itself for battle : 
 At Daria [ <unk> ] , since the city was now so near , the sovereigns drew up their forces in battle formation and assigned the legions to their proper places in the order of march ... Because of its supposed familiarity with the country , the division led by the King of Jerusalem was , by common decision of the princes , directed to lead the way and open a path for the legions following . To the King of the Franks [ Louis VII ] and his army was assigned the second place or centre that they might aid those ahead if the need arose . By the same authority , the Emperor [ Konrad III ] was to hold the third or rear position , in readiness to resist the enemy if , perchance an attack should be made from behind . 
 The Muslims were well prepared and constantly attacked the army advancing through the orchards outside Damascus on 24 July . These orchards were defended by towers and walls and the crusaders were constantly pelted with arrows and lances along the narrow paths . 
 On Saturday 24 July the Crusaders began with an attack in the morning along the banks of the Barada river . There was ferocious combat in the orchards and narrow roads between the Christian force and a mixture of professional troops of Damascus , the ahdath militia and Turkoman mercenaries . William of Tyre reported : 
 The cavalry forces of the townsmen and those who had come to their assistance realized that our army was coming through the orchards in order to besiege the city and they accordingly approached the stream which flowed into the town . This they did with their bows and their <unk> [ crossbows ] so that they could fight off the Latin army ... The emperor [ Konrad ] , in command of the forces following , demanded to know why the army did not advance . He was told the enemy was in possession of the river and would not allow our forces to pass . Enraged at this news , Konrad and his knights galloped swiftly forward through the king 's lines and reached the fighters who were tying to win the river . Here all leaped down from their horses and become foot soldiers , as is the custom of the Teutons when a desperate crisis occurs . 
 The historian David Nicolle wrote that William of Tyre did not explain how Conrad was able to bring his forces up from the rear to the front without totally disorganizing the Christian army " . According to Syrian chronicler Abu Shama : 
 Despite the multitude of ahdath [ militia ] , Turks , and common people of the town , volunteers and soldiers who had come from the provinces and had joined with them , the Muslims were overwhelmed by the enemy 's numbers and were defeated by the infidels . The latter crossed the river , found themselves in the gardens and made camp there ... The Franks ... cut down trees to make palisades . They destroyed the orchards and passed the night in these tasks . 
 Thanks to a charge by Conrad , the crusaders managed to fight their way through and chase the defenders back across the Barada river and into Damascus . 
 Having arrived outside the walls of the city , they immediately put it to siege , using wood from the orchards . The Crusaders began to build their siege position opposite the Bab al @-@ Jabiya gate where the Barada did not run past Damascus . Inside the city the inhabitants barricaded the major streets , preparing for what they believed to be an inevitable assault . Unur had sought help from Saif ad @-@ Din Ghazi I of Mosul and Nur ad @-@ Din Zangi of Aleppo , and personally led an attack on the crusader camp ; the crusaders were pushed back from the walls into the orchards , where they were prone to ambushes and guerrilla attacks . During the counter @-@ attack on Sunday , July 25 the Damascus forces took heavy losses which included the 71 @-@ year @-@ old lawyer and well known scholar named Yusuf al @-@ <unk> , the Sufi mystic Al @-@ <unk> and the soldier Nur al @-@ Dawlah <unk> . According to William of Tyre , on 27 July the crusaders decided to move to the plain on the eastern side of the city , which was less heavily fortified but had much less food and water . During a raid on the Crusader camp on 26 July , according to Abu Shama : 
 A large group of inhabitants and villagers ... put to flight all the sentries , killed them , without fear of danger , taking the heads of all the enemy they killed and wanting to touch these trophies . The numbers of heads they gathered was considerable . 
 There were conflicts in both camps : Unur could not trust Saif ad @-@ Din or Nur ad @-@ Din from conquering the city entirely if they offered help ; and the crusaders could not agree about who would receive the city if they captured it . Guy <unk> , lord of Beirut , was the suggestion of the local barons , but Thierry of Alsace , Count of Flanders , wanted it for himself and was supported by Baldwin , Louis , and Conrad . It was recorded by some that Unur had bribed the leaders to move to a less defensible position , and that Unur had promised to break off his alliance with Nur ad @-@ Din if the crusaders went home . Meanwhile Nur ad @-@ Din and Saif ad @-@ Din had by now arrived at Homs and were negotiating with Unur for possession of Damascus , something that neither Unur nor the crusaders wanted . Saif ad @-@ Din apparently also wrote to the crusaders , urging them to return home . With Nur ad @-@ Din in the field it was impossible to return to their better position . The local crusader lords refused to carry on with the siege , and the three kings had no choice but to abandon the city . First Conrad , then the rest of the army , decided to retreat back to Jerusalem on 28 July , though for their entire retreat they were followed by Turkish archers who constantly harassed them . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Each of the Christian forces felt betrayed by the other . A new plan was made to attack Ascalon but this was abandoned due to the lack of trust that had resulted from the failed siege . This mutual distrust would linger for a generation due to the defeat , to the ruin of the Christian kingdoms in the Holy Land . Following the battle , Conrad returned to Constantinople to further his alliance with Manuel . As a result of the attack , Damascus no longer trusted the crusaders , and the city was formally handed over to Nur ad @-@ Din in 1154 . Bernard of Clairvaux was also humiliated , and when his attempt to call a new crusade failed , he tried to disassociate himself from the fiasco of the Second Crusade altogether . 
 = Tropical Storm Josephine ( 1996 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Josephine was an unusual Atlantic tropical storm that moved from west to east across the Gulf of Mexico in October 1996 . It formed on October 4 as a tropical depression from the remnants of a cold front . Early in its duration , the system interacted with a ridge over the central United States , which produced strong winds and high tides along the Texas coast . The outer rainbands caused flooding rainfall in southern Texas , and in Louisiana , high tides flooded roads and stranded residents on Grand Isle . Moving generally to the east due to a trough , the depression intensified into a tropical storm on October 6 , and the next day reached peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) while approaching the west coast of Florida . Josephine made landfall in Taylor County near peak intensity early on October 8 , and soon after became extratropical . While moving ashore , the storm produced a high storm surge reaching 9 @.@ 3 ft ( 2 @.@ 8 m ) in Suwannee . High tides flooded about 3 @,@ 600 houses along the west coast . Josephine also produced heavy rainfall , which flooded hundreds of winds , and high winds , which left 400 @,@ 000 people without power . The storm also spawned at least 16 tornadoes , one of which damaged 130 homes . 
 The extratropical remnants of Josephine moved along the eastern coast of the United States , producing wind gusts as strong as 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) in St. Mary 's County and in Ocean City , Maryland . The winds caused widespread power outages , including 26 @,@ 000 in Virginia and 31 @,@ 000 in New Jersey . Heavy rainfall flooded low @-@ lying areas and rivers along the storm 's path , including in North Carolina which had previously been affected by hurricanes Bertha and Fran earlier in the year . In the southeastern United States , the storm contributed to dozens of traffic accidents , which killed a person each in Georgia , North Carolina , and Virginia . Damage throughout the United States totaled about $ 130 million ( 1996 USD ) . Josephine later moved offshore , and after passing southeast of Cape Cod , moved through Atlantic Canada with moderate rainfall and gusty winds . The storm later restrengthened in the northern Atlantic Ocean before merging with another extratropical storm near Iceland on October 16 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late September 1996 , a cold front stalled over the southwestern Gulf of Mexico , producing an area of convection . The thunderstorms were possibly related to the same tropical wave that spawned Hurricane Hernan in the eastern Pacific Ocean . A low pressure area formed in the Bay of Campeche by October 2 , although initially upper @-@ level conditions did not favor tropical cyclogenesis . The convection became more persistent on October 3 and gradually became better organized . On October 4 , classifications based on the Dvorak technique began , and later that day the Hurricane Hunters flew into the system . Based on the data from the flight , it is estimated that Tropical Depression Ten formed at 1800 UTC that day off the northeast coast of Mexico . During its formative stages , the depression interacted with a ridge near the Great Lakes to produce strong winds across the Gulf Coast of the United States . With weak steering currents , the depression moved slowly to the northeast , and initially , wind shear prevented further organization . On October 6 , a strong trough caused the system to accelerate to the east @-@ northeast . The storm 's west to east motion across the Gulf of Mexico was unusual although not unprecedented . 
 On October 6 , the banding features became better defined , and the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Josephine . Further intensification followed , and Josephine attained peak winds of about 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) on October 7 . This was based on flight @-@ level winds of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) , and while near peak intensity , the storm developed a partial eyewall . Josephine accelerated to the northeast while maintaining peak winds , and it made landfall in Taylor County , Florida at 0330 UTC on October 8 . By that time , Josephine was losing tropical characteristics , and shortly thereafter the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone as it moved over Georgia . The remnants continued to accelerate to the northeast , having weakened quickly to winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . It moved along the East Coast of the United States , emerging from North Carolina into the western Atlantic , and later crossed Atlantic Canada . On October 12 , the remnants of Josephine turned to the north and later to the northwest within the general flow of the north Atlantic Ocean . The next day , the storm strengthened to again reach its peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . On October 16 , the storm merged with another extratropical storm near Iceland . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 About 19 hours before landfall , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) issued a tropical storm warning from Apalachicola to Venice , Florida , which was preceded by a tropical storm watch six hours prior . As the storm intensified further , the NHC issued a hurricane warning from Apalachicola to Anclote Key , and extended the tropical storm warning westward to Fort Walton Beach . The agency later issued a tropical storm warning for the Atlantic coast from Cape Canaveral to Little River Inlet in South Carolina . Officials ordered evacuations for barrier islands in nine Florida counties along the gulf coast , and about 3 @,@ 000 people stayed in shelters . Government offices closed along the storm 's projected path in the state . Later , the storm forced the cancellation of part of Bob Dole 's bus tour through New York , and postponed a search for the wreck of TWA Flight 800 . Game one of the 1996 World Series was postponed by one day due to the storm . 
 While Josephine was forming , it produced high tides of 3 to 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) above normal that flooded coastal regions and eroded beaches along the Texas coast . Coastal flooding covered portions of Texas State Highway 316 and John F. Kennedy Memorial Causeway . The storm 's outer periphery dropped locally heavy rainfall that reached 10 @.@ 81 in ( 275 mm ) at Brownsville International Airport , which flooded homes in Brownsville and streets near San Benito . Light rainfall also occurred elsewhere along the gulf coast . In Louisiana , tides were 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal , which flooded portions of Louisiana Highway 1 and several houses . The floods damaged two houses in Mandeville , and damage statewide was estimated at $ 5 @.@ 5 million . After residents refused to evacuate Grand Isle , over 200 people were stranded when floodwaters rose . 
 Josephine made landfall in northwestern Florida along Apalachee Bay and produced a high storm surge of around 9 @.@ 3 ft ( 2 @.@ 8 m ) in Suwannee , causing minor to moderate beach erosion . The storm produced widespread tropical storm force wind gusts in the state , and the highest sustained winds were 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) along the Sunshine Skyway Bridge ; the same location reported a peak gust of 72 mph ( 115 km / h ) . Josephine dropped heavy rainfall in the state , peaking at 11 @.@ 39 in ( 289 mm ) in Fernandina Beach . The storm also spawned at least 16 tornadoes in northern Florida , most of which caused minor tree damage . One 400 yd ( 370 m ) wide tornado , rated an F2 , remained on the ground for 7 mi ( 11 km ) in Edgewater , which damaged 130 houses , 30 of them severely . The tornado caused a woman to have a heart attack in Edgewater , and its damage was estimated at $ 2 @.@ 4 million . In western Florida , the high tides flooded roads and buildings along the coast . Between Levy to Lee county along the gulf coast , Josephine flooded about 3 @,@ 600 homes , mostly west of U.S. Route 19 . The heaviest storm surge damage was in Pinellas County , where about 1 @,@ 400 homes were affected , causing $ 25 million in damage . One person was injured in the county when a man was surfing in rough seas . The high tides damaged three fishing piers along the west coast . In Clay County , flooding rains forced about a dozen families to seek shelter elsewhere , and a few roads were washed out . In Jacksonville , high rains flooded hundreds of roads and caused schools countywide to close . Street flooding occurred as far south as the Florida Keys . High winds caused sporadic wind damage across northern Florida , and about 400 @,@ 000 people lost power statewide . Following the storm , President Bill Clinton declared 16 counties as disaster areas , which made them eligible for federal assistance in reconstructing . 
 When the remnants of Josephine moved into Georgia , rainfall of over 7 in ( 180 mm ) flooded portions of Georgia State Route 40 and destroyed six houses along the St. Marys River . A woman died after driving into a downed tree in the state . In South Carolina , the storm caused flash flooding that covered roads and cars , after 6 in ( 150 mm ) of precipitation fell . Wind gusts in the state reached 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) along the coast , while high tides caused minor beach erosion . The remnants of Josephine spawned a weak tornado in Horry County that downed trees and power lines . Heavy rainfall , including reports of 4 in ( 100 mm ) in three and a half hours , also affected North Carolina , which flooded low @-@ lying areas , rivers , and portions of several roads including U.S. Route 70 . A woman and her child required rescue from a flooded road in <unk> . In some areas of eastern North Carolina , the storm raised river levels only weeks after they receded following Hurricane Fran . High winds of up to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) downed trees and power lines , causing power outages and dozens of traffic accidents ; one man died while driving amid heavy rainfall . High tides flooded barrier islands and caused erosion in beaches , previously affected by hurricanes Bertha and Fran earlier in the year . In conjunction with a cold front , Josephine spawned three tornadoes in the state along the state 's central coastline . The tornadoes destroyed several mobile homes , uprooted trees , and brought down power lines . 
 After having tracked across the southeastern United States , Josephine emerged into the western Atlantic Ocean as a strong extratropical cyclone and remained near the coast . It continued to bring strong winds and heavy rainfall . In southeastern Virginia , where wind gusts reached 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) at the Chesapeake Bay Bridge – Tunnel , the storm left about 26 @,@ 000 people without power , while flooding contributed to over 70 traffic accidents . A three car accident killed a man in the state . In neighboring Maryland , the storm produced a peak wind gust of 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) in St. Mary 's County and in Ocean City , which knocked down trees onto houses and left about 7 @,@ 000 people without power . In the Chesapeake Bay , waves of 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in height caused minor coastal damage and flooded portions of the coastline , including along Maryland Route 238 . In Ocean City , a 160 ft ( 49 m ) barge broke from its moorings during the storm , which later washed ashore . About 4 @,@ 000 people lost power in Delaware , where winds reached 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) and high tides , peaking at 7 @.@ 6 ft ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) at Lewes , flooded oceanfront homes and portion of Delaware Route 1 . High rainfall caused the Christina River to crest at 10 @.@ 6 ft ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) , causing some people to require rescue from their cars . About 1 @,@ 500 people lost power in southeastern Pennsylvania , when high winds knocked down some tree limbs onto power lines . In neighboring New Jersey , high winds of around 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) left about 31 @,@ 000 homes without power , and 12 houses lost their roofs during the storm . In both New Jersey and New York , rainfall was around 1 to 3 in ( 25 to 76 mm ) , causing minor street flooding . While passing offshore New England , the remnants of Josephine produced gusts as high as 68 mph ( 109 km / h ) at Blue Hill Meteorological Observatory in Massachusetts . Minor street flooding occurred in the state after the storm dropped up to 4 @.@ 50 in ( 114 mm ) of rainfall on Cape Cod . Throughout New England , the high winds downed trees and branches , causing scattered power outages in Rhode Island , Massachusetts , New Hampshire , and Maine . Nationwide , damage was estimated at $ 130 million ( 1996 USD ) . 
 Later , the remnants of Josephine moved across Atlantic Canada , where rainfall peaked at 2 @.@ 76 in ( 70 mm ) in northern Newfoundland . The strongest winds in the region were 52 mph ( 83 km / h ) , strong enough to cause ferry service to be canceled or delayed . In Amherst and Fort Lawrence , the storm caused power outages and school closings . 
 = Marry You = 
 " Marry You " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Bruno Mars for his debut studio album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans ( 2010 ) . Written and produced by The Smeezingtons , the track serves as the record 's sixth track and was released as Mars 's fourth single outside of the United States . " Marry You " is a pop song featuring strong influences of doo @-@ wop . The recording focuses on spontaneous marriage and therefore , since its release , has frequently been used as a proposal song . 
 " Marry You " received generally positive reviews from music critics , with some complimenting its production and its reminiscence of 60 's pop style . Some criticized a perceived lack of creativity . Despite not being released as a single in the US , the song charted at number 85 on the Billboard Hot 100 and has since sold 2 @.@ 2 million copies there . It charted on most international markets within the top fifteen , reaching number 10 on the Canadian Hot 100 , number 8 in Australia , the top five in New Zealand , and charting at number 11 in the United Kingdom . The single was certified three times platinum by Music Canada and two times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association . Mars performed " Marry You " on both of his worldwide tours , The Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans Tour ( 2010 – 12 ) and the Moonshine Jungle Tour ( 2013 – 14 ) . The song has been covered a number of times , most notably by the cast of Glee ; their cover outperformed the original song by reaching number 32 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Development and conception = = 
 " Marry You " is one of the eleven songs composed and produced by The Smeezingtons , the collaboration of Bruno Mars , Philip Lawrence , and Ari Levine , for Mars 's debut studio album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans . Lawrence explained the inspiration behind the song in an interview with American Songwriter stating , " [ w ] e had this image of a slow @-@ mo video in Vegas of a couple running , and she ’ s in her gown and he ’ s in his tux , the wedding party is behind them and everyone ’ s raging . This sort of crazy , daring , wedding feeling " . Lawrence was surprised at the impact of the song after watching some YouTube videos . He stated that " [ w ] e always thought it was a good song and catchy , but we didn ’ t think it would affect pop culture the way that it has . The first time we saw one of those YouTube videos , it changed everything for us . We were almost in tears , just the power of music ... the power of what it is we can create . These ideas , words , and lyrics and how they can get into the fabric of society and affect people ’ s lives in such an amazing way . " 
 " Marry You " was recorded at Larrabee Recording Studios in Hollywood and Levcon Studios in Los Angeles . The song was mixed by Manny Marroquin and assistants Christian Plata and Erik Madrid . Levine and Mars played and recorded all of the instruments on the track . Levine was also responsible for engineering the song at Levcon Studios . Stephen Marcussen mastered the song at Marcussen Mastering in Los Angeles . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Marry You " was written by The Smeezingtons ( Mars , Lawrence , and Levine ) . It combines elements of pop and doo @-@ wop and lasts three minutes and fifty seconds . According to the digital sheet music published by Alfred Music Publishing , it was composed in time signature of common time and in the key of F major with a tempo of 145 beats per minute . The track includes drums , double hand @-@ claps , piano , echoing church wedding bells and a sing @-@ songy chorus . Mars 's vocal range spans from C4 to D5 . His vocals in the song have been described as " plaintive " and " ach [ ing ] so gently " , while wooing throughout the track . 
 The song has been characterized as possessing " forceful velocity " and an " instantly hummable melody " with it being " buoyant " , " bubbly " and " Motown marriage track " . A love song , it lyrically tells about a couple that go to Las Vegas , give up their " capricious impulses " and spontaneously decide to get married . Although the song has since become a " classic marriage tune " , Lawrence has stated that the writers instead meant to imply a " racy kind of idea " . Critics have compared the song to 60 's girl groups and to the " surf pop of The Beach Boys " , and Coldplay . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Marry You " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Digital Spy 's Lewis Corner gave it a strong review , rating it four out of five stars , with him labeling it as a song that " would not only impress the Elvis impersonator in any Vegas chapel , but is enough to make him a shoo @-@ in for ultimate seducer of 2011 " and a " 60s @-@ inspired jive @-@ starter " . NPR 's Ken Tucker and Emily Yang of The Signal said that the recording 's sound was reminiscent of 60 's pop . Nina Baniamer of Contactmusic.com found the track 's production " epic and ambitious " and called the " anthemic " song " sure fire hit " . The Boston Globe critic Ken Capobianco praised the song for its " artfully arranged throwback " and exalted Mars 's vocals on his love songs , such as " Marry You " . Leah Greenblatt , writing for Entertainment Weekly , stated that " Marry You " has " a malt @-@ shop heart " beating beneath its " digital skin " , which shows innovation and creativity . The Independent music critic , Andy Gill , flattered the single by calling it " overly ingratiating " . In a mixed review , Tim Sendra of Allmusic praised the song 's " dynamic and nuanced production " , yet founding the track " pleasantly silly " . In a negative review , Mike Diver of BBC Music thought confessed that the recording was a " too @-@ clingy and very creepy love song " and noted its lack of inspiration . Similarly , Slant Magazine 's Eric Henderson suggested that the song was spun off of Cee Lo Green 's " Fuck You " , where the word " fuck " was changed to " marry " . He further added that the single was a " bizarrely syncopated piledriver " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Marry You " debuted at number 91 on the Billboard Hot 100 on December 11 , 2010 . It reached a peak of number 85 on January 15 , 2011 and remained on the chart for a total of 5 weeks . The song was never released as a single in the United States , despite its strong airplay on mainstream and adult top 40 radio stations . As of January 2015 , the track has sold 2 @.@ 2 million copies there and has yet to be certified by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 The song 's reception was stronger outside of the United States , thus debuting at number 89 in Canada on December 11 , 2010 , after the Glee performance of the track . It reached its peak position of number 10 on the Canadian Hot 100 in early November 2011 . It was certified three times platinum by Music Canada . In the United Kingdom , " Marry You " debuted and peaked at number 11 on the UK Singles Chart and remained on the chart for 39 weeks . The single performed well across the rest of Europe , reaching the top 10 in Austria , Czech Republic , Ireland , Luxembourg , and Slovakia and the top 20 in Belgium , Germany , Netherlands , and Switzerland . In 2014 , the song re @-@ entered the Spanish Charts two years after its first appearance and reached a new peak of 26 . It also made its debut on the Danish Charts at number 34 . 
 In Australia , " Marry You " debuted at number 50 on the ARIA Singles Chart on December 12 , 2010 and remained on the chart for three weeks . It reappeared on the chart on June 19 , 2011 , reaching a peak position at number 8 for two non @-@ consecutive weeks ; it dropped off the chart after 19 weeks . The single was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association in 2011 . The single reached number 5 on New Zealand 's RIANZ Singles Chart and spent five months on the chart . In Asia , the song peaked at number 3 on the Japan Hot 100 , and the track was awarded Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of Japan . The single reached number 12 in South Korea and sold 2 @,@ 152 @,@ 783 copies there as of 2015 . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 Mars has performed the song at several shows , first at the Bowery Ballroom in New York City on August 25 , 2010 . On November 6 , 2011 , Mars and his band performed it live at the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards . He also sang it on December 8 , 2012 for the 2012 edition of Jingle Bell Ball , an event annually held and promoted by Capital FM at the O2 Arena in London . It was the eight song of his debut worldwide tour , The Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans Tour ( 2010 ) , and was eight ( 2013 set list ) or sixth ( 2014 set list ) on his second worldwide tour , The Moonshine Jungle Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 The song has been covered several times , first on the " Furt " episode of the television show Glee , which aired on November 23 , 2010 . The show 's cover version achieved moderate success by peaking at number 27 in Australia , number 19 in Canada , number 31 in Ireland and number 32 in the United States . On January 1 , 2013 , the song was covered by Sunny , Sooyoung , and <unk> of South Korean girl group Girls ' Generation for their comeback special , Girls ' Generation 's Romantic Fantasy . Rapper and actor Donald Glover sang a cover of the song in the film Magic Mike XXL . The cover appeared on the movie 's soundtrack album , which was released on June 30 , 2015 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Promo CD Single 
 " Marry You " - 3 : 50 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and mixing 
 Recorded at Larrabee Recording Studios and Levcon Studios in Los Angeles , California ; 
 Mixed at Larrabee Sound Studios in North Hollywood , California . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans , Elektra Records : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Process = = = 
 On August 15 , 2011 , a promo CD single containing the album version of " Marry You " became available for purchase through Elektra Records and Warner Music Group . A week later , the song was released in the United Kingdom . It was announced on September 13 , 2011 that " Marry You " would be released in Germany . 
 = = = History = = = 
 = Erie , Pennsylvania = 
 Erie / <unk> / is a city located in northwestern Pennsylvania , United States . Named for the lake and the Native American tribe that resided along its southern shore , Erie is the state 's fourth @-@ largest city ( after Philadelphia , Pittsburgh and Allentown ) , with a population of 101 @,@ 786 at the 2010 census , and an estimated population of 99 @,@ 452 in 2014 . It was the third @-@ largest city in the state until 1999 . It is the second largest city in Western Pennsylvania ( after Pittsburgh ) . Erie 's metropolitan area , equivalent to all of Erie County , consists of approximately 280 @,@ 000 residents . The city is the seat of government for Erie County and the principal city of the Erie , PA Metropolitan Statistical Area . 
 Erie is between Buffalo , New York , Cleveland , Ohio , and Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . Once teeming with heavy industry , Erie 's manufacturing sector remains prominent in the local economy , though service industries , healthcare , higher education , and tourism are emerging as greater economic drivers . Millions visit Erie for recreation at Presque Isle State Park , as well as attractions like the casino and horse racetrack named for the state park . 
 Erie is known as the " Flagship City " because of its status as the home port of Oliver Hazard Perry 's flagship Niagara . The city has also been called the " Gem City " because of the sparkling lake . Erie won the All @-@ America City Award in 1972 . 
 = = History = = 
 Cultures of indigenous peoples occupied the shoreline and bluffs in this area for thousands of years , taking advantage of the rich resources . The <unk> Park Archaeological District located in Millcreek Township , Pennsylvania west of the city , includes artifacts from the Archaic period in the Americas , as well as from the Early and Middle Woodland Period , roughly a span from <unk> to <unk> . 
 The historic Iroquoian @-@ speaking Erie Nation occupied this area before being defeated by the five nations of the Iroquois Confederacy in the 17th century during the Beaver Wars . The Iroquois tribes had developed and five nations formed a political league in the 1500s , adding their sixth nation in the early 18th century . The Erie area became controlled by the Seneca , " keeper of the western door " of the Iroquois , who were largely based in present @-@ day New York . 
 Europeans first arrived as settlers in the region when the French constructed Fort Presque Isle near present @-@ day Erie in 1753 , as part of their effort to defend New France against the encroaching British colonists . The name of the fort refers to the peninsula that juts into Lake Erie , now protected as Presque Isle State Park . The French term " presque @-@ isle " means peninsula ( literally , " almost an island " ) . When the fort was abandoned by the French in 1760 during the French and Indian War ( Seven Years ' War ) , it was the last post they held west of Niagara . The British established a garrison at the fort at Presque Isle that same year , three years before the end of the French and Indian War . 
 Present @-@ day Erie is situated in what was the disputed Erie Triangle , a triangle of land that was claimed after the American Revolutionary War by the states of New York , Pennsylvania , Connecticut ( as part of its Western Reserve ) , and Massachusetts . It officially became part of Pennsylvania on March 3 , 1792 , after Connecticut , Massachusetts and New York relinquished their claims to the federal government , which in turn sold the land to Pennsylvania for 75 cents per acre or a total of $ 151 @,@ 640 @.@ 25 in Continental currency . The Iroquois released the land to Pennsylvania in January 1789 for payments of $ 2 @,@ 000 from Pennsylvania and $ 1 @,@ 200 from the federal government . The Seneca Nation separately settled land claims against Pennsylvania in February 1791 for the sum of $ 800 . 
 The General Assembly of Pennsylvania commissioned the surveying of land near Presque Isle through an act passed on April 18 , 1795 . Andrew Ellicott , who completed Pierre Charles L 'Enfant 's survey of Washington , D.C. and helped resolve the boundary between Pennsylvania and New York , arrived to begin the survey and lay out the plan for the city in June 1795 . Initial settlement of the area began that year . Lt. Colonel Seth Reed and his family moved to the Erie area from Geneva , New York ; they were Yankees from Uxbridge , Massachusetts . They became the first European @-@ American settlers of Erie , settling at what became known as " Presque Isle " . 
 President James Madison initiated the construction of a naval fleet during the War of 1812 in order to gain control of the Great Lakes from the British . Daniel Dobbins of Erie and Noah Brown of Boston were notable shipbuilders who led construction of four schooner − rigged gunboats and two brigs . Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry arrived from Rhode Island and led the squadron to success in the historic Battle of Lake Erie . 
 Erie was an important shipbuilding , fishing , and railroad hub during the mid @-@ 19th century . The city was the site where three sets of track gauges met . While the delays required cargo troubles for commerce and travel , they provided much needed local jobs in Erie . When a national standardized gauge was proposed , those jobs , and the importance of the rail hub itself , were put in jeopardy . In an event known as the Erie Gauge War , the citizens of Erie , led by the mayor , set fire to bridges , ripped up track and rioted to try to stop the standardization . 
 On August 3 , 1915 , the Mill Creek ( Lake Erie ) flooded downtown Erie . A culvert , or a tunnel , was blocked by debris , and collapsed . A four @-@ block reservoir , caused by torrential downpours , had formed behind it . The resulting deluge destroyed 225 houses and killed 36 people . After the flood , Mayor Miles Brown Kitts had the Mill Creek directed into another larger culvert , constructed for more than 2 miles under the city , before emptying into Presque Isle Bay on the city 's lower east side . 
 Downtown Erie continued to grow for most of the 20th century , based on its manufacturing base . It attracted numerous new waves of European immigrants for industrial jobs . Erie 's economy began to suffer in the later part of the 20th century as industrial restructuring took place and jobs moved out of the area ; it was considered part of the Rust Belt . The importance of American manufacturing , US steel and coal production , and commercial fishing began to gradually <unk> before taking a major population downturn in the 1970s . 
 With the advent of the automobile age after World War II and government subsidies for highway construction , thousands of residents left Erie for suburbs such as Millcreek Township , which now has over 50 @,@ 000 people . This caused a decline in retail businesses , some of which followed to the suburbs . 
 Erie won the All @-@ America City Award in 1972 , and was a finalist in 1961 , 1994 , 1995 and 2009 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Erie is situated in northwestern Pennsylvania at 42 ° 6 ′ 52 ″ N 80 ° 4 ′ 34 ″ W ( 42 @.@ <unk> , <unk> ) , on the southern shore of Lake Erie across from the Canadian province of Ontario . It is 100 miles ( 160 km ) northeast of Cleveland , Ohio , 90 miles ( 140 km ) southwest of Buffalo , New York , and 128 miles ( 206 km ) north of Pittsburgh . Erie 's bedrock is Devonian shale and siltstone , overlain by glacial tills and stratified drift . Stream drainage in the city flows northward into Lake Erie , then through Lake Ontario into the St. Lawrence River , and out to the Atlantic Ocean . South of Erie is a drainage divide , beyond which most of the streams in western Pennsylvania flow south into the Allegheny or Ohio rivers . 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 19 @.@ 3 square miles ( 49 @.@ 9 km2 ) , with 19 @.@ 1 square miles ( 49 @.@ 4 km2 ) being land and the remaining 0 @.@ 2 square miles ( 0 @.@ 5 km2 ) , or 1 @.@ 03 % , being water . Presque Isle State Park ( known to the locals as " The Peninsula " ) , juts into Lake Erie just north of the city limits and has 7 miles ( 11 km ) of public beaches , wetlands , and fishing sites . 
 Erie is laid out in a grid surrounding Perry Square in the downtown area . The downtown buildings are separated from the waterfront by the Bayfront Parkway . The tallest structure in Erie is St. Peter Cathedral at 265 feet ( 81 m ) , and the tallest building is Renaissance Centre at 198 feet ( 60 m ) . Erie has generally small ethnic neighborhoods including a Little Italy . South of 38th Street , the grid gives way to curvilinear roads of post @-@ 1970 suburban development . Millcreek Township and upper Peach Street in Summit Township include the Erie metropolitan area 's newer developments . 
 Most of the cityscape includes renovated and refurbished factory buildings , mid − rise housing , single family homes , and office buildings . Erie 's waterfront includes the Burger King Amphitheater and surrounding parkland , which hosts numerous festivals . The Bayfront Convention Center is on Sassafras Pier next to Dobbins Landing . The Bicentennial Tower is centrally located in the skyline when viewed from Presque Isle State Park , with the high @-@ rise and mid @-@ rise buildings flanking the higher ground behind and to the east and west sides . On the east end of the waterfront , the Erie Maritime Museum and the city 's main library , and third largest in Pennsylvania , host the USS Niagara . Docks and marinas fill the freshwater shoreline in between . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The climate of Erie is typical of the Great Lakes . Erie is located in the snow belt that stretches from Cleveland to Syracuse and Watertown ; accordingly , its winters are typically cold , with heavy lake effect snow , but also with occasional stretches of mild weather that cause accumulated snow to melt . Erie lies on the typical humid continental zone ( Köppen Dfa ) . The city experiences a full range of weather events , including snow , ice , rain , thunderstorms and fog . The city 's lakeside location helps to temper summer heat , with an average of only 3 @.@ 8 days of 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) + highs annually , and the highest temperature ever recorded was 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) on June 25 , 1988 ; there is an average of 2 @.@ 5 days with lows of 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) or colder annually , and the lowest temperature ever recorded was − 18 ° F ( − 28 ° C ) on January 19 , 1994 and February 16 , 2015 . 
 Erie is 6th on The Daily Beast list of snowiest places in the United States , averaging 78 @.@ 7 inches ( 200 cm ) ; however , the 1981 – 2010 normal seasonal snowfall is 100 @.@ 8 in ( 256 cm ) . The adverse winter conditions caused USAir Flight 499 to overrun the runway at Erie International Airport in 1986 , as well as causing <unk> that were responsible for a 50 car pile @-@ up on Interstate 90 . 
 Erie was determined to be the snowiest city in the US in the 2013 @-@ 2014 snow season . Erie received 138 @.@ 4 inches of snow that season . According to the National Weather service , Erie was just ahead of Syracuse , NY by 6 inches of snow . 
 = = Demographics and religion = = 
 As of the 2010 United States Census , there were 101 @,@ 786 people , 40 @,@ 913 households , and 22 @,@ 915 families residing in the city . There were 44 @,@ 790 housing units at an average vacancy rate of 8 percent . Erie has long been declining in population due to the departure of factories and dependent businesses . The city has lost approximately 40 @,@ 000 people since the early 1960s , allowing Allentown to claim the position as Pennsylvania 's third @-@ largest city behind Philadelphia and Pittsburgh . 
 Erie 's population was spread evenly among all age groups , with the median being 34 . About 13 % of families and 19 % of the population were below the poverty line . Most of the people who reside in Erie are of European descent . 
 Since the mid @-@ 1990s , the International Institute of Erie ( IIE ) , founded in 1919 , has helped with the resettlement of refugees from Bosnia , Eritrea , Ghana , Iraq , Kosovo , Liberia , Nepal , Somalia , Sudan , the former Soviet Union , and Vietnam . The inclusion of refugees in Erie 's community augments religious diversity and prompts community events such as cultural festivals . 
 In the early 20th century , Erie had a significant Russian immigrant community , many of whom worked in the shipbuilding plants along the bayfront . Unusual for a Great Lakes city , a substantial number of these Russian immigrants were <unk> ( <unk> ) Old Believers . In 1983 , most of this community united with the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia and became an Old Ritualist priest within the canonical Orthodox Church . Even today , the gold @-@ domed Church of the Nativity , on the bayfront near the former heart of the Russian community , is an Old Ritualist church and home parish to the famed iconographer Fr . Theodore <unk> . 
 Erie has a Jewish community that is over 150 years old . Temple Anshe <unk> , a member of the Union for Reform Judaism , is served by its spiritual leader , Rabbi John L. Bush . Congregation Brith Sholom ( The Jewish Center ) is affiliated with the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism , and Rabbi Leonard <unk> has been its spiritual leader since 1989 . 
 Erie is home to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Erie , covering 13 counties — at 9 @,@ 936 square miles ( 25 @,@ 734 km2 ) , it is the largest in the state . Its diocesan seat is the Saint Peter Cathedral in Erie , which has a 265 feet ( 81 m ) central tower flanked by two 150 feet ( 46 m ) towers . Lawrence Thomas Persico is Bishop of Erie , since October 1 , 2012 ; Donald Trautman is Bishop Emeritus of the diocese . 
 According to the Association of Religion Date Archives , Erie County had a total population of 280 @,@ 843 people in 2000 , of which 103 @,@ 333 claimed affiliation with the Catholic Church , 40 @,@ 301 with mainline Protestant houses of worship , and 12 @,@ 980 with evangelical Protestant churches . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Erie is the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania 's primary access point to Lake Erie , the Great Lakes , and the Saint Lawrence Seaway . The city emerged as a maritime center after the American Revolution , then as a railroad hub during the great American westward expansion . Erie became an important city for iron and steel manufacturing during the Industrial Revolution and thrived well into the 20th century with big industry . 
 While only General Electric diesel @-@ electric locomotive building remains from the ranks of the large manufacturers in the early 21st century , a more diverse mix of mid @-@ sized industries has emerged . This broader economic base includes not only smaller and more agile steel and plastic plants , but also a vigorous service sector : health , insurance and tourism . As of December 2010 , Erie 's unemployment rate was 8 @.@ 9 percent , as compared to rates for Pennsylvania and the United States at 8 @.@ 5 and 9 @.@ 4 percent , respectively . 
 Erie is the corporate headquarters of the Erie Insurance Group , and Marquette Savings Bank . Lord Corporation was founded and has major operations in Erie . Along with GE and Erie Insurance , major employers in the county , and consequently , the city include the County , State and Federal governments , as well as the Erie City School District . 
 Over 10 percent of the USA 's plastics are manufactured or finished in Erie @-@ based plastics plants . Erie is an emerging center for biofuels and environmental research , producing over 45 million U.S. gallons of biofuel a year . Tourism plays an increasingly important role in the local economy with over 4 million people visiting Presque Isle State Park and other attractions . Shoppers from Ohio , New York , and the Canadian province of Ontario frequent the Millcreek Mall and Peach Street stores and attractions as a result of Pennsylvania 's tax exemption on clothing . 
 Both <unk> Hamot and Saint Vincent Health System are also major employers in Erie . Although both of these hospitals had been stand @-@ alone Erie entities , Hamot merged with the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center in 2011 , and St. Vincent joined became affiliated with the Cleveland Clinic in 2012 . , followed by Highmark 's Allegheny Health Network in 2013 . The United States Department of Veterans Affairs operates the Erie Veterans Affairs Medical Center on East 38th Street . The Shriners International operates Shriners Hospital for Children in Erie since 1927 . 
 = = Utilities = = 
 The Erie Water Works , which was incorporated in 1865 as the Erie Water and Gas Company , includes a reservoir , two water treatment plants , and an elaborate water works and pipe network that provides water for most of the city and suburbs . <unk> , a subsidiary of FirstEnergy , supplies electricity to the region , as well as the Northwestern Pennsylvania Rural Electric Cooperative . Time Warner Cable became the region 's cable television provider , after taking over Adelphia , and also provides digital phone and high @-@ speed internet to the region . Local telephone and high speed internet service is also provided by Verizon . 
 Sewage service in Erie is provided by the Erie Sewer Authority , and many outlying townships have partnerships with the Sewer Authority for service . The Authority cleans about 30 − 40 million US gallons ( 150 @,@ 000 m3 ) of wastewater every day . 
 The time and temperature number in Erie is 452 @-@ <unk> and was originally discontinued by Verizon in October 2008 before being restarted by a private individual two years later . The city of Erie and northwest Pennsylvania is located in area code 814 . On December 16 , 2010 , the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission ( PUC ) voted to split the area code , which was to take effect February 1 , 2012 . The North American Numbering Plan decided that northwest Pennsylvania would receive the new code of 582 . A local grassroots coalition began organizing an opposition to the plan , and generated numerous petitions for reconsideration . The PUC immediately voted to review their decision and ordered additional public input hearings and technical conferences as a response to the strong public outcry . In January 2011 , the PUC announced that it was placing the entire area code split plan on hold as <unk> pushed the projected exhaustion date back two years to 2015 . 
 = = Arts and culture = = 
 Erie is home to several professional and amateur performing @-@ arts groups . The most significant is the Erie Philharmonic , in continuous existence since 1913 ( with the exception of an interregnum during World War II ) . This group of professional musicians also has a full chorus and a Junior Philharmonic division that tours the area . The Lake Erie Ballet is a professional company that performs well @-@ known programs throughout the year . The Erie Civic Music Association attracts , sponsors , and books performances by professional musicians , singers , entertainers , and ensembles from around the world . 
 The Erie Art Museum is the city 's main art gallery , located in the Old Customshouse on State Street . Its collection has an emphasis on folk art and modern art and it hosts a popular blues and jazz concert series . The Erie Art Museum also works on public art projects in an effort to revitalize and improve the city . In 2000 , the Erie Art Museum created a project entitled <unk> , similar to <unk> . 95 fiberglass fish were decorated by Erie artists and placed throughout the city . Patrons paid $ 3 @,@ 000 for a fish and the proceeds went to Gannon University 's Scholarship Fund and the Erie Public Art Endowment Fund . The Erie Art Museum created a similar public art project in 2004 that involved frogs rather than fish . In 2012 , the Erie Art Museum began a project to create forty artistic and functional bike racks , designed and created by local artists . The Museum 's intentions are to add color and interest to downtown Erie and to promote bicycling , encouraging healthy lifestyles and environmental awareness . 
 Downtown Erie 's historic and ornate Warner Theatre hosts a range of performances . Renovated in the 1980s and again in 2007 , the Warner is the hub of Erie 's Civic Center . The downtown area is the home of the Erie Playhouse , one of the leading community theaters in the country , and the third oldest community theater in the U.S. . Since 2007 , the annual Roar on the Shore motorcycle rally has taken place in Erie . 
 Along West 6th Street is Millionaires Row , a collection of 19th century Victorian mansions . The John Hill House is one of the notable residences . The Erie Land Light stands at the foot of Lighthouse Street . The lighthouse was built in 1818 and replaced in 1867 . 
 The Bicentennial Tower , on Dobbins Landing at the foot of State Street , was built in 1995 − 96 to celebrate the city 's bicentennial . It is 187 feet ( 57 m ) tall and gives a panoramic view of Lake Erie and downtown . The Blasco Library and Erie Maritime Museum are its neighbors to the east . Presque Isle Downs opened on February 28 , 2007 , and was the fourth slots parlor in the state and the first in Western Pennsylvania . Table games opened at the casino on July 8 , 2010 . 
 Erie has also been the location for many movies , including the hometown for fictional band " The Wonders " in That Thing You Do ! featuring Tom Hanks . It is also mentioned in the film Wall Street as the location of the fictional company <unk> Steel . Erie is the hometown of Train lead singer , Patrick Monahan . Erie is also the hometown of Marc Brown , the author and illustrator of Arthur books and TV series . 
 = = Media = = 
 Erie is served by Erie Times @-@ News , the city 's only daily newspaper . The Nielsen Company ranks Erie as 144 out of the 210 largest television market in the United States , as of the 2010 − 2011 report . The market is served by stations affiliated with major American networks including <unk> @-@ TV ( NBC ) , <unk> @-@ TV ( ABC ) , <unk> ( FOX ) , <unk> @-@ TV ( CBS ) , and <unk> @-@ DT2 ( CW ) . <unk> is a member of Public Broadcasting Service and also broadcasts in London , Ontario . Cable companies available for Erie include Time Warner Cable , DirecTV , and Dish Network . Erie is also served by several AM and FM radio stations based in the city , and dozens of other stations are received from elsewhere . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Erie plays host to a number of semi @-@ pro and professional sports teams . The Erie SeaWolves play AA baseball in the Eastern League as an affiliate of the Detroit Tigers . The Erie Otters play hockey in the Ontario Hockey League . The Erie BayHawks are a member of the NBA Development League . The Erie Illusion is a member of the United States Women 's Football League . Hockey and basketball games are played at Erie Insurance Arena , while Minor League Baseball games are held at Jerry <unk> Park . 
 Gannon University , Mercyhurst University , <unk> University , and Penn State Behrend have active NCAA collegiate sports programs . The local high schools compete in PIAA District 10 sporting events . Additionally , Cathedral Preparatory School hosts the annual high school basketball tournament featuring top national teams ; called the Burger King Classic since 2010 . Scholastic and intramural sports are held at school and park facilities around the city . The Mercyhurst Ice Center , the JMC Ice Arena , Family First Sports Park , and Erie Veterans Memorial Stadium are many sports arenas and stadiums available in and around the city . 
 The Lake Erie Speedway , a 3 ⁄ 8 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 6 km ) NASCAR sanctioned race track is located in Greenfield Township . Horse racing is found at the Presque Isle Downs and Casino located near Summit Township . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Erie 's location along the shores of Lake Erie provides a plethora of outdoor activities throughout the year . The region 's largest attraction is Presque Isle State Park , drawing over four million visitors a year . The region grows grapes and produces the third largest amount of wine in the United States . 
 Downtown Erie is surrounded by Presque Isle State Park , a National Natural Landmark . The Seaway Trail runs through downtown Erie along the lakefront . The Tom Ridge Environmental Center , at the foot of Presque Isle , features 7 @,@ 000 square feet ( 650 m2 ) of exhibit space . 
 Other tourist destinations include the Bayfront Convention Center ; the Bicentennial Tower that overlooks Lake Erie ; Dobbins Landing , a pier in downtown Erie ; the Erie Land Light , and the Erie Maritime Museum , the home port of the Niagara . The 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 240 @,@ 000 m2 ) Millcreek Mall , one of the largest shopping malls in the United States , is located on Peach Street in nearby Millcreek Township . The indoor waterpark Splash Lagoon , in Summit Township , is the largest indoor waterpark on the East Coast and third largest in the United States . <unk> Park , located at the base of Presque Isle , is the fourth oldest amusement park in Pennsylvania , and the tenth oldest in the United States . 
 = = Government = = 
 The city of Erie is incorporated as a 3rd class city under Pennsylvania law . Incorporated under an " optional charter " , the city is governed by a mayor – council government . The government consists of a mayor , treasurer , controller and a seven @-@ member city council . All of whom are elected to four @-@ year terms , with the terms of the council designed to be overlapping . The mayor is chief executive ; the city council prepares legislation and conducts oversight . The city council meets in Mario S. <unk> Council Chambers at City Hall . Joseph E. Sinnott ( D ) is the mayor of the city of Erie and was first elected in 2005 . As of July 2016 , the Erie City Council consists of : 
 Robert <unk> Council President 
 Sonya M. Arrington 
 David Brennan 
 Curtis Jones , Jr . 
 Casimir <unk> 
 James <unk> 
 Melvin Witherspoon 
 In exchange for tax revenue , the city of Erie provides its residents with police and fire protection . For separate quarterly payments , the city provides garbage , recycling , water and sewer services . The Erie Police Department provides law enforcement in the city and currently has a complement of 173 sworn personnel under the direct supervision of Chief of Police Randy Bowers . The City of Erie Fire Department is a full @-@ time career fire department and employs around 150 uniformed personnel . These employee 's are under the direct supervision of Chief Tony Pol . The City currently operates out of six fire houses and protects approximately 20 square miles ( 52 km2 ) . The city has six engines , two towers and one water rescue unit . The city provides mutual aid to fire departments of Millcreek Township , Summit Township and East County . 
 Erie is the largest city in Pennsylvania 's 3rd congressional district and is currently represented in Congress by Republican Mike Kelly , who was elected in 2010 . Republican Jane M. <unk> of the 49th District has represented Erie in the Pennsylvania State Senate since 1997 . Senator <unk> declined to run for a fifth term in 2012 and was succeeded by Democrat Sean D. Wiley . The city of Erie is split by the 1st and 2nd Districts of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives and is represented by Democrats Patrick Harkins and Florindo Fabrizio , respectively . 
 = = Education = = 
 Erie Public Schools enroll 12 @,@ 527 students in primary and secondary grades . The district has 23 public schools including elementary , middle , high , and one charter school . Other than public schools , the city is home to more than 40 private schools and academies . Bethel Christian School is in Erie . 
 The City of Erie is served by four city high schools , Central Tech High School , East High School , Northwest Pennsylvania Collegiate Academy , Strong Vincent High School , three Catholic high schools Cathedral Preparatory School , Mercyhurst Preparatory School , Villa Maria Academy , and nearby McDowell High School and Iroquois High School in adjacent Millcreek Township and Lawrence Park Township , respectively . 
 Erie is home to several colleges and universities . Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine ( <unk> ) , a large medical school , with branch campuses in Bradenton , Florida and Greensburg , Pennsylvania , has the largest enrollments of medical students in the country , with over 3 @,@ 000 . 
 Penn State Behrend offers more than 40 degrees at the associate , bachelor 's and master 's levels . It has an enrollment of 4400 , with housing for 1800 on campus . 
 Other notable colleges in the Erie area include Gannon University , a Catholic university , situated in downtown Erie . Another Catholic institution , Mercyhurst University , is in the southeast part of the city . 
 Ranking Erie city and county officials , as well as officials of the Erie School District , began looking into the need for a community college in the Erie area in 2006 . As of January 2008 , county officials and representatives of Penn State @-@ Behrend , Mercyhurst and Gannon were in serious discussions expected to lead to the creation of Northwest Pennsylvania Community College by September 2009 . Besides accreditation issues , officials must resolve whether to use local four @-@ year educational institutions or to build a separate site in Summit Township for community college classes . 
 Erie is also home of the Barber National Institute and its Elizabeth Lee Black School , which provides services and education for children and adults with mental disabilities . Erie is home to its main campus , and it provides services in Philadelphia and Pittsburgh . The Achievement Center also serves the needs of children from birth to age 21 with physical and mental health <unk> public libraries in Erie are part of the Erie County library system . The Raymond M. Blasco , M. D. Memorial Library , named for its benefactor , opened in 1996 . It is the third largest library in Pennsylvania . It is connected to the Erie Maritime Museum , both of which are part of a bayfront improvement project that includes the Bayfront Convention Center and the Bicentennial Tower on Dobbins Landing . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Erie is well connected to the Interstate Highway System . There are six " Erie exits " along Interstate 90 , a major cross @-@ country thoroughfare running from Boston to Seattle . Erie is the northern terminus of Interstate 79 , which travels south to Pittsburgh and , ultimately , West Virginia . The western terminus for Interstate 86 , also called the " Southern Tier Expressway , " is at Interstate 90 between Erie and North East , Pennsylvania . Interstate 86 continues east through New York to Binghamton . The Bayfront Connector runs from Interstate 90 in <unk> to the Bayfront Parkway and downtown Erie , along the east side of the city , then connects to Interstate 79 on the west side of the city . Major thoroughfares in the city include 12th Street , 26th Street , 38th Street and Peach Street . Peach is also a part of U.S. Route 19 , whose northern terminus is in Erie and continues south eventually reaching the Gulf of Mexico . Other major routes running through Erie are Pennsylvania Route 5 , known as the Seaway Trail and is made up of parts of 6th Street , 8th Street , 12th Street , and East Lake Road in the city , U.S. Route 20 , which is 26th Street in the city . The city is divided between east and west by State Street . 
 The Erie Metropolitan Transit Authority ( <unk> ) operates the city 's transit bus system , known as the ' e ' . Buses run seven days a week in the city , with trips out to other parts of the county occurring a couple times a week . Intercity buses providing transportation between Buffalo , Cleveland and Pittsburgh are operated by Greyhound Lines . Service between Buffalo and Cleveland is also provided by Lakefront Lines . Both companies operate out of the Intermodal Transportation Center , which opened in 2002 at the foot of Holland Street . 
 The former " Water Level Route " of the New York Central Railroad travels directly through Erie . It is now the mainline for CSX freight trains . The mainline of the Norfolk Southern Railway , originally built by the Nickel Plate Railroad , also travels through Erie . At one time Norfolk Southern trains ran down the middle of 19th Street , but were removed in 2002 . Passenger rail service is provided by Amtrak 's Lake Shore Limited out of Union Station at 14th and State Streets . The Lake Shore Limited stops twice daily — one eastbound towards New York City , and one westbound towards Chicago . 
 Erie International Airport / Tom Ridge Field ( IATA code : <unk> ; <unk> code : <unk> ) is located 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of the city and hosts general aviation , charter , and airline service . Destinations with non @-@ stop flights out of Erie include Chicago O 'Hare International Airport via United Airlines , Philadelphia International Airport via US Airways and Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport via Delta Air Lines . Erie International is in the midst of a $ 80 @.@ 5 million runway extension . The extension is slated to increase the runway 's length by 1 @,@ 920 feet ( 590 m ) , for a total runway length of 8 @,@ 420 feet ( 2 @,@ 600 m ) , " to meet safety requirements " as well as allowing the airport to accommodate larger aircraft . 
 The Port of Erie is located on Presque Isle Bay , a natural harbor formed by Presque Isle . It offers some of the finest port facilities for cargo shipping on the Great Lakes , with direct rail access . The Erie − Western Pennsylvania Port Authority provides water taxi service in the summer months between Dobbins Landing and Liberty Park in downtown Erie , and the Waterworks ferry landing on Presque Isle . 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Erie has four official sister cities as designated by Sister Cities International : 
 Dungarvan , Ireland ( 2007 ) 
 Lublin , Poland ( 1999 ) 
 Mérida , Yucatán , Mexico ( 1973 ) 
 <unk> , Shandong , China ( 1985 ) 
 = Sid Luckman = 
 Sidney Luckman ( November 21 , 1916 – July 5 , 1998 ) was an American football quarterback for the Chicago Bears of the National Football League ( NFL ) from 1939 through 1950 . During his twelve seasons with the Bears he led them to four NFL championships . 
 Luckman was the first modern T @-@ formation quarterback and is considered the greatest long range passer of his time . He was named the NFL 's Most Valuable Player in 1943 , and Pulitzer prize winning sports writer Ira <unk> wrote that Luckman was " the first great T @-@ formation quarterback " . Following his retirement from playing , Luckman continued his association with football by tutoring college coaches , focusing on the passing aspect of the game . 
 Luckman was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1965 , and in 1988 he was declared a joint winner of the Walter Camp Distinguished American Award . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Luckman was born in Brooklyn , New York , to Jewish immigrants from Germany . His father sparked his interest in football at age eight , by giving him a football to play with . He and his parents lived in a residence near Prospect Park and it was here as a youngster that Sid first started throwing the football around . 
 He played both baseball and football for Erasmus Hall High School , with his football skills impressing recruiters from about 40 colleges . Luckman chose Columbia University after meeting Lions coach Lou Little during a Columbia / Navy game at the university 's Baker Field athletic facility . Luckman was not admitted to Columbia College ; instead , he attended the New College for the Education of Teachers , an undergraduate school , which was within Teachers College at Columbia . He competed on the football team from 1936 until the New College closed in 1939 , when he transferred to Columbia College . Coach Little had a problem of getting good high school athletes because of the entrance requirements at Columbia , and Columbia didn ’ t have any physical education undergraduate program , and so , when New College was started Lou Little was happy because they had a P. E. Department . In fact , the 1936 varsity football squad had five other New College students , Hubert Schulze , Edward <unk> , Oscar <unk> , Harry Ream , and Antoni <unk> . 
 At Columbia Luckman was a member of the Zeta Beta Tau fraternity . Keen to remain in Columbia to stay close to his family , he took on jobs such as dish @-@ washing , baby @-@ sitting , and messenger delivery around the campus . At Columbia , as a part of the football team , he completed 180 of 376 passes for 2 @,@ 413 yards and 20 touchdowns and finished third in the 1938 Heisman Trophy voting , behind Davey O 'Brien and Marshall Goldberg . 
 = = Chicago Bears = = 
 = = = Draft = = = 
 Hearing of Sid Luckman 's exploits as a single @-@ wing tailback at Columbia University , Chicago Bears owner and coach George Halas believed Luckman had the ability to become an effective T @-@ formation quarterback , and traveled to New York to watch him play . Halas then convinced the Pittsburgh Pirates ( later the Steelers ) to draft Luckman second overall and then trade him to the Bears because he was interested in using Luckman 's skills to help him restructure the offensive side of the game . However , despite his successes at Columbia University , Luckman initially declined any further interest in pro football , instead preferring to work for his father @-@ in @-@ law ’ s trucking company . Halas went to work on convincing him otherwise . After gaining an invitation to Luckman 's tiny apartment for a dinner which Luckman 's wife Estelle prepared , Halas produced a contract for $ 5 @,@ 500 ( $ 92 @,@ 500 today ) which Luckman immediately signed . At that time both at the college and pro levels , offenses were a drab scrum of running the ball with only occasional passes . In what was then the predominant single @-@ wing formation , the quarterback was primarily a blocking back and rarely touched the ball . Most passing was done by the tailback , and then usually only on third down with long yardage to go . Halas and his coaches , primarily Clark Shaughnessy , invented a rather complex scheme building on the traditional T @-@ formation , but needed the right quarterback to run it properly . 
 Upon starting with Halas , Luckman mastered an offense that revolutionized football , and became the basis of most modern professional offenses . Eventually , Luckman tutored college coaches across the Big Ten , Notre Dame and West Point in the intricacies of the passing game . 
 = = = T @-@ formation = = = 
 In 1940 , during his second season with the Bears , Luckman took over the offense and led the Bears to the title game against Sammy Baugh and the Washington Redskins . The Redskins had beaten the Bears , 7 – 3 , during the regular season . Using the " man @-@ in @-@ motion " innovation to great advantage , the Bears destroyed the Redskins , 73 – 0 , stated to be " the most one @-@ sided game in the history of the sport " . Luckman passed only six times , with four completions and 102 yards in the rout . 
 From 1940 to 1946 the Bears displayed their dominance in the game , playing in five NFL championship games , winning four , and posted a 54 – 17 – 3 regular season record . In 1942 , the Bears posted a perfect 11 – 0 record and outscored their opponents , 376 – 84 , however they lost the championship game to the Redskins . Although the T @-@ formation had been used many years before Luckman joined the Chicago Bears , he was central to Chicago 's successful use of this style of play because of his game @-@ sense and versatility . <unk> Halas ' complex offensive scheme of fakes , men in motion , and quick hitting runs , Luckman added the dimension of accurate downfield throwing . He was instrumental in his team 's record @-@ setting 73 – 0 win over the Washington Redskins in the 1940 NFL championship game . Sportscaster Jimmy Cannon once said in reference to Luckman 's years at Columbia , " You had to be there to realize how great Sid was . " Luckman later became a sought @-@ after tutor and instructor for universities wishing to install the T @-@ formation as an offense . 
 = = = Service with the Merchant Marine = = = 
 In 1943 , as soon as the season had ended , Luckman volunteered as an ensign with the U. S. Merchant Marine . He was stationed stateside and while he could not practice with the team , he did receive permission to play for the Bears on game days during the following seasons . He returned again to the Bears , as a full @-@ time occupation , in 1946 and led them to a fifth NFL championship . 
 = = = Numbers and accomplishments = = = 
 During his career , Luckman completed 51 @.@ 8 % of his passes for 14 @,@ 686 yards and 137 touchdowns with 132 interceptions . He averaged 8 @.@ 4 yards per attempt , second all @-@ time only to Otto Graham ( 8 @.@ 6 ) , and also has a career touchdown rate ( percentage of pass attempts that result in touchdowns ) of 7 @.@ 9 percent . 
 In 1943 , Luckman completed 110 of 202 passes for 2194 yards and 28 touchdowns . His 13 @.@ 9 % touchdown rate that year is the best ever in a single @-@ season , while his 10 @.@ 9 yards per attempt is second all @-@ time . During one game that year , Luckman threw for 443 yards and seven touchdowns , still tied for the most passing touchdowns in one game ; it was also the first 400 @-@ yard passing game in NFL history . His 28 touchdown passes in 1943 ( in only 10 games ) was a record that lasted for many years . 
 Luckman led the NFL in yards per attempt an NFL record seven times , including a record five consecutive years from 1939 to 1943 , and led the NFL in passing yards three times . Luckman was a five @-@ time All @-@ NFL selection , was named the National Football League 's Most Valuable Player Award in 1943 , and led the " Monsters of the Midway " to championships in 1940 , 1941 , 1943 , and 1946 . Despite the fact that his career ended in 1950 , Luckman still owns several Bears ' passing records . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Bold text indicates career best 
 = = Later years = = 
 After retiring from the NFL , Luckman went to work for <unk> @-@ U @-@ Craft , a Chicago @-@ based manufacturer of cellophane products , eventually becoming its president . The company was a part of the Rapid American Corporation of which he also obtained shares . In 1969 , RAC was the subject of an IRS investigation over the payment of these shares and dividends , a case that Luckman and his wife appealed . 
 Luckman 's wife Estelle <unk> died of cancer in 1981 , and he underwent a triple heart bypass operation the following year . Luckman eventually retired to Aventura , Florida where he died on July 5 , 1998 at the age of 81 . He is survived by a son , Bob , and two daughters , Gale and Ellen . 
 = = List of honors = = 
 Joe F. Carr Trophy – National Football League Most Valuable Player in 1943 . 
 College Football Hall of Fame in 1960 
 Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1965 . 
 Walter Camp Distinguished American of the Year Award in 1988 . 
 Columbia University Athletics Hall of Fame in 2006 . 
 = Battle of Gospić = 
 Battle of Gospić ( Croatian : Bitka za Gospić ) was fought in the environs of Gospić , Croatia , from 29 August until 22 September 1991 during the Croatian War of Independence . The battle pitted the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) , stationed in five barracks in the town , and paramilitary elements of the Serbian Guard against the Croatian National Guard ( ZNG ) , police forces based in Gospić and police reinforcements from elsewhere in Croatia . Fighting in the eastern districts of Gospić , controlled by JNA forces with supporting artillery , was largely static but the balance shifted in favor of the Croatian forces following the capture of several JNA depots and barracks on 14 September . The remaining barracks were captured by 20 September leading to the expulsion of the JNA and Serbian Guard forces from the town . 
 The battle followed escalating ethnic tensions in the Lika region , including attacks on Croatian civilians in Lovinac , an attack on a Croatian police checkpoint in Žuta Lokva , and skirmishes at the Plitvice Lakes and the Ljubovo Pass on the Gospić – <unk> <unk> road . The remainder of 1991 saw further deterioration of the situation in the region , resulting in war crimes against Serbs and Croats in the Gospić and Široka Kula massacres . Fighting in the region remained deadlocked , with little to no territorial gains to either side , until a lasting ceasefire was called with the signing of the Sarajevo Agreement of 2 January 1992 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 1990 , an insurrection took place in Croatia centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around the city of Knin , as well as in parts of the Lika , Kordun , and Banovina regions , and settlements in eastern Croatia with significant Serb populations . These regions became the newly formed SAO Krajina ( Serb Autonomous Oblast ) . The announcement of SAO Krajina 's intent to integrate with Serbia resulted in the Croatian Government declaring the insurrection a rebellion . 
 By March 1991 , the conflict had escalated into the Croatian War of Independence and in June 1991 , with the Breakup of Yugoslavia , Croatia declared its independence . The declaration came into effect on 8 October after a three @-@ month moratorium . The SAO Krajina , renamed Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) on 19 December , then initiated a campaign of ethnic cleansing against Croatian civilians . 
 Control of the growing tensions became hampered by increasing support of SAO Krajina being provided by the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) . The inability of the Croatian Police to cope with the situation led to the establishment of the Croatian National Guard ( ZNG ) in May 1991 . However , the development of the ZNG into a military force was hampered by a UN arms embargo , introduced in September , while the military conflict in Croatia continued to escalate — the Battle of Vukovar started on 26 August . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 An already tense situation in the Lika region , following 1 April Plitvice Lakes incident when the first fatalities of the Croatian War of Independence occurred , deteriorated further in June when Croatia reaffirmed its sovereignty through a parliamentary declaration . This was reflected in the rise of violent incidents , setting up of unauthorized road checkpoints and occasional exchanges of small arms fire . On 22 June , three policemen were abducted on the road between Gospić and SAO Krajina @-@ controlled Gračac , and a series of attacks on the Croatian police occurred in various parts of Lika , including Gospić , on 27 – 28 June . In July 1991 , the JNA started to openly confront the Croatian police and the ZNG in Lika . On 1 July , Plitvice police station was surrounded by the JNA , and on 6 July , two ZNG troops were killed and another two wounded in a JNA ambush near Gospić . Further escalation of the fighting was seen at the Ljubovo pass on the Gospić – Korenica road , where the JNA and SAO Krajina troops fought and pushed the ZNG back on 28 – 29 July . 
 Ethnic violence continued to escalate when Serb paramilitaries abducted and killed five Croatian civilians from Lovinac in southern Lika on 5 August , and a police checkpoint in Žuta Lokva was attacked . In early August , the JNA moved the 236th Proletarian Motorized Brigade ( a brigade in name only , the 236th was actually only a company @-@ sized unit ) and a portion of the motorised battalion of the 4th Armoured Brigade , previously deployed to the Ljubovo pass , to Gospić as reinforcements for its garrison in the town . Other movements in that month include the assault and capture of the Plitvice police station on the 30th by SAO Krajina forces . 
 With the imminent capture of Plitvice and the withdrawal of the ZNG from Lički Osik on 31 August , 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 miles ) north of Gospić , the SAO Krajina and the JNA shifted their focus in Lika to Gospić itself , where Serbs comprised 38 @.@ 4 % of the total population of 12 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The JNA forces consisted of 70 officers and 200 soldiers garrisoned at the Stanko <unk> barracks and four other smaller JNA facilities in Gospić . The garrison was supported by 128 Serbian Guard paramilitaries led by Đorđe Božović , which deployed to Gospić from Serbia using JNA transportation , according to an interview with the commanding officer of the southern Lika Territorial Defence in 1991 . Following a reorganization in 1991 , the JNA units based in Gospić were the 236th Motorized Brigade and the 1st Brigade of the 35th Partisan Division , both subordinated to the Rijeka Corps . Prior to this , the 10th Proletarian Infantry Regiment , a B @-@ class unit required to maintain only 15 % of wartime troop levels , was stationed in Gospić , but was amalgamated with the 9th Proletarian Infantry Regiment to form the 236th Motorized Brigade . The JNA garrison in Gospić was formally commanded by Colonel Petar <unk> , however effective command was taken over by his chief of staff , Yugoslav Counterintelligence Service Major Relja Tomić . 
 In early September , Croatian forces in Gospić comprised 427 troops , largely drawn from police forces based in Gospić , Rijeka and Zabok , volunteers from Gospić , Zagreb and Senj as well as Croatian Defence Forces troops . The only ZNG unit in Gospić was the 118th Infantry Brigade , which started to form around the ZNG 58th Independent Battalion on 14 August , but would not be fully assembled until after October . By mid @-@ September , the brigade comprised two battalions — one with four companies and the other one three . The 118th Infantry Brigade was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Mirko Norac , while the head of the Croatian police in Gospić was Ivan Dasović . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 The JNA and the Serb paramilitary force bombarded Gospić with artillery stationed in the village of Divoselo and JNA <unk> Barracks on 29 August 1991 . The intensity of these attacks increased significantly towards mid @-@ September causing significant damage to Gospić ; one SAO Krajina report of the attack estimated that more than 50 % of structures in the city were damaged . 
 At the outset of the battle , the JNA and the paramilitaries pushed the Croatian force out of eastern Gospić . On 5 September , Croatian forces captured JNA Major General <unk> <unk> , along with three armoured personnel carriers ( APCs ) and 32 soldiers , when he attempted to reach JNA barracks that were isolated in the centre of the town but released them the next day following the successful negotiation of a prisoner exchange ( POWs ) . The Croatian commanders in Gospić , however , declined a request that the APCs also be returned — contrary to the instructions of Croatian authorities in Zagreb . Following the capture of <unk> , the JNA artillery bombardment intensified , averaging 1 @,@ 100 artillery shells per day . Despite the intense bombardment , the second week of the battle was a stalemate , without any changes in lines of control . 
 The ZNG and Croatian police planned to cut power , water and communications to all JNA facilities in the government @-@ controlled part of Croatia on 14 September . In Gospić , this action was brought forward to 13 September , the same day that the ZNG captured a JNA storage facility . This provided the Croatian troops with 14 @,@ 000 rifles and a substantial quantity of antitank weapons , more than sufficient for the Croatian forces to match the JNA in the town . The JNA barracks in Perušić and <unk> Barracks in Gospić were captured the following day . The bulk of the JNA garrison in Gospić surrendered on 18 September , following three days of fighting for the Stanko <unk> Barracks . An infantry attack aiming to support the JNA garrison was successfully repelled by Croatian forces on 16 September in the Divoselo area , where Božović was killed . After the city centre became relatively secure , the Croatian forces extended their offensive , capturing the <unk> Barracks and relieving two Croatian @-@ held pockets in villages of Ribnik and <unk> by 20 September . As the JNA surrendered , the Serb forces retreated from the eastern parts of Gospić to a line 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 miles ) in front of Medak , as the Croatian forces completed mopping up in Gospić by 22 September . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Croatia captured approximately 300 JNA officers and soldiers , who were taken to Rijeka after their capture . They were later exchanged for Croatian POWs captured by the JNA in the Battle of Vukovar and elsewhere in Croatia . A large quantity of small arms and ammunition was captured as well as seven tanks and twelve 120 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) mortars . After the battle , the artillery bombardment of Gospić continued from positions around Divoselo and Lički <unk> , approximately 5 to 8 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 to 5 @.@ 0 miles ) south of Gospić . Skirmishes in Lika continued until January 1992 as each side sought to improve their positions on the ground , especially around Gospić and Otočac . On 23 September , a Croatian advance to the south was stopped by JNA and SAO Krajina forces , consisting of an infantry battalion and the Krajina Express armored train , which were defending a JNA storage depot in Sveti Rok . The JNA secured the depot and captured Lovinac on 26 September . By the end of September , Croatian defensive positions around Otočac were sufficiently reinforced that only minor attacks were launched and primarily near the village of <unk> <unk> . In late October and early December , fighting intensified around Divoselo near Gospić , but no territory changed hands . The intensity of artillery bombardment of Gospić peaked on 1 November 1991 , when 3 @,@ 500 artillery shells struck the town . In December , the JNA Knin Corps proposed to the JNA General Staff to advance from Gračac in an attempt to capture Gospić and Otočac , but the signing of the Sarajevo Agreement and ceasefire of 2 January 1992 largely halted further fighting , until the commencement of Operation Medak Pocket in September 1993 . 
 The continuing military confrontation in the region was accompanied by an escalation of ethnic violence , culminating in war crimes against civilians committed by military authorities in Gospić and the SAO Krajina military in the area around Lički Osik in October 1991 . In Gospić , approximately 50 Serb civilians were taken from the town and killed in the surrounding fields . The individuals responsible for the event , later known as the Gospić massacre , were prosecuted by the Croatian judiciary . This resulted in the conviction , in 2003 , of Norac and two other defendants to 12 years in prison . The killings in the Lički Osik area , known as the Široka Kula massacre , resulted in the deaths of 40 civilians , mostly Croats but also some Serbs suspected of supporting Croatia . In 2011 , a court in Belgrade , Serbia , convicted four former SAO Krajina militiamen of killing four Serbs and a Croat in Široka Kula . 
 In 1993 , Croatian authorities charged Marcel <unk> , Tomo Čačić , Jovo <unk> , Bogdan <unk> , Relja Tomić , Duško Bajić , Dane Drakula , Mićo Vasić , <unk> <unk> , Slobodan Dotlić , Dragoljub Lazarević , Radovan <unk> , Bratislav Milojković , Stevo Milošević and Miloš Bogdanović , 15 former JNA officers , posted in Gospić garrison in 1991 with war crimes against a civilian population . All of the defendants , except Drakula were tried in absentia . Drakula was acquitted , while <unk> , Tomić and Bajić were convicted and sentenced to 20 years in prison each while the remaining defendants were sentenced to 15 years . The rulings were upheld by the Supreme Court of Croatia in 1994 . Dotlić was arrested on 18 October 2013 after he visited his parents living in Croatia . Prior to his arrest , Dotlić had requested a new trial , but after his arrest the charges against him were changed to armed insurrection but this was later dropped following the General Amnesty Act . 
 = Sidney Mashbir = 
 Sidney Forrester Mashbir ( 12 September 1891 – 13 June 1973 ) was a senior officer in the United States Army who was primarily involved in military intelligence . Born in New York , he served in the Arizona Army National Guard during the Mexican @-@ American Border War . Mashbir then held several posts in intelligence positions , taking credit for catching the first German spy in the United States , before departing for on a four @-@ year assignment as a language officer to Japan in 1920 . He resigned from the army in 1923 in an attempt to execute his own master plan devised to extract intelligence from Japan in event of a war . His plan failed as a result of the Great Kantō earthquake in September 1923 and he was left bankrupt ; he consequently returned to the US as an engineering businessman . 
 In 1937 , Mashbir returned to Japan in a second attempt to activate his plan on behalf of the Office of Naval Intelligence ; it again failed , and Mashbir was dis @-@ enrolled from the reserves in 1939 . However , following the attack on Pearl Harbor , Mashbir was re @-@ enrolled in January 1940 to lead the Allied Translator and Interpreter Section of Southwest Pacific Area , where he quickly rose to the rank of Colonel . He later served as the Executive Officer for the Army Adjutant General 's Office before retiring in 1951 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sidney Mashbir was born in Manhattan , New York , on 12 September 1891 , but moved to Safford , Arizona in 1899 . Sidney 's father was Professor <unk> S. Mashbir , a Russian immigrant who was well @-@ educated and became the first Russian @-@ speaking attorney to practice Law in New York City . Sidney 's mother , Frieda Freudenthal was also well @-@ educated , and in 1906 became the postmistress of Safford , which included the area of <unk> . 
 Mashbir attended public schools in Safford and Tucson , later studying engineering at the University of Arizona for six months each year until 1911 , whilst simultaneously maintaining a career as an engineering draughtsman , primarily for the engineering department of Tucson , and railroad companies . He married his first wife Blanche Beckwith on 12 September 1913 , with whom he had his first son , Forrester Mashbir ; the couple separated during the mid / late @-@ 1920s . 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = Early service = = = 
 Mashbir joined the Arizona National Guard at a young age , and served as the bugler of Company B in 1904 . He later became the First Lieutenant and adjutant of the University Battalion whilst studying at the University of Arizona . In 1912 , he served as a Lieutenant in Company K of the National Guard encampment , which based at Fort Huachuca . The senior instructor at the time was Captain Louis Joseph Van <unk> . 
 In early 1916 , Mashbir received his first official intelligence assignment , when he was assigned as the Assistant Intelligence Officer of the Ajo @-@ Yuma district of Arizona as a part of the first Arizona Infantry under General Frederick Funston . The unit was at the time was involved in the Mexican @-@ American Border War . Mashbir 's duties included mapping roads , trails and waterholes in northern Sonora . Additionally he would scout Mexican towns with Papago Indian scouts , reporting on the strength and equipment of Mexican garrisons and installing primitive wiretaps on Mexican communication lines . Mashbir was also responsible for investigating Japan 's physical presence in Mexico at the time . 
 In late 1916 , Mashbir applied for a commission in the Regular Army and was accepted with General Funston 's support despite the Army ’ s policy that married men not be accepted . After attending the Army Service Schools at Fort Leavenworth , he joined the 22nd Infantry Regiment , which was stationed at Governors Island , New York , but was soon detailed for counter @-@ espionage duty and was recommended to join a new Counter Intelligence service that was being formed . 
 On 10 September 1917 Mashbir was detailed as assistant to the Department Intelligence Officer at Governors Island . He enrolled in the Military Intelligence Division G @-@ 2 Reserves , where he was promoted to temporary Lieutenant Colonel . During this time he wrote the Provisional Rules for Counter Espionage , Eastern Department , which would become a model for future counterintelligence manuals until World War II , as well as a 52 @-@ page book titled Ten Lessons in Bayonet Fighting published by George Banta Publishing Company at the end of 1917 . Mashbir is also credited with investigations as a Coast Defense Intelligence Officer at Fort Hamilton , which uncovered the first German spy to be apprehended in the United States , Paul Otto Kuhn . 
 = = = Between the wars = = = 
 Following World War I , Mashbir held a position teaching military science and tactics at Syracuse University , where he first considered studying the Japanese language and culture . In August 1919 , he asked the War Department if he could embark on this course of study , stating that it was his intention to apply for a posting to Japan for the purpose of learning the language if the War Department saw fit . Ranked Captain , Mashbir was assigned as one of four US Army Language Officers in Japan on 7 July 1920 . He relocated to Tokyo the following month to begin his four @-@ year tour . When he arrived he reported for duty to Lieutenant Colonel Charles Burnett , the military attaché . Having few Army colleagues , while in Tokyo Mashbir sought the company of other intelligence professionals in the Navy , one of whom was an assistant naval attaché , Lieutenant @-@ Commander Ellis M. Zacharias , with whom Mashbir began a lifelong friendship and collaboration . In July 1922 , at Zacharias ' request , Mashbir secretly worked day and night to produce a secret plan to gather intelligence and get information out of Japan in case of war ; it become known as M @-@ Plan , named after Mashbir . His undisclosed activities working for the naval attaché did not sit well with his superiors , however . 
 In order to establish a network of foreign businessmen in Japan who could be turned into an intelligence network in time of war , it was suggested by his commander , Colonel Burnett , that Mashbir resign his commission and become a businessman in Tokyo himself , in order to put the M @-@ Plan in effect . Consequently , Mashbir resigned in 1923 to pursue business interests and undercover secret intelligence operations , under the impression that he could be reinstated in the Army when his work was done . However the Great Kantō earthquake of September 1923 bankrupted him and , when he sought reinstatement in the military , discovered that it was not possible , because the reinstatement clause of the law under which he had resigned was no longer valid . Neither Mashbir nor Colonel Burnett , who had urged Mashbir to resign , was aware of this , and it become a sticking point for Mashbir in later life , noting that even in 1926 the law was still being reprinted without the correct clause . Consequently , the M @-@ Plan to establish an intelligence network in Japan was scrapped . Mashbir returned to the United States in 1926 under the impression that his military career was over , and sought employment selling refrigerators . He managed to rejoin the Military Intelligence Division G @-@ 2 Reserves , but only spent one year in active duty beginning in the summer of 1927 during which time he updated the Order of Battle documentation on Japan . For the next ten years he returned to his original profession of engineering , including some government work on technical standards . 
 In 1937 , Mashbir returned to Japan after an 11 @-@ year absence in a second attempt to launch the M @-@ Plan on behalf of the Office of Naval Intelligence and his friend , naval attaché Zacharias . This mission aroused suspicions among ill @-@ informed military attachés in Tokyo and an investigation was started into Mashbir . In a misunderstanding that would come close to damaging his career irreparably once more , Mashbir was investigated in Hawaii and , influenced by the military attaché suspicions , a prejudicial report based upon erroneous assumptions was delivered on 24 June 1937 . Colonel Mashbir was advised on 25 February 1939 that he was <unk> from the Military Intelligence Division G2 Reserves for failure to report on the specified day for physical examination . However , it appeared that the actual cause of the <unk> was due to suspicions aroused by failure to communicate to uninformed individuals the nature and the extent of the work on which he was actually engaged . Mashbir ’ s dismissal and the failure to implement an intelligence network such as that suggested in Mashbir 's M @-@ Plan has been described as a key factor in the United States ' failure to have more information on Japan before the attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 . 
 = = = World War II and after = = = 
 Despite Mashbir 's dismissal , the outbreak of hostilities in World War II between Japan and the US , led to him being immediately sought after by the Signal Corps due to his military experience , wide technical skill and knowledge of the Japanese language . He was sworn in for active duty on 24 January 1942 and sent to Brisbane , Australia , and later Manila , Philippines to co @-@ ordinate the inter @-@ service joint Australian / American Allied Translator and Interpreter Section ( ATIS ) , within the Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) . It was at this time that the suspicions which lingered about Mashbir ’ s 1937 mission to Japan on behalf of Naval Intelligence were cleared up with the assistance of Admiral Zacharias , now Assistant Director of Naval Intelligence , interceding with the Assistant Chief of Staff of G2 . 
 The prompt accomplishments of the Allied Translator and Interpreter Section and Mashbir ’ s executive ability resulted in Mashbir being promoted to full Colonel by General Douglas MacArthur after only one month . Mashbir then joined the forefront of MacArthur ’ s intelligence activities and Japanese surrender negotiations , remaining the Commandant of ATIS until December 1945 . He was made famous at the time in the motion picture and still photograph of the preliminary surrender negotiations at Manila , as the man who pushed the ink @-@ well , indicating that General Richard K. Sutherland should correct the Japanese Instrument of Surrender ; and also as the man who thumbed the Japanese Lieutenant General Torashirō Kawabe along as he attempted to shake hands . The second incident provoked some mixed feelings , including sentiment that it could have damaged surrender talks . Mashbir also played a critical role retrieving and translating the Z Plan and in organizing the final surrender of Japan . In his autobiography , Mashbir explained that he was not permitted to shake hands , and that it would have been rude to point , which ultimately lead to the awkward thumbing motion that was photographed . 
 Colonel Mashbir left Japan on 8 December 1945 to serve on the management staff of the Adjutant General ’ s office in Washington , later becoming the executive officer . He retired in October 1951 , having reached the statutory age of 60 . As a result of his military service , Mashbir received several medals including the Army Distinguished Service Medal , Army Commendation Medal ( Silver Oak Leaf Cluster ) , Army of Occupation Medal , World War II Victory Medal , American Defense Service Medal and American Campaign Medal . He was also recommended to become an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( Honorary ) in 1946 by the Australian Governor @-@ General , as was presented OBE insignia in 1948 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Two years after retiring , Mashbir published a 374 @-@ page memoir describing his military and intelligence career in I Was an American Spy ( New York : Vantage , 1953 ) . In Chapter 13 , " The Nisei " ( whom Mashbir used as translators in ATIS ) he pays tribute to Military Intelligence Service ( MIS ) soldiers in these words : " The United States of America owes a debt to these men and to their families which it can never fully repay . " 
 Because of the highly classified and secret nature of ATIS missions , and the work of many MIS soldiers , knowledge of Mashbir and his colleagues was largely missing during the war and even decades afterwards . The role and activities of the MIS was kept in secrecy for more than 30 years ; the few records about its activities were finally made available to the public in 1972 under the Freedom of Information Act , however much still remains unknown today . Consequently , many MIS soldiers did not receive recognition or decorations for their efforts . They became " unsung heroes " , unacknowledged for their contributions in wartime as well as postwar activities . An exception to this was the Military Intelligence Hall of Fame , of which Mashbir was inducted in 1988 . 
 Sidney Mashbir died on 13 June 1973 and was buried at Fort Rosecrans National Cemetery , Point Loma , California . His second wife , Mary Irene ( Donahue ) Mashbir ( born 10 April 1896 ) , with whom he had his second son , Don , and with whom he was buried , died earlier on 3 May 1964 . He was survived by his third wife , Alice Moore Mashbir ( 1928 – 2003 ) , and his two sons , Forrester Mashbir ( 1921 – 2003 ) and Don Stuart Mashbir ( 1931 – 2008 ) . 
 = Black Coffee ( All Saints song ) = 
 " Black Coffee " is a song recorded by English @-@ Canadian girl group All Saints for their second studio album , Saints & Sinners ( 2000 ) . It was released by London Records on 2 October 2000 as the second single from the album . The track was initially written and recorded under the working title , " I Wouldn 't Wanna Be " , by Swiss model and singer Kirsty Bertarelli , after she met Swiss entrepreneur Ernesto Bertarelli in 1997 . All Saints ' later recording was produced by William Orbit who , together with group members Shaznay Lewis and Melanie Blatt , gave it a new arrangement and renamed it " Black Coffee " . A moderately fast ambient , electropop and R & B song , " Black Coffee " has a distinctly production @-@ laden and hazy sound , with obscure and breathy keyboard instruments , guitar , synths , and glitching electronics throughout . It is a sad love song about Kirsty 's love at first sight feelings for Ernesto . 
 The track has received universal acclaim from critics who have cited it as among the group 's best releases , commending Orbit 's obscure electronic production , and the group 's wistful harmonies . " Black Coffee " marked All Saints ' fifth number @-@ one single on the UK Singles Chart and , at the time , made them the girl group with the second most number @-@ one singles in the UK after the Spice Girls , surpassing B * <unk> . It was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) and is the group 's fourth best @-@ selling single in the UK . " Black Coffee " also achieved success internationally , reaching the top 10 in Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , New Zealand and Sweden , and the top 20 in Australia , Finland and Norway . 
 The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Bo Johan Renck . It made use of bullet time @-@ like effects and featured the group at a high rise apartment block , serenading an arguing couple . All Saints promoted " Black Coffee " with live performances on Top of the Pops , Children in Need , Later ... with Jools Holland and at the Smash Hits Poll Winners Party . Despite the single 's success , its release happened during a bitter rift within the group . This became visible publicly during tense live renditions of the song . As well , each member purposefully avoided the others filming their scenes separately during the making of the music video . 
 = = Background = = 
 Swiss model and singer Kirsty Bertarelli ( then Roper , stage name : Kirsty Elizabeth ) based " I Wouldn 't Wanna Be " on her first experiences and feelings for Swiss entrepreneur Ernesto Bertarelli . The pair had met at a dinner on his yacht off the coast of Sardinia in 1997 , and fell in love . The track was later produced by Kirsty 's recording partner , and BBC Radio 1 DJ , Gary Davies who passed it on to songwriter Tom Nichols for input , in an attempt to establish " I Wouldn 't Wanna Be " as a single for Kirsty . Nichols and Alexander Von Soos further modified the song and Kirsty later recorded the demo . Nichols developed it as a quirky pop song , something " slightly left of centre , not completely mainstream " and " slightly out of the ordinary " . While searching for a major label deal for Kirsty , Davies played the " I Wouldn 't Wanna Be " demo to London Records executive Tracy Bennett who wanted the group All Saints to record it instead . 
 = = New arrangement and recording = = 
 Davies accepted Bennett 's offer , though much time had passed since their meeting leaving him and Nichols unsure if the song was going to be recorded at all . However , after the success of All Saints ' single " Pure Shores " in February 2000 , Bennett handed " I Wouldn 't Wanna Be " over to musician William Orbit who was approached for the production of the group 's 2000 album Saints & Sinners . Orbit and All Saints members Shaznay Lewis and Melanie Blatt did a new arrangement for the song and renamed it " Black Coffee " . 
 " Black Coffee " was recorded at Guerilla Beach and Larrabee West studios in Los Angeles , and at Sarm West and Olympic Studios in London . The recording sessions took place during a complex period for All Saints ; they had been developing Saints & Sinners for three years , having written over 40 songs for the album , and had to work around Orbit 's busy schedule for studio time with him . The " Black Coffee " sessions with Orbit were viewed by Blatt as beneficial for the group as he helped them to explore more experimental genres than those on their previous releases . Nichols found Orbit 's production " fantastic " and vastly different from that of the demo . 
 For group member Natalie Appleton , the " Black Coffee " sessions were more frustrating . She was optimistic that the song could feature her own lead vocals as well as those of her sister and fellow group member Nicole Appleton as it was the group 's first original single not written by Lewis . According to Natalie , before the Appletons arrived at the session , Lewis was already present and " staking her claim " to sing lead vocals on " Black Coffee " because Blatt had the lead vocals on " Pure Shores " . Natalie then suggested that each member should have a chance at the song as they were all fond of it . Eventually , the group 's management let Natalie cut a lead vocal , but she was nervous during the session and believed they were placating her . In the Appletons ' autobiography Together , she recalled : " Without support , it is hard to do your best . " Lewis was ultimately chosen as the track 's lead vocalist ; Natalie found this unsurprising , but felt " used and slacked off " . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Black Coffee " is composed in 4 / 4 simple time with a moderately fast tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is an ambient , electropop , R & B song . The track has an unconventional sound ; it is complemented by being more production @-@ laden in comparison to other pop songs . The production is indebted to the genres of electronic and techno music with welding , clipped dance rhythms . It includes obscure and breathy keyboard instruments as well as guitar , synths , and glitching electronics throughout . The verses have a mellow , hazy , and sinister sound and are dislocated from one another with All Saints using eerie harmonies in the build @-@ up to the chorus . These segments generally follow a chord progression of Bm7 – E – Bm7 – E. In the chorus , the song becomes more wistful and changes to a sequence of E – Bm – D – A. 
 " Black Coffee " is a sad love song about Kirsty 's love at first sight feelings for Ernesto . It recalls how they met , during a time where they were frequently sailing and did not want to be elsewhere . The hook , " I wouldn 't want to be anywhere else but here , anywhere at all " , explains how Ernesto made Kirsty feel . The song 's first verse and outro narrates their romance : " Night swimming / Beach walking / Always silent / Never talking / Then you call my name / And I know inside I love you ... " The second verse details more domestic scenarios during their relationship : " Brush your teeth / Pour yourself a cup of black coffee . " Mary Ann A. Bautista of the Philippine Daily Inquirer opined that the lyrics manifested a role reversal in a romantic relationship : " Not only does the girl make the first move , but she also reveals her true emotions by saying ' I love you ' first ; along the way , she hopes to be loved and nurtured . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Black Coffee " was released on 2 October 2000 as the second single from Saints & Sinners . London Records commissioned the single in CD , cassette , 7 " and 12 " formats . It was accompanied by a B @-@ side , " I Don 't Wanna Be Alone " , written by Lewis , Ali Tennant , Wayne Hector and Karl Gordon , and produced by Gordon . Remixes by <unk> , the Shadow Snipers and Wideboys were also made available , as well as a remix by The Neptunes which featured a rap by American duo Clipse . The single 's cover art was photographed by Ellen von Unwerth . A second version of the song accompanied the release of the group 's 2001 single " All Hooked Up " . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Black Coffee " has received universal acclaim from critics . Sean O 'Brien of The Sunday People gave the song a rating of eight out of ten , opining that it was poised for great commercial success . David <unk> of The Jerusalem Post called the track " wistful " and " radio @-@ friendly " . Tim de Lisle of The Mail on Sunday considered it a " wispy but beguiling piece " and wrote that Orbit 's " floaty atmospheres proved to be perfectly suited to the girls ' slender voices " . Simon Evans writing in the Birmingham Post described the song as a " beautiful slice of haunting , hypnotic pop " . John Mulvey of The Scotsman praised its " sleek , scrupulously mature sound " . Siobhan Grogan of the NME found the track " almost perfect " and complimented its " mellow , glossy haziness " , adding that it was if the group recorded the track lying down . Grogan concluded : " It 's wistful in all the right places and makes sadness sound rather alluring like only the bitterest love songs can . " John Walshe of the Hot Press deemed the group 's harmonies " so saccharine they could have been copyrighted by <unk> " . 
 A Sunday Herald critic opined that the song was " impressively @-@ lacquered " and " undoubtedly [ helped ] tentpole the album proper " . Samuel McGuire of the same publication viewed the track as a " gem of a truly wondrous lustre " . Nigel Packer of the BBC News considered it to be a highlight of Saints & Sinners , complimenting its " pure pop " and " liquid techno sound " . Lindsay Baker of The Guardian cited " Black Coffee " as the album 's " particularly infectious " track . R.S. Murthi writing in the New Straits Times described it as " the most endearing " song on Saints & Sinners , deeming it " tasty " and " redolent of the Cocteau Twins " . Eva Simpson of the Daily Mirror regarded the track as " sassy " and a " curtain raiser " for Saints & Sinners , noting that Orbit 's production " brought the same high @-@ gloss sheen " as " Pure Shores " . Adrian Thrills of the Daily Mail named " Black Coffee " , together with " Pure Shores " , as the two best tracks on the album , deeming them " brilliantly produced " . Russell Baillie of The New Zealand Herald considered " Black Coffee " , along with " Pure Shores " and " Surrender " , to " put most [ of the album ] in the shade " . A Western Mail critic said " Black Coffee " was as " equally tremendous " as " Pure Shores " . 
 Julie MacCaskill of the Daily Record believed that the song was a testament to the group 's " pop power " . Jon O 'Brien from AllMusic felt that " Black Coffee " was among All Saints ' most accomplished and mature work , praising its " lush electronic landscapes " . " Black Coffee " placed among 2000 year @-@ end lists compiled by Dotmusic ( number three ) , and the NME ( number 26 ) . In 2016 , Lewis Corner from Digital Spy placed the song at number three in his ranking of All Saints ' singles , commending its " euphoric " chorus and concluding : " It quite literally is pop @-@ form caffeine . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Black Coffee " debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart for the week @-@ ending 14 October 2000 with first @-@ week sales of 60 @,@ 000 copies . At the time , this was the second lowest first @-@ week sales tally for a number @-@ one single in 2000 , beating only Westlife 's " I Have a Dream " / " Seasons in the Sun " . In spite of low sales , " Black Coffee " sold nearly 25 % more copies than the number @-@ two single that week - Mariah Carey and Westlife 's " Against All Odds " . It marked All Saints ' fifth number @-@ one single and , at the time , made them the girl group with the second @-@ most number one singles after the Spice Girls , surpassing B * <unk> . The song was also Orbit 's third UK number @-@ one single as a producer in 2000 , following " Pure Shores " and Madonna 's " American Pie " . " Black Coffee " dropped to number three in its second week and went on to spend a total of 21 weeks on the chart . On 20 October 2000 , the single was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting UK shipments in excess of 200 @,@ 000 copies . By 2008 , " Black Coffee " had sold 230 @,@ 000 copies . It is the group 's fourth best @-@ selling single in the UK according to the Official Charts Company . 
 The song also had success across Europe , peaking at number five on the European Hot 100 Singles chart for two consecutive weeks . It reached the top 10 in Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands and Sweden , and the top 20 in Finland and Norway . In Australia , the track entered the ARIA Singles Chart issued for 15 October 2000 at number 29 and went on to peak at number 20 for two consecutive weeks . " Black Coffee " debuted at number 40 on the New Zealand Singles Chart dated 29 October 2000 and reached number seven in its seventh week , becoming All Saints ' fifth top 10 single there . The success of " Black Coffee " launched both Nichols and Kirsty 's musical careers . In an interview for HitQuarters , Nichols explained : " I owe a lot to the All Saints and to Tracy Bennett at London [ ... ] they are a large further reason why I have a career because suddenly when that song was released , the opportunities that [ I got ] certainly in the UK , but also Europe @-@ wide , [ were ] absolutely huge . " Kirsty received royalties of over £ 12 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Black Coffee " was directed by Bo Johan Renck . It was filmed at Ealing Studios in London on 17 August 2000 . Special effects , similar to the bullet time from the 1999 film The Matrix , were used as they were considered state of the art at the time . The video was specially edited as each All Saints member filmed their scenes separately . The members requested that they not be put in the same room as each other because they were not on speaking terms during this period . The Daily Mirror reported : " The girls have formed camps with sisters Nicole and Natalie sticking together while Mel and Shaznay are the other duo . There are definitely tensions . " The video aired on 4 September 2000 . 
 The video opens with a view of a high rise apartment block at night and All Saints , in individual scenes , dancing and singing from its rooftop . An interracial couple is shown arguing in various rooms in their apartment as different members of the group appear invisible beside them at various points . Each time the pair engages in aggressive behaviour , their actions are frozen while All Saints serenade them . These actions include : throwing pillows , leaves , a suitcase full of clothes , splashing bathwater , and breaking a mirror . The girlfriend later sits in a corner and cries during her boyfriend 's rage . The video ends with frozen , individual visuals of each group member throughout the now empty apartment . 
 The music video received heavy rotation from MTV Europe . Corner noted that it signified when " cracks were initially starting to show " within All Saints , explaining : " There 's a reason they don 't appear alongside each other in the music video : by then , they couldn 't physically stand each other . " CBC Television placed " Black Coffee " at number five in its ranking of the group 's music videos , praising its special effects and the combination of " an angelic serenade during an argument " . Jon Stewart , author of Oh Blessed Holy Caffeine Tree : Coffee in Popular Music , felt that the music video 's " opulent location " identified " strongly with the culture industry 's image of coffee as a luxurious beverage whose consumption signifies prominent social status " . Stewart further opined that the visual put emphasis on the " romantic disharmony " of the song 's lyrics . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 To promote " Black Coffee " , All Saints first performed it at BBC 's People 's Awards on 6 October 2000 . The group also performed the song on Top of the Pops on 13 October 2000 , the Pepsi Chart Show on 15 October 2000 , and at G @-@ A @-@ Y on 11 November 2000 . The group also performed the song for BBC 's Children in Need telethon on 17 November 2000 . Prior to this performance , there was much backstage tension between the group 's members because Nicole had revealed her pregnancy to the other members the previous day . Spice Girls singer Melanie C described the atmosphere as " icy " , while Nicole 's then @-@ boyfriend Liam Gallagher recalled : " Nic and Nat are working really hard , but it doesn 't matter what they do – the other two have got it in for them . You don 't treat people like that , trying to control their lives . " All Saints performed " Black Coffee " along with " Pure Shores " and " <unk> ' Over You " on Later ... with Jools Holland on 18 November 2000 . 
 The group next performed the song at the Smash Hits Poll Winners Party on 10 December 2000 . By this time , tensions within the group had become visible on stage ; and the Appletons , along with their make @-@ up artists and hairdressers , were ignored by Lewis and Blatt . Natalie recalled : " It was as if Nic and I were not there . " The performance received a negative review from Betty Clarke of The Guardian who wrote : " Only All Saints let the side down , going through the motions ... " All Saints performed " Black Coffee " and " Pure Shores " at Capital Radio 's Christmas Party later that month . However , a rift between the members was now palpable on stage with Lewis and Blatt on one side of the stage and the Appletons on the other . The tension was prompted by a row which erupted backstage between Lewis and Natalie over who would wear a particular jacket for the performance and nearly led to the two coming to blows . The rift ultimately caused All Saints to split up the following year . 
 In 2000 , Kirsty sang " Black Coffee " at her wedding to Ernesto . In an interview for The Daily Telegraph , she said : " Hearing my song on the radio brought mixed emotions , I have to be thankful to All Saints , they were so popular at the time they could make the song number one , but I knew the emotions behind that song . I wanted to sing it myself because there 'd have been real meaning behind it , which was my love for Ernesto . " In 2014 , All Saints reunited and performed " Black Coffee " as part of their set list for five dates as special guests on the Backstreet Boys ' In a World Like This Tour in Ireland and the UK ( 26 March – 5 April 2014 ) . The group dressed in tracksuit jackets , and casual leggings and trousers for their renditions . They also reprised the song at G @-@ A @-@ Y on 12 April 2014 , and performed it at the V Festival ( 16 @-@ 17 August 2014 ) . The group then performed " Black Coffee " at Manchester Pride on 25 August 2014 , dressed in matching military shirts , bomber jackets , leggings and trainers . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 According to Clem Bastow of The Sydney Morning Herald , " Black Coffee " , in particular , won All Saints " major critical points " over the Spice Girls and complemented the group 's " impeccable back catalogue " . Graeme Virtue of the Sunday Herald hailed it as one of " the best pop singles ever " . Kathy McCabe of the Herald Sun deemed the song " the benchmark of sassy , harmony @-@ laden pop " . Christie Leo of the New Straits Times wrote : " The aromatic shimmer of ' Black Coffee ' alone is all the evidence you 'll need to know that All Saints were truly heavenly . " Ian Sturgess of the Daily Mirror said the track : " boasts one of the most infectious pop choruses of all time " . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian found " Black Coffee " superior to " Pure Shores " , praising its " beguiling treatment of a domestic scenario " and citing its lyrics as " easily the most alluring depiction of a bleary @-@ eyed morning routine ever recorded . " Q magazine placed " Black Coffee " in their list of 1010 Songs You Must Own . 
 In 2007 , " Black Coffee " was included in the competitive music video game series SingStar . According to Fiona Shepherd of The Scotsman , the " smart @-@ pop attack " of the song " paved the way " for later girl groups Girls Aloud and the Sugababes . Neil Hannon of the Irish band The Divine Comedy expressed admiration for " Black Coffee " , commending its production @-@ heavy sound which " adds to the sound of it , rather than taking anything away " , and noted that its sound later became apparent in singles by Girls Aloud : " Girls Aloud do pop like that now : songs like ' Biology ' are a bit weird , and they flout the general rules , and I admire that . But ' Black Coffee ' is better . " Writing for Metro in 2013 , Seamus Duff stated that " Black Coffee " still sounded as " fresh and relevant " . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Saints & Sinners . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certification = = 
 = Juniata County , Pennsylvania = 
 Juniata County is a county located in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . At the 2010 census , the population was 24 @,@ 636 . Its county seat is Mifflintown . The county was created on March 2 , 1831 , from part of Mifflin County and named for the Juniata River . 
 Mountains in Juniata County include Tuscarora Mountain and Shade Mountain . Agricultural land and forested land make up most of the county 's area . Major rivers and creeks in the county include the Susquehanna River , the Juniata River , Tuscarora Creek , and West Branch Mahantango Creek . It borders six other counties . The county lies over 16 different rock formations ( which are from the Ordovician , Silurian , and Devonian ) and 51 different soils . 
 Juniata County has a relatively low population density . The most population @-@ dense parts of the county are the boroughs of Mifflintown and Mifflin . The most common races in the county are white ( 96 @.@ 8 % of all residents ) and black ( 0 @.@ 6 % of all residents ) . Between 1940 and 2005 , Juniata County 's population grew faster than all but two other counties in Pennsylvania . Susquehanna Township had the fastest @-@ growing population of any borough or township in the county during this time period . Livestock farming is the largest industry in the county , although there are other industries as well , including crop farming and tourism . Manufacturing jobs are the most common jobs in the county . The county 's median household income is $ 34 @,@ 698 per year and its median family income is $ 39 @,@ 757 per year . The poverty rate is 9 @.@ 5 % and the unemployment rate is 5 @.@ 4 % . The median house value in the county was $ 87 @,@ 000 in 2000 . The main roads in Juniata County are Pennsylvania Route 235 , Pennsylvania Route 35 , Pennsylvania Route 104 , U.S. Route 11 / U.S. Route 15 , U.S. Route 22 / U.S. Route 322 , Pennsylvania Route 74 , Pennsylvania Route 850 , and Pennsylvania Route 333 . 
 There are four boroughs and thirteen townships in Juniata County . The county is served by two school districts : the Juniata County School District and the Greenwood School District . There are five areas in Juniata County that are protected by the Central Pennsylvania Conservancy and 59 natural heritage sites in the county . 
 The first European settlers arrived in Juniata County in the 1750s . The county has historically been part of Mifflin County and before that , part of Cumberland County . 
 = = History = = 
 Juniata County was historically a part of Cumberland County and later Mifflin County . Juniata County was formed on March 2 , 1831 , from parts of Mifflin County . It is named after the Juniata River . The word " <unk> " itself is a Seneca word that means either " people of the standing stone " or " blue waters " . The first boroughs in the county to be settled were Mifflintown and Thompsontown , which were settled in 1790 . Port Royal and Mifflin were settled in 1812 and 1848 , respectively . The first of these borough to be incorporated was Mifflintown , on March 6 , 1833 . The last one to be incorporated was Thompsontown , on February 7 , 1868 . However , squatters arrived in the county and were removed from it considerably earlier , by 1750 and one of the first warrants for land in the county was issued in 1755 . Many of the earliest landowners in Delaware Township were speculators as opposed to settlers . There was an Indian raid in the county in 1755 and 1756 , although Fort Bingham and Fort Peterson had been constructed . The Beale family was one of the earliest families to inhabit the county . More settlers arrived in the 1750s and 1760s and the first gristmill on the western side of the Juniata River was built in the county in 1767 . A public road was built in the county between Tuscarora Creek and a location near Shade Mountain in 1768 . John Hamilton constructed a sawmill and gristmill on <unk> Creek in Delaware Township in 1776 . The first known physician in the county , Dr. Ezra Doty , settled in Mifflintown in 1791 . 
 The first four townships in what would become Juniata County were formed on October 23 , 1754 . They were Lack Township , Aire Township , Fannett Township , and Tyrone Township . These early townships had no formal boundaries . By 1913 , the original townships had been divided into a total of 13 townships . 
 The Pennsylvania Canal began serving Juniata County in 1826 and closed in 1900 . The Pennsylvania Railroad reached the county in the late 1840s . The Tuscarora Valley Railroad was also in the county until it closed in 1934 . 
 During Hurricane Agnes in 1972 , a total of <unk> acres of Juniata County were flooded . 57 families were displaced during this flooding . 
 Juniata County was the last county in Pennsylvania to develop a modern comprehensive plan . It did , however , construct a comprehensive plan in 1974 . 
 In a 1997 survey , 66 @.@ 8 % of respondents found Juniata County a " very desirable " living place . In a similar survey in 2007 , however , only 56 @.@ 9 % of respondents found the county a " very desirable " living place . 
 = = = Historic places = = = 
 Eight locations in Juniata County are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . They were listed between 1972 and 1986 . They include the Academia Pomeroy Covered Bridge , the Tuscarora Academy , and the Book Site in Beale Township ; the <unk> Covered Bridge in Greenwood Township ; the <unk> @-@ Port Royal Bridge in Milford Township ; and the East Oriental and North Oriental covered bridges . Eight additional places are eligible for a listing on the National Register of Historic Places . There are five Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission historical markers in Juniata County . They commemorate the Tuscarora Path , the Tuscarora Academy , Patterson 's Fort , Fort Bingham , and Juniata County itself . 
 The Academia Pomeroy Covered Bridge ( also known as the Pomeroy Academia Covered Bridge ) was built in 1901 . It is 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) wide and 278 feet ( 85 m ) long , making it one of the longest remaining covered bridges in Pennsylvania . 
 = = Geography = = 
 According to the U.S. Census Bureau , the county has a total area of 394 square miles ( 1 @,@ 020 km2 ) , of which 391 square miles ( 1 @,@ 010 km2 ) is land and 2 @.@ 2 square miles ( 5 @.@ 7 km2 ) ( 0 @.@ 6 % ) is water . 
 Juniata County is located between two major metropolitan areas . One is State College , which is northwest of the county . The other is Harrisburg , which is to the southeast of the county . U.S. Route 22 / U.S. Route 322 , which is a four @-@ lane highway , leads from the county to these metropolitan areas . 
 Parts of Juniata County are fairly flat , but there are areas in the county with slopes of 25 % or greater . However , most development in the county is confined to areas with slopes of 15 % or less . Many of the county 's steepest slopes , with grades of 25 % of more , are located on the edges of the county . These slopes are generally found on mountainous ridges . However , there are some similarly steep slopes in the middle of the county . All four boroughs in the county have slopes with a grade of 25 % or more near them . Slopes of 15 % to 25 % can be found throughout the county . 
 Much of Juniata County is hilly . Mountains occupy many of the county 's borders . Tuscarora Mountain forms the county 's border with Perry County . Shade Mountain runs from Snyder County through Juniata County and into Huntingdon County . 
 There are two locations in Juniata County that the Juniata County Comprehensive Plan describes as " outstanding and unique scenic features " . These are <unk> Overlook and the Concord Narrows . <unk> Overlook is an overlook in Milford Township on Pennsylvania Route 333 , from which the Juniata River between Shade Mountain and Blue Mountain can be seen , as well as the Lewistown Narrows . The Concord Narrows are a narrow water gap where the Juniata River flows past Tuscarora Mountain . <unk> from the Silurian Period can be found in this water gap . 
 = = = Rivers and watersheds = = = 
 There are several major streams and rivers in Juniata County . These include the Susquehanna River , the Juniata River , Tuscarora Creek , <unk> Creek , West Branch Mahantango Creek , Licking Creek , and Lost Creek . 
 112 @,@ 000 acres , or 45 % of Juniata County 's area is in the Tuscarora Creek watershed , including the borough of Port Royal . 59 @,@ 000 acres ( 24 % of the county 's area ) is in the Juniata River watershed . This area includes parts of all four of the boroughs in the county . 26 @,@ 000 acres of Juniata County are in the <unk> Creek watershed and a similar amount of the county is in the watershed of Lost Creek . 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 % of the counties area ) are in the West Branch Mahantango Creek watershed . 
 = = = Land use = = = 
 Residential land makes up more than 50 @,@ 000 acres , or one fifth , of Juniata County 's area . The bulk of residential land is single @-@ family dwellings , but seasonal homes and mobile homes also make up significant portions of it . The county 's residential land is concentrated along in its boroughs , but occurs along roads and in villages throughout the county . Multi @-@ family residential land is comparatively rare . Less than 1 % of the county 's land ( 430 acres ) is used for manufacturing purposes . Only approximately 370 acres are used for transportation and utilities . Roughly 300 acres are used for transportation and communication and 70 acres are used for other utilities . Businesses make up 0 @.@ 21 % of the county 's land , or 525 acres . 490 acres are devoted to retail businesses , while 35 acres are devoted to wholesale businesses . Services occupy 0 @.@ 67 % of the county 's area . 
 Land devoted to recreation in Juniata County makes up 0 @.@ 5 % , or 1000 acres , of its area . Agricultural land comprises 41 % ( 101 @,@ 000 acres ) of the county . A total of 167 @,@ 500 acres , or approximately two thirds of the county 's area , is forested land . Large portions of the southwestern part of the county are forested . 34 % of the county 's land is undeveloped , most of which ( 60 @,@ 000 acres ) is unused land . 
 The vast majority of Juniata County is rural land . However , there are a few rural hamlets and villages ( which have one to four housing units per acre ) scattered throughout the county . There is also an area termed a " high growth area " by the Juniata County Comprehensive Plan near the boroughs of Mifflin and Mifflintown . It has between 8 and 17 housing units per acre . The Juniata County Comprehensive Plan also designates areas near Thompsontown and Port Royal as " rural growth area [ s ] " . These areas have three to six housing units per acre . 
 = = = Adjacent counties = = = 
 Juniata County borders Mifflin County , Pennsylvania to the northwest , Snyder County , Pennsylvania to the north , Northumberland County , Pennsylvania to the northeast , Dauphin County , Pennsylvania to the southeast , Perry County , Pennsylvania to the south , and Huntingdon County , Pennsylvania and Franklin County , Pennsylvania to the southwest . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Juniata County lies over 16 different rock formations , some of which contain limestone . These rock formations come from the Ordovician Period , the Silurian Period , and the Devonian Period . The northernmost part of the county contains rocks of the Juniata Formation , the Bald Eagle Formation , and undivided Juniata and Bald Eagle formations . All of these formations primarily consist of sandstone . South of these formations lie the Bloomsburg and Mifflintown Formation undivided , the Clinton Group , and the Tuscarora Formation . The first two of these consist mainly of shale , while the third is composed of quartzite . The rock formations in the southwestern part of the county include the Brallier and Harrell Formations undivided , the Hamilton Group , the Irish Valley member of the Catskill Formation , and others . The eastern part of the county lies almost entirely over the Hamilton Group , the Tuscarora Formation , and the Irish Valley member of the <unk> Formation . 
 Other rock formations found in Juniata County include the Keyser through Mifflintown Formation undivided , the Keyser and Tonoloway Formation undivided , the Onondaga and Old Port Formations undivided , the <unk> Formation , the Trimmers Rock Formation , the Wills Creek Formation , and the Wills Creek Formation through Mifflintown Formation undivided . 
 Four of the rock formations found in Juniata County come from def Ordovician Period , seven come from the Silurian Period , and seven come from the Devonian Period . 
 There are seven soil associations in Juniata County . One of these is the Hazelton @-@ Laidig @-@ Buchanan Association . It is a deep and fairly well @-@ drained soil that is found in 24 % of the county . It is mostly found in the county 's forested areas . The Berks @-@ Weikert @-@ Bedington Association is also found in the county . It is found in 33 % of the county 's area and is not as deep as the Hazelton @-@ Laidig @-@ Buchanan Association , but is well @-@ drained . The soil is mostly found in agricultural lands and some forested areas . Another soil association in the county is the Edon @-@ Opequon @-@ Weikert Association , which is a well @-@ drained soil that occupies 17 % of the county . The <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ Mertz Association is a deep and well @-@ drained soil that makes up 12 % of the county . The Chenango @-@ Pope @-@ Holly Association and the Morrison @-@ Hazelton @-@ Clymer Association make up 7 % and 6 % of the county , respectively . They are both deep and occur on gentle slopes . However , the former is poorly drained , while the latter is well @-@ drained . The Hazelton @-@ Laidig @-@ Buchanan Association is well @-@ drained and makes up 1 % of the county 's area . 
 There are 51 different soil types in Juniata County , of which 18 are considered prime farmland . There area few agricultural soils on the northern and southern edges of the county . 
 The main rock formations in the boroughs of Mifflin and Mifflintown are the undivided Keyser and Tonoloway Formations and the Irish Valley Member of the Catskill Formation . The same rock formations are found in the borough of Port Royal , along with the Clinton Group and the Hamilton Group to the northwest and southeast of the borough , respectively . The Hamilton Group , the Keyser and Tonoloway Formations , and the Irish Valley Member of the Catskill Formation are found in or near the borough of Thompsontown . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Juniata County is in the Humid Continental climatic region . In the summer , highs are generally in between 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) and 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) , but on occasion exceed 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) . The lows in the summer are typically slightly below 60 ° F ( 16 ° C ) . High temperatures in the winter are usually between 30 ° F ( − 1 ° C ) and 40 ° F ( 4 ° C ) . 
 On average , Juniata County receives 38 inches ( 97 cm ) of precipitation per year . An average of 28 inches ( 71 cm ) of snow fall on the county each winter . The county rarely experiences long @-@ term droughts , but does experience short @-@ term droughts often . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 At the 2010 census , there were 24 @,@ 636 people , 9 @,@ 476 households , and 6 @,@ 839 families residing in Juniata County . The projected population of the county for 2020 is 26 @,@ 071 . The population density was 63 people per square mile ( 24 / km ² ) . There were 10 @,@ 978 housing units at an average density of 28 per square mile ( 10 / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the county was 96 @.@ 8 % White , 0 @.@ 6 % Black or African American , 0 @.@ 1 % Native American , 0 @.@ 3 % Asian ( 0 @.@ 1 % Indian , 0 @.@ 1 % Chinese , and 0 @.@ 1 % Korean ) , 1 @.@ 1 % from other races , and 1 % from two or more races . 
 There are eight Filipino people , five Vietnamese people , and two Samoans in Juniata County . 
 2 @.@ 5 % of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race . These include 195 Puerto Ricans , 77 Mexicans , and 2 Cubans . The highest percentage of Hispanic people in any township or borough in the county is 8 @.@ 71 % , in Mifflintown . Between 1990 and 2000 , the Hispanic population in the county increased by 653 % . In 2000 , 45 @.@ 4 % of the population of Juniata County were of German , 20 @.@ 2 % American , 5 @.@ 7 % Irish and 5 @.@ 0 % English ancestry according to Census 2000 . 3 @.@ 95 % reported speaking Pennsylvania German , German , or Dutch at home ; 1 @.@ 63 % speak Spanish . 
 The housing density and population density of Juniata County is considerably below average for a Pennsylvania county . 
 The administrative subdivisions of Juniata County with the highest population density are Mifflintown ( with a density of 6 @,@ 184 @.@ 9 people per square mile ) , Mifflin ( with a density of <unk> @.@ 9 people per square mile ) , and Thompsontown ( with a density of 2193 @.@ 1 people per square mile ) . The township with the highest population density in the county is Monroe Township , with 104 @.@ 0 people per square mile . The highest density of housing units in the county is in Mifflintown ( 2 @,@ 837 @.@ 4 per square mile ) , followed by Mifflin ( 1 @,@ 454 @.@ 2 per square mile ) and Thompsontown ( 1 @,@ 144 @.@ 4 per square mile ) . Greenwood Township has the third lowest population density of any administrative division in Juniata County : 27 @.@ 9 people per square mile . The second lowest density is in Tuscarora Township ( 24 @.@ 5 people per square mile ) and the lowest density is in Lack Township ( 13 @.@ 2 people per square mile ) . The lowest density of housing units in the county is in Lack Township ( 10 @.@ 0 per square mile ) , the second @-@ lowest density is in Greenwood Township ( 11 @.@ 3 per square mile ) , and the third @-@ lowest density is in Tuscarora Township ( 13 @.@ 7 per square mile ) . 
 Between 1940 and 2005 , the population of Juniata County was proportionally the third fastest @-@ growing population of any county in Pennsylvania , with only Snyder County 's and Perry County 's populations growing faster . In this time period , the county 's population has increased by 50 @.@ 69 % , or 7 @,@ 792 people . In the 1980s , the county 's rate of population growth was more than 50 times higher than the rate of population growth in Pennsylvania . The county 's rate of population growth in the 1970s was even higher . 
 Susquehanna Township 's population was the fastest @-@ growing population of any administrative division in Juniata County between 1990 and 2005 , with an increase of 35 @.@ 42 % . Other fast @-@ growing populations in the county include those of Milford Township ( 22 @.@ 53 % ) and Thompsontown 20 @.@ 1 % ) . The populations of Mifflin and Mifflintown are the only administrative divisions in the county whose populations decreased in that time period ( at a rate of <unk> % and <unk> % , respectively ) . However , between 2000 and 2005 , eight administrative divisions experienced decreasing populations . Between 1990 and 2000 , every borough and township in the county experienced an increase in population . 
 At the 2010 census , the average household size in Juniata County was 2 @.@ 57 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 01 . 23 @.@ 0 % of the county 's households were inhabited by a single individual . 
 In 2000 , there were 11 @,@ 353 males and 11 @,@ 468 females in Juniata County , or 98 @.@ 99 males per 100 females . The highest percentage of males in any administrative division in the county was 52 @.@ 07 % , in Beale Township . The highest percentage of females in any township or borough in the county was 52 @.@ 95 % , in Fermanagh Township . 
 At the 2010 census , the population in Juniata County was spread out with 6 @.@ 3 % under 5 years of age , 6 @.@ 8 % from 5 to 9 years of age , and the same percentage from 10 to 14 years of age . 6 @.@ 5 % of the county 's inhabitants were 15 to 19 years of age , 5 @.@ 4 % were 20 to 24 years old , 5 @.@ 3 % were 25 to 29 years old , and 5 @.@ 5 % were 30 to 34 years old . People of 35 to 39 years of age comprised 6 @.@ 1 % of the population , 40- to 44 @-@ year @-@ olds comprised 6 @.@ 6 % of the population , and 7 @.@ 6 % of the population consisted of 50- to 54 @-@ year @-@ olds . People of 55 to 59 years of age made up 7 @.@ 6 % of the population , people of 60 to 54 years of age comprised 6 @.@ 0 % of it , and <unk> to 69 @-@ year @-@ olds made up 4 @.@ 9 % of the population . People of 70 to 74 years of age make up 3 @.@ 9 % of the county 's population , people of 75 to 79 years of age make up 3 @.@ 2 % of the population , people of 80 to 84 years old make up 2 @.@ 5 % of the population , and people older than 85 years make up 2 @.@ 3 % of the population . 
 = = Infrastructure , industry , and economy = = 
 In 2000 , the agricultural , hunting / fishing , forestry , and mining industries made up 5 @.@ 46 % of the industry in Juniata County . Livestock farming was more popular in the county than crop cultivation . In 2002 , the egg and poultry industry in the county generated $ 32 million in sales ( the 7th highest of the Pennsylvania counties ) and the dairy industry generated $ 17 million in sales ( the 23rd highest of the Pennsylvania counties ) . The hog and pig industry generated $ 7 million and the cattle industry generated $ 4 million in sales ( the 10th and 27th highest of Pennsylvania counties , respectively ) . The county 's grain industry generated $ 1 million ( the 35th highest of Pennsylvania counties ) . The county is the fourth most prolific poultry @-@ producing county in Pennsylvania . In addition to the aforementioned industries , there are also small @-@ scale clothing manufacturing businesses in the county . 
 There were 801 farms in Juniata County in 1997 , occupying a total of 96 @,@ 312 acres of farmland . By 2002 , there were only 644 farms and 86 @,@ 203 acres of farmland . 
 There is one public library in Juniata County : the Juniata County Library in Mifflintown . It has approximately 64 @,@ 000 materials and an annual circulation of 131 @,@ 940 materials . It will be celebrating its 50th anniversary in 2016 . 
 There are no hospitals in Juniata County . The county is served by a hospital in Lewistown , which was established in 1905 . The county has six emergency medical services units and eight fire companies , all of which are volunteer fire departments . As the county does not have its own police force , it is served by the Pennsylvania State Police . 
 There are more than 100 cemeteries in Juniata County . 
 = = = Economic and employment statistics = = = 
 In 2000 , the most common occupation in Juniata County was manufacturing . 23 @.@ 6 % of employed people over 16 years old in the county performed manufacturing jobs . 10 @.@ 5 % of employed people older than 16 worked in health services , 9 @.@ 5 % worked in other services , 9 @.@ 3 % each work in construction and retail , 6 @.@ 2 % worked in public administration , and 6 @.@ 1 % worked in transportation . 5 @.@ 6 % had an occupation in the field of education , and a similar number worked in finance , insurance , and real estate . 5 @.@ 5 % worked in agriculture , fishing , forestry , or mining , 3 @.@ 5 % worked in wholesale trade , 1 @.@ 7 % worked in communications , utilities , and related fields . 
 In 2000 , a total of 1 @,@ 955 households in Juniata County made less than $ 20 @,@ 000 per year and 3036 households made $ 20 @,@ 000 to $ 39 @,@ 999 per year . 1 @,@ 940 households made $ 40 @,@ 000 to $ 59 @,@ 999 per year , 1 @,@ 308 households made $ 60 @,@ 000 to $ 99 @,@ 999 per year , and 216 households made $ 100 @,@ 000 to $ 149 @,@ 999 per year . 125 households made more than $ 150 @,@ 000 per year . In 1999 , the median household income for the county was $ 34 @,@ 698 per year and the median family income was $ 39 @,@ 757 per year . Both of these figures are lower than the average for Pennsylvania . The per capita income in the county was $ 16 @,@ 142 per year in 1999 and $ 14 @,@ 539 in 1989 . The county 's poverty rate , 9 @.@ 5 % , is below the average poverty rate for Pennsylvania , which is 11 % . In 1999 , Mifflin had the highest poverty rate of any township or borough in the county , 17 @.@ 54 % . Greenwood Township had the lowest poverty rate , 6 @.@ 99 % . The county 's unemployment rate was 5 @.@ 3 % in 1999 and 5 @.@ 4 % in 2008 . According to the Juniata County Comprehensive Plan , the economic situation in the county " suggests a fairly healthy county economy " . 
 Of the boroughs and townships in Juniata County , Beale Township had the highest household and family income in 1999 : $ 41 @,@ 458 and $ 43 @,@ 625 , respectively . The borough of Mifflin had the lowest household and family income in 1999 : $ 26 @,@ 438 and $ 28 @,@ 750 , respectively . 
 94 @.@ 32 % of the houses in Juniata County have full plumbing facilities . This is below Pennsylvania 's average ( 98 @.@ 51 % ) , which may be due to the presence of cabins and other houses that are not permanently inhabited . Mifflin has the highest percentage of houses with full plumbing facilities of any township or borough in the county ( 100 % ) . Lack Township has the lowest percentage of houses with full plumbing facilities ( 72 @.@ 31 % ) . There are six public sewer companies in the county , the largest of which , the Twin Boroughs Sanitary Authority , is used at a rate of 450 @,@ 000 gallons per day . The county also has five public water companies , including the Port Royal Municipal Authority and the Mifflintown Municipal Authority . The Mifflintown Municipal Authority is the most @-@ used water company in the county , serving 465 @,@ 000 gallons of water per day . 
 On average , Juniata County generates 32 tons of solid waste per day . 
 Nine townships and all four boroughs in Juniata County receive electricity from Pennsylvania Power and Light . The remaining townships are given electricity by First Energy and Valley Rural Electric Cooperative , Inc .. Nittany Media Inc. and Dish and Direct TV provide cable services to the county . 
 = = = Housing = = = 
 In 2000 , 28 @.@ 70 % of the houses in Juniata County were built before 1939 , 6 @.@ 51 % were built in the 1940s , and 8 @.@ 26 % were built in the 1950s . 8 @.@ 53 % of the county 's houses were built in the 1960s , 17 @.@ 99 % were built in the 1970s , and 14 @.@ 18 % were built in the 1980s . 15 @.@ 82 % of the houses were built in the 1990s or in 2000 . The majority of the houses in Mifflin and Mifflintown were built before 1939 . 
 In 2000 , 14 @.@ 43 % of the houses in Juniata County were vacant . 9 @.@ 42 % of the county 's houses were vacant for seasonal or recreational reasons . The county 's vacancy rate is higher than average for Pennsylvania . Mifflintown had the lowest vacancy rate of any township or borough in the county ( 5 @.@ 18 % ) . Lack Township had the highest vacancy rate ( 48 @.@ 77 % ) . 66 @.@ 49 % of the county 's houses are occupied by their owner and 19 @.@ 08 % are occupied by a renter . Many of the houses in the southwestern part of the county are seasonally occupied . 
 13 @.@ 11 % of the houses in Juniata County cost less than $ 50 @,@ 000 and 51 @.@ 07 % cost $ 50 @,@ 000 to $ 99 @,@ 999 . 17 @.@ 51 % of the county 's houses cost $ 100 @,@ 000 to $ 124 @,@ 999 and 9 @.@ 74 % cost from $ 125 @,@ 000 to $ 149 @,@ 999 . 4 @.@ 62 % of the houses cost between $ 150 @,@ 000 and $ 174 @,@ 999 and 1 @.@ 21 % cost between $ 175 @,@ 000 and $ 199 @,@ 999 . 1 @.@ 92 % of the houses in the county cost between $ 200 @,@ 000 and $ 249 @,@ 999 , 0 @.@ 39 % cost between $ 250 @,@ 000 and $ 299 @,@ 999 , and 0 @.@ 43 % cost more than $ 300 @,@ 000 . Of the administrative divisions in the county , Fermanagh Township has the highest percentage of houses costing over $ 300 @,@ 000 ( 1 @.@ 34 % ) and numerous townships and boroughs in the county do not have any houses costing over $ 300 @,@ 000 . Mifflin has the highest percentage of houses costing less than $ 50 @,@ 000 ( 56 @.@ 48 % ) and Delaware Township has the lowest percentage of such houses ( 4 @.@ 73 % ) . 
 In 1990 , the median house value in Juniata County was $ 51 @,@ 500 . This rose to $ 87 @,@ 000 by 2000 . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 The most common crimes committed in Juniata County between 2005 and November 2007 were property crimes , with 996 recorded offenses . Other common crimes in the county are assaults , with 383 offenses between 2005 and 2007 and alcohol @-@ related crimes , with 306 offenses between 2005 and 2007 . Rarer crimes in the county include drug violations ( 71 offenses between 2005 and 2007 ) , sex offenses ( 64 offenses between 2005 and 2007 ) and arson , with only 12 offenses between 2005 and 2007 . There were no homicides in the county in these years . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 There are municipal parks in all four boroughs of Juniata County . There are also five boat launches in the county , all of which are on or near the Juniata River . There are two golf courses in the central part of the county and one campground in the southern part of the county . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 = = = Roads = = = 
 The main roads in the eastern part of Juniata County are Pennsylvania Route 235 , Pennsylvania Route 35 , Pennsylvania Route 104 , and U.S. Route 11 / U.S. Route 15 . The main roads in western Juniata County are U.S. Route 22 / U.S. Route 322 , Pennsylvania Route 74 , Pennsylvania Route 850 , and Pennsylvania Route 333 . U.S. Route 22 / U.S. Route 322 experiences the most traffic . It and U.S. Route 11 / U.S. Route 15 are considered major arterial roads . Pennsylvania Route 75 and Pennsylvania Route 35 northeast of U.S. Route 22 / U.S. Route 322 are minor arterial roads . Major rural collector roads in the county include Pennsylvania Route 850 Pennsylvania Route 74 , Pennsylvania Route 235 , and Pennsylvania Route 35 southwest of U.S. Route 22 / U.S. Route 322 . Minor rural collector roads include Pennsylvania Route 333 and numerous less prominent roads . There are also many local roads throughout the county , most of which are in its northeastern and central parts . 
 There are approximately 735 miles ( 1 @,@ 183 km ) of roads in Juniata County 's road system . 372 @.@ 6 miles ( 599 @.@ 6 km ) of the roads are locally owned , 354 @.@ 9 miles ( 571 @.@ 2 km ) are owned by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation , and 8 @.@ 0 miles ( 12 @.@ 9 km ) are owned by Pennsylvania or the United States . 508 @.@ 3 miles ( 818 @.@ 0 km ) are local roads , 89 @.@ 7 miles ( 144 @.@ 4 km ) are minor collector roads , 68 @.@ 7 miles ( 110 @.@ 6 km ) are major collector roads , 46 @.@ 8 miles ( 75 @.@ 3 km ) are minor arterial roads , and 21 @.@ 4 miles ( 34 @.@ 4 km ) are major arterial roads . 
 The daily traffic of Juniata County 's arterial roads ranges from several dozen to several thousand vehicles per day . Pennsylvania Route 75 carries 50 vehicles per day in the southwestern part of the county and 7 @,@ 000 vehicles per day in the northeastern part of the county . Pennsylvania Route 104 carries 2 @,@ 900 vehicles per day in the county . The most heavily traveled road there , however , is U.S. Route 22 / U.S. Route 322 , which carries 11 @,@ 000 to 18 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . The least @-@ trafficked major rural connector road is State Route 2026 , which is used by 350 vehicles per day and the most @-@ trafficked major rural connector road is Pennsylvania Route 35 , which gets up to 7100 vehicles per day . Traffic on minor rural collector roads ranges from 100 vehicles per day on Academia Road to over 1000 vehicles per day on several roads . The volume of vehicle traffic in the county has changed little since the late 1990s . 
 U.S. Route 11 and U.S. Route 15 allow Juniata County residents to access numerous locations in New York , Pennsylvania , and Maryland . It receives approximately 12 @,@ 000 vehicles per day in the county . Pennsylvania Route 35 allows access to Mifflin and Mifflintown from other locations in the county . Pennsylvania Route 75 is used by trucks in the county to access the Pennsylvania Turnpike . 
 There are 21 road intersections in Juniata County that were the site of five or more crashes between January 1 , 2002 , and December 31 , 2006 . 
 = = = Bridges = = = 
 There are 254 state @-@ owned bridges in Juniata County , of which 77 are considered structurally deficient by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation . 
 The longest bridge in Juniata County is the First Street Bridge over the Juniata River in Port Royal . It is 1 @,@ 087 feet ( 331 m ) long and was built in 1937 . The second @-@ longest bridge in the county crosses the Juniata River at Thompsontown Station and is 808 @.@ 1 feet ( 246 @.@ 3 m ) long . It was built in 1994 . All other bridges in the county are less than 500 feet ( 150 m ) long . 
 = = = Other transportation = = = 
 For air travel , Juniata County is served by the privately owned Mifflintown Airport and the <unk> Memorial Heliport in Tuscarora Township . 
 The <unk> Route J runs through Juniata County on U.S. Route 11 and U.S. Route 15 . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Schools and school districts = = = 
 There are two public school districts in Juniata County : the Juniata County School District and the Greenwood School District . Both of these are K @-@ 12 schools . The Greenwood School District serves Greenwood Township and parts of Perry County and the Juniata County School District serves the rest of Juniata County . 
 The Juniata County School District has nine elementary schools , one junior high school , and two high schools . In the 2006 – 2007 school year , there were 3 @,@ 123 students in the school district . The largest high school in the district is the Juniata High School , with 637 students . The largest elementary school in the district is the Fermanagh @-@ Mifflintown Elementary School , with 238 students and the smallest one is the Susquehanna Township Elementary School , with 63 students . 
 The Greenwood School District has an elementary school , a middle school , and a high school . They have 449 , 137 , and 278 students , respectively . 
 Additionally , there are 12 private schools in Juniata County , most of which are religious schools run by groups such as the Amish or other types of Mennonites . Nearly all are based in Mifflintown , <unk> , or Thompsontown , although one is based in Port Royal . In May 2014 , the largest private school in the county was the Juniata Mennonite School , which had 220 students , and the smallest private school was the Breezy Hollow Amish School , which had 18 students . 
 There are no colleges in Juniata County , although there are twelve in the county 's general vicinity . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 In 1990 , 16 @.@ 91 % of Juniata County residents over 25 years of age had less than a ninth @-@ grade education . 17 @.@ 93 % of residents over 25 years of age had a ninth @-@ grade education to a twelfth @-@ grade education and 46 @.@ 35 % had graduated from high school . 7 @.@ 80 % of the residents had attended college , but did not have a degree and 3 @.@ 76 % had an associate degree . 4 @.@ 67 % of Juniata County residents aged 25 years or more had a bachelor 's degree and 2 @.@ 59 % had a graduate or professional degree . 
 By 2000 , the percentage of people with less than a ninth @-@ grade education had decreased to 5 % and the percentage with a ninth @-@ grade to twelfth @-@ grade education had decreased to 13 % . The percentage of people who graduated high school decreased to 38 % , but the percentage of people who attended college but did not get a degree increased to 16 % . The percentage of people with an associate degree increased to 6 % , the percentage of people who had a bachelor 's degree increased to 14 % , and the percentage of people with a graduate or professional degree increased to 8 % . 
 Of the townships and boroughs in Juniata County , Lack Township has the highest percentage of people without a high school diploma ( 42 @.@ 43 % ) . Spruce Hill Township has the lowest percentage of people without a high school diploma ( 18 @.@ 00 % ) . Mifflintown has the highest percentage of people with a higher education . 
 = = Biology = = 
 There are five areas in Juniata County that are protected by the Central Pennsylvania Conservancy : the Baker <unk> , the Brady <unk> Preserve , the Gregory Alan <unk> Preserve , the <unk> Preserve Addition , the McLaughlin <unk> , and the Port Royal Wetlands . The combined area of these lands is 415 acres . There are State Game Lands in the northwestern part of the county and state forests in the county 's northern and southern portions . 
 Four streams in Juniata County are considered high @-@ quality coldwater fisheries . There are also some Class A Wild Trout Waters in the northern and western parts of the county . 
 The Juniata County Natural Heritage Inventory lists 59 natural heritage sites in Juniata County . 11 are considered " exceptional significance " , 19 are considered " high significance " , 12 are considered " notable significance " , and 17 are considered " local significance " . Sites on the inventory are found in every township in the county except for Greenwood Township . 
 The largest remaining intact wetland in Juniata County may be the Cedar Spring Run Wetland , which is in Walker Township . The Juniata County Natural Heritage Inventory considers it to be an " exceptional significance " site . Numerous wetland plants that are rare in the area inhabit this wetland , including Quercus <unk> . The wetland is a red maple @-@ black ash palustrine forest community . Another wetland on the Natural Heritage Inventory 's list of exceptional significance sites is the Locust Run Wetlands , which is in Walker Township and Delaware Township . These wetlands consist of two large groups of temporary pools and several permanent ones . The West Branch Mahantango Creek Vernal Pools are also in the county . This system consist of dozens of temporary pools that are inhabited by <unk> racemosa . The Slim Valley Wetlands are in Fayette Township and Fermanagh Township . They contain spotted pondweed and serve as a breeding ground for amphibians . 
 There are four sites on Tuscarora Creek and its tributaries on the " exceptional significance " list in the Juniata County Natural Heritage Inventory . The Doyle Run Floodplain is located on the creek in Beale Township . It contains a silver maple floodplain forest and is home to Ranunculus <unk> and many species that are rare in Pennsylvania . Barton Hollow , a tributary of Tuscarora Creek in Lack Township , is home to plant species such as Carex <unk> and Pinus echinata and animal species such as the Emperor Butterfly and a mussel species known as the Triangle Floater . Tuscarora Creek supports Carex <unk> downstream of Blair Hollow in Lack Township , as well as 350 plant species and 50 animal species . The creek 's valley downstream of <unk> Island in Lack Township is home to <unk> <unk> and Quercus <unk> . 
 A woodland known as the Kurtz Valley Woodland is located in Delaware Township , Juniata County . It is listed as an " exceptional significance " site on the Juniata County Natural Heritage Inventory and contains a red cedar – redbud shrubland community , which is rare in Pennsylvania . The McAlister Limestone Glade is another " exceptional significance " site in the county . It is located in Fayette Township and contains a side @-@ oats grama calcareous grassland , which is described as a " very important " natural feature . The Westfall Prairie is also located in Fayette Township and is home to a number of rare species . 
 Allegheny <unk> live on the slopes of the Lewistown Narrows in Milford Township , Juniata County and Northern Myotis bats feed there . The Lewistown Narrows are an " exceptional significance " site according to the Juniata County Natural Heritage Inventory . 
 = = Communities = = 
 Under Pennsylvania law , there are four types of incorporated municipalities : cities , boroughs , townships , and , in at most two cases , towns . 
 = = = Boroughs = = = 
 Boroughs in Juniata County include : 
 Mifflin 
 Mifflintown ( county seat ) 
 Port Royal 
 Thompsontown 
 = = = Townships = = = 
 Townships in Juniata County include : 
 = = = Census @-@ designated places = = = 
 Census @-@ designated places are geographical areas designated by the U.S. Census Bureau for the purposes of compiling demographic data . They are not actual jurisdictions under Pennsylvania . <unk> in Juniata County include : 
 East Salem 
 East Waterford 
 <unk> 
 Mexico 
 Richfield 
 = = = Population ranking = = = 
 The population ranking of the following table is based on the 2010 census of Juniata County . 
 † county seat 
 = Olivia Shakespear = 
 Olivia Shakespear ( born Olivia Tucker ; 17 March 1863 – 3 October 1938 ) was a British novelist , playwright , and patron of the arts . She wrote six books that are described as " marriage problem " novels . Her works sold poorly , sometimes only a few hundred copies . Her last novel , Nurse Harry , is considered her best . She wrote two plays in collaboration with Florence Farr . 
 Olivia was the daughter of a retired Adjutant General , and had little formal education . She was well @-@ read however , and developed a love of literature . In 1885 she married London barrister Henry Hope Shakespear , and in 1886 gave birth to their only child , Dorothy . In 1894 her literary interests led to a friendship with William Butler Yeats that became physically intimate in 1896 . He declared that they " had many days of happiness " to come , but the affair ended in 1897 . They nevertheless remained lifelong friends and corresponded frequently . Yeats went on to marry Georgie Hyde @-@ Lees , Olivia 's step @-@ niece and Dorothy 's best friend . 
 Olivia began hosting weekly salon frequented by Ezra Pound and other modernist writers and artists in 1909 , and became influential in London literary society . Olivia 's daughter Dorothy Shakespear married Pound in 1914 , despite the less than enthusiastic blessing of her parents . After their marriage , Pound would use funds received from Olivia to support T. S. Eliot and James Joyce . When Dorothy gave birth to a son , Omar Pound , in France in 1926 , Olivia assumed guardianship of the boy . He lived with Olivia until her death on 3 October 1938 . 
 = = Early life and marriage = = 
 Olivia 's father , Henry Tod Tucker ( b . 1808 ) , was born in Edinburgh and joined the British Indian Army as an ensign at age 16 . He rose to the rank of Adjutant General in Bengal , but retired in 1856 at age 48 owing to ill health . Within a year of returning to Britain he married Harriet Johnson ( b . 1821 ) of Bath . The couple moved to the Isle of Wight where their two daughters were born : Florence in 1858 and Olivia on 17 March 1863 . Soon after they relocated to Sussex where their third child , Henry , was born in 1866 . In 1877 the family moved to London and raised their daughters in a social world that encouraged the pursuit of leisure . Olivia often visited her many Johnson relatives in the country , and became particularly fond of her cousin Lionel Johnson — the only one of many uncles and cousins not to join the military — who went on to become a poet and friend to W. B. Yeats . It is likely that Olivia received little formal education ; she may have been educated by tutors , and appears to have become well @-@ read as a young woman . 
 In 1885 Olivia married Henry Hope Shakespear , a man described by Terence Brown in The Life of W.B. Yeats : A Critical Biography as " worthy " but " dull " . Born in India in 1849 , he was descended from 17th @-@ century East London <unk> and , like Olivia , came from a military family , although of less prestige and wealth than the Tuckers and Johnsons . John Harwood , Olivia 's biographer and author of Olivia Shakespear and W. B. Yeats : After Long Silence believes Henry probably saw an opportunity to increase his social standing and annual income in wedding Olivia . He had attended Harrow , studied law , and joined a law practice in 1875 . The couple were married on 8 December 1885 , and honeymooned in Boulogne and Paris . Olivia 's father endowed them with a comfortable income in the form of a trust . Nine months after the wedding their only child , Dorothy , was born on 14 September 1886 ; they likely discontinued physical relations after the honeymoon , and Olivia realised quite soon that the marriage was devoid of passion . Yeats ' biographer Alexander Jeffares writes , " she was <unk> , unselfish , deeply imaginative and sympathetic and , until she met Yeats , she seems to have accepted the fact of her unhappy loveless marriage " . 
 Shakespear dissolved his legal partnership in the late 1880s — his partner may have been embezzling from clients ' trusts — and formed his own practice . Harwood writes that Shakespear 's attitude to the situation showed a certain amount of " timidity " on his part and a definite " dislike of scenes " . During this period Olivia moved from socialising with military wives to literary women : Valentine Fox ( unhappily married to a Kent brewer ) and Pearl Craighie , a divorced American writer who published as John Oliver Hobbes . 
 = = W. B. Yeats = = 
 = = = Friendship = = = 
 Accompanied by Pearl Craighie , on 16 April 1894 Olivia attended a literary lunch to launch The Yellow Book . Olivia was seated opposite W. B. Yeats . Recently returned from visiting Maud Gonne in Paris , Yeats was in London for the production of his play The Land of Heart 's Desire . The two were not introduced that evening but Yeats , probably through Lionel Johnson ( who became disruptively drunk at the dinner ) , enquired about the woman seated opposite . Yeats was deeply affected , later writing in his memoirs of the encounter : " I noticed opposite me .... a woman of great beauty ... She was exquisitely dressed ... and suggested to me an incomparable distinction . " Soon after Olivia attended a showing of The Land of Heart 's Desire , and found herself moved by the performance . She wanted to meet the " tall and black haired " poet and asked Johnson to invite Yeats to tea on 10 May 1894 , adding in her handwriting to the invitation , " I shall be so glad to see you " . In his Memoirs Yeats referred to her as " Diana Vernon " , writing , " In this book I cannot giver her real name — Diana Vernon sounds pleasantly in my ears and will suit as well as any other " . 
 They quickly established a strong friendship , with Olivia listening sympathetically to his obsessive love for Maud . When Yeats later described their friendship , he wrote , " I told her of my love sorrow , indeed it was my obsession , never leaving by day or night " . Writing in The Last Courtly Lover , Gloria Kline suggests Olivia and Yeats began a friendship based on the discussion of literature and his willingness to review her work . John Unterecker , writing in " Faces and False Faces " , sees friendship as the most important aspect in the relationship , explaining , " she found in Yeats , as he in her , a person who could discuss literature and ideas ... she was one of the few persons with whom he could be completely relaxed " . Comparing the difference between Maud and Olivia he writes , " Maud Gonne offered Yeats subject matter for poetry , the ' interesting ' life he had hoped for , and Olivia Shakespear offered him repose " . According to Kline , Yeats compared Olivia to Diana and Maud to Helen ; he was attracted to dark coloured women , describing Olivia 's skin as " a little darker than a Greek 's would have been and her hair was very dark " . Literary scholar Humphrey Carpenter writes that Yeats ' impression of Olivia was one of a woman with " a profound culture , a knowledge of French , English , and Italian and seemed always at leisure . Her nature was gentle and contemplative , and she was content , it seems , to have no more of life than leisure and the talk of her friends " . Nevertheless she was working on her third novel , Beauty 's Hour , and it is likely that Yeats read the manuscript , suggested revisions , and may have contributed to the characterisations . Kline believes the two began a friendship based on the discussion of literature and his willingness to review her work ; Yeats biographer Foster adds they were drawn together by a mutual interest in the occult . For Yeats , then aged 30 , an important aspect of their friendship was the opportunity it presented for a sexual relationship with a woman , something he had not then experienced . 
 In August Yeats returned to Ireland , continuing his correspondence with Olivia , writing to her about Maud who had recently given birth to a daughter , Iseult . In her letters Olivia may have been honest about her feelings toward him ; in April 1895 he wrote to her , " I no more complain of your writing of love , than I would complain of a portrait painter keeping to portraits " . 
 = = = Love affair = = = 
 Yeats delayed visiting Olivia in London a month later ; he instead tended to Johnson who was involved in the Wilde case and descending into the alcoholism that would kill him . Yeats appeared to have persuaded himself that Olivia and her cousin shared a flaw , writing , " here is the same weakness I thought ... Her beauty ... dark and still , had the nobility of defeated things , and how could it help but wring my heart . I took a fortnight to decide what I should do " . He constructed a plan to reconcile his desire with what he believed to be her wickedness : he would ask that she leave her husband to live with him . Until then their friendship would remain platonic . 
 Yeats finally visited Olivia at her <unk> Circle home a few weeks later to present his well @-@ thought out intentions but , to his bewilderment , Olivia declared her love for him . Unsure of himself , he took another absence , during which he decided that if Maud was unattainable , or unavailable due to circumstances , he would have Olivia , writing " but after all if I could not get the woman I loved it would be a comfort for a little while to devote myself to another " . For Yeats , Olivia was willing to lose her daughter , financial security , social standing , and the goodwill of her family . Although her husband had grounds to sue Yeats and consequently destroy his reputation , her best hope against complete ruin was Shakespear 's strong dislike of public scenes . Then Yeats lost his nerve again , suggesting instead each seek advice from a friend ( a " sponsor " ) . He probably chose Florence Farr to be his sponsor while Olivia chose Valentine Fox — Harwood speculates that the sponsors advised the two to go ahead with the affair , perhaps to Yeats ' discomfort . On 15 July 1895 , Yeats and Olivia travelled to Kent to visit Valentine Fox ; the trip Harwood says " would have been , emotionally speaking a highly charged outing " . Of the railway trip , Yeats wrote in his memoirs , " when on our first railway journey together — we were to spend the day at Kent — she gave the long passionate kiss of love , I was startled & a little shocked " . They went on to share more passionate kisses in art galleries and at her home . 
 Still distressed about Lionel , Yeats turned to Arthur Symons for companionship , moving into a room adjacent to his in October 1895 . One day while preoccupied and thinking about Maud he locked himself out for a visit just before Olivia and her sponsor arrived to visit ; as soon as she left he stayed up all night telling Symons about Maud . She arrived in London a few weeks later for a brief visit . Yeats was ambivalent about Olivia despite the advice of the sponsors ; with no money to support her , he suggested she seek a legal separation ( instead of a divorce ) , sparing her social ostracism and financial ruin . Ezra Pound biographer Jay Wilhelm suggests Shakespear knew that Olivia loved Yeats but seemed more concerned about the loss of social status in the event of divorce , causing Yeats and Olivia to decide that " it was kinder to simply deceive him than totally abandon him " . In January 1896 Yeats moved again , into a small flat in Woburn Place , so as to be nearer to her . Finally after a charged bed @-@ buying session , with Yeats describing " an embarrassed conversation upon the width " , and his nervousness preventing them at first from becoming lovers , he eventually wrote in January 1896 , " at last she came to me in my thirtieth year .... and we had many days of happiness " . Yeats ' happiness is apparent in the poems he wrote at that period , and for the duration of their affair , Olivia appears to have acted as a muse to the poet . 
 Six months later he was in back in Ireland , and in August Olivia was visiting Valentine Fox with her husband where she received news of her father 's death . She left for an extended stay in Torquay where she stayed until September before leaving for a visit to Scotland with her husband . Yeats left Ireland for Paris to visit Maud in November , and did not return to London until January 1897 , with Maud following close behind and arriving in London in February . Yeats wrote of Maud 's visit : " Maud wrote to me ... she was in London & would I come to dine . I dined with her & my trouble increased — she certainly had no thought of the mischief she was doing – & at last one morning .... [ Olivia ] found my mood did not answer hers and & burst into tears — ' There is someone else in your heart ' she said . It was the breaking between us for many years " . The affair ended that spring when Yeats again returned to Ireland . Olivia did not visit him again at Woburn Place for many years , according to Yeats biographer Richard Ellmann . 
 = = Pembroke Mansions = = 
 Olivia 's life is not well documented between 1897 and 1908 . It is known that she visited her cousin Lionel for the last time in 1897 before he was isolated by his alcoholism . He died alone of a cerebral haemorrhage in 1902 . In 1899 the family suffered an unspecified financial setback that forced them to move into an apartment in Bayswater to Pembroke Mansions , which a friend described by as " an uninviting Bayswater slum " . A few months later Olivia 's mother died . Within a week Olivia received a letter of condolence from Yeats , which may have been the first letter she received from him in two years , since 1897 . Several scholars and biographers speculate that they resumed their love affair at some point between 1903 and 1910 ; Pound biographer Wilhelm believes they reconciled as early as 1903 , while Yeats biographers Jeffares and Ross suggest the affair likely reignited for a period in 1906 . 
 For a short time in 1901 Olivia held a position as a book reviewer for The Kensington Review , a small literary magazine , until it succumbed to poor sales . After , she dabbled in the occult and became friendly with prominent London occultists . In 1902 she co @-@ wrote with Florence Farr — who for a time led the Order of Golden Dawn — two plays on the occult , The Beloved of Hathor and The Shrine of the Golden Hawk , which were subsequently published as a pair . 
 Although the family received an inheritance from Olivia 's mother , they continued to live in Bayswater . For a period Dorothy was at boarding school , after which she was sent to a finishing school in Geneva . To save money , the family often left London during the summer , to take long visits to relatives in the country , in particular her brother Henry Tucker . Not until 1905 did the family lease a house in Brunswick Gardens , near Kensington Palace , when Dorothy returned home to live with her parents . 
 = = Dorothy and Ezra Pound = = 
 Records of Olivia 's life resume through Dorothy 's letters and diaries surrounding the arrival of the American poet Ezra Pound in London in 1909 . Following her friends in Kensington society , Olivia opened her home once a week for a salon , beginning an important period in her life . When Yeats returned to London that year , Olivia became the centre of a blossoming literary movement . Yeats held a Monday evening salon ; those who attended usually also visited Olivia 's . She hosted , and became a nexus for , much of the pre @-@ war literary activity in London . Notable attendees included Pound , H.D. ( Hilda <unk> ) , Yeats , Wyndham Lewis , Henri Gaudier @-@ Brzeska , Walter Morse Rummel , Richard Aldington , William Carlos Williams , T. E. Hulme and John <unk> . The gatherings were held in her drawing room , a place Pound described in a letter as " full of white magic " . Olivia was by now a well @-@ known occultist and hosted séances in her drawing room . She became well @-@ versed in astrology and palmistry , passing on what she knew to Dorothy who shared her interest . Both read grimoires ; Olivia was an expert at " drawing occult symbols " and quite familiar with the symbology of the occult . 
 Olivia met Pound in January 1909 at a Kensington salon hosted by a friend ; she invited him for tea on 16 February 1909 , and at his insistence introduced Pound to Yeats in May 1909 . Yeats had recently returned to London and began a thorough investigation of spiritualism and the occult , turning to Olivia for advice . She took the young American poet to Yeats ' rooms at Woburn Place , fostering their relationship . 
 Dorothy soon fell in love with Pound . In late 1909 and early 1910 Olivia and Dorothy attended his lectures at the London Polytechnic Institution ; in June 1910 they joined him in <unk> , Italy . For reasons unclear to biographers Olivia forbade the two from writing to each other during his extended visit to New York from 1910 to 1911 . Despite the restriction Dorothy seems to have considered herself engaged to Pound , although uncertain whether he intended to stay in New York or return to London . 
 In 1910 Yeats thought his horoscope suggested a return to Olivia ; he distanced himself from Maud and in June began to see Olivia more frequently . Pound was fond of Olivia , which may have caused Yeats some jealousy as when , for example , Pound met the two at the theatre and took them afterward to tea — an occasion when Yeats was extremely rude to Pound . A year later , Olivia introduced Yeats to Georgie Hyde @-@ Lees , her 18 @-@ year @-@ old step @-@ niece and Dorothy 's best friend , whom Yeats eventually married . 
 Pound returned from America in 1911 and resumed his visits to Olivia and Dorothy , adhering to Olivia 's restrictions . That October Pound formally asked to marry Dorothy ; her father refused on the basis of Pound 's meagre income . Neither Dorothy nor Pound gave up : he again asked for permission to marry her in March 1912 but was again rejected . In Dorothy 's mind they continued to be engaged , although they were only allowed short visits in the Family drawing room once a week or every two weeks . 
 Olivia became concerned about her daughter after Hilda Doolittle , who also believed she was engaged to Pound , arrived in London in 1911 . Olivia welcomed H.D. to her home , but she witnessed the interactions between Dorothy , Pound , H.D. and Richard Aldington , whom H.D. married in 1913 . In September 1912 Olivia wrote a stern letter to Pound , in which she pointedly told him to break off his friendship with Dorothy : 
 You told me you were prepared to see less of Dorothy this winter . I don 't know if you wd rather leave it to me to say I don 't think it advisable she should see so much of you etc. or whether you wd rather do it in your own way .... I don 't know if she still considers herself engaged to you — but she obviously can 't marry you — it 's hardly decent ! There 's another point too — which is the personal inconvenience & bother to myself — I had all last winter , practically to keep 2 days a week for you to come & see her ... She must marry — She & I can 't possibly go on living this feminine life practically à deux for ever , & we haven 't money enough to separate ... You ought to go away — Englishmen don 't understand yr American ways , & any man who wanted to marry her wd be put off by the fact of yr friendship ( or whatever you call it ) with her . If you had ₤ 500 a year I should be delighted for you to marry her ! 
 In 1913 , Olivia introduced Pound to <unk> sculptor Henri Gaudier @-@ Brzeska at an art exhibition at the Albert Hall . At the same exhibition the sculptor met Nina Hamnett , whom he subsequently used as a model for a series of nudes bronzes , one of which Olivia bought . In 1914 Olivia translated a grimoire for Yeats and Pound , who spent November 1913 to January 1914 in the countryside at Stone Cottage in Ashdown Forest — Pound acting as secretary to Yeats — researching the occult . They read several grimoires , and Olivia provided for them a translation of the Abbot of Villar 's 1670 grimoire Le Comte de <unk> . Her translation was serialised in the literary magazine The Egoist later that year . 
 By 1914 Olivia seems to have realised that Dorothy was determined to marry Pound , and finally consented ; ironically Pound was then earning less than he had in 1911 . Hope Shakespear relented when the couple agreed to a church wedding rather than a civil ceremony , which took place on 20 April 1914 . Olivia gave them two early circus drawings by Pablo Picasso . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After Dorothy 's wedding much of the documentation of Olivia 's life ceases . She moved out of Brunswick Gardens in 1924 , throwing away personal correspondence and giving away hundreds of books . Hope Shakespear died on 5 July 1923 ; within months Olivia moved to an apartment in West Kensington , taking with her two maids who had been with the family for decades . Her life continued unchanged , filled with social events . In September 1926 , Dorothy gave birth to a son , Omar Pound , who in 1927 was brought from France to be raised in England . Olivia became his guardian and Dorothy spent summers with her mother and son . 
 In 1926 Yeats spent several weeks in London , likely visiting Olivia frequently . He showed regret for his behaviour in 1897 , writing to her , " I came across two early photographs of you yesterday ... Who ever had a like profile ? — a profile from a Sicilian coin . One looks back to one 's youth as to a cup that a mad man dying of thirst left half tasted . I wonder if you feel like that ? " The two maintained their correspondence , as they had for many years . 
 Olivia continued to socialise and had many friends , one of whom , Wyndham Lewis , painted her portrait ; he enjoyed her company despite finding it difficult to relate to others . She stopped writing but remained an avid reader , turning to detective stories for light relief although she also kept up with literary authors . She became friendly with Thomas <unk> , whom she invited for tea , later writing to him , " <unk> has given me the new edition of Reveries and the Veil , & I am re @-@ reading it all . It is very beautifully done . He was about 29 when I first knew him " . McGreevy told Yeats that Olivia was " always a symbol of elegance , a kind of gold and ivory image " . Harwood writes of her , " Olivia Shakespear was avant @-@ garde in literature , agnostic in religion , and conservative in politics , at least later in life " . 
 Olivia 's correspondence with Pound continued throughout the 1920s and 1930s , when she acted in part as his agent in London . In 1924 , at Pound 's request , she welcomed George Antheil into her social circle , procured artwork and books that were sent on to Dorothy and Ezra in Rapallo , and mediated in a dispute between Pound and Lewis . She was uninterested in Pound 's politics and economic views and particularly disliked his later Cantos . After her husband 's death , Olivia 's income was sufficient to support a comfortable lifestyle . During the 1920s and 1930s she gradually increased Dorothy 's income ( which was also increased by various family bequests ) , and in the 1930s she made investments in Dorothy 's name , sending the proceeds to Dorothy and Pound . In a very real sense , according to Harwood , Olivia Shakespear is the " unsung heroine " of the modernist period , because much of the money Ezra Pound generously used to support struggling writers such as T.S. Eliot and James Joyce came from her . 
 Olivia died of complications brought on by gall bladder disease on 3 October 1938 . The day before her death she wrote in a letter to Dorothy : " On Monday I was taken suddenly ill with gall bladder trouble — awful pain — sent for Doctor Barnes — he gave me dope & an injection and pain gradually went ... He says I am going on all right , but of course I feel rather a wreck " . She died the following day of a heart attack . John Unterecker believes Olivia 's death shattered Yeats , who died only months later , because she added warmth to his life . Yeats wrote of her death : 
 Olivia Shakespear has died suddenly . For more than forty years she has been the centre of my life in London and during all that time we have never had a quarrel , sadness sometimes but never a difference . When I first met her she was in her late twenties but in looks a lovely young girl . When she died she was a lovely old woman ... She came of a long line of soldiers and during the last war thought it her duty to stay in London through all the air raids . She was not more lovely than distinguished — no matter what happened she never lost her solitude ... For the moment I cannot bear the thought of London . I will find her memory everywhere . 
 Dorothy was ill when her mother died , unable to travel to London . She sent Pound to organise the funeral and to clear out the house . Ezra sorted through Olivia 's correspondence and returned to Yeats many of her letters . Unterecker writes that Yeats made an effort to keep the correspondence private : " Shortly before his death he methodically destroyed a large group of letters to Olivia Shakespear . These , returned to him after her death ... Yeats wanted no one to read " . 
 = = Novels : description and reception = = 
 Olivia had six novels published between 1894 and 1910 , which as described by Foster are about women unhappy in love , with insipid and uninspiring male characters . The heroines — frequently orphaned , educated by elderly tutors , and depicted in country house libraries — fall in love with much older men in the later novels . 
 The first two novels were published in 1894 to mixed reviews . Love on a Mortal Lease ( title from George Meredith ) was released in June , followed in November by The Journey of High Honour , at 30 @,@ 000 words considerably shorter than the 355 pages of Love on a Mortal Lease . Each novel sold only a few hundred copies . Harwood describes the early work such as Love on a Mortal Lease as showing stylistic similarities to contemporary women novelists such as Craighie and Rhonda Broughton , with witty dialogue in Craighie 's style , although he thinks Olivia brought a more serious voice to her work . He describes Love on a Mortal Lease as a work in which the heroine is well @-@ characterised but the background is weak . 
 She dedicated The False Laurel , published in 1896 , to Lionel Johnson . The plot features a poetess who falls in love with and marries an insipid young poet , giving up her own writing to attend to his needs . She becomes bored , writes a successful play , and then goes mad . The False Laurel was the least successful of her books , selling fewer than 200 copies . It received a poor review from The Bookman but a good one from The <unk> . 
 Rupert Armstrong was published in 1899 by Harper and Brothers , dedicated to Valentine Fox . In this , the fourth of her novels , Harwood believes her writing and voice became more original . The complicated plot — a mother and daughter struggle for " possession of the [ father 's ] artistic soul " — shows hints of incestuous love , a theme found in her later work . Written during the affair with Yeats , Harwood sees the characters presented " in a precise , bitter intensity unlike anything in the earlier work " . 
 The Devotees was published by Heinemann in December 1900 . Like Rupert Armstrong , the plot of The Devotees depicts a mildly incestuous love : a young man and girl , raised together since childhood , devote themselves for decades to his drug @-@ addicted mother before they marry . The reviews were mostly unkind . 
 Olivia 's final novel , Uncle Hilary , was published in 1910 and is considered her best work . Of Uncle Hilary Jane Eldridge Miller writes in Rebel Women : Feminism , Modernism , and the Edwardian Novel , " Shakespear demonstrates the ways in which that ideal leads to disillusionment and resentment " . In the complicated plot a young woman unwittingly marries her stepfather , leaves him , and accepts a marriage proposal from her guardian . Harwood believes her loveless marriage , the love affair with Yeats , the frustration with Dorothy , and Pound 's unfaithfulness to Dorothy , built in her a strength and acceptance of life that bordered on the spiritual and she no longer needed to write . Miller writes that in the novel Olivia explores " marriage laws , divorce , and bigamy " , with a focus on the nature of romantic love — rejected in favour of spiritual and intellectual pursuits . Leon Surette writes in The Birth of Modernism , Olivia 's Uncle Hilary highlights the ties between spiritualism , occultism and feminism , seeing Uncle Hilary as a feminist novel which he describes as " quite readable " . 
 Jane Miller characterises the works as " marriage problem " novels in which the wife confronts the reality of marriage , its restrictions , and the need to achieve independence . By finding interests outside marriage the wife loses the overwhelming need for love within the marriage . Miller writes that in Uncle Hilary Olivia examines issues such as marriage laws , divorce , and bigamy , while focusing on the nature of romantic love . It was in Uncle Hilary that Olivia wrote of love : " Love is the worst slavery that exists ... it is the most persistent of illusions " . 
 = = List of works = = 
 Novels 
 Love on a Mortal Lease ( 1894 ) 
 Beauty 's Hour ( 1894 ) 
 The Journey of High Honour ( 1894 ) 
 The False Laurel ( 1896 ) 
 Rupert Armstrong ( 1898 ) 
 The Devotees ( 1904 ) 
 Uncle Hilary ( 1909 ) 
 Plays 
 The Beloved of Hathor ( 1902 ) 
 The Shrine of the Golden Hawk ( 1902 ) 
 = Coelurus = 
 Coelurus ( / <unk> / si @-@ <unk> @-@ əs ) is a genus of coelurosaurian dinosaur from the Late Jurassic period ( mid @-@ late Kimmeridgian faunal stage , 153 – 150 million years ago ) . The name means " hollow tail " , referring to its hollow tail vertebrae ( Greek κοιλος , koilos 
 = hollow + <unk> , oura = 
 tail ) . Although its name is linked to one of the main divisions of theropods ( Coelurosauria ) , it has historically been poorly understood , and sometimes confused with its better @-@ known contemporary Ornitholestes . Like many dinosaurs studied in the early years of paleontology , it has had a confusing taxonomic history , with several species being named and later transferred to other genera or abandoned . Only one species is currently recognized as valid : the type species , C. fragilis , described by Othniel Charles Marsh in 1879 . It is known from one partial skeleton found in the Morrison Formation of Wyoming , United States . It was a small bipedal carnivore with elongate legs . 
 = = Description = = 
 Coelurus is known from most of the skeleton of a single individual , including numerous vertebrae , partial pelvic and shoulder girdles , and much of the arms and legs , stored at the Peabody Museum of Natural History ; however , the relative completeness of the skeleton was not known until 1980 . The fossils were recovered from Reed 's Quarry 13 at Como Bluff , Wyoming . Additionally , two arm bones possibly belonging to this genus are known from the Cleveland Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry in Utah . It was not a large dinosaur . Its weight has been estimated at around 13 to 20 kilograms ( 29 to 44 lb ) , with a length of about 2 @.@ 4 meters ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) and a hip height of 0 @.@ 7 meters ( 2 @.@ 3 ft ) . From reconstructions of the skeleton , Coelurus had a relatively long neck and torso due to its long vertebrae , a long slender hindlimb due to its long metatarsus , and potentially a small slender skull . 
 The skull is unknown except for possibly a portion of lower jaw found at the same site as the rest of the known Coelurus material . Although it has the same preservation and coloring as the fossils known to belong to the Coelurus skeleton , it is very slender , which may mean it does not belong to the skeleton ; this bone is 7 @.@ 9 centimeters long ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) but only 1 @.@ 1 centimeters tall ( 0 @.@ 43 in ) . In general , its vertebrae were long and low , with low neural spines and thin walls to the bodies of the vertebrae . Its neck vertebrae were very pneumatic , with numerous hollow spaces on their surfaces ( pleurocoels ) ; these hollows were not evenly distributed among the vertebrae and varied in size . The neck vertebrae were very elongate , with bodies four times longer than wide , and they articulated with concave faces on both ends ( <unk> ) . The back vertebrae were not as elongate , lacked surface hollows , and had less developed concave faces and bodies that were hourglass @-@ shaped . The tail vertebrae also lacked surface hollows . 
 The only bone known from the shoulder girdle is a fragment of scapula . The upper arm had a distinct S @-@ shaped curve in side view and was slightly longer than the forearm ( 11 @.@ 9 centimeters [ 4 @.@ 7 in ] versus 9 @.@ 6 centimeters [ 3 @.@ 8 in ] ) . The wrist had a semilunate carpal † similar to that of Deinonychus , and the fingers were long and slender . The only bone known from the pelvic girdle is paired and fused pubis bones , which had a prominent , long " foot " at the end . The thigh bones had an S @-@ shape when viewed from the front . The metatarsals were unusually long and slender , nearly the length of the thigh bones ( the best preserved thigh bone is about 21 centimeters long [ 8 @.@ 3 in ] ) . 
 = = = Coelurus , Ornitholestes , and Tanycolagreus = = = 
 The three best @-@ known small theropods of the Morrison Formation — Coelurus , Ornitholestes , and Tanycolagreus — were generalized coelurosaurs , and they have been mistaken for each other at various times . Now that Coelurus and Ornitholestes have been more fully described , it is possible to distinguish them by various characteristics of their anatomy . For example , they had visibly different proportions : Coelurus had a longer back and neck than Ornitholestes , and longer , more slender legs and feet . Coelurus and Tanycolagreus are more similar , but differ in a variety of details . Such details include the shape of the upper arm , forearm , and thigh bones ; the location of muscle attachments on the thigh bone , proportionally longer back vertebrae ; and , again , the very long metatarsus of Coelurus . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Since the growth of phylogenetic studies in the 1980s , Coelurus has usually been found to be a coelurosaurian of uncertain affinities , not fitting with the better @-@ known clades of the Cretaceous . Along with several other generalized coelurosaurians such as the compsognathids , Ornitholestes , and Proceratosaurus , it has had multiple placements around the base of Coelurosauria . The phylogenetic analysis conducted by Rauhut ( 2003 ) and Smith et al . ( 2007 ) found that Coelurus was more closely related to compsognathids than to other coelurosaurs . Oliver Rauhut ( 2003 ) proposed that Coeluridae was composed of Coelurus plus the compsognathids , but he and others have not since found the compsognathids to group with Coelurus . However , a work published by Phil Senter in 2007 following the description of Tanycolagreus found it and Coelurus to be closely related at the base of Tyrannosauroidea . Senter proposed that Coelurus and Tanycolagreus were the only <unk> and were actually tyrannosauroids , but the phylogenetic analysis of Turner et al . ( 2007b ) found that Coelurus was a basal coelurosaur , although more derived than the tyrannosaurids . <unk> in 2010 recovered Coelurus as a basal maniraptoran . Coelurus is sometimes put into its own family , Coeluridae , although the membership of the family has not been stable . 
 Before the use of phylogenetic analyses , Coeluridae and Coelurosauria were taxonomic <unk> used for small theropods that did not belong to other groups ; thus , they accumulated many dubious genera . As late as the 1980s , popular books recognized over a dozen " <unk> " , including such disparate forms as the noasaurid <unk> and the oviraptorosaurian Microvenator , and considered them descendants of the <unk> . A wastebasket Coeluridae lingered into the early 1990s in some sources ( and appears in at least one 2006 source ) but since then it has only been recognized in a much reduced form . Coeluridae received a formal phylogenetic definition in 2015 , when it was defined as all species more closely related to Coelurus fragilis than to Proceratosaurus bradleyi , Tyrannosaurus rex , Allosaurus fragilis , Compsognathus longipes , Ornithomimus <unk> , or Deinonychus antirrhopus by Hendrickx , Hartman and Mateus . It remains unclear whether or not this group contains any species other than Coelurus itself , and while Tanycolagreus is often included , support for this relationship has been weak in most of the studies that recovered it . 
 Below is a cladogram placing Coelurus in Coelurosauria by Cau et al. in 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 Coelurus was described in 1879 by Othniel Charles Marsh , an American paleontologist and naturalist known for his " Bone Wars " with Edward Drinker Cope . At the time , he only described what he interpreted as vertebrae from the back and tail , found at the same location as the type specimen of his new genus and species <unk> dispar ( later renamed Camptosaurus because <unk> was already in use for a cricket ) . Marsh was impressed with the hollow interiors of the thin @-@ walled vertebrae , a characteristic that gave the type species its name : Coelurus fragilis . He thought of his new genus as an " animal about as large as a wolf , and probably carnivorous " . Coelurus would prove to be the first named small theropod from the Morrison Formation , although at the time Marsh was not certain that it was a dinosaur . He returned to it in 1881 and provided illustrations of some bones , along with putting it in a new order ( <unk> ) and family ( Coeluridae ) . 
 From there , the story becomes more complex . Apparently , the skeleton was scattered throughout the quarry , with the remains being recovered from September 1879 to September 1880 . Marsh elected to place some of the material in a new species , C. agilis , on the strength of a pair of fused pubic bones he thought belonged to an animal three times the size of C. fragilis . He returned to the genus in 1888 to add C " . gracilis , based on unknown remains only represented today by a single claw bone pertaining to a small theropod from the Early Cretaceous Arundel Formation of Maryland . This species is not currently accepted as representing Coelurus in reviews of the genus , but has not been given its own genus . 
 Despite their professional animosity , Cope also assigned species to Coelurus ; in 1887 , he named fossils from the Late Triassic of New Mexico as C. bauri and C. longicollis . He later gave them their own genus , Coelophysis . 
 In 1903 , Henry Fairfield Osborn named a second genus of small theropod from the Morrison Formation , Ornitholestes . This genus was based on a partial skeleton from Bone Cabin Quarry , north of Como Bluff . Ornitholestes became intertwined with Coelurus in 1920 , when Charles Gilmore , in his influential study of theropod dinosaurs , concluded that the two were synonyms . This was followed in the literature for decades . The two genera were not formally compared , however , nor was there a full accounting of what actually belonged to Coelurus , until John Ostrom 's study in 1980 . 
 Gilmore had suspected that C. fragilis and C. agilis were the same , but Ostrom was able to demonstrate this synonymy . This greatly expanded the known material pertaining to C. fragilis , and Ostrom was able to demonstrate that Ornitholestes was quite different from Coelurus . At the time , Dale Russell had proposed that C. agilis was a species of <unk> based on the incomplete information then published ; Ostrom was also able to demonstrate that this was not the case . Additionally , he showed that one of the three vertebrae Marsh had illustrated for C. fragilis was actually a composite of two vertebrae , one of which was later shown to come from another quarry and belonged not to Coelurus but to another , unnamed small theropod . This unnamed genus would not be the last small theropod from the Morrison Formation to be confused with Coelurus ; a later discovery ( 1995 ) of a partial skeleton in Wyoming was first thought to be a new larger specimen of Coelurus , but further study showed it belonged to a different but related genus , Tanycolagreus . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 Only one species of Coelurus , the type species C. fragilis , is still recognized as valid today , although six other species have been named over the years . C. agilis , as discussed , was named by Marsh in 1884 for what turned out to be additional parts of the skeleton of C. fragilis . Cope 's C. bauri and C. longicollis , named in 1887 from Late Triassic fossils from New Mexico , were transferred by Cope in 1889 to his new genus Coelophysis . C. daviesi was named by Richard Lydekker in 1888 for Harry Seeley 's <unk> daviesi , a neck vertebra from the Early Cretaceous of England , but this species was later transferred to its own genus , <unk> . C. gracilis , another Early Cretaceous species , was also named in 1888 . It was coined by Marsh for what seems to be an assortment of limb remains , but Gilmore could only find a single claw when he reviewed the species in 1920 . This species has been proposed as outside Coelurus since the 1920s ( when Gilmore assigned it to Chirostenotes ) , and has been regarded as a dubious species outside of Coelurus in recent reviews . Finally , during the period when Ornitholestes was thought to be the same as Coelurus , its type species was recognized as distinct by Steel , as C. <unk> . 
 = = Paleobiology and paleoecology = = 
 = = = Provenance and occurrence = = = 
 The type specimen of Coelurus agilis , YPM 2010 ( now considered a synonym of Coelurus fragilis ) was recovered in the Brushy Basin member of the Morrison Formation , in Albany County , Wyoming . The specimen was collected by Reed in gray sandstone and brown / green claystone that were deposited during the Kimmeridgian stage of the Jurassic period , approximately 157 to 152 million years ago . This specimen is housed in the collection of the Yale Peabody Museum in New Haven , Connecticut . 
 = = = Fauna and habitat = = = 
 The Morrison Formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons , and flat floodplains . Vegetation varied from river @-@ lining forests of conifers , tree ferns , and ferns , to fern savannas with rare trees . It has been a rich fossil hunting ground , holding fossils of green algae , fungi , mosses , horsetails , ferns , cycads , ginkgoes , and several families of conifers . Other fossils discovered include bivalves , snails , ray @-@ finned fishes , frogs , salamanders , turtles such as <unk> , sphenodonts , lizards , terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphans like <unk> , several species of pterosaur like <unk> , numerous dinosaur species , and early mammals such as docodonts , multituberculates , symmetrodonts , and triconodonts . Such dinosaurs as the theropods Ceratosaurus , Allosaurus , Ornitholestes , and Torvosaurus , the sauropods Apatosaurus , Brachiosaurus , Camarasaurus , and Diplodocus , and the ornithischians Camptosaurus , Hesperosaurus , Drinker , Fruitadens , Dryosaurus , and Stegosaurus are known from the Morrison . Coelurus is regarded as a small terrestrial carnivore , feeding on small prey items like insects , mammals , and lizards . It is thought to have been a fast animal , certainly faster than the similar but shorter @-@ footed Ornitholestes . Coelurus is present in stratigraphic zones 2 and 5 of the Morrison Formation . 
