 Salon Kitty became even more popular when selected guests in the military and diplomatic corps were told the " secret codeword " and monitors made thousands of recordings during their visits . One of the customers was Galeazzo Ciano , son @-@ in @-@ law of Italian dictator Benito Mussolini and Foreign Minister of Fascist Italy , whose forthright opinions about the Führer were not particularly positive . Another visitor , SS general Sepp Dietrich , wanted all the 20 special girls for an all @-@ night orgy , but he revealed no secrets . Additionally , propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels has been marked as a client ; he enjoyed " lesbian displays " that were otherwise considered anti @-@ social acts outside of that context . Heydrich also made a number of " inspection tours " , although the microphones were turned off on those occasions . 
 British agent Roger Wilson , under his cover identity as Romanian press secretary " Ljubo <unk> " , noticed the microphone wires while there . He became a regular customer of the salon with a regular girl , and later arranged a wiretap to three cables . Now British intelligence heard some of the same conversations as the SD did . 
 = = = Air raid and closing = = = 
 As the war progressed , the clientele of Salon Kitty decreased . In July 1942 , the building was demolished during an air attack and the brothel had to be relocated . Within the year the SD decided to abandon the project and handed the salon back to Schmidt , with the threat that she would keep silent or face retaliation . 
 Madame Schmidt did not talk about the matter even after the war . She died in 1954 at the age of 71 without revealing the identity of any of her former employees . Total number of Gestapo recordings from the brothel was estimated by the Stasi ( East German Security Service ) to be about 25 @,@ 000 . Virtually all of the recordings have since been lost or destroyed due to their post @-@ war unimportance . According to a 2005 article in Die Tageszeitung , the brothel continued to exist after World War II under the management of Schmidt 's son and daughter . In the 1990s , it was turned into a home for asylum @-@ seekers , which was closed soon after because of local protest against the residents . 
 = = Media = = 
 The story of what happened at Salon Kitty first came to light in Walter Schellenberg 's memoirs , published in Germany in 1956 under the title The Labyrinth . Peter Norden later expanded the story in his 1970 book Salon Kitty . This book became the basis for the highly controversial 1976 film Salon Kitty , directed by Tinto Brass and starring Helmut Berger as Walter Schellenberg ( renamed Helmut Wallenberg ) and Ingrid <unk> as Kitty Schmidt ( renamed Kitty Kellermann ) . 
 The 1981 BBC comedy drama Private Schulz , about a German fraudster and petty criminal 's unwilling World War II service in the SS , prominently features the salon . In the first episode , Schultz has been given the job of manning a listening post in the brothel 's basement and recording the conversations picked up by the hidden microphones . 
 The concept of the Gestapo using a brothel full of spies to find traitors within the Nazi regime has been recycled several times in various European nazi exploitation films . 
 = = = Printed = = = 
 Craig , John ( 2005 ) . Peculiar Liaisons : In War , Espionage , and Terrorism in the Twentieth Century . <unk> Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 <unk> , Christopher ( 2005 ) . Ken Adam : The Art of Production Design . Farber & Farber . ISBN 0 @-@ 571 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Hyde , Montgomery ( 1985 ) . Crimes and Punishment . Marshall Cavendish . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Lepage , Jean @-@ Denis ( 2013 ) . An Illustrated Dictionary of the Third Reich . McFarland Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Roland , Paul ( 2014 ) . Nazi Women : The Attraction of Evil . Arcturus Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Stephenson , Jill ( 2014 ) . Women in Nazi Germany . Routledge Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Online = = = 
 Private Schulz . British Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 4 May 2015 . 
 <unk> , Hanna ( 27 August 2008 ) . " <unk> für den ' Führer ' " . <unk> ( in German ) . Spiegel Online . Retrieved 4 July 2015 . 
 <unk> , Tina ( 11 May 2005 ) . " Wie in ein Nazi @-@ <unk> das <unk> Leben <unk> " ( in German ) . Die Tageszeitung . Retrieved 4 July 2015 . 
 = Heidi Game = 
 The Heidi Game or Heidi Bowl was an American Football League game played on November 17 , 1968 , between the Oakland Raiders and the visiting New York Jets . The game was notable for its finish , in which Oakland scored two touchdowns in the final minute to win the game 43 – 32 , but was named for a decision by the game 's broadcaster , NBC , to break away from its coverage of the game on the east coast to broadcast the television film Heidi , causing many viewers to miss the Raiders ' comeback . 
 In the late 1960s , few professional football games took longer than two and a half hours to play , and the Jets – Raiders ' three @-@ hour time slot was thought to be adequate . A high @-@ scoring contest , together with a number of injuries and penalties for the two bitter AFL rivals , caused the game to run long . NBC executives had originally ordered that Heidi begin at 7 : 00 p.m. ET , but decided to allow the game to air to its conclusion . However , as 7 p.m. approached , NBC 's switchboards were jammed by viewers phoning to inquire about the night 's schedule , preventing the planned change from being communicated . Heidi began as scheduled , preempting the final moments of the game and the two Oakland touchdowns in the eastern half of the country , to the outrage of viewers . 
 Response to the pre @-@ emption by viewers and other critics was negative ; the family members of several Jets players were unaware of the game 's actual conclusion , while NBC received further criticism for its poor timing in displaying the final score of the game during the Heidi movie . NBC 's president Julian Goodman formally apologized for the incident , while footage of the Raiders ' touchdowns were featured across network newscasts the next day . Reaction to the game itself was positive among Raiders fans , with critics lauding its " exciting " conclusion . Alongside the Raiders ' unexpected victory , the ejection of Jets safety Jim Hudson after an argument with an official also drew the ire of team staff , with assistant coach Walt Michaels alleging that the official had cursed at Hudson to provoke the negative reaction that got him ejected . The Jets and Raiders met again in the AFL Championship Game , with the Jets winning 27 – 23 . They later defeated the Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III . 
 The Heidi Game influenced the broadcasting of football : to ensure that network personnel could communicate under similar circumstances , NBC installed special telephones ( dubbed " Heidi phones " ) , with a connection to a different telephone exchange from other network phones , while the future National Football League would contractually stipulate that all game telecasts be shown to their conclusion in the markets of the visiting team . In 1997 , the Heidi Game was voted the most memorable regular season game in pro football history . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Jets – Raiders rivalry = = = 
 When the Jets played the Raiders , it wasn 't a rivalry . It was a war . 
 The Jets and Raiders were founding members of the American Football League ; both teams began to play in 1960 , the Jets under the name Titans of New York . The two teams had little success in their early years , playing so poorly that both the Titans and Raiders were allowed to draft players from other AFL teams following the 1962 season . In 1967 , the Jets , under the guidance of coach Weeb Ewbank and quarterback Joe Namath , posted their first winning record at 7 – 5 – 2 . Oakland , on the other hand , won the Western Division in 1967 with a 13 – 1 mark under coach John Rauch and then the AFL Championship Game over the Houston Oilers , 40 – 7 , before falling to the Green Bay Packers in Super Bowl II . Both teams were seen as likely contenders for the 1968 AFL Championship . 
 The two teams did not play in the same division . However , each AFL team played all other teams in the league each year , allowing the Raiders and Jets to forge a bitter rivalry . In 1963 , Oakland general manager ( later owner ) Al Davis traded guard Dan Ficca to New York during training camp , without mentioning to Ewbank ( who was also the Jets ' general manager ) that Ficca would not be released from his military service for another six weeks . In 1966 , with less than a minute to go and the Raiders leading at the new Oakland Coliseum , 28 – 20 , Jets left tackle Winston Hill predicted to Namath in the huddle that the man he was blocking , Ben Davidson , would rush on the next play , leaving the Raiders exposed to a draw play . Namath called the draw , and handed the ball off to running back Emerson Boozer for 47 yards and a touchdown . After a Jets two @-@ point conversion , the game ended in a 28 – 28 tie , and an embittered Davidson stated , " I 'll get even . They still have to play us next year . " They did , twice . In Week 4 , the Jets defeated the Raiders at Shea Stadium , 27 – 14 ; this was the Raiders ' only regular season loss . In Week 14 , each team 's 13th game , the teams met again , in Oakland . Sportswriter Paul Zimmerman said of the second 1967 Jets @-@ Raiders game : 
 The 1967 game was one of the most vicious in Jet history . Namath was slugged to the turf ; he was hit late , punched in the groin . They aimed for his knees , tried to step on his hands ... And Davidson got Namath . He got him on a rollout , with a right that started somewhere between Hayward and Alameda . It knocked Namath 's helmet flying , and broke his jaw , but Namath didn 't miss a play , and he threw for 370 yards and three TD 's in that 38 – 27 loss . 
 Davidson had this about his play in the Oakland victory , " I don 't think my tackle broke Namath ’ s cheekbone . Not that I care … Namath says that he ’ s been beat up worse by girls . He ’ s asking for it again . " The Jets loss to the Raiders in 1967 knocked New York out of a tie for first place in their division – the AFL East was won by the Houston Oilers . 
 In the 1968 season , the Jets , Raiders , San Diego Chargers and Kansas City Chiefs established themselves as the leading teams . Going into Week 11 of the AFL season , each team had lost only two games ; the Chiefs , who had not yet had a bye week , had eight wins , the others seven . In an era with no wild card teams , the Raiders needed a victory over the Jets in Week 11 to avoid falling a game and a half behind the Chiefs in the AFL West – finishing second , however good their record , would end their season . The Jets , on the other hand , would clinch at least a tie for the AFL East title with a victory over the Raiders in their only regular season meeting . Depending on the results of other games , the Jets could win the division if they beat the Raiders , gaining a berth in the AFL Championship Game , the winner of which would play the NFL champion in the Super Bowl . The ill @-@ feeling of previous years was resurrected by an immense blown @-@ up photograph , posted at Raider headquarters , of Davidson smashing Namath in the head . The photographed play was said to have broken the quarterback 's jaw ( though Namath stated he had broken it on a tough piece of steak , and some claim it was Raiders defensive end Ike Lassiter who injured Namath ) . Although the poster , which had been placed by Davis , was removed before the game , word of this " intimidation through photography " reached the Jets in New York . 
 Namath , interviewed by reporters , stated that he liked the Raiders the least of any AFL team . In 2000 , New York Times sportswriter Dave Anderson wrote of the Jets ' preparations for the Oakland game : 
 When the Jets went to Oakland in 1968 , that photo on the Raiders ' wall symbolized the rivalry as well as Coach Weeb Ewbank 's distrust of Davis . Whenever a helicopter flew anywhere near a Jets practice the week before a game against the Raiders , Ewbank would look up and shake his fist . He just knew Davis had somebody spying on the Jets . 
 The Raiders declined to allow New York reporters to watch practices , a courtesy Ewbank extended to Oakland pressmen . Raiders assistant coach ( later head coach ) John Madden was responsible for the exchange of game films with upcoming opponents ; he sent the films to the Jets through Chicago so they would arrive a day or two late , reasoning that Davis , not he , would be blamed for the delay . Ewbank blamed Davis for heavily watering the Coliseum field to slow the Jets ' speedy receivers , a tactic the Oakland co @-@ owner credited to Madden . 
 = = = Game telecast = = = 
 NBC 's preparations for the Sunday , November 17 game at Oakland were routine . The game was to be televised to most of the country beginning at 4 : 00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time , with Curt Gowdy and Al DeRogatis announcing . NBC hoped that viewers who tuned their television channel selectors to the game would not walk over to the television and change the channel or turn off the power switch , but would watch the evening 's programming . They anticipated a good game , which would cause the audience to remain in their seats and watch the game in its entirety , " a perfect lead in for the network 's special presentation of Heidi , the Johanna <unk> children 's classic , which was scheduled to air after the game at 7 p.m. ( EST ) " . The television film was preempting Walt Disney 's Wonderful World of Color , the program normally shown by NBC on Sunday at that time . As the game started at 1 : 00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time , the western half of the country would have to wait after the game for 7 : 00 p.m. local time before seeing Heidi . Under television rules at the time , the Jets – Raiders game was blacked out within 90 miles of Oakland even though it was a sellout , leaving then @-@ NBC affiliate <unk> @-@ TV ( channel 4 ) and other NBC affiliates in nearby markets unable to show the game . 
 Heidi was heavily promoted by NBC in television commercials and newspaper advertisements . The network hoped to gain a large audience , especially among families , whom the network anticipated would watch the entire two @-@ hour film . Individual commercials for the film could not be purchased by advertisers ; instead , the entire two @-@ hour block was sold by NBC to watch manufacturer Timex , which would air the film and have its own commercials run during the broadcast . The New York Times touted Heidi as the best TV program of the day . Under the terms of the contract between Timex and NBC , Heidi had to go to air promptly at 7 : 00 p.m. Eastern ( 6 : 00 p.m. Central ) , and could not be delayed or joined in progress for any reason . NBC was inclined to favor the movie over the game as sponsors like Timex were treated well in hopes of return business , while AFL football 's television drawing power was as yet unproven . Dom Cosentino , in his 2014 article on the Heidi Game , points out the irony that Timex , a watch company , was the sponsor ; the game would become infamous for its telecast , cut short because of time . 
 Steven Travers , in his history of the Raiders , noted : 
 That Sunday evening at 7 : 00 p.m. the family classic Heidi was scheduled . This is the well @-@ known story of a little Swiss girl who lives with her grandfather in the [ Alps ] , a staple of wholesome entertainment . In the days before cable , pay @-@ per @-@ view , VHS , DVD , TiVo , record , rewind , and 700 channels – when the choices came down to what NBC , ABC , CBS , and maybe a handful of local stations wanted to show the public , TV viewers scheduled their days around events like Heidi . It was on once a year . If one missed it , they missed it until the next year . 
 The nerve center for NBC was known as Broadcast Operations Control ( BOC ) . Dick Cline , the network BOC supervisor for sports telecasts , prepared the series of network orders which would result in the game running as scheduled , followed by Heidi . Cline had no reason to believe that the game would run over three hours ; no professional football game presented by NBC ever had . However , other NBC executives stressed that Heidi must start as scheduled . NBC president Julian Goodman told his executives before the weekend that the well @-@ sponsored , well @-@ promoted film must start on time . NBC Sports executive producer Don " Scotty " Connal took care to tell the game producer , Don Ellis , that Heidi must start at 7 : 00 in the East , over Ellis ' objection that he had been trained never to leave a game in progress . Connal told Ellis that NBC had sold the time , and was obligated to switch to the film . 
 NBC ran three <unk> , in Burbank , California , Chicago , and New York City , with the last the largest . Cline was stationed at the New York BOC for the game . In the era before satellite transmission , programming was transmitted by coaxial cable line , with the cooperation of the telephone company . For this game , the Burbank BOC was to receive the feed from Oakland , insert commercials and network announcements , and send the modified feed via telephone wire to a switching station west of Chicago near the Mississippi River . An engineer was stationed there to activate the Oakland feed into the entire network when the game began , to cut it on instruction and then to return to his base . He had been told to expect at 6 : 58 : 20 Eastern Time a network announcement for Heidi , after which he was to cut the feed from Burbank , and the Heidi feed from New York would begin . This placed Burbank in effective control of whether the engineer would cut the feed , since he would act upon hearing the announcement . 
 Connal , Cline 's boss , was available in case of trouble , watching from his home in Connecticut . His superior , NBC Sports vice president Chet Simmons , who alternated weekends with Connal as on @-@ call in the event of difficulties , was also watching from his Manhattan home . NBC president Goodman and NBC Sports head Carl Lindemann also turned on the game , which was expected to be exciting , in their New York area homes . The Buffalo Bills – San Diego Chargers game , shown as the first of a network doubleheader , was running long in its 2 ½ -hour time slot , and NBC unhesitatingly cut its ending to go to the Jets and Raiders . 
 = = Gameday events = = 
 = = = The game = = = 
 On the opening kickoff , the Jets were penalized for a personal foul against the Raiders . The Jets took an early 6 – 0 lead on 44 @-@ yard and 18 @-@ yard field goals made by kicker Jim Turner . The Raiders , led by quarterback Daryle Lamonica , who had been battling recent back and knee injuries , scored the game 's first touchdown , taking a 7 – 6 lead on a 22 @-@ yard pass to receiver Warren Wells towards the end of the first quarter . The Raiders added to their lead when Lamonica threw a 48 @-@ yard pass to tight end Billy Cannon at the beginning of the second quarter . 
 However , the Jets cut into Oakland 's lead when Namath drove the offense 73 yards down field and ran the ball in for a 1 @-@ yard touchdown with five seconds remaining in the first half . The Jets lined up as if to kick the extra point , but holder and backup quarterback Babe Parilli tried to complete a two @-@ point conversion pass , which fell incomplete . The Raiders led the Jets 14 – 12 at halftime . 
 Approximately five minutes into the third quarter , Namath forged another Jets drive , following an interception by safety Jim Hudson , that ended with halfback Bill Mathis scoring a 4 @-@ yard touchdown behind blocking guard Dave Herman to give New York a 19 – 14 lead . The Raiders responded with an 80 @-@ yard drive that saw running back Charlie Smith score his first touchdown of the game on a 3 @-@ yard pass from Lamonica . The Raiders took a 22 – 19 lead on a two @-@ point conversion with Lamonica completing the attempt to receiver <unk> Dixon . During this drive , Hudson was ejected from the game after being called for a face mask penalty followed by a dispute with an official . As he left the field , he gave the jeering crowd the finger . The penalties caused the ball to be placed at the Jets ' 3 @-@ yard line , and Smith scored for Oakland one play later . 
 The fourth quarter began with Smith fumbling the football with Oakland in scoring position . New York defensive end Gerry Philbin recovered the football at the Jets ' 3 @-@ yard line setting up a 97 @-@ yard drive , consisting entirely of two Namath passes to Don Maynard , who was covered by Raiders ' rookie cornerback George Atkinson . The 50 @-@ yard touchdown pass followed a 47 @-@ yard throw , and gave the Jets a 26 – 22 lead . Turner added another field goal to the Jets ' total , giving them a 29 – 22 lead . The Raiders promptly responded with Lamonica orchestrating an 88 @-@ yard drive that ended with a 22 @-@ yard pass to receiver Fred Biletnikoff with less than four minutes remaining in the game , tying the contest . 
 Turner made a 26 @-@ yard field goal to break the tie and give the Jets a three @-@ point lead with a little over a minute remaining in the game . Turner kicked the ball off to the Raiders ' Smith , who took the kick out of the end zone and to Oakland 's own 22 @-@ yard line . Lamonica completed to Smith for an apparent touchdown , but the play was called back due to a penalty , causing New York cornerback Johnny Sample to say to Lamonica , " Nice try , Lamonica . Better luck next year . " On first down , Smith caught a 20 @-@ yard reception from Lamonica , while a 15 @-@ yard penalty was assessed against the Jets when a player grabbed Smith 's facemask , moving the ball to the Jets ' 43 @-@ yard line . On the ensuing play , Lamonica threw another pass to Smith who outpaced Jets safety Mike D 'Amato , who replaced the ejected Jim Hudson , for a 43 @-@ yard touchdown . Kicker George Blanda made the extra point attempt which gave the Raiders a 36 – 32 lead . 
 With 42 seconds remaining , the Jets still had a chance to score ; however , on the kickoff , New York return man Earl Christy fumbled the ball at the Jets ' 12 @-@ yard line when he was tackled by Raiders linebacker Bill <unk> . Oakland reserve running back Preston Ridlehuber picked up the fumbled ball and ran into the end zone , which with another Blanda extra point gave the Raiders a 43 – 32 lead , deflating any hopes of the Jets coming back to win the contest . Ridlehuber could not remember whether AFL rules permitted advancing a fumbled kickoff return ( they did ) , so tried to make it appear he was entering the end zone with the same motion he gathered in the ball . Oakland kicked off to New York again , but it could do little with the ball in the final seconds , and the game ended . 
 = = = Decision to leave the game for Heidi = = = 
 The two starting quarterbacks combined for 71 dropped passes , with the clock stopping on each incompletion , and the officials called 19 penalties , leading to more clock stoppages . Each team used all six of its allocated timeouts , and the many scores led to additional commercial breaks . At halftime , Connal called Cline , and without urgency discussed the fact that the game seemed to be running longer than expected . 
 As the fourth quarter began , it was 6 : 20 EST , and NBC executives began to realize the game might not end by 7 : 00 . NBC Sports vice president Chet Simmons recalled : 
 They kept promoting Heidi , kept promoting Heidi . I kept looking at my watch , and I said to myself , there 's no way to me that Heidi 's going to make this at seven o 'clock . Julian Goodman , the president of the company , told us going into the weekend that Heidi had to start on time ... I looked at my watch , looked at another table clock , looked at the game , and thought , no way is this going to happen . 
 Connal , watching the game from his home in Old Greenwich , Connecticut , also noticed the fourth quarter was running " terribly slow " . At 6 : 45 , he called Cline again , and both men agreed the game would not end on time . Both supported running the end of the game , but given Goodman 's instructions , his permission was required . Connal agreed to call NBC Sports president Lindemann , and that he and Lindemann would then speak to Goodman . After promising Cline a return call , Connal reached Lindemann by telephone . Lindemann agreed that the end of the game should be broadcast , and both men began trying to reach Goodman . Lindemann was successful in reaching Goodman , and asked the network president , " What about the instruction to broadcast operations control that Heidi had to go on at 7 : 00 ET , no matter what ? " Goodman replied , " That 's crazy . It 's a terrible idea . " Lindemann then set up a three @-@ way conversation with himself , Goodman and NBC Television president Don Durgin . After several minutes of discussion , Durgin agreed to delay the start of Heidi until after the game was completed . Sportswriter Kyle <unk> , in his history of sports gaffes , noted , " And even though earlier executives had told [ Cline ] to make sure he started Heidi on time , those same executives changed their minds late in the game . " 
 Cline , watching the clock nervously , attempted to call Connal back , only to find both lines busy . He waited as long as he could , then made one final , unsuccessful attempt . Unknown to Cline , Connal was talking to Goodman , who had agreed to " slide the network " , that is , start Heidi as soon as Curt Gowdy signed off from the game . Connal called the game producer , Ellis , in Oakland , to tell him the news , then called the BOC supervisor in Burbank – who , not knowing Connal , refused his order , and insisted on speaking with Goodman directly . As Goodman had disconnected to allow Connal to call Oakland , this could not be done . 
 Beginning about 6 : 45 , many members of the public began calling NBC network and affiliate switchboards . Some demanded the game be shown to its conclusion ; others wanted to know if Heidi would start on time . These calls jammed the switchboards , and even blew repeated fuses in them , preventing the executives from getting through to each other to resolve the situation . NBC protocol required an operations order from Connal , to countermand the midweek written orders , but Cline received no call from the increasingly desperate Connal , who was frustrated by the switchboard issues . Without such an order , and not knowing of Goodman 's approval , Cline made the decision that Heidi would start on time . The television audience saw Smith return Turner 's kickoff out of the end zone to the Oakland 22 @-@ yard line with 1 : 01 remaining . Burbank BOC played the closing football theme and gave the word cue , to the outraged shock of Ellis and Connal , and the connection was irretrievably broken . Although the western United States continued to view the game , the eastern half of the nation instead saw a little girl on a Swiss mountain and was unaware that Oakland was in the course of scoring two touchdowns to win the game . 
 Oakland Tribune reporter Bob Valli reported on the Heidi Game : " Television missed one of football 's most exciting and exhausting minutes of emotion . In that minute , Oakland fans saw despair turn to delirium . " 
 = = Reaction and aftermath = = 
 = = = Viewer reaction = = = 
 On realizing that NBC was switching away from the game , Goodman said to Lindemann by phone , " Where the hell has our football game gone ? " During the station break which began with the network announcement , Goodman called a BOC phone to which only he knew the number and which was not part of NBC 's <unk> @-@ 7 exchange ( which blew a fuse 26 times in an hour ) . When Cline answered it , Goodman ordered him to go back to the game . Although Cline knew there was no way to reconnect the feed , he promised to do the best he could . By the time the game ended at 7 : 07 , thousands of viewers were calling the network to complain about missing the end of the football game . Others called newspapers , television stations , even the New York City Police Department , both to seek the final score , and simply to vent . Humorist Art Buchwald wrote " Men who wouldn 't get out of their chairs in an earthquake rushed to the phone to scream obscenities [ at the network ] . " As people learned of the outcome , some became upset because Ridlehuber 's touchdown meant the Raiders had won by more than the point spread of 71 ⁄ 2 , and bets thought to be won were now lost . In Oakland , Gowdy and DeRogatis left the broadcast booth to tell Ellis that the final two minutes were the most exciting they had ever seen . Ellis replied , " It 's too bad America didn 't see it . " Realizing that the original call had been lost , Ellis had the two sportscasters re @-@ create their descriptions of the two Raider touchdowns on tape . 
 In an attempt to inform the audience of the outcome of the game , NBC flashed the final score across the screen . It did so during a scene in the film just as Heidi 's paralyzed friend , Clara , was taking her first , slow steps . According to sportswriter Jack Clary , " The football fans were indignant when they saw what they had missed . The Heidi audience was peeved at having an ambulatory football score intrude on one of the story 's more touching moments . Short of pre @-@ empting Heidi for a skin flick , NBC could not have managed to alienate more viewers that evening . " 
 At 8 : 30 , Goodman issued a statement apologizing for the incident , and stating that he had missed the ending of the game " as much as anybody " . He stated that it was " a forgivable error committed by humans who were concerned about children expecting to see Heidi " . The following morning , Cline was called into a meeting with his bosses . He was told that if he had done anything other than what he did , NBC would have been at the mercy of Timex and Cline would have been fired . The network turned the fiasco into an advantage by subsequent self @-@ mockery , promoting the following week 's Jets game telecast with an advertisement showing Namath with Heidi on his shoulders , and running another ad with testimonials about Heidi , the last : " I didn 't get a chance to see it , but I hear it was great " , signed by Namath . Other networks joined in : on the CBS Evening News the following Monday night ( November 18 ) , Harry Reasoner announced the " result " of the game : " Heidi married the goat @-@ herder " . That same evening , NBC 's own Huntley @-@ Brinkley Report aired the tape of the game 's final minute , complete with the re @-@ created Gowdy / DeRogatis commentary . On the ABC Evening News , anchor Frank Reynolds read excerpts from Heidi while clips of the Raiders ' two touchdowns were shown as cut @-@ ins . 
 = = = Ramifications = = = 
 To prevent similar occurrences happening in future game telecasts , a special " Heidi phone " , a hotline connected to a different exchange and unaffected by switchboard meltdowns , was installed in BOC . The network quickly changed its procedures to allow games to finish before other programming begins , which is now standard practice . Three weeks after the Heidi Game , NBC aired a special presentation of Pinocchio . In the promotional newspaper advertisement for the film , Pinocchio himself assured football fans that they would view the entire game before the film and that he would sooner cut off his nose than " have them cut off " the action . On December 15 , the nationally televised game between the Raiders and Chargers ran over its allotted time slot . NBC started The New Adventures of Huckleberry Finn at 7 : 08 Eastern Time , and announced that all network programming that evening would be started eight minutes late . " I can 't remember when we 've done anything like this before , " stated an NBC executive . " It 's very unusual . " 
 In subsequent television contracts , the merged NFL required language which obligated the networks to show games to completion in the road team 's television market . On November 23 , 1975 , NBC planned to air the heavily promoted children 's film Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory at 7 : 00 p.m. Eastern , right after a game between the Raiders and Washington Redskins . When the game went into overtime , NBC stayed with it for almost 45 minutes and then joined the Wonka film in progress , prompting angry calls from parents . 
 Cline stated in 1989 , " I wonder if this Heidi thing will ever die ... maybe now that it 's past 20 years people will stop asking me about it . " The Heidi Game , in 1997 , was voted among the ten most memorable games in pro football history , and the most memorable regular season contest . In 2005 , TV Guide designated the Heidi Game at # 6 on its list of the " 100 Most Unexpected TV Moments " in history . Interviewed by the magazine , Jennifer Edwards , title star of Heidi , commented : " My gravestone is gonna say , ' She was a great moment in sports . ' " 
 Cline summed up the events of the Heidi Game : 
 Everything had to be perfect . It was just a series of events that fit together . The game ran late , there was a lot of scoring ; there were some injuries that stopped play . And if the Jets had won , there would not have been the to @-@ do that was made . But the way they lost fanned the fires . 
 = = = Game aftermath = = = 
 The Jets were enraged by the outcome of the game , for reasons unrelated to the television problems , of which they were initially unaware . Feeling that Hudson 's disqualification was unjustified ( his replacement , D 'Amato , was beaten for the winning touchdown ) , assistant coach Walt Michaels chased after the officials , and he and team doctor James Nicholas banged on the door of their dressing room , complaining bitterly . Ewbank mentioned the officiating in his postgame press conference . When told of Michaels ' actions , the head coach ordered , " Get him out of there , it can only cost him money . " Oakland coach Rauch told reporters , " There were so many turning points which kept putting both teams back in the game , it 's impossible to discuss them all . " 
 Ewbank learned of the television problems in the locker room when he received a telephone call from his wife congratulating him on a Jets victory – Lucy Ewbank assumed the fact that the end of the game was not shown meant New York had won . Her husband <unk> informed her of the game result . She was not the only Jets relative deceived – cornerback Johnny Sample flew back east after the game on personal business , and when his father picked him up at Philadelphia International Airport , he congratulated his son on a Jets triumph . 
 Michaels accused Al Davis of getting the officials to inspect Turner 's kicking shoes before a field goal attempt to see if they contained illegal metal plates , and called the Oakland team official " a man who has never contributed anything to football " , to which Davis responded , " It 's utterly ridiculous , unbelievable . It seems the Jets always lose to us because of penalties . But I like them and don 't want any feud in case we visit New York December 29 [ if both teams qualify for the AFL Championship Game ] " . The Jets left their white road uniforms in Oakland to be laundered and sent to them in San Diego , where they were to play their next game . The uniforms were not seen again once the team removed them in the Oakland locker room , and Jets management hastily ordered the green home uniforms , as well as the white uniforms the team had worn in the preseason , to be shipped from New York . 
 While in California , Michaels complained by phone to Mel Hein , AFL supervisor of officials , stating that an official had cursed at Hudson , provoking a response which led to Hudson 's ejection . Jets officials also showed excerpts from the game films to the sportswriters from the New York papers who were assigned to cover the team . Zimmerman , who wrote for the New York Post , later stated , " I never saw such ferocity on a football field in my life " and remembered that the films showed Oakland defensive lineman Dan Birdwell punch Namath in the groin , causing him to remain on the ground for several minutes , though he did not have to leave the game . Birdwell 's action was not penalized by the game officials . In early December , football Commissioner Pete Rozelle fined the Jets $ 2 @,@ 000 , Michaels $ 150 , Hudson $ 200 ( including a mandatory $ 50 fine for being ejected from the game ) , and Jets player John Elliott , also disqualified , $ 50 ; he had hit Oakland center Jim Otto . Rozelle criticized Ewbank and Michaels for their " extreme bad manners " while criticizing the officials and cited the Jets ' screening of the game excerpts as a factor contributing to the team 's fine . To avoid adverse fan reaction , the AFL reassigned field judge Frank Kirkland , whom Hudson had accused of using foul language , from the December 1 Jets game against the Miami Dolphins at Shea Stadium , to another game . 
 The Jets defeated San Diego , 37 – 15 , and clinched the AFL East four days later when the second @-@ place Oilers lost to the Chiefs in a Thanksgiving Day game . The Raiders finished tied for the AFL West title with Kansas City ; they then defeated the Chiefs in a tie @-@ breaking playoff game . This set up a December 29 rematch between the Jets and Raiders in the AFL Championship . 
 The Jets hosted the Raiders at Shea Stadium on a windy December afternoon to determine who would play in Super Bowl III against the NFL champions , who proved to be the Baltimore Colts . The Jets defeated the Raiders , 27 – 23 . Two weeks later , the Jets defeated the Colts in the Super Bowl . According to sportswriter Doyle Dietz , in the Jets ' upset victory ( the Colts were favored by as many as 19 ½ points ) , " the American Football League came of age " . Madden later stated that the Jets ' Super Bowl upset " was great for the history of the game , but a part of me has always felt that should have been [ the Raiders ] who were the first AFL team to do it ... [ Super Bowl III ] changed pro football . But I will always believe we would have beaten the Colts , too . " 
 In 1988 , Namath and Madden , by then both television analysts , were interviewed for the 20th anniversary of the Heidi Game . According to Madden , the Oakland victory in the Heidi Game " was kind of the start of the Raiders being a great team . One of the things we were doing was getting these fantastic come @-@ from @-@ behind things ... We didn 't even know about the Heidi thing until we read about it the next day . " Namath noted , " When I remember that game , it brings to mind the revenge factor we had against them going into the championship game . We paid them back then , " to which Madden chuckled , " He 's full of crap . " 
 = = Box score = = 
 = = = Other sources = = = 
 Dave Anderson ( December 10 , 2000 ) . " Sports of The Times ; In <unk> Days , Jets @-@ Raiders Was a Rivalry " . The New York Times . Retrieved August 18 , 2011 . 
 " Jets shoot down Oakland , 27 – 14 " . The Modesto Bee . Associated Press . October 8 , 1967 @.@ p . 1 , Sports section . Retrieved August 21 , 2011 – via Google News . 
 " Huck Finn , etc . , yield to grid " . St. Petersburg Times . Associated Press . December 16 , 1968 @.@ p . 1 – C. Retrieved September 18 , 2011 – via Google News . 
 " Raiders recall Heidi win when last they met Jets " . The Spokesman @-@ Review . Associated Press . December 25 , 1968 @.@ p . 15 . Retrieved August 21 , 2011 . 
 " Oilers plan no change in offense " . Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette . Associated Press . December 30 , 1967 . Retrieved September 18 , 2011 – via Google News . 
 Larry Fox ( December 3 , 1968 ) . " Rozelle fines Jets $ 2 @,@ 000 " . New York Daily News . 
 " Hot and cold streaks on the line " . The New York Times ( The New York Times Company ) . November 16 , 1968 . Retrieved September 5 , 2011 . ( subscription required ) 
 " Oakland jinx hits Jets : Even uniforms are lost " . The New York Times ( The New York Times Company ) . November 23 , 1968 . Retrieved August 20 , 2011 . ( subscription required ) 
 Joe Schuster ( March 1993 ) . " Great Games : Jets vs. Raiders , 1968 " . Sport ( Macfadden Publications ) : 22 – 23 . 
 Rachel Shuster ( November 17 , 1988 ) . " Twenty years later , NBC 's Heidi game remembered " . USA Today ( Gannett Company ) . 
 " Timeline – Raiders Historical Highlights " . Oakland Raiders . Archived from the original on August 21 , 2011 . Retrieved August 17 , 2011 . 
 Bob Valli ( November 16 , 1967 ) . " Not like ' 67 : Jets <unk> " . The Oakland Tribune. pp. 13 – 18 . 
 Bob Valli ( November 18 , 1968 ) . " That clutch Raiders win " . The Oakland Tribune. pp. 33 , 39 . 
 " Oakland stops Houston , 40 – 7 " . The Altus Times @-@ Democrat . United Press International . January 1 , 1968 @.@ p . 3 . Retrieved August 21 , 2011 – via Google News . 
 George Usher ( November 19 , 1968 ) . " Bitter Oakland taste still choking Michaels " . Newsday . 
 George Usher ( December 4 , 1968 ) . " Jets ' letter provokes 2 @,@ 000 guesses " . Newsday . 
 William N. Wallace ( August 25 , 1968 ) . " Rams , Raiders Powerful ; Rams and Raiders Lead Pro Teams " . The New York Times ( The New York Times Company ) . p . S1 . Retrieved August 20 , 2011 . ( subscription required ) 
 Paul Zimmerman ( August 13 , 1976 ) . " Heidi , Ben , Warren and memories " . Pro ! ( Oakland ed . ) ( NFL Properties ) . 
 = Back from Vacation = 
 " Back from Vacation " is the twelfth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 40th episode overall . It first aired on January 4 , 2007 , on NBC , and was the first episode to air after the December holiday hiatus . " Back from Vacation " was the first script written by Justin Spitzer for the series . Julian Farino served as the episode director . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) returns from his vacation in Jamaica and has a luau in the warehouse to celebrate . It is revealed that he went to Jamaica with Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) when a racy photograph of him and Jan is circulated . Meanwhile , Karen Filippelli ( Rashida Jones ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) have an argument over Karen 's living situation , leading to Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) offering him advice . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by an estimated 8 @.@ 80 million viewers . Among the 18 – 49 demographic , it earned a 4 @.@ 3 / 11 ratings share and helped NBC finish in first place for the night . " Back from Vacation " received generally positive reviews from critics , with Carell 's performance receiving positive attention in particular . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) returns from his Jamaican vacation rejuvenated , and directs the Party Planning Committee to throw a luau @-@ themed party in the warehouse to accompany the annual inventory . When Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) notices Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) in the margins of a photo from Michael 's vacation , he admits to the documentary crew that he and Jan went to Jamaica together . 
 Michael attempts to send another vacation photograph to Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) as proof of the trip , but mistakenly chooses " Packaging " instead of " Packer " from the address menu , sending the photograph to the entire shipping warehouse , including Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) , the warehouse supervisor . The photo is quickly forwarded throughout the office and beyond . Michael enlists Dwight Schrute 's ( Rainn Wilson ) assistance in preventing its spread , but these efforts are largely ineffective . 
 Karen Filippelli ( Rashida Jones ) has been upset with Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) because he expressed objections to the prospect of Karen moving into an apartment two blocks from his own . Pam convinces Jim that he is being unreasonable , and Jim accepts her advice and apologizes to Karen . Pam tells the documentary crew that she was glad to help Jim , but Dwight walks in on her crying in private . He awkwardly attempts to console her , although he misunderstands : " So , you 're <unk> pretty bad , huh ? " 
 During the luau / inventory , Jan arrives at the office to speak with Michael in private . Michael is terrified that Jan is there to confront him over the widely spread photo , but she appears to be unaware of it , instead confessing her attraction to him against all reason . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Back from Vacation " was written by Justin Spitzer , a staff writer who joined The Office in its third season . The episode was his first script for the series . Spitzer found Jan 's final scene with Michael – in which he expects she will yell at him for their circulated picture but instead informs him they are staying together – especially tricky to write . Spitzer was unsure how to craft the scene , and eventually requested advice from the other series ' writers . They decided that Jan would give a " psychobabble " response to Michael . Sitting on a panel of television writers at Northwestern University , Spitzer briefly described her reasoning , " Jan ’ s nuts . She has some bad psychiatrist giving her bad advice . " He praised the benefits of a " good writers room , " in which " scenes go to this place you never could have gone to alone . " 
 " Back from Vacation " was directed by Julian Farino , who later was responsible for directing " The Deposition " , a fourth season episode that featured some of the ramifications of Michael 's circulated picture . Recurring actors Creed Bratton , Ed Helms , Rashida Jones , Craig Robinson , and David Koechner appeared as guest stars in " Back from Vacation " . 
 The season three DVD contains a number of deleted scenes , such as Michael arriving from Jamaica at the airport , wearing warm @-@ weather clothes , Dwight , Meredith , Angela and Kevin separately reacting to the news that Michael took Jan to Jamaica , and Jan maintaining the ruse that she was in Scottsdale while talking to a coworker at Corporate , who is viewing the photo on his computer . Additional scenes include Dwight complaining about Jim 's pranks while Michael was on vacation , Roy helping Ryan with inventory , Andy challenging Dwight to a box @-@ stacking race , and Meredith climbing on a shelf , which falls and traps her . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Back from Vacation " first aired on January 4 , 2007 in the United States on NBC . It was the first episode of the season to air after the end of the December holiday break . According to Nielsen Media Research , an estimated 8 @.@ 80 million viewers watched the episode . It earned a 4 @.@ 3 / 11 ratings share among adults aged 18 to 49 , meaning that it was seen by 4 @.@ 3 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of broadcast . The Office and its lead @-@ in show , My Name Is Earl , helped NBC finish in first place for the night in that demographic . 
 The episode attracted generally positive reviews from critics . Brian Zoromski of IGN rated " Back from Vacation " 9 @.@ 7 / 10 , an indication of an " amazing " episode . Stated highlights included the opening sequence , Carell 's performance , and Pam 's storyline with Jim and Karen . Zoromski concluded in his review that " with so much attention to detail , realistic character reactions , and very few completely over @-@ the @-@ top comedy moments , ' Back from Vacation ' is one of the best Office episodes yet this season . We 're very glad they 're back . " AOL TV 's Michael Sciannamea expressed surprise that Jan accompanied Michael on his vacation and immediately wanted to discover more about their relationship . He was also intrigued with Dwight 's attempt to cheer up Pam , until the PMS joke when he thought it " would have been very interesting if Dwight had been a real comfort to her and offered his friendship . " Sciannamea concluded that " this was just a terrific episode . Well written , well acted , and had you begging for more at the end . What more can you ask for ? " 
 Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Abby West focused on Carell 's acting , explaining that " the way that Michael 's desire to boast and his healthy fear of offending Jan played out on Steve Carell 's face was fantastic . From his braggadocio on the phone with Todd Packer ( Packer ! ) to his death march up the stairs to face Jan , it was a thing of beauty . " BuddyTV 's Oscar Dahl believed that " Back from Vacation " was " one of the two or three best of the season " , opining that " simplicity " was the key to the series ' success . Dahl continued , " Each episode 's premise can be entirely mundane and inconsequential . It will still mine laughs from the situation at hand . We also had some nice development in the Jim @-@ Pam @-@ Karen triangle , with Pam giving Jim relationship advice , then bawling her eyes out afterwards . Maybe the best scene in the episode saw Dwight comfort her . " Television Without Pity graded the episode with an A. 
 = Ika Hügel @-@ Marshall = 
 Erika " Ika " Hügel @-@ Marshall ( born 13 March 1947 ) is an Afro @-@ German author and activist . She helped found the organization ADEFRA and the Afro @-@ Deutsch movement . Her autobiography , Daheim unterwegs ( published as Invisible Woman in English ) , discusses racism in Germany and her search for a family identity . She has been influenced by and has praised the work of her friend , American activist Audre Lorde . 
 Hügel @-@ Marshall was born to a German mother and African @-@ American father , whom she did not meet until she was 46 . She experienced severe racism as a child , especially during her time in an orphanage . She studied well and helped to modernise a children 's home in Frankfurt am Main . In the 1980s she helped establish the Afro @-@ Deutsch movement and became interested in Lorde 's work . Daheim unterwegs was published in 1998 and has been described as highlighting issues within German racism . She has since given talks and readings , based on the autobiography , at universities and festivals . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Erika Hügel @-@ Marshall was born on 13 March 1947 , the child of a Bavarian woman and an African @-@ American soldier , Eddie Marshall , who had returned to the US before her birth . Her parents had met just after the end of World War II , after a relaxation of laws forbidding military personnel from interacting with civilians . According to her , black soldiers treated native German children well , distributing food and clothing , but her parents generally met in secret due to racist remarks from others . In November 1946 her father returned to the US after an illness . By that time , both of them knew that her mother was pregnant , but she did not know he was leaving until after he was already gone . A year after Ika 's birth , her mother married a former officer in Hitler 's Sturmabteilung ( SA ) , a paramilitary wing of the Nazi party , and a half @-@ sister was born the following year . Her mother and grandmother loved her and treated her like any other child , despite social disapproval . She was close to her half @-@ sister , but her step @-@ father was distant toward her . 
 Despite her recollections of a pleasant early childhood , Hügel @-@ Marshall was singled out for her skin colour . Growing up , she faced constant racism and was referred to by the local community as a <unk> ; Mischling was the term used by the Nazis to designate " mixed " children ( with a Jewish and a non @-@ Jewish parent ) . In 1952 , when she was ready to start school , her mother was forced by social services to send her to the orphanage God 's Little Cabin Children 's Home . She lived there for the rest of her childhood , despite promises that it was only temporary , that she would only be there for six weeks . At the home , she endured mental and physical abuse from both adults and children . This included being shouted at to stop crying for her mother , being force @-@ fed her own vomit , and undergoing an exorcism , during which she was blindfolded and forced to repeat such phrases as " Satan , I cast you out " and " Lord Jesus , purify my black soul . " She was allowed to go home for summer vacations ; she never told her family about her bad experiences at the children 's home . 
 Hügel @-@ Marshall performed well at school , often finishing top of the class , and taught herself to swim , but was still patronised by the nuns teaching her , who said " we never expected much from you " . Teachers told her she would never amount to anything : she would be promiscuous , have children out of wedlock , become an alcoholic , and do no better than find a job in childcare . She begged to go to a school where she could get higher education and become a teacher , but instead she was transferred to a boarding school where she was taught how to work with young children . After two years of training she was unable to find employment , although her white roommate immediately found a position . 
 = = = Adulthood = = = 
 Hügel @-@ Marshall continued to study and achieved a licence in child education and welfare . She then found work in a children 's home in Frankfurt am Main , where she worked for twelve years . The home reminded her of the degrading orphanage she had been sent to and seemed more like a detention center than a school . Working with the other teachers , and over the opposition of the school 's management , she was able to make substantial changes and to modernise it during her time there . While working there , she completed a degree in social work and pedagogy . 
 In Frankfurt she met and married a white German man named Alexander . Her family and his attended the wedding , but several incidents illustrated once again how German society treated her as " invisible " . When she and Alexander went to get their marriage license , the registrar greeted Alexander , wrote down his name , and then asked " Where is the bride ? " As they were descending the courthouse steps after their wedding , a passerby offered wedding congratulations to the maid of honor . She ignored the incidents even though " I am troubled by this continual need to point out to others that it is I who am getting married . " After six years she and Alexander divorced . 
 Hügel @-@ Marshall became active in the women 's rights movement while in Frankfurt . But even among her feminist activist colleagues she felt isolated , because she was the only black woman there . She had never met another black German , and from her years in the children 's home she had learned to think of blacks ( including herself ) as inferior and immoral . Years later she commented that " the most disastrous thing I learned at the home was self @-@ hatred . " In 1986 , she attended a meeting of Afro @-@ Germans ; she was 39 years old and it was the first time she had ever seen " a black face that wasn 't my own . " She was empowered by the sense of community and became an activist for Afro @-@ Germans , studying their history and asserting their legitimacy in a society that still assumed that all Germans must be white . 
 In 1965 she attempted to find her father , and wrote him a letter explaining her situation , but the letter was returned marked " insufficient address " . She never gave up the hope of finding him and when , in 1990 , she moved to Berlin , she met people who offered to help her trace her father and that side of her family . In 1993 , at the age of 46 , she finally met her father and his large American family in Chicago , where she was welcomed and accepted as an equal . Hügel @-@ Marshall later said " here is my journey 's end " , referring to the meeting , adding " I knew my survival in a white racist society was not for nothing " . He died the following year . 
 Hügel @-@ Marshall has taught gender studies and psychological counselling in Berlin , having gained a degree in social <unk> . She works as a psychotherapist with an inter @-@ cultural focus , and is also an artist who specialises in color drawings and wood sculpture . 
 = = Activism = = 
 In Munich in 1986 , Hügel @-@ Marshall co @-@ founded the Afro @-@ Deutsch women 's movement ADEFRA . " ADEFRA " is short for " <unk> Frauen " ( Afro @-@ German Women ) . It uses literature and the media to call attention to the status of Afro @-@ Germans as " statistically invisible and yet uncomfortably <unk> . [ sic ] " She and other German @-@ born , German @-@ speaking people with African ancestry were commonly not accepted as German because of their skin colour . The Afro @-@ Deutsch movement , a forerunner to the Black European identity movement , used community building " to resist marginalization and discrimination , to gain social acceptance , and to construct a cultural identity for themselves . " 
 Hügel @-@ Marshall 's work has been influenced by American civil rights activist Audre Lorde . Lorde was living in Germany when ADEFRA was founded , and encouraged Afro @-@ Germans to come together and discuss their lives . She encouraged them to write their autobiographies , which Hügel @-@ Marshall did . She and Lorde first met in 1987 , by which time Hügel @-@ Marshall had read substantial material of Lorde 's work and was excited that they would meet . In 2012 , she attended the Audre Lorde Legacy Cultural Festival in Chicago with lesbian activist Dagmar Schultz . Hügel @-@ Marshall has a positive relationship with Chicago , as it was here she found her father . 
 = = Autobiography = = 
 In 1998 Hügel @-@ Marshall published her autobiography , Daheim unterwegs : Ein deutsches Leben , chronicling her experiences surviving as a black woman in Germany . Daheim means " at home " while unterwegs means " on the way " or " in transit " ; the combination is a deliberate oxymoron suggesting someone seeking a home in her own country . The English translation of the book , published in 2001 by Continuum International Publishers , is titled Invisible Woman : Growing Up Black in Germany ; an annotated English version was published by Peter Lang Publishing in 2008 . The book explores the relationship with her father and with Germany , and describes a search for her identity . 
 The book has won the Audre Lorde Literary award and has been read by Hügel @-@ Marshall at public events across Germany , Austria and the US . It has been described as " an intensely moving journey in search of herself ... a personal story , but also a microcosm of racism in contemporary Germany " and " in many ways , paradigmatic for the Black @-@ German experience . " In 2007 she gave a reading and seminar on the book at the University of Rochester and in 2012 , she gave a public reading at the Goethe Institute 's annual Berlin & Beyond Film Festival . 
 = The Scientist ( song ) = 
 " The Scientist " is the second single from British alternative rock band Coldplay 's second studio album , A Rush of Blood to the Head ( 2002 ) . The song was written collaboratively by all the band members for the album . It is built around a piano ballad , with its lyrics telling the story about a man 's desire to love and an apology . The song was released in the United Kingdom as the second single from A Rush of Blood to the Head and reached number 10 in the UK Charts . It was released in the United States as the third single and reached number 18 on the US Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart and number 34 on the Adult Top 40 chart . 
 Critics were highly positive towards " The Scientist " and praised the song 's piano ballad and falsetto . Several remixes of the track exist , and its riff has been widely sampled . The single 's music video won three MTV Music Video Awards , for the video 's use of reverse narrative . The song was also featured on the band 's 2003 live album Live 2003 and has been a permanent fixture in the band 's live set lists since 2002 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Vocalist Chris Martin wrote " The Scientist " after listening to George Harrison 's " All Things Must Pass " . In an interview with Rolling Stone , Martin revealed that while working on the band 's second album , A Rush of Blood to the Head , he knew that the album was missing something . One night , during a stay in Liverpool , Martin found an old piano that was out of tune . He wanted to work on Harrison 's song , " Isn 't It a Pity " , but he could not manage to do so . When the song came to Martin , he asked that the recorder be turned on . He concluded by saying that he came across this chord sequence and noted that the chord was " lovely " . Martin recorded the vocals and piano takes in a studio in Liverpool . 
 When asked about the development of the song , during a track @-@ by @-@ track reveal , Martin said : " That 's just about girls . It 's weird that whatever else is on your mind , whether it 's the downfall of global economics or terrible environmental troubles , the thing that always gets you most is when you fancy someone . " The liner notes from A Rush of Blood to the Head , on the other hand , states that " The Scientist is Dan . " , with Dan referring to Dan Keeling , the A & R man who signed the band to Parlophone . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song is a piano @-@ driven ballad ; the song also contains a piano riff . Chris Martin opens the song and is joined by the rest of the band after the first chorus . The song begins with a four @-@ chord piano melody , with Martin singing . The track also includes a string arrangement . Towards the end of the song , an electric guitar can be heard . 
 The lyrics to the song allude to a man 's powerlessness in the face of love . His helplessness is exemplified in the first line of the chorus , as Martin cries " nobody said it was easy " . The song implies that he wants to go " back to the start . " The first lines of the first verse emphasise an apology : " Come up to meet you / tell you I 'm sorry / you don 't know how lovely you are . " The song 's title also alludes to science in question in verse three : " I was just guessing at numbers and figures / pulling the puzzles apart / questions of science , science and progress / do not speak as loud as my heart . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Coldplay released " The Scientist " in Europe on 4 November 2002 as the album 's second single . The single was pressed with two B @-@ sides : " 1 @.@ 36 " and " I Ran Away . " While preparing for the song as the album 's second release , the band 's US label felt the song failed to " provide enough of a blood rush for American listeners " ; instead , they released " Clocks " as the second single in the US . The song was released on 15 April 2003 in the US . 
 " The Scientist " appeared on Australia Singles Chart at number 40 on 1 November 2003 . It appeared on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks at number 18 . The song peaked at number sixteen at Canada Singles Chart . The song peaked at number 10 in UK Top 75 on 17 November 2002 . 
 The single 's cover , created by Sølve Sundsbø , as with the album 's other singles , features a band member , which in this case is drummer Will Champion . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Scientist " received widespread critical acclaim . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone , in his review of the album , wrote : " The fantastic piano ballad ' The Scientist ' ... [ has ] a cataclysmic falsetto finale that could raise every hair on the back of your neck . " Nick Southall of Stylus magazine wrote : " The piano that chimes through ' The Scientist ' is captured perfectly , the warm depression of each individual key caught rather than a shrill ringing as is so often the case . " Ian Watson of NME wrote : " ' The Scientist ' is a song inexorably linked with the endless night sky and the secret hopes and regrets of a hundred thousand strangers . " 
 In October 2011 , NME placed it at number 37 on its list " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " . In 2009 , Rolling Stone ranked it number 54 on its " 100 Best Songs of the Decade " list . In April 2013 , A Rush of Blood to the Head triumphed in a poll of Radio 2 listeners in the United Kingdom and was named the " favourite album of all time " beating out albums composed by artists like The Beatles and The Rolling Stones . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 In 2003 , " The Scientist " was featured on Coldplay 's live album Live 2003 . The song was covered live by Aimee Mann and released on a special edition of her album Lost in Space . Natasha Bedingfield , Alex Band , Eamon , and Avril Lavigne covered the song on Jo Whiley 's Live Lounge radio show . Also , Belinda Carlisle did a live rendition on the ITV1 reality show Hit Me Baby One More Time . The British female quartet All Angels did a choral arrangement of the song on their album Into Paradise which was released in 2007 . The chords to this song are replicated by Sum 41 in their song " Pieces . " In addition , the American television show MADtv did a parody of the video , called " The Narcissist . " Coldplay 's original version plus a cover of the track performed by <unk> Napolitano and Danny Lohner were featured in the 2004 film Wicker Park . Allison Iraheta and Kris Allen performed an acoustic duet of the song at Oprah Winfrey 's " No Phone Zone " rally in Los Angeles , California . 
 In 2011 , Willie Nelson covered it for a Chipotle Mexican Grill @-@ sponsored short film titled " Back to the Start " , highlighting the problems of Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations . It also appears as the last cut on his 2012 album Heroes . Nelson 's version plays during the closing credits of the 2014 movie The Judge . 
 In 2012 , Glee cast covered it in season 4 , episode 4 , titled " The Break Up " . The song was performed by Cory Monteith , Darren Criss , Naya Rivera , Matthew Morrison , Lea Michele , Chris Colfer , Heather Morris and Jayma Mays . 
 The Voice ( U.S. ) contestant Holly Henry performed the song for her blind audition in 2013 , which led to all four coaches wanting her on their team . 
 In 2014 , actress / singer Miley Cyrus covered the song at selected stops of her Bangerz Tour . 
 In 2015 , The Voice U.S. contestant Chase Kerby performed the song for his blind audition . His performance led Gwen Stefani to turn around , and he instantly became part of Team Gwen , although Adam said he loved the song and thanked him for singing it . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Chris Martin – vocals , piano , synthesizer 
 Jonny Buckland – guitars 
 Will Champion – drums , backing vocals 
 Guy Berryman – bass guitar 
 = = Music video = = 
 The popular music video for " The Scientist " was notable for its distinctive reverse narrative , which employed reverse video . The same concept had been previously used for Spike Jonze 's 1996 music video for The Pharcyde 's " Drop . " The reverse video style had first been seen in 1989 for the video for the song " The Second Summer of Love " by Scottish band Danny Wilson . In order for Martin to appear to be singing the lyrics in the reversed footage , he had to learn to sing the song backwards , which took him a month . The video was filmed at various locations , including London and at Bourne Woods in Surrey , before the first leg of the A Rush of Blood to the Head tour . It was directed by Jamie Thraves . The video premiered on 14 August 2002 . 
 The video opens , looking down on Martin who is singing , as he lies on his back on a mattress . As the camera shot pulls back , the mattress is revealed to be outside . A cyclist cycles past in reverse and Martin leaps up from the mattress . He walks in reverse through a city , out into the suburbs and eventually crossing a railway line and into woods , picking up his suit jacket as he goes . Upon arriving at his car , a black BMW , he gets in and briefly passes out . A woman , at first shown lying unresponsive on the ground in front of the car , is shown flying back in through the shattered windscreen . The car rolls back up a hill in the woods and through a broken fence , which joins back together as the car passes through it . As the video closes , the couple is shown driving back up the road . It is revealed that Martin 's passenger had removed her seat belt , in order to put her jacket on , just before the car accident , causing her death . Irish actress Elaine Cassidy portrays the female passenger . 
 In 2003 , " The Scientist " won multiple MTV Video Music Awards for Best Group Video , Best Direction , and Breakthrough Video . It was also nominated at the 2004 Grammy Awards for Best Short Form Music Video but lost to Johnny Cash 's video for " Hurt " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 CD 
 " The Scientist " – 5 : 11 
 " 1 @.@ 36 " – 2 : 05 
 " I Ran Away " – 4 : 26 
 " 1 @.@ 36 " features Tim Wheeler of Ash on guitar . 
 DVD 
 " The Scientist " ( Edit ) 
 " The Scientist " ( video running backwards ) 
 " Lips Like Sugar " ( Live , Echo & the Bunnymen – Cover ) 
 Interview with band members 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Salta , Cumbria = 
 Salta is a hamlet in the parish of Holme St Cuthbert in northwestern Cumbria , United Kingdom . It is located 1 @.@ 1 miles ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) southwest of the village of Mawbray , and 25 @.@ 1 miles ( 40 @.@ 4 km ) southwest of the city of Carlisle . It has a population of about 35 people . 
 Salta can only be accessed from the lane from Mawbray , which goes on to join the B5300 coast road , although two public bridleways provide access over the fields from <unk> and Mawbray . The hamlet consists of mainly bungalows , and a farm is still in operation in the vicinity . A caravan park , Manor House Park , is situated across the Moss to the southeast , to the southwest of the hamlet of Edderside . 
 The settlement 's name is derived from " <unk> @-@ tir " , meaning " salt land " in Old English , as during Anglo @-@ Saxon times , salt making was a major industry on the Solway Plain . Fortified during the Roman period , in the 1550s , Salta participated in a system called " <unk> " , a night watch to guard the coast against incursions across the Solway by the Scots . Salta Moss was designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1954 and forms part of the Solway Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . It is home to a diversity of wildlife , including Adders , Britain 's only native venomous snake , and several varieties of heather , as well as the purple moor grass Molinia caerulea . 
 = = History = = 
 The name " Salta " comes from Old English " <unk> @-@ tir " , meaning " salt land " . In Anglo @-@ Saxon times , salt making was a major industry on the Solway coast , and there are remains of medieval salt pans near <unk> 21 , only a few miles down the coast from Salta . Salta appears in older documents with several variant spellings , including " <unk> " . 
 On Salta Moss , an area of common land next to the hamlet , a Bronze Age rapier ( a kind of sword ) was discovered in the 1980s , proving that the area was settled by ancient Britons millennia ago . The rapier currently resides in the Tullie House Museum in Carlisle , and archaeologists date it as being crafted as early as 1100 BC . Two perforated axe @-@ hammers and a polished axe dated to the Neolithic period were unearthed at nearby Mawbray . After the arrival of Romans in Britain , the area around Salta was fortified as part of the coastal defences which extended beyond the western end of Hadrian 's Wall . By the 1550s , Salta participated in a system called " <unk> " , which was a night watch to guard the coast against incursions across the Solway by the Scots . These incursions were frequent , and on one occasion in 1592 at Dubmill , near Salta , a Mr <unk> the local miller was taken prisoner by Scottish raiders . 
 One of the properties in Salta is known to date from the 16th century , and the hamlet has been continually inhabited ever since . During the Second World War , 43 evacuees from the Newcastle @-@ Upon @-@ Tyne area were billeted to the parish of Holme St. Cuthbert , and several ended up in Salta . Development in the 20th century saw new houses built , but mainline water and electricity arrived later than in other parts of Britain , perhaps due to the small population . Excavations of a <unk> enclosure at Edderside , beyond the Moss to the southeast of Salta , were conducted in 1989 – 1990 by Robert H. Bewley . The <unk> House wind turbine was approved for construction in 2013 in spite of local opposition , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) to the northeast , to the south of <unk> , and will join a number of other wind turbines in the area around Salta . 
 = = Geography and farming = = 
 Salta lies near the coast of northwestern Cumbria . By road it is situated 1 @.@ 1 miles ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) south of Mawbray , 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) north of Allonby , 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) southwest of Holme St Cuthbert and 7 @.@ 4 miles ( 11 @.@ 9 km ) southwest of <unk> . It shares very close community ties with nearby Mawbray , although the city of Carlisle provides wider amenities , some 25 @.@ 1 miles ( 40 @.@ 4 km ) to the northeast . The shore of Allonby Bay , an inlet of the Solway Firth , is a mere half @-@ a @-@ mile to the west of the hamlet . A beck ( a local word meaning " stream " ) flows through Salta , fed in part by irrigation channels . This beck eventually joins the Black Dub and drains into the Solway Firth at Dubmill . 
 Salta Moss is a Site of Special Scientific Interest , both for its natural and historical significance , and is itself is located in a designated Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty which covers much of the Solway Plain . The Moss is an area of peatland , containing " mainly oligotrophic semi- fibrous grass @-@ sedge peat " according to Soil Survey Record . It combines characteristics of both a raised bog and a valley mire , and lies atop deposits of glacial sand from the last ice age . It was designated an SSSI in 1954 . Having been cut with irrigation channels , and been the site of burning and peat working , Salta Moss has different flora than other bogs or mires on the Solway Plain . The Moss today is common ground , but a track runs through it to provide access for local farmers to outlying fields , which surround it . An irrigation ditch has also been dug to provide drainage to the surrounding farmland . 
 There is some concern that areas of the Moss have been damaged or partly destroyed as a result of agricultural activity , including the digging of drainage ditches . Natural England , the agency responsible for the management of SSSIs in England , has suggested that no further irrigation channels should be dug , existing ones should not be deepened , and that the area should not be exposed to fertilisers or surface water run @-@ off . Natural England further notes that the site 's continued status as an SSSI depends on maintaining a high water table . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Salta , like the rest of the Solway plain , has an oceanic climate ( Köppen climate classification Cfb ) , with warm summers and cool winters which generally avoid extremes of temperature . Salta has a cool climate , with average daytime highs of around 19 ° C during July and 7 ° C during December , although lows of − 12 ° C have been recorded . It is wet all year round , with rain or drizzle expected on 16 to 19 days of most months . Snowfall is relatively uncommon . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Salta , and the Moss in particular , is home to a variety of plant and animal life , including some rare specimens . Adders , Britain 's only native venomous snake , are seen on the Moss , and prey upon small rodents , such as voles . Many wild bird species inhabit Salta and the surrounding area , including larger species such as pheasants , which are also bred locally for hunting . 
 The Moss contains several varieties of heather , as well as the purple moor grass Molinia caerulea . Ferns and gorse are common too , and in areas where peat has been cut in the past , there are bog mosses , the bog bean <unk> <unk> , and marsh pennywort . 
 = = Landmarks and amenities = = 
 Salta today is still a very small settlement , home to approximately 35 people . Most of the houses are fairly modern bungalows , such as those named Barnfield , Heather Moor , Moss View and <unk> , although there are older two @-@ floor cottages on either side of the hamlet . Another bungalow is named Anchorage , which features a ship anchor scheme on its gates . 
 There is still a functioning farm in Salta , which is passed on the lane accessing the hamlet . There are other farms in Mawbray and Allonby , and the hamlet is surrounded by farmland belonging to these local farmers . Though the road through the hamlet comes to a dead @-@ end , and is accessed by lane only from the coastal B5300 road or Mawbray , two public bridleways at the end provide access over the fields to <unk> and Mawbray , with the latter emerging right next to the pub in the centre of the village . A caravan park , Manor House Park , is situated across the peat to the southeast , to the southwest of the hamlet of Edderside . 
 Allerdale Borough Council provides refuse collection , <unk> , and other modern amenities . The nearest primary schools are Allonby Primary School in Allonby and Holme St Cuthbert School near Mawbray , and the nearest secondary school is Beacon Hill Community School in <unk> . Modern Salta is a predominantly Christian community , though the local Church is located at Holme St Cuthbert , several miles away . As at 2014 , a bus service runs between <unk> and Workington on the B5300 approximately every two hours , and can be requested to make a stop at Dubmill , near Salta . 
 = Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea = 
 Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea is a town in Somerset , England , at the mouth of the River Parrett and Bridgwater Bay . Burnham was a small fishing village until the late 18th century , when it began to grow because of its popularity as a seaside resort . It forms part of the parish of Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea and Highbridge and shares a town council with its neighbouring market town of Highbridge . According to the 2011 census the population of the parish ( i.e. including Highbridge ) was 19 @,@ 576 , of which the populations of the wards of Burnham Central and Burnham North , which made up most of the town , totalled 13 @,@ 601 . 
 The position of the town on the edge of the Somerset Levels and moors where they meet the Bristol Channel , has resulted in a history dominated by land reclamation and sea defences since Roman times . Burnham was seriously affected by the Bristol Channel floods of 1607 , with the present curved concrete wall being completed in 1988 . There have been many shipwrecks on the Gore Sands , which lie just offshore and can be exposed at low tides . Lighthouses are hence prominent landmarks in the town , with the original lighthouse known as the Round Tower built to replace the light on the top of the 14th century tower of St Andrews Church . The 110 @-@ foot ( 34 @-@ metre ) pillar or High Lighthouse and the low wooden pile lighthouse or Lighthouse on legs on the beach were built to replace it . The town 's first lifeboat was provided in 1836 by the Corporation of Bridgwater . 
 A stone pier was built in 1858 by the Somerset Central Railway . Soon afterwards , in 1860 , a steamer service to Wales was inaugurated , but it was never a commercial success , and ended in 1888 . Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea railway station was the terminus of the Burnham branch of the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway . It opened in 1858 , closed to scheduled passenger traffic in 1951 , and stopped being used for excursions in 1962 . The former Great Western Railway station is now known as Highbridge and Burnham . A second pier , built of concrete between 1911 and 1914 , is claimed to be the shortest pier in Britain . 
 = = History = = 
 The name Burnham is derived from <unk> , as it was called in the will of King Alfred , made up from the Old English words Burna meaning stream and Hamm for enclosure . On @-@ Sea was added later as there are several other towns of the same name in England . 
 The history of Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea is the history of the reclamation of the Somerset Levels from the River Severn and the Bristol Channel . The Romans were the first peoples to try to reclaim the Somerset levels , and it was their people who were probably the first settlers in the high sand dunes behind the River Parrett . This could have been in part to maintain navigational systems , to aid ships entering the River Parrett and what is now Highbridge . When the Romans left , the system of drainage they installed was not maintained , and the areas reverted to become a tidal salt flat during the Anglo Saxon period . 
 It is likely that at the time of the Norman Domesday book , settlements existed at Burnham and Huntspill , their common boundary running along what is now the Westhill Rhyne . The church at Burnham and its lands were given to Gloucester Abbey in the 12th century , later transferred to the Wells Cathedral along with up to 50 houses surrounding the church . Burnham was part of the hundred of <unk> . 
 One of the earliest recorded incidents to affect the town was the Bristol Channel floods of 1607 , since when various flood defences have been installed . In 1911 a concrete wall was built . After the Second World War , further additions to the defences against the sea were added by bringing part of the remains of a Mulberry harbour used for the Normandy Landings , and burying them in the sand . Today the town is defended from flooding by a large curved concrete wall , completed in 1988 following serious flooding in 1981 . The wall runs along the Esplanade , and serves as the canvas for a wide variety of graffiti and street art . 
 The USS <unk> was a Clemson @-@ class destroyer in the United States Navy built in 1918 to 1919 . In 1940 she was transferred to the British under the agreement with the United Kingdom exchanging American destroyers for bases in the Atlantic . She transferred to the Royal Navy where she served as HMS Burnham ( <unk> ) during the Second World War . In 1942 , Burnham was formally adopted by Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea . In 1944 , she was used on aircraft training duties in the Western Approaches Command , which allowed a contingent from the ship to visit the town and march through its streets . Burnham was reduced to reserve at Milford Haven , Wales , in November 1944 . She was ultimately scrapped at Pembroke , in December 1948 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea is notable for its beach and mudflats , the danger they pose to individuals and shipping , and the efforts to which locals have gone in defending their town and preventing loss of life . Burnham is close to the estuary of the River Parrett where it flows into the Bristol Channel , which has the second highest tidal range in the world . At 11 m ( 36 ft ) , it is second only to the Bay of Fundy in Eastern Canada . Burnham 's extensive mud flats are characteristic of Bridgwater Bay and the rest of the Bristol Channel , where the tide can recede for over 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 kilometres ) . Bridgwater Bay consists of large areas of mud flats , saltmarsh , sandflats and shingle ridges , some of which are vegetated . It has been designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest since 1989 , and is designated as a wetland of international importance under the Ramsar Convention . 
 Apex Leisure and Wildlife Park , in the south @-@ west corner of Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea , north of the River Brue , occupies an area of more than 42 acres ( 17 hectares ) . The park was created from excavated clay pits , which were flooded , and the lakes are now home to many types of wildlife and leisure activities . 
 Hinkley Point is a headland extending into Bridgwater Bay 5 mi ( 8 km ) west of Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea , close to the mouth of the River Parrett . The landscape of Hinkley Point is dominated by two nuclear power stations : Hinkley Point A – Magnox ( now closed ) and Hinkley Point B – AGR . A third , twin @-@ unit European Pressurized Reactor ( EPR ) reactor is planned , and will become Hinkley Point C. 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Burnham has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures . The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . In winter , mean minimum temperatures of 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) or 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) are common . In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south @-@ west of England , however convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine . Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most the rainfall in the south @-@ west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = = Sea defences = = = 
 Burnham was seriously affected by the Bristol Channel floods of 1607 , and various flood defences have been installed since then . In 1911 , a concrete sea wall was built , and after World War II further additions to the defences were made using the remains of a Mulberry harbour . 
 On 13 December 1981 , a large storm hit the North Somerset coast . Meteorological conditions resulted in a very intense secondary low @-@ pressure area moving rapidly at 40 knots ( 74 km / h ; 46 mph ) into the Bristol Channel , with pressure dropping from 1 @,@ 012 to 962 hectopascals ( 29 @.@ 9 to 28 @.@ 4 inches of mercury ) between 00 : 00 and 18 : 00 . This caused a large rising surge in sea level , with the maximum surge at Hinkley Point measured at 1 @.@ 3 m ( 4 ft 3 in ) above the 7 @.@ 4 m ( 24 ft 3 in ) tidal level Ordnance Datum ( OD ) at 20 : 25 , and 1 @.@ 3 m ( 4 ft 3 in ) measured at Avonmouth . The wind was measured at 40 knots ( 74 km / h ; 46 mph ) from the west . Over topping of the sea defences along a 7 mi ( 11 km ) stretch of the Somerset coast at 22 locations from Clevedon to Porlock began after 19 : 30 , and continued until about 21 : 30 when the wind speed had reached 50 knots ( 93 km / h ; 58 mph ) from the west . Although there was no loss of life , the resultant flooding covered 12 @,@ 500 acres ( 5 @,@ 100 ha ) of land , affecting 1 @,@ 072 houses and commercial properties , with £ 150 @,@ 000 worth of livestock killed and £ 50 @,@ 000 of feed and grain destroyed . Wessex Water Authority estimated the total cost of the damage caused at £ 6M . This resulted in a three @-@ year programme of sea defence assessment , repair and improvement . 
 Burnham , being the largest occupied town within the 1981 surge affected area , also bore the brunt of the resultant damage . 400 properties were affected , with pavements , stone and concrete from the sea wall ripped up and the <unk> destroyed ; total damage within the parish was estimated at £ <unk> Although emergency repairs were undertaken , Wessex Water Authority began planning new sea defences for the town . Construction work started in 1983 on a £ 7M scheme , creating what was then Britain ’ s biggest wave return wall . The scheme raised the level of the sea wall and the promenade by 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) , by creating a 1 @.@ 6 km ( 0 @.@ 99 mi ) long and 3 @.@ 2 m ( 10 ft 6 in ) high sea wall , and a new wider Esplanade . Taking five years to complete and coming into operation in 1988 , beach access is now via a series of raised steps for visitors , with three vehicle access points which can be closed during storms using sealed gates . 
 = = = Lifeboats and BARB = = = 
 There have been many shipwrecks on the Gore Sands . The first lifeboat was sent to Burnham by the Bridgwater Corporation in 1836 , and a replacement boat in 1847 . 
 The first Royal National Lifeboat was funded by the town of Cheltenham , and arrived in 1866 . The lifeboat was removed in 1930 because of the difficulty in getting a full crew , and because the launching arrangements were not suitable for a powered boat . The current Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea Lifeboat Station is the base for Royal National Lifeboat Institution ( RNLI ) search and rescue operations . The present station was opened in 2003 . It operates two inshore lifeboats ( <unk> ) , a B Class rigid @-@ hulled boat and an inflatable D Class . 
 The Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea Area Rescue Boat now known as BARB Search & Rescue was set up in 1992 to fund and operate rescue craft in the Bridgwater Bay area . BARB 's boat house on the sea front was built in 1994 by the Challenge <unk> TV show . In 2002 , Lelaina Hall , a five @-@ year @-@ old girl from Worcester , died on the mud flats before help could reach her . The outcry over her death prompted a Western Daily Press campaign to fund an inshore hovercraft . BARB currently operates the Spirit of Lelaina alongside her sister hovercraft the Light of Elizabeth , which is named after Lelaina 's sister . 
 = = Present = = 
 Modern Burnham has become a quiet residential town outside of the holiday season , and in the last 10 years with the community of Highbridge has gained the patronage of the well @-@ known brands as seen in most modern day high streets . This has been driven by modern housing development to the east of the town and within Highbridge , allowing easy access via the M5 to Bristol to the north and Taunton to the south , although Burnham is still a noted retirement town often for those from the West Midlands who have previously holidayed there . 
 The first purpose @-@ built Somerfield supermarket on the site of the former S & DJR railway station opened in 1983 , which operated as a Morrisons until November 2015 . Also established in the town are a Lidl , Tesco and , in Highbridge , an Asda . The high street area has over 160 retailers and it has a large number of vintage , secondhand goods and cafes . Many national brands such as Boots the Chemists , Greggs bakery , Costa Coffee , and Specsavers are also present . The major banks and all of the local building societies can also be found along the high street , whilst J D Wetherspoon now operates one of the main public houses on the sea front . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The civil parish of Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea and Highbridge has responsibility for local issues , including setting an annual precept ( local rate ) to cover the council 's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny . The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police , district council officers , and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime , security , and traffic . The parish council 's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities , as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance , repair , and improvement of highways , drainage , footpaths , public transport , and street cleaning . In recent years the parish council has become a significant grant funder of local organisations and events . There is currently a debate underway about the correct disbursement and monitoring of these grants , following allegations of impropriety regarding some councillors . 
 Burnham was a large ancient parish , and until the late 19th century included the then hamlet of Highbridge and rural areas around <unk> . In 1894 Highbridge became a separate civil parish , itself divided in 1896 between the new civil parishes of North Highbridge ( within Highbridge Urban District ) and Burnham Without . Burnham itself became Burnham Urban District , renamed Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea Urban District in 1917 . In 1933 it annexed Highbridge Urban District . This combined urban district became a civil parish in 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972 . The town now falls within the non @-@ metropolitan district of Sedgemoor , which was formed under the same legislation . Sedgemoor is responsible for local planning and building control , local roads , council housing , environmental health , markets and fairs , refuse collection and recycling , cemeteries and crematoria , leisure services , parks , and tourism . 
 Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education , social services , libraries , main roads , public transport , policing and fire services , trading standards , waste disposal and strategic planning . 
 There are two electoral wards in the town itself ( Central and North ) making the total population at the 2011 census mentioned above of 13 @,@ 601 . 
 It falls within the Wells county constituency which elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) to the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom , by the first past the post voting system . As of 2010 , the MP is Tessa <unk> of the Liberal Democrats . It is also within the South West England of the European Parliament which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Lighthouses = = = 
 Because of its position near the mouth of the River Parrett , and the constantly shifting sands of the Bristol Channel , there has always been a significant risk to shipping in the area . As a result , several lighthouses , have been built . 
 The original lighthouse , known as the Round Tower , was built after the local vicar , either John Goulden in 1764 or Walter Harris in 1799 , raised a subscription amongst the local population to replace the light on the top of St Andrews Church tower . The four @-@ storey Round Tower was built next to the church . It was taken over and improved by Trinity House in 1815 , and operated until 1832 , following which the top two storeys were removed . 
 The 110 ft ( 34 m ) pillar or High Lighthouse was designed and built by Joseph Nelson for Trinity House in 1830 , and equipped with a paraffin lamp . The ground floor was 5 m ( 16 ft 5 in ) in diameter and the top room 3 m ( 9 ft 10 in ) . It was automated in 1920 . In 1992 , it was sold to a member of the Rothschild family , who owned it until 1996 , when it was bought at auction by Patrick O 'Hagan . Conversion for residential use included the removal of the 6th floor and the construction of stairs where there had previously only been ladders . A Grade II listed building , it is now available for holiday lets . 
 The low wooden pile lighthouse or " Lighthouse on legs " , was built two years later , also by Joseph Nelson , to complement the High Lighthouse . It is a total of 36 ft ( 11 m ) high , with the light being at 23 ft ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) above the sand . It stands on nine wooden piers , some with plate metal reinforcement . The structure is whitewashed with a vertical red stripe on the sea side . The lights were inactive between 1969 and 1993 , but were recommissioned when the High Lighthouse lights were permanently deactivated . They have a focal plane of 7 m ( 23 ft 0 in ) and provide a white flash every 7 @.@ 5 seconds , plus a directional light ( white , red , or green depending on direction ) at a focal plane of 4 m ( 13 ft 1 in ) . 
 = = = Pier = = = 
 A 900 ft ( 270 m ) stone pier was constructed in 1858 by the Somerset Central Railway . Soon afterwards , in 1860 , a steamer service to Wales was inaugurated , but it was never a commercial success , and ended in 1888 . The pier retains its railway lines under a surface coating of concrete . 
 The concrete pier , built in 1911 – 1914 , is claimed to be the shortest pier in Britain . In 2008 , it was rated amongst the top five piers in Britain by the Daily Express . 
 = = = Listed buildings = = = 
 The Esplanade along the sea front contains several listed buildings from the early 19th century , including number 44 , which is also known as Steart House , and numbers 46 and 47 . 
 On Berrow Road , near the High Lighthouse , numbers 4 , 6 and 8 were part of a terrace built between 1838 and 1841 . Number 31 was previously a lodge . On the corner of Berrow Road and Sea View is a drinking fountain from 1897 with a single dressed stone pier and moulded plinth , topped by a cast iron urn . Each side has the lions head design with those on the north and south sides giving water into a Purbeck Marble bowl . 
 = = Education = = 
 Primary schools in the town providing education for children up to the age of 11 include : Berrow Church of England Primary School , Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea Community Infants School , St Andrew 's Church of England Junior School , St Joseph 's Catholic Primary School and Nursery . 
 The nearest secondary school is The King Alfred School , a coeducational comprehensive school located in Highbridge , often referred to as the ' College of <unk> ' . The school is a specialist Sports College . In 2007 , the school celebrated its 50th anniversary . The facilities of the dual @-@ use King Alfred Sports Centre , which is next to the school site , are shared between the school and town . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 The parish church , St. Andrew 's , is a Grade I listed building dating from the 14th century . It has a 78 ft ( 24 m ) high tower , which leans significantly from the vertical , caused by its poor foundations . During the 18th century , a light was placed on the tower to guide fishing boats into the harbour . The church contains a number of marble carvings designed by Sir Christopher Wren for the private chapel in the Palace of Westminster . 
 There are also places of worship for Baptists , Methodists , Roman Catholics and Jehovah 's Witnesses in the town . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea railway station was the terminus of the Burnham branch of the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway , but the tracks continued onto the jetty , where ferry services to South Wales could be boarded . The station opened in 1858 as Burnham , and was renamed Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea in 1920 . It closed to scheduled passenger traffic in 1951 and stopped being used for excursions in 1962 . It finally closed to goods traffic in 1963 . 
 The former Great Western Railway station is now known as Highbridge and Burnham . The station was opened as " Highbridge " on 14 June 1841 , when the Bristol and Exeter Railway opened its broad gauge line as far as Bridgwater . A road crossed the line at the north end of the platforms , and a goods shed was provided beyond this on the west side of the line . The Bristol and Exeter Railway amalgamated with the Great Western Railway on 1 January 1876 . 
 The town is approximately 3 mi ( 5 km ) from the M5 motorway and the A38 road . 
 = = Culture and sport = = 
 The town is part of the West Country Carnival circuit . 
 Burnham and Berrow Golf Course lies at the North of the town and is a 36 hole championship course voted as one of the top 100 courses in the UK . 
 Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea is a noted venue for <unk> , as well as other water sports , and has its own sailing club . 
 Land side many activities cater for either the dominant resident elderly population or the seasonal tourists , including bowls , and there is also a swimming pool and sports academy . 
 The Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea rugby union club was founded in 1919 but was wound up after World War 2 . The club subsequently reformed , and after winning the Tribute Somerset Premier in the 2008 / 2009 season they were promoted to the Western Counties North . At the start of the 2013 @-@ 14 season they were moved into the Tribute Western Counties West division of the English Rugby Union South West Division . 
 The Burnham on Sea Cricket club was established in 1861 and has played continuously since then . The Club currently plays in the Somerset Cricket League Div 2 . The ground is situated in <unk> Road and boasts fine facilities . The best @-@ known player in the club 's history is Sammy Woods , who played Test cricket for England and Australia during the 1890s . The club has also provided a number of players for Somerset in the County Championship competition . 
 The town has a twice a year food and drink festival , focused on producers within a 25 mi ( 40 km ) radius . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Thomas Alan Stephenson , a marine biologist , was born in the town in 1898 , and it was also the birthplace of John <unk> , a theoretical chemist , in 1925 . The novelist Isobel English was sent to La <unk> , a Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea convent school , in 1920 . The town was also the home of Walter " Wally " Postings and Beatrice " Pete " Postings . The couple were married for 80 years , the longest marriage in Britain . Arthur Gilbert , confirmed as the world 's oldest triathlete in 2011 , lives and competes in the town . George Shelley of X Factor boy band Union J lived in Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea and attended The King Alfred School , Highbridge where he studied his GCSE 's . Also resident is world champion Scottish Darts player Gary Anderson . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea is twinned with : 
 Cassis , France 
 = Aang = 
 Avatar Aang ( <unk> , ān <unk> ) is a fictional character and the protagonist of Nickelodeon 's animated television series Avatar : The Last Airbender ( created by Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko ) , voiced by Zach Tyler Eisen . 
 Aang is the last surviving Airbender , a monk of the Air Nomads ' Southern Air Temple . He is an incarnation of the " Avatar " , the spirit of light and peace manifested in human form . As the Avatar , Aang controls all four elements and is tasked with keeping the Four Nations at peace . At 12 years old , Aang is the series ' reluctant hero , spending a century in suspended animation before joining new friends Katara and Sokka on a quest to master the elements and save their world from the imperialist Fire Nation . 
 Aang 's character has appeared in other media , such as trading cards , video games , T @-@ shirts , and web comics . Aang has also been portrayed by Noah Ringer in the feature film The Last Airbender , and voiced by D.B. Sweeney in the sequel animated series The Legend of Korra . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 Aang 's character was developed from a drawing by Bryan Konietzko , depicting a bald man with an <unk> design on his head , which the artist developed into a picture of a child with a flying bison . Meanwhile , Michael Dante DiMartino was interested in a documentary about explorers trapped in the South Pole , which he later combined with Konietzko 's drawing . 
 " There 's an air guy along with these water people trapped in a snowy wasteland ... and maybe some fire people are pressing down on them ... " 
 The plot they described corresponds with the first and second episodes of Avatar : The Last Airbender , where the " water people " ( Katara and Sokka ) rescue the " air guy " ( Aang ) while " trapped in a snowy wasteland " ( the Southern Water Tribe ) with " some fire people [ that ] are pressing down on them " ( Fire Nation Troops and Zuko ) . The creators of the show intended Aang to be trapped in an iceberg for one thousand years , later to wake inside a futuristic world , wherein he would have a robot named Momo and a dozen bison . The creators lost interest in this theme , and changed it to one hundred years of suspended animation . The robotic Momo became a flying lemur , and the herd of bison was reduced to one . 
 Airbending , the martial art Aang primarily uses in the show , is based on an " internal " Chinese martial art called Baguazhang . This fighting style focuses on circular movements , and does not have many finishing moves ; traits meant to represent the unpredictability of air and the peaceful character of Airbenders . 
 In the episode " Tales of Ba Sing Se " , Aang ’ s name was written as <unk> ( ān <unk> ) in Chinese . 
 = = = Personality and characteristics = = = 
 Michael Dante DiMartino , the show 's co @-@ creator , said : 
 " We wanted Aang to solve problems and defeat enemies with his wits as well as his powerful abilities " . 
 According to the show 's creators , " Buddhism and Taoism have been huge inspirations behind the idea for Avatar . " As shown in " The King of <unk> " and " The Headband " , a notable aspect of Aang 's character is his vegetarian diet , which is consistent with Buddhism , Hinduism , and Taoism . In the <unk> Sutra , a Buddhist code of ethics , vegetarianism is encouraged . Furthermore , the writers gave Aang a consistent reluctance to fight and an aversion to killing . In " The Spirit World ( Winter Solstice , Part 1 ) " , Aang encounters an angry spirit destroying a village and kidnapping villagers ; but instead of fighting the spirit , Aang negotiates . He is also depicted showing ethical reluctance in killing <unk> Ozai , and eventually strips Ozai of his bending instead of killing him . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Avatar : The Last Airbender = = = 
 Upon death , Avatar Roku was reincarnated and Aang was born , and later raised by Monk Gyatso , a senior monk at the Southern Air Temple and friend of the late Avatar Roku . Even prior to learning he was the Avatar , Aang distinguished himself by becoming one of the youngest Airbending Masters in history by inventing a new technique . As a result of Fire Lord Sozin 's increasingly hostile attitude towards the other nations , the senior monks decided to reveal Aang 's nature as the Avatar four years before the traditional age ( Avatars are usually told of their status once they turn 16 ) and relocate him to one of the other Air Temples . Learning that he was to be taken from Gyatso caused Aang to flee the monastery on his flying bison , Appa , before being caught by a storm ; the life @-@ or @-@ death conditions triggered the Avatar State , encasing the young Avatar and his bison in an air @-@ pocket among icebergs , where he remained suspended for a century . 
 After one hundred years of suspended animation in an iceberg , twelve @-@ year @-@ old Aang was freed when found by Katara and Sokka , yet unaware of the events that occurred during his rest . His reawakening catches the attention of Zuko , the banished prince of the Fire Nation , and Aang is forced to leave , with Katara and Sokka accompanying him after they learn that he is the Avatar . Aang and his new friends visit the Southern Air Temple , where they meet a winged lemur whom Aang later names Momo . It is there that Aang learns that he was in the ice for a whole century , and that the Fire Nation wiped out his people , including Gyatso . After a series of misadventures , Aang meets his previous incarnation , Roku , who informs him that he must master all four bending arts and end the war before the coming of Sozin 's Comet at the end of summer . Upon arriving to the Northern Water Tribe , after a few conflicts , Aang became an apprentice of Waterbending Master Pakku alongside Katara . After helping the Water Tribe drive off a Fire Nation invasion headed by Admiral Zhao , with Katara as his teacher , Aang and his group journey to the Earth Kingdom to find an Earthbending teacher . 
 In the second season , Aang learns Earthbending from Toph Beifong after he has a vision of the blind Earthbending prodigy in a swamp . On their journey , they are chased by Fire Princess Azula and her friends Mai and Ty Lee . After learning of the Day of Black Sun in a secret underground library , Aang and his group attempt to reveal the information to the Earth King at Ba Sing Se . However , their flying bison , Appa , is captured by <unk> . Aang grows upset and angry and confronts the <unk> , learning that Appa has been sold . After stopping a Fire Nation drill threatening the safety of Ba Sing Se , they look for Appa only to find themselves dealing with the Dai Li before exposing their leader 's deception . The group reunites with Jet helping them find Appa at Dai Li headquarters . They expose the Hundred Year War to the Earth King , who promises to help them invade the Fire Nation . Soon after , Aang meets a guru who attempts to teach Aang to open his seven chakras in order to control the defensive ' Avatar State ' ; but when Aang perceives Katara in danger , he leaves before the seventh chakra is opened , and thus loses his progress until the seventh is opened . Though Aang manages to unlock the Seventh Chakra , he is mortally wounded by Azula , yet was saved by Katara before the injury became truly fatal . 
 In the third and final season , Aang is unable to use the Avatar State . Although reluctant with the plan at first , Aang accepts to have everyone think he had died and his remaining allies attack the Fire Nation 's capital , but are thwarted by Azula . However , Zuko has a change of heart , rebels against his father , and offers to teach Aang Firebending . Aang and Zuko also improve their Firebending powers with the help of their world 's last two dragons . During the finale , finding himself on a strange island , Aang is reluctant to actually kill Fire Lord Ozai , despite his four previous past lives convincing him it is the only way . But upon learning that he was actually on the back of a Lion Turtle , one of four that made the first benders by manipulating humans ' chi , Aang receives the Lion Turtles ' Energybending ability . With this ability , as he regained his Avatar State , Aang removes Ozai 's bending ability , rendering him harmless and ending the Hundred Year War . Later , in the Fire Nation capital , Aang is seen beside Zuko , the new Fire Lord . The series ends with Aang and his friends relaxing at Iroh 's tea shop at Ba Sing Se , where Aang and Katara share a kiss . 
 = = = Post Avatar : The Last Airbender = = = 
 After beginning the Harmony Restoration Movement , an event that was meant to remove Fire Nation remnants from the Earth Kingdom , Aang agrees to end Zuko 's life should he go down a path similar to his father , after the latter requests it , being stopped by Katara from entering the Avatar State as he began a later encounter with Zuko and then tries to mediate protestors and the Yu Dao resistance , afterward assembling members of a fan club and forming the " Air Acolytes " , a group that he intends to teach the ways of the Air Nomads . Aang then participated in a search for Zuko 's mother Ursula , successfully finding her and entering the Spirit World to assist in locating the Mother of Faces , convincing her to grant Rafa a new face . After a period of entertainment , Aang is contacted by his former life <unk> , who tried contacting him about Old Iron 's return . Aang also has a fight with the Rough Rhinos when they try to oust him from the Eastern Fire Refinery . Aang then aids in preventing Azula , disguised as the <unk> , from stealing any more children . 
 = = = The Legend of Korra = = = 
 Some sixty years prior to the series , Avatar Aang and Fire Lord Zuko founded the United Republic of Nations , and its capital Republic City . In the following years , Aang married Katara and they have three children : Bumi ( named for Aang 's old friend ) , Kya ( after Katara 's deceased mother ) , and Tenzin . In his adult years , Aang grew a neatly cropped chinstrap beard , which many statues of Aang 's adult form depict him with , including the one in the restored Southern Air Temple . He also founded the Air Acolytes , a sect who eschewed their home cultures in favor of following the Air Nomads ' way of life ( the comics reveal that the first Air Acolytes were the reorganized Avatar Fan Club ) . A forty @-@ year @-@ old Aang assisted Toph in arresting Water Tribe crime lord Yakone . As Aang watched the trial where Yakone was convicted of using the rare and illegal technique Bloodbending , Yakone tried to escape Republic City , using his unique abilities to subdue everyone in the court room , thus leaving them unconscious . Able to resist Yakone 's Bloodbending through the Avatar State , Aang used his Energybending abilities to put a halt to Yakone 's plans . Being frozen in an iceberg for a hundred years while in the Avatar State drained much of Aang 's life energy . While he did not feel the effects for many years , after he entered middle age in his 50 's the strain of this exertion increasingly weighed upon his body . Ultimately , it resulted in Aang dying at the relatively young biological age of 66 , in 153 AG . Aang was survived by his wife , Katara , and his three children , but he did not live to see his grandchildren , all of whom would be powerful Airbenders . Prior to his death , Aang tasked the Order of the White Lotus with finding and guiding the new Avatar after him . When Aang died , the Avatar spirit reincarnated into the Southern Water Tribe female Korra . Aang intended for the Order to simply guide and guard Korra , but several mishaps in the aftermath of Aang 's death ( including a kidnapping attempt by the anarchist Zaheer ) and the still @-@ fragile state of relations between the now @-@ Five Nations resulted in Katara and Tenzin sequestering Korra in a compound at the South Pole , bringing teachers to her instead of allowing her to seek out her own . 
 In the sequel series ' first season , Avatar Aang 's spirit occasionally serves as the spiritual advisor to seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Korra ( much like the previous Avatar incarnation , Roku , did for Aang ) . Initially , Aang is only able to give Korra glimpses of his memory concerning Yakone in relation to her confrontations with his two sons , Amon and Tarrlok , the products of Yakone 's Bloodbending vendetta on the Avatar . It is only after she loses her ability to bend that Korra allows herself to listen to her past lives , at which point Aang restores her powers by triggering the Avatar State and teaching her to <unk> . 
 The sequel series ' second season reveals that Avatar Aang apparently treated Tenzin as his favorite child , due to his son 's Airbender status ; Kya and Bumi mentioned to Tenzin that Aang always took Tenzin on vacations with him , but never them . Aang 's Air Acolytes also were unaware that Aang had two other children besides Tenzin . Aang himself later appears , along with Roku , Kyoshi and <unk> , before Korra in a vision and encourages her to learn the origins of Wan ( the first Avatar ) and Raava . Aang , or possibly a vision of him , later appears in the Spirit World , encouraging Tenzin to move past the enormous legacy of being Aang 's son and find his own path . Korra 's connection to Aang and the other preceding Avatars is severed when Vaatu extracts and subsequently kills Raava , the divine Avatar Spirit entity within her . Even though Raava is reborn and fused again with Korra , she discovers , to her dismay , that her spiritual connection to Aang and all past Avatars is gone forever . 
 = = = Appearances in other media = = = 
 = = = = Games = = = = 
 Aang 's character appeared in the Avatar : The Last Airbender Trading Card Game on a multitude of cards . He appeared in the Avatar : The Last Airbender video game as one of the four playable characters . Two sequels were made : Avatar : The Last Airbender – The Burning Earth , followed by Avatar : The Last Airbender – Into the Inferno . 
 Aang also appeared in Escape from the Spirit World , an online video game that can be found on Nickelodeon 's official website . The game includes certain plot changes that are not shown in the show . The show 's directors , Michael DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko , claim the events are canon . 
 = = = = Films = = = = 
 Tokyopop has published a films comic ( sometimes referred to as cine @-@ manga ) , in which Aang , being the main character of the show , appears repeatedly . 
 In 2010 , director M. Night Shyamalan cast 12 @-@ year @-@ old Tae Kwon Do practitioner Noah Ringer as Aang in the film adaptation of the series , The Last Airbender . The casting of a presumed white actor in the role of Aang ( as well as a primarily Caucasian cast ) in the Asian @-@ influenced Avatar universe triggered negative reactions from some fans , marked by accusations of racism , a letter @-@ writing campaign , and a protest outside of a Philadelphia casting call for movie extras . A counter @-@ movement was spawned in response by other fans who believed the casting was appropriate . The casting decisions were also negatively received by several critics , who stated that the original casting call expressed a preference for Caucasian actors over others . Noah Ringer later identified himself to Entertainment Weekly as an American Indian . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In the show 's intended demographics , Aang has been received exceptionally . Kendall Lyons stated , " Aang seems to be the lighthearted kid that you can easily familiarize yourself with " , and that he " seems to bring comfort in the most dangerous or hostile situations . " There are many similar descriptions about Aang as a childlike character who is " reckless and excitable " . Reviews point out that " as the Avatar , Aang seems unstoppable , but as Aang , he is just another Airbender " ; the review states later that the show continues to focus on a more realistic character instead of a perfect one by revealing many character flaws . 
 = Parti des déshérités de Madagascar = 
 The Parti des déshérités de Madagascar ( PADESM , " Party of the Disinherited of Madagascar " ) was a political party active in Madagascar from June 1946 into the First Republic ( 1960 – 1972 ) . It was formed in reaction to the establishment and rapid political success of the Mouvement démocratique de la rénovation malgache ( MDRM ) political party , formed by Merina elites on a platform of independence from France . While nationalism - and therefore the MDRM - had widespread support from all ethnic communities , PADESM championed the empowerment and equitable government of coastal peoples , who had historically been subjugated by the Merina and feared the MDRM could ensure their return to political dominance upon independence . They actively recruited and campaigned along ethnic lines , initially including coastal peoples and the descendents of Merina slaves , but eventually excluding the latter entirely . The formation and political success of PADESM was actively fostered by the French colonial administration , which manipulated election results in favor of the coastal party . 
 The nationalist Malagasy Uprising of 1947 led the French colonial administration to dissolve the MDRM and temporarily suspend all other political parties , including PADESM . Tensions between the parties played out during the uprising through targeted acts of violence between supporters of the rival groups . An estimated 1 @,@ 900 to 5 @,@ 000 PADESM supporters were killed during the uprising by pro @-@ MDRM nationalist fighters . After the nationalist movement was crushed in December 1948 , PADESM experienced an increase in popularity , aided by continuing French support . The party won several key political elections in the 1950s . Nevertheless , as the process toward independence began , it became fragmented between conservative and progressive factions , with the latter splitting off in December 1956 to form the Parti sociale <unk> ( PSD , Social Democratic Party ) . With this split and independence in 1960 , PADESM became moribund . 
 PADESM has had a lasting impact on political life in Madagascar . Philibert Tsiranana , leader of the PSD , went on to become Madagascar 's first president upon independence in 1960 . Many other major political figures in Madagascar have connections to PADESM and PSD , including former president Didier Ratsiraka and former prime minister Jacques Sylla . More broadly , the formation of PADESM cemented ethnic rivalries within Malagasy politics , linking the interests of specific ethnic groups with particular political parties . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding and ideology = = = 
 At the first post @-@ war constituent assembly convened in Paris in November 1945 to draft the constitution of the French Fourth Republic , Madagascar was represented by two doctors named Joseph Raseta and Joseph Ravoahangy . They formed the Mouvement démocratique de la rénovation malgache ( MDRM ) political party together with future writer Jacques Rabemananjara in early 1946 . All three leaders were the descendents of Hova Merina who had been politically prominent in the former royal court . The party 's platform was built on national independence from France and garnered mass support that cut across geographic , ethnic and class divisions . In November 1946 the trio were elected to represent Madagascar as deputies ( <unk> ) in the French National Assembly . 
 In reaction to the founding of the MDRM , which many non @-@ Merina feared would revive Merina political hegemony , the Party for the Disinherited of Madagascar ( Parti des déshérités de Madagascar , PADESM ) was formed in June 1946 by members of coastal communities formerly subjugated by the Merina empire , as well as highland @-@ based descendents of former Merina slaves . Militant leader <unk> <unk> was key in the creation of the party . Other founding members included Philibert Tsiranana ( who became Madagascar 's first president after independence ) , Albert Sylla ( who became Minister of Foreign Affairs under Tsiranana , and whose son , Jacques Sylla , would go on to become Prime Minister of Madagascar under Marc Ravalomanana ) , and Pascale <unk> , father @-@ in @-@ law of future president Didier Ratsiraka . 
 In July 1946 , PADESM was changed to become a direct opposition party to MDRM . Initially a non @-@ nationalist party , PADESM eventually favored a gradual process toward independence that would preserve close ties to France and prevent the reemergence of the precolonial hegemony . It actively recruited membership along ethnic lines to include coastal peoples and the descendents of Merina slaves , attracting a number of intellectual elites and political leaders from coastal areas . Its platform focused on increasing distribution of resources to coastal areas to counterbalance decades of colonial investment in the central highlands . Over time , the party grew more conservative , and <unk> <unk> led a successful effort to exclude any Merina from the party , including descendants of those who had been enslaved by nobles of their own ethnic group under the Kingdom of Imerina and shared their coastal compatriots ' concerns regarding Merina political dominance . 
 The Socialist @-@ dominated French authorities actively supported PADESM . The French characterized this support as an effort to champion the oppressed masses and strengthen their protection against exploitative Hova elites . Governor General Jules Marcel de Coppet provided the party with space in public buildings for meetings . PADESM candidates in the January 1947 provincial elections received financial support from French settlers owing to the party 's favorable disposition to the French administration . 
 In the critical November 1946 election to select the first ever deputies to represent Madagascar at the French National Assembly , MDRM accused the French administration of stuffing ballot boxes , tampering with electoral rolls , intimidating MDRM candidates and supporters , and blatantly falsifying election results to ensure PADESM victory . Despite these irregularities , MDRM won 71 percent of the vote , and none of the PADESM candidates was elected . While MDRM won decisive victories in the central and eastern province , results were close in the western province , where the MDRM candidate Joseph Raseta won 21 @,@ 475 votes and the PADESM candidate <unk> won 19 @,@ 014 votes . 
 = = = Role during and after the Malagasy Uprising = = = 
 In early 1947 the French administration instituted a new rule that increased the weight of the French vote over the Malagasy vote in selection of candidates , and three PADESM candidates favored by French conservatives were successfully elected to the Conseil de la Republique . The results of the election and popular discontent with French interference served to intensify widespread frustration against the colonial authority and desire for Malagasy self @-@ governance across the island . These factors finally erupted in a nationalist uprising that began on the evening of 29 March 1947 with attacks against a police camp and several French plantations in the eastern rainforest carried out by militant Malagasy nationalists , chief among them the members of the nationalist secret societies Vy <unk> <unk> ( VVS ) and Jiny . 
 Despite the role of the militants in leading the Uprising , the colonial authorities immediately accused the MDRM of instigating the movement . This view was echoed by PADESM leaders and shared by the majority of French settlers . The French authorities responded by targeting not only MDRM leaders and members , but also their supporters , drawing the wider population into the conflict . Attacks against the colonial authority in the east were immediately followed by similar actions in the south of the island before rapidly spreading throughout the country . The movement enjoyed particularly strong support in the south , where the revolt attracted as many as one million peasants to fight for the nationalist cause . The French responded with heavy military action and psychological warfare , including incidences of crimes against humanity . Between July and September 1948 , most of the key leaders of the Uprising were captured or killed , and the last of the fighters disbanded and fled into the forests in December 1948 . 
 The eruption of the conflict provided the pretext for violence between highland Merina and coastal Malagasy of other ethnic groups . An estimated 1 @,@ 900 to 5 @,@ 000 Malagasy PADESM supporters were killed by their pro @-@ MDRM nationalist countrymen during the conflict . 
 Although the MDRM leadership consistently maintained its innocence , the party was dissolved by the French administration on 10 May 1947 , and all other political parties , including PADESM , were temporarily suspended . The banning of MDRM further strengthened PADESM 's prominence after the end of the uprising . Between 1951 and 1956 , PADESM candidates won three consecutive legislative elections . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Despite the outward appearance of success , the party was suffering from internal divisions . Other countries under French colonial rule , including Morocco , Indochina and several in West Africa , had either become independent or had begun to negotiate the process to independence ; this inspired the hope that Madagascar could follow suit , allowing the tantalizing opportunity for PADESM to wield unfettered power in Malagasy politics . This emerging possibility fragmented the party , which became paralyzed by in @-@ fighting . The progressive faction split off to form the Parti sociale <unk> ( PSD , Social Democratic Party ) in Mahajanga in December 1956 , under the leadership of Philibert Tsiranana , a French @-@ educated school teacher of Tsimihety coastal origin , and Andre Raseta . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The PSD that emerged from the disintegration of PADESM was a powerful force in Malagasy politics throughout the First Republic . When Madagascar achieved independence in 1960 , PSD leader Tsiranana was named the country 's first president , a position he held until the rotaka protests forced him to resign in 1972 . His administration was succeeded by the socialist nationalist Second Republic under Didier Ratsiraka . 
 = Renaissance = 
 The Renaissance ( UK / <unk> / , US / <unk> / ) is a period in Europe , from the 14th to the 17th century , regarded as the cultural bridge between the Middle Ages and modern history . It started as a cultural movement in Italy in the Late Medieval period and later spread to the rest of Europe , marking the beginning of the Early Modern Age . 
 The intellectual basis of the Renaissance was its own invented version of humanism , derived from the rediscovery of classical Greek philosophy , such as that of Protagoras , who said that " Man is the measure of all things . " This new thinking became manifest in art , architecture , politics , science and literature . Early examples were the development of perspective in oil painting and the recycled knowledge of how to make concrete . Although the invention of metal movable type sped the dissemination of ideas from the later 15th century , the changes of the Renaissance were not uniformly experienced across Europe . 
 As a cultural movement , the Renaissance encompassed innovative flowering of Latin and vernacular literatures , beginning with the 14th @-@ century resurgence of learning based on classical sources , which contemporaries credited to Petrarch ; the development of linear perspective and other techniques of rendering a more natural reality in painting ; and gradual but widespread educational reform . In politics , the Renaissance contributed to the development of the customs and conventions of diplomacy , and in science to an increased reliance on observation and inductive reasoning . Although the Renaissance saw revolutions in many intellectual pursuits , as well as social and political upheaval , it is perhaps best known for its artistic developments and the contributions of such polymaths as Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo , who inspired the term " Renaissance man " . 
 There is a consensus that the Renaissance began in Florence , in the 14th century . Various theories have been proposed to account for its origins and characteristics , focusing on a variety of factors including the social and civic peculiarities of Florence at the time : its political structure ; the patronage of its dominant family , the Medici ; and the migration of Greek scholars and texts to Italy following the Fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks . Other major centres were northern Italian city @-@ states such as Venice , Genoa , Milan , Bologna , and finally Rome during the Renaissance Papacy . 
 The Renaissance has a long and complex historiography , and , in line with general scepticism of discrete <unk> , there has been much debate among historians reacting to the 19th @-@ century glorification of the " Renaissance " and individual culture heroes as " Renaissance men " , questioning the usefulness of Renaissance as a term and as a historical delineation . The art historian Erwin Panofsky observed of this resistance to the concept of " Renaissance " : 
 It is perhaps no accident that the factuality of the Italian Renaissance has been most vigorously questioned by those who are not obliged to take a professional interest in the aesthetic aspects of civilization — historians of economic and social developments , political and religious situations , and , most particularly , natural science — but only exceptionally by students of literature and hardly ever by historians of Art . 
 Some observers have called into question whether the Renaissance was a cultural " advance " from the Middle Ages , instead seeing it as a period of pessimism and nostalgia for classical antiquity , while social and economic historians , especially of the longue <unk> , have instead focused on the continuity between the two eras , which are linked , as Panofsky observed , " by a thousand ties " . 
 The word Renaissance , literally meaning " Rebirth " in French , first appeared in English in the 1830s . The word also occurs in Jules Michelet 's 1855 work , Histoire de France . The word Renaissance has also been extended to other historical and cultural movements , such as the Carolingian Renaissance and the Renaissance of the 12th century . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The Renaissance was a cultural movement that profoundly affected European intellectual life in the early modern period . Beginning in Italy , and spreading to the rest of Europe by the 16th century , its influence was felt in literature , philosophy , art , music , politics , science , religion , and other aspects of intellectual inquiry . Renaissance scholars employed the humanist method in study , and searched for realism and human emotion in art . 
 Renaissance humanists such as Poggio Bracciolini sought out in Europe 's monastic libraries the Latin literary , historical , and oratorical texts of Antiquity , while the Fall of Constantinople ( 1453 ) generated a wave of émigré Greek scholars bringing precious manuscripts in ancient Greek , many of which had fallen into obscurity in the West . It is in their new focus on literary and historical texts that Renaissance scholars differed so markedly from the medieval scholars of the Renaissance of the 12th century , who had focused on studying Greek and Arabic works of natural sciences , philosophy and mathematics , rather than on such cultural texts . 
 In the revival of neo @-@ Platonism Renaissance humanists did not reject Christianity ; quite the contrary , many of the Renaissance 's greatest works were devoted to it , and the Church patronized many works of Renaissance art . However , a subtle shift took place in the way that intellectuals approached religion that was reflected in many other areas of cultural life . In addition , many Greek Christian works , including the Greek New Testament , were brought back from Byzantium to Western Europe and engaged Western scholars for the first time since late antiquity . This new engagement with Greek Christian works , and particularly the return to the original Greek of the New Testament promoted by humanists Lorenzo Valla and Erasmus , would help pave the way for the Protestant Reformation . 
 Well after the first artistic return to classicism had been exemplified in the sculpture of Nicola Pisano , Florentine painters led by Masaccio strove to portray the human form realistically , developing techniques to render perspective and light more naturally . Political philosophers , most famously Niccolò Machiavelli , sought to describe political life as it really was , that is to understand it rationally . A critical contribution to Italian Renaissance humanism Giovanni Pico della Mirandola wrote the famous text " De <unk> <unk> " ( Oration on the Dignity of Man , 1486 ) , which consists of a series of theses on philosophy , natural thought , faith and magic defended against any opponent on the grounds of reason . In addition to studying classical Latin and Greek , Renaissance authors also began increasingly to use vernacular languages ; combined with the introduction of printing , this would allow many more people access to books , especially the Bible . 
 In all , the Renaissance could be viewed as an attempt by intellectuals to study and improve the secular and worldly , both through the revival of ideas from antiquity , and through novel approaches to thought . Some scholars , such as Rodney Stark , play down the Renaissance in favor of the earlier innovations of the Italian city @-@ states in the High Middle Ages , which married responsive government , Christianity and the birth of capitalism . This analysis argues that , whereas the great European states ( France and Spain ) were absolutist monarchies , and others were under direct Church control , the independent city republics of Italy took over the principles of capitalism invented on monastic estates and set off a vast unprecedented commercial revolution that preceded and financed the Renaissance . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Many argue that the ideas characterizing the Renaissance had their origin in late 13th @-@ century Florence , in particular with the writings of Dante Alighieri ( 1265 – 1321 ) and Petrarch ( 1304 – 1374 ) , as well as the paintings of Giotto di Bondone ( 1267 – 1337 ) . Some writers date the Renaissance quite precisely ; one proposed starting point is 1401 , when the rival geniuses Lorenzo Ghiberti and Filippo Brunelleschi competed for the contract to build the bronze doors for the Baptistery of the Florence Cathedral ( Ghiberti won ) . Others see more general competition between artists and polymaths such as Brunelleschi , Ghiberti , Donatello , and Masaccio for artistic commissions as sparking the creativity of the Renaissance . Yet it remains much debated why the Renaissance began in Italy , and why it began when it did . Accordingly , several theories have been put forward to explain its origins . 
 During the Renaissance , money and art went hand in hand . Artists depended entirely on patrons while the patrons needed money to foster artistic talent . Wealth was brought to Italy in the 14th , 15th , and 16th centuries by expanding trade into Asia and Europe . Silver mining in Tyrol increased the flow of money . <unk> from the Eastern world , brought home during the Crusades , increased the prosperity of Genoa and Venice . 
 Jules Michelet defined the 16th @-@ century Renaissance in France as a period in Europe 's cultural history that represented a break from the Middle Ages , creating a modern understanding of humanity and its place in the world . 
 = = = Latin and Greek phases of Renaissance humanism = = = 
 In stark contrast to the High Middle Ages , when Latin scholars focused almost entirely on studying Greek and Arabic works of natural science , philosophy and mathematics , Renaissance scholars were most interested in recovering and studying Latin and Greek literary , historical , and oratorical texts . Broadly speaking , this began in the 14th century with a Latin phase , when Renaissance scholars such as Petrarch , Coluccio Salutati ( 1331 – 1406 ) , Niccolò de ' <unk> ( 1364 – 1437 ) and Poggio Bracciolini ( 1380 – 1459 ) scoured the libraries of Europe in search of works by such Latin authors as Cicero , Lucretius , Livy and Seneca . By the early 15th century , the bulk of such Latin literature had been recovered ; the Greek phase of Renaissance humanism was under way , as Western European scholars turned to recovering ancient Greek literary , historical , oratorical and theological texts . 
 Unlike with Latin texts , which had been preserved and studied in Western Europe since late antiquity , the study of ancient Greek texts was very limited in medieval Western Europe . Ancient Greek works on science , maths and philosophy had been studied since the High Middle Ages in Western Europe and in the medieval Islamic world ( normally in translation ) , but Greek literary , oratorical and historical works ( such as Homer , the Greek dramatists , Demosthenes and Thucydides ) were not studied in either the Latin or medieval Islamic worlds ; in the Middle Ages these sorts of texts were only studied by Byzantine scholars . One of the greatest achievements of Renaissance scholars was to bring this entire class of Greek cultural works back into Western Europe for the first time since late antiquity . Arab logicians had inherited Greek ideas after they had invaded and conquered Egypt and the Levant . Their translations and commentaries on these ideas worked their way through the Arab West into Spain and Sicily , which became important centers for this transmission of ideas . This work of translation from Islamic culture , though largely unplanned and disorganized , constituted one of the greatest transmissions of ideas in history . This movement to reintegrate the regular study of Greek literary , historical , oratorical and theological texts back into the Western European curriculum is usually dated to the 1396 invitation from Coluccio Salutati to the Byzantine diplomat and scholar Manuel <unk> ( <unk> – 1415 ) to teach Greek in Florence . This legacy was continued by a number of expatriate Greek scholars , from <unk> Bessarion to Leo <unk> . 
 = = = Social and political structures in Italy = = = 
 The unique political structures of late Middle Ages Italy have led some to theorize that its unusual social climate allowed the emergence of a rare cultural efflorescence . Italy did not exist as a political entity in the early modern period . Instead , it was divided into smaller city states and territories : the Kingdom of Naples controlled the south , the Republic of Florence and the Papal States at the center , the Milanese and the Genoese to the north and west respectively , and the Venetians to the east . Fifteenth @-@ century Italy was one of the most urbanised areas in Europe . Many of its cities stood among the ruins of ancient Roman buildings ; it seems likely that the classical nature of the Renaissance was linked to its origin in the Roman Empire 's heartland . 
 Historian and political philosopher Quentin Skinner points out that Otto of Freising ( c . 1114 – 1158 ) , a German bishop visiting north Italy during the 12th century , noticed a widespread new form of political and social organization , observing that Italy appeared to have exited from Feudalism so that its society was based on merchants and commerce . Linked to this was anti @-@ monarchical thinking , represented in the famous early Renaissance fresco cycle Allegory of Good and Bad Government in Siena by Ambrogio Lorenzetti ( painted 1338 – 1340 ) , whose strong message is about the virtues of fairness , justice , republicanism and good administration . Holding both Church and Empire at bay , these city republics were devoted to notions of liberty . Skinner reports that there were many defences of liberty such as the Matteo Palmieri ( 1406 – 1475 ) celebration of Florentine genius not only in art , sculpture and architecture , but " the remarkable efflorescence of moral , social and political philosophy that occurred in Florence at the same time " . 
 Even cities and states beyond central Italy , such as the Republic of Florence at this time , were also notable for their merchant Republics , especially the Republic of Venice . Although in practice these were oligarchical , and bore little resemblance to a modern democracy , they did have democratic features and were responsive states , with forms of participation in governance and belief in liberty . The relative political freedom they afforded was conducive to academic and artistic advancement . Likewise , the position of Italian cities such as Venice as great trading centres made them intellectual crossroads . Merchants brought with them ideas from far corners of the globe , particularly the Levant . Venice was Europe 's gateway to trade with the East , and a producer of fine glass , while Florence was a capital of textiles . The wealth such business brought to Italy meant large public and private artistic projects could be commissioned and individuals had more leisure time for study . 
 = = = Black Death / Plague = = = 
 One theory that has been advanced is that the devastation in Florence caused by the Black Death , which hit Europe between 1348 and 1350 , resulted in a shift in the world view of people in 14th @-@ century Italy . Italy was particularly badly hit by the plague , and it has been speculated that the resulting familiarity with death caused thinkers to dwell more on their lives on Earth , rather than on spirituality and the afterlife . It has also been argued that the Black Death prompted a new wave of piety , manifested in the sponsorship of religious works of art . However , this does not fully explain why the Renaissance occurred specifically in Italy in the 14th century . The Black Death was a pandemic that affected all of Europe in the ways described , not only Italy . The Renaissance 's emergence in Italy was most likely the result of the complex interaction of the above factors . 
 The plague was carried by fleas on sailing vessels returning from the ports of Asia , spreading quickly due to lack of proper sanitation : the population of England , then about 4 @.@ 2 million , lost 1 @.@ 4 million people to the bubonic plague . Florence 's population was nearly halved in the year 1347 . As a result of the decimation in the populace the value of the working class increased , and commoners came to enjoy more freedom . To answer the increased need for labor , workers traveled in search of the most favorable position economically . 
 The demographic decline due to the plague had economic consequences : the prices of food dropped and land values declined by 30 to 40 % in most parts of Europe between 1350 and 1400 . <unk> faced a great loss , but for ordinary men and women it was a windfall . The survivors of the plague found not only that the prices of food were cheaper but also that lands were more abundant , and many of them inherited property from their dead relatives . 
 The spread of disease was significantly more rampant in areas of poverty . Epidemics ravaged cities , particularly children . Plagues were easily spread by lice , unsanitary drinking water , armies , or by poor sanitation . Children were hit the hardest because many diseases such as typhus and syphilis target the immune system and left young children without a fighting chance . Children in city dwellings were more affected by the spread of disease than the children of the wealthy . 
 The Black Death caused greater upheaval to Florence 's social and political structure than later epidemics . Despite a significant number of deaths among members of the ruling classes , the government of Florence continued to function during this period . Formal meetings of elected representatives were suspended during the height of the epidemic due to the chaotic conditions in the city , but a small group of officials was appointed to conduct the affairs of the city , which ensured continuity of government . 
 = = = Cultural conditions in Florence = = = 
 It has long been a matter of debate why the Renaissance began in Florence , and not elsewhere in Italy . Scholars have noted several features unique to Florentine cultural life that may have caused such a cultural movement . Many have emphasized the role played by the Medici , a banking family and later ducal ruling house , in patronizing and stimulating the arts . Lorenzo de ' Medici ( 1449 – 1492 ) was the catalyst for an enormous amount of arts patronage , encouraging his countrymen to commission works from the leading artists of Florence , including Leonardo da Vinci , Sandro Botticelli , and Michelangelo <unk> . Works by Neri di Bicci , Botticelli , da Vinci and Filippino Lippi had been commissioned additionally by the convent di San Donato <unk> <unk> of the Augustinians order in Florence . 
 The Renaissance was certainly underway before Lorenzo de ' Medici came to power – indeed , before the Medici family itself achieved hegemony in Florentine society . Some historians have postulated that Florence was the birthplace of the Renaissance as a result of luck , i.e. because " Great Men " were born there by chance : Leonardo da Vinci , Botticelli and Michelangelo were all born in Tuscany . Arguing that such chance seems improbable , other historians have contended that these " Great Men " were only able to rise to prominence because of the prevailing cultural conditions at the time . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Humanism = = = 
 In some ways humanism was not a philosophy but a method of learning . In contrast to the medieval scholastic mode , which focused on resolving contradictions between authors , humanists would study ancient texts in the original and appraise them through a combination of reasoning and empirical evidence . Humanist education was based on the programme of ' Studia <unk> ' , the study of five humanities : poetry , grammar , history , moral philosophy and rhetoric . Although historians have sometimes struggled to define humanism precisely , most have settled on " a middle of the road definition ... the movement to recover , interpret , and assimilate the language , literature , learning and values of ancient Greece and Rome " . Above all , humanists asserted " the genius of man ... the unique and extraordinary ability of the human mind " . 
 Humanist scholars shaped the intellectual landscape throughout the early modern period . Political philosophers such as Niccolò Machiavelli and Thomas More revived the ideas of Greek and Roman thinkers and applied them in critiques of contemporary government . Pico della Mirandola wrote the " manifesto " of the Renaissance , the Oration on the Dignity of Man , a vibrant defence of thinking . Matteo Palmieri ( 1406 – 1475 ) , another humanist , is most known for his work Della vita <unk> ( " On Civic Life " ; printed 1528 ) , which advocated civic humanism , and for his influence in refining the Tuscan vernacular to the same level as Latin . Palmieri drew on Roman philosophers and theorists , especially Cicero , who , like Palmieri , lived an active public life as a citizen and official , as well as a theorist and philosopher and also Quintilian . Perhaps the most succinct expression of his perspective on humanism is in a 1465 poetic work La <unk> di vita , but an earlier work , Della vita <unk> ( On Civic Life ) , is more wide @-@ ranging . Composed as a series of dialogues set in a country house in the Mugello countryside outside Florence during the plague of 1430 , Palmieri expounds on the qualities of the ideal citizen . The dialogues include ideas about how children develop mentally and physically , how citizens can conduct themselves morally , how citizens and states can ensure probity in public life , and an important debate on the difference between that which is pragmatically useful and that which is honest . 
 The humanists believed that it is important to transcend to the afterlife with a perfect mind and body , which could be attained with education . The purpose of humanism was to create a universal man whose person combined intellectual and physical excellence and who was capable of functioning honorably in virtually any situation . This ideology was referred to as the uomo universale , an ancient Greco @-@ Roman ideal . Education during the Renaissance was mainly composed of ancient literature and history as it was thought that the classics provided moral instruction and an intensive understanding of human behavior . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 Renaissance art marks a cultural rebirth at the close of the Middle Ages and rise of the Modern world . One of the distinguishing features of Renaissance art was its development of highly realistic linear perspective . Giotto di Bondone ( 1267 – 1337 ) is credited with first treating a painting as a window into space , but it was not until the demonstrations of architect Filippo Brunelleschi ( 1377 – 1446 ) and the subsequent writings of Leon Battista Alberti ( 1404 – 1472 ) that perspective was formalized as an artistic technique . 
 The development of perspective was part of a wider trend towards realism in the arts . Painters developed other techniques , studying light , shadow , and , famously in the case of Leonardo da Vinci , human anatomy . Underlying these changes in artistic method was a renewed desire to depict the beauty of nature and to unravel the axioms of aesthetics , with the works of Leonardo , Michelangelo and Raphael representing artistic pinnacles that were much imitated by other artists . Other notable artists include Sandro Botticelli , working for the Medici in Florence , Donatello , another Florentine , and Titian in Venice , among others . 
 In the Netherlands , a particularly vibrant artistic culture developed . The work of Hugo van der Goes and Jan van Eyck was particularly influential on the development of painting in Italy , both technically with the introduction of oil paint and canvas , and stylistically in terms of naturalism in representation ( see Renaissance in the Netherlands ) . Later , the work of Pieter Brueghel the Elder would inspire artists to depict themes of everyday life . 
 In architecture , Filippo Brunelleschi , the most inventive and gifted designer of all time , was foremost in studying the remains of ancient classical buildings . With rediscovered knowledge from the 1st @-@ century writer Vitruvius and the flourishing discipline of mathematics , Brunelleschi formulated the Renaissance style that emulated and improved on classical forms . His major feat of engineering was building the dome of the Florence Cathedral . Another building demonstrating this style is the church of St. Andrew in Mantua , built by Alberti . The outstanding architectural work of the High Renaissance was the rebuilding of St. Peter 's Basilica , combining the skills of Bramante , Michelangelo , Raphael , Sangallo and Maderno . 
 During the Renaissance , architects aimed to use columns , pilasters , and entablatures as an integrated system . The Roman orders types of columns are used : Tuscan , Doric , Ionic , Corinthian and Composite . These can either be structural , supporting an arcade or architrave , or purely decorative , set against a wall in the form of pilasters . One of the first buildings to use pilasters as an integrated system was in the Old Sacristy ( 1421 – 1440 ) by Brunelleschi . Arches , semi @-@ circular or ( in the Mannerist style ) segmental , are often used in arcades , supported on piers or columns with capitals . There may be a section of entablature between the capital and the springing of the arch . Alberti was one of the first to use the arch on a monumental . Renaissance vaults do not have ribs ; they are semi @-@ circular or segmental and on a square plan , unlike the Gothic vault , which is frequently rectangular . 
 Renaissance artists were not pagans , although they admired antiquity and kept some ideas and symbols of the medieval past . Nicola Pisano ( c . 1220 – c . 1278 ) imitated classical forms by portraying scenes from the Bible . His Annunciation , from the Baptistry at Pisa , demonstrates that classical models influenced Italian art before the Renaissance took root as a literary movement 
 = = = Science = = = 
 The rediscovery of ancient texts and the invention of printing democratized learning and allowed a faster propagation of ideas . In the first period of the Italian Renaissance , humanists favoured the study of humanities over natural philosophy or applied mathematics , and their reverence for classical sources further enshrined the Aristotelian and Ptolemaic views of the universe . Writing around 1450 , Nicholas <unk> anticipated the heliocentric worldview of Copernicus , but in a philosophical fashion . 
 Science and art were intermingled in the early Renaissance , with polymath artists such as Leonardo da Vinci making observational drawings of anatomy and nature . Da Vinci set up controlled experiments in water flow , medical dissection , and systematic study of movement and aerodynamics , and he devised principles of research method that led Fritjof Capra to classify him as the " father of modern science " . 
 A suitable environment had developed to question scientific doctrine . The discovery in 1492 of the New World by Christopher Columbus challenged the classical worldview . The works of Ptolemy ( in geography ) and Galen ( in medicine ) were found to not always match everyday observations . As the Protestant Reformation and Counter @-@ Reformation clashed , the Northern Renaissance showed a decisive shift in focus from <unk> natural philosophy to chemistry and the biological sciences ( botany , anatomy , and medicine ) . The willingness to question previously held truths and search for new answers resulted in a period of major scientific advancements . 
 Some view this as a " scientific revolution " , heralding the beginning of the modern age , others as an acceleration of a continuous process stretching from the ancient world to the present day . Significant scientific advances were made during this time by Galileo Galilei , Tycho Brahe and Johannes Kepler . Copernicus , in De Revolutionibus , posited that the Earth moved around the Sun . De humani corporis fabrica ( On the <unk> of the Human Body ) , by Andreas Vesalius , gave a new confidence to the role of dissection , observation , and the mechanistic view of anatomy . 
 Another important development was in the process for discovery , the scientific method , focusing on empirical evidence and the importance of mathematics , while discarding Aristotelian science . Early and influential proponents of these ideas included Copernicus , Galileo , and Francis Bacon . The new scientific method led to great contributions in the fields of astronomy , physics , biology , and anatomy . 
 Applied innovation extended to commerce . At the end of the 15th century Luca Pacioli published the first work on bookkeeping , making him the founder of accounting . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 From this changing society emerged a common , unifying musical language , in particular the polyphonic style of the Franco @-@ Flemish school . The development of printing made distribution of music possible on a wide scale . Demand for music as entertainment and as an activity for educated amateurs increased with the emergence of a bourgeois class . Dissemination of chansons , motets , and masses throughout Europe coincided with the unification of polyphonic practice into the fluid style that culminated in the second half of the sixteenth century in the work of composers such as Palestrina , Lassus , Victoria and William Byrd . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The new ideals of humanism , although more secular in some aspects , developed against a Christian backdrop , especially in the Northern Renaissance . Much , if not most , of the new art was commissioned by or in dedication to the Church . However , the Renaissance had a profound effect on contemporary theology , particularly in the way people perceived the relationship between man and God . Many of the period 's foremost theologians were followers of the humanist method , including Erasmus , Zwingli , Thomas More , Martin Luther , and John Calvin . 
 The Renaissance began in times of religious turmoil . The late Middle Ages was a period of political intrigue surrounding the Papacy , culminating in the Western Schism , in which three men simultaneously claimed to be true Bishop of Rome . While the schism was resolved by the Council of Constance ( 1414 ) , a resulting reform movement known as <unk> sought to limit the power of the pope . Although the papacy eventually emerged supreme in ecclesiastical matters by the Fifth Council of the Lateran ( 1511 ) , it was dogged by continued accusations of corruption , most famously in the person of Pope Alexander VI , who was accused variously of simony , nepotism and fathering four children ( most of whom were married off , presumably for the consolidation of power ) while a cardinal . 
 Churchmen such as Erasmus and Luther proposed reform to the Church , often based on humanist textual criticism of the New Testament . In October 1517 Luther published the 95 Theses , challenging papal authority and criticizing its perceived corruption , particularly with regard to instances of sold indulgences . The 95 Theses led to the Reformation , a break with the Roman Catholic Church that previously claimed hegemony in Western Europe . Humanism and the Renaissance therefore played a direct role in sparking the Reformation , as well as in many other contemporaneous religious debates and conflicts . 
 Pope Paul III came to the papal throne ( 1534 – 1549 ) after the sack of Rome in 1527 , with uncertainties prevalent in the Catholic Church following the Protestant Reformation . Nicolaus Copernicus dedicated De revolutionibus orbium coelestium ( On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres ) to Paul III , who became the grandfather of Alessandro Farnese ( cardinal ) , who had paintings by Titian , Michelangelo , and Raphael , as well as an important collection of drawings , and who commissioned the masterpiece of Giulio Clovio , arguably the last major illuminated manuscript , the Farnese Hours . 
 = = = Self @-@ awareness = = = 
 By the 15th century , writers , artists , and architects in Italy were well aware of the transformations that were taking place and were using phrases such as modi <unk> ( in the antique manner ) or alle romana et alla <unk> ( in the manner of the Romans and the ancients ) to describe their work . In the 1330s Petrarch referred to pre @-@ Christian times as antiqua ( ancient ) and to the Christian period as nova ( new ) . From Petrarch 's Italian perspective , this new period ( which included his own time ) was an age of national eclipse . Leonardo Bruni was the first to use tripartite periodization in his History of the Florentine People ( 1442 ) . Bruni 's first two periods were based on those of Petrarch , but he added a third period because he believed that Italy was no longer in a state of decline . Flavio Biondo used a similar framework in Decades of History from the Deterioration of the Roman Empire ( 1439 – 1453 ) . 
 Humanist historians argued that contemporary scholarship restored direct links to the classical period , thus bypassing the Medieval period , which they then named for the first time the " Middle Ages " . The term first appears in Latin in 1469 as media <unk> ( middle times ) . The term la <unk> ( rebirth ) first appeared , however , in its broad sense in Giorgio Vasari 's Lives of the Artists , 1550 , revised 1568 ) . Vasari divides the age into three phases : the first phase contains Cimabue , Giotto , and <unk> di Cambio ; the second phase contains Masaccio , Brunelleschi , and Donatello ; the third centers on Leonardo da Vinci and culminates with Michelangelo . It was not just the growing awareness of classical antiquity that drove this development , according to Vasari , but also the growing desire to study and imitate nature . 
 = = Spread = = 
 In the 15th century , the Renaissance spread rapidly from its birthplace in Florence to the rest of Italy and soon to the rest of Europe . The invention of the printing press by German printer Johannes Gutenberg allowed the rapid transmission of these new ideas . As it spread , its ideas diversified and changed , being adapted to local culture . In the 20th century , scholars began to break the Renaissance into regional and national movements . 
 = = = Northern Europe = = = 
 The Renaissance in Northern Europe has been termed the " Northern Renaissance " . While Renaissance ideas were moving north from Italy , there was a simultaneous southward spread of some areas of innovation , particularly in music . The music of the 15th century Burgundian School defined the beginning of the Renaissance in music , and the polyphony of the Netherlanders , as it moved with the musicians themselves into Italy , formed the core of the first true international style in music since the standardization of Gregorian Chant in the 9th century . The culmination of the Netherlandish school was in the music of the Italian composer Palestrina . At the end of the 16th century Italy again became a center of musical innovation , with the development of the polychoral style of the Venetian School , which spread northward into Germany around 1600 . 
 The paintings of the Italian Renaissance differed from those of the Northern Renaissance . Italian Renaissance artists were among the first to paint secular scenes , breaking away from the purely religious art of medieval painters . Northern Renaissance artists initially remained focused on religious subjects , such as the contemporary religious upheaval portrayed by Albrecht Dürer . Later , the works of Pieter Bruegel influenced artists to paint scenes of daily life rather than religious or classical themes . It was also during the Northern Renaissance that Flemish brothers Hubert and Jan van Eyck perfected the oil painting technique , which enabled artists to produce strong colors on a hard surface that could survive for centuries . A feature of the Northern Renaissance was its use of the vernacular in place of Latin or Greek , which allowed greater freedom of expression . This movement had started in Italy with the decisive influence of Dante Alighieri on the development of vernacular languages ; in fact the focus on writing in Italian has neglected a major source of Florentine ideas expressed in Latin . The spread of the printing press technology boosted the Renaissance in Northern Europe as elsewhere , with Venice becoming a world center of printing . 
 = = = England = = = 
 In England , the sixteenth century marked the beginning of the English Renaissance with the work of writers William Shakespeare , Christopher Marlowe , Edmund Spenser , Sir Thomas More , Francis Bacon , Sir Philip Sidney , as well as great artists , architects ( such as Inigo Jones who introduced Italianate architecture to England ) , and composers such as Thomas Tallis , John Taverner , and William Byrd . 
 = = = France = = = 
 The word " Renaissance " is borrowed from the French language , where it means " re @-@ birth " . It was first used in the eighteenth century and was later popularized by French historian Jules Michelet ( 1798 – 1874 ) in his 1855 work , Histoire de France ( History of France ) . 
 In 1495 the Italian Renaissance arrived in France , imported by King Charles VIII after his invasion of Italy . A factor that promoted the spread of secularism was the inability of the Church to offer assistance against the Black Death . Francis I imported Italian art and artists , including Leonardo da Vinci , and built ornate palaces at great expense . Writers such as François Rabelais , Pierre de Ronsard , Joachim du Bellay and Michel de Montaigne , painters such as Jean Clouet , and musicians such as Jean Mouton also borrowed from the spirit of the Renaissance . 
 In 1533 , a fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Caterina de ' Medici ( 1519 – 1589 ) , born in Florence to Lorenzo II de ' Medici and Madeleine de la Tour d 'Auvergne , married Henry II of France , second son of King Francis I and Queen Claude . Though she became famous and infamous for her role in France 's religious wars , she made a direct contribution in bringing arts , sciences and music ( including the origins of ballet ) to the French court from her native Florence . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 In the second half of the 15th century , the Renaissance spirit spread to Germany and the Low Countries , where the development of the printing press ( ca . 1450 ) and early Renaissance artists such as the painters Jan van Eyck ( 1395 – 1441 ) and Hieronymus Bosch ( 1450 – 1516 ) and the composers Johannes Ockeghem ( 1410 – 1497 ) , Jacob Obrecht ( 1457 – 1505 ) and Josquin des Prez ( 1455 – 1521 ) predated the influence from Italy . In the early Protestant areas of the country humanism became closely linked to the turmoil of the Protestant Reformation , and the art and writing of the German Renaissance frequently reflected this dispute . However , the gothic style and medieval scholastic philosophy remained exclusively until the turn of the 16th century . Emperor Maximilian I of Habsburg ( ruling 1493 – 1519 ) was the first truly Renaissance monarch of the Holy Roman Empire . 
 = = = Netherlands = = = 
 Culture in the Netherlands at the end of the 15th century was influenced by the Italian Renaissance through trade via Bruges , which made Flanders wealthy . Its nobles commissioned artists who became known across Europe . In science , the anatomist Andreas Vesalius led the way ; in cartography , Gerardus Mercator 's map assisted explorers and navigators . In art , Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting ranged from the strange work of Hieronymus Bosch to the everyday life depictions of Pieter Brueghel the Elder . 
 = = = Spain = = = 
 The Renaissance arrived in the Iberian peninsula through the Mediterranean possessions of the Aragonese Crown and the city of Valencia . Many early Spanish Renaissance writers come from the Kingdom of Aragon , including <unk> March and Joanot Martorell . In the Kingdom of Castile , the early Renaissance was heavily influenced by the Italian humanism , starting with writers and poets such as the Marquis of Santillana , who introduced the new Italian poetry to Spain in the early 15th century . Other writers , such as Jorge Manrique , Fernando de Rojas , Juan del <unk> , Juan <unk> <unk> and Garcilaso de la Vega , kept a close resemblance to the Italian canon . Miguel de Cervantes 's masterpiece Don Quixote is credited as the first Western novel . Renaissance humanism flourished in the early 16th century , with influential writers such as philosopher Juan Luis Vives , grammarian Antonio de <unk> and natural historian Pedro de Mexía . 
 Later Spanish Renaissance tended towards religious themes and mysticism , with poets such as fray Luis de León , Teresa of Ávila and John of the Cross , and treated issues related to the exploration of the New World , with chroniclers and writers such as Inca Garcilaso de la Vega and Bartolomé de las Casas , giving rise to a body of work , now known as Spanish Renaissance literature . The late Renaissance in Spain produced artists such as El Greco and composers such as Tomás Luis de Victoria and Antonio de <unk> . 
 = = = Portugal = = = 
 Although Italian Renaissance had a modest impact in Portuguese arts , Portugal was influential in broadening the European worldview , stimulating humanist inquiry . Renaissance arrived through the influence of wealthy Italian and Flemish merchants who invested in the profitable commerce overseas . As the pioneer headquarters of European exploration , Lisbon flourished in the late 15th century , attracting experts who made several breakthroughs in mathematics , astronomy and naval technology , including Pedro Nunes , João de Castro , Abraham <unk> and Martin <unk> . <unk> Pedro <unk> , Lopo Homem , <unk> Gomes and Diogo Ribeiro made crucial advances in mapping the world . Apothecary Tomé Pires and physicians Garcia de Orta and Cristóvão da Costa collected and published works on plants and medicines , soon translated by Flemish pioneer botanist Carolus Clusius . 
 In architecture , the huge profits of the spice trade financed a sumptuous composite style in the first decades of the 16th century , the Manueline , incorporating maritime elements . The primary painters were Nuno Gonçalves , <unk> Lopes and Vasco Fernandes . In music , Pedro de Escobar and Duarte Lobo produced four songbooks , including the <unk> de Elvas . In literature , Sá de Miranda introduced Italian forms of verse . <unk> Ribeiro developed pastoral romance , plays by Gil Vicente fused it with popular culture , reporting the changing times , and Luís de Camões inscribed the Portuguese feats overseas in the epic poem Os <unk> . Travel literature especially flourished : João de Barros , <unk> , António Galvão , Gaspar Correia , Duarte Barbosa , and Fernão Mendes Pinto , among others , described new lands and were translated and spread with the new printing press . After joining the Portuguese exploration of Brazil in 1500 , Amerigo Vespucci coined the term New World , in his letters to Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de ' Medici . 
 The intense international exchange produced several cosmopolitan humanist scholars , including Francisco de Holanda , André de Resende and Damião de Góis , a friend of Erasmus who wrote with rare independence on the reign of King Manuel I. Diogo and André de Gouveia made relevant teaching reforms via France . Foreign news and products in the Portuguese factory in Antwerp attracted the interest of Thomas More and Dürer to the wider world . There , profits and know @-@ how helped nurture the Dutch Renaissance and Golden Age , especially after the arrival of the wealthy cultured Jewish community expelled from Portugal . 
 = = = Hungary = = = 
 After Italy , Hungary was the first European country where the renaissance appeared . The Renaissance style came directly from Italy during the Quattrocento to Hungary first in the Central European region , thanks to the development of early Hungarian @-@ Italian relationships – not only in dynastic connections , but also in cultural , humanistic and commercial relations – growing in strength from the 14th century . The relationship between Hungarian and Italian Gothic styles was a second reason – exaggerated breakthrough of walls is avoided , preferring clean and light structures . Large @-@ scale building schemes provided ample and long term work for the artists , for example , the building of the <unk> ( New ) Castle in Buda , the castles of Visegrád , Tata and <unk> . In Sigismund 's court there were patrons such as Pipo Spano , a descendant of the Scolari family of Florence , who invited <unk> <unk> and Masolino da <unk> to Hungary . 
 The new Italian trend combined with existing national traditions to create a particular local Renaissance art . Acceptance of Renaissance art was furthered by the continuous arrival of humanist thought in the country . Many young Hungarians studying at Italian universities came closer to the Florentine humanist center , so a direct connection with Florence evolved . The growing number of Italian traders moving to Hungary , specially to Buda , helped this process . New thoughts were carried by the humanist prelates , among them Vitéz János , archbishop of Esztergom , one of the founders of Hungarian humanism . During the long reign of emperor Sigismund of Luxemburg the Royal Castle of Buda became probably the largest Gothic palace of the late Middle Ages . King Matthias Corvinus ( r . 1458 – 1490 ) rebuilt the palace in early Renaissance style and further expanded it . 
 After the marriage in 1476 of King Matthias to Beatrice of Naples , Buda became one of the most important artistic centres of the Renaissance north of the Alps . The most important humanists living in Matthias ' court were Antonio Bonfini and the famous Hungarian poet Janus <unk> . András Hess set up a printing press in Buda in 1472 . Matthias Corvinus 's library , the Bibliotheca <unk> , was Europe 's greatest collections of secular books : historical chronicles , philosophic and scientific works in the 15th century . His library was second only in size to the Vatican Library . ( However , the Vatican Library mainly contained Bibles and religious materials . ) 
 In 1489 , Bartolomeo della Fonte of Florence wrote that Lorenzo de ' Medici founded his own Greek @-@ Latin library encouraged by the example of the Hungarian king . Corvinus 's library is part of UNESCO World Heritage . Other important figures of Hungarian Renaissance : Bálint Balassi ( poet ) , <unk> <unk> Lantos ( poet ) , Bálint <unk> ( composer and lutenist ) and Master MS ( fresco painter ) . 
 = = = Poland = = = 
 An early Italian humanist who came to Poland in the mid @-@ 15th century was Filippo Buonaccorsi . Many Italian artists came to Poland with Bona Sforza of Milan , when she married King Sigismund I the Old in 1518 . This was supported by temporarily strengthened monarchies in both areas , as well as by newly established universities . The Polish Renaissance lasted from the late 15th to the late 16th century and was the Golden Age of Polish culture . Ruled by the Jagiellon dynasty , the Kingdom of Poland ( from 1569 known as the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth ) actively participated in the broad European Renaissance . The multi @-@ national Polish state experienced a substantial period of cultural growth thanks in part to a century without major wars – aside from conflicts in the sparsely populated eastern and southern borderlands . The Reformation spread peacefully throughout the country ( giving rise to the Polish Brethren ) , while living conditions improved , cities grew , and exports of agricultural products enriched the population , especially the nobility ( szlachta ) who gained dominance in the new political system of Golden Liberty . The Polish Renaissance architecture has three periods of development . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Renaissance trends from Italy and Central Europe influenced Russia in many ways . Their influence was rather limited , however , due to the large distances between Russia and the main European cultural centers and the strong adherence of Russians to their Orthodox traditions and Byzantine legacy . 
 Prince Ivan III introduced Renaissance architecture to Russia by inviting a number of architects from Italy , who brought new construction techniques and some Renaissance style elements with them , while in general following the traditional designs of Russian architecture . In 1475 the Bolognese architect <unk> <unk> came to rebuild the Cathedral of the Dormition in the Moscow Kremlin , which had been damaged in an earthquake . <unk> was given the 12th @-@ century Vladimir Cathedral as a model , and he produced a design combining traditional Russian style with a Renaissance sense of spaciousness , proportion and symmetry . 
 In 1485 Ivan III commissioned the building of the royal residence , <unk> Palace , within the Kremlin , with <unk> da Milano as the architect of the first three floors . He and other Italian architects also contributed to the construction of the Kremlin walls and towers . The small banquet hall of the Russian Tsars , called the Palace of Facets because of its facetted upper story , is the work of two Italians , Marco Ruffo and Pietro <unk> , and shows a more Italian style . In 1505 , an Italian known in Russia as Aleviz <unk> or Aleviz <unk> arrived in Moscow . He may have been the Venetian sculptor , <unk> Lamberti da Montagne . He built 12 churches for Ivan III , including the Cathedral of the Archangel , a building remarkable for the successful blending of Russian tradition , Orthodox requirements and Renaissance style . It is believed that the Cathedral of the Metropolitan Peter in <unk> Monastery , another work of Aleviz <unk> , later served as an inspiration for the so @-@ called octagon @-@ on @-@ <unk> architectural form in the Moscow Baroque of the late 17th century . 
 Between the early 16th and the late 17th centuries , an original tradition of stone tented roof architecture developed in Russia . It was quite unique and different from the contemporary Renaissance architecture elsewhere in Europe , though some research terms the style ' Russian Gothic ' and compares it with the European Gothic architecture of the earlier period . The Italians , with their advanced technology , may have influenced the invention of the stone tented roof ( the wooden tents were known in Russia and Europe long before ) . According to one hypothesis , an Italian architect called <unk> Maly may have been an author of the Ascension Church in Kolomenskoye , one of the earliest and most prominent tented roof churches . 
 By the 17th century the influence of Renaissance painting resulted in Russian icons becoming slightly more realistic , while still following most of the old icon painting canons , as seen in the works of Bogdan <unk> , Simon Ushakov , <unk> Nikitin , Karp <unk> and other Russian artists of the era . Gradually the new type of secular portrait painting appeared , called <unk> ( from " persona " – person ) , which was transitional style between abstract <unk> and real paintings . 
 In the mid 16th @-@ century Russians adopted printing from Central Europe , with Ivan Fyodorov being the first known Russian printer . In the 17th century printing became widespread , and woodcuts became especially popular . That led to the development of a special form of folk art known as <unk> printing , which persisted in Russia well into the 19th century . 
 A number of technologies from the European Renaissance period were adopted by Russia rather early and subsequently perfected to become a part of a strong domestic tradition . Mostly these were military technologies , such as cannon casting adopted by at least the 15th century . The Tsar Cannon , which is the world 's largest bombard by caliber , is a masterpiece of Russian cannon making . It was cast in 1586 by Andrey <unk> and is notable for its rich , decorative relief . Another technology , that according to one hypothesis originally was brought from Europe by the Italians , resulted in the development of vodka , the national beverage of Russia . As early as 1386 Genoese ambassadors brought the first aqua vitae ( " the living water " ) to Moscow and presented it to Grand Duke Dmitry <unk> . The Genoese likely developed this beverage with the help of the alchemists of Provence , who used an Arab @-@ invented distillation apparatus to convert grape must into alcohol . A Moscovite monk called Isidore used this technology to produce the first original Russian vodka c . 1430 . 
 = = = Further countries = = = 
 Renaissance in Croatia 
 Renaissance in Scotland 
 = = Historiography = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 The Italian artist and critic Giorgio Vasari ( 1511 – 1574 ) first used the term <unk> retrospectively in his book The Lives of the Artists ( published 1550 ) . In the book Vasari attempted to define what he described as a break with the barbarities of gothic art : the arts ( he held ) had fallen into decay with the collapse of the Roman Empire and only the Tuscan artists , beginning with Cimabue ( 1240 – 1301 ) and Giotto ( 1267 – 1337 ) began to reverse this decline in the arts . Vasari saw antique art as central to the rebirth of Italian art . 
 However , only in the 19th century did the French word Renaissance achieve popularity in describing the self @-@ conscious cultural movement based on revival of Roman models that began in the late @-@ 13th century . French historian Jules Michelet ( 1798 – 1874 ) defined " The Renaissance " in his 1855 work Histoire de France as an entire historical period , whereas previously it had been used in a more limited sense . For Michelet , the Renaissance was more a development in science than in art and culture . He asserted that it spanned the period from Columbus to Copernicus to Galileo ; that is , from the end of the 15th century to the middle of the 17th century . Moreover , Michelet distinguished between what he called , " the bizarre and monstrous " quality of the Middle Ages and the democratic values that he , as a vocal Republican , chose to see in its character . A French nationalist , Michelet also sought to claim the Renaissance as a French movement . 
 The Swiss historian Jacob Burckhardt ( 1818 – 1897 ) in his The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy ( 1860 ) , by contrast , defined the Renaissance as the period between Giotto and Michelangelo in Italy , that is , the 14th to mid @-@ 16th centuries . He saw in the Renaissance the emergence of the modern spirit of individuality , which the Middle Ages had stifled . His book was widely read and became influential in the development of the modern interpretation of the Italian Renaissance . However , <unk> has been accused of setting forth a linear Whiggish view of history in seeing the Renaissance as the origin of the modern world . 
 More recently , some historians have been much less keen to define the Renaissance as a historical age , or even as a coherent cultural movement . The historian Randolph <unk> , of the University of California Berkeley , stated in 1998 : 
 " Rather than a period with definitive beginnings and endings and consistent content in between , the Renaissance can be ( and occasionally has been ) seen as a movement of practices and ideas to which specific groups and identifiable persons variously responded in different times and places . It would be in this sense a network of diverse , sometimes converging , sometimes conflicting cultures , not a single , time @-@ bound culture " . 
 = = = Debates about progress = = = 
 There is debate about the extent to which the Renaissance improved on the culture of the Middle Ages . Both Michelet and Burckhardt were keen to describe the progress made in the Renaissance towards the modern age . Burckhardt likened the change to a veil being removed from man 's eyes , allowing him to see clearly . 
 In the Middle Ages both sides of human consciousness – that which was turned within as that which was turned without – lay dreaming or half awake beneath a common veil . The veil was woven of faith , illusion , and childish <unk> , through which the world and history were seen clad in strange hues . 
 On the other hand , many historians now point out that most of the negative social factors popularly associated with the medieval period – poverty , warfare , religious and political persecution , for example – seem to have worsened in this era , which saw the rise of Machiavellian politics , the Wars of Religion , the corrupt Borgia Popes , and the intensified witch @-@ hunts of the 16th century . Many people who lived during the Renaissance did not view it as the " golden age " imagined by certain 19th @-@ century authors , but were concerned by these social maladies . Significantly , though , the artists , writers , and patrons involved in the cultural movements in question believed they were living in a new era that was a clean break from the Middle Ages . Some Marxist historians prefer to describe the Renaissance in material terms , holding the view that the changes in art , literature , and philosophy were part of a general economic trend from feudalism towards capitalism , resulting in a bourgeois class with leisure time to devote to the arts . 
 Johan Huizinga ( 1872 – 1945 ) acknowledged the existence of the Renaissance but questioned whether it was a positive change . In his book The Waning of the Middle Ages , he argued that the Renaissance was a period of decline from the High Middle Ages , destroying much that was important . The Latin language , for instance , had evolved greatly from the classical period and was still a living language used in the church and elsewhere . The Renaissance obsession with classical purity halted its further evolution and saw Latin revert to its classical form . Robert S. Lopez has contended that it was a period of deep economic recession . Meanwhile , George <unk> and Lynn Thorndike have both argued that scientific progress was perhaps less original than has traditionally been supposed . Finally , Joan Kelly argued that the Renaissance led to greater gender dichotomy , lessening the agency women had had during the Middle Ages . 
 Some historians have begun to consider the word Renaissance to be unnecessarily loaded , implying an unambiguously positive rebirth from the supposedly more primitive " Dark Ages " , the Middle Ages . Most historians now prefer to use the term " early modern " for this period , a more neutral designation that highlights the period as a transitional one between the Middle Ages and the modern era . Others such as Roger Osborne have come to consider the Italian Renaissance as a repository of the myths and ideals of western history in general , and instead of rebirth of ancient ideas as a period of great innovation . 
 = = Other <unk> = = 
 The term Renaissance has also been used to define periods outside of the 15th and 16th centuries . Charles H. Haskins ( 1870 – 1937 ) , for example , made a case for a Renaissance of the 12th century . Other historians have argued for a Carolingian Renaissance in the 8th and 9th centuries , and still later for an Ottonian Renaissance in the 10th century . Other periods of cultural rebirth have also been termed " <unk> " , such as the Bengal Renaissance , Tamil Renaissance , Nepal Bhasa renaissance , al @-@ Nahda or the Harlem Renaissance . 
 = U.S. Route 20 in Indiana = 
 U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) in Indiana is a main east – west highway that is parallel to the Indiana Toll Road . The western terminus of US 20 is at the Illinois state line and the eastern terminus is at the Ohio state line . US 20 through Whiting , East Chicago , and Gary is concurrent with US 12 twice . The route varies between one @-@ way , two @-@ lane , and four @-@ lane streets , in northwestern Indiana . From the east side of Gary to west of South Bend , US 20 is a four @-@ lane undivided highway . The route then heads around the west and south sides of South Bend and Elkhart as a four @-@ lane limited access divided highway . East of Elkhart County Road 17 ( CR 17 ) , US 20 is two @-@ lane rural highway . 
 US 20 was part of the Dunes Highway from the Illinois state line to Michigan City , concurrent with US 12 . The Dunes Highway started being paved in 1922 . The section of the highway , that is known as Lincoln Way as part of the 1913 section of the Lincoln Highway . Indiana State Highway Commission , later renamed Indiana Department of Transportation , began signing US 20 in 1926 . US 20 went through downtown South Bend and Elkhart before the St. Joseph Valley Parkway was built . Before the parkway was completed , the route that was open to traffic was called Bypass US 20 . A small realignment in LaGrange County was done in 2005 , in which the roadway was straightened . Other small realignments included the route through Michigan City , which followed US 35 from US 12 to I @-@ 94 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Only the segment of US 20 that is concurrent with the St. Joseph Valley Parkway are included as a part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) . The NHS is a network of highways that are identified as being most important for the economy , mobility and defense of the nation . The highway is maintained by the Indiana Department of Transportation ( INDOT ) like all other U.S. Routes in the state . The department tracks the traffic volumes along all state highways as a part of its maintenance responsibilities using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . This measurement is a calculation of the traffic level along a segment of roadway for any average day of the year . In 2010 , INDOT figured that lowest traffic levels were the 3 @,@ 390 vehicles and 1 @,@ 090 commercial vehicles used the highway daily near the Ohio state line . The peak traffic volumes were 36 @,@ 040 vehicles and 731 commercial vehicles AADT along the section of US 20 concurrent with SR 331 . 
 = = = Illinois to South Bend = = = 
 US 20 enters Indiana <unk> with US 12 and US 41 , at which point it passes under the Indiana Toll Road . The road passes by both commercial and industrial areas , between Wolf Lake and Horseshoe Casino . US 12 , US 20 , and US 41 are concurrent until US 41 turns south on Calumet Avenue . US 12 and US 20 head southeast toward East Chicago ; in East Chicago , US 12 turns east and US 20 continues south . US 20 meets State Road 312 ( SR 312 ) and passes under the Indiana Toll Road . US 20 turns left onto Michigan Street and heads east to Gary passing both industrial and residential . On the way to Gary , US 20 has an interchange with SR 912 ; at the interchange , the road name changes to 5th Avenue . Just west of Gary , US 12 and US 20 have a concurrency . 
 US 12 and US 20 are concurrent through most of Gary . From Bridge Street to Vermont Street , the eastbound traffic of US 12 / US 20 is on 5th Avenue and westbound traffic is on 4th Avenue . East of downtown Gary , the eastbound and westbound lanes merge to form the Dunes Highway . Before reaching the neighborhoods of northeastern Gary , the Dunes Highway has an interchange with Interstate 65 ( I @-@ 65 ) and I @-@ 90 / Indiana Toll Road . 
 Shortly thereafter , US 12 leaves to the northeast toward Michigan City and US 20 heads east then northeast , forming a major retail corridor through the neighborhoods of Aetna and Miller Beach . The route meets SR 51 at the northern terminus of SR 51 , near the boundary between Lake Station and Gary . Just west of Portage , the road passes under I @-@ 94 . In Portage , the route has intersections with both SR 249 and SR 149 . The road now enters Burns Harbor and has interchanges with I @-@ 94 and SR 49 , just south of the Indiana Dunes . The route heads northeast until Town of Pines , where it intersects with SR 520 . After Pines , the route heads due east to US 421 in Michigan City . 
 From US 421 , the route heads east and then northeast around Michigan City . On the east side of Michigan City the route has an interchange with both SR 212 and I @-@ 94 followed by an intersection with the northern terminus of US 35 . After US 35 , the route becomes a four @-@ lane undivided highway until Rolling Prairie , passing SR 39 at Springville . East of Rolling Prairie the route meets SR 2 . US 20 heads northeast and then east and SR 2 heads due east . The route passes through Hudson Lake and New Carlisle before South Bend . 
 = = = South Bend to Ohio = = = 
 On the west side of South Bend , US 20 heads onto the St. Joseph Valley Parkway continuing due south . The St. Joseph Valley Parkway runs along the west side of South Bend . The route turns due east having a cloverleaf interchange with US 31 , just south of downtown South Bend . On the south side of Mishawaka , US 20 has a 2 @.@ 09 miles ( 3 @.@ 36 km ) concurrency with SR 331 . The road has a partial cloverleaf interchange with US 33 near Dunlap . The interchange with Old US 20 is incomplete with no access to westbound Old US 20 from eastbound US 20 . Soon after the interchange with Old US 20 is an interchange with CR 17 . This exit is also the end of the St. Joseph Valley Parkway . 
 US 20 heads east from Elkhart towards Middlebury , having an intersection with SR 15 south of Bristol . At this intersection the road is a four @-@ lane undivided highway , and soon after the intersection the road becomes a two @-@ lane highway . The route passes through the southwest side of Middlebury . On the south side of Middlebury the route has a traffic light at SR 13 . The route becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway just west of this intersection , and soon after the intersection the road becomes a two @-@ lane highway . From Middlebury , the route heads east towards Lagrange , passing through rural farmland in eastern Elkhart County and western <unk> County . On the way to Lagrange the route passes through an intersection with SR 5 just south of <unk> . The route heads east towards downtown Lagrange , having an intersection with SR 9 . The route heads east through rural farmland in eastern LaGrange County and western Steuben County . The route enters Angola and has an interchange with I @-@ 69 . The road enters downtown Angola and passes just north of Trine University . The road heads towards downtown and a roundabout with SR 127 ( Old US 27 ) . After going through the east side of Angola , the route leaves Angola heading east towards Ohio . In rural eastern Steuben County , the route passes through farmland and has an intersection with the northern terminus of SR 1 . Just west of the Ohio state line the route passes under the Indiana Toll Road ( I @-@ 80 / I @-@ 90 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 An important road from 1900 to 1910 was the Old Chicago Road , later renamed the Dunes Highway . The Dunes Highway Association engineers envisioned the Dunes Highway a " state of the art " 40 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 12 m ) concrete highway with a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) right @-@ of @-@ way . In August 1919 , Commission director H.L. Wright tentatively designated the Dunes Highway as State Road 43 , to be 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide . <unk> than anticipated , the new concrete highway was still superior to most Indiana roads , which in the mid @-@ 1920s were gravel or dirt with paved sections only between the larger towns . Dunes Highway construction began in 1922 under the guidance of Gary contractor <unk> Moe and construction engineer Ezra <unk> . 
 US 20 was part of the first alignment of the Lincoln Highway in 1913 from the current SR 2 in Rolling Prairie to Elkhart , where the Lincoln Highway turned southeast on to current US 33 . In 1926 , the Lincoln highway was rerouted to US 30 . 
 Between 1917 and 1926 the route from Illinois state Line to Michigan City was SR 43 ; this route was named Dunes Highway . At this time , US 20 from Michigan City to Ohio state line was SR 25 . When US 20 was signed in Indiana , in 1926 , the section from Illinois state line to Michigan City was concurrent with US 12 and the Dunes Highway . In the early 1930s US 20 from the Illinois state line to Michigan City was moved to its current route . In the mid @-@ 1970s Bypass US 20 ( BYP US 20 ) went from US 31 to US 20 , on the southwest side of South Bend . Until 1998 , US 20 went through downtown Elkhart and South Bend . When the State of Indiana built the St. Joseph Valley Parkway , the route downtown was decommissioned . 
 In 2005 a series of sharp curves around Rainbow Lake were removed ; the curves were located six miles west of Lagrange . A new straight roadway was built , from just east of SR 5 to just east of Lagrange County Road 600 West . 
 = = Future = = 
 The Indiana Department of Transportation plans to make US 20 a four @-@ lane highway with a center turn lane from the east end of the St. Joseph Valley Parkway to SR 13 . The project will be done in three different phases . Phase one will be from Elkhart County Road 17 to SR 15 , phase two will be from SR 15 to Elkhart County Road 35 , and phase three will be from CR 35 to SR 13 . The final phase is scheduled for completion around 2020 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hare coursing = 
 Hare coursing is the pursuit of hares with greyhounds and other sighthounds , which chase the hare by sight and not by scent . 
 In some countries , it is a legal , competitive activity , in which dogs are tested on their ability to run , overtake and turn a hare , rather than a form of hunting aiming at the capture of game . It has a number of variations in its rules around the world . Informal coursing can be a form of hunting , conducted to kill game or vermin , either for food , pest control or as a pastime . Coursing is a long established hunting technique , practiced historically with greyhounds , other sighthound breeds , or with <unk> which are crossbred sighthounds , and working breeds . The sport grew in popularity in Europe during the 19th century , but has since experienced a decline due in part to the introduction of greyhound racing with betting , and animal welfare legislation . 
 In recent decades , controversy has developed around hare coursing , with some viewing it as a cruel <unk> . Hare coursing is illegal in Scotland , Wales and England and became illegal in Northern Ireland in 2011 . However , it continues elsewhere in the world as a regulated and judged , competitive sport , in e.g. the Republic of Ireland , Iberia , and the Western United States . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formal coursing = = = 
 Whether for sporting or hunting purposes , hare coursing was in Europe historically restricted to landowners and the nobility , who used sighthounds , the ownership of which was at certain historic times prohibited among the lower social classes . The oldest documented description of hare coursing is the work <unk> ( Greek ) , otherwise known as Cynegeticus ( Latin ) , which was written by Arrian circa 180 AD . This work , known from its first complete English translation as On Coursing 1831 , by William Dansey , was considered by its original author as a necessary addition to the classic work of the same name Cynegeticus ( On Hunting ) , scent hunting , by Xenophon . Arrian felt compelled to describe the sight hunt and sighthounds because the Ancient Greeks only knew the scent hunt . It is from Arrian that the most famous quote on the sporting fairness of coursing originates " ... true huntsmen do not take out their hounds to catch the creature , but for a trial of speed and a race , and they are satisfied if the hare manages to find something that will rescue her " . The competitive version of hare coursing was given definitive form in the UK when the first complete set of English rules was drawn up in the reign of Elizabeth I by Thomas Howard , 4th Duke of Norfolk , providing for a pursuit of no more than two hounds , a headstart termed " Law " to be given to the hare for a fair run , and for the manner of awarding points on " Speed " , " Go @-@ bye " , " Turn " , " Wrench " , " Kill " & " Trip " , to judge the dogs ' performance . The first modern coursing club was established at Swaffham in 1776 , and the National Coursing Club was founded to regulate the sport in 1858 . From 1876 coursing meets were held at Plumpton , East Sussex , and this name was used for such events in Australia . 
 During the 19th century , coursing crossed the class divide , and reached its peak of popularity , with more than 150 coursing clubs in Britain , some attracting up to 80 @,@ 000 people . By the late 19th century , hare coursing had become a predominantly working class sport . 
 Coursing declined during the 20th century , notably due to the development of urban greyhound racing in the 1920s , and there were less than 30 coursing clubs in the UK by 2000 . 
 = = = Informal coursing = = = 
 The oldest form of hare coursing simply involved two dogs chasing a hare , the winner being the dog that caught the hare ; this could be for sport , food or pest control . In order to indulge in the informal practice , or hunting , various cross breeds ( under the generic British term <unk> ) have been created ; such animals may be specifically bred for coursing , such as the <unk> used to hunt coyote in the United States . Informal coursing has long been closely associated with pheasant hunting or poaching , lacking the landowner 's permission , and is often seen as a problem by the local public , landowners and the police . Clubs affiliated to the Association of Lurcher Clubs organised informal coursing with the landowner 's permission , sometimes using a single <unk> rather than a pair to chase a hare . 
 = = = Lure coursing = = = 
 Lure coursing is a sport for dogs based on hare coursing , but involving dogs chasing a mechanically operated lure . Some critics of hare coursing suggest that coursers could test their dogs through lure coursing . However , coursers believe that , while lure coursing is good athletic exercise for their dogs , it does not approximate the testing vigour and sport of live coursing . 
 = = = Illegal coursing = = = 
 In 2015 in England and Wales , illegal hare coursing has continued since coursing was banned by the Hunting Act 2004 . A typical hare coursing involves groups of two to 12 people walking in a line approximately 10 metres apart and then letting their dogs off the leads to chase flushed hares . The dogs are filmed so that the coursing can be played later , when betting occurs . Illegal hare coursing occurs on a large scale in Lincolnshire , Cambridgeshire and Norfolk , although the " gangs " often travel large distances to course hares . The dogs are starved beforehand " so the hares are often ripped to shreds when they are caught " . 
 = = Description of formal coursing = = 
 Modern hare coursing is practiced using a number of sighthounds : mainly greyhounds but also Borzois , Salukis , Whippets , and Deerhounds that are registered with a governing body such as the National Coursing Club or Kennel Club in Great Britain , the Irish Coursing Club , or the National Open Field Coursing Association ( <unk> ) in the US . Events are conducted through local coursing clubs which are regulated by their governing body . The objective of legal formal coursing is to test and judge the athletic ability of the dogs rather than to kill the hare . 
 Legal , formal hare coursing has a number of variations in how it is undertaken . Open coursing takes place in the open field , and closed coursing ( or park or Irish style ) takes place in an enclosure with an escape route . Open coursing is either run as walked @-@ up coursing , where a line of people walk through the countryside to flush out a hare , or as driven coursing , where hares are driven by beaters towards the coursing field . In each case , when a suitable hare appears , a person known as a slipper uses a slip with two collars to release two dogs at the same time , in pursuit of the hare which is given a head start ( known as fair law ) , usually between 70 – 90 metres ( 80 – 100 yards ) . The sighthound is released elsewhere by the handler . 
 The chased hare will then run at around 40 – 45 km / h ( 24 – 26 mph ) and the course will last around 35 – 40 seconds over 0 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 3 miles ) . The greyhounds which pursue the hare will , being faster , start to catch up with it . As greyhounds are much larger than hares but less agile , they find it difficult to follow the hares ' sharp turns which they make to evade the dogs . This agility gives the hare an important and often crucial advantage as it seeks to escape . Under some coursing club rules , the dogs are awarded points on how many times they can turn the hare , and how closely they force the hare 's progress . In the UK , the contest between the greyhounds was usually judged from horseback , and the winning greyhound proceeded to the next round of a knock @-@ out tournament . The 2003 UK coursing season ran from 1 October to 28 February . 
 = = = Variations in the Republic of Ireland = = = 
 Hare coursing is popular in the Republic of Ireland , with the national meeting in Clonmel , County Tipperary , being the most important event in the coursing calendar , attracting 10 @,@ 000 spectators , and claimed by its organisers to be worth up to € 16 million for the local economy . There are around 70 formal coursing clubs in the Republic and two in Northern Ireland , together holding 80 – 85 meetings per year . 
 There are several differences between the rules of coursing in Great Britain ( where it is regulated by the National Coursing Club ) and Irish coursing which has been organised by the Irish Coursing Club since 1916 . Because hares are not plentiful in all parts of the island of Ireland , mainly due to modern agricultural practices , coursing clubs are licensed by the Irish government to net 70 – 75 hares for their events . The hares are then transported in boxes to the coursing venue where they are kept for up to eight weeks and trained to be coursed . 
 Instead of being coursed on open land , the Irish form is run in a secure enclosure over a set distance . Since 1993 , Irish Coursing Club rules have made it compulsory for the greyhounds to be muzzled while they chase the hare . After the coursing event , the hares are transported back to where they were netted and re @-@ released into the wild . Whereas the UK form of coursing was run with dogs winning points for their running and turning of the hare , the Republic of Ireland form is run on the basis that the first dog to turn the hare wins . This is denoted by either a red flag or a white flag , indicating the colours of the respective dogs ' collars . 
 = = = Variations in the United States = = = 
 Greyhounds were introduced in the Americas for sport and pleasure , they helped farmers control jackrabbits , and organised coursing meets were taking place in the United States in the 19th century , by 1886 according to Gulf Coast Greyhounds . Open field coursing of jackrabbits , which are members of the hare family , now takes place in a number of states in Western America , including California , Montana and Wyoming , and is said by the North American Coursing Association to take place also in Idaho , Nevada , New Mexico and Utah . It takes place with up to four dogs chasing the hare . 
 The legality of hare coursing across the different states of the USA is not always clear . Animal Place , a California @-@ based animal rights group which opposes coursing , claims that the activity is legal in California , Colorado , Nevada , New Mexico , Utah and Wyoming but illegal in Arizona , Florida , Idaho , Kansas , Maine , Minnesota , Massachusetts , Oklahoma , Oregon , Texas , Vermont and Wisconsin . The pro @-@ coursing campaign , <unk> says that open field coursing is legal in all US states with a huntable population of jackrabbits . Washington state lists jackrabbits as a protected species , due to an unusually low population for a western state , and bans all forms of hunting them . 
 During the 2006 – 07 coursing season , the leading United States coursing body , the National Open Field Coursing Association , registered 480 dogs of various breeds , and oversaw 83 coursing events . Its quarry is the Black @-@ tailed Jackrabbit . Coursing of White @-@ tailed Jackrabbits is organised by a smaller body , the North American Coursing Association . 
 = = = Variations in other countries = = = 
 According to the UK Government review , the Burns Inquiry ( published in 2000 ) , hare coursing was taking place in Pakistan , Portugal and Spain . Pakistan has officially prohibited the use of dogs or hawks for coursing unless a special licence is issued for carrying out such activity although , according to some reports , hare coursing is still practised and popular . Hare coursing in Portugal is run in both forms : open ( <unk> de <unk> a Campo ) , and closed ( park ) coursing where it is known as <unk> a <unk> . Hare coursing in Portugal may only be legally undertaken with two dogs and operates under the same ethos as coursing in the United States . In Spain , the hare coursing is open coursing , and the areas where the activity takes place includes the <unk> area . Coursing has long been undertaken in Spain , where Spanish <unk> rather than greyhounds are used . These dogs have a precarious life after their coursing careers , with World Animal Protection suggesting that many tens of thousands die cruelly each year . Hare coursing also takes place in Russia but is illegal in most European countries and in Australia , where it had a long history from 1867 until it was banned in 1985 following a long decline in popularity . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 As long ago as 1516 , Thomas More wrote in Utopia that , 
 Thou <unk> rather be moved with pity to see a silly innocent hare murdered of a dog , the weak of the stronger , the fearful of the fierce , the innocent of the cruel and unmerciful . Therefore , all this exercise of hunting is a thing unworthy to be used of free men . 
 Coursing has long sparked opposition from activists concerned about animal welfare . In 1892 , Lady Florence Dixie criticised hare coursing as an " aggravated form of torture " and the League Against Cruel Sports was established in 1924 to campaign against rabbit coursing on Morden Common and continues to believe that it is wrong to expose animals to the risk of injury or death for human entertainment . The Waterloo Cup became a centrepiece of the campaign against coursing in the UK . In opposition , coursing has long enjoyed the fame of being known as " the noblest of field sports " precisely because the death of the hare is not the aim of the sport . Under most regulated forms of coursing only two hounds pursue the hare , the dogs competing against each other for a short time , and allowing the hare a significant chance of escape . 
 = = = Welfare arguments = = = 
 Until the 1970s , there was a dearth of scientific evidence on the welfare impact of coursing . The first thorough study was carried out in 1977 – 79 by the Universities Federation for Animal Welfare ( UFAW ) , albeit that it said that it was " not easy to draw conclusions from these reports " . According to a review of this study conducted for the Burns Inquiry , " Of the 53 hares killed , 43 had neck injuries , 18 of which were inflicted by the handler ( as evidenced from a clean break and no teeth marks ) . No clean breaks were believed to have been caused by dogs ( where tooth marks were evident ) . The UFAW team 's assessment was that all chest injuries would have been quickly fatal ( in six cases these included a punctured heart ) ; 10 animals without neck injuries had chest injuries . Abdominal injuries included six punctured livers , but generally involved a ruptured gut . In the UFAW team 's opinion , hindleg and back injuries could have been extremely painful until chest or neck injuries were inflicted " . 
 The Burns Inquiry , set up by the UK Government to examine hunting with dogs in England and Wales , which included coursing , concluded that " We are ... satisfied that being pursued , caught and killed by dogs during coursing seriously compromises the welfare of the hare . It is clear , moreover , that , if the dog or dogs catch the hare , they do not always kill it quickly . There can also sometimes be a significant delay , in driven coursing , before the picker @-@ up reaches the hare and dispatches it ( if it is not already dead ) . In the case of walked @-@ up coursing , the delay is likely to be even longer " . 
 = = = Welfare arguments in Irish @-@ style coursing = = = 
 Since the introduction of muzzling for greyhounds in 1993 , deaths to hares are less common , falling from an average of 16 % to about 4 % of hares coursed ( reducing to around 150 – 200 hares per year ) . <unk> dogs are more likely to buffet a hare than to bite it , a factor that may still affect the hare 's subsequent survival . Hares can either die due to injuries sustained by contact with the much larger dogs or due to capture myopathy . The report from the official Countryside ranger at the Wexford Coursing Club meeting in December 2003 confirms that , exceptionally , 40 hares died at the event and the report of the veterinary surgeon who examined the hares blames the " significant stress " of being " corralled and coursed " . Coursing supporters deny that hare coursing is cruel and say that hares that are injured , pregnant or ill are not allowed to run . Hares are reported to be examined by a vet before and after racing . 
 In the context of open ( not park ) coursing , the ( British ) National Coursing Club evidence to the Burns Inquiry said that muzzled coursing can cause more suffering than <unk> if the coursing officials are not able to reach injured hares quickly . The Irish Council Against <unk> , an organisation that campaigns against hare coursing has video evidence that shows this happening , even in enclosed coursing . 
 = = = The kill = = = 
 In 2000 , the rules of the UK National Coursing Club awarded a point to a greyhound that killed a hare " through superior dash and speed " . By early 2003 , this rule had been deleted to remove the appearance of the kill incentive . Observers of hare coursing at the Waterloo Cup – the most important event in the UK coursing calendar until it was last held in 2005 – regularly reported a minority of people in the crowd cheering when hares were killed . In 2005 in the US , points were still awarded for a " touch ... where the quarry is captured or killed " . 
 The number of hares killed in coursing is unclear . The UK government 's Burns Inquiry which submitted its final report in 2000 said that about 250 hares were killed each year in formal <unk> although much larger numbers of kills are believed to take place in informal coursing . The UK National Coursing Club and the organisers of the now defunct Waterloo Cup said that , on average , one in seven or eight hares coursed were killed . Inspectors from the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals who attended the event estimated that a greater number , one in five hares coursed , were killed . 
 During the 2013 season , the Irish National Parks and Wildlife Service oversaw 23 hare coursing meetings . Over 100 hares “ required assistance ” after being struck during races , which led to over 20 of them dying of natural causes or having to be euthanised . 
 = = Conservation or pest control = = 
 In different parts of the world two contrasting arguments are made in favour of hare coursing . In some places , the high densities of hare leads to the animals being considered as agricultural pests – a view taken , for example , by the California Department of Agriculture . Coursing is sometimes defended on this basis , even though the U.S. Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife has said that coursing does not " reduce the population enough to alleviate damage " . 
 Elsewhere , such as in the UK , hares are not always seen as pests , and there are species action plans aiming to significantly increase their numbers . Some coursers say that coursing assists conservation because it leads to sporting landowners creating a habitat suitable for hares . Opponents of coursing say that the converse is true , namely that coursing takes place where hares live rather than hares living where coursing takes place . It is also the case that coursing kills slower hares , and it is said by some coursers that this leaves faster hares to breed and multiply . 
 = = Debate and legislation = = 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 The practice of hare coursing has only recently , in historical terms , been debated in Parliament , although Parliament created an exemption in 1921 from the cruelty legislation , the Protection of Animals Act 1911 , for animals released for coursing . Eric Heffer , MP for Liverpool Walton , was a major opponent of coursing in the late 1960s , and Prime Minister Harold Wilson joined in the criticism . 
 Under Wilson 's premiership , the House of Commons voted for Government Bills to ban hare coursing in 1969 and 1975 , but neither passed the House of Lords to become law . In 2002 , the Scottish Parliament passed the Protection of Wild Mammals ( Scotland ) Act , which banned hare coursing in Scotland . In 2004 the British Parliament passed the Hunting Act , which banned hare coursing as well as other forms of hunting with hounds with effect from 18 February 2005 . Prosecutions were successful against two hare coursers in 2008 and against two Yorkshire landowners in 2009 . The private prosecution brought against the organisers of the March 2007 North Yorkshire event organised by a Field <unk> Club clarified in September 2009 that hare coursing is still an illegal activity under the Hunting Act 2004 even if the dogs used are muzzled . 
 No formal coursing has taken place in Northern Ireland since 2002 , as Ministers have refused the coursing clubs permission to net hares , and have protected them from being coursed or hunted under the Game Preservation ( Northern Ireland ) Act and in June 2010 the Northern Ireland Assembly voted to ban the practise . The two extant Northern Ireland coursing clubs since 2002 have travelled to the Republic to hold meetings jointly with coursing clubs there . Opinion polls commissioned by the League Against Cruel Sports as part of its campaigning have shown very strong public opposition to hare coursing from both urban and rural residents of Northern Ireland ( and the Republic of Ireland ) . 
 In 2015 , it was reported that hare coursing incidents fell by approximately 78 per cent across Suffolk since the re @-@ launch of an operation against coursing in September 2013 . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 = = = = California = = = = 
 In early 2006 , the TV channel ABC 7 showed a film of coursing with sets of three greyhounds competing in the chase of a number of hares . Coursing was banned in the County concerned , and California Assemblywoman Loni Hancock promoted a bill , <unk> , to make it a crime for any person in California to engage in open field coursing – defined as a " competition in which dogs are , by the use of rabbits , hares , or foxes , assessed as to skill in hunting live rabbits , hares , or foxes " . A pro @-@ coursing campaign was also established . The Bill was passed by the Public Safety Committee but did not become law . 
 = Rebel Heart ( Madonna album ) = 
 Rebel Heart is the thirteenth studio album by American singer and songwriter Madonna . It was released on March 6 , 2015 , by Interscope Records . Following the completion of the MDNA release and promotion , Madonna worked on the album throughout 2014 , co @-@ writing and co @-@ producing it with various musicians , including Diplo , Avicii , and Kanye West . She regularly uploaded pictures of her recording sessions on her Instagram account . Unlike her previous efforts , which involved only a few people , working with a large number of collaborators posed problems for Madonna in keeping a cohesive sound and creative direction for the album . 
 Thematically , Rebel Heart represents the singer 's romantic and rebellious sides . The themes grew organically during the writing and recording sessions . Musically , it is a pop record which merges an array of genres such as 1990s house , trap , and reggae , as well as the use of acoustic guitars and gospel choir . Some of the songs are autobiographical in nature while others talk about love and Madonna 's career . Rebel Heart features guest appearances by boxer Mike Tyson and rappers Nicki Minaj , Nas and Chance the Rapper . 
 The record had been set for a March 2015 release , with the first single to be released on Valentine 's Day . But after a flurry of unexpected album content leaks , Madonna released the album for pre @-@ order on the iTunes Store on December 20 , 2014 , with six songs being available immediately for download . A police investigation led to an Israeli man being arrested and charged with hacking into Madonna 's computer and leaking the songs . The leaked cover art for the deluxe edition of the album became popular , leading to numerous memes being created on Instagram , Tumblr , and Twitter . To promote the album , Madonna made several television appearances and performances , including the 57th Annual Grammy Awards and the 2015 Brit Awards . It was further promoted by the Rebel Heart Tour which started in September 2015 , and concluded in March 2016 , visiting North America , Europe , Asia , and Oceania . " Living for Love " , " Ghosttown " , " Bitch I 'm Madonna " , and " Hold Tight " were released as singles from the album . 
 Rebel Heart received predominantly positive reviews from music critics ; multiple reviewers called it her best effort in a decade . They found that unlike her two previous studio efforts , Hard Candy ( 2008 ) and MDNA ( 2012 ) , the album 's sound was progressive . It peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 chart in the United States and the UK Albums Chart . Rebel Heart also peaked at number one in various countries across the world , including major music markets such as Australia , Canada , Germany , Italy , Spain , and Switzerland , while reaching the top ten on charts in France , Ireland , Mexico , Japan , New Zealand , and Sweden , and attaining Gold certifications in some of the regions . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Following the release of her twelfth studio album , MDNA ( 2012 ) , Madonna embarked on The MDNA Tour to promote it . The tour created much controversy over her statements on violence , human rights , and politics , and her use of fake firearms and her nudity on stage . She was threatened with several lawsuits . She was enraged by many world events , which she claimed were acts of " injustice " against human beings . In September 2013 , she released secretprojectrevolution , a short film she directed with Steven Klein , dealing with artistic freedom and human rights . The film also launched a global initiative called Art for Freedom to promote freedom of expression . She clarified in L <unk> Vogue that her next album would be connected with Art for Freedom , saying that she " had " to be committed to the initiative and use her voice as an artist . 
 By December 2013 , Madonna 's manager Guy Oseary commented that the singer was " eager to get started " on her next album . However , she had another project in mind - developing the screenplay for the Andrew Sean Greer novel , The Impossible Lives of Greta Wells . Madonna decided to split her time between writing the screenplay and writing songs for the new album . In February 2014 , Madonna confirmed that she had already begun working on her thirteenth studio album , saying : " I 'm right now in the process of talking to various co @-@ writers and producers and talking about where I want to go with my music " . Working with a number of collaborators on the album , Madonna encountered problems in keeping a cohesive sound and creative direction for Rebel Heart , since her previous efforts had been produced with only a small core group of people developing the music . She observed that a lot of the people she enlisted would not stay in one city at a time due to their different projects , resulting in Madonna not finishing her songs . " So , I was just the person standing there with a clipboard in the headlights , going ' Ok ! ' A little bit like a school teacher , " she admitted . 
 = = Writing and recording sessions = = 
 In March 2014 , Madonna started posting a number of images on the social media website Instagram , where she hinted at possible songwriters and collaborators with hashtag captions . First she posted about going into the recording studio with Swedish DJ and producer Avicii . Record producer Carl Falk talked to the Dagens Nyheter newspaper in April 2014 about the sessions with Madonna and Avicii . He recalled that eleven demos were recorded within a week at Henson Recording Studios in Hollywood , with acoustic guitars and piano . A total of six personnel were selected by Avicii 's manager Arash " Ash " Pour Nouri . They were divided into two groups , the first consisted of Falk , Rami Yacoub , and Savan Kotecha ; the second consisted of Salem Al Fakir , Vincent <unk> , and Magnus <unk> . Avicii worked with both groups to create the demo songs , while Madonna arrived at the studio in the afternoon and stayed until 7 am . She worked closely with both teams while writing and changing melodies , and was in charge of the process . 
 A few days later , Madonna posted an image of a sunset with the words " Rebel Heart " on them , and a caption which the media interpreted as lyrics from a new song . The lines posted were : " Day turns into night . I won 't give up the fight . Don 't want to get to the end of my days ... saying I wasn 't amazed " . Additional images showed Madonna with singer Natalia Kills in front of a microphone , and with Martin Kierszenbaum , the founder and chairman of Cherrytree Records , and senior executive of A & R for Interscope Records , Madonna 's label . By mid @-@ April 2014 , she had also revealed on Instagram the names of songwriters Toby Gad and <unk> and record producer Symbolyc One with images of the group working in studio . The list of personnel grew to include producer Ariel Rechtshaid and sound engineer Nick Rowe . In an interview with Sirius XM Radio , Kierszenbaum described the recording process : 
 We were supposed to be with her in the studio for a couple of days . She kindly invited us to stay a little longer . We don 't know what 's going to end up on the album but it was an absolute you know honor ... For me being such a fan for so long it was so exciting to hear her vocal in the room right next to me , coming out of her head really sounding exactly like all those records we all love and she 's a pleasure to work with because she 's so in tune with who she is and what she wants to sing . I don 't know . It 's really great collaborating with her and Natalia is such a great writer . 
 In May 2014 , Madonna posted a selfie in which she talked about working with American DJ Diplo . Madonna had invited him for her annual Oscar party , but he could not attend . They eventually started talking about music through texts and decided to collaborate on the album . Madonna asked Diplo to provide his " craziest record " for the album . Together they wrote and recorded seven songs . " Those records are gonna be crazy @-@ sounding . We really pushed the envelope with some of the stuff we were doing ... [ S ] he was up for anything . I love when an artist gives a producer the confidence he needs to work with them , and Madonna was very open @-@ minded to my ideas " , Diplo added . One song was composed using a hook Madonna had sung in the studio ; Diplo described it as " super weird " . Another one , later confirmed as " Living for Love " , had nearly twenty versions recorded ranging from a piano ballad to an EDM version . Ultimately Madonna and Diplo compromised on version midway between the two styles . Rechtshaid and British singer MNEK also joined their writing sessions , improving the song 's verses . Diplo also confirmed another track , known as " Bitch I 'm Madonna " , which he believed would push the lyrical boundaries for a pop song . Both Alicia Keys and Ryan Tedder confirmed working on the album , saying that they had contributed to the songwriting with Keys playing piano on " Living for Love " . Two other songs , " Messiah " and " Devil Pray " , were confirmed by Madonna in different interviews . 
 = = Titling and themes = = 
 Thematically , Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone felt that the album focused on two subjects : listening to one 's heart , and being a rebel . Madonna explained that these concepts were not the initial inspiration , but emerged during the sessions with Avicii . Madonna observed two distinct themes emerging organically , and felt the need to express them . The record was titled Rebel Heart , since it dealt with two different aspects of the singer 's character — her rebellious , renegade side , and her romantic side ; she wanted the album to represent both . On the French radio station NRJ , she explained that Rebel Heart could be both autobiographical and fictional , since she mixed both her own experiences with imaginary narratives while writing the songs . The title also stemmed from Madonna 's belief that contemporary music artists are not encouraged or inspired to be rebellious , take risks , or speak @-@ up , and she wanted to highlight this . However , she understood the importance of having love in the rebellious nature , so added the word Heart to the title . 
 Introspection was also listed as one of the foundational themes prevalent on the album , along with " genuine statements of personal and careerist reflection scattered among the posturing of ' Bitch I 'm Madonna ' and ' Unapologetic Bitch ' " according to Slant 's Sam C. Mac as well as her " obsessive self @-@ regard " . Madonna explained to Jon Pareles of The New York Times that although she has never looked back at her past endeavors , reminiscing about it felt right for Rebel Heart . " And it 's bittersweet for me to think about that . It just seemed like a time where I wanted to stop and look back . It 's kind of like survivor guilt . How did I make it and they didn 't ? " During the album 's development phase , she became comfortable expressing her ideas in front of a few people , comparing it to : " writing your diary in front of somebody and reading it out loud ... It was almost like an acting exercise , you know , just putting myself in a room and letting ideas flow even if I didn 't feel so connected to the people " . 
 Further inspiration for the album came from Madonna 's exploration of other cultures and art , literature , and music , referencing them in the songs . She believed that the tracks should stand on their own , so that one could sing them accompanied with just a guitar . Madonna enlisted the help of her daughter Lourdes and son Rocco , calling them her A & R advisers . They visited night clubs and were able to provide her with news about up @-@ and @-@ coming music and artists , helping to create the sounds she gravitated towards for the album . 
 Generally a pop record , Rebel Heart was different from Madonna 's releases in the last decade according to Bradley Stern from MuuMuse . He called it an " eclectic record " citing the merging of an array of musical genres like 1990s house , trap , and reggae along with the use of acoustic guitars . Stern felt that unlike Hard Candy ( 2008 ) and MDNA which chased then current musical trends , this album 's sound was progressive . Adding to this , Mitchell Sunderland from Vice felt that Rebel Heart was a " lesson learned " from the criticism Madonna had received for her previous two albums . Jed Gottlieb of the Boston Herald found the album continued Madonna 's " increasingly interesting , innovative approach " by combining contemporary musical styles with her previous tastes . He found Rebel Heart to be an improvement from the generic dance tunes on MDNA . For Jon Pareles of The New York Times , Rebel Heart was like a sequel to MDNA in its composition , but while the latter was marred by its cold mechanized vocals and clichéd songwriting , the former portrays Madonna 's musical abilities as someone " who ponders sin along with romance and fame " . Jay Lustig of The Record believed that Madonna had always lacked a thematic coherence with her previous endeavors . However , with the songs from Rebel Heart , she was able to create potentially successful singles despite the tracks ' different styles , thereby maintaining consistency on the record . 
 = = Music and lyrical interpretation = = 
 Rebel Heart opens with the song " Living for Love " . Composed in the house genre , it begins with Madonna singing over a " regal " piano line , eventually joined by percussion . Although a breakup song , " Living for Love " talks about being triumphant and hopeful . According to Dean Piper of The Daily Telegraph , the song has " some classic Madonna traits : religious references , a gospel choir , 90s piano beats and a whirling bass " . It was compared to her 1989 singles , " Like a Prayer " and " Express Yourself " by Jason Lipshutz of Billboard . The second track , " Devil Pray " , was inspired by how one could be enticed to partake of narcotics to achieve a higher level of consciousness and connect to God . Lyrically it asks for salvation from a variety of drug abuses , making allusions to Saint Mary and Lucifer , as well as the pain of healing from drug abuse . Produced by Madonna with Falk , Avicii , DJ Dahi , and Blood Diamonds , " Devil Pray " starts with gentle guitar sounds which build up to an electropop production , accompanied by a house beat . " Ghosttown " talks about civilizations ending and the world encountering an armageddon , but humans seeing hope amid the destruction . Written with Jason Evigan , Evan Bogart , and Sean Douglas , it is a power ballad song , which Madonna sings in " piercing " and " warm " vocals like those of Karen Carpenter 's , and the production is comparable to her 1986 single , " Live to Tell " . According to Douglas , " Ghosttown " was written in three days , after Madonna personally requested studio time with him and the other songwriters . The fourth track , " Unapologetic Bitch " , has reggae , dancehall , and dubstep influences , and is a ska song where Madonna speaks negatively about a break @-@ up and her lover , in lyrics such as : " It might sound like I 'm an Unapologetic Bitch but sometimes you have to call it like it is " . Madonna explained that the song is about having fun irrespective of the situation one is in . 
 The fifth song , " Illuminati " , was inspired after Madonna learned that some people labelled her as a member of the Illuminati . She researched the real Illuminati and wrote the song . Lyrically it refers to the Illuminati conspiracy theory , the Egyptian pyramids , the Phoenix , the Age of Enlightenment , and the Eye of Providence among others , with the chorus lyrics : " It 's like everybody in this party is shining like Illuminati " . According to Madonna , Kanye West , who produced the track , loved the melody and changed the composition adding his own spin to it . Minaj appears on the sixth track , " Bitch I 'm Madonna " , where she raps , asking everybody to " go hard or go home " , while Madonna shouts lyrics like : " I just want to have fun tonight , I wanna blow up this house tonight " . Produced by Diplo and Sophie , the track has a tearing sound alongside the " bleepy electro " and " churning dubstep " composition . During the writing sessions , Minaj had to rewrite the lyrics until she could get the correct sentiment Madonna wanted . " Hold Tight " consists of an " arresting " chorus and a drum beat sound , described by Sam C. Mac of Slant Magazine as : " innocuous , lyrically platitudinous pop that briefly works itself up into something exciting when it threatens to become a <unk> stomp " . Track eight , " Joan of Arc " , is a ballad in which Madonna sings about the media scrutiny of her life , singing : " Each time they take a photograph , I lose a part of me I can 't get back " . It also references the Roman Catholic saint of the same name . Madonna 's hushed , vibrato @-@ tinged vocals , and confessional lyrics in " Joan of Arc " , are enhanced by a new beat instrumentation that utilizes strings and acoustic guitars in the bridge . 
 " Iconic " features Chance the Rapper and boxer Mike Tyson . The latter has a spoken word introduction to the song , similar to his addition on Canibus ' debut single , " Second Round <unk> " ( 1998 ) . Madonna invited Tyson to the recording studio where he talked about his life ; he recorded the introduction in one take . Consisting of a " weird " beat , " Iconic " finds Madonna embracing herself as an icon through the lyrics . " HeartBreakCity " follows " Iconic " , and is a piano ballad talking about lost love , with Madonna singing in a deeper vocal register , inspired by baroque pop . Containing synths , banjo sounds , and hollow drums , " Body Shop " describes love as a damaged car on the highway , requiring a body repair to be alive . West also produced the next track , " Holy Water " , where the singer compares her bodily fluids to the title . With hedonistic sound effects , the song is reminiscent of Madonna 's 1990 single , " Justify My Love " and contains a lyrical excerpt from " Vogue " . A bassline accompanies the chorus , consisting of moaning sounds , arcade game music , and synths . " Inside Out " was produced by Mike Dean , and features Madonna 's vocals with reverb , accompanied by piano sounds and restrained chords . " Wash All Over Me " follows , and is the last track on the standard version of the album . Baroque piano sounds , and a steady military beat , lead up to the chorus as Madonna sings about the world changing , heartbreaks , and acceptance . A gospel choir and minimum synths back the song 's sound . 
 The deluxe version of Rebel Heart begins with the track " Best Night " , an 80s electro composition reminiscent of Sade 's songs with drums and Indian flute instrumentation . Madonna begins the song with the line , " You can call me M tonight " but her voice is not discernible in the chorus , only in the harmonies . There is another reference to " Justify My Love " at one point during the intermediate bridge . " Veni Vidi Vici " appears next , and is a rap " origin story song " with its lyrics built around Madonna 's songs : " I expressed myself , came like a virgin down the aisle / Exposed my naked ass , and I did it with a smile / And when it came to sex , I knew I walked the Borderline / and when I struck a pose , all the gay boys lost their minds " . Madonna sings the chorus over simple guitar beats , uttering " I came , I saw , I conquered " , the English translation of the song 's title . Nas appears for a guest verse talking about his own life as Diplo backs it with shotgun and crunching horn sounds . " <unk> " is the next track where Madonna asks sarcastically " tell me what you know about sex " over sounds of bass , synths and a string arpeggio . Near the end she lists a number of bondage items like : " Twisted rope , handcuffs , blindfold , string of pearls " . Described as both an embodiment and critique of act , " <unk> " talks about the lack of intimacy with Madonna rapping in a " dispassionate " voice ; she purposely made it sound like she had a lisp in her articulation of the words . 
 " Messiah " is a dramatic pop ballad with an orchestra backing and violins . Madonna sings in a " deeper velvety " tone , with the lyrics talking about lighting candles , necromancy , and casting love spells . The title track finishes off the deluxe version and was changed completely from its leaked demo . It consists of acoustic guitar and violins , with autobiographical lyrics . Amy Pettifer of The Quietus noted , " ' Rebel Heart ' quietly [ acknowledges Madonna 's ] part in building the scene and popularizing stylistics that are the foundation of current trends . " The super deluxe version presented tracks like " Graffiti Heart " , where Madonna drew inspiration from her pre @-@ fame friends like artists Jean @-@ Michel Basquiat and Keith Haring evoking the power of art in gaining freedom . It was described by the Pretty Much Amazing blog as a " a galloping love letter to creativity " , while " Beautiful Scars " is a disco @-@ lite throwback track . " Borrowed Time " deals with war and social issues while " Auto @-@ Tune Baby " features a baby wailing in the background . 
 = = Release , leaks , and artwork = = 
 In May 2014 , photographer Mert Alas posted on his Instagram account that he was listening to a new Madonna album , but Billboard clarified that she was still in the process of recording it in Los Angeles . They later posted a 50 @-@ second snippet of an instrumental which media claimed to be from Madonna , but the sample was traced back to Dutch DJ Sander Kleinenberg and his song " We Are Superstars " . Oseary confirmed that Madonna looked forward to a 2015 release date for the album . However , on November 28 , 2014 , two songs titled " Rebel Heart " and " Wash All Over Me " were leaked onto the Internet ; the songs were immediately taken down , and Oseary tweeted asking for assistance in finding the source of the leaks . On December 17 , 2014 , a total of thirteen songs were leaked , as well as artwork suggesting the album was to be named Iconic . An aggravated Madonna clarified that the songs were demo versions from earlier recordings ; she described the leak as " artistic rape " . She was criticized subsequently for referring to the hack as " terrorism " in the wake of the Peshawar school massacre and the Sydney hostage crisis , terrorist acts that had taken place earlier in 2014 . Madonna said in a Billboard interview that after the leak she and her team tried to trace it back to the source , but ultimately decided to release the finished songs . Referring to the Sony Pictures Entertainment hack , she was critical of the Internet and explained that the incident led to her securing her laptop and hard drives , and disabling the Wi @-@ Fi . " I wanted to plan everything in advance . Release the single , shoot a video , start talking about my record . And you know , prepare for the release of the entire album and have everything set up just so ... But we sort of were left with no choice " , she added . 
 On December 20 , 2014 , the album was made available for pre @-@ order at the iTunes Store . When ordered , six tracks ( five in the United Kingdom ) were automatically downloaded . Madonna stated that the songs were meant to be " an early Christmas gift " with the final release on March 10 , 2015 . Originally , " Living for Love " was intended to serve as the lead single from the album . It was to be released on Valentine 's Day , with the rest of the record slated for the spring . However , due to the leak , the release date had to be pushed up . Oseary recalled that they did not receive a confirmation until Friday night whether the pre @-@ release could be executed , since iTunes was closing for the Christmas weekend . After much discussion on the pros and cons of the release , and with the aid of Interscope vice @-@ chairman Steve Berman , and Apple Inc . ' s Robert <unk> , they were able to go live slowly . The six songs Madonna chose had to be polished , and since the tracks ' producers were unavailable , she mastered and mixed them herself . The album 's release was compared to Beyoncé 's self @-@ titled surprise release in 2013 , with The Guardian calling it a " partial Beyoncé " . The leaks continued with fourteen new demos being revealed between December 23 and December 27 . Three new tracks — " Hold Tight " , " Joan of Arc " and " Iconic " — became available following Madonna 's Grammy performance . 
 The final track list for Rebel Heart was revealed on January 20 , 2015 , including the standard and deluxe version song names . A day later Israeli police arrested a man suspected of hacking into Madonna 's , as well as other musicians ' computers , stealing and leaking content . <unk> 433 , an Israeli crime @-@ fighting umbrella organization , had led a month @-@ long investigation after the leaks occurred , working closely with the FBI . Although Israeli police refused to name the suspect , media identified him as former reality show contestant Adi Lederman , who had participated in the Israeli singing competition , Kokhav <unk> , season ten . As the deluxe edition leaked in full , Lederman was charged by Israel 's Magistrate Court on four counts : computer trespassing , prohibited secret monitoring and additional computer trespassing , copyright Infringement , and obstructing investigation . The investigation also revealed that Lederman was the one who had leaked the demo of Madonna 's lead single from MDNA , " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " . Copies of songs , including rehearsal recordings of upcoming Madonna performances , were sold for more than $ 1 @,@ 000 to various clients . Lederman was ultimately sentenced to fourteen months in a Tel Aviv prison . 
 The cover art , featuring Madonna 's face inter @-@ crossed with black wires , became popular on social media resulting in numerous memes being created on Instagram , Tumblr and Twitter . Fans wound black wires across their faces imitating the cover , and even created memes with the faces of other celebrities , including : Britney Spears , Michael Jackson , Homer Simpson , Jim Carrey , Marlon Brando , and the Grinch . Madonna forwarded many of the images to her social media accounts . However , three of the images — those of Martin Luther King Jr . , Nelson Mandela and Bob Marley with the same wires around their faces — were heavily criticized for being " disrespectful and racist " . The singer explained the photos the next day , saying that she was flattered by the comparison to the three and characterized herself as a " freedom fighter " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Madonna confirmed her appearance at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards on February 8 , 2015 ; Oseary clarified that the singer would also perform at the ceremony . The singer performed " Living for Love " wearing a one @-@ piece , matador red outfit , surrounded by male dancers dressed as Minotaurs similar to the song 's music video . Forbes reported that Madonna 's performance was the most @-@ watched moment of the night . Her effort to sing live without Auto @-@ Tune during the choreographed performance was also widely praised . She also performed the song at the 2015 Brit Awards , on February 25 , 2015 . However , in the early stages of the performance , a wardrobe malfunction caused her to be pulled down a flight of stairs that made up part of the stage . She later took to Instagram to confirm that she was well , posting : " Thanks for the good wishes ! I 'm fine " . It was later revealed that her cape was tied too tightly , and when her dancers attempted to remove it from her neck , this caused her to crash to the floor , leaving the audience in shock . After several seconds , she continued her performance as planned . 
 Madonna partnered with the <unk> networking app , Grindr to promote Rebel Heart . A contest was held and five of the app 's users were selected for an exclusive interview with the artist . The contest required re @-@ creating the artwork for Rebel Heart and posting it as a Grindr profile picture . Other winners received signed copies of the album . Joe Stone from The Guardian considered this to be a " savvy " promotional method allowing Madonna to connect directly with her gay audience . Madonna appeared on The Jonathan Ross Show , for her first UK television interview in three years , on February 26 , 2015 ( aired on March 14 ) . She performed an edited version of " Living for Love " , as well as " Ghosttown " for the first time . On March 1 , she travelled to Italy for an appearance on the television show Che tempo che fa ( aired on March 8 ) , where she performed " Devil Pray " and " Ghosttown " while talking with host Fabio Fazio on numerous topics including the album 's development process . The next day she appeared on France 's Le Grand Journal show , performing an edited version of " Living for Love " and " Ghosttown " . Another interview aired on The Today Show on March 9 and 10 , 2015 , where she spoke to host Carson Daly about the Rebel Heart leaks . Madonna appeared for the first time on a special edition of The Howard Stern Show on March 11 , 2015 during which she discussed her life , and personal relationships , as well as confirming that " Ghosttown " was to be the second single from Rebel Heart . 
 Madonna appeared and performed on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in the US for the entire week of March 16 to 20 . Songs performed included " Living for Love " with DeGeneres herself joining the singer onstage , a stripped down version of " Joan of Arc " , " Ghosttown " , and finally , her 1985 single " Dress You Up " , during a bathroom concert sequence with DeGeneres . On March 29 , 2015 , Madonna performed " Ghosttown " at the 2nd iHeartRadio Music Awards in Los Angeles , where she was joined onstage by singer Taylor Swift playing guitar . Two days later , the BBC 's Jo Whiley interviewed her for Radio 2 , the singer 's first radio interview in the UK . Madonna appeared on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon on April 9 , 2015 , singing " Bitch , I 'm Madonna " and her 1983 single , " Holiday " . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Living for Love " was the first single from the album , released along with five other tracks . It was sent for radio play in the US on February 10 , 2015 . The song received positive feedback with Slant Magazine listing it at number 25 on their year end top songs list for 2015 , saying : " Overworked and overthought , for sure , but the song 's essence remains in tact , and if Madonna 's message of life after love didn 't register as a commercial comeback on the scale of , say , Cher 's ' Believe ' , it remains a pop @-@ gospel sequel of the highest order " . An accompanying music video , directed by the French duo Julien Choquart and Camille Hirigoyen , together known as J.A.C.K. , was released in February 2015 . Its storyline incorporates mythological elements and shows Madonna as a matador , fighting her dancers dressed like minotaurs on a red circular stage . " Ghosttown " was first sent for radio airplay in Italy on March 13 , 2015 , and a week later in Australia . The music video was directed by Jonas Åkerlund , and starred actor Terrence Howard . The video 's main theme was " an apocalyptic situation mimicking the end of the world " , showing the singer and Howard as the sole survivors in a destroyed city . 
 The third single , " Bitch I 'm Madonna " , was released as a remix EP , featuring remixes by various collaborators . Åkerlund again helmed the video for the song , which featured Minaj and Diplo with Madonna , and cameo appearances by : Rita Ora , Chris Rock , Jon Kortajarena , Miley Cyrus , Alexander Wang , Beyoncé , Katy Perry , Kanye West , and Madonna 's two sons , Rocco and David . The video was shot at the Standard Hotel in New York City and shows Madonna and her entourage having a party throughout the building , ending on the rooftop . The release of the video to the streaming service Tidal was plagued by technical difficulties , and was met with a mixed response . Critics complimented the craziness of the clip but panned the absence of the guest stars from the set . " Hold Tight " was a radio only single in Italy , released for airplay on July 24 , 2015 , and served as the fourth single from Rebel Heart in that country . 
 " Bitch I 'm Madonna " became the only track from the album to enter the Billboard Hot 100 . It debuted and peaked at number 84 on the chart , aided by a total of 2 @.@ 6 million streams of the song 's audio and video . The first three singles reached the top of the Billboard Dance Club Songs , extending Madonna 's record as the artist with the most number one songs on the chart , as well as the artist with the most number @-@ one singles ever on a Billboard chart , breaking her tie with country singer George Strait who earned 44 number @-@ ones on the Hot Country Singles chart . " Living for Love " reached number 26 in the United Kingdom , becoming Madonna 's 71st top @-@ forty single , extending her record as the female artist with the most top @-@ forty UK singles . 
 = = = Rebel Heart Tour = = = 
 Numerous news outlets started reporting on the concert tour supporting Rebel Heart . The Italian newspaper Torino Today reported Madonna was planning on returning to Turin with the tour on November 20 and 21 , 2015 . The tour was called the Rebel Heart Tour with appearances in North America , Europe , Asia and Oceania , beginning on September 9 , 2015 . Billboard reported that the tour would use arenas only , and would visit cities where Madonna had not performed previously . The initial itinerary had 25 – 30 shows in North America and 20 – 25 shows in Europe , with additional dates being revealed later on . This tour was the singer 's first visit to Australia in more than 20 years , having last toured there with The Girlie Show World Tour in 1993 , and her first time performing in New Zealand and the Philippines . The tour 's main stage was elevated and set up at the end of each arena , with a long catwalk extending from its middle to the center of the space . At the middle of the catwalk there was a circular stage , while the far end of the pathway ended in a heart @-@ shaped stage . Designers working on the tour 's wardrobe included : Jeremy Scott for Moschino , Alessandro Michele for Gucci and Alexander Wang , along with Fausto <unk> , Prada , Miu Miu , Swarovski , Lebanese designer Nicolas <unk> , as well as Madonna 's longtime collaborator Arianne Phillips . The tour generated positive critical reviews , many noting that Madonna appeared to be in a happy mood . At its completion , the tour grossed a total of $ 169 @.@ 8 million from the 82 shows , with over 1 @.@ 045 million ticket sales . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 On its release , Rebel Heart received positive critical reviews . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews by music critics , the album received an average score of 68 , based on 29 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . The Daily Telegraph writer Neil McCormick , Andy Gill of The Independent , AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine , and Lauren Murphy of The Irish Times each gave the album 4 out of 5 stars . McCormick felt that " ( f ) or the first time in years , [ Madonna ] doesn 't sound desperate " , praising it in comparison to Hard Candy and MDNA . Saeed called it : " a fine collection of sturdy pop tunes in which Madonna finally allows herself to look back and sometimes pilfer from her peak periods of the late 80s and early 2000s " . Murphy wrote " the indisputable pop icon is back with a tentative bang " after MDNA had " few memorable pop hits " . For Gill , the most impressive aspect of Rebel Heart was Madonna 's vocals , while Erlewine found the album to be a revival of Madonna 's defiant side and her confessional mood . 
 Writing for The Quietus , Amy Pettifer praised the album , describing it as : " a darker return to the club culture roots [ for Madonna ] , and it seems – on some level – to face up to the missteps of her more recent releases " . Giving it 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , USA Today writer Elysa Gardner described the album 's sound and lyrics as " <unk> direct " . Chicago Tribune writer Greg Kot and Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times awarded it 3 out of 4 stars . Kot believed that the album would have been better without the songs referencing sexuality , but still considered it to be " fascinating " while Roberts believed that Rebel Heart stood out " sturdily " because of its production . Writing for The Boston Globe , James Reed opined that the album was a : " welcome detour in the artist 's recent discography ... her most satisfying effort in a decade and nimbly connects the dots between Madonna 's various eras and guises " . Critic Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle called Rebel Heart : " a complex , consistently strong album " . 
 Slant Magazine editor Sal Cinquemani , Joe Levy of Billboard , and Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone each awarded the album 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . Cinquemani wrote that the album was " all over the map " , yet felt it was " a surprisingly coherent one " . Levy wrote that the album was " subtle " compared to " current standards " , adding that : " These songs unfold slowly , building through foreplay @-@ like intros before hooks are displayed over a shifting series of textures " . Ganz felt that Rebel Heart " is at its strongest when Madonna shoves everyone to the side and just tells it to us straight " , and added : " Deep down , Madonna does have a rebel heart – and you can 't fault her for reminding us that pop music is all the better for it " . Jamieson Cox of Time commended the album for its consistent production and sound , and for Madonna 's vocals and songwriting . Giving it a rating of " B " , Kyle Anderson and Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly called the album " Madonna 's best outing since 2000 's Music " . Alexis Petridis of the The Guardian and Time Out writer Nick Levine gave the album 3 out of 5 stars . Petridis felt that the two contrasting sides of the album did not " quite gel " , reasoning that : " the former might represent the music Madonna wants to make , while the latter is the music she feels obliged to make " . Levine wrote : " ' Rebel Heart ' may lack cohesion , but she 's definitely not down for the count : this contains some of the best music Madonna 's made in a decade " . 
 Annie <unk> of The A.V. Club said the album had its " fair share of those head scratching moments " , but found it to be a move in the right direction musically . Spin writer Andrew Unterberger gave the album a 6 out of 10 ranking . While describing the record as " clunky " , Unterberger also wrote that it : " contains a number of Madonna 's best songs in years " . Writing for The New Zealand Herald , Lydia Jenkin gave it a mixed review , deeming the album a " bit of a mess " and " confused " . Lindsay Zoladz of New York magazine was disappointed , feeling that Madonna sounded " safe " in the songs , adding that : " ( t ) he Madonna of Rebel Heart [ has ] succeeded once again in the increasingly empty goal of sounding current " . Gavin Haynes of NME panned the album , saying that the album : " feels like a wasted opportunity . <unk> self @-@ empowerment anthem ' Iconic ' informs us that there 's only two letters difference between Icon and I Can 't . Sadly , there are also two letters between class and ass " . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 According to Andrew Hampp of Billboard , the pre @-@ order received a strong commercial response after its release to iTunes Stores around the world . In the United States , three of the six released tracks debuted on Billboard 's Dance / Electronic Songs chart dated January 3 , 2015 — " Living for Love " , " Bitch I 'm Madonna " , and " Unapologetic Bitch " — despite being available for only two days . The six songs had sold a combined 146 @,@ 000 digital downloads , according to Nielsen SoundScan . The album 's pre @-@ orders were estimated at around 50 @,@ 000 to 60 @,@ 000 copies , according to industry prognosticators . The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 chart with 121 @,@ 000 album equivalent units , behind the soundtrack of the TV series Empire . While Rebel Heart was the best @-@ selling album of the week — ranking number one on Billboard 's Top Album Sales chart with pure album sales of 116 @,@ 000 copies ( 96 % of overall units ) — it fell behind the soundtrack when it came to streaming and track equivalent album units , with just over 1 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 000 respectively . It became Madonna 's 21st top @-@ ten album , but was her first studio release not to debut atop the chart since 1998 's Ray of Light . Rebel Heart 's concert tour bundle amounted to less than 10 @,@ 000 copies compared to the 180 @,@ 000 copies sold for her previous album , MDNA . The release also prompted Madonna to debut at number seven on the Billboard Artist 100 chart , moving up by 2 @,@ 919 % in overall Artist 100 points and gaining 31 % in social media activity . In Canada , Rebel Heart debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart with 18 @,@ 000 copies sold in the first week , making it her seventh number @-@ one there during the SoundScan era . The next week , the album dropped 19 places on the Billboard 200 , while in Canada it dropped only one position . Billboard reported that the sales dropped by 78 % to 26 @,@ 000 units , a reflection of the high pre @-@ orders during first week . The album gradually dropped down the next two weeks . On the fifth week it received a boost in sales as a result of Madonna 's appearance on The Tonight Show with Jimmy Fallon , jumping from number 57 to 41 on the Billboard 200 . The album was present for a total of 11 weeks on the chart , and ranked at number 151 on the Billboard 200 year end chart for 2015 . 
 In the United Kingdom , the Official Charts Company reported that Rebel Heart outsold its nearest competitors by a ratio of nearly 3 : 1 , after just 24 hours on sale . However , Sam Smith 's In the Lonely Hour pushed ahead at the last minute , and Rebel Heart debuted at number two with a difference of 12 @,@ 000 copies . It became Madonna 's first studio album to miss the top spot since Bedtime Stories , which also debuted at number two in 1994 . The album sold 37 @,@ 245 copies including 416 from streaming , the lowest first week sales for a studio album by Madonna . However , she extended her lead as the biggest selling female artist of the 21st century in UK , with cumulative sales of 7 @.@ 65 million copies . The following week , the album dropped to number 7 , with sales declining by 67 @.@ 46 % to 11 @,@ 983 copies . The album was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for selling over 60 @,@ 000 copies and has sold 76 @,@ 490 copies as of June 2015 . 
 Rebel Heart debuted at the top of the German Albums Chart , becoming her twelfth chart @-@ topping record there . Madonna surpassed The Beatles and Robbie Williams as the foreign act with the most number @-@ one albums in German chart history , and equaled Herbert <unk> for third place overall , behind only Peter <unk> and James Last with 16 and 13 chart @-@ toppers respectively . In France , the album debuted at number three on the SNEP Albums chart , with three @-@ day sales of 17 @,@ 000 copies . Rebel Heart also debuted at number one on record charts in : Austria , Belgium ( Flanders ) , Croatia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Italy , the Netherlands , Portugal , Spain and Switzerland , as well as in the top ten in the rest of Europe . 
 In Australia , Rebel Heart debuted at the top of the ARIA Albums Chart with sales of 6 @,@ 962 copies , becoming Madonna 's eleventh number @-@ one album in the country and tying her with U2 as the act with the most number @-@ one albums since the establishment of ARIA in 1983 . It became Madonna 's 19th week atop the chart , ranking her at number 24 on the list of artists with most accumulated weeks at the top . The album had a sharp drop the next week , selling 1 @,@ 312 copies and dropping to number 18 on the album chart . In New Zealand , it debuted at number seven on the Official New Zealand Music Chart . In Japan , Rebel Heart debuted at number eight on the Oricon Albums Chart with first @-@ week sales of 7 @,@ 548 physical units , becoming her 23rd top @-@ ten album there . It also entered the Oricon International Albums Chart at number one , staying there for a second week . In South Korea , the album gave Madonna two top @-@ ten entries simultaneously on the Gaon International Albums Chart , with the deluxe edition at number one and the standard edition at number seven . As of March 2016 , the album has sold an estimated one million copies worldwide . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 In its year end review of albums released in 2015 , Rolling Stone ranked Rebel Heart at # 45 noting : " How did it take this long for Madonna to write herself a theme song titled ' Unapologetic Bitch ' ? No apologies offered or needed — Rebel Heart was the queen 's finest album in a decade , picking up the disco @-@ stick baton of her 2005 Confessions on a Dance Floor as Madonna voyages back into the groove and reflects on where she 's been lately " . It was also listed at number six on its ranking of the 20 Best Pop Albums of 2015 . Similarly , in its year end review , Spin magazine listed the album at number 21 as Andrew Unterberger noted that : " For most artists who spent whole decades defining the mainstream , titling an album Rebel Heart would seem misguided at best , but for Madonna , it 's truer now than ever : A fifty @-@ something refusing to bend to public demands about how she should age gracefully ... is as big an act of defiance as you can stage in contemporary pop music " . AllMusic listed Rebel Heart as one of their Favorite Pop Albums of 2015 , describing it as : " Bold , messy , and life @-@ affirming record that finds Madonna simultaneously looking forward and back " . 
 For its year end tabulation , Digital Spy listed Rebel Heart at number 10 on the list of Top 25 Albums of 2015 with Lewis Corner noting that the tracks ranged from : " brilliant , dancehall groove to more reflective and somber pop ballads " . He added that : " At this stage in her career , if Madonna doesn 't have ' pop chameleon ' on her LinkedIn profile ... then Rebel Heart alone is enough to endorse that title " . He listed " Devil Pray " as a standout track . Associated Press music editor Mesfin Fekadu ranked the album at number 5 , describing the album as a " contemporary classic that puts albums from other female artists half [ Madonna ] ' s age to shame " . Fekadu criticized radio for not playing the songs from the album , listing " Bitch I 'm Madonna " and " Joan of Arc " as highlights . Billboard listed the Deluxe edition album cover at number 15 in their ranking of the Best Album Covers of 2015 . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from Madonna 's official website . 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ [ b ] signifies an additional producer 
 ^ [ c ] signifies a remixer 
 ^ [ d ] signifies personnel listed with BMI as songwriter on the song . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Performers 
 Musicians 
 Technical personnel 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Madonna 's official website . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = George Pickingill = 
 George Pickingill ( c . 1816 – 10 April 1909 ) was an English farm labourer who lived and worked in the village of Canewdon in the eastern English county of Essex . Widely considered to be a cunning man , or vocational folk magician , he reportedly employed magical means to offer cures for ailments and to locate lost property , although was also alleged to have threatened to place curses on people . 
 Born into a rural working @-@ class family , Pickingill grew up in Hockley , Essex and was baptised into the Church of England . Working as a farm labourer , in 1856 he married Sarah Ann Bateman in Gravesend , Kent . The couple moved back to Essex , settled in Canewdon and had four children . Pickingill 's wife died in 1887 , and in later life he attracted limited press attention for his claim to be one of the oldest men in England . These claims also appeared in his obituaries , although were later shown to be incorrect . 
 Pickingill was brought to wider public attention in the early 1960s by the folklorist Eric Maple . As part of his research into beliefs regarding folk magic and witchcraft in nineteenth @-@ century Essex , Maple had interviewed a number of Canewdon residents and collected their stories about Pickingill and his reputation as a cunning man . According to their accounts , Pickingill attracted visitors from around Essex seeking his magical help , for which he did not charge . They attributed to him the power to control animals , to command imps to do his bidding , and to wield power over either six or nine malevolent witches who lived in Canewdon . It was also claimed that he was able to coerce assistance and beer from local residents by threatening to place a curse upon them or their belongings . Although it has been suggested that local people were inventing claims to please Maple , many of which were based on older tales regarding the Essex cunning man James Murrell , subsequent research by historian Ronald Hutton has confirmed aspects of the folklorist 's original accounts . 
 In the 1970s , the occultist E.W. " Bill " Liddell began publicising claims that secretive hereditary witch families had informed him that Pickingill was not simply a rural cunning man but that he was a major figure in the nineteenth @-@ century esoteric community . According to Liddell 's account — which has failed to receive any scholarly support — Pickingill was a member of a hereditary witch @-@ cult , leading a Canewdon coven and forming nine other covens across southern England . Liddell claimed that Pickingill reformed the established English witch @-@ cult by introducing new concepts from French and Danish witchcraft and from Classical sources , and that in doing so , Pickingill created the structure from which Gardnerian Wicca emerged in the 1950s . Prominent Wiccans Doreen Valiente and Lois Bourne have expressed criticism of his claims , which have also been rejected as spurious by such scholars of Pagan studies and magical history as Maple , Hutton , Owen Davies , and Aidan A. Kelly . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Life and family = = = 
 George Pickingill was the son of Charles Pickingill , a labourer and blacksmith , and Susannah <unk> , a woman who also went by the name of Hannah Cudmore ; the couple had married on 17 September 1813 . Although he had no known birth record , according to parish records , George Pickingill was baptised on 26 May 1816 at the church in Hockley . The year of Pickingill 's birth is however in question , as he made differing claims in different censuses ; in the 1851 census , he claimed to be 26 , meaning that his birth would have occurred circa 1825 , while in the 1861 census , he claimed to be 46 , which would have placed his birth <unk> By the time of the 1901 census , he was claiming to be 95 , moving his birth to <unk> ; it has been suggested that he made himself appear older to ease the process of collecting parish assistance from the church . Throughout his life , Pickingill would also use a variety of different spellings of his surname on official records , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 It is apparent from census data that Pickingill lived with his parents from 1816 until the 1830s , although it is not stated where he was living at the time of the 1841 census . In 1851 , he was recorded as lodging in the household of David Clemens in Little <unk> , Essex , and describing himself as a farm labourer by profession . On 18 May 1856 he married Sarah Ann Bateman at St George 's Church , an Anglican church in Gravesend , Kent . In that record , both Pickingill and Bateman described themselves as residing in Gravesend , and Pickingill declared that he was working as a labourer ; no profession was listed for Bateman . Bateman was born <unk> in Tillingham , Essex , as the daughter of Joseph Bateman and his wife Mary Ann <unk> ; throughout married life , she identified as " Mary Ann Pickingill " and appeared as " Sarah Ann <unk> " in her burial record . 
 On 22 June 1858 the couple 's daughter , Martha Ann , was born in Hawkwell , Essex . By 1861 they had moved to Eastwood , Essex , where they were recorded in that year 's census . Here , Pickingill described himself as an agricultural labourer . That same year , their son Charles Frederick was born . The following year , Pickingill 's wife was caught stealing two pecks of potatoes , and subsequently fined ten shillings . In 1863 , a second daughter , named Mary Ann , was born to the couple . 
 At some point in the coming four years , the Pickingill family moved to Canewdon , where another son , George , was born in 1876 . The couple and their four children were then recorded in the 1871 census , where Pickingill was again listed as working as an agricultural labourer . In the 1881 census , the couple were recorded as living with two of their children , Mary Ann and George , and Pickingill was again identifying as a labourer . On 17 August 1887 , a homeless man named James Taylor stole a jacket and pair of leather gloves from Pickingill . Taylor was arrested and brought to trial in Rochford on 24 August ; in October , he pleaded guilty to the theft of the jacket , although not to those of the other items . He was sentenced to six months imprisonment with hard labour . 
 On 13 September 1887 Pickingill 's wife died at the age of 63 in Canewdon ; her death was attributed to a disease of the liver by the certifying doctor . She was buried at Canewdon 's St. Nicholas Church on 17 September . According to the 1891 census , Pickingill was still employed as an agricultural labourer , and was living in Canewdon with his married daughter Marry Ann and his granddaughter , Emily Wood . Records show that he was living in a rented cottage with an adjacent garden , and that in July 1899 the owner sold the property at auction . By 1901 he was listed as living on parish relief , with his two sons back living with him . 
 By this time , Pickingill was increasingly inflating his age , eventually claiming that he was 105 years old . This attracted attention from other areas , including London , and in September 1908 a journalist visited Canewdon ; he arrived by automobile , the first that Pickingill had ever seen , and allowed the old man to ride in it . The journalist subsequently wrote an article about the alleged <unk> , in which he claimed that his name was " Frederick <unk> " ; it is possible that Pickingill gave the false name so that no one would be able to look up the parish records and discover his real age . Maple described Pickingill as " a tall , unkempt man , solitary and uncommunicative . He had very long finger @-@ nails , and kept his money in a purse of sacking " . He also noted that he had worked as a farm labourer and that he was a widower with two sons . 
 = = = Magical activities = = = 
 The first printed account of Pickingill that described him as a cunning man appeared fifty years after his death . This was provided by the <unk> Eric Maple , who was making a systematic study of nineteenth @-@ century traditions regarding witchcraft and magic in south @-@ eastern Essex , and who examined the case of Canewdon in the winter of 1959 – 60 . He had begun his enquiries by meeting with a number of elderly local residents at the home of the schoolmistress , from whom he gained a variety of tales pertaining to magical practices in the village . His initial findings were published in 1960 in the scholarly journal Folklore , produced by The Folklore Society . He subsequently produced a sensationalist popular history of witchcraft , The Dark World of Witches ( 1962 ) , in which he repeated many of the claims regarding Pickingill . In this work , he erroneously described south @-@ eastern Essex as the last bastion of English witchcraft beliefs , and ignored scholarly conventions in relating his information , resulting in a critical reception from folklorists ; the book nevertheless was popular and sold well . 
 Maple noted that , unusually — given his role as a cunning man — Pickingill did not charge for his services , but did receive some money from visitors , and that his recorded roles included restoring lost property and curing minor ailments , both of which were common practices amongst British cunning folk . According to one account , he cured a woman of rheumatism by transferring the ailment to her father . Maple wrote that Pickingill was known to use cursing and malevolent magic on occasion , something that the folklorist contrasted with the activities of other contemporary cunning folk that he had studied , such as James Murrell . At harvest time , Maple recorded , Pickingill was known to wander around the field threatening to bewitch farm machinery , with many farmers thus offering him beer so that he would leave them alone . He was also recorded as coercing local people to obtain water for him from the village pump by threatening to set upon them white mice , a rodent which in local folklore was associated with misfortune . Another tale that Maple recorded also associated Pickingill with white mice ; according to this , a visitor travelled to the cunning man 's cottage only to find him lying in bed , with the mice suckling from his nipples . 
 Pickingill was also known for his purported ability to control animals , namely horses , and it was believed that when he struck a hedgerow with his stick , game animals would run out that could then be caught , killed and eaten . It was also rumoured that he could do things faster than ordinary human beings , and that he could do an hour 's job in only a few minutes , with some believing that he got his imps — his familiar spirits — to do the job for him . Maple also noted that people who visited his cottage reported seeing ornaments and furniture dancing around the room of their own accord ; the folklorist believed that this story had originated in a Dutch folkloric tradition that may have been imported to Essex when many Dutch migrants settled there in the seventeenth century . 
 According to Maple , Pickingill was sufficiently well known in Essex as an accomplished cunning man that people came to visit him from outside Canewdon in search of magical aid , sometimes " from great distances " , including men from the Essex village of <unk> , who sought his advice in a wage dispute . Meanwhile , as Maple noted , Canewdon had developed a reputation associating it with witchcraft and magic by the end of the nineteenth century , when it was often thought of as " The Witch Country " and avoided by many wagoners who feared having their vehicles bewitched . This was possibly due to its relative isolation from neighbouring settlements , as it was surrounded by marshland , and the insular nature of its community . Maple recorded that in this period there was a rumour that there were either six or nine elderly women living in Canewdon who were malevolent witches and used their magic to harm others . It was believed that whilst they were not known to one another , they all owed their allegiance to a singular wizard or master of witches , and there was a rumour in the local community that Pickingill himself was this figure . It was claimed that as " Master of Witches " , Pickingill simply had to whistle in order for these nine witches to stand by their front doors and reveal their identities , or that alternately he could " will them " to dance for him in the local churchyard . 
 Subsequent researchers also travelled to Canewdon to meet with Maple 's informants and confirm his account for themselves . In April 1967 Ronald Hutton visited the village where he met with elderly resident Lillian Garner , who had been one of Maple 's informants . He also found an informant that Maple had not encountered , an old man named Jack Taylor , then living in a retirement home . Taylor claimed that as a young man he knew Pickingill , and that the latter had the power of horse @-@ whispering — the magical ability to command horses to do his bidding . On the whole , Hutton found that the account of Pickingill among the local people to whom he spoke was entirely consistent with that provided by Maple . In 1977 Hutton was followed by the Gardnerian Wiccan initiate Michael Howard , who met with Garner , then eighty @-@ seven years old . On this occasion , she recalled Pickingill being photographed with the first car to arrive in the village , and also gave Howard the original copy of a photograph of him that was in her possession . She then added the information — which she had not given to Maple or Hutton — that her own mother had talked of Pickingill leading a local coven , and that he received " many visitors " from " a long way away " who sought his magical knowledge . 
 A different account was provided by Charles Lefebvre , an American author of the sensationalist Witness to Witchcraft ( 1970 ) . Here , his use of sources was unclear , although he asserted that Pickingill had had an ageless body , was a relative of Roma people , was the last survivor of an old witch family , held Black Masses and orgies in the church yard , and was visited by " black magicians " from across Europe . According to Lefebvre , Pickingill was finally killed when confronted by the sign of the cross . Hutton later described these as " fantasies " which served to support Lefebvre 's view that witchcraft should be criminalised . 
 However , claims have since been made that Pickingill was not a cunning man or involved in folk magic at all . Local Canewdon historian Sylvia Webster expressed her view to Howard that tales regarding Pickingill 's magical practices had been invented by the locals of Canewdon to impress Maple . Supporting this position , she highlighted that there was no evidence to suggest that Pickingill was a cunning man prior to Maple 's publications . Similarly , Richard Ward argued that the contemporary obituaries and interviews conducted with Pickingill had shown no evidence of any magical activities , when such might have been expected . Ward suggested that many of the stories regarding Pickingill 's magical activities were adapted from those of a genuine Essex cunning man , James Murrell . Hutton responded critically to Ward 's claims , highlighting his own investigations into the local folklore and his interview with Taylor to express the view that there " seems little doubt " that Pickingill was a cunning man , although " there are still questions over what sort of one he was " . At the same time , Hutton also accepted the possibility that some of the legends associated with Murrell had come to be associated with Pickingill , although stated that this seemed to be " incapable of solid proof " . In his counter @-@ response to Hutton , Ward accepting that Pickingill could have been associated with " some apparent supernatural control or knowledge of horses " as Taylor had claimed , but that this did not automatically make him a cunning man , for which there remained no contemporary historical evidence . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 According to Maple 's account , in the last few weeks of Pickingill 's life , when he had become very ill , the local people moved him to the infirmary against his will , where he declared that at his funeral there would be one more demonstration of his magical powers . Many locals interpreted this as coming true when as the hearse carrying his coffin drew up to the churchyard , the horses stepped out of their harness shafts . His body was subsequently buried in the church 's graveyard , whilst his abandoned house gradually became dilapidated before falling down . 
 According to his death certificate , " George <unk> " died on 10 April 1909 at the age of 103 , and his cause of death was " senile decay " and " cardiac failure " . He was buried at Canewdon 's St Nicholas Church on 14 April ; although his stated age of 103 was recorded , the vicar added a note asserting that this was erroneous , for in reality Pickingill was " born at Hockley 1816 [ and ] was only in his 93rd year " . 
 Pickingill 's death attracted national press attention . It was claimed in both the Essex Newsman and The Times that he was " believed to be the oldest man in England " ; these publications recorded his age as 106 . The story was also picked up by New Zealand newspaper The Star , in which he was described as " the oldest man in England " . 
 According to Maple , Pickingill left " a legacy of myth which is curiously alien to the general run of witch traditions . In all the stories told of Pickingill there is a subtle undercurrent of horror which one finds hard to pinpoint . Possibly it arises from the fact that many of those who recount the tales actually knew the man and experienced just such a quiet terror when he passed them in the village street . " 
 = = Bill Liddell 's claims = = 
 In 1974 , a writer began sending articles to Pagan newsletter The Wiccan , then edited by the Gardnerian Wiccan John Score , articulating an alternative account of Pickingill 's life and relation to the British occult movement . First identifying himself only as " a well wisher " , he later began using the pseudonym Lugh , named for the Irish mythological figure . In 1977 , Lugh ceased sending the articles to The Wiccan and instead began publishing them in a rival British magazine , The Cauldron , edited by Michael Howard ; he claimed to have switched outlets because The Wiccan had been too dominated by Gardnerian perspectives . Lugh later revealed his name to be E.W. " Bill " Liddell , describing himself as an Englishman born in Essex . He added that circa 1960 he had moved to Auckland , New Zealand , before later relocating to Australia , from where he wrote his articles . In a 1984 letter he noted that he was not born with the surname of Liddell but had instead adopted it later in life . Claiming that Pickingill had been the first @-@ cousin of his paternal great @-@ great grandfather , Liddell asserted that he had been initiated into his family 's hereditary form of witchcraft in 1950 , and that he had subsequently been initiated into both the Gardnerian and Alexandrian traditions of Wicca . His partner , Sylvia Tatham , had been heavily involved in the development of the Alexandrian tradition in the early 1960s , having been one of those present when its founder , Alex Sanders , was initiated into the Gardnerian tradition . In 1982 , Wiccan Publications collected together and published these articles as two pamphlets : Old George Pickingill and the Roots of Modern Witchcraft and Medieval Witchcraft and the Freemasons . The articles were republished in one single volume in 1994 as The Pickingill Papers , edited by Liddell and Howard . 
 Liddell 's claims regarding Pickingill are self @-@ contradictory . Liddell explained this by stating that the information contained in his articles had been passed on to him by three separate sources , all of which had decided to use him as a mouthpiece for their own claims . The first were the members of a hereditary tradition of Pagan witchcraft , while the second were the practitioners of a similar yet separate tradition of Pagan witchcraft which , Liddell alleged , had been greatly influenced by Pickingill in the nineteenth century . The third source cited by Liddell was his own experiences gained from being born into a witchcraft family and subsequently being initiated into both of the aforementioned traditions and a separate " cunning lodge " . He claimed that most of the information that he was publishing came from " Elders " , or older members , involved in the first two of these traditions , and that as such he could not vouch for its accuracy , going so far as to state that he doubted the veracity of much of it . 
 Noting that these Elders themselves had very different opinions on Gardnerian Wicca , he also stated that the Elders ceased providing him with new information in the early 1980s . He stated that these various Elders had chosen him to disseminate the information because he had been involved in both hereditary witchcraft and Gardnerian Wicca and because he was based in New Zealand , thereby making it hard for anyone to trace their identities . Despite Liddell claiming that the material he was putting forward came from various sources , the historian Ronald Hutton noted that it was all presented in a " single , dogmatic , authorial voice " , with no indication of where the different pieces of information came from . Hutton also asserted that Liddell 's changing claims would be entirely consistent with a single individual making up stories and changing them as they went along . 
 = = = Liddell 's account = = = 
 According to Liddell 's initial 1974 claims , since the eleventh century the Pickingill family had been priests of a pre @-@ Christian , pagan religion devoted to the worship of the Horned God . In this , his claims fitted within the historical framework of the discredited witch @-@ cult hypothesis as propagated in the works of Margaret Murray . Later he added that the " medieval witch cult " was influenced by the " tenets " of the Iron Age druids , in particular their knowledge of ley lines which were marked out by the stone circles erected in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages . Conflicting with these ideas , in 1998 Liddell personally informed Hutton that the witch @-@ cult did not derive from ancient pre @-@ Christian religion but that it instead had been founded in fifteenth @-@ century France , emerging from a union between Christian heretics , cunning lodges , and a cult of Lucifer founded by Islamic Moors with the intent of undermining Christianity . 
 Liddell claimed that the Pickingill family had many links to the travelling Romani population , and that Pickingill spent many of his early years in a Romani caravan . Liddell claimed that Pickingill faced persecution as a result , and that he " set out to terrify " the locals of Canewdon in retaliation . According to Liddell , Pickingill was trained in Romani magic , and thus in later life became " the most famous gypsy <unk> in England " . Liddell also claimed that Pickingill despised Christianity and wanted to see it overthrown ; to this end he collaborated with Satanists and included Satanic elements within his ritual practices , something which horrified other members of the East Anglian witch @-@ cult . Thus , according to Liddell , Pickingill was " England 's most feared and vilified ' Satanist ' " . Elsewhere , he stressed that Pickingill was not a Satanist , but rather that he had been considered such by other witches because he practised sex magic . 
 Liddell asserted that Pickingill spent time in France , where he was initiated into a local form of the witch @-@ cult . According to this account , upon his return to Canewdon , Pickingill was invited to lead a local coven which had been operating since the mid @-@ fifteenth century — the " Seven Witches of Canewdon " — and that he continued to lead the group until disbanding it several years prior to his death . Liddell added that Pickingill proceeded to introduce many new innovations into the English witch @-@ cult by applying concepts borrowed from the Danish and French witch @-@ cults , namely the idea that the coven should be led by a woman . Liddell asserted that Pickingill then established nine covens in England , spread out in Essex , Norfolk , Hertfordshire , Sussex , and Hampshire ; he further added that two of those covens , based in Hertfordshire and Norfolk , survived into at least the 1970s . According to Liddell , Pickingill was propagating witchcraft in a reformed , female @-@ oriented form because the oncoming Age of Aquarius would be more receptive to this form of spirituality . 
 In Liddell 's account , Pickingill travelled widely and joined a variety of cunning lodges , gaining access to their grimoires and libraries . According to Liddell , from the 1850s onward Pickingill began co @-@ operating with a group of Freemasons who considered themselves to be Rosicrucians and who wanted to prove that Freemasonry and Rosicrucianism were " siblings " of the witch @-@ cult . Two of these Freemasons , Hargrave Jennings and W.J. <unk> , became pupils of Pickingill , who aided them in producing a Rosicrucian Manifesto that was used in the formation of the <unk> <unk> in 1865 . According to Liddell , Pickingill 's involvement with Freemasons also led to the foundation of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn in 1888 . Liddell also asserted that Pickingill was influenced by a coven that had been founded in the early nineteenth @-@ century by a group of Cambridge University academics led by Francis Barrett and whose rituals were based largely on Classical sources . 
 Liddell also claimed that the prominent occultist Aleister Crowley had been initiated into one of these nine covens as a young man . According to this account , Crowley had been introduced to the coven in 1899 or 1900 by his magical mentor , Allan Bennett . Liddell asserted that Crowley was subsequently ejected from the coven for his misbehaviour . As evidence for these claims , he stated that his own grandfather had been present on three occasions at which Bennett and Crowley met with Pickingill , and that he had seen a photograph in which the three figures are together . When asked to present this photograph for public scrutiny in 1977 , Liddell claimed that it was " not available " ; when independently asked again in 1983 , he asserted that it had been stolen by " interested parties " . 
 Further , Liddell stated that one of Pickingill 's covens was the New Forest coven , a Wiccan group which Gerald Gardner — the founder of Gardnerian Wicca — claimed had initiated him in 1939 . However , Liddell did later state that he was not certain whether this was true . He also asserted that Gardner later joined another of the Pickingill covens , based in Hertfordshire , through which he received " the Second Rite of the Hereditary Craft " . Liddell stressed that this group was separate from Gardner 's own Bricket Wood coven . He furthermore claimed that Gardner received the " Third Rite " from an East Anglian coven , with this three @-@ degree system of initiation influencing that in Gardnerian Wicca . As a result , he stated that the structure and rituals of Gardnerian Wicca were based on those devised by Pickingill , and that " no impartial observer could fail to see that they formed the nucleus of the rites of Wicca . " Liddell believed that while many hereditary witches despised him , Gardner represented " the spiritual heir of Pickingill " , because he had similarly reformed and propagated witchcraft for contemporary purposes . 
 = = = Pagan response = = = 
 Liddell 's claims have received a mixed response from the British Wiccan community . Score championed them in private letters to his correspondents , declaring that they proved that the Gardnerian tradition had historical origins predating Gardner . His successor as editor of The Wiccan , Leonora James , was intrigued by Liddell 's claims and investigated the original records pertaining to Pickingill 's life ; however , by the 1980s she had concluded that Liddell 's claims were spurious . In her 1978 book Witchcraft for Tomorrow , the Wiccan Doreen Valiente – who had been Gardner 's High Priestess in the Bricket Wood coven during the 1950s — stated that she had an " East Anglian source " from Essex who claimed that many of Liddell 's assertions were correct . In particular , the informant championed Liddell 's claims that Crowley had been an initiate of one of Pickingill 's covens . By the time of her 1989 book The Rebirth of Witchcraft , Valiente was more sceptical of Liddell 's claims , noting that any supporting evidence was " still sadly lacking " . 
 Another of Gardner 's High <unk> , Lois Bourne , asserted that she was " as sure as I can be " that Gardner had nothing to do with any witches from Canewdon and that if they existed in the first place , then they must have belonged to a tradition distinct from Gardnerian Wicca . Privately , the Gardnerian initiate and founder of Alexandrian Wicca , Alex Sanders , rejected the claims that Liddell made . In his 2013 biography of Valiente , Jonathan Tapsell stated that the Liddell material was " generally regarded as a hoax " , being " a spurious history at best , or a malicious prank at worst . " Hutton asserted that the only " sustained champion " of Liddell 's claims has been Michael Howard , noting that he had defended such ideas in a " limited and measured " manner . Pagan studies scholar Ethan Doyle White noted that in his history of the Traditional Witchcraft movement , Children of Cain , Howard " remains cautious and refrains from accepting [ Liddell 's claims ] outright " . Howard has maintained that he keeps an " open mind " about Liddell 's claims , noting that while no evidence has been brought forward to substantiate them , similarly he does not believe that " any real evidence " has been brought forth to disprove them . 
 Support for Liddell 's story came from Cecil Williamson , founder of the Museum of Witchcraft , who claimed to have known about Pickingill through his acquaintances with both Crowley and Gardner . However , Williamson was an unreliable source , and was known to repeatedly fabricate claims regarding past events . Another figure , known only as Colonel Lawrence , also supported Liddell 's story , asserting that his own great @-@ grandmother had studied under Pickingill and thus had been introduced to Crowley ; as with Williamson 's , however , Lawrence 's claims are unreliable , particularly as he has made the unsupported claim that his great @-@ grandmother studied witchcraft under the American folklorist Charles Leland . Also supporting Liddell 's claims was the Wiccan Ralph Harvey , who , following the publication of Liddell 's material , publicly declared that in the 1950s or 1960s he had been initiated into one of Pickingill 's Nine Covens , located in Storrington , Sussex . Following the publication of Liddell 's claims , a number of covens appeared in both the United States and Australia claiming to be practitioners of a tradition originating with Pickingill . Liddell himself has been critical of such groups , expressing his regret that the material he published led to their formation . 
 = = = Academic response = = = 
 Liddell 's claims have had a far more critical reception from scholars specialising in magic and witchcraft in British history . In 1975 , Eric Maple dismissed Lugh 's claims as preposterous . He believed that such tales had been fabricated by someone who had used his own book , The Dark World of Witches , as a basis . Maple informed the historian James W. Baker that he believed people connected to Valiente were behind the Lugh claims , although Baker disagreed , commenting that Valiente was " one of the most honest of commentators on the subject " of contemporary witchcraft , and that as a result was unlikely to be involved in such duplicity . Baker described Liddell 's account as " an extravagant hoax " , with its claims constituting " a preposterous ahistorical muddle " . 
 Historian Ronald Hutton also scrutinised Liddell 's claims , although added that he had corresponded with Liddell " at length and in detail " , over the course of which he had come to like him , noting that " he has responded to often forceful criticisms with patience , modesty , and good humour " . However , Hutton highlighted that no independent witnesses have emerged to support the existence of Liddell 's alleged informants , while no supporting documentation has appeared to back any of his many claims . Hutton deemed this particularly unusual , because were Liddell 's claims to have been accurate , much documentary evidence could be expected to exist . Focusing on Liddell 's claim that Crowley had been initiated into one of Pickingill 's covens during the 1890s , Hutton noted that there is no mention of Pickingill or a witches ' coven in either Crowley 's published work or personal diaries , and that similarly there was no mention of either in the diaries of Bennett , who was Crowley 's magical tutor during the 1890s . 
 Hutton 's assessment was shared by historian Owen Davies ; in his study of English cunning @-@ folk , he described Liddell 's stories as " seductive but entirely unsubstantiated " . Instead , he maintained that Pickingill was " a simple rural cunning @-@ man whose small world of village affairs never crossed with that of middle @-@ class occultists . He received a Christian burial and the idea that he was a pagan priest would probably make him turn in his grave . " While agreeing with Maple 's assessment that Pickingill was " one of the last practising cunning @-@ folk in the country " , Maple noted that — unlike Murrell , James Tuckett , John Wrightson , and William Brewer — Pickingill was not a " major regional figure " in the profession . 
 American Pagan studies scholar Aidan A. Kelly similarly rejected Liddell 's claims . Kelly highlighted that whereas Liddell had claimed that Gardnerian Wicca had adopted the concept of a female coven leader from French and Scandinavian witch covens , the historical evidence clearly showed that Gardner developed the concept of a coven being led by a high priestess during the late 1950s , thus disproving Liddell 's assertions . He noted that Liddell 's claim that Crowley wrote Gardner 's Book of Shadows " cannot possibly be true " because Crowley died before the Book was written . Kelly believed that either Liddell or his Elders had purposely created a " phony history " in order to hide the fact that Gardner had invented Wicca in its entirety in the early 1950s . Similarly , in a 2014 article about Pickingill in The Cauldron , Richard Ward argued that Liddell 's claims did not stand up under scrutiny , and that they had simply been made in an attempt to promote claims regarding the existence of a " pre @-@ Gardnerian tradition " of witchcraft . Liddell has specifically denied any charges that he was deliberately falsifying claims to make Gardnerian Wicca appear to have an older pedigree than it really has . 
 = The OF Tape Vol . 2 = 
 The OF Tape Vol . 2 is the debut studio album by American hip hop collective Odd Future , released March 20 , 2012 , on Odd Future Records . It serves as the sequel from their debut mixtape , The Odd Future Tape ( 2008 ) . The album features all members of the group , with lead member Tyler , The Creator and Left Brain , serving as the main producers on the project . The Super 3 and Frank Ocean also received production credits . Lyrically the album ranges from being serious to being satirical , with some tracks offering an overly absurdist take on rap . 
 Odd Future toured in support of the album , and four singles were released from it , all of which received music videos . The album peaked at number 5 on the US Billboard 200 and received mostly positive reviews from critics , receiving a score of 71 % on review website Metacritic . Critics generally praised the presence of Tyler and Ocean , the vintage style of production and album closer , " Oldie " . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Los Angeles hip hop collective Odd Future ; who they were known for their frequent collaborations , releasing mixtapes together in the past , such as Radical and the original Odd Future Tape . In January 2012 , the group confirmed that they were to release their first commercially released album , titled the The OF Tape Vol . 2 . In 2012 , the album was to feature production and appearances by only Odd Future members , and would be promoted with a North American tour . 
 The album was quickly recorded in Los Angeles over the course of two weeks . In an interview with The Guardian , when asked about the expectations of the album , Tyler replied " I don 't know . I have my doubts . Everybody 's going on it and I just think , fuck , everybody might hate this shit . Everybody might go : ' What the fuck is this ? We wanted this , we wanted that . ' There we go . We made an album we wanted to make . If everybody hates it , OK . We have an album we like . " The track " Forest Green " was released over a year before the release of the album but was featured on the project with remastered production . 
 = = Content = = 
 The album opener “ Hi ” , is a song where group member L @-@ Boy insults each “ dusty ass motherfucker ” on the album , serving as a comical hip hop skit . " Bitches " is performed by Hodgy and Domo , with production by Left Brain . The track is a " boastful " scorcher , built from New Age synthesizers and hammering snare drums . The two rappers trade off @-@ kilter verses at each other , with Hodgy delivering his verses with a melodic flow . Hodgy " turns up the aggression " on " NY ( Ned Flander ) " , a track similar to the aesthetic of Tyler 's album Goblin . Critics noted the song 's " stark " , " unnerving " and repetitive piano line that serves as the platform for Tyler and Hodgy 's verses . Nathan Rabin wrote that all the songs up to " NY ( Ned Flander ) " are rap songs , but the one that follows , " Ya Know " , is not , as it is more reminiscent of the band N.E.R.D. with its sonic shifts and " hazy " atmosphere . The track is performed by Matt Martians and Syd the Kyd of psych @-@ soul act The Internet , with jazz influences . 
 Mike G is the only performer on " Forest Green " , which reviewers described as a lurching banger with a creepy , hypnotic beat . " Lean " is a parody song in the style of Waka Flocka Flame , an absurdist take on rap music with lines like “ If I was a dinosaur , I ’ d be a <unk> ” . Syd the Kyd makes another singing appearance on " Analog 2 " . The song features Ocean singing a chorus over a production of what writers thought of as atmospheric , with a sultry swirl of synths , and a segue with 12 seconds of silence . Tyler raps with relative innocence about hanging out with his girlfriend , and Syd the Kid muses about moonlight kisses and rooftop sexual encounters . Hodgy is the main contributor to " 50 " , a bass @-@ driven , comical song that takes cues from the comedy troupe The Lonely Island . " 50 " demonstrates both an aggressive and comical side to the album , with verses like " I 'll fuck your grandmother up . " 
 Hodgy reappears on " Snow White " , featuring more singing from Ocean . Hodgy Beats raps at a very fast rate , centered on an intense beat . The 10th track is " <unk> " , where Tyler boasts about taking “ three pills of <unk> ” to cure his erectile dysfunction , in a flow similar to rapper Eminem . The production was handled by Left Brain , with elements of electronic music , sounding like " something out of a Donkey Kong Country level . " <unk> and Taco contemplate the issues of having not having an ideal woman on " Real Bitch " . The track was written to be purposely offensive , with the two rappers trading verses on what reviewers described as an atmospheric , " slow @-@ jam " beat . " P " features a bass @-@ driven beat influence by post @-@ grunge , with Tyler rapping in the vein of the Wu @-@ Tang Clan . The song features casual references to Jerry Sandusky and Casey Anthony , and Tyler 's description of his flow being as " retarded as the sound of deaf people arguing . " 
 " White " features Ocean alone , and is similar to a song from his album Channel Orange with the same name . The song is a vast departure from the rest of the album , featuring Ocean gently singing in the style of Stevie Wonder . Ocean speaks a contemplative poem about the transitory mystery of love , with the song serving as an intermission from the more aggressive style of the album . The song is followed by " <unk> " , with heavy synths played over Left Brain 's verses about horror @-@ related topics . Taco and Jasper Dolphin appear on the comical track " We Got Bitches " , another absurdist parody composition . The song has a chaotic beat , taking influence from punk rock and rave music . <unk> rapping is prominent on the track , with the crew screaming the chorus " We got bitches , we got diamonds , we got cars , we got jacuzzis , " adding " and yo ’ bitch be on my dick ! " The album closer is " Oldie " , where Earl Sweatshirt makes his first rapping appearance in over a year . The song is a 10 @-@ minute track featuring , in order of appearance on the song , Taco , Tyler , Hodgy Beats , Left Brain , Mike G , Domo Genesis , Frank Ocean , Jasper Dolphin and Earl Sweatshirt , with Tyler closing the song with another verse . The song features the collective 's blending of eccentricity and rebellion , and each rapper taking a verse to express their own topics of interest lyrically . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 On February 20 , 2012 , the music video for single " <unk> " premiered online . The video was directed by Tyler , and according to Pitchfork Media 's Jordan Sargent . The video can be summarized as " Hodgy Beats shoots lasers from his crotch turning girls into cats , while Domo Genesis smacks a black girl in the face , turning her into an Asian , and Tyler as a coke @-@ snorting centaur . " 
 The music video for " NY ( Ned Flander ) " , also directed by Tyler , was premiered on March 5 . The video contained scenes of Hodgy as a bald , deadbeat dad preoccupied with softcore porn , and Tyler 's head on a baby 's body . 
 The music video for " Oldie " , directed by Lance Bangs , was released on March 20 . The video was shot during at a Terry Richardson 's photo shoot featuring the entire group , the collective decided to shoot an impromptu video , lip @-@ syncing their verses . The rappers interrupt each other , while laughing and smile for the majority of the video . 
 " Sam ( Is Dead ) " was promoted as a short film , directed by Tyler . The short film is a war @-@ themed comedic narrative , featuring Sweatshirt , Tyler , L @-@ Boy , and even Lee Spielman of Odd Future Records 's Trash Talk . Odd Future have performed several of the songs from the album on their tours . During Ocean 's 2012 setlist at the Coachella Music Festival , Tyler joined Ocean on stage for a performance of " Analog 2 " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial response = = = 
 In the United States , the album debuted at number 5 on the Billboard 200 with first @-@ week sales of 40 @,@ 000 copies . As of May 2012 , the album has sold 71 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The album topped the US Billboard Top Rap Albums chart , the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart , and the Top Independent Albums chart . It also charted within the top 40 in Australia , Canada , Denmark and the UK . The song " Oldie " appeared at position 23 on the Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles chart . 
