 = = = Development = = = 
 Neal Purvis and Robert Wade wrote a draft of a remake of the 1969 British crime comedy The Italian Job which was rejected by Paramount . Screenwriting team Donna and Wayne Powers were subsequently commissioned to write a remake . The duo viewed the original film , which neither had seen before , only once " because [ they ] wanted to get a sense of what it was about " in regards to its tone . Over the course of two years and through 18 drafts , they developed a screenplay which was described by director F. Gary Gray as " inspired by the original . " Gray , Powers and Powers , and executive producer James Dyer identified the most prominent similarities as the trio of Mini Coopers used by the thieves , as well as the titular heist involving the theft of gold bullion . Some sequences of the film were storyboarded and previsualized by Gray before production began . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Gray had been interested in working with Wahlberg since seeing his performance in Boogie Nights ( 1997 ) . After reading the script for The Italian Job , Gray contacted Wahlberg , who " fell in love with it " after reading it himself . Green was also attracted to the project because of the script . Theron was Gray 's first choice for the character of Stella Bridger , and Wahlberg also recommended her for the role . She spent time with a safecracker in preparing for the role . Gray 's casting director Sheila Jaffe suggested Statham for the role of getaway driver Handsome Rob , and Gray agreed with her choice . Norton took the role of Steve Frazelli , due to a contractual obligation he had to fulfill . Wahlberg , Theron , and Statham attended special driver 's training sessions at Willow Springs International Motorsports Park for nearly a month during pre @-@ production . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Gray and cinematographer Wally Pfister worked together to develop a visual style for the film before production began . They viewed car commercials and magazine photographs , as well as chase sequences from The French Connection ( 1971 ) , Ronin ( 1998 ) , and The Bourne Identity ( 2002 ) as visual references . Pfister wanted " dark textures and undertones and strong contrast " ; he collaborated with production designer Charlie Wood on the color palette , and the two would confer with Gray on their ideas . Paramount preferred that The Italian Job not be shot in the anamorphic format , despite Pfister 's wishes to do so . Gray wanted a widescreen aspect ratio , so they chose to shoot the film in Super 35 for a 2 @.@ 4 : 1 aspect ratio . Once principal photography began , Gray frequently utilized dollies , as well as Steadicams and a <unk> , to keep the cameras almost constantly moving . 
 Most of The Italian Job was shot on location , at sites Pfister scouted over 12 weeks during pre @-@ production , but some scenes were filmed on sets . The Venice building where the film 's opening heist sequence takes place , the van from which the thieves survey Steve Frazelli 's mansion , a hotel room , and the <unk> Red Line subway tunnel were sets constructed at Downey Studios in California . For the scene in which an armored truck falls through Hollywood Boulevard and into the subway tunnel below , Pfister set up seven cameras to capture the vehicle 's ~ 30 foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) descent . Three hundred cars were used to simulate the traffic jam at the intersection of Hollywood and Highland , which was controlled by the production crew for a week . Three of the 32 custom @-@ built Mini Coopers used during principal photography were fitted with electric motors since combustion engines were not allowed in the subway tunnels , where some scenes were shot . Other Mini Coopers were modified to allow for camera placement on and inside the vehicles . The director remarked that " [ the Mini Coopers are ] part of the cast . " 
 Gray wanted the film to be as realistic as possible ; accordingly , the actors did most of their own stunts , and computer @-@ generated imagery was used very sparingly . The second unit , under director Alexander Witt and cinematographer Josh Bleibtreu , filmed establishing shots , the Venice canal chase sequence , and the Los Angeles chase sequence over a period of 40 days . Filming on location posed some challenges . The opening heist sequence in Venice , Italy , was strictly monitored by the local authorities , due to the high speeds the boats were driven at . The frigid temperatures at Passo Fedaia in the Italian Alps created problems during production : " The guns would jam , and if you could imagine not being able to walk 40 feet with a bottle of water without it freezing , those are the conditions we had to work in , " Gray remarked . Pedestrians had to be allowed to use the sidewalks of Hollywood Boulevard between takes . Also , scenes which took place on freeways and city streets were only filmed on weekends . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box @-@ office performance = = = 
 The Italian Job premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival on May 11 , 2003 , and was theatrically released in the United States on May 30 , 2003 . In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 19 @,@ 457 @,@ 944 , ranking at # 3 . Paramount re @-@ released the film on August 29 , and by the time its theatrical release closed in November 2003 , the film had grossed $ 106 @,@ 128 @,@ 601 in the United States and Canada and $ 69 @,@ 941 @,@ 570 overseas — $ 176 @,@ 070 @,@ 171 worldwide . It was the highest @-@ grossing film produced by Paramount in 2003 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Based on 177 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , The Italian Job has an overall approval rating of 73 % , with a weighted average score of 6 @.@ 4 / 10 . By comparison , Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews from mainstream critics , calculated an average score of 68 out of 100 from the 37 reviews it collected , indicating " generally favorable reviews . " 
 Stephanie Zacharek , writing for Salon.com , liked the reinvention of the plot and the style and execution of the action sequences , specifically those involving the trio of Mini Coopers , which she wrote were the stars of the film . BBC reviewer Stella Papamichael gave The Italian Job 4 stars out of 5 , and wrote that the " revenge plot adds wallop lacking in the original " . Los Angeles Times reviewer Kevin Thomas praised the opening Venice heist sequence and the characterization of each of the thieves , but felt that the Los Angeles heist sequence was " arguably stretched out a little too long " . Roger Ebert gave the film 3 stars out of 4 , writing that the film was " two hours of mindless escapism on a relatively skilled professional level . " Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle concurred , describing The Italian Job as pure but smart entertainment " plotted and executed with invention and humor " . Reviewer James Berardinelli also gave the film 3 stars out of 4 , and said that Gray had discovered the right recipe to do a heist movie : " keep things moving , develop a nice rapport between the leads , toss in the occasional surprise , and top with a sprinkling of panache . " Variety 's Robert Koehler compared The Italian Job to The Score ( 2001 ) , another " finely tuned heist pic " which also featured Edward Norton in a similar role . 
 David Denby , writing for The New Yorker , praised Norton 's performance , as well as those of Seth Green and Mos Def , and the lack of digital effects in the action sequences . Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B − grade , comparing it positively to the 2000 remake of Gone in 60 Seconds , as well as the 2001 remake of Ocean 's Eleven . New York Daily News reviewer Jack Mathews gave The Italian Job 2 @.@ 5 stars out of 4 , writing that the action sequences and plot twists were a " vast improvement " from the original , and that the Los Angeles heist sequence was " clever and preposterous " . Mike Clark of USA Today also questioned the probability of the Los Angeles heist sequence and wrote that the film was " a lazy and in @-@ name @-@ only remake " , giving it 2 stars out of 4 . Peter Travers , writing for Rolling Stone , gave The Italian Job 1 star out of 4 , describing the film as " a tricked @-@ out remake of a heist flick that was already flat and formulaic in 1969 . " Travers enjoyed the comic relief in Green 's and Def 's characters , and added that Norton 's was " [ t ] he most perversely magnetic performance " outside of the Mini Coopers , but felt that there was a lack of logic in the film . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Italian Job was released on DVD by Paramount Home Entertainment October 7 , 2003 , and includes five bonus features on different aspects of the film 's production , in addition to six deleted scenes . It was released on HD DVD August 8 , 2006 and on Blu @-@ ray Disc October 24 , 2006 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 F. Gary Gray won a Film Life Movie Award for Best Director at the 2004 American Black Film Festival . Clay Cullen , Michael <unk> , Jean Paul Ruggiero and Mike Massa won an award for Best Specialty Stunt at the 2004 Taurus World Stunt Awards for the boat chase through the canals of Venice . The Italian Job was nominated for the 2003 Saturn Award for Best Action / Adventure / Thriller Film , but lost to Kill Bill . In April 2009 , IGN named the film 's Los Angeles chase sequence one of the top 10 car chases of the 21st Century . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Criminologist Nicole Rafter saw The Italian Job as part of a revival of the heist film around the start of the 21st century , along with The Thomas Crown Affair ( 1999 ) and Ocean 's Eleven ( 2001 ) , both of which were also remakes of 1960s heist films . In describing his theory of a " team film " genre , film scholar Dr. Jeremy Strong writes that The Italian Job could be categorized as such , along with The Magnificent Seven ( 1960 ) , The Great Escape ( 1963 ) , The Dirty Dozen ( 1967 ) , and more recently The Usual Suspects ( 1995 ) and Mission : Impossible ( 1996 ) . He states that 
 a team film involves a group working towards a particular objective . However , goal @-@ orientation is a widely shared plot attribute of many texts and genres and it is also the case that the overwhelming majority of films involve a plurality of interacting characters . An element that distinguishes the team film then is that a heightened significance is afforded to the group as the means by which a given objective is attempted . [ ... ] From film to film there is variation in the extent to which particular central characters may determine events and take up screen time but team films are recognizable by their insistence upon the relationship between group and goal . 
 Strong additionally makes a direct comparison between The Italian Job and Mission : Impossible , citing the plot device of " a first task that elucidates the roles and skills of team members but which is sabotaged by betrayal , necessitating a re @-@ constitution of the team . " 
 The use of BMW 's then @-@ new line of retro @-@ styled Minis in the film was mentioned by critics and business analysts alike as a prime example of modern product placement , or more specifically " brand integration " . Film critic Joe Morgenstern called The Italian Job " the best car commercial ever " . Zacharek and Mathews both noted the cars ' prominence in their reviews of the film , also writing that their presence served as a connection to the 1969 film upon which it was based . BusinessWeek reported in April 2004 that sales of the Mini in 2003 — the year in which The Italian Job was theatrically released — had increased 22 percent over the previous year . 
 = = Possible sequel = = 
 A sequel to The Italian Job , tentatively titled The Brazilian Job , was in development by the summer of 2004 , but has since faced multiple delays . Principal photography was initially slated to begin in March 2005 , with a projected release date in November or December 2005 . However , the script was never finalized , and the release date was pushed back to sometime in 2006 , and later summer 2007 . 
 Writer David Twohy approached Paramount Pictures with an original screenplay entitled The Wrecking Crew , and though the studio reportedly liked the idea , they thought it would work better as a sequel to The Italian Job . Gray was slated to return as director , as well as most , if not all , of the original cast . At least two drafts of the script had been written by August 2007 , but the project had not been greenlit . 
 In March 2008 , in an interview , Jason Statham said that " somebody should just erase it from IMDb .... and put it back on there when it 's fully due and ready . [ ... ] It 's one of those things that 's just sitting around . " Producer Donald De Line revealed in June that a script for The Brazilian Job had been developed and budgeted , but " a lot of things were happening with various management changes and it got tabled . " Describing its story , he said it " starts in Brazil , the set up is in Rio and the picture moves to Belgium where there ’ s something involving diamonds . " However , Green stated that September that the sequel was unlikely in the near future . 
 On March 9 , 2009 , De Line said that " [ we ] have a version at Paramount that we 're talking very serious about " , additionally mentioning that the cast was interested in the project . Neal Purvis and Robert Wade had been working on a draft of the sequel that year . The Daily Record reported in September that Theron was signed up for the film . That October , Gray said that he enjoyed making The Italian Job and hoped that he would still be interested in directing the sequel if the script became finalized and mentioned that it would be dependent upon scheduling . 
 In January 2010 , Twohy was quoted in an interview as saying " The Brazilian Job probably isn 't happening . I wrote it years ago , and they just keep rolling it over on IMDb . Paramount — what can I say ? " When asked about the sequel that June , Green said " The Brazilian Job doesn 't exist actually " and called it a " wonderful myth of IMDb . " However , the next month , Mark Wahlberg said that sequel production was " active " again . 
 = Black hole = 
 A black hole is a region of spacetime exhibiting such strong gravitational effects that nothing — including particles and electromagnetic radiation such as light — can escape from inside it . The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass can deform spacetime to form a black hole . The boundary of the region from which no escape is possible is called the event horizon . Although crossing the event horizon has enormous effect on the fate of the object crossing it , it appears to have no locally detectable features . In many ways a black hole acts like an ideal black body , as it reflects no light . Moreover , quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation , with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass . This temperature is on the order of billionths of a kelvin for black holes of stellar mass , making it essentially impossible to observe . 
 Objects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace . The first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole was found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916 , although its interpretation as a region of space from which nothing can escape was first published by David Finkelstein in 1958 . Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity ; it was during the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity . The discovery of neutron stars sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality . 
 Black holes of stellar mass are expected to form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle . After a black hole has formed , it can continue to grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings . By absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes , supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses ( M ☉ ) may form . There is general consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of most galaxies . 
 Despite its invisible interior , the presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light . Matter that falls onto a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by friction , forming some of the brightest objects in the universe . If there are other stars orbiting a black hole , their orbits can be used to determine the black hole 's mass and location . Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars . In this way , astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems , and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A * , at the core of our own Milky Way galaxy , contains a supermassive black hole of about 4 @.@ 3 million solar masses . 
 On 11 February 2016 , the LIGO collaboration announced the first observation of gravitational waves ; because these waves were generated from a black hole merger it was the first ever direct detection of a binary black hole merger . On 15 June 2016 , a second detection of a gravitational wave event from colliding black holes was announced . 
 = = History = = 
 The idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was first put forward by John Michell in a letter written in 1783 to Henry Cavendish of the Royal Society : 
 If the semi @-@ diameter of a sphere of the same density as the Sun were to exceed that of the Sun in the proportion of 500 to 1 , a body falling from an infinite height towards it would have acquired at its surface greater velocity than that of light , and consequently supposing light to be attracted by the same force in proportion to its vis <unk> , with other bodies , all light emitted from such a body would be made to return towards it by its own proper gravity . 
 In 1796 , mathematician Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace promoted the same idea in the first and second editions of his book Exposition du système du Monde ( it was removed from later editions ) . He justified his argument mathematically in 1799 . 
 Such " dark stars " were largely ignored in the nineteenth century , since it was not understood how a massless wave such as light could be influenced by gravity . 
 = = = General relativity = = = 
 In 1915 , Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity , having earlier shown that gravity does influence light 's motion . Only a few months later , Karl Schwarzschild found a solution to the Einstein field equations , which describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass . A few months after Schwarzschild , Johannes Droste , a student of Hendrik Lorentz , independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties . This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius , where it became singular , meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite . The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time . In 1924 , Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates ( see Eddington – Finkelstein coordinates ) , although it took until 1933 for Georges Lemaître to realize that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was an unphysical coordinate singularity . Arthur Eddington did however comment on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book , noting that Einstein 's theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because " a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the sun . Firstly , the force of gravitation would be so great that light would be unable to escape from it , the rays falling back to the star like a stone to the earth . Secondly , the red shift of the spectral lines would be so great that the spectrum would be shifted out of existence . Thirdly , the mass would produce so much curvature of the space @-@ time metric that space would close up around the star , leaving us outside ( i.e. , nowhere ) . " 
 In 1931 , Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated , using special relativity , that a non @-@ rotating body of electron @-@ degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass ( now called the Chandrasekhar limit at 1 @.@ 4 M ☉ ) has no stable solutions . His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau , who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse . They were partly correct : a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star , which is itself stable because of the Pauli exclusion principle . But in 1939 , Robert Oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above approximately 3 M ☉ ( the Tolman – Oppenheimer – Volkoff limit ) would collapse into black holes for the reasons presented by Chandrasekhar , and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes . 
 Oppenheimer and his co @-@ authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped . This is a valid point of view for external observers , but not for infalling observers . Because of this property , the collapsed stars were called " frozen stars " , because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it inside the Schwarzschild radius . 
 = = = Golden age = = = 
 In 1958 , David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon , " a perfect unidirectional membrane : causal influences can cross it in only one direction " . This did not strictly contradict Oppenheimer 's results , but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers . Finkelstein 's solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole . A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal , who was urged to publish it . 
 These results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity , which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research . This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars in 1967 , which , by 1969 , were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars . Until that time , neutron stars , like black holes , were regarded as just theoretical curiosities ; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse . 
 In this period more general black hole solutions were found . In 1963 , Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole . Two years later , Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged . Through the work of Werner Israel , Brandon Carter , and David Robinson the no @-@ hair theorem emerged , stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr – Newman metric : mass , angular momentum , and electric charge . 
 At first , it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed , and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations . This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky , Isaak <unk> , and Evgeny Lifshitz , who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions . However , in the late 1960s Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically . 
 Work by James Bardeen , Jacob Bekenstein , Carter , and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics . These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy , area to entropy , and surface gravity to temperature . The analogy was completed when Hawking , in 1974 , showed that quantum field theory predicts that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole . 
 The first use of the term " black hole " in print was by journalist Ann Ewing in her article " ' Black Holes ' in Space " , dated 18 January 1964 , which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science . John Wheeler used the term " black hole " at a lecture in 1967 , leading some to credit him with coining the phrase . After Wheeler 's use of the term , it was quickly adopted in general use . 
 = = Properties and structure = = 
 The no @-@ hair theorem states that , once it achieves a stable condition after formation , a black hole has only three independent physical properties : mass , charge , and angular momentum . Any two black holes that share the same values for these properties , or parameters , are indistinguishable according to classical ( i.e. non @-@ quantum ) mechanics . 
 These properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole . For example , a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object . Similarly , the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss 's law , the ADM mass , far away from the black hole . Likewise , the angular momentum can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field . 
 When an object falls into a black hole , any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole , and is lost to outside observers . The behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance — the membrane paradigm . This is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism , which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level , because they are time @-@ reversible . Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters , there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions : the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in . The information that is lost includes every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon , including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number . This behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox . 
 = = = Physical properties = = = 
 The simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum . These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916 . According to Birkhoff 's theorem , it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric . This means that there is no observable difference between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass . The popular notion of a black hole " sucking in everything " in its surroundings is therefore only correct near a black hole 's horizon ; far away , the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass . 
 Solutions describing more general black holes also exist . Non @-@ rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner – Nordström metric , while the Kerr metric describes a non @-@ charged rotating black hole . The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr – Newman metric , which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum . 
 While the mass of a black hole can take any positive value , the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass . In Planck units , the total electric charge Q and the total angular momentum J are expected to satisfy 
 <formula> 
 for a black hole of mass M. Black holes satisfying this inequality are called extremal . Solutions of Einstein 's equations that violate this inequality exist , but they do not possess an event horizon . These solutions have so @-@ called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside , and hence are deemed unphysical . The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities , when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter . This is supported by numerical simulations . 
 Due to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force , black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star . Rotation , however , is expected to be a common feature of compact objects . The black @-@ hole candidate binary X @-@ ray source GRS 1915 + 105 appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value . 
 Black holes are commonly classified according to their mass , independent of angular momentum J or electric charge Q. The size of a black hole , as determined by the radius of the event horizon , or Schwarzschild radius , is roughly proportional to the mass M through 
 <formula> 
 where <unk> is the Schwarzschild radius and MSun is the mass of the Sun . This relation is exact only for black holes with zero charge and angular momentum ; for more general black holes it can differ up to a factor of 2 . 
 = = = Event horizon = = = 
 The defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon — a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can only pass inward towards the mass of the black hole . Nothing , not even light , can escape from inside the event horizon . The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary , information from that event cannot reach an outside observer , making it impossible to determine if such an event occurred . 
 As predicted by general relativity , the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass . At the event horizon of a black hole , this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole . 
 To a distant observer , clocks near a black hole appear to tick more slowly than those further away from the black hole . Due to this effect , known as gravitational time dilation , an object falling into a black hole appears to slow as it approaches the event horizon , taking an infinite time to reach it . At the same time , all processes on this object slow down , from the view point of a fixed outside observer , causing any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer , an effect known as gravitational redshift . Eventually , the falling object becomes so dim that it can no longer be seen . 
 On the other hand , indestructible observers falling into a black hole do not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon . According to their own clocks , which appear to them to tick normally , they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour ; it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations . 
 The shape of the event horizon of a black hole is always approximately spherical . For non @-@ rotating ( static ) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical , while for rotating black holes the sphere is oblate . 
 = = = Singularity = = = 
 At the center of a black hole , as described by general relativity , lies a gravitational singularity , a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite . For a non @-@ rotating black hole , this region takes the shape of a single point and for a rotating black hole , it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation . In both cases , the singular region has zero volume . It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution . The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density . 
 Observers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole ( i.e. , non @-@ rotating and not charged ) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity , once they cross the event horizon . They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent , but only up to a limit ; after attaining a certain ideal velocity , it is best to free fall the rest of the way . When they reach the singularity , they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole . Before that happens , they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as <unk> or the " noodle effect " . 
 In the case of a charged ( Reissner – Nordström ) or rotating ( Kerr ) black hole , it is possible to avoid the singularity . Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole . The possibility of traveling to another universe is however only theoretical , since any perturbation would destroy this possibility . It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves ( returning to one 's own past ) around the Kerr singularity , which lead to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox . It is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes . 
 The appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory . This breakdown , however , is expected ; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions , due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions . To date , it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory , although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity . It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities . 
 = = = Photon sphere = = = 
 The photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness in which photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in a circular orbit about the black hole . For non @-@ rotating black holes , the photon sphere has a radius 1 @.@ 5 times the Schwarzschild radius . Their orbits would be dynamically unstable , hence any small perturbation , such as a particle of infalling matter , would cause an instability that would grow over time , either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole , or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon . 
 While light can still escape from the photon sphere , any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole . Hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon . 
 Other compact objects , such as neutron stars , can also have photon spheres . This follows from the fact that the gravitational field external to a spherically @-@ symmetric object is governed by the Schwarzschild metric , which depends only on the object 's mass rather than the radius of the object , hence any object whose radius shrinks to smaller than 1 @.@ 5 times the Schwarzschild radius will have a photon sphere . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still , called the ergosphere . This is the result of a process known as frame @-@ dragging ; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly " drag " along the spacetime immediately surrounding it . Any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation . For a rotating black hole , this effect is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still . 
 The ergosphere of a black hole is a volume whose inner boundary is the black hole 's event horizon and an outer boundary of an oblate spheroid , which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but noticeably wider around the equator . The outer boundary is sometimes called the <unk> . 
 Objects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere . Through the Penrose process , objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered . This energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole causing the latter to slow . 
 = = = Innermost stable circular orbit ( ISCO ) = = = 
 In Newtonian gravity , test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object . In general relativity , however , there exists an innermost stable circular orbit ( often called the ISCO ) , inside of which , any infinitesimal perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to <unk> into the black hole . The location of the ISCO depends on the spin of the black hole , in the case of a Schwarzschild black hole ( spin zero ) is : 
 <formula> 
 and decreases with increasing spin . 
 = = Formation and evolution = = 
 Considering the exotic nature of black holes , it may be natural to question if such bizarre objects could exist in nature or to suggest that they are merely pathological solutions to Einstein 's equations . Einstein himself wrongly thought that black holes would not form , because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius . This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years . However , a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects , and by the end of the 1960s , they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon . 
 Once an event horizon forms , Penrose proved , general relativity without quantum mechanics requires that a singularity will form within . Shortly afterwards , Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter ( see " Penrose – Hawking singularity theorems " ) . The Kerr solution , the no @-@ hair theorem , and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible , making them respectable subjects for research . The primary formation process for black holes is expected to be the gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars , but there are also more exotic processes that can lead to the production of black holes . 
 = = = Gravitational collapse = = = 
 Gravitational collapse occurs when an object 's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object 's own gravity . For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little " fuel " left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis , or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature . In either case the star 's temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight . The collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star 's constituents , allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state . The result is one of the various types of compact star . The type of compact star formed depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left after the outer layers have been blown away . Such explosions and pulsations lead to planetary nebula . This mass can be substantially less than the original star . Remnants exceeding 5 M ☉ are produced by stars that were over 20 M ☉ before the collapse . 
 If the mass of the remnant exceeds about 3 – 4 M ☉ ( the Tolman – Oppenheimer – Volkoff limit ) , either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter , even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse . No known mechanism ( except possibly quark degeneracy pressure , see quark star ) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole . 
 The gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes . Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars , which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to 103 M ☉ . These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies . It has further been suggested that supermassive black holes with typical masses of ~ 105 M ☉ could have formed from the direct collapse of gas clouds in the young universe . Some candidates for such objects have been found in observations of the young universe . 
 While most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly , an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process . Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter , a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon , due to gravitational time dilation . Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer , with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time . Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon ; instead , the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red @-@ shifted , eventually fading away . 
 = = = = Primordial black holes in the Big Bang = = = = 
 Gravitational collapse requires great density . In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are only found in stars , but in the early universe shortly after the big bang densities were much greater , possibly allowing for the creation of black holes . The high density alone is not enough to allow the formation of black holes since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up . In order for primordial black holes to form in such a dense medium , there must be initial density perturbations that can then grow under their own gravity . Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the size of these perturbations . Various models predict the creation of black holes , ranging from a Planck mass to hundreds of thousands of solar masses . Primordial black holes could thus account for the creation of any type of black hole . 
 = = = High @-@ energy collisions = = = 
 Gravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes . In principle , black holes could be formed in high @-@ energy collisions that achieve sufficient density . As of 2002 , no such events have been detected , either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments . This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes . Theoretically , this boundary is expected to lie around the Planck mass ( <unk> = √ <unk> / G ≈ 1 @.@ 2 × 1019 GeV / c2 ≈ 2 @.@ 2 × 10 − 8 kg ) , where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity . This would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high @-@ energy process occurring on or near the Earth . However , certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the Planck mass could be much lower : some <unk> scenarios for example put the boundary as low as 1 TeV / c2 . This would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high @-@ energy collisions that occur when cosmic rays hit the Earth 's atmosphere , or possibly in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN . These theories are very speculative , and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists . Even if micro black holes could be formed , it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10 − 25 seconds , posing no threat to the Earth . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 Once a black hole has formed , it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter . Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings and omnipresent cosmic background radiation . This is the primary process through which supermassive black holes seem to have grown . A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate @-@ mass black holes found in globular clusters . 
 Another possibility for black hole growth , is for a black hole to merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes . Although not necessary for growth , this is thought to have been important , especially for the early development of supermassive black holes , which could have formed from the coagulation of many smaller objects . The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate @-@ mass black holes . 
 = = = Evaporation = = = 
 In 1974 , Hawking predicted that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation ; this effect has become known as Hawking radiation . By applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background , he determined that a black hole should emit particles that display a perfect black body spectrum . Since Hawking 's publication , many others have verified the result through various approaches . If Hawking 's theory of black hole radiation is correct , then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles . The temperature of this thermal spectrum ( Hawking temperature ) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole , which , for a Schwarzschild black hole , is inversely proportional to the mass . Hence , large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes . 
 A stellar black hole of 1 M ☉ has a Hawking temperature of about 100 <unk> . This is far less than the 2 @.@ 7 K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation . Stellar @-@ mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrink . To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2 @.@ 7 K ( and be able to evaporate ) , a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon . Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter . 
 If a black hole is very small , the radiation effects are expected to become very strong . Even a black hole that is heavy compared to a human would evaporate in an instant . A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10 − 24 m and take a nanosecond to evaporate , during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun . Lower @-@ mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster ; for example , a black hole of mass 1 TeV / c2 would take less than 10 − 88 seconds to evaporate completely . For such a small black hole , quantum gravitation effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable , although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate so . 
 The Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth . A possible exception , however , is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes . Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes . NASA 's Fermi Gamma @-@ ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes . 
 = = Observational evidence = = 
 By their very nature , black holes do not directly emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation , so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations . For example , a black hole 's existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational interactions with its surroundings . However , the Event Horizon Telescope ( EHT ) , run by MIT 's Haystack Observatory , is an attempt to directly observe the immediate environment of the event horizon of Sagittarius A * , the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way . The first image of the event horizon may appear as early as 2018 . The existence of magnetic fields just outside the event horizon of Sagittarius A * , which were predicted by theoretical studies of black holes , was confirmed by the EHT in 2015 . 
 = = = Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes = = = 
 On 24 September 2015 the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first @-@ ever successful observation of gravitational waves . The signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes : one with about 36 solar masses , and the other around 29 solar masses . This observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date . For instance , the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two object prior to merger was just 350 km ( or roughly 4 times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses ) . The objects must therefore have been extremely compact , leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation . 
 More importantly , the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post @-@ merger ringdown , the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state . Arguably , the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole . From the LIGO signal it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown . From these it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object , which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger . The frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere . Hence , observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere , however it cannot exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere . 
 The observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar @-@ mass black hole binaries . Furthermore , it is the first observational evidence of stellar @-@ mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more . 
 = = = Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A * = = = 
 The proper motions of stars near the center of our own Milky Way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole . Since 1995 , astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A * . By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits , the astronomers were able to infer , in 1998 , that a 2 @.@ 6 million M ☉ object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0 @.@ 02 light @-@ years to cause the motions of those stars . Since then , one of the stars — called S2 — has completed a full orbit . From the orbital data , astronomers were able to make refine the calculations of the mass to 4 @.@ 3 million M ☉ and a radius of less than 0 @.@ 002 lightyears for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars . The upper limit on the object 's size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius ; nevertheless , these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume . Additionally , there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon , a feature unique to black holes . 
 = = = Accretion of matter = = = 
 Due to conservation of angular momentum , gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disc @-@ like structure around the object . Artists ' impressions such as the accompanying representation of a black hole with corona commonly depict the black hole as if it were a flat @-@ space material body hiding the part of the disc just behind it , but detailed mathematical modelling shows that the image of the disc would actually be distorted by the bending of light that originated behind the black hole in such a way that the upper side of the disc would be entirely visible , while there would be a partially visible secondary image of the underside of the disk . 
 Within such a disc , friction would cause angular momentum to be transported outward , allowing matter to fall further inward , thus releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas . 
 When the accreting object is a neutron star or a black hole , the gas in the inner accretion disc orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the compact object . The resulting friction is so significant that it heats the inner disc to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation ( mainly X @-@ rays ) . These bright X @-@ ray sources may be detected by telescopes . This process of accretion is one of the most efficient energy @-@ producing processes known ; up to 40 % of the rest mass of the accreted material can be emitted as radiation . ( In nuclear fusion only about 0 @.@ 7 % of the rest mass will be emitted as energy . ) In many cases , accretion discs are accompanied by relativistic jets that are emitted along the poles , which carry away much of the energy . The mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood . 
 As such , many of the universe 's more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes . In particular , active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion discs of supermassive black holes . Similarly , X @-@ ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion . It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X @-@ ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate @-@ mass black holes . 
 In November 2011 the first direct observation of a quasar accretion disk around a supermassive black hole was reported . 
 = = = X @-@ ray binaries = = = 
 X @-@ ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the X @-@ ray part of the spectrum . These X @-@ ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars ( compact object ) accretes matter from another ( regular ) star . The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides a unique opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole . 
 If such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object , it cannot be a black hole . The absence of such a signal does , however , not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star . By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object . If this is much larger than the Tolman – Oppenheimer – Volkoff limit ( that is , the maximum mass a neutron star can have before it collapses ) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole . 
 The first strong candidate for a black hole , Cygnus X @-@ 1 , was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton , Louise Webster and Paul Murdin in 1972 . Some doubt , however , remained due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole . Currently , better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X @-@ ray binaries called soft X @-@ ray transients . In this class of system , the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass . Moreover , these systems are actively emit X @-@ rays for only several months once every 10 – 50 years . During the period of low X @-@ ray emission ( called quiescence ) , the accretion disc is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period . One of the best such candidates is <unk> Cyg . 
 = = = = <unk> and advection @-@ dominated accretion flow = = = = 
 The faintness of the accretion disc of an X @-@ ray binary during quiescence is suspected to be caused by the flow of mass entering a mode called an advection @-@ dominated accretion flow ( <unk> ) . In this mode , almost all the energy generated by friction in the disc is swept along with the flow instead of radiated away . If this model is correct , then it forms strong qualitative evidence for the presence of an event horizon , since if the object at the center of the disc had a solid surface , it would emit large amounts of radiation as the highly energetic gas hits the surface , an effect that is observed for neutron stars in a similar state . 
 = = = = Quasi @-@ periodic oscillations = = = = 
 The X @-@ ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies . These signals are called quasi @-@ periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk ( the innermost stable circular orbit ) . As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object . They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes . 
 = = = Galactic nuclei = = = 
 Astronomers use the term " active galaxy " to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics , such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission . Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei ( AGN ) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes , which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones . The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun ; a disk of gas and dust called an accretion disk ; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk . 
 Although supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN , only some galaxies ' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates . Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy , M32 , M87 , NGC <unk> , NGC <unk> , NGC 4258 , NGC 4889 , NGC 1277 , OJ 287 , <unk> <unk> + <unk> and the Sombrero Galaxy . 
 It is now widely accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy , not just active ones , contains a supermassive black hole . The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy 's bulge , known as the M @-@ sigma relation , strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and the galaxy itself . 
 = = = Microlensing ( proposed ) = = = 
 Another way that the black hole nature of an object may be tested in the future is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity . One such effect is gravitational lensing : The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected much as light passing through an optic lens . Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing , in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds . However , it has never been directly observed for a black hole . One possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars in orbit around the black hole . There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A * . 
 = = = Alternatives = = = 
 The evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star . The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter . New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound . A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars , and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars . Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of <unk> as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons , which could hypothetically form <unk> stars . These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates . However , it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass . 
 Since the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass , supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes ( the average density of a 108 M ☉ black hole is comparable to that of water ) . Consequently , the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane . For example , a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects . However , such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates . 
 The evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes to not form , general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity , perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections . A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artifacts . In 2002 , much attention has been drawn by the <unk> model in string theory . Based on calculations for specific situations in string theory , the proposal suggests that generically the individual states of a black hole solution do not have an event horizon or singularity , but that for a classical / semi @-@ classical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity . 
 = = Open questions = = 
 = = = Entropy and thermodynamics = = = 
 In 1971 , Hawking showed under general conditions that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease , even if they collide and merge . This result , now known as the second law of black hole mechanics , is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics , which states that the total entropy of a system can never decrease . As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature , it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy . If this were the case , the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy @-@ laden matter entering a black hole , resulting in a decrease of the total entropy of the universe . Therefore , Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy , and that it should be proportional to its horizon area . 
 The link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking 's discovery that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature . This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics , since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink . The radiation , however also carries away entropy , and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing . This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics , with the mass acting as energy , the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy . 
 One puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume , since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system . This odd property led Gerard ' t Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle , which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume . 
 Although general relativity can be used to perform a semi @-@ classical calculation of black hole entropy , this situation is theoretically unsatisfying . In statistical mechanics , entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities ( such as mass , charge , pressure , etc . ) . Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity , one cannot perform such a computation for black holes . Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity . In 1995 , Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the Bekenstein – Hawking entropy . Since then , similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity . 
 = = = Information loss paradox = = = 
 Because a black hole has only a few internal parameters , most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost . Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole , it appears that only information concerning the total mass , charge , and angular momentum are conserved . As long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic , as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole , inaccessible from the outside . However , black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation . This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole , meaning that this information appears to be gone forever . 
 The question whether information is truly lost in black holes ( the black hole information paradox ) has divided the theoretical physics community ( see Thorne – Hawking – <unk> bet ) . In quantum mechanics , loss of information corresponds to the violation of vital property called unitarity , which has to do with the conservation of probability . It has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy . Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem . 
 = = = Popular reading = = = 
 = = = University textbooks and monographs = = = 
 = = = Review papers = = = 
 = Maryland Route 7 = 
 Maryland Route 7 ( MD 7 ) is a collection of state highways in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known for much of their length as Philadelphia Road , there are five disjoint mainline sections of the highway totaling 40 @.@ 23 miles ( 64 @.@ 74 km ) that parallel U.S. Route 40 ( US 40 ) in Baltimore , Harford , and Cecil counties in northeastern Maryland . The longest section of MD 7 begins at US 40 just east of the city of Baltimore in Rosedale and extends through eastern Baltimore County and southern Harford County to US 40 in Aberdeen . The next segment of the state highway is a C @-@ shaped route through Havre de Grace . The third mainline section of MD 7 begins in Perryville and ends at US 40 a short distance west of the start of the fourth section , which passes through Charlestown and North East before ending at US 40 just west of Elkton . The fifth segment of the highway begins at South Street and passes through the eastern part of Elkton before reconnecting with US 40 west of the Delaware state line . 
 MD 7 is the old alignment of US 40 in northeastern Maryland . The route was first laid out early in colonial times and later formed part of the post road between Baltimore and Philadelphia and between the northern and southern colonies . The highway in Baltimore and Harford counties became a turnpike in the 19th century . The Maryland State Roads Commission marked portions of what became known as the Philadelphia Road close to Baltimore and between Perryville and Elkton for improvement as state roads in 1909 . Those sections and the highway between Aberdeen and Havre de Grace were constructed as modern roads in the early to mid @-@ 1910s . The remainder of the highway was constructed in the 1920s and designated US 40 in 1927 . The high volume of traffic and the required continuous expansion of the highway led the Maryland State Roads Commission to construct the modern Pulaski Highway between 1935 and 1941 . Old sections of US 40 became segments of MD 7 between 1938 and 1941 as portions of the new four @-@ lane divided highway opened from Baltimore to Elkton . 
 = = Route description = = 
 There are five mainline sections of MD 7 : 
 MD 7 ( without suffix ) runs 22 @.@ 83 miles ( 36 @.@ 74 km ) from US 40 in Rosedale to US 40 and MD 159 in Aberdeen . 
 MD 7A extends 2 @.@ 66 miles ( 4 @.@ 28 km ) from US 40 west of Havre de Grace to US 40 and MD 155 in the city . 
 MD 7B has a length of 3 @.@ 56 miles ( 5 @.@ 73 km ) from Perry Point VA Medical Center in Perryville to US 40 east of Perryville . 
 MD 7C runs 9 @.@ 73 miles ( 15 @.@ 66 km ) from US 40 west of Charlestown east to US 40 and MD 279 west of Elkton . 
 MD 7D spans 1 @.@ 45 miles ( 2 @.@ 33 km ) from South Street east to US 40 within Elkton . 
 = = = Baltimore – Aberdeen = = = 
 MD 7 begins at an intersection with US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) in Rosedale just east of the Baltimore city line . The highway heads north then immediately turns east at a three @-@ way intersection ; the west leg of the intersection is Old Philadelphia Road , which is unsigned MD 7BA . MD 7 heads northeast as a two @-@ lane street through a residential neighborhood with scattered businesses and industrial properties as well as a crossing of <unk> Creek . The route intersects MD 588 ( Golden Ring Road ) and expands to a five @-@ lane road with center turn lane before meeting Interstate 695 ( I @-@ 695 ) ( Baltimore Beltway ) at a partial cloverleaf interchange . MD 7 continues east past The Centre at Golden Ring shopping center , crossing <unk> Run before its intersection with Rossville Boulevard in Rossville . The state highway reduces to two lanes and continues northeast through residential subdivisions on the westbound side and industrial facilities on the eastbound side of the highway . 
 MD 7 expands to a five @-@ lane highway with center turn lane as it approaches Campbell Boulevard in White Marsh . The road passes between a pair of shopping centers before crossing White Marsh Run . MD 7 continues northeast between industrial parks , intersecting Industrial Park Road ( unsigned MD <unk> ) before reducing to two lanes and crossing MD 43 ( White Marsh Boulevard ) . Westbound MD 43 is accessed via a ramp east of the overpass . The state highway crosses <unk> Run and passes through a mix of forest and residential subdivisions , intersecting <unk> Avenue and Joppa Road before crossing Gunpowder Falls . MD 7 passes through farmland and intersects Bradshaw Road in the hamlet of Bradshaw before crossing Little Gunpowder Falls and entering Harford County . 
 MD 7 heads east through forest and scattered residential subdivisions through the northern fringe of <unk> , where the highway intersects Old Mountain Road and MD 152 ( Mountain Road ) . The route crosses Winters Run and intersects Edgewood Road and MD 24 ( Vietnam Veterans Memorial Highway ) in Edgewood . MD 7 crosses Haha Branch and meets Abingdon Road at Abingdon , which is home to the Nelson @-@ Reardon @-@ Kennard House . The highway intersects MD 136 ( Calvary Road ) in between crossings of Bynum Run and James Run , which flow into the Bush River . MD 7 temporarily expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway as it passes through the commercial area of Riverside , where the highway meets MD 543 ( Creswell Road ) just south of that highway 's interchange with I @-@ 95 . The road passes through forest with isolated residential subdivisions , one of which is served by Holly Oak Circle , which meets MD 7 at a roundabout . 
 MD 7 's name changes to Old Philadelphia Road as it crosses Grays Run . Beyond Stepney Road , the state highway curves to the southeast to cross over CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision , passing between industrial parks before reaching its eastern terminus at US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) on the western edge of Aberdeen . Old Philadelphia Road continues east as MD 159 before becoming a county highway that serves an industrial area , intersects MD 715 ( Short Lane ) , and passes the historic home Poplar Hill , after which the highway merges with US 40 just west of downtown Aberdeen . 
 = = = Havre de Grace = = = 
 MD 7 begins at an intersection with US 40 just west of Havre de Grace . The highway heads northeast as two @-@ lane Revolution Street , crossing the Amtrak Northeast Corridor and passing through an industrial area before entering a residential area upon entering the city limits . MD 7 veers east to enter the street grid at Bloomsbury Avenue . The state highway turns north onto Union Street , which heads south as MD 490 , adjacent to Harford Memorial Hospital . The route heads through the Havre de Grace Historic District , passing through a residential area about four blocks from the Susquehanna River waterfront through Congress Street , where the highway begins to approach the waterfront . Immediately after passing under the Amtrak Susquehanna River Bridge , MD 7 turns west onto Otsego Street . The highway reaches its northern terminus at a five @-@ way intersection with Otsego Street , MD 155 ( Ohio Street ) , and US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) , which crosses the Susquehanna River a short distance to the east on the Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge . 
 = = = Perryville = = = 
 MD 7 begins at the entrance to the Perry Point VA Medical Center just north and east of the Amtrak Susquehanna River Bridge adjacent to Rodgers Tavern in the town of Perryville . The highway heads east as municipally maintained Broad Street , passing under both railroad tracks of the wye of Norfolk Southern Railway 's Columbia & Port Deposit line with the Amtrak Northeast Corridor , within which is the Perryville MARC station . Maintenance responsibility transfers from the town of Perryville to the state at MD 222 ( Aiken Avenue ) . MD 7 heads east over Mill Creek , past MD 327 ( Ikea Way ) , and leaves the town limits after an intersection with <unk> Boulevard , which leads to US 40 . The route continues east as Principio Furnace Road through farmland , passing the historic home Woodlands and Furnace Bay Golf Course . MD 7 passes the remains of Principio Furnace and crosses Principio Creek before reaching its eastern terminus at US 40 . 
 = = = Charlestown – Elkton = = = 
 MD 7 begins at US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) northwest of Charlestown , a short distance east of the terminus of MD 7B . The highway heads southeast as two @-@ lane Old Philadelphia Road in a forested area between a pair of quarries . As MD 7 approaches the Amtrak Northeast Corridor , MD 267 ( Baltimore Street ) splits to the southeast and crosses the tracks to pass through Charlestown , while MD 7 begins to closely parallel the tracks along the northern edge of the town . The state highway receives the other end of MD 267 ( Bladen Street ) as it curves away from the railroad . MD 7 crosses Broad Creek and Stony Run before passing under the Amtrak line . 
 MD 7 crosses North East Creek and enters the town of North East , where the highway is known as Cecil Avenue . The highway intersects MD 272 , which follows a one @-@ way pair , Main Street southbound and Mauldin Avenue northbound . MD 7 leaves the town and passes through a forested area with scattered residences . The route passes through an S @-@ curve during which it crosses to the north side of the Amtrak Northeast Corridor . On the north side of the bridge is a stub of old alignment , MD 7H . MD 7 continues east , passing Old Elk Neck Road before turning north and reaching its eastern terminus at US 40 . The roadway continues beyond the intersection as MD 279 ( Elkton Road ) . 
 = = = Elkton = = = 
 MD 7 begins at South Street east of downtown Elkton , heading east on two @-@ lane undivided East Main Street . Main Street continues west into downtown Elkton as a municipally @-@ maintained road . A short distance past the western terminus , Main Street continues east as MD 281 while MD 7 turns southeast onto Delaware Avenue . The state highway crosses Big Elk Creek and passes through a residential area before reaching its eastern terminus at US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of the Delaware state line . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Predecessor roads and state road construction = = = 
 The rough alignment of what is now MD 7 in Baltimore and Harford counties existed by 1695 as a rudimentary road ; Baltimore County ordered that the road be widened to 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) in width to allow easy passage for carts and for bridges to replace ferries at the numerous creeks along the route . In 1717 , the route from Baltimore to Elkton became part of a new overland post road between Philadelphia and Williamsburg . The highway between Baltimore and Havre de Grace was maintained as a turnpike , the Baltimore and Havre @-@ de @-@ Grace Turnpike , by 1825 . This turnpike later became known as the Baltimore and Philadelphia Turnpike and , after collection of tolls had ceased on the highway , the Philadelphia Road or the Post Road . The final ferry along the route to be eliminated was the Susquehanna River crossing . The first vehicular bridge was a converted railroad bridge built by the Pennsylvania Railroad in 1873 , replaced with the current Amtrak bridge immediately to the north in 1904 , and converted into a tolled vehicular bridge owned by several citizens of Harford and Cecil counties in 1910 . The Maryland State Roads Commission purchased the bridge in 1923 and removed the tolls in 1928 . In 1926 , the commission double @-@ decked the bridge to increase the bridge 's capacity . 
 When the Maryland State Roads Commission laid out a proposed state road system in 1909 , two sections of the Philadelphia Road were included : from the eastern city limit of Baltimore , then at Elwood Avenue , east to Rossville in Baltimore County , and from Perryville to Elkton . The highway was paved as an 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) wide tarred macadam road from Elwood Avenue to Herring Run in 1910 . The remainder of the road from Herring Run to Rossville was completed in concrete by 1921 . In Cecil County , the Philadelphia Road was paved with a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide macadam surface from the eastern town limit of North East to the western town limit of Elkton in 1913 . The highway was paved in concrete from Perryville to Principio Creek and in macadam from there through Charlestown in 1914 . The state road was paved in macadam from Charlestown to North East , including Cecil Avenue within the latter , in 1915 . The section of the state road through Charlestown , which is now MD 267 , was bypassed with a concrete road that remained on the north side of the Pennsylvania Railroad by 1921 . 
 The section of the Post Road between Bel Air Avenue in Aberdeen and the former racetrack in Havre de Grace , much of which is now MD 132 , was paved under the state aid system as a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide macadam road by 1911 . The first section of the gap between Rossville and Aberdeen was filled with a concrete road from Bradshaw to Winters Run by 1921 . The remainder of the highway in Baltimore County and the section from Winters Run to Bynum Run were paved in concrete by 1923 . The final piece of Philadelphia Road in Harford County was completed as a concrete road from Bynum Run to Aberdeen in 1926 . The highway was paved in concrete along Main Street and Delaware Avenue through Elkton , with the exception of a gap at the west end of town , by 1923 . The gap between Elkton and the Delaware state line was filled in 1925 . The 1 @,@ 100 @-@ foot ( 340 m ) gap at the west end of Elkton was left in inferior condition in anticipation of a grade separation of the Pennsylvania Railroad . This grade separation and its approaches was completed in 1929 , completing US 40 , which had been assigned to the length of the Philadelphia Road in 1927 . 
 = = = Improvements and construction of Pulaski Highway = = = 
 Improvements to US 40 began shortly after its designation . The highway was widened to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) in width from Baltimore to Rosedale and from Aberdeen to Havre de Grace , and to 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) between Rosedale and Aberdeen , by 1930 . US 40 was also widened to 17 to 24 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 to 7 @.@ 3 m ) from Perryville to the Delaware state line by 1934 . The Cecil County section of the highway was widened again with a pair of 3 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) shoulders in 1937 and 1938 . The U.S. Highway was relocated to its present alignment through Aberdeen to eliminate a pair of crossings of the Pennsylvania Railroad between 1930 and 1933 ; the old highway south of the railroad tracks became an extension of MD 22 . However , the very high levels of traffic due to being the main highway between Baltimore and Philadelphia led to calls for the highway to be expanded to 40 feet ( 12 m ) in width along its entire length by 1934 . 
 Rather than widen the existing road further , the Maryland State Roads Commission decided to build a new Philadelphia Road , later known as Pulaski Highway , as a divided highway on a new alignment between Baltimore and Aberdeen and to expand the newly relocated highway through Aberdeen to Havre de Grace to a four @-@ lane divided highway . The new US 40 was started in 1935 and completed in 1938 . The original Philadelphia Road between Baltimore and Aberdeen became the first section of MD 7 . The next sections of the old highway to be bypassed were in Havre de Grace and Perryville when the Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge and its approaches opened in August 1940 , replacing the double @-@ decked converted railroad bridge . The portions of the old highway on either side of the river became additional sections of MD 7 . Construction on the new Philadelphia Road in Cecil County began in 1938 and was completed in 1941 . Transfer of US 40 to its new alignment resulted in the addition of two more sections of MD 7 from west of Charlestown through North East to west of Elkton and through Elkton . 
 Despite the bypassing of the original Philadelphia Road , improvements continued to be made to MD 7 . The state highway was widened with dual 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) shoulders from the Baltimore city limit to Rossville in 1938 . MD 7 was widened through Havre de Grace in 1953 and through Elkton in 1954 . The highway was relocated and became a divided highway on both sides of its intersection with MD 543 in Riverside concurrent with the construction of MD 543 's interchange with I @-@ 95 in 1989 . MD 7 's roundabout at Holly Oak Circle in Riverside was installed in 2000 . Several portions of the state highway have been transferred to local maintenance . The portion of MD 7 to the south of US 40 in the southern portion of Aberdeen was removed in 1950 ; MD 159 was extended north to MD 7 's new eastern terminus and the remainder of Old Philadelphia Road became the responsibility of Harford County and Aberdeen . MD 7 between MD 213 and South Street in Elkton became one @-@ way eastbound in 2001 and municipally maintained in 2003 . The western terminus of that section of MD 7 was truncated at MD 213 in 2010 , resulting in the portion of Main Street from a dead end at the Amtrak Northeast Corridor to MD 213 also becoming the responsibility of Elkton . In 2012 , the MD 7 designation was removed from the portion of municipally @-@ maintained roadway between MD 213 and South Street . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = = MD 7 = = = 
 = = = MD 7A = = = 
 The entire route is in Havre de Grace , Harford County . 
 = = = MD 7B = = = 
 The entire route is in Cecil County . 
 = = = MD 7C = = = 
 The entire route is in Cecil County . 
 = = = MD 7D = = = 
 The entire route is in Elkton , Cecil County . 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 MD 7 has four auxiliary routes : 
 MD 7BA is the unsigned designation for Old Philadelphia Road , a 0 @.@ 18 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 29 km ) section of old alignment of MD 7 at its western terminus . MD 7BA continues the alignment of MD 7 west , becoming one lane westbound until it merges with westbound US 40 just east of the Baltimore city line . 
 MD <unk> is the unsigned designation for the 0 @.@ 09 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 14 km ) ramp from westbound US 40 to westbound MD 7D in Elkton . 
 MD 7H is the unsigned designation for an unnamed 0 @.@ 12 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 19 km ) section of old alignment of MD 7 on the north side of the Bacon Hill crossing of the Amtrak Northeast Corridor . 
 MD <unk> is the unsigned designation for Industrial Park Road , a highway that connects MD 7 with an exit ramp from eastbound MD 43 in White Marsh . 
 MD 7K is the unsigned designation for Patriotic Lane , a 0 @.@ 13 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 21 km ) road which runs from MD 7C east to the end of state maintenance , where it continues as an unnamed road , west of Elkton . The route was designated in 2012 . 
 = 2012 – 13 Ivy League men 's basketball season = 
 The 2012 – 13 Ivy League men 's basketball season marked the continuation of the annual tradition of competitive basketball among Ivy League members . The tradition began when the league was formed during the 1956 – 57 season and its history extends to the predecessor Eastern Intercollegiate Basketball League , which was formed in 1902 . Due to a cheating scandal that involved defending champion Harvard , Princeton was the preseason favorite . 
 Harvard won the regular season title outright and earned the conference 's only postseason bid . Princeton 's Ian Hummer earned the Ivy League Men 's Basketball Player of the Year after setting records for most single @-@ season and career Ivy League Player of the Week awards . Harvard tied an Ivy League single @-@ season team record with 13 combined Player of the Week and Rookie of the Week Awards . Ivy League records also fell for career games played by Hummer and career free throw percentage ( Brian Barbour ) . 
 In the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , Harvard earned the school 's first ever NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament victory and the conference 's first NCAA Tournament victory in three years . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 The Ivy League media selected Princeton as the preseason favorite when 16 of 17 voting members ( one voter selected Harvard ) named Princeton first in the preseason poll . Jeff Goodman of CBS Sports also selected Princeton as his preseason choice with Harvard second , noting that Harvard had been his preseason favorite until the September 2012 Harvard cheating scandal that involved about 125 athletes and students , including Kyle Casey and Brandyn Curry who withdrew from school as a result . Casey and Curry had been first @-@ team and second @-@ team All @-@ Ivy selections for the 2011 – 12 Ivy League men 's basketball season , respectively . Both players withdrew in hopes of preserving their final year of athletic eligibility following the investigation . 
 = = Season = = 
 Twelve different television networks scheduled a total of 36 Ivy League men 's basketball live broadcasts for the 2012 – 13 season . This includes a 14 @-@ game television package , featuring all eight member institutions , with 13 games being broadcast on the NBC Sports Network and one on the CBS Sports Network . The conference endured two one @-@ day postponements due to the February 2013 nor 'easter ( also known as Winter Storm Nemo ) . Harvard 's contest against Columbia at Levien Gymnasium in Manhattan that was originally scheduled for February 9 at 7 : 00 PM was postponed until February 10 at 2 : 00 PM . Similarly , Dartmouth 's game against Cornell originally scheduled to be played at 7 : 00 PM on February 9 at Newman Arena in Ithaca , New York was postponed until February 10 at 12 : 00 noon . 
 Led by Wesley Saunders ' five Ivy League Player of the Week Awards and Siyani Chambers ' six Rookie of the Week Awards , Harvard tied the Ivy League team record with thirteen single @-@ season weekly recognitions . Meanwhile Hummer tied the individual career record with nine player of the week awards and set a new single @-@ season record with seven . Two Ivy League career statistical records fell . Columbia 's Brian Barbour completed his career with an 89 @.@ 7 % free throw shooting percentage , surpassing Jim Barton of Dartmouth ( class of 1989 ) who tallied 89 @.@ 5 % . Hummer surpassed former teammate Doug Davis ' ( class of 2012 ) 122 career games played with 123 games . 
 = = Honors and accolades = = 
 Columbia senior guard Brian Barbour was listed among 30 preseason Senior CLASS Award candidates . Cornell 's Eitan <unk> and Brown 's Matthew Sullivan were first team All @-@ District selections from District I placing them among the 40 candidates for the 15 @-@ man Academic All @-@ American team . Brown , a third @-@ team selection in 2012 , was recognized as a 2013 first @-@ team All @-@ American . 
 = = = In season = = = 
 Each week the Ivy League selected one or more player ( s ) of the week and one or more rookie ( s ) of the week . 
 G – Guard 
 F – Forward 
 C – Center 
 Fr . – Freshman 
 So . – Sophomore 
 Jr . – Junior 
 Sr. – Senior 
 = = = All @-@ Ivy = = = 
 The following players earned Ivy League postseason recognition with ( Class , Position – Hometown ) : 
 = = = USBWA = = = 
 On March 12 , the U.S. Basketball Writers Association released its 2012 – 13 Men 's All @-@ District Teams , based upon voting from its national membership . There were nine regions from coast to coast , and a player and coach of the year were selected in each . The following lists all the Ivy League representatives selected within their respective regions . 
 = = = NABC = = = 
 The National Association of Basketball Coaches announced their Division I All ‐ District teams on March 26 , recognizing the nation 's best men 's collegiate basketball student @-@ athletes . Selected and voted on by member coaches of the NABC , 240 student @-@ athletes , from 24 districts were chosen . The selections on this list were then eligible for the State Farm Coaches ' Division I All @-@ America teams . The following list represented the District 13 players chosen to the list . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Hummer also earned Associated Press honorable mention All @-@ American recognition . 
 = = Postseason = = 
 = = = NCAA Tournament = = = 
 On March 21 in the 2013 NCAA Tournament , Harvard earned the school 's first NCAA Tournament victory and its first victory over a top 10 opponent when it defeated number three seeded New Mexico ( 10 , AP Poll / 10 , Coaches ' Poll ) . The victory was the conferences first since the 2009 – 10 Cornell Big Red men 's basketball team advanced to the Sweet Sixteen . Two days later , the team lost to Arizona , ending its season . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Princeton declined any postseason invitation . No other bids were accepted . 
 = Gloucester Road tube station = 
 Gloucester Road is a London Underground station in Kensington , west London . It is served by the District , Circle and Piccadilly lines . On the District and Piccadilly lines , the station is between South Kensington and Earl 's Court , and on the Circle line , it is between South Kensington and High Street Kensington . It is in London fare zone 1 . The station entrance is located close to the junction of Gloucester Road and Cromwell Road . Close by are the Cromwell Hospital and Baden @-@ Powell House . 
 The station is in two parts : sub @-@ surface platforms , opened in 1868 by the Metropolitan Railway as part of the company 's extension of the Inner Circle route from Paddington to South Kensington and to Westminster , and deep @-@ level platforms opened in 1906 by the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway . A variety of underground and main line services have operated over the sub @-@ surface tracks . The deep @-@ level platforms have remained largely unaltered . A disused sub @-@ surface platform features periodic art installations as part of Transport for London 's Art on the Underground scheme . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Sub @-@ surface station = = = 
 The station was opened as Brompton ( Gloucester Road ) on 1 October 1868 by the Metropolitan Railway ( MR , later the Metropolitan line ) when it opened an extension from Praed Street ( now Paddington ) . The station acted as the temporary terminus of the railway until 24 December 1868 when the MR opened tracks to South Kensington to connect to the first section of the District Railway ( DR , later the District line ) which opened on the same day from South Kensington to Westminster . The station was provided with four platforms sheltered by an elliptical glazed iron roof . A two @-@ storey station building in cream @-@ coloured brick with arched windows and an ornamental balustrade at roof level was built at the eastern end . Initially , the MR operated all services over both companies ' tracks . 
 Residential development had been gradually spreading westward from Belgravia since the 1840s , but the area around the station site was mainly in horticultural use as market gardens when the new line was constructed . The planning of the line encouraged the local land owners , including Lord Kensington , to extend Cromwell Road westwards and the opening of Gloucester Road station , stimulated rapid residential development in the surrounding area . 
 On 12 April 1869 , the DR opened a south @-@ westward extension from Gloucester Road to West Brompton where it opened an interchange station with the West London Extension Joint Railway ( WLEJR , now the West London Line ) . At the opening there was no intermediate station – Earl 's Court station did not open until 1871 – and the service operated as a shuttle between the two stations . On 1 August 1870 , the DR opened additional tracks between Gloucester Road and South Kensington and the West Brompton shuttle became a through service . 
 On 3 July 1871 , the DR opened its own tracks between Gloucester Road and High Street Kensington . These tracks , the Cromwell Curve , were opened without Parliamentary authority in an unsuccessful attempt by the DR to improve its share of the revenues between High Street Kensington and South Kensington stations which were divided on the basis of mileage of track owned by the two companies . 
 On 1 February 1872 , the DR opened a northbound branch from its station at Earl 's Court to connect to the West London Extension Joint Railway ( WLEJR , now the West London Line ) at Addison Road ( now Kensington ( Olympia ) ) . From that date the Outer Circle service began running over the DR 's tracks . The service was run by the North London Railway ( NLR ) from its terminus at Broad Street ( now demolished ) in the City of London via the North London Line to Willesden Junction , then the West London Line to Addison Road and the DR to Mansion House – at that time the eastern terminus of the DR. 
 From 1 August 1872 , the Middle Circle service also began operations through Gloucester Road , running from Moorgate along the MR 's tracks on the north side of the Inner Circle to Paddington , then over the Hammersmith & City Railway ( H & CR ) track to Latimer Road , then , via a now demolished link , on the WLEJR to Addison Road and the DR to Mansion House . The service was operated jointly by the H & CR and the DR. 
 On 30 June 1900 , the Middle Circle service was withdrawn between Earl 's Court and Mansion House , and , on 31 December 1908 , the Outer Circle service was also shortened to terminate at Earl 's Court . In 1949 , the Metropolitan line @-@ operated Inner Circle route was given its own identity on the tube map as the Circle line . In 1907 , " Brompton " was dropped from the station 's name to bring it into accordance with the deep @-@ level station . 
 In the 1970s , the eastbound Circle line platform was taken out of use and the track layout was rearranged to remove the westbound Circle line track and widen the island platform . The eastbound Circle and District lines both serve the north side of the island platform and the westbound Circle line which was redirected to serve the south side of the island platform . The disused platform is used for Art on the Underground installations , often placed into the brick recesses in the northern retaining wall . In the 1990s a deck was constructed above the District and Circle line platforms on which was constructed a shopping mall and apartment building . 
 = = = Deep @-@ level station = = = 
 By the beginning of the 20th century , the DR had been extended to Richmond , Ealing Broadway , Hounslow West and Wimbledon in the west and to New Cross Gate in the east . The southern section of the Inner Circle was suffering considerable congestion between South Kensington and Mansion House , between which stations the DR was running an average of 20 trains per hour with more in the peak periods . 
 To relieve the congestion , the DR planned an express deep @-@ level tube line starting from a connection to its sub @-@ surface tracks west of Gloucester Road and running to Mansion House . The tunnels were planned to run about 60 to 70 feet ( 18 – 21 m ) beneath the existing sub @-@ surface route with only one intermediate stop at Charing Cross ( now Embankment ) . Parliamentary approval was obtained in 1897 but no work was done . In 1898 , the DR took over the Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway ( B & PCR ) which had a route planned from South Kensington to Piccadilly Circus . The route was modified to join the DR deep @-@ level route at South Kensington . 
 Following the purchase of the DR by the Underground Electric Railways Company of London in 1902 , the planned DR and B & PCR lines were merged with a third proposed route from the Great Northern and Strand Railway . The DR deep @-@ level route was revised at its western end to continue to Earl 's Court and surface to the east of Barons Court . The deep @-@ level platforms were opened on 15 December 1906 by the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( GNP & BR , now the Piccadilly line ) which ran between Finsbury Park and Hammersmith . A new surface building for the lifts was designed by Leslie Green with the GNP & BR 's distinctive ox @-@ blood red glazed terracotta façade . 
 As part of the development over the sub @-@ surface platforms , the station buildings were remodelled internally to share a single entrance and ticket office . Space in the Piccadilly line building that was formerly used for operational purposes or as the exit to the street is now used for retail purposes . During the 2000s , the deep @-@ level parts of the station underwent refurbishment with areas of damaged wall tiles being replaced . The dark green and cream tiled walls of the Piccadilly line 's lower level passages and platforms were restored , with damaged tiles being replaced by reproductions to match the original designs . 
 On 24 May 1957 Teresa <unk> , a Polish Countess who had survived Auschwitz concentration camp , was stabbed five times on the eastbound Piccadilly line platform and died shortly afterwards . Her murder remains unsolved to this day . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is in London fare zone 1 . On the District and Piccadilly lines , the station is between Earl 's Court and South Kensington , and on the Circle line , it is between High Street Kensington and South Kensington . Gloucester Road is the westernmost interchange between these three lines , although the tube map promotes the easier interchange at South Kensington . Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally District line trains operate every 2 – 6 minutes from approximately 05 : 15 to 00 : 30 eastbound and 06 : 00 to 00 : 45 westbound ; they are supplemented by Circle line trains every 8 – 12 minutes from approximately 05 : 20 to 00 : 30 clockwise and 05 : 15 to 00 : 15 anticlockwise . Piccadilly line trains operate every 2 – 6 minutes from approximately 05 : 40 to 00 : 25 eastbound and 05 : 55 to 00 : 40 westbound . 
 On the Piccadilly line 1973 Stock is used . On the Circle line S Stock is used and on the District line D78 Stock . The District Line also uses S Stock , which is being introduced to replace the D78 Stock by 2016 . 
 = = Connections = = 
 London Buses routes 49 and 74 and night routes N74 and N97 serve the station . 
 = Romaine Brooks = 
 Romaine Brooks , born Beatrice Romaine Goddard ( May 1 , 1874 – December 7 , 1970 ) , was an American painter who worked mostly in Paris and Capri . She specialized in portraiture and used a subdued palette dominated by the color gray . Brooks ignored contemporary artistic trends such as Cubism and Fauvism , drawing instead on the Symbolist and Aesthetic movements of the 19th century , especially the works of James McNeill Whistler . Her subjects ranged from anonymous models to titled aristocrats . She is best known for her images of women in androgynous or masculine dress , including her self @-@ portrait of 1923 , which is her most widely reproduced work . 
 Brooks had an unhappy childhood after her father abandoned the family ; her mother was emotionally abusive and her brother mentally ill . By her own account , her childhood cast a shadow over her whole life . She spent several years in Italy and France as a poor art student , then inherited a fortune upon her mother 's death in 1902 . Wealth gave her the freedom to choose her own subjects . She often painted people close to her , such as the Italian writer and politician Gabriele D 'Annunzio , the Russian dancer Ida Rubinstein , and her partner of more than 50 years , the writer Natalie Barney . 
 Although she lived until 1970 , she painted very little after 1925 . She made a series of line drawings during the early 1930s , using an " unpremeditated " technique resembling automatic drawing , then virtually abandoned art , completing only a single portrait after World War II . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Beatrice Romaine Goddard was born in Rome , Italy , the youngest of three children of wealthy Americans Ella Waterman Goddard and Major Henry Goddard ; her maternal grandfather was the multi @-@ millionaire Isaac S. Waterman , Jr . Her parents divorced when she was small , and her father abandoned the family . Beatrice was raised by her mother , who was unstable and abused her emotionally while doting on her mentally ill brother , St. Mar. They lived mostly in New York , where from an early age Goddard had to tend to St. Mar because he attacked anyone else who came near him . According to her memoir , when she was seven , her mother fostered her to a poor family living in a New York City tenement , then disappeared and stopped making the agreed @-@ upon payments . The family continued to care for Beatrice , although they sank further into poverty . She did not tell them where her grandfather lived for fear of being returned to her mother . 
 After the foster family located her grandfather on their own , Beatrice was sent to study at St. Mary 's Hall ( now : Doane Academy ) an Episcopal boarding school for several years . Later she attended a convent school , in between times spent with her mother , who moved around Europe constantly , although the stress of travel made St. Mar harder to control . In adulthood Goddard Brooks referred to herself as having been a " child @-@ martyr " . 
 In 1893 at the age of 19 , Goddard left her family and went to Paris . She extracted a meager allowance from her mother , took voice lessons , and for a time sang in a cabaret , then travelled to Rome to study art . As the only female student in her life class , as it was unusual for women to work from nude models , Goddard encountered what would now be called sexual harassment . When a fellow student left a book open on her stool with pornographic passages underlined , she picked it up and hit him in the face with it , and was not bothered again . 
 In the summer of 1899 Goddard rented a studio in the poorest part of the island of Capri , which was a very inexpensive place to live . She studied art briefly in Paris , but her funds were insufficient . After several months of near starvation , she suffered a physical breakdown . In 1901 her brother St. Mar died . She returned home to help care for her grief @-@ stricken mother , who died less than a year later from complications of advanced diabetes . She was 28 when she and her sister inherited the large estate their grandfather had left , which made them independently wealthy . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 On 13 June 1903 Goddard married her friend John Ellingham Brooks , an unsuccessful pianist and translator who was in deep financial difficulty . He was homosexual , and the bisexual Goddard never revealed exactly why she married him . Her biographer Meryle Secrest suggests that she was motivated by concern for him and a desire for companionship , rather than the need for a marriage of convenience . They quarrelled almost immediately when she cut her hair and ordered men 's clothes for a planned walking tour of England ; he refused to be seen in public with her dressed that way . <unk> at his desire for outward propriety , she left him after only a year and moved to London . He frightened her because he kept making references to " our " money . Brooks spent the rest of his life on Capri ( where he died in 1929 ) and , for a while , lived there with E. F. Benson , author of the Mapp and Lucia novels . 
 = = Career = = 
 In 1904 Romaine Brooks , the name she preferred , became dissatisfied with her work , and in particular with the bright color schemes that she had used in her early paintings . She travelled to St. Ives on the Cornish coast , rented a small studio , and began learning to create finer gradations of gray . When a group of local artists asked her to give an informal show of her work , she displayed only some pieces of cardboard on which she had <unk> her experiments with gray paint . From then on , nearly all her paintings were dominated by gray , white , and black , sometimes with ochre or umber . She had found the palette she would use her whole career . 
 = = = First exhibition = = = 
 Brooks left St. Ives and moved to Paris . As painters such as Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse were reinventing art in the Bohemian districts of Montparnasse and Montmartre , Brooks took an apartment in the fashionable 16th arrondissement , mingled in elite social circles , and painted portraits of wealthy and titled women . This included her current lover , the Princess de Polignac . 
 In 1910 she had her first solo show at the prestigious Gallery Durand @-@ Ruel , displaying thirteen paintings , almost all of women or young girls . Some were portraits ; others showed anonymous models in interior scenes or against monochromatic backgrounds , often with pensive or withdrawn expressions . The paintings were generally naturalistic , showing an attentive eye for the details of Belle Époque fashion , with parasols , veils , and elaborate bonnets on display . 
 Brooks included two nude studies in this first exhibition — a provocative choice for a woman artist in 1910 . In one , The Red Jacket , a young woman stands in front of a large folding screen , wearing only a small open jacket , with her hands behind her back . She is so frail , and her downcast face looks so forlorn that one contemporary reviewer referred to her as a consumptive ; Brooks described her simply as " a poor girl who was cold " . The other , White <unk> , is a more sexually charged nude study of a woman reclining on a couch in Brooks 's studio . Contemporary reviews compared it to Francisco de Goya 's La maja <unk> and Édouard Manet 's Olympia . Unlike the women in those paintings , the subject of White <unk> looks away from the viewer , with a distinctly forbidding expression . 
 The exhibition established Brooks 's reputation as an artist . Reviews were effusive , and the poet Robert de Montesquiou wrote an appreciation calling her " the thief of souls . " The restrained , almost monochromatic decor of her home also attracted attention ; she was often asked to give advice on interior design , and sometimes did , though she did not relish the role of decorator . She became more and more disillusioned with Parisian high society , finding the conversation dull and feeling that people were whispering about her . Despite her artistic success , she described herself as a <unk> — literally , a victim of stoning . 
 = = = Gabriele D 'Annunzio and Ida Rubinstein = = = 
 In 1909 Brooks met Gabriele D 'Annunzio , an Italian writer and politician who had come to France to escape his debts . She saw him as a martyred artist , another <unk> ; he wrote poems based on her works and called her " the most profound and wise orchestrator of grays in modern painting " . They spent the summer of 1910 in a villa on the coast of France , in a romantic interlude that was disrupted when D 'Annunzio 's jealous ex @-@ mistress arrived in town . Their friendship remained strong throughout D 'Annunzio 's life . 
 In 1911 Brooks became romantically involved with Ida Rubinstein , an actress and dancer formerly with Serge Diaghilev 's Ballets Russes . D 'Annunzio had an obsessive but unrequited attraction to her as well . Rubinstein was deeply in love with Brooks ; she wanted to buy a farm in the country where they could live alone together — a mode of life in which Brooks had no interest . Although they broke up in 1914 , Brooks painted Rubinstein more often than any other subject ; for Brooks , Rubinstein 's " fragile and androgynous beauty " represented an aesthetic ideal . The earliest of these paintings are a series of allegorical nudes . In The Crossing ( also exhibited as The Dead Woman ) , Rubinstein appears as a corpse , stretched on a white bed or bier against a black void ; in Spring , she <unk> flowers on the ground in a grassy meadow . When Rubinstein starred in D 'Annunzio 's play The Martyrdom of Saint Sebastian , Brooks painted her as Saint Sebastian — tied to a post , being shot with an arrow by a masked dwarf standing on a table . The dwarf is thought to represent D 'Annunzio . 
 At the beginning of World War I , Brooks painted The Cross of France , a symbolic image of France at war , showing a Red Cross nurse looking off to the side with a resolute expression while Ypres burns in the distance behind her . Although it is not a portrait of Ida Rubinstein , it does resemble her , and she may have modelled for it . It was exhibited along with a poem by D 'Annunzio calling for courage and resolution in wartime , and later reproduced in a booklet sold to raise funds for the Red Cross . After the war , Brooks received the cross of the Legion of Honor for her fundraising efforts . 
 The political imagery of The Cross of France has been compared to Eugène Delacroix 's painting Liberty Leading the People , in which a woman personifying Liberty holds up a flag against the background of a burning city . Delacroix 's Liberty leads a group of Parisians who have taken up arms , while the subject of The Cross of France stands alone . Brooks used this romantic image of a figure in heroic isolation several times ; a 1912 portrait of D 'Annunzio , a 1914 self @-@ portrait , and a portrait of Rubinstein completed in 1917 all show their subjects wrapped in dark cloaks and isolated against seascapes . 
 During the war , D 'Annunzio became a national hero as leader of a fighter squadron . During the Paris Peace Conference , he led a group of nationalist irregulars who seized and held the city of Fiume to prevent Italy from ceding it to Croatia . He briefly set up a government , the Italian Regency of Carnaro , with himself as Duce . Although he was never part of Benito Mussolini 's government , he is regarded as a precursor of Fascism . The details of Brooks 's own politics are unclear , but she was evidently sympathetic to Italian Fascism . The romantic individualism of her paintings may have been influenced by D 'Annunzio 's ideologies — an idea that has troubled some viewers otherwise attracted to the imagery of Brooks 's portraits . 
 Brooks painted Rubinstein one last time in The Weeping Venus ( 1916 – 17 ) , a nude based on a photograph taken during their relationship . According to her unpublished memoir , the painting represents " the passing away of familiar gods " as a result of World War I. She said she tried to repaint Venus 's features many times , but Rubinstein 's face somehow kept returning : " It fixes itself in the mind . " 
 = = = Natalie Barney and Left Bank portraits = = = 
 The longest and most important relationship of Brooks 's life was with Natalie Clifford Barney , whom she met around the start of World War I. Barney was an American @-@ born writer who hosted a literary salon on Paris 's Left Bank . She was avowedly <unk> ; when they met she was already in a close long @-@ term relationship with Duchess Elisabeth de Clermont @-@ Tonnerre , which would last until the Duchess ' death in 1954 . She had many other relationships of varying length and devotion as well . 
 Brooks tolerated Barney 's casual affairs well enough to tease her about them , and had a few of her own over the years , but could become jealous when a new love became serious . Usually she simply left town , but at one point she gave Barney an ultimatum to choose between her and Dolly Wilde — relenting once Barney had given in . At the same time , while Brooks was devoted to Barney , she did not want to live with her full @-@ time , as she disliked Paris , disdained Barney 's friends , and hated the constant socializing on which Barney thrived . She felt most fully herself when alone . To accommodate Brooks 's need for solitude , they built a summer home consisting of two separate wings joined by a dining room , which they called Villa Trait d 'Union , the " hyphenated villa " . Brooks spent part of each year in Italy or travelling elsewhere in Europe , away from Barney . The relationship lasted for more than 50 years . 
 Brooks 's portrait of Barney has a softer look than her other paintings of the 1920s . Barney sits , swathed in a fur coat , in the house at 20 Rue Jacob where she lived and held her salon . In the window behind her , the courtyard is dusted with snow . Brooks often included animals or models of animals in her compositions to represent the personalities of her sitters ; she painted Barney with a small sculpture of a horse , alluding to the love of riding that had led Remy de Gourmont to nickname her " the Amazon " . The paper on which the horse stands may be one of Barney 's manuscripts . 
 From 1920 to 1924 , most of Brooks 's subjects were of women who were in Barney 's social circle or who visited her salon . Truman Capote , who toured Brooks 's studio in the late 1940s , may have been exaggerating when he called it " the all @-@ time ultimate gallery of all the famous dykes from 1880 to 1935 or thereabouts " , but she did paint Elisabeth de Clermont @-@ Tonnerre ; Barney 's lover Elizabeth Eyre de <unk> ; her own lover Renata Borgatti ; Una , Lady Troubridge , the partner of Radclyffe Hall ; and the artist Gluck ( Hannah Gluckstein ) . Another of Brooks 's lovers was the wildly eccentric Marchesa Luisa <unk> , whose portrait she painted while on Capri in 1920 . 
 Several of these paintings depict women who had adopted some aspects of male dress . While in 1903 Brooks had shocked her husband by cutting her hair short and ordering a suit of men 's clothes from a tailor , by the mid @-@ 1920s bobbed and cropped hairstyles were in and wearing tailored jackets — usually with a skirt — was a recognized fashion , discussed in magazines as the " severely masculine " look . Women like Gluck , Troubridge , and Brooks used variations of the masculine mode , not to pass as men , but as a signal — a way of making their sexuality visible to others . At the time these paintings were made , however , it was a code that only a select few knew how to read . To a mainstream audience , the women in these paintings probably just looked fashionable . 
 Gluck , an English artist whom Brooks painted around 1923 , was noted in the contemporary press as much for her style of dress as for her art . She pushed the masculine style further than most by wearing trousers on all occasions , which was not considered acceptable in the 1920s . Articles about her presented her cross @-@ dressing as an artistic eccentricity or as a sign that she was ultra @-@ modern . Brooks 's portrait shows Gluck in a starched white shirt , a silk tie , and a long black belted coat that she designed and had made by a " mad dressmaker " ; her right hand , at her waist , holds a man 's hat . Brooks painted these masculine accoutrements with the same attention she had once given to the parasols and ostrich plumes of La Belle Époque . But while many of her early paintings show sad and withdrawn figures " consumed by petticoats , veiled hats and other period trappings of femininity " , Gluck is self @-@ possessed and quietly intense — an artist who insists on being taken seriously . Her appearance is so androgynous that it would be difficult to identify her as a woman without help from the title , and the title itself — Peter , a Young English Girl — underscores the gender ambiguity of the image . 
 Brooks 's 1923 self @-@ portrait has a grimmer tone . Brooks — who also designed her own clothes — painted herself in a tailored riding coat , gloves , and top hat . Behind her is a ruined building rendered in gray and black , underneath a slate @-@ colored sky . The only spots of strong color are her lipstick and the red ribbon of the Legion of Honor that she wears on her lapel , recalling the Red Cross insignia in The Cross of France . Her eyes are shaded by the brim of her hat , so that , according to one critic , " she 's watching you before you get close enough to look at her . She 's not passively inviting your approach ; she 's deciding whether you 're worth bothering with . " 
 = = = Literary portraits of Brooks = = = 
 In 1925 Brooks had solo exhibitions in Paris , London , and New York . After that year she produced only four more paintings , including portraits of Carl Van Vechten in 1936 and Muriel Draper in 1938 . At the same time that her artwork diminished , she became the subject of literary portraits by three writers . Each portrayed her as part of lesbian social circles in Paris and Capri . 
 Brooks was the model for the painter Venetia Ford in Radclyffe Hall 's first novel , The Forge ( 1924 ) . The protagonist , Susan Brent , first encounters Ford among a group of women at a masquerade ball in Paris ; the descriptions of these women correspond closely to Brooks 's portraits , particularly those of Elisabeth de Gramont and Una Troubridge . Brent decides to leave her husband and pursue art after seeing the painting The Weeping Venus . Brooks also appeared in Compton Mackenzie 's Extraordinary Women ( 1928 ) , a novel about a group of lesbians on Capri during World War I , as the composer Olympia Leigh . Although the novel is satirical , Mackenzie treats Brooks with more dignity than the rest of the characters , portraying her as a detached observer of the others ' jealous intrigues — even those of which she is the focus . In Djuna Barnes 's Ladies Almanack ( 1928 ) , a roman à clef of Natalie Barney 's circle in Paris , she makes a brief appearance as Cynic Sal , who " <unk> [ s ] like a coachman of the period of <unk> " — a reference to the style of dress seen in her 1923 self @-@ portrait . 
 = = = Drawings and later life = = = 
 In 1930 , while laid up with a sprained leg , Brooks began a series of more than 100 drawings of humans , angels , demons , animals , and monsters , all formed out of continuous curved lines . She said that when she started a line she did not know where it would go , and that the drawings " evolve [ d ] from the subconscious ... [ w ] ithout premeditation . " Brooks was writing her unpublished memoir No Pleasant Memories at the same time she began this series of drawings . Critics have interpreted them as exploring the continuing effect of her childhood on her — a theme expressed even in the symbol she used to sign them , a wing tethered with a rope or chain . Decades later , at 85 , she said " My dead mother gets between me and life . " 
 Brooks stopped drawing around 1935 . She moved from Paris to a villa outside Florence , Italy in 1937 , and in 1940 — fleeing the invasion of France by Germany — Barney joined her there . After World War II ended , Brooks declined to move back to Paris with Barney , saying she wanted to " get back to [ her ] painting and painter 's life " , but in fact she virtually abandoned art after the war . She lost interest in promoting her own work , leaving it to Barney to arrange gallery placements of her paintings . She became increasingly reclusive , and while Barney continued to visit her frequently , by the mid @-@ 1950s she had to stay in a hotel , meeting Brooks only for lunch . Brooks spent weeks at a time in a darkened room , believing she was losing her eyesight . She became paranoid , fearing that someone was stealing her drawings and that her chauffeur planned to poison her . In a 1965 letter she cautioned Barney not to lie down on the benches in her garden , lest the plants feed on her life force : " Trees especially are our enemies and would suck us dry . " In the last year of her life , she stopped communicating with Barney entirely , leaving letters unanswered and refusing to open the door when Barney came to visit . She died in Nice , France , in 1970 at the age of 96 . 
 = = Influences = = 
 Brooks kept aloof from the artistic trends and movements of her time , " act [ ing ] as if the Fauvists , the Cubists , and the Abstract Expressionists did not exist . " However , critics have identified the influence of Aubrey Beardsley 's illustrations and of Symbolism , particularly in her paintings of Ida Rubinstein . The imagery of the 1930s drawings suggests Surrealism , and Brooks 's use of " unpremeditated " drawing as a route to the subconscious resembles the experiments with automatic drawing made by Surrealists such as André Masson . 
 The most widely observed influence on Brooks 's painting is that of James McNeill Whistler , whose subdued palette probably inspired her use of the color gray . She may have been introduced to Whistler 's work by the art collector Charles Lang Freer , whom she met on Capri around 1899 , and who bought one of her early works . Brooks said she " wondered at the magic subtlety of [ Whistler 's ] tones " but thought his ' symphonies ' lacked corresponding subtlety of expression . One 1920 portrait may take its composition from a painting by Whistler . While the poses are almost identical , Brooks removes the little girl and all the details of Whistler 's domestic scene , leaving only Borgatti and her piano — an image of an artist completely focused on her art . 
 = = Legacy and modern criticism = = 
 Brooks 's conservative style led many art critics to dismiss her , and by the 1960s her work was largely forgotten . The revival of figurative painting since the 1980s , and new interest in the exploration of gender and sexuality through art have led to a reassessment of her work . She is now seen as a precursor of present @-@ day artists whose works depict cross @-@ dressing and transgender themes . Critics have described her portraits of the 1920s as a " sly celebration of gender @-@ bending as a kind of heroic act " and as creating " the first visible Sapphic stars in the history of modernism . " 
 More generally , Brooks 's portraits starting with The Cross of France have been interpreted as creating new images of strong women . The portraits of the 1920s in particular — cross @-@ dressed and otherwise — portray their subjects as powerful , self @-@ confident , and fearless . One critic compared them to the faces on Mount Rushmore . Brooks seems to have seen her portraits in this light . According to a memoir by Natalie Barney , one woman complained , upon seeing her portrait , " You haven 't beautified me " , to which Brooks replied , " I have ennobled you . " 
 Yet Brooks did not always ennoble her subjects . Inherited wealth freed her from the need to sell her paintings ; she did not care whether she pleased her sitters or not , and her wit , when unleashed , could be devastating . A striking example is her 1914 – 15 portrait of Elsie de Wolfe , an interior designer whom she felt had copied her monochromatic color schemes . Brooks painted de Wolfe porcelain @-@ pale , in an off @-@ white dress and a bonnet resembling a shower cap ; a white ceramic goat placed on a table at her elbow seems to mimic her simpering expression . 
 One of Brooks 's most analyzed paintings , a 1924 portrait of Una , Lady Troubridge , has been seen as everything from an image of female self @-@ empowerment to a caricature . Art critic Michael Duncan sees the painting as making fun of Troubridge 's " dandified appearance " , while for Meryle Secrest it is " a tour de force of ironic commentary " . Laura Doan , pointing out newspaper and magazine articles from 1924 in which high collars , tailored satin jackets , and watch fobs are described as the latest in women 's wear , describes Troubridge as having a " keen fashion sense and an eye for sartorial detail " . But , these British fashions may not have been favored in Paris ; Natalie Barney and others in her circle considered Troubridge 's outfits ridiculous . Brooks expressed her own view in a letter to Barney : " Una is funny to paint . Her get @-@ up is remarkable . She will live perhaps and cause future generations to smile . " 
 = Oxidative phosphorylation = 
 Oxidative phosphorylation ( or <unk> in short ) is the metabolic pathway in which cells use enzymes to oxidize nutrients , thereby releasing energy which is used to reform ATP . In most eukaryotes , this takes place inside mitochondria . Almost all aerobic organisms carry out oxidative phosphorylation . This pathway is probably so pervasive because it is a highly efficient way of releasing energy , compared to alternative fermentation processes such as anaerobic glycolysis . 
 During oxidative phosphorylation , electrons are transferred from electron donors to electron acceptors such as oxygen , in redox reactions . These redox reactions release energy , which is used to form ATP . In eukaryotes , these redox reactions are carried out by a series of protein complexes within the inner membrane of the cell 's mitochondria , whereas , in prokaryotes , these proteins are located in the cells ' intermembrane space . These linked sets of proteins are called electron transport chains . In eukaryotes , five main protein complexes are involved , whereas in prokaryotes many different enzymes are present , using a variety of electron donors and acceptors . 
 The energy released by electrons flowing through this electron transport chain is used to transport protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane , in a process called electron transport . This generates potential energy in the form of a pH gradient and an electrical potential across this membrane . This store of energy is tapped by allowing protons to flow back across the membrane and down this gradient , through a large enzyme called ATP synthase ; this process is known as chemiosmosis . This enzyme uses this energy to generate ATP from adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) , in a phosphorylation reaction . This reaction is driven by the proton flow , which forces the rotation of a part of the enzyme ; the ATP synthase is a rotary mechanical motor . 
 Although oxidative phosphorylation is a vital part of metabolism , it produces reactive oxygen species such as superoxide and hydrogen peroxide , which lead to propagation of free radicals , damaging cells and contributing to disease and , possibly , aging ( senescence ) . The enzymes carrying out this metabolic pathway are also the target of many drugs and poisons that inhibit their activities . 
 = = Overview of energy transfer by chemiosmosis = = 
 Oxidative phosphorylation works by using energy @-@ releasing chemical reactions to drive energy @-@ requiring reactions : The two sets of reactions are said to be coupled . This means one cannot occur without the other . The flow of electrons through the electron transport chain , from electron donors such as NADH to electron acceptors such as oxygen , is an exergonic process – it releases energy , whereas the synthesis of ATP is an endergonic process , which requires an input of energy . Both the electron transport chain and the ATP synthase are embedded in a membrane , and energy is transferred from electron transport chain to the ATP synthase by movements of protons across this membrane , in a process called chemiosmosis . In practice , this is like a simple electric circuit , with a current of protons being driven from the negative N @-@ side of the membrane to the positive P @-@ side by the proton @-@ pumping enzymes of the electron transport chain . These enzymes are like a battery , as they perform work to drive current through the circuit . The movement of protons creates an electrochemical gradient across the membrane , which is often called the proton @-@ motive force . It has two components : a difference in proton concentration ( a H + gradient , <unk> ) and a difference in electric potential , with the N @-@ side having a negative charge . 
 ATP synthase releases this stored energy by completing the circuit and allowing protons to flow down the electrochemical gradient , back to the N @-@ side of the membrane . This kinetic energy drives the rotation of part of the enzymes structure and couples this motion to the synthesis of ATP . 
 The two components of the proton @-@ motive force are thermodynamically equivalent : In mitochondria , the largest part of energy is provided by the potential ; in <unk> bacteria the electrical energy even has to compensate for a counteracting inverse pH difference . Inversely , chloroplasts operate mainly on <unk> . However , they also require a small membrane potential for the kinetics of ATP synthesis . At least in the case of the <unk> P. <unk> it drives the counter @-@ rotation of subunits a and c of the FO motor of ATP synthase . 
 The amount of energy released by oxidative phosphorylation is high , compared with the amount produced by anaerobic fermentation . Glycolysis produces only 2 ATP molecules , but somewhere between 30 and 36 ATPs are produced by the oxidative phosphorylation of the 10 NADH and 2 succinate molecules made by converting one molecule of glucose to carbon dioxide and water , while each cycle of beta oxidation of a fatty acid yields about 14 ATPs . These ATP yields are theoretical maximum values ; in practice , some protons leak across the membrane , lowering the yield of ATP . 
 = = Electron and proton transfer molecules = = 
 The electron transport chain carries both protons and electrons , passing electrons from donors to acceptors , and transporting protons across a membrane . These processes use both soluble and protein @-@ bound transfer molecules . In mitochondria , electrons are transferred within the intermembrane space by the water @-@ soluble electron transfer protein cytochrome c . This carries only electrons , and these are transferred by the reduction and oxidation of an iron atom that the protein holds within a heme group in its structure . Cytochrome c is also found in some bacteria , where it is located within the periplasmic space . 
 Within the inner mitochondrial membrane , the lipid @-@ soluble electron carrier coenzyme Q10 ( Q ) carries both electrons and protons by a redox cycle . This small benzoquinone molecule is very hydrophobic , so it diffuses freely within the membrane . When Q accepts two electrons and two protons , it becomes reduced to the ubiquinol form ( QH2 ) ; when QH2 releases two electrons and two protons , it becomes oxidized back to the ubiquinone ( Q ) form . As a result , if two enzymes are arranged so that Q is reduced on one side of the membrane and QH2 oxidized on the other , ubiquinone will couple these reactions and shuttle protons across the membrane . Some bacterial electron transport chains use different quinones , such as <unk> , in addition to ubiquinone . 
 Within proteins , electrons are transferred between flavin cofactors , iron – sulfur clusters , and cytochromes . There are several types of iron – sulfur cluster . The simplest kind found in the electron transfer chain consists of two iron atoms joined by two atoms of inorganic sulfur ; these are called [ 2Fe – 2S ] clusters . The second kind , called [ 4Fe – 4S ] , contains a cube of four iron atoms and four sulfur atoms . Each iron atom in these clusters is coordinated by an additional amino acid , usually by the sulfur atom of cysteine . Metal ion cofactors undergo redox reactions without binding or releasing protons , so in the electron transport chain they serve solely to transport electrons through proteins . Electrons move quite long distances through proteins by hopping along chains of these cofactors . This occurs by quantum tunnelling , which is rapid over distances of less than 1 @.@ 4 × 10 − 9 m . 
 = = Eukaryotic electron transport chains = = 
 Many catabolic biochemical processes , such as glycolysis , the citric acid cycle , and beta oxidation , produce the reduced coenzyme NADH . This coenzyme contains electrons that have a high transfer potential ; in other words , they will release a large amount of energy upon oxidation . However , the cell does not release this energy all at once , as this would be an uncontrollable reaction . Instead , the electrons are removed from NADH and passed to oxygen through a series of enzymes that each release a small amount of the energy . This set of enzymes , consisting of complexes I through IV , is called the electron transport chain and is found in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion . Succinate is also oxidized by the electron transport chain , but feeds into the pathway at a different point . 
 In eukaryotes , the enzymes in this electron transport system use the energy released from the oxidation of NADH to pump protons across the inner membrane of the mitochondrion . This causes protons to build up in the intermembrane space , and generates an electrochemical gradient across the membrane . The energy stored in this potential is then used by ATP synthase to produce ATP . Oxidative phosphorylation in the eukaryotic mitochondrion is the best @-@ understood example of this process . The mitochondrion is present in almost all eukaryotes , with the exception of anaerobic protozoa such as Trichomonas vaginalis that instead reduce protons to hydrogen in a remnant mitochondrion called a <unk> . 
 = = = NADH @-@ coenzyme Q oxidoreductase ( complex I ) = = = 
 NADH @-@ coenzyme Q oxidoreductase , also known as NADH dehydrogenase or complex I , is the first protein in the electron transport chain . Complex I is a giant enzyme with the mammalian complex I having 46 subunits and a molecular mass of about 1 @,@ 000 kilodaltons ( kDa ) . The structure is known in detail only from a bacterium ; in most organisms the complex resembles a boot with a large " ball " poking out from the membrane into the mitochondrion . The genes that encode the individual proteins are contained in both the cell nucleus and the mitochondrial genome , as is the case for many enzymes present in the mitochondrion . 
 The reaction that is catalyzed by this enzyme is the two electron oxidation of NADH by coenzyme Q10 or ubiquinone ( represented as Q in the equation below ) , a lipid @-@ soluble quinone that is found in the mitochondrion membrane : 
 The start of the reaction , and indeed of the entire electron chain , is the binding of a NADH molecule to complex I and the donation of two electrons . The electrons enter complex I via a prosthetic group attached to the complex , flavin <unk> ( <unk> ) . The addition of electrons to <unk> converts it to its reduced form , <unk> . The electrons are then transferred through a series of iron – sulfur clusters : the second kind of prosthetic group present in the complex . There are both [ 2Fe – 2S ] and [ 4Fe – 4S ] iron – sulfur clusters in complex I. 
 As the electrons pass through this complex , four protons are pumped from the matrix into the intermembrane space . Exactly how this occurs is unclear , but it seems to involve conformational changes in complex I that cause the protein to bind protons on the N @-@ side of the membrane and release them on the P @-@ side of the membrane . Finally , the electrons are transferred from the chain of iron – sulfur clusters to a ubiquinone molecule in the membrane . Reduction of ubiquinone also contributes to the generation of a proton gradient , as two protons are taken up from the matrix as it is reduced to ubiquinol ( QH2 ) . 
 = = = Succinate @-@ Q oxidoreductase ( complex II ) = = = 
 Succinate @-@ Q oxidoreductase , also known as complex II or succinate dehydrogenase , is a second entry point to the electron transport chain . It is unusual because it is the only enzyme that is part of both the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain . Complex II consists of four protein subunits and contains a bound flavin adenine dinucleotide ( FAD ) cofactor , iron – sulfur clusters , and a heme group that does not participate in electron transfer to coenzyme Q , but is believed to be important in decreasing production of reactive oxygen species . It oxidizes succinate to fumarate and reduces ubiquinone . As this reaction releases less energy than the oxidation of NADH , complex II does not transport protons across the membrane and does not contribute to the proton gradient . 
 In some eukaryotes , such as the parasitic worm Ascaris suum , an enzyme similar to complex II , fumarate reductase ( <unk> : fumarate oxidoreductase , or <unk> ) , operates in reverse to oxidize ubiquinol and reduce fumarate . This allows the worm to survive in the anaerobic environment of the large intestine , carrying out anaerobic oxidative phosphorylation with fumarate as the electron acceptor . Another unconventional function of complex II is seen in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum . Here , the reversed action of complex II as an oxidase is important in regenerating ubiquinol , which the parasite uses in an unusual form of pyrimidine biosynthesis . 
 = = = Electron transfer flavoprotein @-@ Q oxidoreductase = = = 
 Electron transfer flavoprotein @-@ ubiquinone oxidoreductase ( <unk> @-@ Q oxidoreductase ) , also known as electron transferring @-@ flavoprotein dehydrogenase , is a third entry point to the electron transport chain . It is an enzyme that accepts electrons from electron @-@ transferring flavoprotein in the mitochondrial matrix , and uses these electrons to reduce ubiquinone . This enzyme contains a flavin and a [ 4Fe – 4S ] cluster , but , unlike the other respiratory complexes , it attaches to the surface of the membrane and does not cross the lipid bilayer . 
 In mammals , this metabolic pathway is important in beta oxidation of fatty acids and catabolism of amino acids and choline , as it accepts electrons from multiple acetyl @-@ CoA dehydrogenases . In plants , <unk> @-@ Q oxidoreductase is also important in the metabolic responses that allow survival in extended periods of darkness . 
 = = = Q @-@ cytochrome c oxidoreductase ( complex III ) = = = 
 Q @-@ cytochrome c oxidoreductase is also known as cytochrome c reductase , cytochrome <unk> complex , or simply complex III . In mammals , this enzyme is a dimer , with each subunit complex containing 11 protein subunits , an [ 2Fe @-@ 2S ] iron – sulfur cluster and three cytochromes : one cytochrome c1 and two b cytochromes . A cytochrome is a kind of electron @-@ transferring protein that contains at least one heme group . The iron atoms inside complex III ’ s heme groups alternate between a reduced ferrous ( + 2 ) and oxidized ferric ( + 3 ) state as the electrons are transferred through the protein . 
 The reaction catalyzed by complex III is the oxidation of one molecule of ubiquinol and the reduction of two molecules of cytochrome c , a heme protein loosely associated with the mitochondrion . Unlike coenzyme Q , which carries two electrons , cytochrome c carries only one electron . 
 As only one of the electrons can be transferred from the QH2 donor to a cytochrome c acceptor at a time , the reaction mechanism of complex III is more elaborate than those of the other respiratory complexes , and occurs in two steps called the Q cycle . In the first step , the enzyme binds three substrates , first , QH2 , which is then oxidized , with one electron being passed to the second substrate , cytochrome c . The two protons released from QH2 pass into the intermembrane space . The third substrate is Q , which accepts the second electron from the QH2 and is reduced to Q. − , which is the ubisemiquinone free radical . The first two substrates are released , but this ubisemiquinone intermediate remains bound . In the second step , a second molecule of QH2 is bound and again passes its first electron to a cytochrome c acceptor . The second electron is passed to the bound ubisemiquinone , reducing it to QH2 as it gains two protons from the mitochondrial matrix . This QH2 is then released from the enzyme . 
 As coenzyme Q is reduced to ubiquinol on the inner side of the membrane and oxidized to ubiquinone on the other , a net transfer of protons across the membrane occurs , adding to the proton gradient . The rather complex two @-@ step mechanism by which this occurs is important , as it increases the efficiency of proton transfer . If , instead of the Q cycle , one molecule of QH2 were used to directly reduce two molecules of cytochrome c , the efficiency would be halved , with only one proton transferred per cytochrome c reduced . 
 = = = Cytochrome c oxidase ( complex IV ) = = = 
 Cytochrome c oxidase , also known as complex IV , is the final protein complex in the electron transport chain . The mammalian enzyme has an extremely complicated structure and contains 13 subunits , two heme groups , as well as multiple metal ion cofactors – in all , three atoms of copper , one of magnesium and one of zinc . 
 This enzyme mediates the final reaction in the electron transport chain and transfers electrons to oxygen , while pumping protons across the membrane . The final electron acceptor oxygen , which is also called the terminal electron acceptor , is reduced to water in this step . Both the direct pumping of protons and the consumption of matrix protons in the reduction of oxygen contribute to the proton gradient . The reaction catalyzed is the oxidation of cytochrome c and the reduction of oxygen : 
 = = = Alternative reductases and oxidases = = = 
 Many eukaryotic organisms have electron transport chains that differ from the much @-@ studied mammalian enzymes described above . For example , plants have alternative NADH oxidases , which oxidize NADH in the cytosol rather than in the mitochondrial matrix , and pass these electrons to the ubiquinone pool . These enzymes do not transport protons , and , therefore , reduce ubiquinone without altering the electrochemical gradient across the inner membrane . 
 Another example of a divergent electron transport chain is the alternative oxidase , which is found in plants , as well as some fungi , protists , and possibly some animals . This enzyme transfers electrons directly from ubiquinol to oxygen . 
 The electron transport pathways produced by these alternative NADH and ubiquinone oxidases have lower ATP yields than the full pathway . The advantages produced by a shortened pathway are not entirely clear . However , the alternative oxidase is produced in response to stresses such as cold , reactive oxygen species , and infection by pathogens , as well as other factors that inhibit the full electron transport chain . Alternative pathways might , therefore , enhance an organisms ' resistance to injury , by reducing oxidative stress . 
 = = = Organization of complexes = = = 
 The original model for how the respiratory chain complexes are organized was that they diffuse freely and independently in the mitochondrial membrane . However , recent data suggest that the complexes might form higher @-@ order structures called <unk> or " <unk> . " In this model , the various complexes exist as organized sets of interacting enzymes . These associations might allow channeling of substrates between the various enzyme complexes , increasing the rate and efficiency of electron transfer . Within such mammalian <unk> , some components would be present in higher amounts than others , with some data suggesting a ratio between complexes I / II / III / IV and the ATP synthase of approximately 1 : 1 : 3 : 7 : 4 . However , the debate over this <unk> hypothesis is not completely resolved , as some data do not appear to fit with this model . 
 = = Prokaryotic electron transport chains = = 
 In contrast to the general similarity in structure and function of the electron transport chains in eukaryotes , bacteria and archaea possess a large variety of electron @-@ transfer enzymes . These use an equally wide set of chemicals as substrates . In common with eukaryotes , prokaryotic electron transport uses the energy released from the oxidation of a substrate to pump ions across a membrane and generate an electrochemical gradient . In the bacteria , oxidative phosphorylation in Escherichia coli is understood in most detail , while archaeal systems are at present poorly understood . 
 The main difference between eukaryotic and prokaryotic oxidative phosphorylation is that bacteria and archaea use many different substances to donate or accept electrons . This allows prokaryotes to grow under a wide variety of environmental conditions . In E. coli , for example , oxidative phosphorylation can be driven by a large number of pairs of reducing agents and oxidizing agents , which are listed below . The midpoint potential of a chemical measures how much energy is released when it is oxidized or reduced , with reducing agents having negative potentials and oxidizing agents positive potentials . 
 As shown above , E. coli can grow with reducing agents such as formate , hydrogen , or lactate as electron donors , and nitrate , DMSO , or oxygen as acceptors . The larger the difference in midpoint potential between an oxidizing and reducing agent , the more energy is released when they react . Out of these compounds , the succinate / fumarate pair is unusual , as its midpoint potential is close to zero . Succinate can therefore be oxidized to fumarate if a strong oxidizing agent such as oxygen is available , or fumarate can be reduced to succinate using a strong reducing agent such as formate . These alternative reactions are catalyzed by succinate dehydrogenase and fumarate reductase , respectively . 
 Some prokaryotes use redox pairs that have only a small difference in midpoint potential . For example , nitrifying bacteria such as <unk> oxidize nitrite to nitrate , donating the electrons to oxygen . The small amount of energy released in this reaction is enough to pump protons and generate ATP , but not enough to produce NADH or NADPH directly for use in anabolism . This problem is solved by using a nitrite oxidoreductase to produce enough proton @-@ motive force to run part of the electron transport chain in reverse , causing complex I to generate NADH . 
 Prokaryotes control their use of these electron donors and acceptors by varying which enzymes are produced , in response to environmental conditions . This flexibility is possible because different oxidases and reductases use the same ubiquinone pool . This allows many combinations of enzymes to function together , linked by the common ubiquinol intermediate . These respiratory chains therefore have a modular design , with easily interchangeable sets of enzyme systems . 
 In addition to this metabolic diversity , prokaryotes also possess a range of isozymes – different enzymes that catalyze the same reaction . For example , in E. coli , there are two different types of ubiquinol oxidase using oxygen as an electron acceptor . Under highly aerobic conditions , the cell uses an oxidase with a low affinity for oxygen that can transport two protons per electron . However , if levels of oxygen fall , they switch to an oxidase that transfers only one proton per electron , but has a high affinity for oxygen . 
 = = ATP synthase ( complex V ) = = 
 ATP synthase , also called complex V , is the final enzyme in the oxidative phosphorylation pathway . This enzyme is found in all forms of life and functions in the same way in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes . The enzyme uses the energy stored in a proton gradient across a membrane to drive the synthesis of ATP from ADP and phosphate ( Pi ) . Estimates of the number of protons required to synthesize one ATP have ranged from three to four , with some suggesting cells can vary this ratio , to suit different conditions . 
 This phosphorylation reaction is an equilibrium , which can be shifted by altering the proton @-@ motive force . In the absence of a proton @-@ motive force , the ATP synthase reaction will run from right to left , hydrolyzing ATP and pumping protons out of the matrix across the membrane . However , when the proton @-@ motive force is high , the reaction is forced to run in the opposite direction ; it proceeds from left to right , allowing protons to flow down their concentration gradient and turning ADP into ATP . Indeed , in the closely related <unk> type H + <unk> , the hydrolysis reaction is used to acidify cellular compartments , by pumping protons and <unk> ATP . 
 ATP synthase is a massive protein complex with a mushroom @-@ like shape . The mammalian enzyme complex contains 16 subunits and has a mass of approximately 600 kilodaltons . The portion embedded within the membrane is called FO and contains a ring of c subunits and the proton channel . The stalk and the ball @-@ shaped headpiece is called F1 and is the site of ATP synthesis . The ball @-@ shaped complex at the end of the F1 portion contains six proteins of two different kinds ( three α subunits and three β subunits ) , whereas the " stalk " consists of one protein : the γ subunit , with the tip of the stalk extending into the ball of α and β subunits . Both the α and β subunits bind nucleotides , but only the β subunits catalyze the ATP synthesis reaction . Reaching along the side of the F1 portion and back into the membrane is a long rod @-@ like subunit that anchors the α and β subunits into the base of the enzyme . 
 As protons cross the membrane through the channel in the base of ATP synthase , the FO proton @-@ driven motor rotates . Rotation might be caused by changes in the ionization of amino acids in the ring of c subunits causing electrostatic interactions that propel the ring of c subunits past the proton channel . This rotating ring in turn drives the rotation of the central axle ( the γ subunit stalk ) within the α and β subunits . The α and β subunits are prevented from rotating themselves by the side @-@ arm , which acts as a stator . This movement of the tip of the γ subunit within the ball of α and β subunits provides the energy for the active sites in the β subunits to undergo a cycle of movements that produces and then releases ATP . 
 This ATP synthesis reaction is called the binding change mechanism and involves the active site of a β subunit cycling between three states . In the " open " state , ADP and phosphate enter the active site ( shown in brown in the diagram ) . The protein then closes up around the molecules and binds them loosely – the " loose " state ( shown in red ) . The enzyme then changes shape again and forces these molecules together , with the active site in the resulting " tight " state ( shown in pink ) binding the newly produced ATP molecule with very high affinity . Finally , the active site cycles back to the open state , releasing ATP and binding more ADP and phosphate , ready for the next cycle . 
 In some bacteria and archaea , ATP synthesis is driven by the movement of sodium ions through the cell membrane , rather than the movement of protons . Archaea such as <unk> also contain the <unk> synthase , a form of the enzyme that contains additional proteins with little similarity in sequence to other bacterial and eukaryotic ATP synthase subunits . It is possible that , in some species , the <unk> form of the enzyme is a specialized sodium @-@ driven ATP synthase , but this might not be true in all cases . 
 = = Reactive oxygen species = = 
 Molecular oxygen is an ideal terminal electron acceptor because it is a strong oxidizing agent . The reduction of oxygen does involve potentially harmful intermediates . Although the transfer of four electrons and four protons reduces oxygen to water , which is harmless , transfer of one or two electrons produces superoxide or peroxide anions , which are dangerously reactive . 
 These reactive oxygen species and their reaction products , such as the hydroxyl radical , are very harmful to cells , as they oxidize proteins and cause mutations in DNA . This cellular damage might contribute to disease and is proposed as one cause of aging . 
 The cytochrome c oxidase complex is highly efficient at reducing oxygen to water , and it releases very few partly reduced intermediates ; however small amounts of superoxide anion and peroxide are produced by the electron transport chain . Particularly important is the reduction of coenzyme Q in complex III , as a highly reactive ubisemiquinone free radical is formed as an intermediate in the Q cycle . This unstable species can lead to electron " leakage " when electrons transfer directly to oxygen , forming superoxide . As the production of reactive oxygen species by these proton @-@ pumping complexes is greatest at high membrane potentials , it has been proposed that mitochondria regulate their activity to maintain the membrane potential within a narrow range that balances ATP production against oxidant generation . For instance , oxidants can activate uncoupling proteins that reduce membrane potential . 
 To counteract these reactive oxygen species , cells contain numerous antioxidant systems , including antioxidant vitamins such as vitamin C and vitamin E , and antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase , catalase , and peroxidases , which detoxify the reactive species , limiting damage to the cell . 
 = = Inhibitors = = 
 There are several well @-@ known drugs and toxins that inhibit oxidative phosphorylation . Although any one of these toxins inhibits only one enzyme in the electron transport chain , inhibition of any step in this process will halt the rest of the process . For example , if <unk> inhibits ATP synthase , protons cannot pass back into the mitochondrion . As a result , the proton pumps are unable to operate , as the gradient becomes too strong for them to overcome . NADH is then no longer oxidized and the citric acid cycle ceases to operate because the concentration of NAD + falls below the concentration that these enzymes can use . 
 Not all inhibitors of oxidative phosphorylation are toxins . In brown adipose tissue , regulated proton channels called uncoupling proteins can uncouple respiration from ATP synthesis . This rapid respiration produces heat , and is particularly important as a way of maintaining body temperature for hibernating animals , although these proteins may also have a more general function in cells ' responses to stress . 
 = = History = = 
 The field of oxidative phosphorylation began with the report in 1906 by Arthur Harden of a vital role for phosphate in cellular fermentation , but initially only sugar phosphates were known to be involved . However , in the early 1940s , the link between the oxidation of sugars and the generation of ATP was firmly established by Herman <unk> , confirming the central role of ATP in energy transfer that had been proposed by Fritz Albert Lipmann in 1941 . Later , in 1949 , Morris Friedkin and Albert L. Lehninger proved that the coenzyme NADH linked metabolic pathways such as the citric acid cycle and the synthesis of ATP . The term oxidative phosphorylation was coined by Volodymyr <unk> in 1939 . 
 For another twenty years , the mechanism by which ATP is generated remained mysterious , with scientists searching for an elusive " high @-@ energy intermediate " that would link oxidation and phosphorylation reactions . This puzzle was solved by Peter D. Mitchell with the publication of the <unk> theory in 1961 . At first , this proposal was highly controversial , but it was slowly accepted and Mitchell was awarded a Nobel prize in 1978 . Subsequent research concentrated on purifying and characterizing the enzymes involved , with major contributions being made by David E. Green on the complexes of the electron @-@ transport chain , as well as Efraim <unk> on the ATP synthase . A critical step towards solving the mechanism of the ATP synthase was provided by Paul D. Boyer , by his development in 1973 of the " binding change " mechanism , followed by his radical proposal of rotational catalysis in 1982 . More recent work has included structural studies on the enzymes involved in oxidative phosphorylation by John E. Walker , with Walker and Boyer being awarded a Nobel Prize in 1997 . 
 = = = Introductory = = = 
 Nelson DL ; Cox MM ( 2004 ) . Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry ( 4th ed . ) . W. H. Freeman . ISBN 0 @-@ 7167 @-@ 4339 @-@ 6 . 
 Schneider ED ; Sagan D ( 2006 ) . Into the Cool : Energy Flow , Thermodynamics and Life ( 1st ed . ) . University of Chicago Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 226 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Lane N ( 2006 ) . Power , Sex , Suicide : Mitochondria and the Meaning of Life ( 1st ed . ) . Oxford University Press , USA . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 = = = Advanced = = = 
 Nicholls DG ; Ferguson SJ ( 2002 ) . Bioenergetics 3 ( 1st ed . ) . Academic Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Haynie D ( 2001 ) . Biological Thermodynamics ( 1st ed . ) . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Rajan SS ( 2003 ) . Introduction to Bioenergetics ( 1st ed . ) . Anmol . ISBN 81 @-@ 261 @-@ 1364 @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> M ( Ed ) ( 2005 ) . Biophysical and Structural Aspects of Bioenergetics ( 1st ed . ) . Royal Society of Chemistry . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 346 @-@ 2 . 
 = = = General resources = = = 
 Animated diagrams illustrating oxidative phosphorylation Wiley and Co Concepts in Biochemistry 
 On @-@ line biophysics lectures Antony Crofts , University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign 
 ATP <unk> Graham Johnson 
 = = = Structural resources = = = 
 PDB molecule of the month : 
 ATP synthase 
 Cytochrome c 
 Cytochrome c oxidase 
 Interactive molecular models at Universidade Fernando Pessoa : 
 NADH dehydrogenase 
 succinate dehydrogenase 
 Coenzyme Q - cytochrome c reductase 
 cytochrome c oxidase 
 = El Chal = 
 El Chal is a pre @-@ Columbian Maya archaeological site located in the upper San Juan River valley of the southeastern Petén Basin region , Guatemala . The site is situated approximately 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) to the north of the modern town of Dolores , near the contemporary village settlement of the same name , lying some 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) to the south . 
 El Chal was occupied from approximately 300 BC through to 1300 AD ( from the Late Preclassic through to the Early Postclassic Periods of Mesoamerican chronology ) , although some Middle Preclassic activity has been identified in the acropolis . The Late Preclassic occupation of the city was concentrated around an E @-@ Group ceremonial complex some 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) north of the later site core . The site 's major period of occupation was during the Late Classic Period , when it was an important centre in the southeastern Petén region . Among the structures at the site is a large quadrangular residential complex , a structural type that is uncommonly found at Southern Maya lowland sites although there is a smaller one with similar characteristics at Machaquilá . 
 As of 2010 very little restorative work has been undertaken at the site . The archaeological site is protected by the Guatemalan Instituto de Antropología e Historia . 
 = = Location = = 
 El Chal is located in the municipality of Dolores in the department of Petén in northern Guatemala . El Chal is 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) south of Flores , the departmental capital . The archaeological site is within the southern area of a village also named El Chal , 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) to the south of the highway to Flores . The site is situated in the central Petén wet savanna in a well @-@ drained area not subject to seasonal flooding . The local topography is karstic in nature , and includes hills that support some of the city 's architecture . 
 El Chal is located within the valley of the San Juan River , which is a tributary of the Pasión River , at an altitude of 270 metres ( 890 ft ) above mean sea level . The site is situated on a natural north @-@ south communication route between the Maya Mountains and the central Petén region . This route was used during the Colonial Period and was likely to have been inherited from pre @-@ Conquest times . 
 Some of the major architecture of the site core is covered by secondary forest , including some large trees , while much of the city 's remains lie within the modern village , including mounds of various sizes . Some mounds were destroyed in order to build the modern streets , in other cases the mounds were robbed of stone that was reused in modern construction . There are also instances where modern houses have been built on top of ancient mound platforms . Modern houses had previously also occupied the outskirts of the acropolis but were relocated during the Guatemalan Civil War in the late 20th century due to guerrilla activity . 
 = = History = = 
 El Chal was first occupied in the Middle Preclassic Period , with ceramics associated with a burial being recovered from the acropolis . Late Preclassic occupation has only been identified in a few residential groups in the site core . During the Preclassic the centre of the city was probably situated some distance to the northeast of the Late Classic centre , where a large ritual complex is located . 
 The major period of occupation at the site was during the Late Classic , when most of the major architecture was built . At this time the city centre was moved to the site core around the newly built acropolis complex . The sculpted monuments of the city indicate that it was important enough during the Late Classic to possess its own Emblem Glyph . The city experienced a period of intensive construction lasting from the Late Classic through to the Terminal Classic . All hieroglyphic texts sculpted on monuments at El Chal date to the 8th century AD , although the inscriptions are heavily eroded . The residential groups constructed upon platforms in Panorama Sector were built in the Late Classic , when a flint workshop was in production in Panorama Group 19 . During the Late Classic occupation also expanded throughout the other sectors of the city ; Arrepentimiento , Municipal and Central . 
 During the Terminal Classic , El Chal maintained its primary place in the San Juan valley . This is evidenced by major building activity in the site core where the massive structures were underwent new phases of construction and by the erection of new monuments to accompany the already existing Late Classic monuments . The continued importance of El Chal in the Terminal Classic resulted in other centres in the region being eclipsed , such as El <unk> and El <unk> to the west and <unk> , La Puente and El <unk> to the southeast . During the Terminal Classic , El Chal developed its own ceramic production industry . 
 In spite of the continued intensive activity in the site core , in Panorama Sector and the other peripheral residential sectors there was a diminishing of activity compared to the Late Classic , perhaps leading up to the abandonment of the city . 
 Postclassic Period occupation of El Chal has been identified from ceramic fragments recovered from Structure 1 in the Northwest Plaza . A few Postclassic potsherds were also excavated from Group 15 in the Central Sector . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 The name El Chal first appears on a Spanish Colonial watercolour from 1735 together with other villages in the region , with the name of El Chal or El Chacal . It also appears on a map of central and southeastern Petén from 1860 , together with <unk> , Concepción , San Clemente and the ruins of Ixkun . Some of the stonework from the ruins has been stripped to be used in the construction of the modern village . 
 The site was visited by archaeologists Richard Kirsch and Ian Graham in 1974 and 1975 but their work was never published . In 1989 the Atlas Arqueológico de Guatemala mapped the site and catalogued the remaining monuments . In 1993 the first test excavations took place and an area of 4 square kilometres ( 1 @.@ 5 sq mi ) around the site core was explored . 
 In the 1970s some sculpted monuments were removed from El Chal by <unk> ( <unk> y Desarrollo del Petén - " Petén Patronage and Development " ) and were later transferred to the Tikal National Park . By the mid @-@ 1990s the exact location and identity of these monuments had been lost . 
 Further excavations have taken place since the 1990s , including investigations of the West Plaza in 2003 , the East Plaza in 2004 , the acropolis in 2005 – 2006 and the Northwest Plaza in 2006 . 
 = = Site description = = 
 The site core of El Chal consists of an acropolis and three ceremonial plazas in which the majority of sculpted monuments were found , the East Plaza , West Plaza and Northeast Plaza . There are also a number of other plazas in the site core . The plazas and the majority of the residential structures were laid out upon naturally level terrain , while the acropolis was built upon a natural limestone hill and a very few residential groups were built upon artificial basal platforms . 
 A reservoir is located to the northwest of the acropolis . It was built with irregular limestone blocks and measures 65 metres ( 213 ft ) across . In the rain season it fills to a depth of 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) and contains 400 cubic metres ( 14 @,@ 000 cu ft ) . A second , natural reservoir , is located to the south of the artificial reservoir and west of the acropolis . In the rain season it also fills to a depth of 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) . 
 The large ritual complex of El Chal was located a considerable distance to the northeast of the civic centre of the city and was probably first built in the Preclassic Period . 
 Archaeologists have mapped 268 structures clustered in 53 groups around approximately 68 patios in the site core . Residential structures were concentrated in the area surrounding the ceremonial centre , especially on the north and west sides near to the reservoir . Residences tended to be larger the closer they were to the reservoir . The residential area of El Chal was extensive and archaeologists have divided it into four sectors . Municipal consists of the area occupied by the modern village , El Arrepentimiento is the northeastern portion of the site , Panorama is the northwestern area , and Central is the site core . Central El Chal contains 25 groups , Arrepentimiento contains 40 groups , Panorama contains 53 groups and Municipal contains 18 groups . Panorama was an area of chert production while Municipal is associated with the ritual complex of the city . 
 = = = Central Sector = = = 
 = = = = Acropolis = = = = 
 The acropolis was built on a 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) high limestone hill . The base is almost square , measuring 140 metres ( 460 ft ) on each side . The acropolis complex faced northwards onto the south side of the West Plaza . The upper part of the hill was levelled into three wide terraces with an average area of 2 @,@ 800 square metres ( 30 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The terraces were linked by a sunken stairway on the north side of the acropolis . The architecture of the acropolis is arranged in six groups . 
 = = = = = Terraces = = = = = 
 Terrace 1 is the highest terrace in the acropolis . It supports three small patios labelled as Patios A , B and C. These patios are laid out between 10 structures . Among the structures found on Terrace 1 , Structures 1 , 3 , 5 and 6 have been excavated by archaeologists . Structure 5 is the largest , on the west side of Patio A. Terrace 1 has been dated to the Late and Terminal Classic . A complex stairway divided into three flights gave access to the terrace from the south side . The upper flight descended seven steps to a small room measuring 1 @.@ 3 by 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 3 by 4 @.@ 9 ft ) . These steps had a tread of 0 @.@ 3 metres ( 0 @.@ 98 ft ) and a riser of 0 @.@ 25 metres ( 0 @.@ 82 ft ) . The second flight descended from the small room to another similar room , and the third flight descended in the opposite direction to the terrace supporting Patio F ( Terrace 3 ) . The wall of the upper flight was decorated with a sculpted bas @-@ relief frame , the wall of the middle flight was coated with stucco and were painted with a red and black design . 
 Terrace 2 is situated 10 metres ( 33 ft ) below Terrace 1 . It is divided into two patios ( Patios D and E ) by a 9 @-@ metre ( 30 ft ) high pyramid temple . Patio D was accessed via a stairway from the West Plaza directly to the north , the stairway rose in two sections with a minor terrace between them , referred to as the Lower Terrace . The lower section of the stairway measured 59 metres ( 194 ft ) long , extending 5 metres ( 16 ft ) into the plaza at its lower end . Material excavated from the area around the stairway where it joined the base of the acropolis has been dated to the Late and Terminal Classic . Patio D itself was laid out at the very beginning of the Late Classic Period . It was resurfaced a number of times in the Late Classic , and the earliest of the surrounding structures were built at this time . Additional structures were built in the Terminal Classic , and the patio area was extended with the construction of the adjacent Patio G. Patio E was also accessed via a stairway from the base of the acropolis , although it is very poorly preserved . Ceramics recovered from the western portion of the Lower Terrace dated it to the Late and Terminal Classic . A low platform was excavated in the extreme southwestern corner of the Lower Terrace , although most of the ceramic finds were dated to the Terminal Classic , some pieces dating to the Late Preclassic were also found . 
 Terrace 3 is located on the southwest side of the acropolis at the same height as Terrace 2 . It supports one residential patio group , Patio F , formed by five structures . 
 = = = = = Patio A = = = = = 
 Patio A was formed by a group of 5 buildings serving a dual residential and administrative function . Evidence of this is the fact that the structures in the group were divided into multiple rooms with internal benches , a form of architecture that is recognised as being a palace and that may serve for either elite domestic or administrative activity . The stone blocks used in construction measured approximately 40 centimetres ( 16 in ) on each side with a finely dressed front face , tapering towards the back in order to grip the structural fill . This patio is situated on the west side of the main terrace of the acropolis , Terrace 1 . Patio A has an area of 432 square metres ( 4 @,@ 650 sq ft ) , with the largest building on the west side . Patio B lies to the east and Patio C to the west , a lower terrace supports Patio F to the southwest and Patio D to the north . The patio was accessed via a short 3 @-@ step stairway on the southeast side . 
 Excavations identified 3 construction phases in Patio A , with the first two dating to the Late Classic and the final phase dating to the Terminal Classic . 
 Terrace 1 Structure 1 is on the north side of Patio A. It consists of a long platform access via a 23 @-@ metre ( 75 ft ) wide stairway on the south side . The stairway had three steps , each with a tread of 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) and a riser measuring 0 @.@ 35 metres ( 1 @.@ 1 ft ) . Structure 1 experienced two construction phases , in the Late Classic and in the Terminal Classic . In its final form it measured 34 metres ( 112 ft ) long by 8 @.@ 5 metres ( 28 ft ) wide and stood 1 @.@ 4 metres ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) high . The superstructure of the building possessed a C @-@ shaped bench . 
 Terrace 1 Structure 2 is on the northeast side of Patio A. It was a single level platform measuring 8 by 5 metres ( 26 by 16 ft ) by 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) high . It was accessed via a projecting stairway measuring 5 metres ( 16 ft ) wide and protruding 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) from the structure . The five steps each had a tread of 0 @.@ 25 metres ( 0 @.@ 82 ft ) and a riser measuring 0 @.@ 24 metres ( 0 @.@ 79 ft ) . Archaeologists were unable to investigate the summit of Structure 2 due to the large size of the trees growing upon it . The structure clearly shows two construction phases , the first dating to the Late Classic and the second to the Terminal Classic . Finds dating to the Middle Preclassic were recovered from trenches sunk into the patio in front of the structure , consisting of 378 potsherds associated with Burial 265 . A Late Classic cache was also found at the base of the stairway , consisting of 2 eccentric obsidian artefacts shaped like centipedes , a flint arrowhead , various pieces of waste flint , and a number of flint blades and obsidian prismatic blades . 
 Terrace 1 Structure 3 is on the east side of Patio A and separates it from Patio B. Structure 3 was built in two construction phases . The first phase was covered in stucco and raised 1 @.@ 3 metres ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) above the level of the patio . The second phase consisted of a square platform that was 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) high . A bench on the east side of the platform raised the height to 2 @.@ 1 metres ( 6 @.@ 9 ft ) above the floor of the patio . Structure 3 was built from small limestone blocks around a rubble core . In its final form the structure was a rectangular platform measuring 17 by 14 @.@ 5 metres ( 56 by 48 ft ) and standing 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) high . The stairway measured 7 @.@ 5 metres ( 25 ft ) wide and was divided into two by a 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) block . The platform supported a bench measuring 13 @.@ 5 by 7 metres ( 44 by 23 ft ) . An incomplete human skeleton was found next to the south wall ( Burial 73 ) , together with broken ceramic fragments dating to the Terminal Classic . Although material excavated from the two construction phases has been dated to the Late Preclassic and the Early Classic , this material is believed to have been transported there and used as infill during the Late Classic construction of the building and not to represent earlier phases of the structure itself . 
 Terrace 1 Structure 4 is on the south side of Patio A. The earliest version of the building measured 31 by 6 @.@ 5 metres ( 102 by 21 ft ) . It supported a room that measured 28 @.@ 5 by 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 93 @.@ 5 by 8 @.@ 2 ft ) with three doorways . The central door was 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) wide and the flanking doorways measured 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) wide . The front of the building was dominated by a bench that ran the entire width of the structure and became a 9 @-@ metre ( 30 ft ) wide stairway descending to the patio and extending 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) from the platform . The stairway had 3 steps , each with a height of 0 @.@ 3 metres ( 0 @.@ 98 ft ) and a tread of 0 @.@ 4 metres ( 1 @.@ 3 ft ) . The first construction phase included a 1 @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) high wall that was later covered by the stucco floor of a small north @-@ facing room . On the east side of the structure , the walls were still found to stand to a height of 2 @.@ 55 metres ( 8 @.@ 4 ft ) . Structure 4 was deliberately demolished in antiquity . The second construction phase extended the building to a size of 31 by 8 @.@ 5 metres ( 102 by 28 ft ) . It supported three rooms with benches , the combined width of the rooms was 28 @.@ 5 metres ( 94 ft ) by 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) . The same three doors from the earlier phase continued in use . 
 Terrace 1 Structure 5 is on the west side of Patio A. It consists of a single platform that is the highest in the entire acropolis . It measures 19 @.@ 5 by 6 metres ( 64 by 20 ft ) and was 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) high . Structure 5 was joined to Structures 1 and 4 since its earliest phase of construction . Structure 5 was accessed by a projecting stairway that ascended the east side , it measured 5 @.@ 5 metres ( 18 ft ) wide and protruded 2 @.@ 6 metres ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) from the platform . The stairway joins a 2 @.@ 25 @-@ metre ( 7 @.@ 4 ft ) talud wall topped by a 0 @.@ 8 @-@ metre ( 2 @.@ 6 ft ) high cornice that projects 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) from the talud wall . The walls of Structure 5 were built from finely dressed limestone blocks . No trace of any superstructure was found on top of the platform , nor was any earlier substructure identified . Only the lowest courses of limestone blocks were found to be still in place and it is believed that the upper courses were stripped in antiquity . Finds made near the southeast corner of Structure 5 include a piece of a greenstone axe , two spherical stones , pieces of human bone ( labelled as Burial 70 ) and a concentration of broken domestic ceramics . These finds are believed to represent activity from the very end of the Terminal Classic prior to the abandonment of the site . Burial 278 , that of an infant , was found under the floor of Structure 5 and was dated to the Late Classic . 
 = = = = = Patio B = = = = = 
 Patio B was filled with a large amount of rubble in order to bring it up to the same level as the pre @-@ existing Patio A , which lies immediately to the west . It is an enclosed courtyard with an area of 768 square metres ( 8 @,@ 270 sq ft ) . Three structures were built upon the new patio , closing it on the north , east and south sides , while the west side was enclosed by Structures 1 @,@ 2 and 3 of Patio A. 
 Terrace 1 Structure 6 is on the south side of Patio B. It is a square platform with two stepped levels . After the last phase of construction it had two benches on the top and a wide projecting stairway on the north side , it measures 9 metres ( 30 ft ) wide . The structure measures 14 @.@ 5 by 12 @.@ 5 metres ( 48 by 41 ft ) , the first bench measures 11 by 5 metres ( 36 by 16 ft ) and the second 10 by 3 metres ( 32 @.@ 8 by 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . Various human bone fragments , representing pieces of three individuals , were excavated together with domestic ceramics . A smaller second stairway jutted from the southeast corner of the building . Structure 6 has been dated to the Late and Terminal Classic . 
 Terrace 1 Structure 7 is a low platform on the east side of Patio B. It measured 22 @.@ 5 by 4 metres ( 74 by 13 ft ) and stood 0 @.@ 64 metres ( 2 @.@ 1 ft ) high . Upon the platform was a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) wide bench , and a single 9 @.@ 5 metres ( 31 ft ) wide step lead down to the patio . Excavations of the platform uncovered material that was dated to the Late Preclassic , Late Classic and Terminal Classic . Structure 7 was the last to be built on Patio B , <unk> the construction of Structures 6 and 8 . 
 Terrace 1 Structure 8 is on the north side of Patio B. It is a rectangular platform measuring 18 by 8 @.@ 5 metres ( 59 by 28 ft ) with a 5 @-@ metre ( 16 ft ) wide south @-@ facing embedded stairway . The structure was not completely explored due to the dense vegetation covering it . 
 = = = = = Patio C = = = = = 
 Patio C was added to Terrace 1 at the same time as Patio B , using a large amount of rubble to extend the terrace . It is to the northwest of Patio A and is slightly lower than it . Patio C is bordered by 2 structures , on the north and west sides , with the West Structure being the largest . The fill beneath the patio has a depth of 6 metres ( 20 ft ) , which was previously the height of the retaining talud wall of the northwest side of Patio A , as found during excavations . Patio C had 2 construction phases and served an administrative function directly associated with the buildings of Patio A. 
 The West Structure contained a 1 @.@ 2 @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) wide room accessed via a 0 @.@ 7 @-@ metre ( 2 @.@ 3 ft ) wide doorway . The rear room of the structure contained a bench , or throne , that measured 2 @.@ 4 by 2 @.@ 95 metres ( 7 @.@ 9 by 9 @.@ 7 ft ) and stood 0 @.@ 45 metres ( 1 @.@ 5 ft ) high . Material recovered from the structure has been dated to the Late and Terminal Classic Periods , with a small amount dating to the Postclassic . 
 The North Structure was a low platform that was covered with stucco and painted red . 
 = = = = = Patio D = = = = = 
 Terrace 2 Structure 1 is on the north side of Patio D. It is a low rectangular platform measuring 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) high . Its walls rest upon the last surface layer of the patio and the structure 's surface was littered with abundant Terminal Classic ceramic remains . A sunken stairway climbed the structure at a point 10 metres ( 33 ft ) from the southeast corner . The tread of the steps measured 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) deep while the risers measured 0 @.@ 2 metres ( 0 @.@ 66 ft ) high . During the Late Classic this structure apparently had an administrative function . However , by the Terminal Classic it was used as a domestic building , as evidenced by the abundant ceramics and stone artefacts recovered , the latter include a fragment of a metate milling stone , an obsidian knife and two flint knives . 
 Terrace 2 Structure 2 is on the east side of Patio D. It was a 9 @-@ metre ( 30 ft ) tall pyramidal platform that did not possess a summit superstructure . The upper east side of the pyramid has collapsed and looters ' trenches on the west side were filled in by IDAEH in 1991 . The walls possessed <unk> and excavations uncovered traces of red paint . The stairway faced west onto Patio D , the treads measured 0 @.@ 2 metres ( 0 @.@ 66 ft ) and the risers 0 @.@ 25 metres ( 0 @.@ 82 ft ) . The stairway projected 1 @.@ 3 metres ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) into the patio from the pyramid . A burial cist was found near the front of the pyramid , it was labelled as Burial 264 and was dated to the Late Classic . The platform had five layers of stucco flooring . Material recovered during excavation of the stairway dated to the Terminal Classic . 
 Terrace 2 Structure 3 encloses the west side of Patio D. Structure 3 does not face onto Patio D but rather is part of the Terminal Classic construction activity that extended Terrace 2 with the addition of Patio G. The structure measured 7 @.@ 8 metres ( 26 ft ) from east to west . Excavated artefacts around the base have been dated to the Late and Terminal Classic . The stairway is on the west side , facing onto Patio G. The structure is believed to have been built in a single burst of activity in the Terminal Classic . It had two stepped levels and a north @-@ south stairway was identified upon the summit of the structure . 
 = = = = = Patio F = = = = = 
 Patio F is on a terrace at the same level as Patios D and E. The patio is a closed courtyard formed by 5 structures on the west and south sides , while the other two sides are formed by the retaining walls of Patios A and C. The structures were residential buildings built upon low platforms , with the principal structure on the south side of the patio . A long , low platform on the west side supports two structures , labelled as Structures 1 and 2 . Excavations of this platform recovered ceramic remains dating to the Late and Terminal Classic . 
 Structure 1 measures 19 @.@ 3 metres ( 63 ft ) north @-@ south by 4 @.@ 8 metres ( 16 ft ) east @-@ west and was built upon the same platform that supports Structure 2 . The structure had a single room measuring 7 @.@ 5 by 2 metres ( 24 @.@ 6 by 6 @.@ 6 ft ) , which contained a bench . 
 Structure 2 is to the south of Structure 1 , resting upon the same basal platform . It measured 7 @.@ 1 by 5 @.@ 6 metres ( 23 by 18 ft ) with a room measuring 4 @.@ 44 by 1 @.@ 66 metres ( 14 @.@ 6 by 5 @.@ 4 ft ) . 
 Structure 3 was built directly upon Patio F , and is therefore lower than Structures 1 and 2 . It was on the southwest side of Patio F and measured 6 @.@ 2 by 5 @.@ 3 metres ( 20 by 17 ft ) and had a 2 @.@ 13 @-@ metre ( 7 @.@ 0 ft ) wide projecting stairway extending 0 @.@ 66 metres ( 2 @.@ 2 ft ) from the facade . Ceramics from the structure were largely dated to the Terminal Classic , with a few pieces dating to the Postclassic . 
 Structure 4 was located on the south side of Patio F. Ceramics from the structure were dated to the Terminal Classic . 
 = = = = East Plaza = = = = 
 The East Plaza covers an area of 6 @,@ 300 square metres ( 68 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , making it the largest open ceremonial space in the entire city . On its east side it is delimited by 2 medium @-@ height structures ( East Plaza Structures 1 and 2 ) , on the south side by the base of the acropolis , on the west side by Structure 3 of the West Plaza and on the north side by the South Structure of the Northeast Plaza . Six stelae and three altars were found in the East Plaza . The plaza had two construction phases , the first dated to the Late Classic and the second to the Terminal Classic . A few Late Preclassic ceramic fragments were also recovered . The levelling of the East Plaza involved a considerable inversion of labour due to the limestone bedrock being extremely close to the surface at one side and 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) under the surface at the other . 
 East Plaza Structure 1 is on the east side of the plaza . In its final form it was a platform with two levels standing to a total height of 7 metres ( 23 ft ) . It measured 20 metres ( 66 ft ) north @-@ south by 15 metres ( 49 ft ) east @-@ west . The structure had a 2 @-@ metre ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) wide stairway climbing from the plaza on the west side , the stairway was 10 metres ( 33 ft ) long . The lower level was the main platform . It was built from finely dressed limestone blocks . The upper level was built of very poor quality limestone and is extremely badly preserved . A bench was built on top of the structure . It measured 8 by 3 metres ( 26 @.@ 2 by 9 @.@ 8 ft ) with a protruding section measuring 3 by 5 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 by 16 @.@ 4 ft ) . The bench was 25 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) high . A large number of flint chippings were excavated from the structure . They have been dated to the Late Classic . 
 East Plaza Structure 2 is also on the east side of the plaza . It is a rectangular platform measuring 17 by 10 metres ( 56 by 33 ft ) and facing westwards onto the plaza itself . A stairway climbs the west side of the building . It measures 12 by 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 39 @.@ 4 by 3 @.@ 9 ft ) . The platform supports a bench measuring 12 by 3 metres ( 39 @.@ 4 by 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . The broken remains of Stela 6 are scattered in front of the structure . Relatively few ceramic remains were found associated with this structure . Those that were have been dated to the Terminal Classic , although a pit sunk into the summit uncovered remains dating to the Late Classic at a depth of 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) . Lithic artefacts included a piece of an obsidian knife . 
 = = = = West Plaza = = = = 
 The West Plaza covers an area of 3 @,@ 500 square metres ( 38 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The south side of the plaza is formed by the north side of the acropolis and the plaza is also enclosed by four structures that measure more than 5 metres ( 16 ft ) high . The highest structure is on the west side and measures 13 metres ( 43 ft ) high . A 7 @.@ 5 @-@ metre @-@ wide ( 25 ft ) series of three steps stretched between the north wall of Structure 4 and the southwest corner of Structure 1 and gave access to the Northwest Plaza . These steps had a 0 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) tread and were 0 @.@ 2 metres ( 0 @.@ 66 ft ) high . Six monuments were found in the West Plaza . During the final phase of occupation during the Terminal Classic , refuse found at the base of the acropolis indicates that the West Plaza was occupied as a residential area , with the inhabitants using flimsy perishable structures . 
 West Plaza Structure 1 is on the north side of the West Plaza , near the northwest corner . The structure faces southwards onto the plaza and has a stairway that measures 12 by 3 metres ( 39 @.@ 4 by 9 @.@ 8 ft ) climbing the front of the building . The final version of the structure measured 27 by 20 metres ( 89 by 66 ft ) . A bench on the summit of the structure measures 22 by 4 metres ( 72 by 13 ft ) . The structure has two phases of construction , the earliest of which dates to the Late Classic . 
 West Plaza Structure 2 is on the north side of the West Plaza . It is a rectangular platform measuring 27 by 20 metres ( 89 by 66 ft ) with a projecting stairway on the south side that measures 12 by 3 metres ( 39 @.@ 4 by 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . It is the only building on the West Plaza that did not possess a bench upon the summit . A number of potsherds dating to the Terminal Classic were recovered from the front of the platform . 
 West Plaza Structure 3 is on the east side of the West Plaza and separates it from the East Plaza . It is a rectangular building with a wide stairway climbing from the west . The structure measures 38 by 18 metres ( 125 by 59 ft ) and possesses a bench on the summit that measures 25 by 6 metres ( 82 by 20 ft ) . After its final construction phase the platform stood 4 @.@ 45 metres ( 14 @.@ 6 ft ) high . A pit sunk into the structure revealed the presence of two earlier substructures . The first was 2 @.@ 85 metres ( 9 @.@ 4 ft ) high and the second stood 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 @.@ 3 ft ) high . All three stages were filled with a rubble core , although the earliest stage consisted of larger pieces than the latter stages . Various artefacts were recovered from the southwest corner of the final stage of the stairway , including pieces of flint , obsidian blades , metates ( milling stones ) and a large amount of domestic ceramics . 
 = = = = = Structure 4 = = = = = 
 West Plaza Structure 4 is on the west side of the West Plaza and is the tallest structure at El Chal . The platform measures 46 metres ( 151 ft ) north @-@ south and 30 metres ( 98 ft ) east @-@ west ; it has a rectangular base that was formed of three stepped sections . The lowest section measured 1 @.@ 83 metres ( 6 @.@ 0 ft ) high with a 1 @.@ 3 metres ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) wide platform between its upper edge and the beginning of the second section . The middle section was 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) high with a 0 @.@ 6 @-@ metre @-@ wide ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) platform between its upper edge and the base of the upper section . The wall of the top section is poorly preserved with just two courses of stonework remaining in place . The sides of the structure have largely collapsed due to erosion , leaving the north side as the best preserved . The stairway has not been positively identified but is believed to be a wide sunken stairway on the east side . The broken fragments of Stela 1 were found at the base of this stairway . 
 The platform supported a long superstructure facing onto the West Plaza , as evidenced by the bases of its walls . Originally the superstructure consisted of a single , long room but this was later subdivided ; another room to the south was probably demolished at the same time . The floor of the superstructure is 11 @.@ 5 metres ( 38 ft ) above the level of the West Plaza . The walls were 1 @.@ 1 metres ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) thick and the entrance doorway measured 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) wide . This superstructure was divided into five rooms , each measuring 2 @.@ 9 by 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 9 @.@ 5 by 1 @.@ 6 ft ) . These rooms were completely sealed , and in some cases destroyed , by a layer of compact white soil during the Terminal Classic . The rooms were upon a low platform upon the summit and were accessed from the upper section of the basal platform via three steps measuring 22 metres ( 72 ft ) wide , with a tread of 0 @.@ 25 metres ( 0 @.@ 82 ft ) and a height of 0 @.@ 3 metres ( 0 @.@ 98 ft ) . Stucco fragments with traces of pigment indicate that the rooms were once painted . 
 Room 1 was extremely poorly preserved and is the southernmost of the rooms . Only one doorjamb and a portion of wall belonging to a rear bench were found during excavations . 
 Room 2 is one of the best preserved of the rooms atop Structure 4 . It measured 2 @.@ 9 metres ( 9 @.@ 5 ft ) north @-@ south by 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) east @-@ west . The doorway to the room was 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) wide . The room has been dated to the Terminal Classic . 
 Room 3 is the middle room of the superstructure . It was the only room not to have been sealed during the Terminal Classic and due to this is in a poor state of preservation . The room possessed a bench against the back wall the measured 0 @.@ 2 metres ( 0 @.@ 66 ft ) in height and 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) wide . 
 Room 4 was well preserved and is very similar to Room 5 . It measured 2 @.@ 9 metres ( 9 @.@ 5 ft ) north @-@ south by 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) east @-@ west , the door was 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) wide . The bench of the room measured 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) high by 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) thick . 
 Room 5 is of identical proportions as rooms 2 and 4 . It was extremely well preserved , including the rear wall of the bench and the room was used as a model for investigations of the other rooms in Structure 4 . 
 Some artefacts were recovered from the northeastern portion of the structure . They included fragments of a metate and of a <unk> ( <unk> for use with a metate ) and a large quantity of domestic ceramics . Stela 1 and Altar 7 were found in front of Structure 4 . 
 = = = = = Ballcourt = = = = = 
 The Ballcourt is on the north side of the West Plaza . It runs north @-@ south and measures 18 metres ( 59 ft ) long by 4 @.@ 8 metres ( 16 ft ) wide . The sides of the ballcourt measure approximately 4 metres ( 13 ft ) high . These side structures supported rectangular stone benches . The west structure has been damaged by a looters ' trench and originally had a stairway that climbed the west side . Sculpted blocks of stone were found on the benches of both side structures and once decorated the aprons of the ballcourt . The four surviving blocks bear geometric designs and parts of sculpted figures deity masks . The stucco floor at the south end of the ballcourt was found to be well preserved . The ballcourt has been dated to the Late Classic Period . 
 = = = = Northeast Plaza = = = = 
 The Northeast Plaza covers an area of 850 square metres ( 9 @,@ 100 sq ft ) . It is located to the north of the East Plaza . The Northeast Plaza is enclosed by four structures of similar size and form and was accessed from the northeast corner . The tallest structure measures 5 metres ( 16 ft ) high . The four buildings completely enclose an area measuring 30 by 35 metres ( 98 by 115 ft ) . These four structures consist of stepped rectangular platforms and were built from finely dressed limestone blocks . Excavations revealed remains of the superstructure of the tallest structure , including rooms with different entrance doorways . Construction at the plaza dates to the Late Classic period . 
 Northeast Plaza Structure 2 has a rectangular base . The structure is believed to have had three stepped levels that were built with finely dressed stone blocks , some of which were decorated with a double @-@ trapezoid design . Some of the blocks were found to have a thin coating of cream @-@ coloured stucco . The rear of the structure has the form of a truncated pyramid . The stairway and the upper parts of the structure were deliberately destroyed in antiquity , leaving only the lower courses of stonework in place . The southeastern portion of the platform is the best preserved , where a talud wall stands to a height of 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) . Structure 2 is believed to have faced onto the Northeast Plaza . Ceramic remains were found on the east side of the platform and also where Structure 2 joins Structure 4 . Excavations of the upper platform revealed five layers of stucco flooring , all dating to the Late Classic . Burial 67 was found deposited in a cist under the second layer , its location had been marked on that floor with a painted red circle . Upon the top of the platform were found traces of a small ( 0 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) wide ) room with doorways facing the east and west . The walls were 1 @.@ 35 metres ( 4 @.@ 4 ft ) thick and their remains stand to a height of 35 centimetres ( 14 in ) . The floor of the room slopes noticeably down to the east . 
 = = = = Northwest Plaza = = = = 
 The Northwest Plaza covers an area of 3 @,@ 600 square metres ( 39 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . It is enclosed by two structures , the largest of which is a pyramid on the west side . No monuments were found within the Northwest Plaza . The plaza occupies a privileged position at the centre of the city although it does not have a high concentration of structures . Three construction levels have been identified within the Northwest Plaza , all of them date to the Late Classic . 
 Northwest Plaza Structure 1 has a rectangular base measuring 44 metres ( 144 ft ) east @-@ west by 25 metres ( 82 ft ) north @-@ south and standing 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) high . The lowest level of the platform body has an inclining talud wall . A 15 @-@ metre ( 49 ft ) wide stairway projects 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) from the wall of the structure . The stairways was built during the earliest construction phase of the plaza , rising from the lowest plaza level . After the second surfacing of the plaza an unusual inclining talud @-@ style dado was added to the stairway . At the same time a small bench @-@ type structure was attached to the west side of the platform in order to widen the lower level of the building . The small blocks used in this extension contrast with the large , finely dressed blocks used in the main structure . <unk> recovered from the structure mainly represent Late to Terminal Classic utilitarian wares , with additional fragments representing a Postclassic occupation of the structure . 
 Northwest Plaza Structure 2 is a 5 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 18 ft ) high pyramid on the west side of the plaza . Its base measures 30 by 24 metres ( 98 by 79 ft ) . The architectural quality of the pyramid was poor , as demonstrated by the small , irregular blocks used in construction , and it has been badly damaged by the collapse of its sides . These blocks average 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) on each side . The pyramid has also been damaged by a looters ' pit on the west side of the structure . Architectural detail has been largely obliterated by the pyramid 's poor state of preservation , but inset corners have been identified on the north and south sides . Surface ceramic finds all date to the Terminal Classic . Artefacts recovered include portions of a ceramic incense burner and broken obsidian prismatic blades . 
 = = = = Southeast Plaza = = = = 
 Southeast Plaza Structure 1 is a rectangular platform with at least two levels . It has been dated to the Late Classic Period . 
 = = = = Groups 13 and 15 = = = = 
 Group 13 and Group 15 are located just outside the protected archaeological zone , opposite the custodian 's house . Group 15 is situated immediately north of Group 13 and some structures are shared by both groups . Ceramic fragments recovered from the two groups have been dated to the Late Preclassic , Late Classic , Terminal Classic and Postclassic , with the majority dating to the Terminal Classic . 
 Group 15 Structure 2 is a rectangular platform with a projecting stairway . It measures 18 by 7 @.@ 2 metres ( 59 by 24 ft ) with a projecting stairway that measures 9 by 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 29 @.@ 5 by 3 @.@ 9 ft ) . A few domestic ceramics were recovered during excavations . 
 Group 15 Structure 5 was found to have a midden near the northwest corner from which were excavated a large amount of Terminal Classic potsherds together with a few pieces dating to the Postclassic Period . 
 = = = = Group 18 = = = = 
 This group is a residential group to the northeast of the site core . Four low structures were built upon a basal platform , largely clustered on the east side . The plaza area had an area of 300 square metres ( 3 @,@ 200 sq ft ) . The plaza had two construction phases , the earliest dating to the Late Preclassic Period and the second to the Late Classic . Burial 68 was found in the centre of the plaza , under the earlier floor level . 
 Group 18 Structure 1 is on the north side of the plaza . It was severely damaged when a modern street was laid out , cutting through its north side . Only the south wall remains . 
 Group 18 Structure 2 is on the east side of the plaza . Its earliest phase dates to the Late Preclassic . The Preclassic remains consist of a low north wall running east @-@ west . A later construction phase was built over this . It consisted of a rectangular platform that supported a bench . A small pyrite disc was found near the front wall . Obsidian prismatic blades were found on top of the platform , together with pieces of a thin earthenware bowl . Burial 69 was found in front of the base of the platform . 
 Group 18 Structure 3 is a rectangular platform located on the south side of the plaza . The core consists of large pieces of rubble that suggest some kind of older substructure . The platform has been dated to the Late Classic . 
 Group 18 Structure 4 is situated on the west side of the plaza . 
 = = = = Group 21 = = = = 
 This group is located to the north of the reservoir . The layout of the group is difficult to discern due to destruction caused by the construction of a street , although two low structures survive . Group 21 is distinguished by being the only group outside of the ceremonial centre of the city to possess stone monuments , the badly eroded Stela 10 and Altar 6 . 
 = = = = Other structures = = = = 
 The various minor residential groups , including Groups 7 through to 12 , were formed by clusters of very small structures with platforms not exceeding 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) in height . Groups 4 to 6 , 13 to 17 , 20 to 24 , 26 and 52 all date to the Late and Terminal Classic . Late Preclassic ceramics were recovered from Group 23 . 
 = = = Municipal Sector and E @-@ Group = = = 
 The Municipal Sector is the area north of the highway running from Flores to Dolores . Part of this sector actually falls within the municipality of Santa Ana . Eighteen residential groups have been mapped in this sector . These residential groups are clustered around a group of larger structures forming an E @-@ Group ceremonial complex , located 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from the site core . 
 The E @-@ Group consists of a number of structures around a small plaza . These include a pyramid at the west side , a long structure on the east side supporting an upper platform and two smaller structures on the north and south sides . The E @-@ Group was first built in the Late Preclassic Period , it was lightly occupied during the Early Classic and was then expanded with the addition of two structures in the Late Classic . By this time major activity at El Chal had been transferred to the area around the acropolis , leaving the once central E @-@ Group on the periphery . 
 The East Platform of the E @-@ Group has produced ceramics dating to the Late Preclassic , Early Classic and Late Classic . The East Platform was built from limestone blocks and was accessed via a stairway at the rear of the building that projected 6 metres ( 20 ft ) . This stairway climbed a 9 metres ( 30 ft ) wide projection from the rear of the building . The east platform does not support the usual lateral structures found at E @-@ Groups , with the Central Platform being the only upper platform upon the basal platform . 
 The Central Platform of the E @-@ Group is situated upon the middle section of the East Platform . It has produced ceramics dated to the Late Preclassic . The platform has a total height of 8 metres ( 26 ft ) . 
 The West Pyramid of the E @-@ Group produced ceramic evidence dating the Late Preclassic , Early Classic and Late Classic . Although the limestone blocks used for its construction are very poorly preserved , the West Pyramid is believed to have been a radial pyramid dating to the Late Preclassic Period . 
 The North Structure of the E @-@ Group has not been securely dated but is believed to date to the Late Classic , based on comparisons with E @-@ Groups at other Maya cities . 
 The South Structure of the E @-@ Group has not been securely dated but is also believed to have been built in the Late Classic . 
 = = = Arrepentimiento Sector = = = 
 The Arrepentimiento Sector is located beside the highway running from El Chal to Santa Elena . It contains about 40 groups of structures concentrated upon karstic hills , with lesser occupation in low @-@ lying areas . Settlement extends northwards from the highway for about 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) until the dry riverbed of the Río El Chal . The majority of the architectural groups are located among cattle pasture . Some of the groups have been heavily looted , mostly those groups covered by dense vegetation . Those groups in open pasture have not been subject to looting but have suffered from the stripping of their stonework in order to use it in modern construction . 
 The <unk> groups of the Arrepentimiento Sector are residential in nature , with low platforms measuring between 10 and 40 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 and 15 @.@ 7 in ) high laid out around patios with alignments of uncut stones . The structures in these groups date to the Late Classic . 
 The North Mound of Group 1 and the South Mound of Group 2 are the only structures that are greater than 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) in height . 
 = = = Panorama Sector = = = 
 This sector is located within the lands owned by Finca Panorama , some 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) from El Chal along the highway towards Santa Elena . The altitude is very close to that of the site core , averaging 270 metres ( 890 ft ) above mean sea level . Panorama Sector occupies an area of cattle pasture with very few trees but a great many <unk> Palms , the fruit of which is used locally to produce vegetable oil . The northern part of the sector possesses a number of hills upon which residential groups were built , while towards the south the land descends towards an area of unoccupied seasonal swamps . Panorama Sector possesses 53 architectural groups , 34 of which are in the periphery , together with a causeway . 
 Of the ceramic fragments recovered from Panorama Sector , 374 pieces have been dated to the Late Classic , representing 62 % of the total ceramics found in the sector . The vast majority of these are domestic in nature . 234 pieces were dated to the Terminal Classic , representing the remaining 38 % . 
 Group 4 is located 80 metres ( 260 ft ) west of Group 1 . It consists of three structures arranged around a courtyard that is open on the south side . Structure 1 is the largest structure in the group . Structures 2 and 3 have been looted . The group has been dated to the Late Classic Period . 
 Group 5 is 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) southwest of Group 1 . It consists of three structures laid out around a patio that is open of the east side . Group 5 is dated to the Late Classic . 
 Group 6 is 30 metres ( 98 ft ) south of Group 1 . Like Group 5 it consists of three structures laid out around a courtyard that is open on the east side . Group 6 is dated to the Late Classic . 
 Group 7 is located on a hillside to the east of Group 15 . It consists of five structures completely enclosing a patio . Structure 1 , on the north side , and Structure 5 , on the west side , are the largest structures in the group . Structures 1 , 2 and 3 have all been looted . Group 7 dates to the Late Classic Period . 
 Group 9 is 20 metres ( 66 ft ) south of Group 7 . It consists of 5 structures , four of them are small while the west structure is larger . This group is dated to the Late Classic . 
 Group 10 is on a hillside to the southeast of Group 9 . It consists of four structures forming an enclosed patio group and dates to the Late Classic . 
 Group 15A is located on an artificial platform formed by levelling a natural elevation . The group is formed of six structures , four of these are large and enclose a patio . Two smaller structures are located to the southeast and southwest . The group has been looted , recovered ceramics date to the Late and Terminal Classic . 
 Group 15B is situated on the south side of the same artificial platform that supports Groups 15A and 15C . 
 Group 15C is situated at the south end of the same artificial platform that supports Group 15A . It is composed of three structures arranged around a patio that is open on the north side . Group 15C has been dated to the Late Classic . 
 Group 16 has not been excavated but is notable for a 70 @-@ metre ( 230 ft ) long causeway running north @-@ south past its plaza . The causeway is 9 metres ( 30 ft ) wide and bordered by 20 @-@ centimetre ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) high parapets . The original length of the causeway has not been determined . The plaza itself is bordered by the remains of walls that stand 15 to 20 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 to 7 @.@ 9 in ) high . 
 Group 19 consists of three structures laid out around a patio that is open on the south side . The group has been tentatively identified as a stone workshop due to the great quantity of waste product found there , and it may have produced flint cores . Group 19 has been dated to the Terminal Classic . Stela 19 and Altar 9 were found 40 metres ( 130 ft ) east of Group 9 . They are the only monuments that have been found in Panorama Sector . 
 = = = Monuments = = = 
 Nineteen carved stone monuments were originally found at El Chal , all of which are badly eroded . Various monuments are broken into fragments . Only five stelae and three altars bore sculpted designs . The stelae exhibit a variety of forms but all the altars are circular . None of the hieroglyphic texts found on the monuments of El Chal have yet been deciphered . The sculptural style of the monuments is similar to that of 8th century monuments from <unk> , Ucanal and Naranjo . 
 Stela 1 was found at the west side the West Plaza , at the base of Structure 4 . It was associated with Altar 7 . The stela is broken into various fragments and was sculpted with a rectangular frame containing the portrait of a standing person with an elaborate feathered headdress , holding a staff in his right hand . The figure is accompanied by a vertical hieroglyphic panel containing a calendrical date . The text is badly eroded but the numbers 10 and 13 can be read . The stela was resting upon the last construction phase of the plaza . Stela 1 measured 1 @.@ 75 metres ( 5 @.@ 7 ft ) high by 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) wide and was 0 @.@ 35 metres ( 1 @.@ 1 ft ) thick . The best preserved fragment , that possessing the sculpted portrait , was moved to the Museo Regional del <unk> de Petén ( " Southeastern Petén Regional Museum " ) in Dolores in 2005 . This fragment measured 1 @.@ 75 metres ( 5 @.@ 7 ft ) high by 0 @.@ 66 metres ( 2 @.@ 2 ft ) wide and was 0 @.@ 35 metres ( 1 @.@ 1 ft ) thick . Five stela fragments were left where they had fallen , they contained parts of the frame and of the feathered headdress . The central pieces of the stela were not found during the excavations that took place in 2004 and 2005 . 
 Stela 2 was found in centre of the West Plaza . The butt of this stela was found in its original location , although the shaft has broken and fallen backwards . Stela 2 does not appear to have had any sculpted designs or text . It was associated with Altar 1 . 
 Stela 3 was found in the West Plaza . Stela 3 was originally erected at the base of Structure 3 . It was sculpted with a rounded frame containing the figure of a person facing left and accompanied by a badly eroded and completely illegible hieroglyphic text . Stela 3 had been moved from its original location and was associated with Altar 2 . 
 Stela 4 was found in the northern part of the East Plaza . It was the only monument at El Chal to have been sculpted on both sides and had been moved from its original location . Due to its sculptural style and its location , it is believed to have been associated with Altars 3 and 4 . The upper portion of the front of the stela bears a hieroglyphic text with a calendrical date that has been interpreted as 9 @.@ 16 @.@ 10 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 . 1 Ahau 3 Zip ( 17 March 761 ) together with the site 's Emblem Glyph . This side of the stela depicts a Maya bloodletting ritual with a richly dressed person standing with legs apart standing on top of three sitting prisoners , the middle of which bears his own name written upon his left leg . The principal figure bears a spear topped by a serpent head with a flint spearhead emerging from it . This spear is very similar in style to one depicted on Stela 8 at Naranjo . The reverse of the stela depicts three individuals standing upon a monster mask seen in profile . A child or youth is seated before two adult figures . All of them wear rectangular headdresses and hold something in their hands that cannot now be distinguished . Hieroglyphic texts are carved above the heads of the two standing figures and probably represent their names . The sculptural style of the two sides is different , and the foot @-@ level of the standing figures on each side is different , with the figures on the reverse being positioned higher up the shaft than the figure on the front . This probably indicates that both sides were sculpted in situ at different times , with the reverse of the stela being crafted after the floor level of the plaza had risen to cover the base of the front side . 
 Stela 5 was situated at the base of Structure 1 in the East Plaza . It was carved with a rounded frame containing a figure in profile facing to the left . The figure is standing with the legs together and is wearing a feathered headdress and bears a zoomorphic head on its back , from which hang more feathers . The hands of the figure are extended forward and appear to bear a staff of rulership . The stela bears a hieroglyphic panel with an incomplete dedicatory date that must fall within the range from December 740 to November 805 . The text also contains the name of the king who dedicated the stela , Shield Jaguar , and the Emblem Glyph of El Chal . 
 Stela 6 , Stela 7 , Stela 8 and Stela 9 are all either fragments or butts of stelae that were removed in the 1970s by <unk> and are now lost . All of these stelae fragments are situated in the southern half of the East Plaza , with Stela 6 to the east and Stela 9 to the west . 
 Stela 6 is broken into multiple pieces that are scattered at the base of East Plaza Structure 2 . It was a plain limestone monument . 
 Stela 10 was found in Group 21 together with Altar 6 . They are among the very few monuments that were placed outside of the ceremonial centre of the city . Stela 10 was carved with a frame containing a figure , now badly eroded . The figure is standing with feet separated and turned outwards . Small hieroglyphic panels accompany it . Stela 10 had been moved from its original location , which was probably somewhere nearby . 
 Stela 11 was found at the base of one of the structures in the Southeast Plaza , it was a plain monument . Stela 11 has fallen and is lying on its back . 
 Stela 12 was found with Altar 9 some 40 metres ( 130 ft ) east of Group 19 and 350 metres ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) south of the highway to Flores , in Panorama Sector . They are the only monuments to have been found in Panorama Sector . Stela 12 is a plain monument sculpted from limestone . It has fallen from its upright position and is half buried . It is broken in the middle and measures 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long by 0 @.@ 8 metres ( 2 @.@ 6 ft ) wide by 0 @.@ 3 metres ( 0 @.@ 98 ft ) thick . 
 Altar 1 was found in centre of the West Plaza , together with Stela 2 . This altar was found in its original location . It was a plain monument . 
 Altar 2 was found in the West Plaza , where it was associated with Stela 3 at the base of Structure 3 . Altar 2 was a plain monument and had been moved from its original location . 
 Altar 3 was found in the northern part of the East Plaza , where it was associated with Stela 4 . It was sculpted although it is now badly eroded . It bears the images of two seated anthropomorphic figures but further details cannot be distinguished . 
 Altar 4 is a circular monument . It was also found in the northern part of the East Plaza and was associated with Stela 4 . It depicts three seated prisoners , the central figure is facing to the left while the other two are facing inwards towards him . Hieroglyphic texts are carved underneath the prisoners and upon the sides of the altar . The altar has been dated on stylistic grounds to the latter part of the 8th century AD . 
 Altar 5 was found in the East Plaza . It has been broken into various pieces and is badly eroded but is believed to have been sculpted with a scene similar to that represented on Altar 4 . 
 Altar 6 is a plain monument that was found in Group 21 together with Stela 10 . Like its associated stela it had been moved from its original location in antiquity but was probably not moved far . 
 Altar 7 was found in the West Plaza at the base of Structure 4 together with Stela 1 . The altar is plain , without sculpted figures or text and rests upon the last construction phase of the plaza . It was circular and measured 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in diameter and was 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) high . It is broken in three parts . 
 Altar 8 was found in its original location in the Southeast Plaza . It was a plain altar without signs of being sculpted . The monument is badly cracked . 
 Altar 9 was found with Stela 12 in Panorama Sector , near Group 19 . It is located 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) from one end of Stela 12 and is also a plain monument . It is a circular altar , broken in fragments and half buried . It measures 60 centimetres ( 24 in ) in diameter and 45 centimetres ( 18 in ) thick . Only the upper 20 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) are exposed . 
 Altar 11 was found in its original location . 
 Altar 19 was found in its original location . 
 = = = Burials = = = 
 Burial 67 was found in a cist under the second of five stucco floor levels in Northeast Plaza Structure 2 . The skeleton was lying on its back with the head towards the north . The remains were poorly preserved but belonged to an adult . Of the skull only some dental remains were found . A ceramic plate had been placed under the head of the deceased and another plate was placed upon the knees . The plate was painted with four seated anthropomorphic figures with inclined head and wearing leather gloves with jaguar claws . The facial features of the figures are unusual . The bottom of the plate bears the image of a dancer . The ceramics date the burial to the Late Classic . 
 Burial 68 was found in the centre of the Group 18 plaza . The corpse was poorly preserved , it was laid out on its back with the skull towards the north . The remains were covered with small pieces of limestone mixed with brown soil . A piece of the upper jaw indicated that the remains were those of a child aged between 5 and 10 years old . Four ceramic pieces were deposited as an offering ; two plates , an earthenware bowl and a bowl . Burial 68 is dated to the Late Preclassic . 
 Burial 69 was found in front of the base of Group 18 Structure 2 . The remains were extremely poorly preserved but the deceased may have been laid out on their back with the head towards the north . Associated funerary offerings included a tripod plate , a polychrome vase and a flint projectile point . The burial was securely dated to the Late Classic . 
 Burial 264 was found in a cist under the earliest level of the stucco flooring of Terrace 2 Structure 2 , a pyramid on the acropolis . The cist was built from stone slabs and measured 0 @.@ 7 by 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 @.@ 3 by 2 @.@ 0 ft ) by 1 @.@ 4 metres ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) . The human remains consist of some skull fragments and some pieces of the longbones , with the skull at the east end . The offering consisted of a ceramic pot with lid dated to the Late Classic period . 
 Burial 265 was found at the base of the stairway of Terrace 1 Structure 2 in the acropolis . Ceramics associated with the burial have been dated to the Middle Preclassic Period . This burial is the only evidence yet found of such early activity at the site . It consists of the burial of a seated infant together with a newborn . The burial was laid out upon a layer of large stones and was accompanied by a plate and other ceramics as a funerary offering . The child 's skull was found underneath the plate itself . Burnt stones and earth were found next to the burial . 
 Burial 278 was that of an infant , deposited in a cist under the floor of Terrace 1 Structure 5 in the acropolis . It was unaccompanied by any offering , the few ceramic fragments found associated with the cist were dated to the Late Classic Period . The remains were laid out on their back , with the skull oriented to the south . 
 = French battleship Masséna = 
 Masséna was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the French Navy , built in the 1890s . She was a member of a group of five broadly similar battleships , along with Charles Martel , Jauréguiberry , Bouvet , and Carnot , that were ordered in response to the British Royal Sovereign class . She was named in honour of Marshal of France André Masséna . Masséna significantly exceeded her design weight and suffered from serious stability problems that inhibited accurate firing of her guns ; as a result , she was considered to be an unsuccessful design . 
 Masséna served in both the Northern and Mediterranean Squadrons during her career , which included a period as the flagship of the Northern Squadron . She was withdrawn from service before the outbreak of World War I in 1914 . The following year , she was hulked at Toulon . She was later towed to Cape Helles at the end of the Gallipoli peninsula where on 9 November 1915 she was scuttled to create a breakwater to protect the evacuation of the Allied expeditionary force withdrawing from the Gallipoli Campaign . 
 = = Design = = 
 Masséna was the fourth member of a group of five battleships built to a broadly similar design , but different enough to be considered unique vessels . The first ship was Charles Martel , which formed the basis for Masséna and three other ships . Design specifications were identical for each of the ships , but different engineers designed each vessel . The ships were based on the previous battleship Brennus , but instead of mounting the main battery all on the centerline , the ships used the lozenge arrangement of the earlier vessel Magenta , which moved two of the main battery guns to single turrets on the wings . The five ships were built in response to the British Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Masséna was 112 @.@ 65 meters ( 369 ft 7 in ) long between perpendiculars , and had a beam of 20 @.@ 27 m ( 66 ft 6 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 84 m ( 29 ft 0 in ) . She was designed to displace 10 @,@ 835 tonnes ( 10 @,@ 664 long tons ) at normal load , but she was significantly overweight when completed , and she displaced 11 @,@ 735 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 550 long tons ) . This caused the ship to sit lower in the water than intended , which partially submerged her armored belt . She was built with a pronounced snout bow to improve her buoyancy . She had a crew of 667 officers and enlisted men . 
 Masséna had three vertical triple expansion engines each driving a single screw , with steam supplied by twenty @-@ four Lagrafel d 'Allest water @-@ tube boilers . Her propulsion system was rated at 13 @,@ 400 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 000 kW ) , which allowed the ship to steam at a speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) ; this was a knot slower than her design speed of 18 kn ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . With only two @-@ thirds of her boilers operating for more economic cruising , these figures fell to 9 @,@ 650 ihp ( 7 @,@ 200 kW ) and 15 @.@ 49 kn ( 28 @.@ 69 km / h ; 17 @.@ 83 mph ) , respectively . As built , she could carry 650 t ( 640 long tons ; 720 short tons ) of coal , though additional space allowed for up to 800 t ( 790 long tons ; 880 short tons ) in total . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Masséna 's main armament consisted of two Canon de 305 mm Modèle 1893 guns in two single @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft . Each turret had an arc of fire of 250 ° . The placement of the forward gun turret close to the bow placed a great deal of weight too far forward . This exacerbated stability problems with the ship , and rendered accurate shooting more difficult . She also mounted two Canon de 274 mm Modèle 1893 guns in two single @-@ gun turrets , one amidships on each side , sponsoned out over the tumblehome of the ship 's sides . Her secondary armament consisted of eight Canon de 138 @.@ 6 mm Modèle 1891 guns , which were mounted in manually operated twin turrets at the corners of the superstructure with 160 ° arcs of fire . She also carried eight 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) quick @-@ firing guns , twelve 3 @-@ pounder quick @-@ firers , and eight 1 @-@ pounder guns . Her armament suite was rounded out by four 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , two of which were submerged in the ship 's hull . 
 The ship 's armor was constructed with Harvey steel manufactured by Creusot . The main belt was 250 to 450 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 to 17 @.@ 7 in ) thick , and ran for a length of 110 m ( 360 ft ) along the hull . It was 2 @.@ 3 m ( 7 ft 7 in ) wide . Above the belt was 101 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 in ) thick side armor . The bulkheads at either end of the armored belt were 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) thick . The main battery guns were protected with 350 to 400 mm ( 14 to 16 in ) of armor , and the secondary turrets had 99 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides . The main armored deck was 69 mm ( 2 @.@ 7 in ) thick , and the splinter deck below it was 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) thick . The conning tower had 350 mm ( 14 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service = = 
 Masséna was laid down at the Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire shipyard in September 1892 and launched nearly three years later in July 1895 . She was completed in June 1898 , in time for the Northern Squadron maneuvers conducted in July 1898 . She was assigned as the flagship of the Northern Squadron , and flew the flag of Vice Admiral Ménard . The Northern Squadron conducted annual training exercises in June ; the following month , they joined the Mediterranean Squadron for combined fleet maneuvers . In 1900 , four engineering officers were seriously injured while disassembling a pipe to repair it . They had disassembled it too quickly , and were severely scalded by escaping steam . In 1903 , the ship was transferred from the Northern Squadron to the Mediterranean , where she was assigned to the 2nd Squadron along with several of her half @-@ sister ships . 
 On 18 August 1903 , the ship participated in a gunnery trial with the new battleship Suffren off Île Longue . A mild steel plate 55 centimetres ( 21 @.@ 7 in ) thick , measuring 225 by 95 centimetres ( 7 ft 5 in by 3 ft 1 in ) , was attached to the side of Suffren 's forward turret to determine the resistance of an armour plate to a large @-@ calibre shell . Masséna anchored 100 metres ( 330 ft ) away from Suffren and fired a number of 305 @-@ millimetre ( 12 in ) shells at the plate . The first three were training shells that knocked splinters off the armor plate . The last two shells , fired with full charges , cracked the plate , but Suffren 's turret was fully operational , as was her Germain electrical fire @-@ control system and the six sheep placed in the turret were unharmed . One splinter struck Masséna above her armor belt and left a 15 @-@ centimetre sized hole in her hull . Another 50 @-@ kilogram ( 110 lb ) splinter landed within a few meters of the Naval Minister , Camille <unk> , who was observing the trials . 
 In September 1906 , Jean <unk> was assigned to the ship . By 1908 , Masséna had been withdrawn from service and placed in the Reserve Squadron , along with five other old battleships . Masséna remained on active duty until 1913 , when she was withdrawn and placed out of service . She was reduced to a hulk in 1915 . That year , the Triple Entente had launched an invasion at Gallipoli in an attempt to capture Constantinople , knock the Ottoman Empire out of the war , and open a route to supply Russia via the Dardanelles . Too old for active service , Masséna did not take part in the ensuing Gallipoli Campaign , which had stalled by the end of 1915 , having made no significant progress . The Entente decided to withdraw from the operation , and the old battleship did see some use here . Masséna was towed from Toulon to Cape Helles on the Gallipoli peninsula at the end of the year , and scuttled there on 9 November to form a breakwater to protect the evacuation effort that withdrew the Allied expeditionary force in January 1916 . 
 = Bad Blood ( 2003 ) = 
 Bad Blood ( 2003 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and presented by Maxim Hair Color , which took place on June 15 , 2003 , at the Compaq Center in Houston , Texas . It was the second event produced under the Bad Blood name and starred wrestlers from the Raw brand . This event marked the beginning of worldwide pay @-@ per @-@ views ( with the exception of the older and more significant Royal Rumble , WrestleMania , SummerSlam and Survivor Series pay @-@ per @-@ views ) being brand exclusive ( UK @-@ only pay @-@ per @-@ views had been brand exclusive since Rebellion 2002 ) . 
 The main event was a Hell in a Cell match , featuring wrestlers fighting in a ring surrounded by a steel structure . In this match , World Heavyweight Champion Triple H defeated Kevin Nash to retain his title . Two predominant bouts were featured on the undercard ; in respective singles matches , Ric Flair defeated Shawn Michaels and Goldberg defeated Chris Jericho . 
 The event marked the second time the Hell in a Cell format was used by WWE in a Bad Blood event ; the first was at In Your House : Badd Blood in 1997 . The 2003 Bad Blood event grossed over $ 500 @,@ 000 ticket sales from an attendance of 10 @,@ 000 and received about 285 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , which was more than the following year 's event . This event helped WWE increase its yearly pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue by $ 6 @.@ 2 million from the previous year . When the event was released on DVD , it reached a peak position of second on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 The event featured eight professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds , plots and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed either villains or fan favorites as they followed a series of events which built tension , leading to a wrestling match . All wrestlers were from the Raw brand – a storyline division in which WWE assigned its employees to a different program , the other being SmackDown ! . 
 The main event at Bad Blood featured World Heavyweight Champion Triple H defending the title against Kevin Nash in a ring surrounded by a steel structure of metal dubbed as the Hell in a Cell match . The buildup to the match began two months prior at Backlash , where Triple H nailed Kevin Nash with the sledgehammer during the Six man Tag team match , enabling Triple H to Pin Nash for the victory . The following month at Judgment Day , Nash defeated Triple H in a standard wrestling match , also called a singles match , via disqualification but didn 't win the championship . The following night on an episode of Raw , one of WWE 's primary television programs , after Triple H successfully defended the World title against Ric Flair , General Manager Steve Austin , a fictitious match maker and rules enforcer , announced that due to Kevin Nash winning the match at Judgment Day by disqualification , Nash would face Triple H again at Bad Blood for the World Heavyweight title in a Hell in a Cell match to avoid disqualifications . On the May 26 , 2003 episode of Raw , the staged rivalry between the two wrestlers intensified when Randy Orton and Triple H , both of whom were members of Evolution , an alliance of wrestlers that also consisted of Ric Flair , attacked Nash . The following week during an episode of Raw , Nash gained redemption over the previous week 's attack when he alongside Shawn Michaels and The Hurricane defeated Evolution in a tag team match . After the match , Nash lifted and sat Triple H on his shoulders and then slammed him back @-@ first down to the mat , a maneuver Nash calls the Jacknife powerbomb . On June 9 , 2003 during an episode of Raw , Austin announced that Mick Foley , a professional wrestler who had retired three years prior at No Way Out 2000 , would officiate the Hell in a Cell match as the guest referee . 
 One of the featured preliminary matches was Shawn Michaels versus Ric Flair in a singles match . The hype to this match began on May 26 , 2003 during an episode of Raw , where Michaels challenged Flair to a singles match for later during the show , which Flair accepted . As the match was about to take place , the other General Manager , Eric Bischoff , announced that the Flair versus Michaels match was to take place at Bad Blood instead of on the broadcast of Raw . Later on that episode , Flair and Michaels lost to World Champion Triple H in a Handicap match after Flair cheap <unk> Michaels , enabling Triple H to finish him off with the Pedigree . The following Monday on an episode of Raw , Michaels and Flair were in a promotional in @-@ ring segment , where they both discussed who was the better wrestler . Later during the program , Michaels , along with Kevin Nash and The Hurricane defeated Evolution . The feud between Flair and Michaels enhanced on the June 9 , 2003 episode of Raw . During the show , Flair and Michaels managed Randy Orton and The Hurricane , respectively ; after Orton defeated The Hurricane , Flair and Michaels were scripted to brawl until the program went into a commercial break . 
 The other featured preliminary match was Goldberg versus Chris Jericho in a singles match . The buildup to the match began on May 12 , 2003 during an episode of Raw , where a " mystery assailant " attempted to run Goldberg over with a vehicle , though Goldberg was able to avoid it . Later that night , Goldberg went on to defeat Christian in a Steel Cage match . The following Monday on Raw , it was determined that Lance Storm was the " mystery assailant " . He , however , told Austin that he was only hired to run Goldberg over and that Jericho conspired the attack . On the May 26 , 2003 episode of Raw , Jericho held a promotional in @-@ ring segment titled The Highlight Reel . During the segment he explained that he conspired the attack because he grew jealous towards Goldberg 's success in WCW , disliking Goldberg 's ego and felt that since joining the WWE , he had achieved everything he had ever wanted in his career esp. becoming the first WWE Undisputed Champion in history and all that was left was to defeat Goldberg and challenged him to a singles match at Bad Blood . Afterwards , Goldberg came down to the ring and accepted Jericho 's challenge , and as he was about to perform a spear , Jericho sprayed Goldberg 's eyes with pepper spray . 
 A non @-@ physical rivalry developed between the General Managers , Austin and Bischoff , who were feuding over who was the better authority . On the June 2 , 2003 episode of Raw , it was announced that both men would face each other in a series of non @-@ wrestling contests labeled the " Redneck Triathlon " at Bad Blood . The contests would include a belching contest , a pie eating contest , and a singing contest . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event began and aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , an episode of Sunday Night Heat , one of WWE 's secondary television programs , was taped live . The only scheduled match for the show was Ivory versus Molly Holly . Ivory won the match via pinfall after a Poison Ivory . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 After Sunday Night Heat , the pay @-@ per @-@ view began with a tag team match where the Dudley Boyz ( Bubba Ray and D @-@ Von ) faced Rodney Mack and Christopher Nowinski in a tag team match . The match was initially dominated by the Dudley Boyz and they even caused serious damage when they hit the Wassup ? on Nowinski . During the match , Theodore Long , Mack and Nowinski 's manager , verbally distracted D @-@ Von , which was scripted to result in D @-@ Von punching Long and distracting the referee . During this time , Nowinski hit Bubba in the face with a face mask that he was wearing . After the referee placed his attention to the match , <unk> covered Bubba for the pinfall . Following the tag team match , the first contest in the " Redneck Triathlon " was held , in which Steve Austin defeated Eric Bischoff in a belching contest using pre @-@ recorded belches . 
 The second wrestling match on the pay @-@ per @-@ view was Scott Steiner versus Test in a singles match in which the winner would earn the managing services of Stacy Keibler . In the early stages both competitors wrestled inconclusively , before Steiner used a Belly to belly suplex on Test . Afterward , Test rolled out of the ring and grabbed a steel chair . As he was about to hit Steiner with it , however , it bounced off the top rope and hit Test in his face . Steiner followed up on the situation by using the Steiner <unk> and covered Test for the pinfall and thus winning Keibler 's managing services . 
 The next match was a singles match , in which WWE Intercontinental Champion Christian defended the title against Booker T. The match began with Booker T hitting Christian with a spinebuster . Towards the end of the match , Booker T performed a <unk> . As a result , Christian was scripted to appear frustrated , grab the Intercontinental title belt and hit Booker T in the head with it . Therefore , Booker T won the match by disqualification . In WWE , a championship cannot change hands when a match results in a disqualification or countout , thus Christian retained the title . Following the match , the second contest in the " Redneck Triathlon " was held ; Austin and Bischoff had to place their face on the crotch of Mae Young , which Bischoff won after Austin forfeited . 
 Another match on the undercard was a tag team match for the World Tag Team Championship . This was the final pay @-@ per @-@ view that featured a masked Kane . Kane and Rob Van Dam defended the titles against La Résistance ( René Duprée and Sylvan Grenier ) . La Résistance gained the early advantage when Grenier <unk> RVD . Kane and Van Dam , however , regained control of the match when Kane chokeslammed Duprée . Towards the end of the match , Kane brawled with Grenier and Duprée at ringside , which prompted Van Dam to perform an aerial technique onto ringside . La Résistance , however , avoided the attack resulting in Van Dam landing on Kane . In the ring , while Kane was still at ringside , La Resistance performed a double spinebuster on Van Dam , proceeding into a pinfall to win the World Tag Team Championship . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The first main match was Goldberg versus Chris Jericho in a singles match . In the early stages of the match , Jericho and Goldberg fought at ringside . During this tussle , Goldberg attempted to execute a spear on Jericho , who was positioned on the security barricade ; Jericho , however , was scripted to avoid the attack as Goldberg performed the spear and broke through the security barricade . Goldberg was billed as being injured , prompting Jericho to apply several submission holds on Goldberg 's injured shoulder . After remaining in control for the duration of the match , Goldberg was able to counter Jericho 's Wall 's of Jericho and hit the Jackhammer on him . Goldberg then covered Jericho for the pinfall . 
 The other predominant match was Ric Flair versus Shawn Michaels in a singles match . During the match , Michaels set up a table at ringside and positioned Flair on it . Randy Orton was then scripted to come through the audience and interfere in the match , though , Michaels performed a superkick on him . This followed with Michaels performing a Splash on Flair , in the process breaking the table , which resulted in the enhancement of the body splash . Towards the end of the match , Michaels was scripted to knock the referee down and as he was about to perform a Sweet Chin Music on Flair , Orton came into the ring and hit Michaels ' head with a folding chair . Because the referee was incapacitated , Flair could not be disqualified for the interference . Orton then placed Flair on top of Michaels and ran out of the ring . When the referee recuperated , he saw the cover and officiated the pinfall made by Flair . After the match , the final contest in the " Redneck Triathlon " was held . Originally the contest was supposed to be a singing contest , though both men agreed to change it into a pigpen contest , where the objective was to throw your opponent into a pigpen . Austin threw Bischoff into a pigpen set up near the Bad Blood entrance stage , thus Austin won the triathlon 2 – 1 . 
 The main event was the Hell in a Cell match for the World Heavyweight Championship , in which Triple H defended the title against Kevin Nash with Mick Foley as the guest referee . During the beginning of the match , both wrestlers used a steel chair , a hammer , and the steel cage to their advantage . Eventually , Nash hit Triple H with a barbed wire bat several times before Triple H was able to hit him with the steel ring stairs . As Triple H brought a sledgehammer into the ring , Foley attempted to take the object away from him , resulting in Triple H hitting Foley and then Nash in the head with a steel chair . Triple H followed up by Pedigree on Nash . During this time , Foley had recuperated and was able to officiate the pinfall made by Triple H on Nash , thus Triple H retained the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Bad Blood , Steve Austin announced an Elimination Chamber match to take place at SummerSlam for the World Heavyweight Championship , a match contested in a ring surrounded by a steel structure of chain and girders . The match featured , Chris Jericho , Goldberg , Kevin Nash , Randy Orton , and Shawn Michaels ; at SummerSlam , Triple H won the match to retain the World Heavyweight title . The storyline between Flair and Michaels ended when Michaels was announced as a participant in the Elimination Chamber match , in which Flair would not participate . Although their feud ended , the feud <unk> five years later in 2008 . At WrestleMania XXIV , Michaels defeated Flair in a retirement match , a stipulation that only applied to Flair . As a result , Flair retired from professional wrestling . 
 Jericho and Goldberg continued to feud over several weeks before being announced as participants in the Elimination Chamber match , in which Goldberg eliminated Jericho . During the weeks leading up to SummerSlam , Kane would turn on Rob Van Dam after the loss of their tag titles , and his unmasking which occurred eight days after this event along with his heel transformation , would lead to the promotion of a no disqualification singles match between the two at SummerSlam in which Kane won , ending their team . La Résistance would engage in a feud with the Dudley Boyz , eventually a match was scheduled for SummerSlam between the two teams over the World Tag Team titles . La Résistance was able to win the match and retain the titles . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Compaq Center had a maximum capacity of 16 @,@ 285 , which was reduced for Bad Blood . The event grossed US $ 500 @,@ 000 in ticket sales from an attendance of 10 @,@ 000 — the maximum allowed . The event retailed as $ 34 @.@ 95 , but was offered free of charge to members of the United States armed forces who were returning from the Iraq War . Not counting the buys from military personnel , the event received 285 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . The promotion 's pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue was $ 24 @.@ 7 million , which was greater than the following year 's revenue of $ 18 @.@ 5 million . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the event a four out of ten possible points . The main event was rated a five out of ten possible points , while the standard match between Ric Flair and Shawn Michaels rated a seven and a half out of ten possible points . Pro Wrestling Torch , a newsletter and wrestling website in operation since 1987 , rated the event a three and a half out of ten possible points . Both websites criticized the fact that the pay @-@ per @-@ view ended twenty @-@ five minutes before the original scheduled runtime . 
 The event was released on DVD on August 18 , 2003 . The DVD was distributed by Sony Music Entertainment . The DVD debuted on Billboard 's Top Weekly DVD sales chart on September 6 , 2003 , reaching a peak position of second . The DVD remained on the chart for eight more weeks , ranking lower every week . The DVD finally ranked on October 25 , 2003 reaching a final position of 19th . The DVD also received reviews from customers ; the average customer rating from Amazon.com was a three out of five possible stars . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Nationaltheatret Station = 
 Nationaltheatret Station ( Norwegian : Nationaltheatret stasjon ) is an underground railway station on the Drammen Line serving Vika and the central business district of Oslo , Norway . It is the second @-@ busiest railway station in Norway , behind Oslo Central Station ( Oslo S ) , from which Nationaltheatret is 1 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) away . Owned and operated by the Norwegian National Rail Administration , Nationaltheatret serves regional services to the Vestfold Line and intercity services on the Sørland Line operated by the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) , the Oslo Commuter Rail operated by NSB and NSB Gjøvikbanen , and the Airport Express Train . 
 The station is located below an Oslo Metro station with the same name . At ground level there is transfer to the Oslo Tramway and Ruter buses . Nationaltheatret is the only underground mainline railway station in Norway , and named for the adjacent National Theatre . The station opened as the terminus of Holmenkolbanen 's light rail services in 1928 . The railway station opened on 1 June 1980 and was upgraded to four tracks in 1999 . The older section received a full renovation in 2008 . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Nationaltheatret is Norway 's only underground mainline railway station , located within the Oslo Tunnel on the Drammen Line . At ground level , there are three entrances to the station . On the west side of the station , the main entrance is from beneath 7 @.@ <unk> @-@ <unk> and Victoria Terrasse , facing Ruseløkkveien ; and , there is an entrance from Johanne Dybwads plass , which is the site of the National Theatre . From the east , there is an entrance from Henrik Ibsens gate . There is a large , open vestibule near the surface at the entrance to Ruseløkkveien . It has high @-@ mounted windows facing south , giving natural lighting . The area features escalators and elevators to the platforms , manned ticket sale , lockers , kiosks and cafés . The station is also equipped with ticket machines and features baggage trolleys , washrooms , automated teller machines and a Western Union bank . Parking is available 300 meters ( 1 @,@ 000 ft ) away at Vika , where car rental is also provided . Bicycle parking and taxi stands are located at street level . 
 There are two platforms and four tracks , with the older tracks 1 and 2 serving west @-@ bound trains towards Skøyen and Drammen , while the newer tracks 3 and 4 serve east @-@ bound trains to Oslo S. The platforms are 242 and 250 meters ( 794 and 820 ft ) long , respectively , and located 30 meters ( 100 ft ) below the surface . The station has a capacity for 40 @,@ 000 passenger per day and is the second @-@ busiest in Norway . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Norwegian State Railways ' intercity services along the Sørland Line call at Nationaltheatret , up to four times per day per direction . The fastest service to Kristiansand takes 4 hours and 23 minutes and 7 hours and 59 minutes to Stavanger . NSB 's regional service along the Vestfold Line also calls at Nationaltheatret , normally with a one @-@ hour headway . <unk> , these continue past Oslo S and serve the southern part of the Dovre Line until Lillehammer . All eight lines of the Oslo Commuter Rail stop at Nationaltheatret . However , not all services of all line operate west of Oslo S. The Airport Express Train operates direct , high @-@ speed services to Oslo Airport , Gardermoen every 20 minutes , with the journey taking 28 minutes . 
 Located above the railway station , but nonetheless underground , is a metro station , which serves all six lines of the Oslo Metro . The next west @-@ bound station is Majorstuen ( formerly Valkyrie plass , but that station exists no more ) , while the next east @-@ bound station is Stortinget . At ground level , there is transfer to lines 13 and 19 of the Oslo Tramway . The station is located on the Briskeby Line and serves westbound trains heading along the Briskeby and Lilleaker Lines , and eastbound station , via Jernbanetorget , along the Ekeberg Line and the Grünerløkka – Torshov Line . The station also serves Ruter buses 30 , 31 , 32 , 70 , 82 and 83 . 
 = = History = = 
 Planning of the extension of the suburban light rail Holmenkollen Line to the city center started in 1901 . Construction began in 1912 , but stopped again in 1914 because the municipality and the company could not agree on the location of the terminal station . The municipality wanted it at Ruseløkkveien . The following year , the municipality launched a contest to make the best suggestion for the tram networks . It took five years to select a winner , and this allowed the municipality and company to make a compromise by locating the terminus at Nationaltheatret . But not until 1926 was permission granted for the station . Construction commenced and the station and tunnel opened in 1928 . 
 By the 1930s , Oslo had two main railway stations , Oslo East Station and Oslo West Station . Serving as the terminal station of the Drammen Line , Oslo West Station ( Oslo V ) was located in Vika , at the heart of the central business district of Oslo . The much larger Oslo East Station ( Oslo Ø ) served most commuter , regional and intercity trains . In 1938 , the Station Committee of 1938 was established to look into a possible connection of the Drammen Line to Oslo Ø . Led by Axel Grenholm , the committee recommended building a branch from the Drammen Line as a tunnel under the city center , allowing all trains would terminate at Oslo Ø . It was proposed that the tunnel would run from <unk> gate west of Oslo V to Fred . Olsens gate , with an intermediate station close to the location of Oslo V. 
 In 1946 , the Planning Office for Oslo Central Station , led by Fin <unk> , was established by the government . In 1950 , they presented a new report , which recommended that a new route for the tunnel be considered , to ease construction and increase safety . This was in part based on an engineering report from 1949 , which had made the first detailed plans for the line . Another committee , led by Oddvar Halvorsen , was established in 1960 to look at the matter again . Also it recommended a tunnel and a central station . However , it felt that the tunnel should be longer and intersect with the Drammen Line at a point between Skarpsno and Skøyen , and build a second station at Frogner . The proposal was presented to the Parliament of Norway on 4 November 1961 , along with several other matters related to rail transport investments . Construction of the Oslo Tunnel , Oslo Central Station and Nationaltheatret was passed unanimously . 
 Another planning office was established in 1962 , initially led by Erik Himle . The final plans for the route were passed by parliament in 1968 , and construction started in 1971 . The initial station was entirely blasted in bedrock and consisted of a single platform , 220 meters ( 720 ft ) long and 11 meters ( 36 ft ) wide . Adjacent to the bedrock is a layer of construction concrete and above the platforms , there are corrugated steel plates to catch drips and to reduce noise . The section of line past Nationaltheatret was part of a 480 meters ( 1 @,@ 570 ft ) section of the Oslo Tunnel designated <unk> . Of this , 280 @-@ meter ( 920 ft ) was to run with the Common Tunnel of the Oslo Metro directly above it , resulting in a two @-@ story tunnel . However , just east of Nationaltheatret , the two lines diverge , so the metro station is not directly on top of the railway station . 
 The tunnel was officially opened on 30 May 1980 by Minister of Transport and Communications Ronald Bye and officially taken into use on 1 June . The tunnel , including Nationaltheatret , cost NOK 625 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , of which Oslo Municipality had paid NOK 170 million . At first , the tunnel and Nationaltheatret was used by commuter trains from Lillestrøm to Drammen and Spikkestad , and trains from Eidsvoll and Årnes used the tunnel and turned at Skøyen . On 27 May 1989 , Oslo V was closed and all traffic started running via Nationaltheatret . 
 From 1998 , the Airport Express Train would start operating , and more capacity would be needed , both at Nationaltheatret and through the Oslo Tunnel . In 1995 , NSB held an architecture competition to expand the station , which was won by LPO <unk> og Design and their design " Next To Nothing " . Construction commenced in October 1997 and consisted of building 830 meters ( 2 @,@ 720 ft ) of new tunnel , a new double platform , a larger vestibule , escalators and artwork . During the work , 110 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 3 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of rock were blasted and 33 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of concrete were poured . The station was decorated with works by Anne Karine <unk> , Terje <unk> and Katrine Giæver . The upgrades cost NOK 920 million and was officially opened by King Harald V on 16 December 1999 . 
 The new entrance was designed by Arne Eggen and decorated by Terje <unk> . Other art was designed by Bård Breivik and Ole <unk> , including reuse of some of the original vestibule art from 1980 , including a green marble wall designed by Katrine Giæver that runs along the hallway leading to the metro station . The new platform was built using typical 1990s materials , such as glass , metal and concrete , contrasting the old platform which was much darker and featured dark terracotta tiles which were popular during the 1970s . 
 In 2008 , the old section of Nationaltheatret Station was renovated , including tracks 1 and 2 and the two original entrances . Upgrades included new lighting , a new public address system , new escalators which have lighting that changes color , a more powerful fire safety system , improved emergency exits and replacement of cables and baldachin . The upgrade made the old section lighter , and visually similar to the new section , as it was previously painted in dark red . Between 2008 and 2012 , the Norwegian National Rail Administration is performing a major upgrade to the section between Lysaker and Etterstad , including the permanent way past Nationaltheatret . Among the upgrades are axle counters , mounting of an overhead conductor rail , new switches and new tracks . 
 = Hurricane Ella ( 1970 ) = 
 Hurricane Ella was the second of two major hurricanes to threaten Texas during the 1970 Atlantic hurricane season . The sixth tropical storm and third hurricane of the season , Ella developed on September 8 in the western Caribbean Sea . It moved across the Yucatán Peninsula as a tropical depression before rapidly intensifying into a hurricane in the Gulf of Mexico . Initially the hurricane was forecast to hit southern Texas , which prompted evacuations and hurricane warnings . This occurred about a month after Hurricane Celia caused significant damage across the region . Hurricane Ella ultimately turned to the west and maintained a track that spared Texas from significant impact . On September 12 , it moved ashore in northeastern Mexico in the state of Tamaulipas with winds of 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) . The hurricane left one death due to a destroyed house . Ella weakened while moving inland and dissipated on September 13 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Ella were from a well @-@ defined trough that extended from the San Andres archipelago to Florida in early September . A tropical depression developed from the system on September 8 near Swan Island off the north coast of Honduras . Moving northwestward , the depression failed to strengthen much before striking the Yucatán Peninsula on September 10 , just south of Cozumel . As it emerged into the Gulf of Mexico , the depression began to intensify significantly . A few hours later , the Hurricane Hunters observed a tropical storm , which prompted the system being named " Ella " . Around that time , the storm started a general curve toward the west , due to a ridge to its north . With an anticyclone aloft providing favorable conditions , Ella rapidly intensified into a hurricane less than 12 hours after emerging from the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 Initially there was uncertainty in its future track , and the hurricane posed a threat to Texas ; however , Ella turned to the west as its intensification rate slowed . About 24 hours before its final landfall , its center became <unk> on radar from Brownsville , Texas . As the ridge to the north weakened , Ella slowed its forward motion markedly and quickly strengthened . In the 12 hours before moving ashore , the winds increased from 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) to 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) , making Ella a major hurricane ( Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ) . On September 12 , the hurricane made landfall near La Pesca , Tamaulipas , about 150 mi ( 220 km ) south of the Mexico / United States border , with a barometric pressure of 967 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) . This made Ella one of eleven major hurricanes to strike the Atlantic coast of Mexico in the period between 1970 and 2008 . It rapidly weakened over land , dissipating early on September 13 over western Nuevo León . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As the tropical depression that became Ella moved over the Yucatán Peninsula , it produced wind gusts of 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) and a pressure of 1 @,@ 004 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . 
 When Hurricane Ella was still moving to the west @-@ northwest , the Weather Bureau issued a hurricane watch for the entire Texas coastline . This was later upgraded to a hurricane warning from Brownsville to Port Isabel , with gale warnings extending northward to Port Aransas . Officials issued a mandatory evacuation for low @-@ lying areas around Brownsville , as well as in South Padre Island and Port Isabel . An American Red Cross shelter opened to provide shelter . All residents in mobile homes were also told to leave their homes in the Brownsville area . People in the affected area took extra precautions due to the heavy damage left by Hurricane Celia only weeks before . 
 The hurricane increased surf along the Texas coast , with wave heights of 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) observed . As a result , small craft were recommended to remain at port . Ultimately there was no reported storm surge in Texas , although the waves crested high along the beaches . Precipitation was light in Texas , peaking at 0 @.@ 88 in ( 22 mm ) at McAllen . Observations in northeastern Mexico were sparse , although wind gusts from Ella reached 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) . The Brownsville Weather Bureau office noted the potential for 15 in ( 380 mm ) of rainfall to occur in Mexico along the hurricane 's path , and heavy rainfall occurred in portions of northeastern Mexico . There , the rainfall disrupted post @-@ storm rescue work . The rains prevented the transportation of relief goods , including food and medicine , by helicopters . The hurricane destroyed several houses , and there was one death after a girl was stuck in her destroyed house . Due to the hurricane , the Purification and the San Fernando Rivers crested above flood stage . 
 = New Allegiances = 
 " New Allegiances " is the series seven premiere and 57th episode of the British espionage television series Spooks . It was originally broadcast on BBC One on 27 October 2008 . The episode was written by Neil Cross , with additional writing by Ben Richards , and directed by Colm McCarthy . The episode is considered the first of a two @-@ part story , which concludes with following episode " Split Loyalties " . 
 In the episode , Private Andy Sullivan ( Ian Virgo ) is kidnapped by an Al @-@ Qaeda cell , who demand Remembrance Sunday be cancelled or he will be executed . Adam Carter ( Rupert Penry @-@ Jones ) and recently returned Lucas North ( Richard Armitage ) , who spent the past eight years in a Russian prison , work together to find him , only to realise the kidnapping was a diversion to bomb a Remembrance ceremony . Adam drives the rigged car to safety , but dies in the explosion . Knowing FSB head of operation in London Arkady Kachimov ( Stuart Wilson ) withheld the bomb plot , Harry Pearce ( Peter Firth ) plots revenge . 
 Before the episode was broadcast , it was announced that Rupert Penry @-@ Jones would leave the series after playing Adam Carter for four years , while afterwards , another announcement was made introducing a new lead character , Lucas North . Inspiration towards the plot for the episode , and the remainder of the series , came from the resurgence of Russia , which the producers felt would in subtle ways threaten the security of the West . The episode was partially filmed on location in Moscow , the first time in series history where filming took place outside the United Kingdom . 
 After its original broadcast , the episode attracted almost six million viewers ; although it won its time slot , the episode was down by over one million viewers from the last series premiere . The episode received generally positive reactions for its plot , as well as the introduction of Lucas and death of Adam . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode is set six months after the series six finale , where Jo Portman ( Miranda Raison ) and Adam Carter were kidnapped by the Redbacks , a mercenary group known for kidnapping intelligence officers and selling them to be tortured . At the end of the episode , Jo appears to have been killed by Adam to spare her from the torture before they could be rescued . However , in a flashback it is revealed Jo played dead before rescue teams arrived , and later beats her kidnapper , Boscard ( Gus Gallagher ) , to death . At first undecided , towards the end of the episode Jo returns to duty . In the meantime , Sir Harry Pearce secures the release of MI5 officer Lucas North , who was imprisoned in Russia for eight years . 
 In the main plot , British Army Private Andy Sullivan , on leave from Afghanistan , is kidnapped by members of an Al @-@ Qaeda cell while on his way home to see his wife and newborn daughter . From an Internet broadcast , they demand Britain cancel the ceremonies during Remembrance Sunday or Sullivan will be executed . Lucas feels determined to help , much to Harry 's reluctance , as he believes Lucas should be properly rested , but eventually allows him to work until they find Sullivan . Malcolm Wynn @-@ Jones ( Hugh Simon ) voice matches one of the terrorists to <unk> Faris ( Shane Zaza ) , and learns he works under a <unk> Hatem , a known cell leader . In the middle of the night , Adam and Lucas silently break into Hatem 's home and gather intelligence from his mobile phone . On the morning of Remembrance Sunday , the team find that Hatem sends out messages to a man codenamed " Firefly " to relay it to Faris . Ben Kaplan ( Alex Lanipekun ) follows Firefly to a payphone , and Malcolm traces where he is calling . Adam and Lucas arrive at the house Sullivan is being held and successfully rescues him . 
 As this transpires , Ros Myers ( Hermione Norris ) is stationed in Moscow under the codename " Rangefinder " . There she finds intelligence on Tranquility , a codename of a Chechen assassin working with Al @-@ Qaeda . After arriving back in London , Ros discovers Sullivan 's kidnapping was a diversion ; Tranquility is going to bomb a St. Augustus War Memorial ceremony at 11 am . Adam and Lucas arrive at the ceremony ; while Lucas follows Tranquility , Adam discovers the bomb in her car that can only be defused by a code . When Tranquility kills herself , Adam must drive the car to an unpopulated zone . Adam makes it , but the car explodes just as he exits , killing him . 
 Harry realised earlier that FSB head of operations in London Arkady Kachimov purposely withheld the bomb plot when he announces chatter between Chechnya and Al @-@ Qaeda , and plans to commit revenge . Kachimov meanwhile , is on the phone , and asks " is it <unk> ? " to the person on the other end , and appears pleased to the response . In the next episode , it is revealed to be a Russian submarine planning a cyber attack on a submarine communications cable . In the end , Harry visits Wes Carter , Adam 's son , to tell him his father died . 
 = = Production = = 
 After portraying Adam Carter for four years , Rupert Penry @-@ Jones felt his character had run its course over the series and wanted to explore other venues , stating he was " getting to the point where I needed to move on . " In December 2007 , before the sixth series finale was shown , Penry @-@ Jones announced he would leave the series sometime during its seventh year , and revealed the character would leave in what he believed to be " one of the best " Spooks exits . To keep the series in general fresh , the producers wanted to tease the audience into thinking whether or not Adam would escape his fate in time , and even after he is killed , wanted to surprise them and make them think " Oh my God , I can 't believe they just did that . " Penry @-@ Jones found that his last days on Spooks was generally upsetting and " welled up " on his final day . 
 Afterwards in March 2008 , another announcement was made , where a new character was revealed to be in development ; Lucas North . The producers wanted to create Lucas to become a " new heroic figure . " They focused on casting Richard Armitage in the early stages as they felt he could carry the mystery of the character . Armitage was approached following the completion of the second series of Robin Hood , for which he portrayed the regular part of Sir Guy of Gisbourne . He was initially hesitant to join the series because of the " tall order " for replacing Penry @-@ Jones . To keep with the description that Lucas is malnourished on his first appearance , Armitage lost a stone in weight , but also had to keep physically fit in order to perform a fight sequence during his first week of filming . Hermione Norris also returns to the series as Ros Myers , having previously left the series in the eighth episode of the sixth series because of her pregnancy . 
 With regards to the plot , the producers wanted to repeat the same style as the previous sixth series and include another story @-@ arc in the seventh . The writers and producers got together to think about what is to become a big political story that will affect the United Kingdom in twelve to eighteen months time . They decided on using the resurgence of power in Russia following the end of the Cold War , which the producers felt in subtle ways , is threatening the security of the West . The new storyline would allow the series to return to the world of spying , truth , and who the character should trust . The episode was written by Neil Cross . It was also additionally written by Ben Richards . 
 Filming in London commenced at the start of March 2008 . The car explosion was filmed at Finsbury Square . Because it was a large explosion , much of the filming crew present recorded the shot on their mobile phones for the cast to view . Miranda Raison believed the explosion was the " biggest bang " on British television . In August of the same year , production moved to Moscow to film scenes for this episode , as well as the penultimate episode of the seventh series . It was the first time in series history where filming took place outside the United Kingdom ; filming Spooks took place in London , and producer Katie Swinden noted the filming the series was very " London @-@ orientated , " and do not usually film outside the M25 motorway , which circles the city . On that occasion however , the producers were able to afford a shoot in another country . Only Armitage and Hermione Norris , along with a small crew including director Sam Miller and Swinden , could film in Moscow . One of the troubles of filming the scenes in Moscow was because the episode was set in November , Norris had to wear a winter coat during 32 degree heat . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The episode was originally broadcast on BBC One , during the 9 pm to 10 pm time slot on Monday , 27 October 2008 , except in Northern Ireland , where it was withheld until 10 : 35 pm . After its original broadcast , the episode received unofficial overnight viewing figures of 5 @.@ 5 million and an audience share of 23 @.@ 4 per cent . Spooks won its time slot against other terrestrial channels , including the final episode of ITV1 's Wired , which attracted only 3 @.@ 1 million viewers . However , the episode was down by 1 @.@ 1 million from the series six premiere . According to the Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board , the episode received final viewing figures of 5 @.@ 91 million , placing Spooks the 12th most seen programme on BBC One , and the 28th most seen programme overall during the week the episode was broadcast . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from television critics . The Guardian published three separate reviews . Gareth McLean stated " rare is the returning British drama that gets you giddy but , back for its seventh series and resolving last year 's big cliffhanger , Spooks returns triumphant , " adding " it 's no secret that Ros is back , Adam is leaving and new boy Lucas North has been rescued from a Russian prison , but how it all plays out is a delight . " Vicky Frost from the media blog <unk> felt that although the storyline was decent , " it did seem to be about three different episodes stuffed into one . " She also noted the it was generally " ridiculous , but it isn 't nearly as ridiculous - or ridiculously bad - as its spin @-@ off [ Spooks : Code 9 ] was . " Leigh Holmwood however , believed " it was good to see the spy drama return for a seventh series with a high octane episode mixing Islamic terrorism and Russian counter espionage , even if it did overdo the ' for Queen and country ' bit . " Holmwood also stated he was " tempted to watch the second episode , " which was broadcast a day after the first episode on BBC One . 
 Wayne Storr of On the Box stated the series premiere is " another cracking episode , " and " truly wonderful that Spooks still pulls it together to be one of the best British shows on telly . " Storr also stated the episode is an " absolute must watch for anyone who has ever been a fan . For those who aren 't , now is a good time to start . " Whilst also reviewing the second episode , as both episodes are considered a two @-@ parter , Greg O 'Keefe of the Liverpool Echo stated it was " packed with great action sequences , razor @-@ sharp writing and the usual quota of twists and turns . We were also treated to some excellent scenes , shot in Moscow , as the pesky Russians were established as the villains of the series . " John Beresford of TV Scoop stated that although he found " two dodgy moments " in the episode , it " didn 't mar what was otherwise an excellent opener to the new series . " 
 Lucas North 's introduction was met with general praise . Sky TV described his introduction as a " refreshing change " for the series . The Bromsgrove Advertiser noted that Armitage " certainly has the looks needed for the part " with " classic leading man presence , " and while comparing past main actors of the series , Matthew Macfadyen and Rupert Penry @-@ Jones , the author believed that " the eye candy quota is being kept high . " Fans and critics have also both displayed shock towards Adam Carter 's death . Fans voted Adam 's death as the fourth most shocking death scene in the series according to a poll on <unk> . The Radio Times stated the shock factor of his death was " spectacular " and said that " driving a primed car bomb to a safe place is so run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill for the spooks they wouldn 't normally break a sweat . This time , however , it went off . " Hilary Rose of The Times noted that fans will remember Adam 's " dramatic exit , " and said that " the nation 's women duly went into mourning , " regarding that " pretty much every woman with a pulse seems to fancy Rupert . " She then noted that some would find " consolation in the shape of new Spooks totty Richard Armitage . " 
 = Women 's March on Versailles = 
 The Women 's March on Versailles , also known as The October March , The October Days , or simply The March on Versailles , was one of the earliest and most significant events of the French Revolution . The march began among women in the marketplaces of Paris who , on the morning of 5 October 1789 , were near rioting over the high price and scarcity of bread . Their demonstrations quickly became intertwined with the activities of revolutionaries , who were seeking liberal political reforms and a constitutional monarchy for France . The market women and their various allies grew into a mob of thousands , and encouraged by revolutionary agitators , they ransacked the city armory for weapons and marched to the Palace of Versailles . The crowd besieged the palace , and in a dramatic and violent confrontation , they successfully pressed their demands upon King Louis XVI . The next day , the crowd compelled the king , his family , and most of the French Assembly to return with them to Paris . 
 These events ended the king 's independence and signified the change of power and reforms about to overtake France . The march symbolized a new balance of power that displaced the ancient privileged orders of the French nobility and favored the nation 's common people , collectively termed the Third Estate . Bringing together people representing sources of the Revolution in their largest numbers yet , the march on Versailles proved to be a defining moment of that Revolution . 
 = = Background = = 
 The deregulation of the grain market implemented by Turgot , Louis XVI 's Controller @-@ General of Finances , in 1774 , was the main cause of the famine which led to the Flour War in 1775 . At the end of the Ancien Régime , the fear of famine became an ever @-@ present dread for the lower strata of the Third Estate , and rumors of the " <unk> de Famine " to starve the poor were still rampant and readily believed . Mere rumors of food shortage led to the <unk> riots in April 1789 . Rumors of a plot aiming to destroy wheat crops in order to starve the population provoked the Great Fear in the summer of 1789 . 
 When the October <unk> took place , France 's revolutionary decade , 1789 – 1799 , had barely begun . The revolution 's capacity for violence was as yet not fully realized . The storming of the Bastille had occurred less than three months earlier . Flush with newly discovered power , the common citizens of France – particularly in the teeming capital , Paris – felt a newly discovered desire to participate in politics and government . The poorest among them were almost exclusively concerned with the issue of food : most workers spent nearly half their income on bread . In the post @-@ Bastille period , price inflation and severe shortages in Paris became commonplace , as did local incidents of violence in the marketplaces . 
 The king 's court and the deputies of the National Constituent Assembly were all in comfortable residence at the royal city of Versailles , where they were considering momentous changes to the French political system . Reformist deputies had managed to pass sweeping legislation in the weeks after the Bastille 's fall , including the revolutionary August Decrees ( which formally abolished most noble and clerical privileges ) and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen . Now their attention was turned to the creation of a permanent constitution . Monarchists and conservatives of all degrees had thus far been unable to resist the surging strength of the reformers , but by September their positions were beginning , however slightly , to improve . In constitutional negotiations they were able to secure a legislative veto power for the king . Many of the reformers were left aghast by this , and further negotiations were hobbled by contentiousness . 
 Quiet Versailles , the seat of royal power , was a stifling environment for reformers . Their stronghold was in Paris . The bustling metropolis lay within walking distance , less than 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) to the northeast . The reformist deputies were well aware that the four hundred or more monarchist deputies were working to transfer the Assembly to the distant royalist city of Tours , a place even less hospitable to their efforts than Versailles . Worse , many feared that the king , emboldened by the growing presence of royal troops , might simply dissolve the Assembly , or at least renege on the August decrees . The king was indeed considering this , and when on 18 September he issued a formal statement giving his approval to only a portion of the decrees , the deputies were incensed . <unk> their anger even further , the king even stated on 4 October that he had reservations about the Declaration of the Rights of Man . 
 = = = Early plans = = = 
 Despite its post @-@ revolutionary mythology , the march was not a spontaneous event . Numerous calls for a mass demonstration at Versailles had already been made ; the Marquis of Saint @-@ <unk> , one of the popular orators of the Palais @-@ Royal , had called for just such a march in August to evict the obstructionist deputies who , he claimed , were protecting the king 's veto power . Although his efforts were foiled , revolutionaries continued to hold onto the idea of a march on Versailles to compel the king to accept the Assembly 's laws . Speakers at the Palais @-@ Royal mentioned it regularly throughout the next month , creating enduring suspicions of the proprietor , Louis Philippe II , Duke of Orléans . The idea of a march on Versailles was widespread , and was even discussed in the pages of the Mercure de France ( 5 September 1789 ) . A menacing unrest was in the air , and many nobles and foreigners fled the oppressive atmosphere . 
