 = = = Royal banquet = = = 
 Following the mutiny of the French Guards a few hours before the storming of the Bastille , the only troops immediately available for the security of the palace at Versailles were the aristocratic Garde du Corps ( Body Guard ) and the Cent @-@ Suisses ( Hundred Swiss ) . Both were primarily ceremonial units and lacked the numbers and training to provide effective protection for the royal family and the government . Accordingly , the Flanders Regiment ( a regular infantry regiment of the Royal Army ) was ordered to Versailles in late September 1789 by the king 's minister of war , the Comte de Saint @-@ Priest , as a precautionary measure . On 1 October , the officers at Versailles held a welcoming banquet for the officers of the new troops , a customary practice when a unit changed its garrison . The royal family briefly attended the affair , walking amongst the tables set up in the opera house of the palace . Outside , in the cour de <unk> ( central courtyard ) , the soldiers ' toasts and oaths of fealty to the king grew more demonstrative as the night wore on . 
 The lavish banquet was certain to be an affront to those suffering in a time of severe austerity , but it was reported in the L 'Ami du peuple and other firebrand newspapers as nothing short of a gluttonous orgy . Worst of all , the papers all dwelt scornfully on the reputed desecration of the tricolor cockade ; drunken officers were said to have stamped upon this symbol of the nation and professed their allegiance solely to the white cockade of the House of Bourbon . This embellished tale of the royal banquet became the source of intense public outrage . 
 = = Beginning of the march = = 
 On the morning of 5 October , a young woman struck a marching drum at the edge of a group of market @-@ women who were infuriated by the chronic shortage and high price of bread . From their starting point in the markets of the eastern section of Paris then known as the Faubourg Saint @-@ Antoine , the angry women forced a nearby church to toll its bells . Their numbers continued to grow and with restless energy the group began to march . More women from other nearby marketplaces joined in , many bearing kitchen blades and other makeshift weapons , as the <unk> rang from church towers throughout several districts . Driven by a variety of agitators , the mob converged on the Hôtel de <unk> where they demanded not only bread , but arms . As more and more women – and men – arrived , the crowd outside the city hall reached between six and seven thousand , and perhaps as many as ten thousand . 
 One of the men was the audacious Stanislas @-@ Marie Maillard , a prominent <unk> of the Bastille , who eagerly snatched up his own drum and led the infectious cry of " à Versailles ! " Maillard was a popular figure among the market @-@ women , and by unofficial acclamation was given a leadership role . Although hardly a gentle man , c Maillard helped suppress by force of character the mob 's worst instincts ; he rescued the Hôtel de Ville 's quartermaster , Pierre @-@ Louis Lefebvre @-@ Laroche , a priest commonly known as Abbé Lefebvre , who had been strung up on a lamppost for trying to safeguard its gun powder storage . The Hôtel de Ville itself was ransacked as the crowd surged through taking its provisions and weapons , but Maillard helped prevent it from burning down the entire building . In due course , the rioters ' attention turned again to Versailles , and they filtered back to the streets . Maillard deputized a number of women as group leaders and gave a loose sense of order to the proceedings as he led the crowd out of the city in the driving rain . 
 As they left , thousands of National Guardsmen who had heard the news were assembling at the Place de <unk> . The Marquis de Lafayette , in Paris as their commander @-@ in @-@ chief , discovered to his dismay that his soldiers were largely in favor of the march and were being egged on by agitators to join in . Even though he was one of France 's greatest war heroes , Lafayette could not dissuade his troops and they began threatening to desert . Rather than see them leave as another anarchic mob , the Parisian municipal government told Lafayette to guide their movements ; they also instructed him to request that the king return voluntarily to Paris to satisfy the people . Sending a swift horseman forward to warn Versailles , Lafayette contemplated the near mutiny of his men : he was aware that many of them had openly promised to kill him if he did not lead or get out of the way . At four o 'clock in the afternoon , fifteen thousand guards with several thousand more civilian latecomers set off for Versailles . Lafayette reluctantly took his place at the head of their column , hoping to protect the king and public order . 
 = = Goals of the march = = 
 The hunger and despair of the market women was the original impetus for the march , but what started as a search for bread soon took on a much more ambitious goal . The Hôtel de Ville had already opened its plentiful stores to the rioters , but they remained unsatisfied : they wanted not just one meal but the assurance that bread would once again be plentiful and cheap . Famine was a real and ever @-@ present dread for the lower strata of the Third Estate , and rumors of an " aristocrats ' plot " to starve the poor were rampant and readily believed . 
 At the same time , there was common resentment against the reactionary attitudes prevailing in Court circles even before the uproar sparked by the notorious banquet precipitated the political aspects of the march . Deeper planners in the crowd spread the word that the king needed to dismiss his royal bodyguards entirely and replace them all with patriotic National Guardsmen , a line of argument that had a compelling resonance among Lafayette 's soldiers . 
 These two popular goals coalesced around a third that was largely the revolutionaries ' idea , which was that the king and his court , and the Assembly as well , must all be moved to Paris to reside among the people . Only then would the foreign soldiers be expelled , food be reliably available , and France served by a leader who was " in communion with his own people " . The plan appealed to all segments of the crowd . Even those who were innocently supportive of the monarchy ( and there were many among the women ) felt the idea of bringing home le bon papa was a good and comforting plan . For revolutionaries , the preservation of their recent legislation and the creation of a constitution were paramount , and a lockdown of the king within reformist Paris would provide the best possible environment for the Revolution to succeed . 
 = = Siege of the palace = = 
 The crowd traveled the distance from Paris to Versailles in about six hours . Among their makeshift weaponry they dragged along several cannons taken from the Hôtel de Ville . <unk> and energetic , they recruited ( or impressed into service ) more and more followers as they surged out of Paris in the autumn rain . In their ambiguous but always aggressive <unk> slang , d they chattered enthusiastically about bringing the king back home . Less affectionately , they spoke of the queen , Marie Antoinette , and many had no restraint in calling for her death . 
 = = = Occupation of the Assembly = = = 
 When the crowd finally reached Versailles , it was met by another group that had assembled from the surrounding area . Members of the Assembly greeted the marchers and invited Maillard into their hall , where he fulminated about the Flanders Regiment and the people 's need for bread . As he spoke , the restless Parisians came pouring into the Assembly and sank exhausted on the deputies ' benches . Hungry , fatigued , and bedraggled from the rain , they seemed to confirm that the siege was a simple demand for food . The unprotected deputies had no choice but to receive the marchers , who shouted down most of the speakers and demanded to hear from the popular reformist deputy Mirabeau . The great orator declined this chance at demagoguery but nonetheless mingled familiarly with the market women , even sitting for some time with one of them upon his knee . A few other deputies welcomed the marchers warmly , including Maximilien Robespierre who was still at that time a relatively obscure figure in politics . Robespierre gave strong words of support to the women and their plight , and his efforts were received appreciatively ; his solicitations helped greatly to soften the crowd 's hostility towards the Assembly . 
 = = = Deputation to the king = = = 
 With few other options available to him , the President of the Assembly , Jean Joseph <unk> , accompanied a deputation of market @-@ women into the palace to see the king . A group of six women nominated by the crowd were escorted into the king 's apartment , where they told him of the crowd 's privations . The king responded sympathetically , and using all his charm impressed the women to the point that one of them fainted at his feet . After this brief but pleasant meeting , arrangements were made to disburse some food from the royal stores , with more promised , and some in the crowd felt that their goals had been satisfactorily met . As rain once again began to pelt Versailles , Maillard and a small cluster of market women <unk> triumphantly back to Paris . 
 Most of the crowd , however , remained <unk> . They milled around the palace grounds with rumors abounding that the women 's deputation had been duped – the queen would inevitably force the king to break any promises that had been made . Well aware of the surrounding dangers , Louis discussed the situation with his advisors . At about six o 'clock in the evening , the king made a belated effort to quell the rising tide of insurrection : he announced that he would accept the August decrees and the Declaration of the Rights of Man without qualification . Adequate preparations to defend the palace were not made , however : the bulk of the royal guards , who had been deployed under arms in the main square for several hours facing a hostile crowd , was withdrawn to the far end of the park of Versailles . In the words of one of the officers : " Everyone was overwhelmed with sleep and lethargy , we thought it was all over . " This left only the usual night guard of sixty @-@ one Gardes du Corps posted throughout the palace . 
 Late in the evening , Lafayette 's national guardsmen approached up the Avenue de Paris . Lafayette immediately left his troops and went to see the king , grandly announcing himself with the declaration , " I have come to die at the feet of Your Majesty " . Outside , an uneasy night was spent in which his Parisian guardsmen mingled with the marchers , and the two groups sounded each other out . Many in the crowd persuasively denounced Lafayette as a traitor , complaining of his resistance to leaving Paris and the slowness of his march . By the first light of morning , an alliance of the national guards and the women was evident , and as the crowd 's vigor was restored , their roughneck <unk> clamoring resumed . 
 = = = Attack on the palace = = = 
 At about six o 'clock in the morning , some of the protesters discovered a small gate to the palace was unguarded . Making their way inside , they searched for the queen 's bedchamber . The royal guards raced throughout the palace , bolting doors and barricading hallways and those in the compromised sector , the cour de <unk> , fired their guns at the intruders , killing a young member of the crowd . Infuriated , the rest surged towards the breach and streamed inside . 
 Two guardsmen , <unk> and Tardivet , each separately attempted to face down the crowd and were <unk> e The violence boiled over into savagery as Tardivet 's head was shorn off and raised aloft on a pike . As battering and screaming filled the halls around her , the queen ran barefoot with her ladies to the king 's bedchamber and spent several agonizing minutes banging on its locked door , unheard above the din . In a close brush with death , they barely escaped through the doorway in time . 
 The chaos continued as other royal guards were found and beaten ; at least one more was killed and his head too appeared atop a pike . Finally , the fury of the attack subsided enough to permit some communication between the former French Guards , who formed the professional core of Lafayette 's National Guard militia , and the royal gardes du corps . The units had a history of cooperation and a military sense of mutual respect , and Lafayette , who had been snatching a few hours of sleep in his exhaustion , awoke to make the most of it . To the relief of the royals , the two sets of soldiers were reconciled by his charismatic mediation and a tenuous peace was established within the palace . 
 = = = Lafayette 's intervention = = = 
 Although the fighting ceased and the two commands of troops had cleared the palace , the mob was still everywhere outside . The rank and file of both the Flanders Regiment and another regular unit present , the Montmorency Dragoons , now appeared unwilling to act against the people . Lafayette , who had earned the court 's indebtedness , convinced the king to address the crowd . When the two men stepped out on a balcony an unexpected cry went up : " Vive le Roi ! " The relieved king briefly conveyed his willingness to return to Paris , acceding " to the love of my good and faithful subjects " . As the crowd cheered , Lafayette stoked their joy by dramatically pinning a tricolor cockade to the hat of the king 's nearest bodyguard . 
 After the king withdrew , the exultant crowd would not be denied the same accord from the queen , and her presence was demanded loudly . Lafayette brought her to the same balcony , accompanied by her young son and daughter . The crowd ominously shouted for the children to be taken away , and it seemed the stage might be set for a regicide . Yet , as the queen stood with her hands crossed over her chest , the crowd – some of whom had muskets leveled in her direction – warmed to her courage . Amid this unlikely development , Lafayette <unk> let the mob 's fury drain away until , with dramatic timing and flair , he knelt reverently and kissed her hand . The demonstrators responded with a muted respect , and many even raised a cheer which the queen had not heard for quite a long time : " Vive la Reine ! " 
 The goodwill generated by this surprising turn of events defused the situation , but to many observers the scene on the balcony was mere theatricality without long @-@ term resonance . However pleased it may have been by the royal displays , the crowd insisted that the king come back with them to Paris . 
 = = = Return to Paris = = = 
 At about one o 'clock in the afternoon of 6 October 1789 , the vast throng escorted the royal family and a complement of one hundred deputies back to the capital , this time with the armed National Guards leading the way . By now the mass of people had grown to over sixty thousand , and the return trip took about nine hours . The procession could seem merry at times , as guardsmen hoisted up loaves of bread stuck on the tips of their bayonets , and some of the market women rode gleefully astride the captured cannon . Yet , even as the crowd sang pleasantries about their " Good Papa " , their violent mentality could not be misread ; celebratory gunshots flew over the royal carriage and some marchers even carried pikes bearing the heads of the slaughtered Versailles guards . A sense of victory over the ancien régime was imbued in the parade , and it was understood by all that the king was now fully at the service of the people . 
 No one understood this so viscerally as the king himself . After arriving at the dilapidated Tuileries Palace , abandoned since the reign of Louis XIV , he was asked for his orders and he replied with uncharacteristic diffidence , " Let everyone put himself where he pleases ! " Then , with a sullen poignancy , he asked for a history of the deposed Charles I of England to be brought from the library . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The rest of the National Constituent Assembly followed the king within two weeks to new quarters in Paris . In short order , the entire body settled in only a few steps from the Tuileries at a former riding school , the Salle du <unk> . However , some fifty @-@ six <unk> deputies did not come with them , believing the mob threat in the capital to be personally dangerous . The October <unk> thus effectively deprived the monarchist faction of significant representation in the Assembly as most of these deputies retreated from the political scene ; many , like <unk> , fled the country altogether . 
 Conversely , Robespierre 's impassioned defense of the march raised his public profile considerably . The episode gave him a lasting heroic status among the <unk> and burnished his reputation as a patron of the poor . His later rise to become virtual dictator of the Revolution was greatly facilitated by his actions during the occupation of the Assembly . 
 Lafayette , though initially acclaimed , found that he had tied himself too closely to the king . As the Revolution progressed , he was hounded into exile by the radical leadership . Maillard returned to Paris with his status as a local hero made permanent . He participated in several later <unk> , but in 1794 became stricken with illness , dying at the age of thirty @-@ one . For the women of Paris , the march became the source of apotheosis in revolutionary hagiography . The " Mothers of the Nation " were highly celebrated upon their return , and they would be praised and solicited by successive Parisian governments for years to come . 
 King Louis XVI was officially welcomed to Paris with a respectful ceremony held by mayor Jean Sylvain Bailly . His return was touted as a momentous turning point in the Revolution , by some even as its end . Optimistic observers such as Camille Desmoulins declared that France would now enter a new golden age , with its revived citizenry and popular constitutional monarchy . Others were more wary , such as journalist Jean @-@ Paul Marat , who wrote : 
 It is a source of great rejoicing for the good people of Paris to have their king in their midst once again . His presence will very quickly do much to change the outward appearance of things , and the poor will no longer die of starvation . But this happiness would soon vanish like a dream if we did not ensure that the sojourn of the Royal Family in our midst lasted until the Constitution was ratified in every aspect . L 'Ami du Peuple shares the jubilation of its dear fellow citizens , but it will remain ever vigilant . 
 It would take almost two full years until the first French Constitution was signed on 3 September 1791 , and it required another popular intervention to make it happen . Louis attempted to work within the framework of his limited powers after the women 's march but won little support , and he and the royal family remained virtual prisoners in the Tuileries . Desperate , he made his abortive flight to Varennes in June 1791 . Attempting to escape and join up with royalist armies , the king was once again captured by a mixture of citizens and national guardsmen who hauled him back to Paris . Permanently disgraced , Louis was forced to accept a constitution more denuding of his kingship than any previously put forward . The spiral of decline in the king 's fortunes culminated at the guillotine in 1793 . 
 = = = Orléanist conspiracy theory = = = 
 Even while the women were marching , suspicious eyes looked upon Louis Philippe II , Duke of Orléans , already behind the July uprisings , as being somehow responsible for the event . The Duke , a cousin of Louis XVI , was an energetic proponent of constitutional monarchy , and it was an open secret that he felt himself to be uniquely qualified to be king under such a system . Though allegations of his specific actions concerning the October march remain largely unproven , he has long been considered a significant instigator of the events . The Duke was certainly present as a deputy to the Assembly , and he was described by contemporaries as smiling warmly as he walked among the protesters at the height of the siege ; many of them are said to have hailed him with greetings like " Here is our king ! Long live King Orléans ! " Many scholars believe that the Duke paid agents provocateurs to fan the discontent in the marketplaces and to conflate the women 's march for bread with the drive to bring the king back to Paris . Others suggest he coordinated in some way with Mirabeau , the Assembly 's most powerful statesman at the time , to use the marchers to advance the constitutionalist agenda . Still others go so far as to assert that the crowd was guided by such important Orléanist allies as Antoine <unk> , <unk> de <unk> , and the duc d <unk> , all dressed as <unk> in women 's clothes . Yet most of the Revolution 's foremost histories describe any involvement of the Duke as ancillary to the action , efforts of opportunism that neither created nor defined the October <unk> The Duke was investigated by the crown for complicity and none was proven . Still , the pall of suspicion helped convince him to take on Louis XVI 's offer of a diplomatic mission conveniently outside the country . He returned to France the following summer and resumed his place in the Assembly where both he and Mirabeau were officially exonerated of any misdeeds regarding the march . As the Revolution moved forward into the Terror , the Duke 's royal lineage and alleged avarice convicted him in the minds of radical leaders and he was sent to his execution in November 1793 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The women 's march was a signal event of the French Revolution , its impact on a par with the fall of the Bastille . For its inheritors , the march would stand as an inspirational example , emblematic of the power of popular movements . The occupation of the deputies ' benches in the Assembly created a template for the future , forecasting the mob rule that would frequently influence successive Parisian governments . But it was the crudely decisive invasion of the palace itself that was most momentous ; the attack removed forever the aura of invincibility that once cloaked the monarchy . It marked the end of the king 's resistance to the tide of reform , and he made no further open attempts to push back the Revolution . As one historian states , it was " one of those defeats of royalty from which it never recovered " . 
 = 2006 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 2006 Pacific hurricane season was the most active since 2000 , which also produced 19 tropical storms or hurricanes . Eighteen developed within the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) area of warning responsibility , which is east of 140 ° W , and one storm formed between 140 ° W and the International Date Line , which is under the jurisdiction of the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) . Of the 19 total storms , eleven became hurricanes , of which six attained major hurricane status . Within the NHC portion of the basin , the season officially began on May 15 , and in the CPHC portion , it started on June 1 ; the season officially ended on November 30 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the eastern Pacific basin . 
 The strongest storm of the season was Hurricane Ioke , which reached Category 5 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale in the central Pacific Ocean ; Ioke passed near Johnston Atoll and later Wake Island , where it caused heavy damage but no deaths . The deadliest storm of the season was Hurricane John , which killed six people after striking the Baja California Peninsula , and the costliest storm was Hurricane Lane , which caused $ 203 million in damage in southwestern Mexico ( 2006 USD , $ 238 million 2016 USD ) . 
 Seasonal activity began on May 27 when Tropical Storm Aletta formed off the southwest coast of Mexico . No storms formed in June , though the season became active in July when five named storms developed , including Hurricane Daniel which was the second strongest storm of the season , as well as Tropical Storm Emilia . During August , Hurricanes Ioke and John formed , as well as four other storms . September was a relatively quiet month with two storms , of which one was Hurricane Lane . Three storms developed in October including Hurricane Paul and two formed in November ; this marked the second time on record , after 1961 , when more than one tropical storm developed in the basin during the month of November . 
 = = Seasonal forecast = = 
 On May 22 , 2006 , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's ( NOAA ) CPC ( CPC ) released their forecasts for the 2006 Atlantic and Pacific hurricane seasons . The Pacific season was expected to be hindered by the decades @-@ long cycle that began in 1995 , which generally increased wind shear across the basin . NOAA predicted a below @-@ normal level of activity in the Eastern Pacific , with 12 – 16 named storms , of which 6 – 8 were expected to become hurricanes , and 1 – 3 expected to become major hurricanes . The Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility was also expected to be below average , with only two to three tropical cyclones expected to form or cross into the area . They expected that neither El Niño nor La Niña would affect conditions significantly . 
 On May 15 , the hurricane season began in the Eastern Pacific basin , which is the area of the northern Pacific Ocean east of 140 ° W. On June 1 , the season began in the Central Pacific warning zone ( between 140 ° W and the International Dateline ) ; however , no storms occurred in the region until July . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 No tropical storms developed in June in the basin , which was unusual compared to the average of two storms forming during the month . Since 1966 , there have been only three other seasons in which a tropical storm did not form in June , these being 1969 , 2004 , and 2007 . After such an inactive month , the tropics became active in July when five named storms developed , including Hurricane Daniel which was the second strongest storm of the season . During August , Hurricanes Ioke and John formed , as well as four other storms . September was a relatively quiet month with two storms , of which one was Hurricane Lane . By that time , however , El Niño conditions became established across the Pacific , which is known to enhance Pacific hurricane activity . 
 Three storms developed in October , including Hurricane Paul . Tropical activity within the basin in November 2006 was the most active on record , based on the Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) Index . Three tropical cyclones formed , of which two became tropical storms ; only two other seasons on record , 1961 and 2015 , produced two tropical storms in the month of November . In addition , Mexico was struck by four tropical cyclones in 2006 , none on the Atlantic coast and all along the Pacific coast . One hit Baja California Peninsula while the others made landfall on the mainland . 
 An extratropical storm persisted in the extreme northern central Pacific Ocean in late October . It drifted over unusually warm waters up to 3 @.@ 6 ° F ( 2 ° C ) above normal , and gradually developed convection near the center . By November 2 , QuikSCAT satellite suggested the system attained winds of up to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) about 900 mi ( 1450 km ) west of Oregon . The system also developed an eye and an eyewall . The cyclone tracked northeastward as it gradually weakened , and dissipated on November 4 . NASA considered the cyclone to be a subtropical storm . However , as it formed outside of the territory of any monitoring organization , it was not named . Operationally , the United States Navy treated the system as a tropical disturbance , numbered 91C . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Aletta = = = 
 On May 27 , 12 days into the season , Tropical Depression One formed about 190 miles ( 305 km ) south of Acapulco . It slowly organized and became a tropical storm with 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) sustained winds . While named tropical cyclones in May are infrequent events , Aletta marked the seventh consecutive year to have a named cyclone form in May . The storm moved toward the Guerrero coast in southwestern Mexico , prompting the Mexican government to issue tropical storm watches between Punta Maldonado and Zihuatanejo . Aletta then became stationary over the Guerrero and Oaxaca coastlines , but it later turned to the west and dissipated on May 30 . 
 Aletta produced moderate rainfall across Mexico , including a 24 @-@ hour rainfall total of 3 @.@ 94 inches ( 100 mm ) in <unk> , Oaxaca on May 30 , and 3 @.@ 78 inches ( 96 mm ) in La Calera , Guerrero , the next day . There were no reports of damage , flooding , or casualties . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Two @-@ E = = = 
 On the day after Aletta dissipated , a new area of disturbed weather developed off the southwest Mexican coast . High shear slowed the development of the system , although it gained enough convection and organization to be classified as a tropical depression on June 3 . The depression strengthened to near tropical storm status as it approached the coast of southwestern Mexico ; however , shear persisted over the system and it weakened before dissipating on June 4 . 
 Despite never becoming a named storm , heavy rain occurred , including a total of 19 @.@ 13 inches ( 486 mm ) measured in a 48 ‑ hour period in Acapulco . Mudslides and flash flooding were reported , forcing 72 people from their homes . No deaths or serious damage was reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Bud = = = 
 On July 11 , after over a month of inactivity , a disturbance off the Peninsula of Baja California developed into a tropical depression . It moved west @-@ northwestward for its entire duration , quickly intensifying into a tropical storm and hurricane . A clear , well @-@ defined eye developed , and Bud became the first major hurricane of the season . On July 13 , the hurricane attained peak winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) , although cooler waters and stable air caused a marked weakening trend . By July 15 , Bud weakened to tropical depression status , and the next day it degenerated into a remnant low pressure area . The remnants of Bud produced light rainfall across Hawaii . 
 = = = Hurricane Carlotta = = = 
 A tropical wave exited Africa on June 30 and moved across the Atlantic Ocean without development . On July 9 , while crossing Central America into the eastern North Pacific Ocean , thunderstorm activity increased , and the system organized into Tropical Depression Four @-@ E early on July 12 about 290 mi ( 465 km ) south of Zihuatanejo , Guerrero . The large depression moved quickly to the west @-@ northwest to the south of a ridge over northwestern Mexico , and its outer rainbands moved across the coast . Rainfall totals were less than 1 inch ( 25 mm ) . The depression intensified into Tropical Storm Carlotta just six hours after forming . By late on July 12 , the storm developed banding features , and early on July 13 Carlotta attained hurricane status about 430 mi ( 700 km ) south of the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula . 
 As Carlotta intensified , the system became more compact , and it reached peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) on July 13 . An eye formed in the center , and the hurricane was briefly forecast to attain major hurricane status , or a Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . However , Carlotta weakened due to increased wind shear from Hurricane Bud to its west , and the eye and convection deteriorated . Carlotta briefly weakened to tropical storm status late on July 14 , although a decrease in shear allowed it to reintensify into a hurricane . This was short @-@ lived as the center moved into the area of cooler waters , and Carlotta again weakened to tropical storm status . Late on July 15 , the circulation became separated from the convection , and Carlotta weakened to tropical depression status on July 16 , and the next day generated into a remnant low . The circulation continued generally westward , dissipating on July 20 about 1500 mi ( 2400 km ) east of the Hawaiian islands . 
 = = = Hurricane Daniel = = = 
 On July 16 , a tropical disturbance formed far to the south of the Baja California Peninsula and quickly increased in convective activity and organization , becoming a tropical depression . The system continued to organize and was designated as a tropical storm the next day . On July 18 , Daniel attained hurricane status , and two days later underwent rapid intensification ; it reached major hurricane status and was later upgraded further to Category 4 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Its peak intensity was 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) . The hurricane underwent eyewall replacement cycles , which are internal mechanisms that occur in most intense hurricanes . Daniel later became an annular hurricane , which allowed it to maintain Category 4 status for longer than it otherwise would have . 
 It crossed over into the Central Pacific early on July 24 and was predicted to affect Hawaii as a tropical storm ; however , Daniel encountered weak steering currents in the open ocean , causing it to slow down considerably . It rapidly degenerated to a tropical depression on July 25 , and the CPHC issued its last advisory on July 26 while the storm was still well to the east of Hawaii . Its remnants later moved across the Hawaiian islands , dropping heavy rainfall and causing flooding . West <unk> on Maui recorded 3 @.@ 87 inches ( 98 mm ) in one day , which was the highest daily rainfall total from the hurricane . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Emilia = = = 
 The origins of Emilia were from a tropical wave that developed into a tropical depression on July 21 , a short distance off the coast of Acapulco . It moved generally north @-@ northwestward , reaching tropical storm status on July 22 and passing about 175 mi ( 280 km ) southwest of Manzanillo , Colima . An eyewall began to form that day , and Emilia reached peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . It briefly weakened due to wind shear , although restrengthening occurred as the storm turned toward the Baja California peninsula . On July 26 , Emilia again reached peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , and shortly thereafter it passed about 60 mi ( 95 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California . It weakened as it turned into cooler waters , first to tropical depression status on July 27 and then to a convective @-@ less remnant low on July 28 . The remnants dissipated on July 31 about 495 mi ( 800 km ) west @-@ southwest of San Diego , California . 
 In southwestern Mexico , Emilia produced tropical storm force winds along the coastline . Rainfall in the southern portion of the Baja California peninsula caused minor flooding , and gusty winds caused damage to buildings and power lines . Moisture from Emilia reached the southwestern United States . Thunderstorms and rainfall occurred across Arizona , causing flooding . In southern California , the storm dropped light rainfall , which assisted firefighters in containing a wildfire . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fabio = = = 
 A tropical wave crossed the west coast of Africa on July 15 and entered the Pacific on July 25 . Convection increased on July 28 , and at 1800 UTC on July 31 the system became Tropical Depression Seven @-@ E about 980 miles ( 1 @,@ 580 km ) southwest of the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula . Six hours later , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Fabio . It moved westward due to a ridge to its north , and on August 1 Fabio reached peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Later , the storm began weakening due to increased wind shear and dry air . On August 3 , Fabio deteriorated to tropical depression status , and later that day it degenerated into a remnant low pressure area . The remnants continued westward , moving across Hawaii on August 7 . 
 Although Fabio did not impact land , its remnants produced heavy rainfall in Hawaii . In a 24 hour period , 2 @.@ 89 inches ( 73 mm ) of rainfall was recorded at Glenwood on the island of Hawaii ; this was the highest daily rainfall total for the month on the island . However , the heaviest precipitation fell on Mount Waiʻaleʻale on Kauai , where 15 @.@ 08 inches ( 383 mm ) fell in 24 hours ; this total alone was greater than all other monthly rainfall totals in the state . The heavy rainfall flooded the Hanalei River , which forced the closure of the <unk> Highway when a bridge was inundated . On Oahu , the rainfall caused ponding on roadways and flooding along streams . One flooded stream stranded 24 hikers along a trail , all of whom required rescue by helicopter . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Gilma = = = 
 On July 17 , a tropical wave exited Africa and crossed the Atlantic without developing . On July 25 it entered the Eastern Pacific , gradually developing an area of organized convection . Despite marginally favorable upper @-@ level winds , the system organized enough to be declared a tropical depression on August 1 , several hundred miles southwest of Acapulco , Mexico . Initially , the depression tracked west @-@ northwestward . Despite wind shear in the area , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Gilma later on August 1 . The wind shear prevented further strengthening or organization , and Gilma weakened to a tropical depression early on August 2 . The depression turned westward , and Gilma degenerated into a remnant low by August 4 . 
 = = = Hurricane Hector = = = 
 A tropical wave exited Africa on July 31 , and after no development in the Atlantic , it crossed Central America into the northeastern Pacific Ocean on August 10 . Convection gradually increased , and a broad low pressure area developed about 375 miles ( 605 km ) south of Acapulco , Mexico on August 13 . The system continued to become organized , and it developed into a tropical depression around 1800 UTC on August 15 about 650 mi ( 1 @,@ 045 km ) south @-@ southwest of the southern tip of Baja California . It moved west @-@ northwestward , located south of a ridge that extended westward from northern Mexico westward into the Pacific . The depression quickly intensified into Tropical Storm Hector early on August 16 . Hector was able to steadily strengthen , reaching hurricane status at 0600 UTC on August 17 . It is estimated that Hector reached its peak intensity of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) at 0600 UTC on August 18 , while centered about 1 @,@ 035 mi ( 1 @,@ 665 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California . 
 Hector remained a Category 2 hurricane for about 24 hours . Shortly thereafter , it encountered cooler waters and westerly shear , and Hector steadily weakened until becoming a tropical storm by August 20 . Shortly thereafter , the storm reached a weakness in the subtropical ridge , which caused it to move slowly to the northwest . By August 21 , deep convection was confined to the northeast portion of the circulation . The shear was not strong enough to completely weaken the tropical cyclone and Hector remained a tropical storm with 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) winds for about 24 hours . After the remaining shower and thunderstorm activity dissipated on August 22 , the cyclone turned westward in response to the low @-@ level easterly wind flow . Hector weakened to a tropical depression at 0000 UTC on August 23 , and to a remnant low six hours later . The remnant circulation of Hector dissipated on August 24 about 750 mi ( 1 @,@ 210 km ) east of the Hawaiian Islands . 
 = = = Hurricane Ioke = = = 
 The cyclone developed from the Intertropical Convergence Zone on August 20 far to the south of Hawaii . Encountering warm waters , little wind shear , and well @-@ defined outflow , Ioke intensified from a tropical depression to Category 4 status within 48 hours . Late on August 22 it rapidly weakened to Category 2 status before crossing over Johnston Atoll . Two days later favorable conditions again allowed for rapid strengthening , and Ioke attained Category 5 status on August 25 before crossing the International Date Line . At the time , its barometric pressure was estimated at 915 mbar , thus becoming the strongest hurricane on record in the Central Pacific . As it continued westward its intensity fluctuated , and on August 31 it passed near Wake Island with winds of 155 mph ( 249 km / h ) . Ioke gradually weakened as it turned northwestward and northward , and by September 6 it had transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . By then , the cyclone had lasted 19 days , reaching the equivalent of Category 5 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale three times . The remnants of Ioke accelerated northeastward and ultimately crossed into Alaska . 
 Ioke did not affect any permanently populated areas in the Central Pacific or Western Pacific basins as a hurricane or a typhoon . A crew of 12 people stayed in a hurricane @-@ proof bunker on Johnston Atoll during the hurricane 's passage ; the crew estimated winds reached over 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , which damaged trees on the island but did not impact the island 's bird population . The hurricane left moderate damage on Wake Island totaling $ 88 million ( 2006 USD ) , which resulted from blown off roofs and damaged buildings , although the infrastructure of the island was left intact . All military personnel were evacuated from the island , the first full @-@ scale evacuation of the island since Typhoon Sarah in 1967 . Later , the extratropical remnants of Ioke produced a severe storm surge along the Alaskan coastline , causing beach erosion . 
 = = = Hurricane Ileana = = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Ileana were from a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on August 8 . It entered the Eastern North Pacific on August 16 and developed into a tropical depression on August 21 near Acapulco . The depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Ileana six hours after forming . Ileana continued to strengthen , becoming a hurricane in 24 hours and a major hurricane a day after that . Ileana reached its peak intensity of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) before beginning a slow weakening phase on August 24 when it encountered cooler waters . Ileana weakened a tropical depression on the morning of August 27 and quickly degenerated into a remnant low , dissipating on August 29 . As Ileana was heading north along the Mexican coastline , slight rainfall was recorded along the coast . There were also reports of hurricane @-@ force winds on Socorro Island . One fatality was reported when a man drowned in heavy surf near Cabo San Lucas . 
 = = = Hurricane John = = = 
 On August 28 , a persistent area of low pressure southwest of Acapulco , Mexico developed into a tropical depression . Later that day it strengthened into a tropical storm , and it reached hurricane strength 24 hours later on August 29 . John underwent rapid intensification and reached Category 3 intensity later that day and Category 4 on August 30 . Hours later , the hurricane underwent another eyewall replacement cycle , and subsequently weakened to Category 3 status as it paralleled the Mexican coastline a short distance offshore . Potentially due to its eyewall replacement cycle or its interaction with land , Hurricane John weakened to a 105 mph hurricane by late on August 31 , but restrengthened to a major hurricane shortly after . It made landfall near the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula as a Category 2 hurricane on September 1 . John continued northwestward along the eastern Baja California peninsula , weakening to tropical depression status by September 3 and dissipating on September 4 in the Gulf of California . 
 Along the southwestern coast of Mexico , Hurricane John produced heavy surf , strong winds , and heavy rainfall , which flooded roads , caused mudslides , and downed trees . Along the Baja California Peninsula , the hurricane dropped heavy rainfall , with a 24 @-@ hour peak of 10 @.@ 8 inches ( 276 mm ) in Los Planes . The heavy rainfall caused flooding , closed roads , and caused a dam to overflow . The winds and rainfall destroyed thousands of flimsy houses across the region . Across Mexico , five people were killed , and damage amounted to $ 663 million ( 2006 MXN , $ 60 @.@ 8 million 2006 USD ) . Moisture from the remnants of John produced flooding across Texas , which closed a ½ mile ( 800 m ) portion of Interstate 10 in El Paso . In southern New Mexico , the rainfall caused widespread street flooding and some minor damage . Tropical moisture from the storm also produced rainfall in Arizona and southern California , where eight separate mudslides occurred , trapping 19 vehicles but causing no injuries . 
 = = = Hurricane Kristy = = = 
 On August 30 , a tropical wave located about 525 miles ( 850 km ) south @-@ southwest of Baja California became more organized and was designated as the twelfth tropical depression of the 2006 season . It strengthened into Tropical Storm Kristy and became Hurricane Kristy the next day . It did not retain this status for long , partly due to its proximity to Hurricane John . There was a possibility of a Fujiwhara interaction between both systems , causing Kristy to weaken or perhaps be absorbed into the circulation of John . This did not occur , however . Kristy weakened steadily after its peak intensity and looked to be close to dissipating , but on September 3 and again on September 5 , convection flared up and it returned to tropical storm strength . After oscillating between storm and depression strength , the system degenerated into a remnant low on September 7 , which dissipated on September 8 without affecting land . 
 = = = Hurricane Lane = = = 
 On September 13 , a tropical disturbance located about 125 miles ( 200 km ) west @-@ southwest of Acapulco , Mexico , gradually became better organized and was designated the thirteenth tropical depression of the 2006 season . The depression intensified in a favorable environment , and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Lane later that night . As it moved parallel to the Mexican coast it continued to strengthen and became a hurricane on September 15 , and a major hurricane early the next day . Hurricane Lane reached peak winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) before it made landfall on the coast of Sinaloa on September 16 . It quickly weakened over land and dissipated on September 17 . 
 Tropical Storm Lane produced heavy rainfall and high seas along the west coast of Mexico , including Acapulco where flood waters reached 16 inches ( 40 cm ) in depth . The Acapulco airport also experienced flooding , though service was not interrupted . Throughout Mexico , the hurricane caused four deaths and $ 2 @.@ 2 billion ( 2006 MXN , $ 203 million 2006 USD ) in damage , half of which in Sinaloa where heavy crop damage was reported . An estimated 4 @,@ 320 homes were affected by the hurricane , and 19 @,@ 200 miles ( 30 @,@ 000 km ) of roads and highways were damaged to some degree , including some destroyed bridges . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Miriam = = = 
 A disturbance associated with a northerly extension of the Intertropical Convergence Zone and a tropical wave developed a closed circulation on September 15 . It moved northeastward due to the influence from nearby Hurricane Lane , and organized enough to be declared Tropical Depression Fourteen @-@ E on September 16 while located about 500 miles southwest of Cabo San Lucas , Mexico . It quickly strengthened , and organized into Tropical Storm Miriam later that day . After reaching a peak intensity of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) , vertical wind shear and cooler waters rapidly weakened the storm , and the circulation decoupled from the convection on September 17 . After turning more towards the north , Miriam weakened to tropical depression status , and on September 18 it degenerated to a remnant low . The remnant circulation turned to the northwest , then to the east , and dissipated on September 21 a short distance west of Baja California . No deaths are damage are associated with Miriam , and only one ship recorded winds of over tropical storm force near the center . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Two @-@ C = = = 
 On September 19 , an area of disturbed weather associated with the Intertropical Convergence Zone became sufficiently organized to be designated Tropical Depression Two @-@ C. Initially , it was thought that the depression formed from the remnants of Hurricane Kristy , although subsequent analysis confirmed they were two separate systems . Initially , the depression was in an area of favorable conditions , with little wind shear and warm waters . As a result , the CPHC predicted significant strengthening to at least hurricane status . Instead , a high pressure system to its north increased wind shear over the depression , causing the convection to become removed from the center . The depression weakened into a remnant low on September 20 , never reaching tropical storm status . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Three @-@ C = = = 
 During September , El Niño conditions became established across the Pacific , which produced an area of warmer waters along the International Date Line . A few days after Tropical Depression Two @-@ C dissipated , another area of disturbed weather formed , and although it was disorganized , it was also persistent . The CPHC initiated advisories on Tropical Depression Three @-@ C on September 26 after a circulation was evident in the system . Strong wind shear prevented any development , and the system dissipated on September 27 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Norman = = = 
 Early in October , a low pressure system began to organize to the west of the Mexican coast , and on October 9 it developed into Tropical Depression Fifteen @-@ E. It strengthened into a tropical storm the next day , but strong wind shear and low sea @-@ surface temperatures hindered development . Norman slowly began to weaken , and on October 11 it degenerated into a remnant low pressure area . Turning eastward , the system combined with a new tropical disturbance off the southwest Mexican coast , and slowly began to reorganize . The system was re @-@ designated a tropical depression on October 15 just south @-@ southeast of Manzanillo , Colima , although within a few hours it again dissipated . 
 The storm brought heavy rainfall to southwestern Mexico , peaking at 6 @.@ 35 inches ( 161 mm ) in La Villita , Michoacán . The rainfall caused flooding and mudslides around Acapulco , affecting 170 homes , of which 20 were destroyed . About 300 hectares ( 740 acres ) of crop fields sustained damage . Initially there were two people missing ; however , a subsequent report indicated there were no casualties associated with the storm . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Olivia = = = 
 On September 18 , a tropical wave exited Africa and later crossed into the eastern Pacific on September 29 without development . Convection increased in the Pacific along the wave axis , spawning a broad low pressure area on October 5 . Despite the presence of wind shear , it organized enough for the NHC to initiate advisories on Tropical Depression Sixteen @-@ E on October 9 about 1 @,@ 360 miles ( 2 @,@ 190 km ) to the west @-@ southwest of the southern tip of Baja California . Influenced by a high pressure system , the depression drifted northward . Six hours after being upgraded to a tropical storm , Olivia attained peak winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) , although the convection was limited to its northern side due to wind shear . On October 11 , the convective activity diminished and Olivia weakened to tropical depression status . Olivia deteriorated into a remnant low on October 13 . It moved towards the east @-@ southeast , and on October 15 was absorbed into the remnants of Tropical Storm Norman . Olivia never affected land . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Four @-@ C = = = 
 In the middle of October , the Intertropical Convergence Zone extended across the central Pacific Ocean , resembling an extension of the monsoon trough . An area of disturbed weather formed well to the southwest of Hawaii , organizing slowly for several days . Late on October 13 , after the development of a low @-@ level circulation and persistent convection , the CPHC classified the system as Tropical Depression Four @-@ C about 750 mi ( 1 @,@ 200 km ) southwest of Honolulu , Hawaii . Upon being classified , the depression was located in an unusual steering flow that caused it to track eastward . Due to the approach of an upper @-@ level trough , it was expected to dissipate quickly from wind shear , although forecasters noted the possibility for the trough to provide an outflow channel , which might allow strengthening . On October 14 , strong wind shear removed the convection completely from the center , and the system degenerated into a remnant low . 
 The remnant circulation continued slowly eastward , dissipating on October 16 . Concurrently , the convection tracked northeastward ahead of the upper @-@ level trough , which contributed to heavy rainfall and flooding on the island of Hawaii on October 17 . The rainfall event coincided with an earthquake striking the area . 
 = = = Hurricane Paul = = = 
 Hurricane Paul developed from an area of disturbed weather on October 21 , and slowly intensified as it moved into an area of warm waters and progressively decreasing wind shear . Paul attained hurricane status on October 23 , and later that day it reached its peak intensity of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , a strong Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . A strong trough turned the hurricane to the north and northeast into an area of strong vertical shear , and Paul weakened to a tropical storm on October 24 , later passing just south of the Baja California Peninsula . Paul weakened to a tropical depression on October 25 a short distance off the coast of Mexico , and after briefly turning away from the coast it made landfall on northwestern Sinaloa on October 26 . 
 Paul was the third hurricane to threaten western Mexico in the season , the others being Hurricanes John and Lane . Rough surf killed two people along Baja California Sur , while two deaths from flooding were reported in Sinaloa . Paul dropped moderate rainfall across mainland Mexico , including a 24 @-@ hour total of 2 @.@ 28 inches ( 58 mm ) in Mazatlán , Sinaloa . Damage totaled more than $ 35 million ( 2006 MXN , $ 3 @.@ 2 million 2006 USD ) . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eighteen @-@ E = = = 
 The origins of Tropical Depression Eighteen @-@ E were from a tropical wave that exited the coast of Africa on October 7 . It briefly spawned a low @-@ pressure area as the wave continued westward without development . On October 20 , the wave entered the Pacific Ocean , developing an area of thunderstorms about four days later . By 1200 UTC on October 26 , a tropical depression formed about 155 mi ( 260 km ) south of Manzanillo . Initially , Tropical Depression Eighteen @-@ E was located in an area of light wind shear , and the NHC anticipated further organization and strengthening to near hurricane status . The tropical depression initially maintained a steady westward motion away from the Mexican coastline , due to a ridge north of the cyclone . By October 17 , convection had decreased , and the depression was not forecast to intensify as much . Possibly due to intrusion of dry air , the circulation became exposed from the thunderstorms , and having weakened , it turned to a southward drift . By 0000 UTC on October 28 , the system had weakened to a non @-@ convective remnant low , which dissipated the following day . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Rosa = = = 
 A tropical wave exited western Africa on October 22 and continued westward into the Pacific on November 2 , spawning a tropical depression on November 8 about 440 mi ( 710 km ) south of Manzanillo , Colima . Environmental conditions appeared favorable , although wind shear removed the convection from the circulation . Throughout its duration , the storm maintained a northwest track through a weakness in a subtropical ridge . By November 9 , a new area of convection persisted near the center , and a banding feature formed . Despite the shear , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Rosa , although the shear prevented intensification beyond its peak of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Rosa remained a tropical storm for only 18 hours , becoming a tropical depression early on November 10 and dissipating later that day . Rosa was the first tropical storm in the basin to develop during November since 2000 , and was also the first tropical depression to form in the month since 2002 's Tropical Depression Sixteen @-@ E. No impact was reported from the storm . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ E = = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the western coast of Africa on October 21 , briefly developing two weak low pressure areas before the wave crossed into the Pacific Ocean on November 1 . Thunderstorm activity slowly increased as the wave interacted within the Intertropical Convergence Zone . After a curved band of convection developed , it is estimated the system formed into Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ E around 0000 UTC on November 11 , about 550 mi ( 1 @,@ 050 km ) southwest of Manzanillo . Throughout its duration , the depression never completely separated from the Intertropical Convergence Zone . When the NHC issued its first advisory on the depression , the agency predicted slight intensification to tropical storm status and for the depression to last at least two days . This was due to a forecast of gradually increasing wind shear after the first 24 hours . Instead , the circulation became very elongated ; it is estimated the cyclone degenerated into a trough by late on November 11 . 
 = = = Hurricane Sergio = = = 
 Just days after Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ E degenerated into an open trough , Tropical Depression Twenty One @-@ E developed from a tropical wave on November 13 about 460 miles ( 740 km ) south of Manzanillo , Colima . It steadily intensified as it tracked southeastward , reaching peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) on November 15 . Subsequently it began to weaken due to increased wind shear as it turned to the north . Sergio later turned to the west , remaining well off the coast of Mexico , and it dissipated on November 20 about 320 miles ( 515 km ) west @-@ northwest of where it originally formed . 
 Sergio produced light rainfall along the coast of Mexico , though its effects were minimal . The formation of Sergio marked the 2006 season as the most active in 12 years and the second season in which more than one tropical storm formed in November , after 1961 . Sergio set records for the month of November in the basin , becoming the third strongest hurricane , after Sandra from 2015 , and Kenneth from 2011 as well as the longest @-@ lived November Pacific tropical cyclone with a duration of seven days . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the northeast Pacific in 2006 . This is the same list that was used in the 2000 season . There were no names retired from the northeast Pacific list . Therefore , the same list was reused in the 2012 season . 
 For storms that form in the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility , encompassing the area between 140 degrees west and the International Date Line , all names are used in a series of four rotating lists . The next four names that were slated for use in 2006 are shown below , however only the name Ioke was used . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The name Ioke was retired from the north @-@ central Pacific list by the WMO in the spring of 2007 and replaced with <unk> . During the 61st Interdepartmental Hurricane Conference , the Hawaii State Civil Defense requested the retirement of the name Daniel , citing that the storm had become memorable due to threat of damage . However , the request was denied , as the name remains on the tropical cyclone naming list . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of all the storms that have formed in the 2006 Pacific hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , landfall ( s ) , denoted in parentheses , damages , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but were still related to that storm . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical , a wave , or a low , and all the damage figures are in 2006 USD . 
 = Stanley Goble = 
 Air Vice Marshal Stanley James ( Jimmy ) Goble , CBE , DSO , DSC ( 21 August 1891 – 24 July 1948 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He served three terms as Chief of the Air Staff , alternating with Wing Commander ( later Air Marshal Sir ) Richard Williams . Goble came to national attention in 1924 when he and fellow RAAF pilot Ivor McIntyre became the first men to circumnavigate Australia by air , journeying 8 @,@ 450 miles ( 13 @,@ 600 km ) in a single @-@ engined floatplane . 
 During World War I , Goble flew fighters on the Western Front with the British Royal Naval Air Service . He became an ace with ten victories , commanded No. 5 Squadron ( later No. 205 Squadron RAF ) , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order and the Distinguished Service Cross . Returning to Australia , Goble assisted in the formation of the RAAF as an independent branch of the Australian armed forces . On an exchange posting to Britain in the 1930s , he led No. 2 ( Bomber ) Group RAF . 
 As Chief of the Air Staff at the onset of World War II , Goble clashed with the Federal Government over implementation of the Empire Air Training Scheme , which he believed would be detrimental to the defence of Australia . He stepped down as leader of the RAAF in early 1940 , and spent the rest of the war in Ottawa as Air Liaison Officer to Canada . Goble died in 1948 at the age of fifty @-@ six , two years after retiring from the military . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born in Croydon , Victoria , Stanley James Goble was one of four sons to an Australian father , George , and an English mother , Ann . He apparently received little schooling , and began his working life as a clerk with the Victorian Railways at the age of sixteen . By twenty @-@ three he was , like his father , a stationmaster . 
 Goble was prevented from joining the Australian Imperial Force at the beginning of World War I after failing the stringent medical criteria ; he wrote later that " only applicants of the finest physiques were considered suitable for the first contingent of Australian troops " . With his three brothers already on active service , he decided to travel to England at his own expense and enlist in the British armed forces . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Goble was accepted for flying training with the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) in July 1915 . After graduating as a flight sub @-@ lieutenant on 20 October 1915 , he became a test pilot and undertook anti @-@ submarine patrols out of Dover . Goble commenced operations with only three hours solo flying experience . Towards the end of the year he was posted across the Channel to Dunkirk , flying Caudron reconnaissance @-@ bombers and Sopwith Pup fighters . 
 Goble was a founding member of No. 8 Squadron RNAS in 1916 , during the latter part of the Battle of the Somme , where he flew both Pups and Nieuport fighters . He earned the Distinguished Service Cross for his actions on 24 September 1916 when he engaged two enemy fighters near <unk> in West Flanders , " and brought one of them down on fire in a spiral nose @-@ dive " . This victory was the first confirmed " kill " achieved by an Allied pilot flying the Pup . Goble was promoted to flight lieutenant on 1 October , and won the French Croix de guerre later that month . 
 On 17 February 1917 , Goble was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) for his " conspicuous bravery and skill " in three separate actions while operating with No. 8 Squadron : on 7 November 1916 when he forced a hostile fighter down in a field , where it crashed attempting to land ; on 27 November when he engaged four enemy aircraft , destroying one ; and on 4 December when , in repeated combats while escorting Allied bombers , he helped drive off attacking fighters and shot down one of them . The same month that he was awarded the DSO , Goble was posted to No. 5 Squadron RNAS at Petite @-@ <unk> near the Franco @-@ Belgian border , flying Airco DH.4 two @-@ seat light bombers . 
 Goble was promoted twice in 1917 , to flight commander in June , then squadron commander in December . He led No. 5 Squadron for the latter part of the year and into 1918 . His unit supported the British Fifth Army as it bore the brunt of the German Spring Offensive , and he had to evacuate his airfield when it was shelled by advancing enemy artillery . Relocating twice to other landing grounds , he kept his squadron on the attack , and was subsequently recognised by a commendation circulated to all RNAS combat units . When the RNAS merged with the British Army 's Royal Flying Corps on 1 April 1918 , Goble became a major in the newly formed Royal Air Force . Twice mentioned in despatches , he finished the war an ace , with ten victories . Although himself forced to crash land on two occasions , he had avoided any injury during his active service . 
 = = Inter @-@ war years = = 
 = = = Establishment of the Royal Australian Air Force = = = 
 Goble returned to Australia on HT <unk> in November 1918 . He was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 1919 New Year Honours , and made an acting lieutenant colonel in May that year . He received a permanent commission as a squadron leader and honorary wing commander in the RAF on 1 August 1919 , and was seconded to the Royal Australian Navy . 
 When a temporary Air Board was set up to examine the feasibility of an Australian Air Force ( AAF ) , Goble was assigned as a Navy representative , with Lieutenant Colonel Richard Williams , an Australian Flying Corps veteran of World War I , acting as an Army spokesman . The permanent Australian Air Board was established on 9 November 1920 , and recommended creation of the AAF as an independent branch of the armed services . The AAF came into being on 31 March 1921 — the ' Royal ' prefix being granted five months later — and Goble resigned his commission in the RAF the same day to transfer to the new service as a wing commander . 
 The Navy had nominated Goble as First Air Member ( later Chief of the Air Staff ) , but Williams took the post and Goble became Second Air Member and Director of Personnel and Training . Williams and Goble would serve as Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) three times each between 1922 and 1940 . One motive suggested for the rotation was a ploy by Army and Navy interests to limit Williams ' autonomy . Instead , according to RAAF historian Alan Stephens , the arrangement " almost inevitably fostered an unproductive rivalry " between the two officers , which was " exacerbated by the personality differences between the pedantic , autocratic Williams and the cheerful , easy @-@ going Goble " . Although in a legal sense the Air Board led the RAAF rather than the CAS alone , Williams dominated the board to such an extent that Goble would later complain that his colleague appeared to consider the Air Force his personal command . 
 = = = Chief of the Air staff = = = 
 The rivalry between Goble and Williams was such that it was later alleged that government practice was to ensure that they were never in the country at the same time . In October 1921 , Goble was posted to Britain for a naval co @-@ operation course ; his place on the Air Board was taken by Squadron Leader Bill Anderson . Goble married Kathleen Wodehouse in London on Anzac Day , 1922 , and returned to Australia later that year . His first term as CAS began when Williams left the country in December 1922 for study in England . Goble developed a plan to establish a small seaplane base at Rushcutters Bay in Sydney , but Williams cancelled this shortly after he returned to Australia in February 1925 to resume the position of CAS . Goble 's suggestion of a separate Fleet Air Arm fostered suspicions that he was too closely aligned with naval interests . He departed for England to undertake study at the British Army Staff College in Camberley and RAF Staff College , Andover , as Williams had done two years before . Goble also served as Air Liaison Officer with the Australian High Commission in London from May 1926 to September 1927 . He was promoted to group captain on 1 April 1928 . 
 Raised to temporary air commodore , Goble took over as CAS for the second time between December 1932 and June 1934 , while Williams attended the Imperial Defence College in London . On secondment to the RAF from 1935 to 1937 , Goble was attached to the British Air Ministry as Deputy Director of Air Operations . In this capacity he attended a conference in 1936 to examine a Commonwealth @-@ wide air training plan , a concept that would be revived in World War II as the Empire Air Training Scheme . Continuing his exchange posting , on 1 September Goble took over as Air Officer Commanding No. 2 ( Bomber ) Group , based in Hampshire . The group comprised fifteen squadrons , putting him in charge of a force stronger than the entire RAAF . On 28 February 1937 , Goble was raised to temporary air vice marshal . He succeeded Williams as Chief of the Air Staff for the last time in February 1939 , when the latter was dismissed from his position in the aftermath of the Ellington Report criticising the standards of training and air safety observed by the RAAF . When he replaced Williams , Goble was Air Member for Personnel and might therefore have been considered more closely responsible for such standards ; he maintained that Williams had personally overseen the service 's air training since 1934 . 
 = = = Circumnavigation of Australia = = = 
 The young air force was a small , close @-@ knit organisation comparable to a flying club , although several pioneering flights were undertaken by its members . One of the most notable was made by Goble and Flying Officer ( later Flight Lieutenant ) Ivor McIntyre in 1924 , when they became the first men to circumnavigate Australia by air , in a single @-@ engined Fairey IIID floatplane . The English @-@ born McIntyre , who was lead pilot while Goble acted as commander and navigator , was also a World War I veteran of the Royal Naval Air Service . The purpose of the flight was to survey the northern coastline of Australia for defence planning , and to test the capabilities of the Fairey IIID . 
 Goble and McIntyre took off from Point Cook , Victoria , on 6 April 1924 and flew 8 @,@ 450 miles ( 13 @,@ 600 km ) in 44 days , in often arduous conditions . Though well @-@ prepared with fuel stocks and spare parts pre @-@ positioned along the intended route , they had to contend with illness and tropical storms , as well as mid @-@ air engine trouble and fuel leaks . Their journey took them anticlockwise around the continent , along the Eastern Australian coast through Sydney , Southport , Townsville and Thursday Island , crossing the Gulf of Carpentaria to Darwin , and then continuing along the coast through Broome , Carnarvon , Perth , Albany and Port Lincoln , before arriving back in Victoria . As they flew above Point Cook , twelve RAAF aircraft took to the air to escort them to their landing place at St Kilda Beach , where they were welcomed by a crowd of 10 @,@ 000 people . 
 Prime Minister Stanley Bruce called the expedition " one of the most wonderful accomplishments in the history of aviation " , his government presenting Goble with a gift of £ 500 , and £ 250 to McIntyre . The British Royal Aero Club awarded them the annual Britannia Trophy , and they were appointed Commanders of the Order of the British Empire in the King 's Birthday Honours . Though the flight is still acknowledged as one of the most important in Australian aviation , the necessity for the Air Force chief to personally command such a journey has been questioned , suggesting that it was motivated by the one @-@ upmanship that characterised the Williams @-@ Goble relationship . Two years later Williams would make a three @-@ month , 10 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 16 @,@ 000 km ) round trip from Point Cook to the Pacific Islands , the first international flight undertaken by an RAAF plane and crew , amid similar suspicions . 
 = = World War II = = 
 As Chief of the Air Staff at the outbreak of World War II , Goble planned the expansion and decentralisation of the RAAF to meet the needs of home defence and Australia 's obligations in Europe , which included the transfer of No. 10 Squadron to Britain . The Federal Government abandoned his concept of an autonomous Air Expeditionary Force in favour of full commitment to the Empire Air Training Scheme , which Goble considered detrimental to local defence . His proposal to organise the RAAF along functional lines , with Home Defence , Training , and Maintenance Commands , would similarly be rejected . He also came into conflict with his deputy , Air Commodore John Russell , an RAF officer on exchange in Australia . These issues led to Goble tendering his resignation as CAS , which took effect in January 1940 . The Argus in Melbourne reported that " Goble wishes to resign ' on a matter of high principle ' . It is known that he has been dissatisfied for some time with his relations with the Federal Government . " 
 Prime Minister Robert Menzies had in any case been looking for a British officer to head the RAAF and confided to the UK High Commissioner , Sir Geoffrey <unk> , that Goble 's resignation was " undoubtedly very convenient " . Following the interim appointment of Air Commodore Anderson , the Royal Air Force 's Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Burnett became Chief of the Air Staff ; among other things , Burnett proceeded to reorganise the Air Force into a geographically based " area " system of command and control . Goble had offered to submit his resignation from the RAAF as well as from the position of CAS , and was considering a return to Britain for service with the RAF . Menzies persuaded him to remain and take on the role of Australian Air Liaison Officer to Canada , based in Ottawa . Raised to substantive air vice marshal , Goble stayed at this post for the duration of the war and was the RAAF 's representative at the Ottawa Conference in May – June 1942 that negotiated the Joint Commonwealth Air Training Plan . 
 = = Retirement and legacy = = 
 In January 1946 , Goble presided over the court @-@ martial of Australia 's top @-@ scoring fighter ace , Group Captain Clive Caldwell . Charged with alcohol trafficking on the island of Morotai in 1945 , Caldwell was found guilty and reduced to the rank of flight lieutenant ; he left the Air Force soon after . Goble was himself forced into retirement in February 1946 , despite being five years below the mandatory age of sixty . The Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , in recommending Goble 's dismissal , wrote that " this officer has a sound Service knowledge and an alert mind , but suffers from certain nervous characteristics which make continuous application to a task impossible " . Other senior RAAF commanders who were veterans of World War I , including Richard Williams , were also retired at this time , ostensibly to make way for the advancement of younger officers . 
 Goble suffered from hypertensive cerebrovascular disease and died in Heidelberg , Victoria , on 24 July 1948 . He was cremated , leaving his wife Kathleen , and three sons . His son John ( born 1923 ) joined the Royal Australian Navy and qualified as a pilot in the Fleet Air Arm , rising to the rank of commodore and commanding 817 Squadron , the naval air station HMAS Albatross , and the aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne . Goble Street in Hughes , Australian Capital Territory , was named for Jimmy Goble . In 1994 he and Ivor McIntyre were honoured with the issue of a postage stamp by Australia Post , in a series depicting Australian aviators that also included Freda Thompson , Lawrence Hargrave , and Sir Keith and Sir Ross Macpherson Smith . 
 = La La Land ( Demi Lovato song ) = 
 " La La Land " is a song recorded by American singer Demi Lovato . It was written by Lovato , Joe Jonas , Nick Jonas and Kevin Jonas and produced by the Jonas Brothers alongside John Fields , for Lovato 's debut studio album , Don 't Forget ( 2008 ) . It was released as the album 's second single on December 19 , 2008 , through Hollywood Records . " La La Land " is one of six songs on the album co @-@ written by the Jonas Brothers , who also contributed backing vocals and guitars to the track . Lovato said that she wrote the song about being yourself in Hollywood and not letting other people change who you are . Musically , the song is a guitar @-@ driven pop rock song and the lyrics speak of Lovato feeling " out of place " in Hollywood . 
 The song was met with positive reviews from critics . Commercially , " La La Land " peaked at number fifty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 and number thirty @-@ five on the UK Singles Chart . The song achieved its highest peak in Ireland , where it reached number thirty on the Irish Singles Chart . It was less successful in Australia and Germany , where it peaked in the lower half of the charts . The song used to promote Lovato 's Disney Channel sitcom Sonny with a Chance and features guest appearances from her co @-@ stars . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " La La Land " is one of six songs on Lovato 's debut album Don 't Forget ( 2008 ) that she co @-@ wrote with the Jonas Brothers . Lovato said that it was " important " to have them on her album , because " I mean , just look at how successful they are . I would love to have their input anytime , because they 're obviously doing something right . " The band also contributed backing vocals and played the guitar to the song . It was produced by the Jonas Brothers and John Fields , with the latter also playing the bass , guitars and keyboards . The song also features Devin Bronson , who provided a guitar solo , and Dorian Crozier , who played the drums . In an interview , Lovato explained that the song is about being yourself when you are surrounded by " the pressures of fame " . She said , " You get to Hollywood and a lot of times people can try to shape you and mould you into what they want you to be . The song is just about keeping it real and trying to stay yourself when you 're out in Hollywood . " " La La Land " was released as the album 's second and final single on April 10 , 2009 . It was later released in the United Kingdom on May 31 , 2009 , with the new song " Behind Enemy Lines " . A CD single was released on June 1 , 2009 , with a recorded live version of the Camp Rock song " This Is Me " from Jonas Brothers : The 3D Concert Experience . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " La La Land " is a guitar @-@ driven pop rock song . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is composed in the time signature of common time with a moderate beat rate of 84 beats per minute . It is written in the key of A major and Lovato 's vocal range spans from the low @-@ note of F ♯ 3 to the high @-@ note of E5 . It has a basic sequence of F ♯ m – D – E as its chord progression . Lyrically , " La La Land " is about Lovato feeling " out of place " in Hollywood , demonstrated in lines such as , " Who said I can 't wear my Converse with my dress ? " , and " I 'm not a supermodel , I still eat McDonald 's . " Ed Masley of The Arizona Republic compared the track 's theme to Miley Cyrus ' " Party in the U.S.A. " , and the guitars present in the song to works by English punk rock band The Clash . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music wrote a positive review of the song and rated it four out of five stars . He wrote , " So , essentially doing a song like this is rocky ground , but the good news is that Demi generally comes across as the kind of bright , scrappy , girl @-@ next @-@ door type , so it doesn 't sound quite so preposterous when she insists that she 's still quite normal , really . " McAlpine concluded his review , writing , " You can almost hear the paparazzi cameras going off as she 's singing . [ ... ] Of course , the only thing she has to worry about now is that having made this very public declaration , if she slips up for a second , we 'll all be watching ... " Judy Coleman of The Boston Globe said that Lovato shows " her Gen @-@ Y stripes " , and " forcibly rhymes ' everything 's the same ' with ' the La @-@ La land machine ' – pronounced , of course , ' ma @-@ <unk> ' . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic noted it as one of the best tracks on Don 't Forget . Ed Masley of The Arizona Republic included " La La Land " at number eight on his " Top 10 from the Disney girls " list , and wrote , " Are Disney girls just naturally plagued by insecurity or is it all a plot to seem more real ? Like Miley 's " Party in U.S.A. , " this song is all about how out of place Lovato feels in La La Land . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On January 10 , 2009 , " La La Land " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 83 . The following week , it rose to number 56 . The same week , it debuted on the Hot Digital Songs chart at number 42 . On January 31 , 2009 , " La La Land " reached its peak of number 52 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 27 on Hot Digital Songs . To date , it has sold 912 @,@ 000 digital copies in the United States , according to Nielsen SoundScan . On the UK Singles Chart , the song debuted at number 63 on May 2 , 2009 . The following week , it reached its peak of 35 , and spent a total of seven weeks on the chart . In Ireland , it debuted at number 30 , which became its peak . In Germany , the song debuted at number 82 and spent only one week on the chart . In Australia , it reached its peak of number 76 on May 11 , 2009 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 " La La Land " was directed by Brendan Malloy and Tim Wheeler . It was used to promote Lovato 's then @-@ upcoming Disney Channel sitcom , Sonny with a Chance . In an interview with MTV News , Lovato said that it " really describes the show . I 'm excited about that . " Speaking of the video , co @-@ director Malloy said , " The idea for the video is to create this hyperreal world , that 's the word we keep using , La La Land . Fame has definitely gotten to everybody 's head . It 's more like [ Lovato ] is the only one in this world that fame hasn 't gotten to . " According to Lovato , her Sonny with a Chance co @-@ stars play " stereotypical Hollywood Los Angeles [ ... ] big type of people . " The video premiered on December 19 , 2008 on Disney Channel . It was released to the iTunes Store on January 20 , 2009 . Jefferson Reid of E ! Online praised the video , writing , " Mocking Hollywood phonies is always cool by us , and bonus points to Demi Lovato for doing it while rocking out in admirable form . <unk> the " La La Land " machine with sass and grit , Disney 's latest <unk> rock star seems like she might eventually give Miley Cyrus a real run for her money . " 
 The video features appearances from Lovato 's Sonny with a Chance co @-@ stars <unk> Ashley Arm , Doug Brochu , Sterling Knight , Michael Kostroff , Brandon Mychal Smith and Tiffany Thornton , as well as Lovato 's older sister Dallas Lovato . The video begins with Lovato being interviewed on a talk show called Rumor Has It with Benny Beverly ( Brochu ) . After introducing her to the audience , Beverly asks Lovato what it is like to be a star . A video is then shown to the audience , which serves as the main portion of the clip . In Hollywood , Lovato walks past a " Be @-@ seen section , " and bumps into a stranger on the street , which a paparazzo ( Knight ) takes a picture of . A woman then reads a tabloid magazine with Lovato and the " mystery man " on the cover . The video then cuts to Lovato and her Sonny with a Chance co @-@ stars at a red carpet event , with paparazzi taking pictures of Lovato wearing Converse sneakers with a dress . Lovato is then shown on the set of a commercial for her perfume , in a pink wig with makeup being applied to her . She is uncomfortable and eventually refuses to cooperate , which angers the director ( Smith ) . The video then cuts back to Rumor Has It with applause from the audience , and ends with Beverly praising Lovato . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Lovato performed " Get Back " and " La La Land " at the Kids ' Inaugural : " We Are the Future " event on January 19 , 2009 , in Washington D.C. at the Verizon Center . The event was held to celebrate the inauguration of Barack Obama as President of the United States . On April 7 , 2009 , Lovato performed " La La Land " on the eighth season of Dancing with the Stars . During the performance , Benji Schwimmer and Tori Smith danced along . Barrett wrote that " the frantic nature of both song and dance complemented each other quite nicely . " On April 25 , 2009 , Lovato performed the song on the final episode of singing competition My Camp Rock ( UK ) , where she also presented the award to the winner , Holly Hull . 
 During the summer of 2008 , Lovato performed the song on the Jonas Brothers ' Burnin ' Up Tour , for which she served as the opening act . Later in 2009 , the song was performed during her first headlining tour , Summer Tour 2009 . In 2010 , she performed the song during her South American tour . Lovato also performed the song during her set at the Jonas Brothers Live in Concert World Tour 2010 . Scott Mervis of Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette wrote that Lovato performed a " high @-@ energy , high @-@ volume " version of the song . In September 2011 , Lovato performed the song during the revue concert An Evening with Demi Lovato as part of a medley with " Get Back " and " Here We Go Again " . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Demi Lovato – writer , lead vocals 
 John Fields – producer , bass , guitars , keyboards , programming 
 Joe Jonas – writer , background vocals 
 Devin Bronson – guitar solo 
 Dorian Crozier – drums Kevin Jonas 
 John Taylor – guitars , background vocals 
 Nick Jonas – writer , guitars , background vocals 
 Kevin Jonas – writer , guitars , background vocals 
 Jonas Brothers – producers 
 Source : 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 = Collide ( Leona Lewis and Avicii song ) = 
 " Collide " is a song performed by British recording artist Leona Lewis and Swedish DJ and record producer Avicii . It was written by Tim Berg , Simon Jeffes , Arash Pournouri , Autumn Rowe , Sandy Wilhelm , with production helmed by Wilhelm under his production name Sandy Vee and The Young Boys . " Collide " is a house inspired love song , that 's instrumentation consists of piano riffs and a guitar . The song was recorded for Lewis ' third studio album Glassheart , but was not included on the album 's final track listing . 
 Upon the release of the single , Avicii claimed that Lewis and her record label , Syco , had sampled his song " Penguin " without his authorisation , and accused them of plagiarism . Before the lawsuit was filed by Avicii and his record label reach the high court , Syco announced that the song would be a joint release between Lewis and Avicii . The song premiered in the United Kingdom on 15 July 2011 and was sent to Australian radio on 22 August 2011 . " Collide " was released digitally via the iTunes Store on 2 September , as part of a collection of the original song , as well as remixes by Afrojack , Cahill , Alex Gaudino and Jason Rooney . The Afrojack remix is included as a bonus track on the deluxe edition of Glassheart . 
 " Collide " received a mixed reaction from music critics . Some were complimentary of Lewis 's vocal performance and compared it to Katy Perry 's song " Firework " , whilst others were critical of its musical structure . The song achieved commercial success , and peaked inside the top five of the singles charts in Ireland , Scotland and the United Kingdom . It also peaked at number one on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart . As part of promotion for the song , an accompanying music video was shot on a beach in Malibu , California and directed by Ethan Ladder . Lewis also performed the song on the game show Red or Black ? and at London nightclub G @-@ A @-@ Y , along with other songs . At the 2012 Grammy Awards , the Afrojack remix was nominated for Best Remixed Recording . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Lewis began planning her third studio album Glassheart in June 2010 , shortly after completing her first headline tour : The Labyrinth . " Collide " was written by Arash Pournouri , Autumn Rowe , Sandy Wilhelm , Simon Jeffes and Tim Berg , with production of the song helmed by Wilhelm ( under his production name Sandy Vee ) and <unk> . On 14 July 2011 , Lewis announced via her official Twitter account that the song would premiere in the United Kingdom on the The Scott Mills Show radio talk show the following day on 15 July , saying " So excited to let u know to tune into Scott Mills show on Radio One tomorrow for the worldwide exclusive play of my summer single ' Collide ' ( sic ) . " With regard to the song , Lewis spoke about " Collide " and why she chose to release it as the lead single , saying 
 I 'm excited for people to see a different side to my music . I 'm a fan of so many different genres and styles . For me this song has all the great ingredients of a summer anthem . I can 't wait for my fans to hear it and to share the rest of the album . 
 " Collide " was released to Australian mainstream radio on 22 August 2011 . On 2 September 2011 , " Collide " was released to download digitally via iTunes as part of a collection of the original song as well as remixes by Afrojack , Cahill , Alex Gaudino and Jason Rooney , in Austria , Ireland , Italy , Sweden , Switzerland , United Kingdom and the United States . In Germany , the song was released as a CD single on 16 September 2011 . Glassheart was originally set to be released in November 2011 following " Collide " , however the album was subsequently pushed back several times into early 2012 , then Summer 2012 , before settling on October 2012 . 
 = = Sampling controversy = = 
 Soon after " Collide " premiered , the song was received comparisons to an instrumental dance track called " Penguin " by Swedish DJ and recorded producer Avicii . Avicii 's " Penguin " samples the instrumental of " <unk> Mobile " by Penguin Cafe Orchestra . The song originally credited Lewis as the only artist on the track , which prompted a lawsuit against Lewis , and her record label Syco , as Avicii claimed that they had sampled his version of the song without his permission . According to Avicii 's manager Ash Pournouri , he thought that Lewis was going to only sample the original version by Penguin Cafe Orchestra . In a statement , Pournouri said " We were under the impression that they were going to sample the original . They ended up copying our version . We never allowed Syco to replay our version of the track . The original sample rights belong to Simon Jeffes ( Penguin Cafe Orchestra ) and approval for using that composition is not in our control . " As part of the lawsuit for not receiving credit on " Collide " , Avicii attempted to have the release of the song suspended until an agreement was reached . 
 Prior to the case reaching the high court , Lewis tweeted that Avicii was fully aware of his song being sampled on " Collide " , " With regards to my song , Avicii was aware & agreeing publishing splits for himself and his manager . When Avicii sent his track out to have a song written over it I totally fell in love with this version and I think he 's super talented . " Syco also responded to the claim , stating that Avicii was always going to work with Lewis , and that he would be credited on the song . In response , Avicii accused Lewis and her label of lying about working together , and tweeted " Thanks for accusing me of lying and speaking on my behalf . Since we never met or even spoke , please let me and my manager know who told you that and what confirmation they gave you . " Hours before both Lewis 's and Avicii 's record labels were supposed to appear in the high court , Syco released a statement that both record labels had reached an agreement and that Avicii would appear as a featured artist on " Collide " , whilst Lewis would appear as the lead artist . Avicii and his record label were pleased with the result , with the former saying " Glad to FINALLY have resolved situation with Leona . Music is the answer ... We 've finally come to an agreement with Leona on all the issues ... So happy to move on and focus on hit making ... So happy to move on with Leona and focus on having a hit together . " The latter stated " Avicii is an up @-@ and @-@ coming talent ; we think he should be given a fair crack at making this record the hit it deserves to be . " 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 The song was composed in the key of F # major using common time and a groove of 125 beats per minute . According to Michael Cragg for The Guardian , the song is built upon a " pounding beat " which incorporates elements of house . Instrumentation is provided by a piano riffs and a guitar . Lewis 's vocal range in the song spans nearly an octave , from the low note of G ♯ 3 to the high note of E ♭ 5 , on the song . Lewis makes use of harmonies throughout the duration of the song . 
 Amy Sciarretto for Popcrush noted that Lewis appeared to be restraining her vocals on the song , writing " Lewis exercising incredible restraint , as she doesn ’ t let her remarkable , room @-@ filling , enviable voice soar like we are used to . " Sciarretto continued to note that towards the end of the song , the singer does not show any restraint , and that it is a common device used in song production as it allows the singer to build tension . Lyrically , " Collide " is a love song , in which Lewis sings " I 'll pick you up when you 're down / Be there when no one 's around / I 'm in tune with how you feel / Everything ' bout this is real / When you 're in unfamiliar places / Count on me through life 's changes . " Sciarretto also noted that it is when Lewis performs the lyric " Crash into me / At full speed , " that she allows herself to not hold back in her vocal performance , and delivers it with " power and breadth " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Amy Sciarretto for Popcrush was complimentary of Lewis 's vocals , writing that she sounds " appealing and captivating , " and continued to say that it is what her fans have been waiting for . Sciarretto gave " Collide " a rating of three out of a possible five stars . Lewis Corner for Digital Spy praised the song , writing that Lewis combined her ability to deliver power ballad lyrics into a dance orientated song . Corner compared the song to Katy Perry 's " Firework " , also produced by Sandy Vee ; however , Corner noted that Lewis performs " Collide " in a way which distances the comparison . Katherine St. Asaph for Popdust was critical of the song . Whilst she noted that Lewis was venturing into dance music , where artists such as David Guetta and Kylie Minogue have experienced great success , and that Lewis has an iconic voice compared to both , she felt that the delivery still lacked . St. Asaph wrote " The lethargic , two @-@ note verses make her voice sound less husky than bored , an emotion that a comeback single should never evoke . " Michael Cragg for The Guardian felt that the song seemed to build and drop at the wrong times , and that its structure was not cohesive . Cragg continued to say that Lewis does a " passable job as a dance diva , " and noted the resemblances between " Collide " and " Penguin " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Collide " made its first chart appearance in the United States , where it debuted on the Hot Dance Club Songs at number 32 for the week of 20 August 2011 . The following week , an increase in club plays ascended the song to number 22 , and to number 16 in its third week . It ascended into the top ten for the week of 17 September 2011 , at number six . In its seventh week , " Collide " peaked at number one on 1 October 2011 , and was awarded with the Greatest Gainer honour for that week . The song became Lewis 's first number one song on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart and only her second song to do so ; the first was " Bleeding Love " in May 2008 , which peaked at number 11 . " Collide " charted at number 46 on Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Play songs year @-@ end list . In Ireland , " Collide " debuted at number three on 8 September 2011 , and remained in the top ten in its second week , where it charted at number eight . " Collide " was the highest new entry on the Irish Singles Chart for that week . 
 In Belgium ( Flanders ) , the song peaked at number 13 on 9 September 2011 , and remained on that countries singles chart for one month . It also peaked at number six on Belgium 's dance chart on 1 October 2011 ; it remained on the chart for 10 weeks . In the United Kingdom , " Collide " debuted at number four on the UK Singles Chart on 17 September 2011 . The following week , it fell to number 10 , and again to number 18 in its third week . " Collide " became Lewis 's seventh UK Top 5 single , tying her with Olivia Newton John for British female solo artist with the most UK Top 5 singles . It follows " A Moment Like This " which peaked at number one in 2006 and " Bleeding Love " in 2007 . In 2008 , the double A @-@ side " Better in Time " / " Footprints in the Sand " peaked at number two , " Forgive Me " peaked at number five and " Run " peaked at number one , while " Happy " peaked at number two in 2009 . As of December 2013 , Lewis holds the record for British female solo artist with the most UK Top 5 singles , with eight . 
 The song debuted on the UK Digital Chart at number five . In Scotland , the song debuted at number four on 17 September 2011 , and fell by one position to number five the following week . In Austria , " Collide " debuted at number 29 on 23 September 2011 , and remained on the chart for an additional two weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 " Collide " ' s accompanying music video was directed by Ethan Ladder , and filmed on a beach in Malibu , California . The treatment for the video was described as " a beautiful cinematic piece that will showcase the natural beauty of Leona Lewis . It will be inviting , sexy , and organic . It will be a moving fashion spread . It ’ s about finding the beauty in the subtleties of life . We are looking for beautiful men and women to help set the tone for this video . These people need to match Leona ’ s vibe and need to be able to have fun . " It was also noted that models applying to be in the video should have an Abercrombie & Fitch style about them , and that " small tattoos " were acceptable . For the most part of the video , Lewis is featured on a beach in a variety of different settings , such as sitting in an old cabriolet car , in which she is surrounded by her friends . Sitting in the car , Lewis wears a polka dot bikini top . Other scenes include Lewis standing in the shallow part of the ocean by herself , as well as sitting around a fire on the beach . As the video progresses , it changes from daytime to nighttime . Ryan Love of Digital Spy praised the video , saying " [ the video ] sees Lewis show off a new look while chilling with friends throughout the day and into the night . " Robbie Daw for Idolator compared the " party in the sand imagery " to Katy Perry 's music video for " Teenage Dream " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Lewis performed " Collide " for the first time on the first episode of game show Red or Black ? The same night , after performing on Red or Black ? , Lewis performed " Collide " as part of a mini set @-@ list at London nightclub G @-@ A @-@ Y. The performance featured Lewis performing a " raunchy " dance routine with partially nude male dancers . Lewis wore a black knee length dress , with a red heart emblem across her chest . Nadia Sam @-@ <unk> for The Sun wrote that the singer had " dumped her demure image " in favour of " her raunchiest @-@ ever dance routine surrounded by muscly bare @-@ chested hunks . " Lewis performed " Collide " at Radio 1 's Hackney Weekend on 24 May 2012 . She performed the song as part of a set list with a cover of Diddy – Dirty Money 's " Coming Home " , who she was joined on stage with by Wretch 32 , " Better in Time " , " Come Alive " , a new song which she premiered from Glassheart , " Bleeding Love " and " Run " , who she was joined on stage with by the Hackney Community Choir . " Collide " was performed as the fourth song on the set list of Lewis ' 2013 tour called the Glassheart Tour . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Digital EP 
 " Collide " ( Radio Edit ) – 3 : 59 
 " Collide " ( Extended Version ) – 6 : 47 
 " Collide " ( Afrojack Remix ) – 5 : 53 
 " Collide " ( Alex Gaudino and Jason Rooney Remix ) – 7 : 37 
 " Collide " ( Cahill Remix ) – 6 : 18 
 Glassheart ( Deluxe edition ) 
 " Collide " ( Afrojack Remix ) – 5 : 53 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Broadcast Music ( BMI ) . 
 Lead vocals – Leona Lewis 
 Featured artist – Avicii 
 Songwriting – Arash Pournouri , Autumn Rowe , Sandy Wilhelm , Simon Jeffes and Tim Berg 
 Production – Sandy Vee , <unk> 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Hurricane Fern ( 1971 ) = 
 Hurricane Fern was the sixth named storm and fourth hurricane of the 1971 Atlantic hurricane season . It formed from a tropical wave which interacted with a large trough of low pressure to form Fern , as well as Hurricane Ginger , Tropical Storm Heidi , and a system designated Tropical Depression Eighteen in real @-@ time , then Tropical Depression Sixteen after the fact , which moved into South Carolina . Fern crossed southeastern Louisiana as a tropical depression on September 4 before swinging back out over the Gulf of Mexico . Fern reached hurricane status on September 8 , reaching a peak intensity of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) before making landfall near Freeport , Texas , two days later . 
 Fern 's path was erratic since it made 90 ° turns three times during its duration , making it difficult for forecasters to track . The second Atlantic tropical cyclone to make U.S. landfall that year , Fern produced heavy rainfall across Louisiana and Texas , causing flash flooding that left 2 indirect fatalities and damage totaling over $ 30 million ( 1971 USD , $ 170 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A northwestward moving tropical wave moved out the Caribbean Sea on September 1 and became a tropical depression on September 2 after crossing southern Florida . Still moving northwestward , the tropical depression made landfall in southeastern Louisiana on September 4 . A building high pressure system over the Central United States forced the tropical depression to move southwest over the Gulf of Mexico . The warm waters then cause the depression to reach tropical storm strength and the storm was given the name Fern by the National Hurricane Center on September 7 . 
 The following day , Fern reached hurricane status as it neared the Texas coastline . The hurricane reached a peak intensity of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) and its barometric pressure dropped to 979 millibars . An incoming mid @-@ latitude trough caused Fern to stall east of Texas for twelve hours . After the trough moved by , Fern turned southwest , paralleling the Texas coastline before making landfall on September 10 between Freeport and Matagorda . 
 At landfall , Fern had weakened to a strong tropical storm as it moved further inland . Because the center of Fern was elongated , it was still able to receive moisture from the Gulf of Mexico and as a result , weakening was slow . Between September 10 and September 11 , Fern bypassed Corpus Christi , Texas , before dissipating as a tropical depression after crossing the Rio Grande into northern Mexico . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 At the time of its formation , forecasters determined that Fern might loop around in the Gulf of Mexico and it was more threatening to land than Hurricane Edith which was also projected to hit the Gulf Coast . On September 9 , as Fern was becoming organized , forecasters issued a hurricane watch along the Texas coast , anticipating that Fern might strengthen into a hurricane . In addition , small boats were warned to stay in port and residents were advised to be aware of storm conditions brought by Fern . The next day , the hurricane watches were changed to warnings , forcing residents living on the Texas coast to board up and evacuate . In preparation for the storm 's impact , Civil Defense workers and the American Red Cross were put on alert . In Galveston , eight emergency shelters were planned to open but five were closed when officials learned that they were not needed as most residents chose to ride out the storm in their homes . When Fern moved inland , the National Weather Service issued 21 tornado warnings and numerous flood warnings . In North Beach , city buses were used to transport evacuees inland and local officials were concerned about what to do with the relief trailers used to house survivors of Hurricane Celia a year earlier . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The precursor disturbance which later became Fern dropped rainfall up to 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of rainfall across South Florida . Central and Northern Florida received 1 to 3 inches ( 25 to 76 mm ) of rain . In Louisiana , after making landfall as a tropical depression , Fern produced rainfall up to 10 inches ( 250 mm ) across the southeastern part of the state , including up to 7 inches ( 180 mm ) in New Orleans . The outer bands of the tropical depression brought 3 to 5 inches ( 76 to 127 mm ) of rain across the coastal sections of Mississippi and Alabama . There were no reports of damage or fatalities in either Florida or the eastern U.S. Gulf Coast . 
 As Fern made its final landfall , a weather station in Port O 'Connor , Texas recorded a sustained wind speed of 86 miles per hour ( 138 km / h ) . In Corpus Christi , winds up to 66 miles per hour ( 106 km / h ) were reported . In coastal Texas , storm tides of 5 to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 8 m ) above normal were reported from Galveston to Freeport . One spotter reported seeing a flock of swallows in the eye of the storm during landfall . Heavy rainfall from the hurricane fell across eastern and central Texas . A total of 10 to 26 inches ( 250 to 660 mm ) of rain was measured in a stripe from Bee to San Patricio County . Other locations in Texas reported rainfall of 10 to 15 inches ( 250 to 380 mm ) , while areas from Galveston to Rockport received 5 to 12 inches ( 130 to 300 mm ) of rain . The heavy rainfall caused severe flash flooding that isolated numerous small towns in eastern and central Texas . An outbreak of five tornadoes was reported during Fern 's landfall , two of which caused minor tree and roof damage in Texas City . In addition , lightning from the hurricane caused six reported house fires on Galveston Island while 7 @,@ 500 homes and business were damaged ( mainly by flooding ) near Corpus Christi . Two indirect fatalities were reported , both from drowning incidents , while on Mustang Island , the hurricane caused four Cuban fishing boats to run aground . In all , the storm left $ 30 @.@ 2 million ( 1971 USD , $ 171 million 2016 USD ) in damage and two deaths . 
 = 1883 Navy Midshipmen football team = 
 The 1883 Navy Midshipmen football team represented the United States Naval Academy in the 1883 college football season . The team was the third intercollegiate football squad to represent the United States Naval Academy , and the first time the school participated in consecutive seasons . The squad was captained by member Frank Hill . The team played just a single game , a 2 to 0 ( 2 – 0 ) shutout loss to Johns Hopkins , which was the school 's first ever loss . The squad was the first to have the approval of the academy 's staff , and is regarded as the first official game played by the Midshipmen . The season continued a seven @-@ season , eight game rivalry between the Naval Academy and Johns Hopkins . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The first intercollegiate football game was played on November 6 , 1869 , between the Rutgers Scarlet Knights , then known as the Rutgers <unk> , and the New Jersey Tigers , now the Princeton Tigers . The game was a mixture of rugby and soccer , with teams scoring by kicking the ball into the opponent 's net . The game slowly developed , with many new and safer rules being added during the early 1870s . The number of schools participating in the sport also grew . However , even with the expansion , Princeton dominated the game , being declared the champion eight times in ten years . Yale was the only team which came close to Princeton , being awarded four championship designations during the same period . 
 The Naval Academy 's first ever football team was fielded in 1879 . The squad was entirely student @-@ operated , receiving no official support from Naval Academy officials . The team was entirely funded by its members and their fellow students . The 1879 team participated in just one game , which resulted in a scoreless tie . It was played against the Baltimore Athletic Club , at most likely an unused drill field on the Naval Academy campus . Navy would not field a football team in 1880 or 1881 , likely due to the lack of support . When football returned to the academy in 1882 , the squad was led by player @-@ coach Vaulx Carter , and won 8 – 0 in a match with Johns Hopkins , starting the seven @-@ year rivalry between the schools . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Johns Hopkins 2 , Navy 0 = = = 
 The Naval Academy team played its only game of the 1883 season against a squad from Johns Hopkins University . It was captained by Frank Hill , and was the first squad to receive approval from Naval Academy faculty . Previously , the squad was operated entirely by students . The game was played at the Naval Academy on November 29 , 1883 , Thanksgiving Day , most likely on an unused drill field or parade field . The game " began in heat and discussion " , with the " skillful and light weight " Johns Hopkins controlling the " endurance and muscle " of the Naval Academy 's team . However , tensions in the game quickly escalated . During the middle of the game , " matters grew so hot " that Johns Hopkins players were preparing to stop playing . Johns Hopkins scored two single @-@ point safeties and shutout Navy , winning 2 – 0 . The game " ended in quarrel and wrangle " . 
 = = Postseason and aftermath = = 
 The first postseason college football game would not be played until 1902 , with the Pasadena Tournament of Roses ' establishment of the east – west tournament game , later known as the Rose Bowl . The Midshipmen would not participate in their first Rose Bowl until the 1923 season , when they went 5 – 1 – 2 and tied with the Washington Huskies 14 – 14 in the match . As a result of the lack of a competition , there were no postseason games played after the 1882 season . According to statistics compiled by the National Championship Foundation , Parke Davis , the Helms Athletic Foundation , and the Billingsley college football research center , Yale was declared the 1883 season champion , giving them their ninth championship overall . 
 The Midshipmen 's loss was the first in school history , and ended the team 's shutout streak at two seasons . The Naval Academy would not get another shutout until the 1886 season , when they defeated Johns Hopkins 6 – 0 . The 1883 season continued a seven @-@ season , eight @-@ game long rivalry with Johns Hopkins , which Navy would win , five games to four . The 1883 game was the first win for Johns Hopkins , which had officially started playing football in 1881 . 1883 is considered to be the first season played by the Naval Academy , according to the school athletic department . Navy would finish the 1880s with four winning seasons , and an overall record of 14 – 12 – 2 . The school would outscore their opponents 292 – 231 , and would finish the 19th century with an overall record of 54 – 19 – 3 . 
 = Alesha Dixon = 
 Alesha Dixon ( born 7 October 1978 ) is a British singer , dancer , rapper , model and television presenter from Welwyn Garden City , England . She found fame in the all @-@ female R & B / garage trio Mis @-@ Teeq . The trio disbanded in 2005 and Dixon pursued a music career as a solo artist , signing to Polydor Records . She began recording her debut solo album , Fired Up , in 2006 , but due to poor record sales of her first two singles , " Lipstick " and " Knockdown " , she was dropped from Polydor . 
 In 2007 , Dixon won Strictly Come Dancing . Her television exposure led to a successful comeback , which included her signing to Asylum Records , an offshoot of Warner Music Group . Dixon then released a second album , entitled The Alesha Show , in 2008 , which received platinum certification from BPI in the UK and spawned four singles including " The Boy Does Nothing " and " Breathe Slow " , the latter of which became her highest charting single and earned her a Brit Award nomination . 
 In September 2009 , Dixon became a judge on the seventh series of Strictly Come Dancing , replacing Arlene Phillips . The replacement of Phillips by Dixon attracted criticism , as some questioned the extent of Dixon 's dancing knowledge . Or any knowledge of talent In 2010 , Dixon returned for the eighth series of Strictly Come Dancing and released her third studio album , The Entertainer . In January 2012 , shortly after completing the ninth series and her third year as a judge on Strictly Come Dancing , Dixon quit to become a judge on Britain 's Got Talent . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Alesha <unk> Dixon was born in Welwyn Garden City to a Jamaican father , Melvin , and English mother , Beverly Harris . Dixon has six half @-@ siblings . <unk> , she has two half @-@ brothers , and on her father 's side , she has three half @-@ brothers and a half @-@ sister . 
 She was educated at Monk 's Walk School , Welwyn Garden City , Hertfordshire . Dixon 's parents split up when Dixon was four and Dixon 's father moved away , resulting in Dixon later describing her family life as " very dysfunctional " . Between the ages of eight and ten , Dixon witnessed her mother suffer domestic violence from her partner ; she only spoke publicly about the issue 21 years later , in 2010 . Dixon created a documentary for the BBC , Don 't Hit My Mum , regarding the issue of domestic abuse from a child 's perspective , and remarked upon her own childhood : " When I think about that time , I don 't remember living in harmony , I don 't remember any fun times , I suppose because the negativity has clouded it . The negative times and the scary times have blocked anything that was good ... I believe that every child has the right to grow up in an environment where they feel secure and fearless going into the world , and I didn 't really feel that " . 
 Dixon 's first job was at Ladbrokes , although she aspired to become a PE teacher after leaving college . After completing a diploma course in sports studies , she had planned to take up a place at Loughborough University , but whilst at dance classes in London she was approached by a talent scout from a production company . Whilst travelling back home on the train she was approached by another scout who was forming a band and asked if she was interested . 
 = = = 1999 – 2005 : Mis @-@ Teeq = = = 
 Dixon 's career began in 1999 when she met Sabrina Washington as they both joined a dance school in Fulham , south west London . Together , they decided to form a band when Dixon and Washington , the two co @-@ founders , spotted Su @-@ Elise Nash , a girl auditioning for another band . Dixon and Washington proposed that Nash join the group and together they formed a trio . They were soon signed to Telstar Records with the addition of a new member , Zena McNally , and became the popular UK garage / R & B girl band , Mis @-@ Teeq . 
 In October 2000 , Dixon , then relatively unknown , featured on the single " Rumours " by Damage , which charted modestly at 22 on the UK Singles Chart . The genre of the track departed from the band 's R & B style , in favour of a garage @-@ based sound , however , the tepid reaction from fans insured Damage did not venture further into garage . 
 In January 2001 , Mis @-@ Teeq released their first single , " Why " . The track remained commercially unnoticed until a garage remix was produced and the track charted at 8 in April of that year . Two separate music videos for the song were filmed , accompanying the different versions of the song . The song 's success coincided with Zena McNally 's departure ; McNally later alleged that friction between herself and Washington was a factor . Mis @-@ Teeq , continuing as a trio , then released " All I Want " , which charted even more successfully at number 2 , behind Shaggy 's " Angel " . In October 2001 , they released their debut album Lickin ' On Both Sides , featuring hits " One Night Stand " , " B with Me " and double A @-@ side single " Roll On / This Is How We Do It " . In 2002 , Mis @-@ Teeq performed and received a nomination at the BRIT Awards in Earls Court , later in the year band won the MOBO Award for Best Garage Act . After the success of their debut album , 2003 saw Mis @-@ Teeq becoming the faces of JD Sports stores nationwide . 
 In 2003 , Mis @-@ <unk> released their second album Eye Candy , which included the singles " Scandalous " , " Can 't Get It Back " and " Style " . In 2004 , Mis @-@ Teeq toured the United States and released their debut single " Scandalous " from their American self @-@ titled debut , a compilation of the albums Lickin ' On Both Sides and Eye Candy . 
 In 2004 , Dixon went to feature in the N.E.R.D music video " She Wants to Move " . In the video , she is shown dancing on a podium while the band circle her . It was also rumoured that she was dating Pharrell Williams around the time of the video . The last song Dixon recorded with Mis @-@ Teeq was " Shoo Shoo Baby " for the Disney film Valiant . In March 2005 , their Greatest Hits compilation was released and it was announced that they were separating to pursue solo careers . 
 = = = 2006 – 08 : Fired Up , record label departure and Strictly Come Dancing = = = 
 Dixon launched her solo career after Mis @-@ Teeq 's break @-@ up and signed a £ 500 @,@ 000 , three @-@ album deal with Polydor Records . She spent a year writing and recording her solo debut album , Fired Up , working with a wide range of producers including Richard X , Xenomania , Johnny Douglas , Brian Higgins , Estelle and Paul Epworth . During this period , Dixon performed mononymously , known simply as " Alesha " . In June 2005 , she announced her first solo single to be " Superficial " . However , at the last minute , the song " Lipstick " was chosen as the first single . " Lipstick " was released on 14 August 2006 , and charted at 14 on the UK Single Charts . 
 Dixon released her second single " Knockdown " on 30 October 2006 , which charted at 25 on the UK Download Chart . However , on the official UK Singles Charts , the single peaked at number 45 , falling down to 68 the following week . On 6 November 2006 , it was revealed that Dixon had been dropped by her label , Polydor Records . Polydor gave her full rights to her unreleased debut album , Fired Up . Coinciding with her professional troubles was the collapse of her marriage to Harvey ; Dixon filed for divorce just over a year after her wedding due to her husband 's affair with Javine Hylton . 
 Dixon took part in series 5 of TV show Strictly Come Dancing in 2007 , partnered with professional dancer Matthew Cutler . Dixon was at first hesitant to join , fearing that snobbery within the music industry would damage her career . In a later interview , she said , " there 's always this preconceived idea that people do reality TV shows because they want to kick @-@ start their careers whereas I was actually worried that it would affect it . " They had been the favourite from the third week , receiving the most points from the judges on numerous occasions . Dixon herself gained high appraisal from the judges , even being likened to a " young Josephine Baker " by Bruno Tonioli . They received 4 @.@ 5 million votes in the final , beating actor Matt Di Angelo and professional dancer Flavia Cacace to win the glitter disco ball . Dixon is currently the most successful contestant to ever take part in Strictly Come Dancing , with an average point score of 36 @.@ 5 / 40 , the highest average score from any contestant to ever take part in the show . 
 = = = 2008 – 09 : The Alesha Show and Strictly Come Dancing judging = = = 
 After her victory on Strictly Come Dancing , Dixon soon became the centre of a bidding war between record labels and even Polydor Records , the label that had dropped her months previously , put in an offer . Dixon , however , chose to sign a four @-@ album contract with Asylum Records in 2008 . Dixon 's first new album as part of her contract , The Alesha Show was released in the UK on 24 November 2008 and 21 November in Ireland . The official first single from the album , " The Boy Does Nothing " became her first solo top ten hit on the UK Singles Chart , following a 76 spot jump from 84 to 8 on the UK Singles Chart on downloads alone ; the single eventually peaked at number 5 and received Gold certification . The song also became a commercial success in continental Europe and peaked in the top ten on the Australian Singles Chart . The single sold 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 The second single from The Alesha Show was " Breathe Slow " and entered the UK Singles Chart at number thirty @-@ nine solely on download sales . The single rose for three weeks before breaking into the top ten at number six , giving Dixon her second top ten hit in the UK from downloads alone , and eventually peaked at number 3 on the Top 40 UK Charts , becoming Dixon 's highest charting single on the UK Singles Chart . " Breathe Slow " was certified Silver in the UK for sales exceeding 200 @,@ 000 . 
 The third single from The Alesha Show , titled " Let 's Get Excited " was physically released on 11 May and reached a peak position of 13 in the UK Singles Chart . " Let 's Get Excited " became Dixon 's first track from The Alesha Show not to chart inside the top 10 in the UK Singles Chart . The song 's presence in the charts boosted album sales and The Alesha Show rebounded at a new peak of 11 . The album received Platinum certification from BPI , indicating sales of 300 @,@ 000 + in the UK alone . The fourth single from The Alesha Show , called " To Love Again " was released on 15 November 2009 . The track , a ballad penned by Dixon and Gary Barlow , was the first single taken from the deluxe version , entitled The Alesha Show – Encore , released on 23 November . Dixon also embarked upon a 17 @-@ date national tour , named The Alesha Show , which began on 20 October 2009 in Nottingham . 
 It was revealed in July 2009 that Dixon would be joining the Strictly Come Dancing judging panel in September 2009 . She replaced Arlene Phillips , which led to the BBC being accused of ageism and sexism by the media . Dixon , having a conflicting schedule also had to rearrange three dates on her upcoming tour , The Alesha Show to do the show , which is broadcast live on Saturday nights . 
 Dixon 's judging debut was met by criticism by some viewers , and 272 complaints were received by the BBC , according to The Guardian . Despite the complaints , the BBC stated they were " delighted " with Dixon . 
 = = = 2010 – 11 : The Entertainer = = = 
 In early 2010 , Dixon began work on her third studio album , The Entertainer , which she intended to release during the summer . On 15 March Dixon flew to Denmark to begin recording with Soulshock & Karlin , the producers of Dixon 's " Breathe Slow " . Dixon 's fan site later reported that Dixon had secured a recording session with Rodney Jerkins , a record producer who has produced records for Michael Jackson 's final studio album Invincible and most recently produced Lady Gaga and Beyoncé 's " Telephone " . 
 On 16 June , Dixon revealed on a post on her fansite that the upcoming album would be called Unleashed , and on 30 June her fansite president revealed the lead single is a track called " Drummer Boy " , produced by Haitian @-@ American producer , Shama Joseph , or " <unk> " . On 5 August it was revealed that Dixon had decided to change the album name from Unleashed to The Entertainer . " Drummer Boy " , released in August , charted moderately at 15 on the UK Singles Chart . On 16 September , it was announced that Dixon had collaborated with Roll Deep and featured in the band 's single " Take Control " . The track appeared on both Roll Deep 's album — Winner Stays On — and The Entertainer . " Radio " , billed as The Entertainer 's second single , charted poorly upon release in November 2010 , failing to reach the Top 40 . The single 's release coincided with the release of the album , which too made little commercial impact ; a year later it was noted that the album had sold 60 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Acknowledging the album 's lack of commercial success , Dixon said she would always prefer to " take a chance creatively " than release what she perceived to be stultifying records . She commented : " I knew the single ' Drummer Boy ' was a risk . It was a very difficult record and so far removed from anything I 'd done before . I get that ... I take full responsibility for that , but I 'm glad I did it . I 'd rather make a unique record like ' Drummer Boy ' and have it fail than play it safe and release bland , generic music that doesn 't excite me . " 
 = = = 2012 – 2014 : Britain 's Got Talent , motherhood and other ventures = = = 
 Dixon wrote and released a new track " Do It Our Way " for the New Year Weight Watchers campaign which featured in new advertisements for the organisation . The track was released onto iTunes on 1 January 2012 , as a digital download . On 2 January , Dixon announced her departure from her judging role on Strictly Come Dancing , to pursue other projects . It was later announced that she left the panel to join the judging panel of Britain 's Got Talent along with Simon Cowell , Amanda Holden and David Walliams . Michael Hogan , of The Daily Telegraph , pointed out that " if rumours are to be believed , Dixon has more than tripled her salary by defecting to the commercial channel " , a point made by various other sources . 
 In September 2012 it was announced that Dixon would be collaborating with former So Solid Crew rapper Ashley Walters on his new song " Your Love " . The single was released on 11 November . In 2013 , Dixon resumed her role as a judge for the seventh series . 
 It was announced in June 2013 that Dixon was expecting her first child with her partner , former backing dancer <unk> <unk> , and on her 35th birthday , 7 October , 2013 , she stated on Twitter that she had given birth to her daughter , Azura Sienna , the previous week . Dixon said she would put her fourth album on hold and concentrate on motherhood , but in summer 2013 she and Paddy McGuinness presented ITV 's new entertainment show Your Face Sounds Familiar . The programme was not renewed for a second series . 
 Dixon returned for the eighth series of Britain 's Got Talent in 2014 . Dixon also joined the Text Santa presenting team in December 2014 – ITV 's annual Christmas charity telethon . 
 = = = 2015 – present : Do It for Love = = = 
 In December 2014 she announced that she would be releasing a new single in either March or May 2015 . An album release is expected to follow , which will be her first in five years . In January 2015 she returned for the ninth series of Britain 's Got Talent . In March , Dixon confirmed she would be releasing her new single " The Way We Are " , via her own record label Precious Stone Records , on 21 June . The music video premiered in full on Vevo on 19 May . The video was filmed on Paphos , Cyprus and fans were given the opportunity to choose the video 's ending from three options . The first live performance will take place on the Britain 's Got Talent live shows in May . It will be her first single release in over four years , following 2011 's " Every Little Part of Me " . 
 Dixon premièred album track , " Azura ( Blue Sky ) " during Graham Norton 's BBC Radio 2 show in May 2015 . She also explained that the song " Do It for Love " was the first song she had written for the album and was a song about her love for music . 
 Dixon revealed the album 's title as Do It for Love in an Official Charts interview . " Tallest Girl " was released 18 September 2015 as the second single from the album with an accompanying music video , directed by De La Muerte Films . The third single from the album was " People Need Love " . The song has been reworked by Ash Rowes for the official single version . Ash Rowes has also been responsible for reworking Girls Aloud 's " Whole Lotta History " official single version . " People Need Love " was released on 11 December 2015 . 
 She was criticised for forgetting the words to " God Save the Queen " when performing a solo at the 2015 British Grand Prix . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 When Dixon first emerged into the public spotlight with Mis @-@ Teeq , she was primarily the group 's MC , whilst one of her band @-@ mates Sabrina Washington usually sang lead vocals on the records . Washington encouraged her to rap from the band 's inception , saying : " When she started she was a bit shy , but I always said that it adds something , an element of difference . It was the first time I 'd ever heard a woman MC and I was like , ' Alesha , you have got to do that , ' and she was like ' No Bri , don 't make me look stupid ' " . However , when she began her solo career her first UK album , The Alesha Show , saw Dixon undergo a genre @-@ shift . The album featured no rapping and was primarily R & B and soul , unlike Mis @-@ Teeq 's music , which focused mainly on garage and hip hop . Dixon commented that the record consisted of " a lot more guitar @-@ written songs with pop produced around it " . Dixons third album The Entertainer consists mainly of uptempo pop and dance @-@ pop tracks . 
 Dixon , a songwriter and singer , often writes or co @-@ writes her own records . Discussing the writing process of The Alesha Show she said , " I 've written the majority of it and I co @-@ write as well with a lot of people " . Critics have suggested some of her songs are autobiographical , such as " To Love Again " ( 2009 ) , co @-@ written with Gary Barlow and John Shanks . Vocally , reviewer Andy Gill of The Independent suggested that Dixon 's vocal strengths lie with more up @-@ tempo songs , saying " the problem is that her bubbly personality ( and voice ) is simply not as well suited to ballads as to perky dancefloor anthems " . However , The Guardian 's Caroline Sullivan complemented her live vocals whilst reviewing her tour , The Alesha Show . She said , of her concert tour , that " it was her singing that made the impression : she 's more powerful than you would imagine , and when pitted against her band at their most blaring , she more than held her own . While this was going on , she was being flung between two male hoofers , proving , if nothing else , that pop stars who claim they can 't dance and sing simultaneously just aren 't trying " . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Dixon has often cited Madonna as an influence , saying " Madonna is a big idol . I loved her when I was a young girl and I feel like I 've been on a musical journey with her " . Dixon 's single " Let 's Get Excited " namechecked the singer and her 1985 single " Into the Groove " . Furthermore , the music video featured what Dixon described as " a Madonna tribute " featuring voguing throughout . Additionally , Dixon has described Kylie Minogue as her childhood idol . Growing up , the first record Dixon ever bought was " Push It " by the hip hop group Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa ; she remarked " I didn 't understand what they were talking about at the time ... They were raw and did their own thing , and I loved that . I love artists who don 't conform to what people expect of them " . 
 Despite growing up in the predominantly white area of Welwyn Garden City , Hertfordshire , Dixon 's father Melvin would take her to the Notting Hill Carnival in London to allow her to experience some of her Jamaican heritage . The music she would hear influenced her tastes , as she commented : " all the dancehall records I saved up to buy – Shabba Ranks , Buju Banton – I heard them at Notting Hill " . When asked during an interview who her favourite songwriter was , Dixon replied : " Lauryn Hill . I love Lauryn Hill because she is not scared to talk about real life . She may say things that are slightly controversial but she gets people thinking and gets people talking " . Dixon has also named Neneh Cherry as great influence upon her . Cherry , a mixed race singer , inspired her from an early age , with Dixon saying , " I remember seeing Neneh Cherry on the TV when I was little and turning to my mum and saying , ' Mummy , she looks like me ' " . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Dixon has described herself and other celebrities as having a " moral responsibility " to do good works , when asked by The Observer 's Elizabeth Day . Speaking in August 2010 to Blues & Soul Dixon said : " Being in the entertainment industry I do feel I have a responsibility that comes with my fame " . 
 In 2009 , Dixon climbed Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania for Comic Relief with Girls Aloud members Cheryl Cole and Kimberley Walsh , Ben Shephard , Ronan Keating , Fearne Cotton , Denise Van Outen , Chris Moyles and Gary Barlow , who had spearheaded the project . Together they raised over £ 3 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 towards helping combat malaria in Tanzania . In June 2009 Dixon became an official ambassador for the charity Help a London Child , stating that she felt " very honoured " to be asked . 
 Dixon is a patron of the African @-@ Caribbean Leukaemia Trust ( <unk> ) which is a voluntary charity , whose main aim is to increase the number of Black and Mixed Parentage people on the UK Bone Marrow Register . The members of the <unk> freely volunteer their time in attempting to raise awareness in the Black community ; enabling potential donors to come forward and be involved in the process of offering hope and a healthy future to someone whose disorder may otherwise prove fatal . Dixon has also backed Nickelodeon 's See Something , Say Something campaign , a UK anti @-@ bullying initiative . 
 Dixon is engaged with various animal rights organisations and is also a vegetarian . She is Vice @-@ President of the League Against Cruel Sports , a charity which works to end cruelty to animals in the name of sport and featured in a charity appeal due to concerns that the Hunting Act 2004 could be repealed . In 2012 , Dixon travelled to Romania with World Animal Protection to rescue two brown bears from Onesti Zoo , which had closed years previously . The bears were moved to a nearby sanctuary . In 2014 , Dixon encouraged her Twitter followers to sign an online petition calling for the ban of slaughtering animals without being stunned first . UK and EU law requires that animals must be stunned before slaughter , unless for religious purposes ( Halal or Kosher meat ) . Dixon is also a supporter of the <unk> scheme launched by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ( RSPCA ) . The scheme fosters pets belonging to victims of domestic abuse , who often have to leave behind animals , as many refuges and safe houses do not allow pets . The pets are later reunited with their original owners when possible . 
 In addition to Dixon 's commercial role as a model and representative for the cosmetics company Avon on International Women 's Day 2012 , Dixon launched the company 's Pass It On campaign to highlight domestic abuse issues in the UK by encouraging the purchase of a necklace , described by her as " a symbol of women 's empowerment , and infinite possibilities for women " . All the proceeds from Avon 's necklace campaign were donated to Refuge and Women 's Aid . In March 2013 Dixon led a walk down Westminster Bridge to the Houses of Parliament to raise awareness of domestic violence . Regarding the walk , Dixon commented that " awareness of domestic violence is still shockingly low and that 's why it 's so important that we raise awareness about a subject that is too often ignored " . 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 As well as a singer , Dixon has forayed into television presenting , created three documentaries , and has established herself as a businesswoman through various endorsement deals and lucrative contracts . In November 2009 , Dixon announced the release of her jewellery line . Dixon has signed deals with various brands , including car manufacturers Ford , chocolate brand <unk> , cosmetics company Avon and airline Thomson Airways . Additionally , Dixon is creative director of gym chain LA Fitness , a role which she assumed in 2009 . Dixon signed a four @-@ year results @-@ based deal with the gym chain , with her remuneration based on the success of the company . 
 = = = Presenting = = = 
 Dixon has presented shows in the UK , such as the MOBO Awards , CD : UK , ITV2 's coverage of The Brit Awards and presented the Live From the Red Carpet show at the 62nd British Academy Film Awards for E ! . She has also been a guest on BBC One 's current affairs programme This Week on two occasions , in November 2006 and December 2007 . In 2008 , Dixon presented her own mini @-@ documentary entitled Alesha : Look But Don 't Touch , which aired on the BBC and featured a guest appearance from Cheryl Cole . The show explored " improvement " by digital technology in order to understand the impact all these " perfect " images have on society . In 2009 , it was reported that Dixon was in talks with television companies about a possible chatshow . In 2008 and 2009 , she co @-@ presented Children in Need with Terry Wogan and Tess Daly . She returned to present the telethon in 2011 with Daly , Wogan and Fearne Cotton . 
 In March 2010 , Dixon presented the Mister World 2010 pageant in Incheon , Korea . 
 Since 22 August 2011 , Dixon presented a street @-@ dance competition for CBBC called Alesha 's Street Dance Stars . She has also appeared in the CBBC series 12 Again . On 17 May 2013 , Dixon was a guest presenter on ITV Breakfast magazine show Lorraine . 
 In the summer of 2013 , Dixon and Paddy McGuinness co @-@ presented one series the ITV reality show Your Face Sounds Familiar . 
 In 2014 and 2015 , Dixon co @-@ presented segments of ITV 's Text Santa telethon . In 2016 , she co @-@ presented Sport Relief 2016 on BBC One with Greg James . 
 = = Discography = = 
 2006 : Fired Up 
 2008 : The Alesha Show 
 2010 : The Entertainer 
 2015 : Do It for Love 
 = = Tours = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Earth Angel = 
 " Earth Angel " ( occasionally referred to as " Earth Angel ( Will You Be Mine ) " ) is a song by American doo @-@ wop group the Penguins . Produced by Dootsie Williams , it was released as their debut single in October 1954 on Dootone Records . The Penguins had formed the year prior and recorded the song as a demo in a garage in South Los Angeles . The song 's origins lie in multiple different sources , among them songs by Jesse Belvin , Patti Page , and the Hollywood Flames . The song 's authorship was the subject of a bitter legal dispute with Williams in the years following its release . 
 Although the song was going to be overdubbed with additional instrumentation , the original demo version became an unexpected hit , quickly outstripping its A @-@ side . The song grew out of Southern California and spread across the United States over the winter of 1954 – 55 . " Earth Angel " became the first independent label release to appear on Billboard 's national pop charts , where it peaked within the top 10 . It was a big hit on the magazine 's R & B charts , where it remained number one for several weeks . A cover version by white vocal group the Crew @-@ Cuts peaked higher on the pop charts , reaching number three . More cover versions followed , including recordings by Gloria Mann , Tiny Tim , Johnny Tillotson , and Elvis Presley . 
 The Penguins ' only hit , it eventually sold in excess of 10 million copies . The original recording of the song remained an enduring hit single for much of the 1950s , and it is now considered to be one of the definitive doo @-@ wop songs . In 2005 , it was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry , deeming it " culturally , historically , or aesthetically important . " 
 = = Background = = 
 The Penguins — composed of lead vocalist Cleveland Duncan , bass Curtis Williams , tenor Dexter <unk> , and baritone Bruce Tate — formed at Fremont High School in Los Angeles , California in 1953 . The group named themselves after the Kool cigarette advertising mascot . Williams and <unk> Hodge were previously members of The Hollywood Flames , where they began writing " Earth Angel " with mentor Jesse Belvin , also a Fremont High graduate . Belvin had previously had a hit single in " Dream Girl " , a 1952 ballad credited to Jesse & Marvin ( saxophonist Marvin Phillips ) . The song echoes " Earth Angel " in its melodic refrain : " Dream girl , dream girl ... " Its " why @-@ oh " hook was adapted as a background chant within " Earth Angel " . The " Will you be mine ? " hook was borrowed from the R & B hit of the same name by the Swallows . The Hollywood Flames were hired that year by Jessie Mae Robinson to record a demo of " I Went to Your Wedding " , later recorded by Patti Page . Hodge later noted that the group lifted the bridge from that song for " Earth Angel " . The song also contains elements of the Flames ' 1953 recording of " I Know " in its piano introduction and chord progressions , which were closely based on the Rodgers & Hart standard " Blue Moon " . Williams reportedly wrote the song for his wife , Marlene , and Duncan re @-@ wrote the melody , as he disliked the original . 
 " Earth Angel " was recorded as a literal garage demo — it was recorded in a home garage at the Los Angeles home of Ted Brinson ( a relative of Williams who had previously played bass for the Jimmie Lunceford and Andy Kirk bands ) . The home was located at <unk> West 30th Street in South Los Angeles . The garage was used as the primary recording space of Dootsie Williams for all of his Dootone artists , and had also been used to record demos for Jessie Mae Robinson . It was recorded on a single @-@ track Ampex tape recorder , owned by big band veteran Ted Brinson , who performs bass guitar on the track . The drums were muffled with pillows so as to not overwhelm the vocals . A neighbor 's pet dog stopped many takes by barking . " Everytime the dog barked next door , I 'd have to go out and shut him up , and then we 'd do another take , " remembered Williams . Williams performs piano on the track , with Preston Epps on bongos ( though this unconfirmed ) , as well as an unknown drummer . The song is composed in the key of E @-@ flat major and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 76 beats per minute . Duncan 's vocal range spans from C4 to D5 . The first five seconds of the intro are cut off of the recording by accident . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Although it was an unfinished demo , " Earth Angel " began to see immediate success . Williams carried a rough acetate dub with him to Dolphin 's of Hollywood All Night Record Shop , a local record store , to gauge shop owner John Dolphin 's opinion . Dolphin broadcast a late @-@ night rhythm and blues broadcast from his store , and <unk> disc jockey Dick Hugg was sitting in . Hugg played both sides of the single , and by the next morning , requests began coming in for the song . As a result , Williams abandoned an idea to overdub additional instrumentation and began immediate manufacturing of the 7 " single to issue it as soon as possible . Still convinced " Hey Señorita " would be the hit , it was pressed to the A @-@ side ; disc jockeys soon began flipping the record in favor of " Earth Angel " . The demand for " Earth Angel " nearly bankrupted Dootone ; producer Walter Williams ran out of label paper , leading the single to be pressed on multiple colored labels . It made its first appearance in Billboard as a territorial hit for Los Angeles , becoming the second best @-@ selling R & B single in Los Angeles for the second week of October 1954 . It climbed to number one for the city by November 13 , after which it began to grow in popularity in New York , Philadelphia , Cincinnati , Cleveland , Buffalo , Pittsburgh , and Nashville . 
 " Earth Angel " became the first independent label release to appear on Billboard 's national pop charts . Billboard called the record a " Best Buy " for the R & B charts , and Cashbox in Canada gave it its " Award o ' the Week " . It hit number one in New York on November 27 , and by Christmas Day the song was placing on the " Best Sellers in Stores " chart for both R & B and pop , where it debuted at number 25 . By January 15 , 1955 , the single had advanced to the top 20 of the overall Best Sellers in Stores chart , resulting in its addition to the " Honor Roll of Hits " chart . It also reached number one on the " Most Played in Jukeboxes " R & B chart . After seven weeks on the chart , it peaked at number eight on the overall Best Sellers in Stores chart , and by February 19 had hit number one on all the major R & B charts . It remained a number one R & B hit for three weeks , before being dethroned by Johnny Ace 's " Pledging My Love " . 
 At the time , it was a rare achievement for an R & B song to chart within the top echelons of the pop chart . The Penguins were the first West Coast R & B group to dent the pop top ten . In May 1955 , Dootsie Williams was presented with a gold record to celebrate the record selling one million copies ( it was reported that nearly 200 @,@ 000 copies of " Earth Angel " were sold in Southern California alone ) . With the popularity of the song " The Flying Saucer " , the single saw revived sales in summer 1956 . When the Penguins switched to Mercury Records , the label reissued " Earth Angel " in September 1956 with string accompaniment . The following July , Billboard reported that the single was again breaking out in certain markets , remarking , " This wax breaks out every summer . " It made another appearance at # 101 in late December 1959 . Indeed , Billboard confirmed the single 's enduring popularity in 1960 : " The original version of ' Earth Angel , ' for example , is still known to be a heavy traffic item in many areas . " By 1963 , Williams had told Billboard the single had passed the 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 mark , and it was reported to be the top @-@ selling single of Dootone Records ( at this period renamed <unk> ) . The same year , it was reported that thousands of bogus copies of " Earth Angel " were attempted to be sold by an unidentified counterfeiter . 
 The song has continued to sell multiple decades after its release ; in 1983 , for example , it was still selling thousands of copies per week around the world . According to The New York Times , the Penguins ' recording of " Earth Angel " has sold over ten million copies . Its exact figures are uncertain ; the Honolulu Star @-@ Bulletin wrote that the single has sold " perhaps as many as 20 million records , remaining one of the most popular records of all time . " 
 = = Legal issues = = 
 Group members later engaged in a dispute with Dootsie Williams regarding royalties . By mid ‐ January 1955 , the Penguins reportedly did not receive advances from Dootone , and problems began to arise . They hired Buck Ram , a white big band @-@ era veteran , to manage the group ; he would later take partial credit for the song 's success , despite the fact that he only began managing the group after its release . On April 9 , 1955 , the Penguins signed with Mercury Records . Ram had directed the group to Mercury , slyly using his power as a representative to get another <unk> vocal group , the Platters , signed as well . Dootone had previously confirmed to trades that their recording contract with the Penguins spanned three years . A court decision found this contract was invalid as three of the four members of the group were minors at the time of their signing . Curtis Williams sued Dootone for $ 100 @,@ 000 , claiming damages as a result of his underage signing . Dootone countersued , claiming Mercury induced the group to break their Dootone contract and for taking the publishing rights of " Earth Angel " . Jesse Belvin and supposed co @-@ writer Johnny Green sued the group the same week for not receiving credit for writing the song . 
 Dootsie Williams sued and was awarded the rights to the song in 1957 by the Los Angeles Superior Court " on the ground that Belvin and Hodge had written most of it . " 
 = = Cover versions and in popular culture = = 
 " Earth Angel " has been repeatedly covered in popular culture . As was a common occurrence at the time , there were a number of cover versions released upon the record 's immediate success . Many white artists covered the song , including Gloria Mann , Pat O 'Day , and Les Baxter . The most notable of these was performed by a vocal group from Canada named the Crew @-@ Cuts , signed to Mercury Records . Their version peaked at number three on the pop charts , higher than the original . Their version also reached British charts , a feat the original was unable to achieve . Elvis Presley recorded an informal cover during an army stint in Germany . " The Flying Saucer " ( 1956 ) , widely considered one of the first mashup songs , sampled the song without permission . Other cover versions include Johnny Tillotson , The <unk> , The <unk> , New Edition , Joan Baez , and Johnny Preston . 
 In addition to cover versions , the song has also been employed in various film and television soundtracks . The 1991 film Earth Angel was named after the song . The song has been used in the television series Happy Days . It was featured prominently in the film Back to the Future ( performed by Harry Waters Jr. as Marvin Berry & The <unk> ) ' , as well as Superman III and The Karate Kid II . It is also used in the jukebox musical Jersey Boys , a musical about the singing group The Four Seasons . Australian group Human Nature covered the song on their 2014 album Jukebox . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although the Penguins never matched the success of their debut single , the song has continued to see popularity and acclaim . Cleveland Duncan , the song 's lead vocalist , remarked , " I never get tired of singing it , as long as people never get tired of hearing it . " The song became a staple of oldies radio in the late 20th century . 
 " Earth Angel " has been called " a simple but elegant recording now judged by many to be one of the finest examples of what would become doo @-@ wop " . Despite the higher success of the cover by the Crew @-@ Cuts , the original amateur recording by the Penguins is now considered definitive . Steve Sullivan , author of the Encyclopedia of Great Popular Song Recordings , writes that the track " possesses virtually all of the qualities cherished by doo @-@ wop lovers : melodic beauty , a shimmering earnest lead vocal , stripped @-@ to @-@ the @-@ bone simplicity , and a pristine romantic innocence . " The New York Times wrote that " For many the song evokes a glittering , timeless vision of proms , sock hops and impossibly young love " , and the Los Angeles Times concurred , calling it a " nostalgic evocation of post @-@ World War II youth culture . " Steve <unk> , an author and music historian , remarked that " It was the first of the ultra @-@ romantic ballads that hit the nerve of teens at the time ... It stood out because of the sincerity of the delivery . " Rolling Stone placed it at number 152 on their list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time and called it " a pivotal record in the early development of rock & roll . The artless , unaffected vocals of the Penguins , four black high schoolers from L.A. , defined the street @-@ corner elegance of doo @-@ wop . " 
 A 1997 listener poll by New York radio station WCBS placed " Earth Angel " just behind the Five <unk> ' " In the Still of the Night " in a list of most enduring doo @-@ wop songs . Billboard once reported that many consider " Earth Angel " among the first rock and roll hits , and The New York Times stated that " its rhythmic , wailing plea to an idealized young woman captured the spirit of the just @-@ emerging rock generation . " In 2005 , it was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry , deeming it " culturally , historically , or aesthetically important " . 
 In July 2016 , British pop group Coldplay played the song in concert in New Jersey with Michael J. Fox , star of Back to the Future , on guitar , in a tribute to the film . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Washington State Route 117 = 
 State Route 117 ( SR 117 ) is a short , 1 @.@ 40 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 25 km ) long state highway located entirely within Port Angeles , the county seat of <unk> County , in the U.S. state of Washington . The short roadway , named the Tumwater Truck Route , serves the waterfront of Port Angeles and intersects two streets and crosses under another street on a short bridge . Beginning at an interchange with U.S. Route 101 ( US 101 ) , the highway travels northeast to terminate at Marine Drive . SR 117 was first established in 1991 , but a road parallel to the current roadway had existed since 1966 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 117 begins as the Tumwater Truck Road at an interchange with U.S. Route 101 ( US 101 ) in southwest Port Angeles . The interchange only serves traffic from US 101 eastbound driving onto SR 117 northbound and motorists driving from the route southbound onto US 101 westbound , however , left turns are allowed to serve the missing movements . Traveling north , the highway intersects Lauridsen Boulevard and crosses under 8th Street . Between 8th Street and the Port Angeles waterfront , a daily average of 7 @,@ 400 motorists accessed the roadway in 2008 . After the 8th Street bridge , the road intersects 3rd Street and terminates at Marine Drive , which continues east as 1st Street to US 101 . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 117 originated in 1991 , but a short local street connecting the waterfront with U.S. Route 101 ( US 101 ) had existed in 1966 . In 1991 , the Washington State Legislature established SR 117 and the roadway has not been realigned since 1991 . During a severe winter storm on November 27 , 2006 , the Port Angeles Police Department closed both ends of the highway due to treacherous conditions . On December 15 , 2006 , a wind <unk> caused trees near the roadway to block the highway and the route had to be shut down . On August 7 , 2007 , the city of Port Angeles announced that the 8th Street bridge over the Tumwater Truck Route would be closed on August 20 , 2007 . A detour was set for both 8th Street and the truck route ; trucks were routed onto US 101 ( Lincoln Street ) and Marine Drive / Front Street . Starting on April 1 , 2008 , the new bridge 's girders started to arrive at the construction site . The last girders arrived on April 9 and the highway was reopened . On August 1 , the roadway was closed for another month to be reconstructed . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Port Angeles , <unk> County . 
 = Battle of Suwon Airfield = 
 The Battle of Suwon Airfield was the first aerial battle of the Korean War occurring on June 27 , 1950 over Kimpo Airfield and Suwon Airfield . The battle , between aircraft of the United States and North Korea , ended in a victory for the US Air Force after nine of its aircraft successfully shot down seven North Korean People 's Air Force aircraft . It was the first direct engagement of the Air Battle of South Korea . 
 With the outbreak of the war two days earlier , the US forces were attempting to evacuate US civilians and diplomats from the city of Seoul , where a battle was ongoing between North and South Korean forces . Transport aircraft and ships , escorted by US fighter planes , were attempting to bring civilians out of the country as fast as possible . During these missions on June 27 , US forces were attacked by North Korean aircraft in two separate incidents in the Seoul area . Despite being outnumbered , the better @-@ built American aircraft outmaneuvered the North Koreans , quickly shooting down half of the attacking force . 
 The actions were among few air @-@ to @-@ air battles in the early phase of the war as the North Koreans , realizing their aircraft were outmatched , quickly stopped using them aggressively against the UN . The battle also signaled a turning point in the Jet age , as new , jet engine powered fighter aircraft had easily bested conventional fighters . 
 = = Background = = 
 Main Article : Initial Phase of Korean War 
 On the morning of June 25 , 1950 , ten divisions of the North Korean People 's Army launched a full @-@ scale invasion of the nation 's neighbor to the south , the Republic of Korea . The force of 89 @,@ 000 men moved in six columns , catching the Republic of Korea Army by surprise , resulting in a rout . The smaller South Korean army suffered from widespread lack of organization and equipment , and was unprepared for war . The numerically superior North Korean forces destroyed isolated resistance from the 38 @,@ 000 South Korean soldiers on the front before it began moving steadily south . 
 To prevent South Korea 's collapse the United Nations Security Council voted to send military forces . The United States ' Seventh Fleet dispatched Task Force 77 , led by the fleet carrier USS Valley Forge ; the British Far East Fleet dispatched several ships , including HMS Triumph , to provide air and naval support . By June 27 , the naval and air forces moving to Korea had authorization to attack North Korean targets with the goal of helping repel the North Korean invasion of the country . 
 With the US forces accepting the North Korean attack as an act of war , it became imperative to evacuate civilians and American diplomats from Korea , as the forces of the north and south were battling across the peninsula . On June 27 the South Koreans were losing the First Battle of Seoul . Most of South Korea 's forces retreated in the face of the invasion . The North Koreans would capture the city the next day forcing the South Korean government and its shattered army to retreat further south . 
 In the meantime , US naval and air forces were evacuating US diplomats , military dependents , and civilians by ship and air transport , hoping to get American civilians out of the country " by any means . " Civilians were being gathered at Suwon Airfield and Kimpo Airfield in Seoul , before moving to Inchon and out of the <unk> airlifts and convoys were being escorted by aircraft from the United States , which was operating its aircraft from bases in Japan . The two Koreas had very small air forces of their own , with the North Koreans ' 132 aircraft organized into the 1st Air Division . At the early phase in the war , these aircraft were used boldly to the North Koreans ' advantage . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = First sortie = = = 
 On the morning of June 27 , a flight of five F @-@ 82 Twin Mustangs of the 68th Fighter Squadron and 339th Fighter Squadron , 8th Fighter Wing commanded by US Major James W. Little were escorting four C @-@ 54 Skymaster aircraft out of Kimpo . Little , a flying ace with experience in World War II , was the commander of the 339th Squadron . The four transports were unarmed and filled with civilians from the Seoul area , en route to Japan . 
 Around 12 : 00 , a flight of five Korean People 's Air Force ( KPAF ) Lavochkin La @-@ 7 appeared at an altitude of 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) . The North Korean aircraft were headed for Kimpo Airfield with the intention of attacking US transports . Spotting the transport aircraft , the five North Korean planes immediately descended on them and began opening fire , scoring several hits . The North Koreans then began opening fire on the five US fighters guarding the transport aircraft . Little ordered the US aircraft to return fire , and personally fired the first shot against the North Koreans . 
 The North Korean aircraft split off into two groups , with two climbing rapidly into the clouds and the remaining three descending . Two F @-@ <unk> piloted by Lieutenant Charles B. Moran ( tail number 46 @-@ 357 ) and Lieutenant William G. Hudson ( tail number 46 @-@ 383 ) followed the ascending pair . The two North Korean aircraft maneuvered around Moran 's aircraft and opened fire , damaging the tail of his plane . Hudson responded by attacking the lead plane , forcing it to ascend further . Hudson 's shots struck the aircraft in the fuselage and right wing . 
 The North Korean pilot subsequently bailed out of the aircraft , though the navigator remained in it and was killed when the aircraft crashed . Moran , in the <unk> , had stalled while attempting to avoid the second North Korean plane , and when his aircraft recovered he was able to quickly shoot down the second North Korean aircraft which had accelerated in front of his . Little 's aircraft then dived to engage the three remaining North Korean aircraft , quickly shooting one down while attempting to assist Moran . 
 The US planes , which were faster and more maneuverable than the North Korean aircraft , easily outperformed them . Within several minutes , three victories were claimed ; one each by Little , Hudson , and Moran . The remaining two North Korean planes immediately fled . The US aircraft , in the meantime , suffered damage from the dogfight though none was shot down . Fire broke out in Little 's cockpit but in spite of this he rallied the other aircraft and continued to escort them to their destination in Japan . 
 Conflicting reports initially made it impossible to determine who had made the first kill , which would be the first North Korean plane shot down by the United Nations forces in the war . Later research indicated Hudson had successfully shot down the first aircraft . The exact timing of Hudson and Moran 's victories remains unclear , and it is possible each scored a victory within seconds of the other . For his determination in leading the flight , though , Little was awarded a Silver Star Medal . 
 = = = Second sortie = = = 
 Word of the dogfight spread throughout the area , and an air alert was quickly posted over Seoul . In response , four F @-@ <unk> Shooting Star aircraft of the 35th Fighter @-@ Bomber Squadron under US Captain Raymond E. <unk> were posted in the skies over Seoul to counter any North Korean aircraft appearing in the area . The F @-@ 80s were jet engine @-@ powered fighter aircraft which would easily defeat all of the aircraft known in the North Koreans ' air force . 
 Early in the afternoon , the North Korean aircraft returned in larger numbers to attack the air transports . A flight of eight Ilyushin Il @-@ 10s appeared in the airspace between Seoul and Inchon , attempting to ambush transport aircraft while still on the ground at the airfields . The F @-@ 80s spotted the North Korean planes and engaged them . The North Korean aircraft split into two groups of four and quickly destroyed a Republic of Korea Air Force T @-@ 6 Texan parked on the tarmac at Kimpo . 
 = = = = First US jet @-@ aircraft victory = = = = 
 The four F @-@ 80 aircraft were able to attack the North Koreans from a greater distance . With a minimal amount of maneuvering , the US aircraft rushed the North Korean formation and quickly shot four of them down ; two by Lieutenant Robert E. Wayne , one by Lieutenant Robert H. <unk> , and one by <unk> . These victories were the first for US Air Force jet @-@ powered fighters in history . 
 The four remaining North Korean pilots immediately retreated to the north . The aircraft likely staged at Pyongyang Air Base , and informed their superiors . No additional North Korean aircraft were spotted in the area for the rest of the day . By the end of the day the US aircraft from the three squadrons had flown 163 sorties . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The battle was the first air @-@ to @-@ air dogfight between the United Nations and North Korea in the war . The North Korean were unsuccessful in attempting to shoot down the air transports and in the end none of the refugees in the evacuation was ever injured by the North Koreans . In all , the operation saw 2 @,@ 001 people , including 1 @,@ 527 US nationals , evacuated from the peninsula ahead of the wider war . 
 The battle was also considered a sign of the arrival of the Jet age , the Il @-@ 10 , which had been considered a high quality and effective conventional aircraft in World War II had been easily outmatched by the F @-@ 80 and its jet engine . The engagement was a rare example of an air @-@ to @-@ air battle at the early phase of the war , and North Korean forces became much more cautious when deploying their aircraft in battle , knowing they were easily outnumbered and outmatched by UN forces . For the next several months , the UN forces enjoyed air supremacy , operating their air forces in support of ground combat virtually unopposed . The public perception of the F @-@ 80s , which had to this point been cautious , improved with news of the victories . 
 = Robotron : 2084 = 
 Robotron : 2084 ( also referred to as Robotron ) is an arcade video game developed by Eugene Jarvis and Larry DeMar of Vid Kidz and released by Williams Electronics ( part of WMS Industries ) in 1982 . It is a shoot ' em up with two @-@ dimensional graphics . The game is set in the year 2084 in a fictional world where robots have turned against humans in a cybernetic revolt . The aim is to defeat endless waves of robots , rescue surviving humans , and earn as many points as possible . 
 Robotron popularized the twin joystick control scheme , one that had previously been used in Taito 's Space Dungeon . 
 Robotron : 2084 was critically and commercially successful . Praise among critics focused on the game 's intense action and control scheme . The game is frequently listed as one of Jarvis 's best contributions to the video game industry . Robotron : 2084 arcade cabinets have since become a sought @-@ after collector 's item . It was ported to numerous platforms . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Robotron is a 2D multi @-@ directional shooter game in which the player controls the on @-@ screen protagonist from a top @-@ down perspective . The game is set in the year 2084 in a fictional world where robots ( " Robotrons " ) have taken control of the world and eradicated most of the human race . The main protagonist is a nameless superhuman attempting to save the last human family . 
 The game uses a two @-@ joystick control scheme ; the left joystick controls the on @-@ screen character 's movement , while the right controls the direction the character 's weapon fires . Both joysticks allow for an input direction in one of eight ways . Each level , referred to as a " wave " , is a single screen populated with a large number of various enemy robots and obstacles ; types include invincible giants to robots that continually manufacture other robots that shoot the protagonist . Coming into contact with an enemy , projectile , or obstacle costs the player one life , but extra lives can be earned at certain point totals . Waves also include human family members who can be rescued to score additional points , but certain robots can either kill them or turn them into enemies . Destroying all vulnerable robots allows the player to progress to the next wave ; the cycle continues until all reserve lives are lost . 
 = = Development = = 
 Robotron : 2084 features monaural sound and raster graphics on a 19 @-@ inch CRT monitor . It uses a Motorola <unk> central processing unit that operates at <unk> . To produce multiple sounds on a single audio channel , the game uses a priority scheme to generate sounds in order of importance . A custom graphics coprocessor — which operates as a blitter chip — generates the on @-@ screen objects and visual effects . The coprocessor increases the transfer speed of memory , which allows the game to simultaneously animate a large number of objects . 
 The game was developed in six months by Eugene Jarvis and Larry DeMar , founders of Vid Kidz . Vid Kidz served as a consulting firm that designed games for Williams Electronics ( part of WMS Industries ) , whom Jarvis and DeMar had previously worked for . The game was designed to provide excitement for players ; Jarvis described the game as an " athletic experience " derived from a " physical element " in the two joystick design . Robotron : 2084 's gameplay is based on presenting the player with conflicting goals : avoid enemy attacks to survive , defeat enemies to progress , and save the family to earn points . It was first inspired by Stern Electronics ' 1980 arcade game Berzerk and the Commodore PET computer game Chase . Berzerk is a shooting game in which a character traverses a maze to shoot robots , and Chase is a text @-@ based game in which players move text characters into others . The initial concept involved a passive main character ; the object was to get robots that chased the protagonist to collide with stationary , lethal obstacles . The game was deemed too boring compared to other action titles on the market and shooting was added to provide more excitement . 
 The dual joystick design was developed by Eugene Jarvis , and resulted from two experiences in Jarvis 's life : an automobile accident and playing Berzerk . Prior to beginning development , Jarvis injured his right hand in an accident — his hand was still in a cast when he returned to work , which prevented him from using a traditional joystick with a button . While in rehabilitation , he thought of Berzerk . Though Jarvis enjoyed the game and similar titles , he was dissatisfied with the control scheme ; Berzerk used a single joystick to move the on @-@ screen character and a button to fire the weapon , which would shoot the same direction the character was facing . Jarvis noticed that if the button was held down , the character would remain stationary and the joystick could be used to fire in any direction . This method of play inspired Jarvis to add a second joystick dedicated to aiming the direction projectiles were shot . Jarvis and DeMar created a prototype using a Stargate arcade system board and two Atari 2600 controllers attached to a control panel . In retrospect , Jarvis considers the design a contradiction that blends " incredible freedom of movement " with ease of use . 
 The developers felt a rescue theme similar to Defender — one of their previous games — was needed to complete the game , and added a human family as a method to motivate players to earn a high score . The rescue aspect also created a situation where players had to constantly reevaluate their situation to choose the optimal action : run from enemies , shoot enemies , or rescue humans . Inspired by George Orwell 's Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four , Jarvis and DeMar worked the concept of an Orwellian world developed into the plot . The two noticed , however , that 1984 was approaching , but the state of the real world did not match that of the book . They decided to set the game further in the future , the year 2084 , to provide a more realistic timeframe for their version of " Big Brother " . Jarvis , a science fiction fan , based the Robotrons on the idea that computers would eventually become advanced entities that helped humans in everyday life . He believed the robots would eventually realize that humans are the cause of the world 's problems and revolt against them . 
 Jarvis and DeMar playtested the game themselves , and continually tweaked the designs as the project progressed . Though games at the time began to use scrolling to have larger levels , the developers chose a single screen to confine the action . To instill panic in the player , the character was initially placed in the center of the game 's action , and had to deal with projectiles coming from multiple directions , as opposed previous shooting games such as Space Invaders and Galaxian , where the enemies attacked from a single direction . This made for more challenging gameplay , an aspect Jarvis took pride in . Enemies were assigned to stages in different groups to create themes . Early stages were designed to be relatively simple compared to later ones . The level of difficulty was designed to increase quickly so players would struggle to complete later stages . In retrospect , Jarvis attributes his and DeMar 's average player skills to the game 's balanced design . Though they made the game as difficult as they could , the high end of their skills ended up being a good challenge for expert players . The graphics were given a simple appearance to avoid a cluttered game screen , and object designs were made distinct from each other to avoid confusion . Black was chosen as the background color to help characters stand out and reduce clutter . 
 Of special note is that Robotron had a major defect where the game would reset ( Carpet pattern reset / watchdog reset ) if a specific scenario was experienced while shooting an Enforcer in a corner of the screen . In 1987 , Christian <unk> evaluated the code to find the problem . A visit to Williams headquarters to consult with the <unk> resulted in code fixes that eventually made it into all later ports of the game . 
 = = = Enemy designs = = = 
 Each enemy was designed to exhibit a unique behavior toward the character ; random elements were programmed into the enemies ' behaviors to make the game more interesting . The first two designed were the simplest : Electrodes and Grunts . Electrodes are stationary objects that are lethal to the in @-@ game characters , and Grunts are simple robots that chase the protagonist by plotting the shortest path to him . Grunts were designed to overwhelm the player with large groups . While testing the game with the new control system and the two enemies , Jarvis and DeMar were impressed by the gameplay 's excitement and fun . As a result , they began steadily increasing the number of on @-@ screen enemies to over a hundred to see if more enemies would generate more enjoyment . 
 Other enemies were created to add more variety . Large , indestructible <unk> , inspired by an enemy in Berzerk , were added to kill the humans on the stage . Though they cannot be destroyed , the developers decided to have the protagonist 's projectiles slow the Hulk 's movement as a way to help the player . <unk> Enforcers were added as enemies that could shoot back at the main character ; Jarvis and DeMar liked the idea of a floating robot and felt it would be easier to animate . A projectile algorithm was devised for Enforcers to simulate enemy artificial intelligence . The developers felt a simple algorithm of shooting directly at the protagonist would be ineffective because the character 's constant motion would always result in a miss . Random elements were added to make the projectile more unpredictable ; the Enforcer aims at a random location in a ten pixel radius around the character , and random acceleration curves the trajectory . To further differentiate Enforcers , Jarvis devised the <unk> enemy as a robot that continually generated Enforcers , rather than have them already on the screen like other enemies . Brains were conceived as robots that could capture humans and brainwash them into enemies called <unk> . DeMar devised the final enemies as a way to further increase the game 's difficulty ; Tanks that fire projectiles which bounce around the screen , and Quarks as a tank @-@ producing robot . 
 In the summer of 2012 , Eugene Jarvis wrote a comprehensive evaluation of the Robotron Enemy Dynamics : The game is hard @-@ coded with 40 waves , whereupon the game repeats wave 21 to 40 over and over until the game restarts back to the original wave 1 , once the player completes wave 255 . In the summer of 2012 , Larry DeMar also provided details about how to trigger the secret room in Robotron . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Robotron : 2084 was commercially successful ; Williams sold approximately 19 @,@ 000 arcade cabinets , and mini cabinets and cocktail versions were later produced . The different arcade versions have since become varying levels of rarity ; the cocktail and cabaret versions are very rare , while the upright cabinets are more available . It is one of the most collected arcade games , and is consistently higher priced than other titles among collectors . 
 The game has been positively received by critics . Author David Ellis called Robotron : 2084 a " classic favorite " of its time , and stated that , despite the game 's difficulty , it is among the most popular video games in the industry . Retro Gamer rated the game number two on their list of " Top 25 Arcade Games " , citing its simple and addictive design . In 2008 , Guinness World Records listed it as the number eleven arcade game in technical , creative and cultural impact . Brett Alan Weiss of Allgame called it one of the industry 's " most exciting and intense " games . He complimented the gameplay , graphics and audio , calling them addictive , colorful and energized respectively . The game has garnered praise from industry professionals as well . Midway Games 's Tony <unk> and Electronic Arts ' Stephen <unk> called Robotron : 2084 their favorite arcade game . David Thiel , a former Gottlieb audio engineer , referred to the game as the " pinnacle of interactive game design " . <unk> 's John Leffingwell described Robotron : 2084 as " the perfect blend of mayhem and simplicity " , and commented that its plot was an interesting commentary . Jeff Peters from <unk> Games praised the playing field as " crisp and clear " , and described the strategy and dexterity required to play as a challenge to the senses . He summarized the game as " one of the best examples of game play design and execution . " 
 Critics lauded Robotron : 2084 's gameplay . Authors <unk> DeMaria and Johnny Wilson enjoyed the excitement created by the constant waves of robots and fear of the character dying . They considered it one of the more impressive games produced from the 80s and 90s . Author John Vince considered the reward system ( saving humans ) and strategic elements as positive components . ACE magazine 's David Upchurch commented that despite the poor graphics and basic design , the gameplay 's simplicity was a strong point . The control scheme in particular was well received . DeMaria and Wilson considered it a highlight which provided the player a tactical advantage . Owen <unk> of Creative Computing Video & Arcade Games praised the freedom of movement afforded by the controls . Ellis commented that the unique control scheme was a factor in the game 's success . Retro Gamer lauded the controls , describing them as " one of the greatest control systems of all time . " In retrospect , DeMar felt players continued to play the game because the control scheme offered a high level of precision . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Jarvis 's contributions to the game 's development are often cited among his accolades . Vince considered him as one of the originators of " high @-@ action " and " reflex @-@ based " arcade games , citing Robotron : 2084 's gameplay among other games designed by Jarvis . In 2007 , IGN listed Eugene Jarvis as a top game designer whose titles ( Defender , Robotron 2084 , and Smash TV ) have influenced the video game industry . GamesTM referred to the game as the pinnacle of his career . Shane R. Monroe of <unk> Radio called Robotron " ... the greatest twitch and greed game of all time . " 
 Bill Loguidice and Matt Barton of Gamasutra commented that Robotron 's success , along with Defender , illustrated that video game enthusiasts were ready for more difficult games with complex controls . Though not the first to implement it , Robotron : 2084 's use of dual joysticks popularized the design among 2D shooting games , and has since been copied by other arcade @-@ style games . The control scheme has appeared in several other titles produced by Midway Games : Inferno , Smash TV , and Total Carnage . Many shooting games on Xbox Live Arcade and PlayStation Network use this dual control design . The 2003 title Geometry Wars and its sequels also use a similar control scheme . The input design was most prominent in arcade games until video games with three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) graphics became popular in the late 1990s . Jarvis attributes the lack of proliferation in the home market to the absence of hardware that offered two side @-@ by @-@ side joysticks . Most 3D games , however , use the dual joystick scheme to control the movement of a character and a camera . Few console games , like the 2004 title Jet Li : Rise to Honor , use two joysticks for movement and attacking . 
 = = = Remakes and sequels = = = 
 Jarvis planned to produce sequels , but the North American video game crash of 1983 halted most video game production for a few years . Prior to the full effects of the crash , Vid Kidz developed an unofficial sequel ( Blaster ) in 1983 . The game is set in the same universe and takes place in <unk> in a world overrun by Robotrons . Williams considered creating a proper sequel in the mid @-@ 1980s as well as a movie adaptation . The company released a sequel with 3D graphics titled Robotron X in 1996 for the Sony PlayStation and personal computers . It was ported two years later to the Nintendo 64 as Robotron 64 . In addition to the graphical update , the game includes new audio and multiple camera angles . Though the game features similar gameplay as the original , it was not as well received . Authors Andrew Rollings and Ernest Adams considered the moving camera in the 3D environment a negative update . They felt the original format — an overhead perspective of a single screen — presented the player with all the necessary information and relied on the player 's skill . The moving camera angle , however , obscured areas of the playing field and could result in the player being shot by an enemy that suddenly appeared . Vince echoed similar statements , stating that the gameplay suffered from the loss of important aspects from the original . Rollings and Adams , however , attribute the fad of classic video game remakes in the late 1990s in part to Robotron X 's release . 
 Robotron : 2084 has been remade on different platforms . Beginning in 1983 , the game was ported to several platforms including the Atari 5200 , Atari 7800 , Apple IIe , Commodore 64 , and TI @-@ 99 / 4A . Most conversions did not have a dual joystick and were received less favorably by critics . In 2000 , a web @-@ based version of Robotron : 2084 , along with nine other classic arcade games , were published on <unk> ( a website related to Adobe Shockwave ) . Four years later , Midway Games also launched a website featuring the Shockwave versions . The game has been included in several multi @-@ platform compilations : the 1996 Williams Arcade 's Greatest Hits , the 2000 Midway 's Greatest Arcade Hits , the 2003 Midway Arcade Treasures , and the 2012 Midway Arcade Origins . It also appeared in an expansion to Lego Dimensions . In 2004 , Midway Games planned to release a plug and play version of Robotron : 2084 as part of a line of TV Games , however , it was never released . Robotron : 2084 became available for download via Microsoft 's Xbox Live Arcade in November 2005 . In February 2010 , however , Microsoft removed it from the service citing permission issues . The Xbox Live version included high @-@ definition graphics and two @-@ player cooperative multi @-@ player with one player controlling the movement and another the shooting . Scores were tracked via an online ranking system . The game has also inspired other titles . The 1990 arcade game Smash TV , also designed by Jarvis , features a similar design — two joysticks used to shoot numerous enemies on a single screen — as well as ideas he intended to include in sequels . In 1991 , Jeff Minter released a shareware game titled <unk> based on Robotron : 2084 's design . Twenty years later , Minter released an upgraded version titled <unk> : 2112 on the iPhone . 
 = = Reverse engineering work = = 
 Annotated reverse engineering of the Robotron 2084 arcade game can be found at http : / / <unk> 
 = = Robotron II = = 
 The video game crash of the early 80 's saw the <unk> disband before creating Robotron 's sequel . DeMar went back to pinball development and Jarvis went back to college . Later , both went on to entertainment industry successes with hits in pinball , racing games , light gun games , casino games , and social media games . Robotron II remained a forgotten project , never to be implemented . 
 = = In other media = = 
 The robots attacking the player show up in the movie " Pixels " , near the end where the arcade characters begin a full @-@ on attack on Earth . The game is also mentioned in the novel Ready Player One as protagonist Wade Watts ' favorite video game . A modified version of the game appears in Fallout 4 's DLC <unk> as a hidden mini game called <unk> , <unk> with the robots of the franchise . 
 = Jacob van Ruisdael = 
 Jacob Isaackszoon van Ruisdael ( Dutch pronunciation : [ ˈjaːkɔp fɑn <unk> ] ; c . 1629 – 10 March 1682 ) was a Dutch painter , draughtsman , and etcher . He is generally considered the pre @-@ eminent landscape painter of the Dutch Golden Age , a period of great wealth and cultural achievement when Dutch painting became highly popular . 
 Prolific and versatile , Ruisdael depicted a wide variety of landscape subjects . From 1646 he painted Dutch countryside scenes of remarkable quality for a young man . After a trip to Germany in 1650 , his landscapes took on a more heroic character . In his late work , conducted when he lived and worked in Amsterdam , he added city panoramas and seascapes to his regular repertoire . In these , the sky often took up two @-@ thirds of the canvas . In total he produced more than 150 Scandinavian views featuring waterfalls . 
 Ruisdael 's only registered pupil was Meindert Hobbema , one of several artists who painted figures in his landscapes . Hobbema 's work has at times been confused with Ruisdael 's . There is difficulty in attributing Ruisdael 's work , which has not been helped by the fact that three members of his family were also landscape painters , some of whom spelled their name " Ruysdael " : his father Isaack van Ruisdael , his well @-@ known uncle Salomon van Ruysdael , and his cousin , confusingly called Jacob van Ruysdael . 
 Ruisdael 's work was in demand in the Dutch Republic during his lifetime . Today it is spread across private and institutional collections around the world ; the National Gallery in London , the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam , and the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg hold the largest collections . Ruisdael shaped landscape painting traditions worldwide , from the English Romantics to the Barbizon school in France , and the Hudson River School in the US , and influenced generations of Dutch landscape artists . 
 = = Life = = 
 Jacob Isaackszoon van Ruisdael was born in Haarlem in 1628 or 1629 into a family of painters , all landscapists . The number of painters in the family , and the multiple spellings of the Ruisdael name , have hampered attempts to document his life and attribute his works . 
 The name Ruisdael is connected to a castle , now lost , in the village of Blaricum . The village was the home of Jacob 's grandfather , the furniture maker Jacob de Goyer . When De Goyer moved away to Naarden , three of his sons changed their name to Ruysdael or Ruisdael , probably to indicate their origin . Two of De Goyer 's sons became painters : Jacob 's father Isaack van Ruisdael and his well @-@ known uncle Salomon van Ruysdael . Jacob himself always spelled his name with an " i " , while his cousin , Salomon 's son Jacob Salomonszoon van Ruysdael , also a landscape artist , spelled his name with a " y " . Jacob 's earliest biographer , Arnold Houbraken , called him Jakob <unk> , and claimed the name resulted from his specialty in waterfalls , namely the " <unk> " ( rustling noise of water ) falling into a " <unk> " ( dale ) where it foams out into a pond or wider river . 
 It is not known whether Ruisdael 's mother was Isaack van Ruisdael 's first wife , whose name is unknown , or his second wife , Maycken <unk> . Isaack and Maycken married on 12 November 1628 . 
 Ruisdael 's teacher is also unknown . It is often assumed Ruisdael studied with his father and uncle , but there is no archival evidence for this . He appears to have been strongly influenced by other contemporary local Haarlem landscapists , most notably Cornelis Vroom and Allaert van Everdingen . 
 The earliest date that appears on Ruisdael 's paintings and etchings is 1646 . Two years after this date he was admitted to membership of the Haarlem Guild of St. Luke . By this time landscape paintings were as popular as history paintings in Dutch households , though at the time of Ruisdael 's birth , history paintings appeared far more frequently . This growth in popularity of landscapes continued throughout Ruisdael 's career . 
 Around 1657 , Ruisdael moved to Amsterdam , by then a prosperous city which was likely to have offered a bigger market for his work . His fellow Haarlem painter Allaert van Everdingen had already moved to Amsterdam and found a market there . Ruisdael lived and worked in Amsterdam for the rest of his life . In 1668 , his name appears as a witness to the marriage of Meindert Hobbema , his only registered pupil , a painter whose works have been confused with Ruisdael 's own . 
 For a landscape artist , it seems Ruisdael travelled relatively little : to Blaricum , Egmond aan Zee , and Rhenen in the 1640s , with Nicolaes Berchem to Bentheim and <unk> just across the border in Germany in 1650 , and possibly with Hobbema across the German border again in 1661 , via the Veluwe , Deventer and <unk> . Despite Ruisdael 's numerous Norwegian landscapes , there is no record of him having travelled to Scandinavia . 
 There is some speculation that Ruisdael was also a doctor . In 1718 , his biographer Houbraken reports that he studied medicine and performed surgery in Amsterdam . Archival records of the 17th century show the name " Jacobus <unk> " on a list of Amsterdam doctors , albeit crossed out , with the added remark that he earned his medical degree on 15 October 1676 in Caen , northern France . Various art historians have speculated that this was a case of mistaken identity . Pieter <unk> suggests it was Ruisdael 's cousin who appeared on the record . The Ruisdael expert Seymour Slive argues that the spelling " <unk> " is not consistent with Ruisdael 's own spelling of his name , that his unusually high production suggests there was little time to study medicine , and that there is no indication in any of his art that he visited northern France . However , Slive is willing to accept that Ruisdael may still have been a doctor . In 2013 , Jan Paul Hinrichs agreed that the evidence is inconclusive . 
 Ruisdael was not Jewish . Slive reports that , because of Ruisdael 's depiction of a Jewish cemetery and various biblical names in the Ruisdael family , he often heard speculation that Ruisdael must surely be Jewish . The evidence shows otherwise . Ruisdael requested that he be baptised at the Calvinist Reformed Church in Amsterdam , and he was buried in the Saint Bavo 's Church , Haarlem , a Protestant church at that time . His uncle Salomon van Ruysdael belonged to the Young Flemish subgroup of the Mennonite congregation , one of several types of Anabaptists in Haarlem , and it is probable that Ruisdael 's father was also a member there . His cousin Jacob was a registered Mennonite in Amsterdam . 
 Ruisdael did not marry . According to Houbraken this was " to reserve time to serve his old father " . It is not known what Ruisdael looked like , as no known portrait or self @-@ portrait of him exists . 
 The art historian Hendrik Frederik Wijnman disproved the myth that Ruisdael died a poor man , supposedly in the old men 's almshouse in Haarlem . Wijnman showed that the person who died there was in fact Ruisdael 's cousin , Jacob Salomonszoon . Although there is no record of Ruisdael owning land or shares , he appears to have lived comfortably , even after the economic downturn of the disaster year 1672 . His paintings were valued fairly highly . In a large sample of inventories between 1650 and 1679 the average price for a Ruisdael was 40 guilders , compared to an average of 19 guilders for all attributed paintings . In a ranking of contemporary Dutch painters based on price @-@ weighted frequency in these inventories , Ruisdael ranks seventh ; Rembrandt ranks first . 
 Ruisdael died in Amsterdam on 10 March 1682 . He was buried 14 March 1682 in Saint Bavo 's Church , Haarlem . 
 = = Work = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Ruisdael 's work from c . 1646 to the early 1650s , when he was living in Haarlem , is characterised by simple motifs and careful and laborious study of nature : dunes , woods , and atmospheric effects . By applying heavier paint than his predecessors , Ruisdael gave his foliage a rich quality , conveying a sense of sap flowing through branches and leaves . His accurate rendering of trees was unprecedented at the time : the genera of his trees are the first to be unequivocally recognisable by modern @-@ day botanists . His early sketches introduce motifs that would return in all his work : a sense of spaciousness and luminosity , and an airy atmosphere achieved through pointillist @-@ like touches of chalk . Most of his thirty black chalk sketches that survive date from this period . 
 An exemplar of Ruisdael 's early style is Dune Landscape , one of the earliest works , dated 1646 . It breaks with the classic Dutch tradition of depicting broad views of dunes that include houses and trees flanked by distant vistas . Instead , Ruisdael places tree @-@ covered dunes prominently at centre stage , with a <unk> concentrating strong light on a sandy path . The resulting heroic effect is enhanced by the large size of the canvas , " so unexpected in the work of an inexperienced painter " according to Irina Sokolova , curator at the Hermitage Museum . The art historian Hofstede de Groot said of Dune Landscape : " It is hardly credible that it should be the work of a boy of seventeen " . 
 Ruisdael 's first panoramic landscape , View of Naarden with the Church at <unk> in the Distance , dates from 1647 . The theme of an overwhelming sky and a distant town , in this case the birthplace of his father , is one he returned to in his later years . 
 For unknown reasons , Ruisdael almost entirely stopped dating his work from 1653 . Only five works from the 1660s have a , partially obscured , year next to his signature ; none from the 1670s and 1680s have a date . Dating subsequent work has therefore been largely based on detective work and speculation . 
 All thirteen known Ruisdael etchings come from his early period , with the first one dated 1646 . It is unknown who taught him the art of etching . No etchings exist signed by his father , his uncle , or his fellow Haarlem landscapist Cornelis Vroom , who influenced his other work . His etchings show little influence from Rembrandt , either in style or technique . Few original impressions exist ; five etchings survive in only a single impression . The rarity of prints suggests that Ruisdael considered them trial essays , which did not warrant large editions . The etching expert Georges Duplessis singled out <unk> at the Edge of a Wood and The Travellers as unrivalled illustrations of Ruisdael 's genius . 
 = = = Middle period = = = 
 Following Ruisdael 's trip to Germany , his landscapes took on a more heroic character , with forms becoming larger and more prominent . A view of Bentheim Castle , dated 1653 , is just one of a dozen of Ruisdael 's depictions of a particular castle in Germany , almost all of which pronounce its position on a hilltop . Significantly , Ruisdael made numerous changes to the castle 's setting ( it is actually on an unimposing low hill ) culminating in a 1653 version which shows it on a wooded mountain . These variations are considered by art historians to be evidence of Ruisdael 's compositional skills . 
 On his trip to Germany , Ruisdael encountered water mills which he turned into a principal subject for painting , the first artist to ever do so . Two Water Mills with an Open Sluice , dated 1653 , is a prime example . The ruins of Egmont Castle near Alkmaar were another favourite subject of Ruisdael 's and feature in The Jewish Cemetery , of which he painted two versions . With these , Ruisdael pits the natural world against the built environment , which has been overrun by the trees and shrubs surrounding the cemetery . 
 Ruisdael 's first Scandinavian views contain big firs , rugged mountains , large boulders and rushing torrents . Though convincingly realistic , they are based on previous art works , rather than on direct experience . There is no record that Ruisdael made any trip to Scandinavia , although fellow Haarlem painter van Everdingen had travelled there in 1644 and had popularised the subgenre . Ruisdael 's work soon outstripped van Everdingen 's finest efforts . In total Ruisdael produced more than 150 Scandinavian views featuring waterfalls , of which Waterfall in a Mountainous Landscape with a Ruined Castle , c . 1665 – 1670 , is seen as his greatest by Slive . 
 In this period Ruisdael started painting coastal scenes and sea @-@ pieces , influenced by Simon de <unk> and Jan Porcellis . Among the most dramatic is Rough Sea at a Jetty , with a restricted palette of only black , white , blue and a few brown earth colours . However , forest scenes remain a subject of choice , such as the Hermitage 's most famous Ruisdael , A Wooded Marsh , dated c . 1665 , which depicts a primeval scene with broken birches and oaks , and branches reaching for the sky amidst an overgrown pond . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 During Ruisdael 's last period he began to depict mountain scenes , such as Mountainous and Wooded Landscape with a River , dateable to the late 1670s . This portrays a rugged range with the highest peak in the clouds . Ruisdael 's subjects became unusually varied . The art historian Wolfgang <unk> identified thirteen themes within the Dutch Golden Age landscape genre , and Ruisdael 's work encompasses all but two of them , excelling at most : forests , rivers , dunes and country roads , panoramas , imaginary landscapes , Scandinavian waterfalls , marines , <unk> , winter scenes , town views , and nocturnes . Only the Italianate and foreign landscapes other than Scandinavian are absent from his oeuvre . 
 Slive finds it appropriate that a windmill is the subject of one of Ruisdael 's most famous works . Windmill at Wijk bij Duurstede , dated 1670 , shows Wijk bij Duurstede , a riverside town about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) from Utrecht , with a dominant cylindrical windmill . In this composition , Ruisdael united typical Dutch elements of low @-@ lying land , water and expansive sky , so that they converge on the equally characteristic Dutch windmill . The painting 's enduring popularity is evidenced by card sales in the Rijksmuseum , with the Windmill ranking third after Rembrandt 's Night Watch and Vermeer 's View of Delft . Windmills featured throughout Ruisdael 's entire career . 
 Various panoramic views of the Haarlem skyline and its bleaching grounds appear during this stage , a specific genre called <unk> , with the clouds creating various gradations of alternating bands of light and shadow towards the horizon . The paintings are often dominated by Saint Bavo 's Church , in which Ruisdael would one day be buried . 
 While Amsterdam does feature in his work , it does so relatively rarely given that Ruisdael lived there for over 25 years . It does feature in his only known architectural subject , a drawing of the interior of the Old Church , as well as in views of the Dam , and the Panoramic view of the Amstel looking toward Amsterdam , one of Ruisdael 's last paintings . 
 Figures are introduced sparingly into Ruisdael 's compositions , and are by this period rarely from his own hand but executed by various artists , including his pupil Meindert Hobbema , Nicolaes Berchem , Adriaen van de Velde , Philips Wouwerman , Jan Vonck , Thomas de Keyser , Gerard van <unk> and Jan <unk> . 
 = = = Attributions = = = 
 In his 2001 catalogue raisonné , Slive attributes 694 paintings to Ruisdael and lists another 163 paintings with dubious or , he believes , incorrect attribution . There are three main reasons why there is uncertainty over whose hand painted various Ruisdael @-@ style landscapes . Firstly , four members of the Ruysdael family were landscapists with similar signatures , some of which were later fraudulently altered into Jacob 's . This is further complicated by the fact that Ruisdael used variations of his signature . This typically reads " <unk> " or the monogram " <unk> " , sometimes using a small italic ' s ' and sometimes a Gothic long ' s ' , such as on Landscape with Waterfall . Secondly , many 17th century landscape paintings are unsigned and could be from pupils or copyists . Finally , fraudsters imitated Ruisdaels for financial gain , with the earliest case reported by Houbraken in 1718 : a certain Jan <unk> the Elder could imitate Ruisdael 's style so well that he often sold them for real Ruisdaels , especially with figurines added in the style of the artist Wouwerman . There is no large @-@ scale systematic approach to ascertaining Ruisdael 's attributions , unlike the forensic science used to find the correct attributions of Rembrandt 's paintings through the Rembrandt Research Project . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Ruisdael has shaped landscape painting traditions from the English Romantics to the Barbizon school in France , and the Hudson River School in the US , as well as generations of Dutch landscape artists . Among the English artists influenced by Ruisdael are Thomas Gainsborough , J. M. W. Turner , and John Constable . Gainsborough drew , in black chalk and grey wash , a replica of a Ruisdael in the 1740s — now both paintings are housed in the Louvre in Paris . Turner made many copies of Ruisdaels and even painted fantasy views of a nonexistent port he called Port Ruysdael . Constable also copied various drawings , etchings and paintings by Ruisdael , and was a great admirer from a young age . " It haunts my mind and clings to my heart " , he wrote after seeing a Ruisdael . However , he thought Jewish Cemetery was a failure , because he considered that it attempted to convey something outside the reach of art . 
 In the 19th century , Vincent van Gogh acknowledged Ruisdael as a major influence , calling him sublime , but at the same time saying it would be a mistake to try to copy him . Van Gogh had two Ruisdael prints , The Bush and a <unk> , on his wall , and thought the Ruisdaels in the Louvre were " magnificent , especially The Bush , The Breakwater and The Ray of Light " . His experience of the French countryside was informed by his memory of Ruisdael 's art . Van Gogh 's contemporary Claude Monet is also said to be indebted to Ruisdael . Even Piet <unk> 's minimalism has been traced back to Ruisdael 's panoramas . 
 Among art historians and critics , Ruisdael 's reputation has had its ups and downs over the centuries . The first account , in 1718 , is from Houbraken , who waxed lyrical over the technical mastery which allowed Ruisdael to realistically depict water in waterfalls and the sea . In 1781 , Sir Joshua Reynolds , founder of the Royal Academy , admired the freshness and force of Ruisdael 's landscapes . A couple of decades later other English critics were less impressed . In 1801 , Henry Fuseli , professor at the Royal Academy , expressed his contempt for the entire Dutch School of Landscape , dismissing it as no more than a " transcript of the spot " , a mere " enumeration of hill and dale , clumps of trees " . Of note is that one of Fuseli 's students was Constable , whose admiration for Ruisdael remained unchanged . Around the same time in Germany , the writer , statesman and scientist Johann Wolfgang von Goethe lauded Ruisdael as a thinking artist , even a poet , saying " he demonstrates remarkable skill in locating the exact point at which the creative faculty comes into contact with a lucid mind " . John Ruskin however , in 1860 , raged against Ruisdael and other Dutch Golden Age landscapists , calling their landscapes places where " we lose not only all faith in religion but all remembrance of it " . In 1915 , the Dutch art historian Abraham Bredius called his compatriot not so much a painter as a poet . 
 More recent art historians have rated Ruisdael highly . Kenneth Clark described him as " the greatest master of the natural vision before Constable " . Waldemar Januszczak finds him a marvellous storyteller . Januszczak does not consider Ruisdael the greatest landscape artist of all time , but is especially impressed by his works as a teenager : " a prodigy whom we should rank at number 8 or 9 on the Mozart scale " . Slive states Ruisdael is acknowledged " by general consent , as the pre @-@ eminent landscapist of the Golden Age of Dutch art " . 
 Ruisdael is now seen as the leading artist of the " classical " phase in Dutch landscape art , which built upon the realism of the previous " tonal " phase . The tonal phase suggested atmosphere through the use of tonality , while the classical phase strived for a more grandiose effect , with paintings built up through a serious of vigorous contrasts of solid form against the sky , and of light against shade , with a tree , animal , or windmill often singled out . 
 Although many of Ruisdael 's works were on show in the Art Treasures Exhibition , Manchester 1857 , and various other grand exhibitions across the world since , it was not until 1981 that an exhibition was solely dedicated to Ruisdael . Over fifty paintings and thirty @-@ five drawings and etchings were exhibited , first at the Mauritshuis in The Hague , then , in 1982 , at the Fogg Museum in Cambridge , Massachusetts . In 2006 , the Royal Academy in London hosted a Ruisdael Master of Landscape exhibition , displaying works from over fifty collections . 
 = = = Interpretation = = = 
 There are no 17th century documents to indicate , either at first or second hand , what Ruisdael intended to convey through his art . While The Jewish Cemetery is universally accepted as an allegory for the fragility of life , how other works should be interpreted is much disputed . At one end of the spectrum is Henry Fuseli , who contends they have no meaning at all , and are simply a depiction of nature . At the other end is Franz Theodor Kugler who sees meaning in almost everything : " They all display the silent power of Nature , who opposes with her mighty hand the petty activity of man , and with a solemn warning as it were , repels his encroachments " . 
 In the middle of the spectrum are scholars such as E. John Walford , who sees the works as " not so much bearers of narrative or emblematic meanings but rather as images reflecting the fact that the visible world was essentially perceived as manifesting inherent spiritual significance " . Walford advocates abandoning the notion of " disguised symbolism " . All of Ruisdael 's work can be interpreted according to the religious world view of his time : nature serves as the " first book " of God , both because of its inherent divine qualities and because of God 's obvious concern for man and the world . The intention is spiritual , not moral . 
 Andrew Graham @-@ Dixon asserts all Dutch Golden Age landscapists could not help but search everywhere for meaning . He says of the windmill in The Windmill at Wijk bij Duurstede that it symbolises " the sheer hard work needed to keep Holland above water and to safeguard the future of the nation 's children " . The symmetries in the landscapes are " reminders to fellow citizens always to remain on the straight and narrow " . Slive is more reluctant to read too much into the work , but does put The Windmill in its contemporary religious context of man 's dependence on the " spirit of the Lord for life " . With regards to interpreting Ruisdael 's Scandinavian paintings , he says " My own view is that it strains credulity to the breaking point to propose that he himself conceived of all his depictions of waterfalls , torrents and rushing streams and dead trees as visual sermons on the themes of <unk> and vanitas " . 
 = = = Collections = = = 
 Ruisdaels are scattered across collections globally , both private and institutional . The most notable collections are at the National Gallery in London , which holds twenty paintings ; the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam , which holds sixteen paintings ; and the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg , which holds nine . In the US , the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York has five Ruisdaels in its collection , and the J. Paul Getty Museum in California has three . 
 On occasion a Ruisdael changes hands . In 2014 , Dunes by the Sea was auctioned at Christie 's in New York , and realised a price of $ 1 @,@ 805 @,@ 000 . Of his surviving drawings , 140 in total , the Rijksmuseum , the Teylers Museum in Haarlem , Dresden 's <unk> @-@ Kabinett , and the Hermitage each hold significant collections . Ruisdael 's rare etchings are spread across institutions . No collection holds a print of each of the thirteen etchings . Of the five unique prints , the British Museum holds two , two are in the Albertina in Vienna , and one is in Amsterdam . 
 = = Context = = 
 Ruisdael and his art should not be considered apart from the context of the incredible wealth and significant changes to the land that occurred during the Dutch Golden Age . In his study on 17th @-@ century Dutch art and culture , Simon Schama remarks that " it can never be overemphasized that the period between 1550 and 1650 , when the political identity of an independent Netherlands nation was being established , was also a time of dramatic physical alteration of its landscape " . Ruisdael 's depiction of nature and emergent Dutch technology are wrapped up in this . Christopher Joby places Ruisdael in the religious context of the Calvinism of the Dutch Republic . He states that landscape painting does conform to Calvin 's requirement that only what is visible may be depicted in art , and that landscape paintings such as those of Ruisdael have an epistemological value which provides further support for their use within Reformed Churches . 
 The art historian Yuri Kuznetsov places Ruisdael 's art in the context of the war of independence against Spain . Dutch landscape painters " were called upon to make a portrait of their homeland , twice rewon by the Dutch people – first from the sea and later from foreign invaders " . Jonathan Israel , in his study of the Dutch Republic , calls the period between 1647 and 1672 the third phase of Dutch Golden Age art , in which wealthy merchants wanted large , opulent and refined paintings , and civic leaders filled their town halls with grand displays containing republican messages . 
 As well , ordinary middle class Dutch people began buying art for the first time , creating a high demand for paintings of all kinds . This demand was met by enormous painter guilds . Master painters set up studios to produce large numbers of paintings quickly . Under the master 's direction , studio members would specialise in parts of a painting , such as figures in landscapes , or costumes in portraits and history paintings . Masters would sometimes add a few touches to authenticate a work mostly done by pupils , to maximise both speed and price . Numerous art dealers organised commissions on behalf of patrons , as well as buying uncommissioned stock to sell on . Landscape artists did not depend on commissions in the way most painters had to do , and could therefore paint for stock . In Ruisdael 's case , it is not known whether he kept stock to sell directly to customers , or sold his work through dealers , or both . Art historians only know of one commission , a work for the wealthy Amsterdam burgomaster Cornelis de Graeff , jointly painted with Thomas de Keyser . 
 = AdS / CFT correspondence = 
 In theoretical physics , the anti @-@ de Sitter / conformal field theory correspondence , sometimes called Maldacena duality or gauge / gravity duality , is a conjectured relationship between two kinds of physical theories . On one side are anti @-@ de Sitter spaces ( AdS ) which are used in theories of quantum gravity , formulated in terms of string theory or M @-@ theory . On the other side of the correspondence are conformal field theories ( CFT ) which are quantum field theories , including theories similar to the Yang – Mills theories that describe elementary particles . 
 The duality represents a major advance in our understanding of string theory and quantum gravity . This is because it provides a non @-@ perturbative formulation of string theory with certain boundary conditions and because it is the most successful realization of the holographic principle , an idea in quantum gravity originally proposed by Gerard ' t Hooft and promoted by Leonard Susskind . 
 It also provides a powerful toolkit for studying strongly coupled quantum field theories . Much of the usefulness of the duality results from the fact that it is a strong @-@ weak duality : when the fields of the quantum field theory are strongly interacting , the ones in the gravitational theory are weakly interacting and thus more mathematically tractable . This fact has been used to study many aspects of nuclear and condensed matter physics by translating problems in those subjects into more mathematically tractable problems in string theory . 
 The AdS / CFT correspondence was first proposed by Juan Maldacena in late 1997 . Important aspects of the correspondence were elaborated in articles by Steven <unk> , Igor Klebanov , and Alexander Markovich Polyakov , and by Edward Witten . By 2015 , Maldacena 's article had over 10 @,@ 000 citations , becoming the most highly cited article in the field of high energy physics . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Quantum gravity and strings = = = 
 Our current understanding of gravity is based on Albert Einstein 's general theory of relativity . <unk> in 1915 , general relativity explains gravity in terms of the geometry of space and time , or spacetime . It is formulated in the language of classical physics developed by physicists such as Isaac Newton and James Clerk Maxwell . The other nongravitational forces are explained in the framework of quantum mechanics . Developed in the first half of the twentieth century by a number of different physicists , quantum mechanics provides a radically different way of describing physical phenomena based on probability . 
 Quantum gravity is the branch of physics that seeks to describe gravity using the principles of quantum mechanics . Currently , the most popular approach to quantum gravity is string theory , which models elementary particles not as zero @-@ dimensional points but as one @-@ dimensional objects called strings . In the AdS / CFT correspondence , one typically considers theories of quantum gravity derived from string theory or its modern extension , M @-@ theory . 
 In everyday life , there are three familiar dimensions of space ( up / down , left / right , and forward / backward ) , and there is one dimension of time . Thus , in the language of modern physics , one says that spacetime is four @-@ dimensional . One peculiar feature of string theory and M @-@ theory is that these theories require extra dimensions of spacetime for their mathematical consistency : in string theory spacetime is ten @-@ dimensional , while in M @-@ theory it is eleven @-@ dimensional . The quantum gravity theories appearing in the AdS / CFT correspondence are typically obtained from string and M @-@ theory by a process known as compactification . This produces a theory in which spacetime has effectively a lower number of dimensions and the extra dimensions are " curled up " into circles . 
 A standard analogy for compactification is to consider a multidimensional object such as a garden hose . If the hose is viewed from a sufficient distance , it appears to have only one dimension , its length , but as one approaches the hose , one discovers that it contains a second dimension , its circumference . Thus , an ant crawling inside it would move in two dimensions . 
 = = = Quantum field theory = = = 
 The application of quantum mechanics to physical objects such as the electromagnetic field , which are extended in space and time , is known as quantum field theory . In particle physics , quantum field theories form the basis for our understanding of elementary particles , which are modeled as excitations in the fundamental fields . Quantum field theories are also used throughout condensed matter physics to model particle @-@ like objects called quasiparticles . 
 In the AdS / CFT correspondence , one considers , in addition to a theory of quantum gravity , a certain kind of quantum field theory called a conformal field theory . This is a particularly symmetric and mathematically well behaved type of quantum field theory . Such theories are often studied in the context of string theory , where they are associated with the surface swept out by a string propagating through spacetime , and in statistical mechanics , where they model systems at a thermodynamic critical point . 
 = = Overview of the correspondence = = 
 = = = The geometry of anti @-@ de Sitter space = = = 
 In the AdS / CFT correspondence , one considers string theory or M @-@ theory on an anti @-@ de Sitter background . This means that the geometry of spacetime is described in terms of a certain vacuum solution of Einstein 's equation called anti @-@ de Sitter space . 
 In very elementary terms , anti @-@ de Sitter space is a mathematical model of spacetime in which the notion of distance between points ( the metric ) is different from the notion of distance in ordinary Euclidean geometry . It is closely related to hyperbolic space , which can be viewed as a disk as illustrated on the right . This image shows a tessellation of a disk by triangles and squares . One can define the distance between points of this disk in such a way that all the triangles and squares are the same size and the circular outer boundary is infinitely far from any point in the interior . 
 Now imagine a stack of hyperbolic disks where each disk represents the state of the universe at a given time . The resulting geometric object is three @-@ dimensional anti @-@ de Sitter space . It looks like a solid cylinder in which any cross section is a copy of the hyperbolic disk . Time runs along the vertical direction in this picture . The surface of this cylinder plays an important role in the AdS / CFT correspondence . As with the hyperbolic plane , anti @-@ de Sitter space is curved in such a way that any point in the interior is actually infinitely far from this boundary surface . 
 This construction describes a hypothetical universe with only two space and one time dimension , but it can be generalized to any number of dimensions . Indeed , hyperbolic space can have more than two dimensions and one can " stack up " copies of hyperbolic space to get higher @-@ dimensional models of anti @-@ de Sitter space . 
 = = = The idea of AdS / CFT = = = 
 An important feature of anti @-@ de Sitter space is its boundary ( which looks like a cylinder in the case of three @-@ dimensional anti @-@ de Sitter space ) . One property of this boundary is that , locally around any point , it looks just like Minkowski space , the model of spacetime used in nongravitational physics . 
 One can therefore consider an auxiliary theory in which " spacetime " is given by the boundary of anti @-@ de Sitter space . This observation is the starting point for AdS / CFT correspondence , which states that the boundary of anti @-@ de Sitter space can be regarded as the " spacetime " for a conformal field theory . The claim is that this conformal field theory is equivalent to the gravitational theory on the bulk anti @-@ de Sitter space in the sense that there is a " dictionary " for translating calculations in one theory into calculations in the other . Every entity in one theory has a counterpart in the other theory . For example , a single particle in the gravitational theory might correspond to some collection of particles in the boundary theory . In addition , the predictions in the two theories are quantitatively identical so that if two particles have a 40 percent chance of colliding in the gravitational theory , then the corresponding collections in the boundary theory would also have a 40 percent chance of colliding . 
 Notice that the boundary of anti @-@ de Sitter space has fewer dimensions than anti @-@ de Sitter space itself . For instance , in the three @-@ dimensional example illustrated above , the boundary is a two @-@ dimensional surface . The AdS / CFT correspondence is often described as a " holographic duality " because this relationship between the two theories is similar to the relationship between a three @-@ dimensional object and its image as a hologram . Although a hologram is two @-@ dimensional , it encodes information about all three dimensions of the object it represents . In the same way , theories which are related by the AdS / CFT correspondence are conjectured to be exactly equivalent , despite living in different numbers of dimensions . The conformal field theory is like a hologram which captures information about the higher @-@ dimensional quantum gravity theory . 
 = = = Examples of the correspondence = = = 
 Following Maldacena 's insight in 1997 , theorists have discovered many different realizations of the AdS / CFT correspondence . These relate various conformal field theories to compactifications of string theory and M @-@ theory in various numbers of dimensions . The theories involved are generally not viable models of the real world , but they have certain features , such as their particle content or high degree of symmetry , which make them useful for solving problems in quantum field theory and quantum gravity . 
 The most famous example of the AdS / CFT correspondence states that type IIB string theory on the product space <formula> is equivalent to N = 4 supersymmetric Yang – Mills theory on the four @-@ dimensional boundary . In this example , the spacetime on which the gravitational theory lives is effectively five @-@ dimensional ( hence the notation <formula> ) , and there are five additional " compact " dimensions ( encoded by the <formula> factor ) . In the real world , spacetime is four @-@ dimensional , at least macroscopically , so this version of the correspondence does not provide a realistic model of gravity . Likewise , the dual theory is not a viable model of any real @-@ world system as it assumes a large amount of supersymmetry . Nevertheless , as explained below , this boundary theory shares some features in common with quantum chromodynamics , the fundamental theory of the strong force . It describes particles similar to the gluons of quantum chromodynamics together with certain fermions . As a result , it has found applications in nuclear physics , particularly in the study of the quark – gluon plasma . 
 Another realization of the correspondence states that M @-@ theory on <formula> is equivalent to the so @-@ called ( 2 @,@ 0 ) -theory in six dimensions . In this example , the spacetime of the gravitational theory is effectively seven @-@ dimensional . The existence of the ( 2 @,@ 0 ) -theory that appears on one side of the duality is predicted by the classification of superconformal field theories . It is still poorly understood because it is a quantum mechanical theory without a classical limit . Despite the inherent difficulty in studying this theory , it is considered to be an interesting object for a variety of reasons , both physical and mathematical . 
 Yet another realization of the correspondence states that M @-@ theory on <formula> is equivalent to the ABJM superconformal field theory in three dimensions . Here the gravitational theory has four <unk> dimensions , so this version of the correspondence provides a somewhat more realistic description of gravity . 
 = = Applications to quantum gravity = = 
 = = = A non @-@ perturbative formulation of string theory = = = 
 In quantum field theory , one typically computes the probabilities of various physical events using the techniques of perturbation theory . Developed by Richard Feynman and others in the first half of the twentieth century , perturbative quantum field theory uses special diagrams called Feynman diagrams to organize computations . One imagines that these diagrams depict the paths of point @-@ like particles and their interactions . Although this formalism is extremely useful for making predictions , these predictions are only possible when the strength of the interactions , the coupling constant , is small enough to reliably describe the theory as being close to a theory without interactions . 
 The starting point for string theory is the idea that the point @-@ like particles of quantum field theory can also be modeled as one @-@ dimensional objects called strings . The interaction of strings is most straightforwardly defined by generalizing the perturbation theory used in ordinary quantum field theory . At the level of Feynman diagrams , this means replacing the one @-@ dimensional diagram representing the path of a point particle by a two @-@ dimensional surface representing the motion of a string . Unlike in quantum field theory , string theory does not yet have a full non @-@ perturbative definition , so many of the theoretical questions that physicists would like to answer remain out of reach . 
 The problem of developing a non @-@ perturbative formulation of string theory was one of the original motivations for studying the AdS / CFT correspondence . As explained above , the correspondence provides several examples of quantum field theories which are equivalent to string theory on anti @-@ de Sitter space . One can alternatively view this correspondence as providing a definition of string theory in the special case where the gravitational field is asymptotically anti @-@ de Sitter ( that is , when the gravitational field resembles that of anti @-@ de Sitter space at spatial infinity ) . Physically interesting quantities in string theory are defined in terms of quantities in the dual quantum field theory . 
 = = = Black hole information paradox = = = 
 In 1975 , Stephen Hawking published a calculation which suggested that black holes are not completely black but emit a dim radiation due to quantum effects near the event horizon . At first , Hawking 's result posed a problem for theorists because it suggested that black holes destroy information . More precisely , Hawking 's calculation seemed to conflict with one of the basic postulates of quantum mechanics , which states that physical systems evolve in time according to the Schrödinger equation . This property is usually referred to as unitarity of time evolution . The apparent contradiction between Hawking 's calculation and the unitarity postulate of quantum mechanics came to be known as the black hole information paradox . 
 The AdS / CFT correspondence resolves the black hole information paradox , at least to some extent , because it shows how a black hole can evolve in a manner consistent with quantum mechanics in some contexts . Indeed , one can consider black holes in the context of the AdS / CFT correspondence , and any such black hole corresponds to a configuration of particles on the boundary of anti @-@ de Sitter space . These particles obey the usual rules of quantum mechanics and in particular evolve in a unitary fashion , so the black hole must also evolve in a unitary fashion , respecting the principles of quantum mechanics . In 2005 , Hawking announced that the paradox had been settled in favor of information conservation by the AdS / CFT correspondence , and he suggested a concrete mechanism by which black holes might preserve information . 
 = = Applications to quantum field theory = = 
 = = = Nuclear physics = = = 
 One physical system which has been studied using the AdS / CFT correspondence is the quark – gluon plasma , an exotic state of matter produced in particle accelerators . This state of matter arises for brief instants when heavy ions such as gold or lead nuclei are collided at high energies . Such collisions cause the quarks that make up atomic nuclei to <unk> at temperatures of approximately two trillion kelvins , conditions similar to those present at around <formula> seconds after the Big Bang . 
 The physics of the quark – gluon plasma is governed by quantum chromodynamics , but this theory is mathematically intractable in problems involving the quark – gluon plasma . In an article appearing in 2005 , Đàm Thanh Sơn and his collaborators showed that the AdS / CFT correspondence could be used to understand some aspects of the quark – gluon plasma by describing it in the language of string theory . By applying the AdS / CFT correspondence , Sơn and his collaborators were able to describe the quark gluon plasma in terms of black holes in five @-@ dimensional spacetime . The calculation showed that the ratio of two quantities associated with the quark – gluon plasma , the shear viscosity <formula> and volume density of entropy <formula> , should be approximately equal to a certain universal constant : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> denotes the reduced Planck 's constant and <formula> is Boltzmann 's constant . In addition , the authors conjectured that this universal constant provides a lower bound for <formula> in a large class of systems . In 2008 , the predicted value of this ratio for the quark – gluon plasma was confirmed at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory . 
 Another important property of the quark – gluon plasma is that very high energy quarks moving through the plasma are stopped or " quenched " after traveling only a few <unk> . This phenomenon is characterized by a number <formula> called the jet quenching parameter , which relates the energy loss of such a quark to the squared distance traveled through the plasma . Calculations based on the AdS / CFT correspondence have allowed theorists to estimate <formula> , and the results agree roughly with the measured value of this parameter , suggesting that the AdS / CFT correspondence will be useful for developing a deeper understanding of this phenomenon . 
 = = = Condensed matter physics = = = 
 Over the decades , experimental condensed matter physicists have discovered a number of exotic states of matter , including superconductors and <unk> . These states are described using the formalism of quantum field theory , but some phenomena are difficult to explain using standard field theoretic techniques . Some condensed matter theorists including Subir Sachdev hope that the AdS / CFT correspondence will make it possible to describe these systems in the language of string theory and learn more about their behavior . 
 So far some success has been achieved in using string theory methods to describe the transition of a superfluid to an insulator . A superfluid is a system of electrically neutral atoms that flows without any friction . Such systems are often produced in the laboratory using liquid helium , but recently experimentalists have developed new ways of producing artificial <unk> by pouring trillions of cold atoms into a lattice of criss @-@ crossing lasers . These atoms initially behave as a superfluid , but as experimentalists increase the intensity of the lasers , they become less mobile and then suddenly transition to an insulating state . During the transition , the atoms behave in an unusual way . For example , the atoms slow to a halt at a rate that depends on the temperature and on Planck 's constant , the fundamental parameter of quantum mechanics , which does not enter into the description of the other phases . This behavior has recently been understood by considering a dual description where properties of the fluid are described in terms of a higher dimensional black hole . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 With many physicists turning towards string @-@ based methods to attack problems in nuclear and condensed matter physics , some theorists working in these areas have expressed doubts about whether the AdS / CFT correspondence can provide the tools needed to realistically model real @-@ world systems . In a talk at the Quark Matter conference in 2006 , Larry <unk> pointed out that the N = 4 super Yang – Mills theory that appears in the AdS / CFT correspondence differs significantly from quantum chromodynamics , making it difficult to apply these methods to nuclear physics . According to <unk> , 
 <formula> supersymmetric Yang – Mills is not QCD ... It has no mass scale and is <unk> invariant . It has no confinement and no running coupling constant . It is supersymmetric . It has no chiral symmetry breaking or mass generation . It has six scalar and fermions in the adjoint representation ... It may be possible to correct some or all of the above problems , or , for various physical problems , some of the objections may not be relevant . As yet there is not consensus nor compelling arguments for the conjectured fixes or phenomena which would insure that the <formula> supersymmetric Yang Mills results would reliably reflect QCD . 
 In a letter to Physics Today , Nobel laureate Philip W. Anderson voiced similar concerns about applications of AdS / CFT to condensed matter physics , stating 
 As a very general problem with the AdS / CFT approach in condensed @-@ matter theory , we can point to those telltale initials " CFT " — conformal field theory . Condensed @-@ matter problems are , in general , neither relativistic nor conformal . Near a quantum critical point , both time and space may be scaling , but even there we still have a preferred coordinate system and , usually , a lattice . There is some evidence of other linear @-@ T phases to the left of the strange metal about which they are welcome to speculate , but again in this case the condensed @-@ matter problem is overdetermined by experimental facts . 
 = = History and development = = 
 = = = String theory and nuclear physics = = = 
 The discovery of the AdS / CFT correspondence in late 1997 was the culmination of a long history of efforts to relate string theory to nuclear physics . In fact , string theory was originally developed during the late 1960s and early 1970s as a theory of hadrons , the subatomic particles like the proton and neutron that are held together by the strong nuclear force . The idea was that each of these particles could be viewed as a different oscillation mode of a string . In the late 1960s , experimentalists had found that hadrons fall into families called <unk> trajectories with squared energy proportional to angular momentum , and theorists showed that this relationship emerges naturally from the physics of a rotating relativistic string . 
 On the other hand , attempts to model hadrons as strings faced serious problems . One problem was that string theory includes a massless spin @-@ 2 particle whereas no such particle appears in the physics of hadrons . Such a particle would mediate a force with the properties of gravity . In 1974 , Joel <unk> and John Schwarz suggested that string theory was therefore not a theory of nuclear physics as many theorists had thought but instead a theory of quantum gravity . At the same time , it was realized that hadrons are actually made of quarks , and the string theory approach was abandoned in favor of quantum chromodynamics . 
 In quantum chromodynamics , quarks have a kind of charge that comes in three varieties called colors . In a paper from 1974 , Gerard ' t Hooft studied the relationship between string theory and nuclear physics from another point of view by considering theories similar to quantum chromodynamics , where the number of colors is some arbitrary number <formula> , rather than three . In this article , ' t Hooft considered a certain limit where <formula> tends to infinity and argued that in this limit certain calculations in quantum field theory resemble calculations in string theory . 
 = = = Black holes and holography = = = 
 In 1975 , Stephen Hawking published a calculation which suggested that black holes are not completely black but emit a dim radiation due to quantum effects near the event horizon . This work extended previous results of Jacob Bekenstein who had suggested that black holes have a well defined entropy . At first , Hawking 's result appeared to contradict one of the main postulates of quantum mechanics , namely the unitarity of time evolution . Intuitively , the unitarity postulate says that quantum mechanical systems do not destroy information as they evolve from one state to another . For this reason , the apparent contradiction came to be known as the black hole information paradox . 
 Later , in 1993 , Gerard ' t Hooft wrote a speculative paper on quantum gravity in which he revisited Hawking 's work on black hole thermodynamics , concluding that the total number of degrees of freedom in a region of spacetime surrounding a black hole is proportional to the surface area of the horizon . This idea was promoted by Leonard Susskind and is now known as the holographic principle . The holographic principle and its realization in string theory through the AdS / CFT correspondence have helped elucidate the mysteries of black holes suggested by Hawking 's work and are believed to provide a resolution of the black hole information paradox . In 2004 , Hawking conceded that black holes do not violate quantum mechanics , and he suggested a concrete mechanism by which they might preserve information . 
 = = = Maldacena 's paper = = = 
 In late 1997 , Juan Maldacena published a landmark paper that initiated the study of AdS / CFT . According to Alexander Markovich Polyakov , " [ Maldacena 's ] work opened the flood gates . " The conjecture immediately excited great interest in the string theory community and was considered in articles by Steven <unk> , Igor Klebanov and Polyakov , and by Edward Witten . These papers made Maldacena 's conjecture more precise and showed that the conformal field theory appearing in the correspondence lives on the boundary of anti @-@ de Sitter space . 
 One special case of Maldacena 's proposal says that N = 4 super Yang – Mills theory , a gauge theory similar in some ways to quantum chromodynamics , is equivalent to string theory in five @-@ dimensional anti @-@ de Sitter space . This result helped clarify the earlier work of ' t Hooft on the relationship between string theory and quantum chromodynamics , taking string theory back to its roots as a theory of nuclear physics . Maldacena 's results also provided a concrete realization of the holographic principle with important implications for quantum gravity and black hole physics . By the year 2015 , Maldacena 's paper had become the most highly cited paper in high energy physics with over 10 @,@ 000 citations . These subsequent articles have provided considerable evidence that the correspondence is correct , although so far it has not been rigorously proved . 
 = = = AdS / CFT finds applications = = = 
 In 1999 , after taking a job at Columbia University , nuclear physicist Đàm Thanh Sơn paid a visit to Andrei Starinets , a friend from Sơn 's undergraduate days who happened to be doing a Ph.D. in string theory at New York University . Although the two men had no intention of collaborating , Sơn soon realized that the AdS / CFT calculations Starinets was doing could shed light on some aspects of the quark – gluon plasma , an exotic state of matter produced when heavy ions are collided at high energies . In collaboration with Starinets and Pavel Kovtun , Sơn was able to use the AdS / CFT correspondence to calculate a key parameter of the plasma . As Sơn later recalled , " We turned the calculation on its head to give us a prediction for the value of the shear viscosity of a plasma ... A friend of mine in nuclear physics joked that ours was the first useful paper to come out of string theory . " 
 Today physicists continue to look for applications of the AdS / CFT correspondence in quantum field theory . In addition to the applications to nuclear physics advocated by Đàm Thanh Sơn and his collaborators , condensed matter physicists such as Subir Sachdev have used string theory methods to understand some aspects of condensed matter physics . A notable result in this direction was the description , via the AdS / CFT correspondence , of the transition of a superfluid to an insulator . Another emerging subject is the fluid / gravity correspondence , which uses the AdS / CFT correspondence to translate problems in fluid dynamics into problems in general relativity . 
 = = Generalizations = = 
 = = = Three @-@ dimensional gravity = = = 
 In order to better understand the quantum aspects of gravity in our four @-@ dimensional universe , some physicists have considered a lower @-@ dimensional mathematical model in which spacetime has only two spatial dimensions and one time dimension . In this setting , the mathematics describing the gravitational field simplifies drastically , and one can study quantum gravity using familiar methods from quantum field theory , eliminating the need for string theory or other more radical approaches to quantum gravity in four dimensions . 
 Beginning with the work of J. D. Brown and Marc <unk> in 1986 , physicists have noticed that quantum gravity in a three @-@ dimensional spacetime is closely related to two @-@ dimensional conformal field theory . In 1995 , <unk> and his coworkers explored this relationship in more detail , suggesting that three @-@ dimensional gravity in anti @-@ de Sitter space is equivalent to the conformal field theory known as Liouville field theory . Another conjecture formulated by Edward Witten states that three @-@ dimensional gravity in anti @-@ de Sitter space is equivalent to a conformal field theory with monster group symmetry . These conjectures provide examples of the AdS / CFT correspondence that do not require the full apparatus of string or M @-@ theory . 
 = = = dS / CFT correspondence = = = 
 Unlike our universe , which is now known to be expanding at an accelerating rate , anti @-@ de Sitter space is neither expanding nor contracting . Instead it looks the same at all times . In more technical language , one says that anti @-@ de Sitter space corresponds to a universe with negative cosmological constant , whereas the real universe has a small positive cosmological constant . 
 Although the properties of gravity at short distances should be somewhat independent of the value of the cosmological constant , it is desirable to have a version of the AdS / CFT correspondence for positive cosmological constant . In 2001 , Andrew Strominger introduced a version of the duality called the dS / CFT correspondence . This duality involves a model of spacetime called de Sitter space with a positive cosmological constant . Such a duality is interesting from the point of view of cosmology since many cosmologists believe that the very early universe was close to being de Sitter space . Our universe may also resemble de Sitter space in the distant future . 
 = = = Kerr / CFT correspondence = = = 
 Although the AdS / CFT correspondence is often useful for studying the properties of black holes , most of the black holes considered in the context of AdS / CFT are physically unrealistic . Indeed , as explained above , most versions of the AdS / CFT correspondence involve higher @-@ dimensional models of spacetime with unphysical supersymmetry . 
 In 2009 , Monica <unk> , Thomas Hartman , Wei Song , and Andrew Strominger showed that the ideas of AdS / CFT could nevertheless be used to understand certain astrophysical black holes . More precisely , their results apply to black holes that are approximated by extremal Kerr black holes , which have the largest possible angular momentum compatible with a given mass . They showed that such black holes have an equivalent description in terms of conformal field theory . The Kerr / CFT correspondence was later extended to black holes with lower angular momentum . 
 = = = Higher spin gauge theories = = = 
 The AdS / CFT correspondence is closely related to another duality conjectured by Igor Klebanov and Alexander Markovich Polyakov in 2002 . This duality states that certain " higher spin gauge theories " on anti @-@ de Sitter space are equivalent to conformal field theories with O ( N ) symmetry . Here the theory in the bulk is a type of gauge theory describing particles of arbitrarily high spin . It is similar to string theory , where the excited modes of vibrating strings correspond to particles with higher spin , and it may help to better understand the string theoretic versions of AdS / CFT and possibly even prove the correspondence . In 2010 , Simone <unk> and Xi Yin obtained further evidence for this duality by computing quantities called three @-@ point functions . 
 = Enta da Stage = 
 Enta da Stage is the debut album of American East Coast hip hop group Black Moon , released on October 19 , 1993 through Nervous Records . The album was produced by DJ Evil Dee and Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz . Enta da Stage features the debut of underground hip hop duo Smif @-@ N @-@ Wessun , as well as appearances from Havoc of Mobb Deep and Dru Ha , the co @-@ founder of Duck Down Records . 
 Despite being critically acclaimed and having two singles that charted on the Billboard Hot 100 ( " Who Got da Props ? " and " I Got Cha Opin " ) , the album sold poorly , and is often overlooked in favor of subsequent East Coast albums such as Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) , Illmatic , Liquid Swords , Ready to Die , Only Built 4 Cuban Linx ... , and The Infamous . Nonetheless , Enta da Stage preceded those releases and served as a precursor to the resurgence of the New York hip hop scene in the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 = = Background = = 
 The roots of Black Moon go back to Brooklyn 's Bushwick High School , where 5 ft and DJ Evil Dee met and formed a group called Unique Image . The two later met Buckshot in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn , and formed a friendship based on similar musical aspirations . The newly formed group recruited Evil Dee 's older brother Mr. Walt , and began recording the pre @-@ production of their debut album at the <unk> Crib of Hits at Mr. Walt 's house . Their first group release was their 1992 single " Who Got da Props ? " , which is now hailed as a classic hip hop single . Black Moon signed to Nervous Records in 1992 , based on the strength of the debut single , which peaked at number 86 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in early 1993 . Buckshot soon formed a close relationship with Nervous employee Drew Friedman , later known as Dru Ha . The two formed a management company named " Duck Down Management " , and oversaw the release of Enta da Stage as co @-@ executive producers . The group finished recording Enta da Stage at New York City 's D & D Studios between late 1992 and early 1993 , and prepared it for a late 1993 release date . 
 = = Music = = 
 Much of the acclaim the album received was due to the performance of lead MC Buckshot , who originally went by the name Buckshot Shorty . Ten of the fourteen tracks on the album are Buckshot solo tracks , and he appears on every song but " Son Get Wrec " . Buck , who was eighteen at the time of the recording , was a young man trying to establish himself and his crew in the hip hop world . In a 2005 interview with <unk> , Buckshot described a day in his life while recording his debut : 
 Enta da Stage was really rough for me . It was a really rough era . A lot of people don 't know what I went through personally . I think I had just turned eighteen and I had the pressure of running a management company as an eighteen year old shorter than 5 ' 6 . I had that problem of people taking my company and my representation seriously . So a day in the life around the Enta da Stage era was based on constant struggle and <unk> ' people know you respect Duck Down management as a real management company and not just as some little cute thing that Buckshot is doing . Nah , for real , we 're management type deal . I was battling keeping Smif @-@ n @-@ Wessun in a good deal , I was battling trying to get Heltah Skeltah a good deal . I was battling trying to bring my record company into existence , so it was a really hard time . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 The <unk> described in the above interview rules the content on the album , as the lyrics are loaded with violent narratives and braggadocio and little else , as Buckshot and 5 ft try to solidify their status in rap . Allmusic 's Chris Witt stated that " Emcees Buckshot and <unk> Accelerator attack their verses with an aggressive nihilism not heard since Kool G Rap 's peak . " 5 ft , originally known as <unk> Accelerator , appears on three tracks here , and his lyrical content does not differ from that of Buckshot 's . Unlike later work by New York City peers like Nas , the lyrical content found here does not peer deeply into social issues or provide much substance . Allmusic 's album review stated that " Theirs is a grim reality , filled with guns , weed and violence . Buckshot displays none of the usual gangster remorse , he is a willful public menace . " 
 Buckshot was praised not only for his lyricism , but also for his lyrical delivery and breath control , with his flow and dramatic , conversational vocal tones being seen as original and entertaining . In a 2005 interview with <unk> , hip hop producer 9th Wonder stated that Buckshot 's style strongly influenced his current sound , and that the singles " Who Got da Props ? " and " How Many MC 's ... " changed his life . 
 The album features an original style of choruses , which are now known as " Black Moon hooks " , in which they gather a large number of people in the booth to simultaneously yell the lyrics . These vocals were provided by a number of artists , including Smif @-@ n @-@ Wessun , Mr. Walt , Mobb Deep 's Havoc and the trio themselves . " <unk> Talk Shit " , " Who Got da Props ? " , " Ack Like U Want It " , " Buck Em Down " , " Black Smif @-@ n @-@ Wessun " , " Son Get Wrec " , " Make <unk> " and " U da Man " all feature " Black Moon hooks " . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 DJ Evil Dee and Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz , who produced the album , put their samplers to use here , lacing the album with their signature basement sound , filled with hard drums , grimy horn arrangements and deep basslines . In the album 's liner notes , DJ Evil Dee stated : " This album was done on blunted terms . Anyone who is offended by the contents of the album , FUCK YOU . Nuff said . " Allmusic describes the dark production : " The Beatminerz production crew craft subterranean beats to match Buckshot 's mayhem . The tracks are dark , layered with muted jazz samples , and seemingly bottomless . " A few of the samples used here were later recreated by a number of hip hop artists in the 1990s . The single " Buck Em Down " features a sample from Donald Byrd 's " Wind Parade " , a sample which was later re @-@ used for Organized <unk> 's 1994 concept track " Stray Bullet " . " How Many MC 's ... " features a sample from Grover Washington , Jr . ' s " Hydra " , which was used for earlier hip hop tracks like EPMD 's " Underground " . The iconic " Who Got Da Props " heavily utilizes a looped sample from Ronnie Laws 's jazz classic " Tidal Wave " , which was featured in several hip @-@ hop and R & B tracks , including Usher 's " Think Of You " from his self @-@ titled 1994 album . Evil Dee and Walt take a portion of the sample and craft it into a different loop . 
 An Enta da Stage review on OhWord.com praises the production work , stating " Though the album 's success is largely attributable to Buckshot 's performance , one cannot ignore the phenomenal production from the Beatminerz . They took the already dark sound of The Low End Theory and one @-@ upped it , filtering out almost all treble and using spare , hardcore drum samples . The compositions of Mr. Walt and Evil Dee are also cleverly structured , propelling Buckshot 's raps directly into the listener 's psyche . " ... " The crackle of scratched vinyl pervades the album , contributing to the feel of warmth and timelessness . Thanks to the Beatminerz , there is something inviting about Enta da Stage , despite its confrontational lyrics . " 
 = = Singles = = 
 Enta da Stage featured four singles and music videos , including their debut " Who Got da Props ? " . In mid @-@ 1993 , the " How Many MC 's ... " single was released ; it became popular in the underground rap circuit , but was not able to find success with mainstream audiences , barely breaking into the Top 50 on the Hot Rap Singles chart . The third single from the album was a remix of " I Got Cha Opin " , which utilized a smooth jazz sample , courtesy of Barry White 's " Playing Your Game Baby " . The remix featured a new chorus and all @-@ new verses to go along with the new production . The single became the group 's second Billboard Hot 100 hit in 1994 , peaking at number 93 . The last single , " Buck Em Down " , was released in mid @-@ 1994 , with the music video featuring the remixed version . Both original and remixed versions featured sampled portions from Donald Byrd 's " Wind Parade " and similar lyrics , with the remix featuring a different vocal delivery and edited lyrics . 
 The album spawned additional remixes . Along with " Buck Em Down " and " I Got Cha Opin " , the tracks " Ack like U Want It " , " Son Get Wrec " , " Shit Iz Real " , " How Many MC 's ... " and " U da Man " all featured remixes , which were later included on Black Moon 's <unk> ' in dah Vaults compilation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Enta da Stage has received generally favorable reviews from most music critics and publications . Allmusic gave the album 4 ½ stars out of 5 , while The Source gave it 4 out of 5 Mics . In 1998 , the album was selected as one of The Source 's 100 Best Rap Albums , and former Source magazine writer Cheo H. Coker stated in their November 1993 issue : 
 Enta da Stage is a stunning debut that does not disappoint by any stretch of the imagination . The only term that adequately describes Black Moon 's smooth combination of funky jazz rhythms and ferocious vocals is ' elegant madness . ' It 's nice to see that there are still shining spots of originality to be found in a genre that 's becoming increasingly overrun by bogus bandwagon jumpers just out to make a quick buck . Make this <unk> a priority . 
 Though praised for its originality and production , Enta da Stage has also seen criticism for its monotony and lack of lyrical substance . Rolling Stone magazine gave the album a 3 @-@ star rating , and criticized the release for " ignorance " , and claimed that the release failed to capitalize on its promise , stating that " They leave blank the ultimate canvas – the self . " In naming it the fourth greatest album on About.com 's list of the Best Rap Albums of 1993 , columnist Henry Adaso wrote of the album favorably , stating " Unlike most hip @-@ hop albums of its era , Enta Da Stage eschewed confrontational raps and opted for brooding , electrifying brand of hip @-@ hop . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 Though not as widely heralded as similar groundbreaking East Coast albums such as Nas ' Illmatic , The Notorious B.I.G. ' s Ready to Die , Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) , Onyx 's <unk> and Mobb Deep 's The Infamous , Enta da Stage was critically acclaimed on a similar level . Though all of the albums mentioned above were able to reach at least Gold status , Enta da Stage , released before all of these albums , has not sold nearly as well , selling just over 350 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. as of June 2006 . Allmusic described the importance of the album : " It set the tone for much of the hip hop to follow . Biggie Smalls suicidal thoughts and Noreaga 's boisterous thuggery both have their roots here . The album marked a turning point in hip hop . " Enta da Stage has also been described as " Era defining " , and was one of the pioneering releases during the return of New York City 's street hip hop resurgence of the mid 1990s , after the West Coast 's reign of the early 1990s . Enta da Stage is still prominent among hip hop artists today , such as lyrics from " How Many MC 's ... " being used as a hook for Jedi Mind Trick 's song " Speech Cobras " . 
 The album also served as the introduction of the supergroup Boot Camp <unk> . The collective was a prominent underground rap group in the 1990s – also producing the acclaimed Smif @-@ n @-@ Wessun 's Dah Shinin ' , Heltah Skeltah 's Nocturnal , and <unk> ' s Da Storm . Enta da Stage heralded the debut of Da Beatminerz . After producing here , and on other Boot Camp albums Dah Shinin ' , Nocturnal and Da Storm , Mr. Walt and Evil Dee went on to expand their sounds , and produce for popular artists like <unk> @-@ Ra , Big Daddy Kane , Craig G , De La Soul , <unk> Peoples , Eminem , <unk> Squad , Jean Grae , KRS @-@ One , M.O.P. , Naughty by Nature , O.C. and Black Star . The album is extensively broken down track @-@ by @-@ track by Buckshot , DJ Evil Dee , and Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz in Brian Coleman 's book Check the Technique ( 2007 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Track listing and producer information is taken from the CD . 
 " Ack Like U Want It " was not on the cassette or the vinyl release . 
 " Slave " was not on the vinyl release . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart history = = 
 Album 
 Singles 
 = House ( 1977 film ) = 
 House ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a 1977 Japanese horror film directed and produced by Nobuhiko Obayashi . The film stars mostly amateur actors with only Kimiko Ikegami and Yōko Minamida having any notable previous acting experience . The film is about a schoolgirl traveling with her six classmates to her ailing aunt 's country home , where they come face to face with supernatural events as the girls are , one by one , devoured by the home . 
 The film company Toho approached Obayashi with the suggestion to make a film like Jaws . Influenced by ideas from his daughter Chigumi , Obayashi developed ideas for a script that was written by <unk> Katsura . After the script was green @-@ lit , the film was put on hold for two years as no director at Toho wanted to direct it . Obayashi promoted the film during this time period until the studio allowed him to direct it himself . The film was a box office hit in Japan but received negative reviews from critics . House received a wide release in 2009 and 2010 in North America , where it received more favorable reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Japan , a young girl nicknamed Gorgeous ( Kimiko Ikegami ) has plans for a summer vacation with her father ( Saho <unk> ) who had been in Italy scoring film music . Her father returns home and surprises Gorgeous by announcing she has a new stepmother , Ryoko Ema ( Haruko Wanibuchi ) . This upsets Gorgeous as her mother had died years earlier . Gorgeous goes to her bedroom and writes a letter to her aunt asking if she could come visit her this summer instead . Gorgeous ' aunt replies and allows her to come visit . Gorgeous invites her six friends , Prof ( Ai Matsubara ) , Melody ( Eriko Tanaka ) , Kung Fu ( Miki <unk> ) , Mac ( Mieko Sato ) , Sweet ( Masayo Miyako ) and Fantasy ( Kumiko Oba ) to come along with her . On arriving at the aunt 's house , the girls are greeted by Gorgeous ' aunt ( Yōko Minamida ) to whom they present a watermelon . 
 After a tour of the home , the girls leave the watermelon in a well to keep it refrigerated . Mac later goes to retrieve the watermelon and does not return . When Fantasy goes to retrieve the watermelon from the well , she finds Mac 's head , which flies in the air and bites Fantasy 's buttocks before she escapes . The other girls also begin to encounter other supernatural traps throughout the house . The aunt disappears after entering the broken refrigerator , and the girls are attacked or possessed by a series of items in the house , such as Gorgeous becoming possessed after using her aunt 's mirror and Sweet disappearing after being attacked by mattresses . These attacks cause the girls to try to escape the house . As soon as Gorgeous walks out the door , the rest of the girls find themselves locked in . The girls try to find the aunt to unlock the door but only find Mac 's severed hand in a jar . Melody begins to play the piano to keep the girl 's spirits up as the girls hear Gorgeous singing upstairs . As Prof and Kung Fu go to investigate , Melody 's fingers are bitten off by the piano , and it ultimately eats her whole . 
 Upstairs in the house , Kung Fu and Prof find Gorgeous wearing a bridal gown , who then reveals her aunt 's diary to them . Kung Fu follows Gorgeous as she leaves the room , only to find Sweet 's body trapped in a grandfather clock . Panic @-@ driven , the remaining girls barricade the upper part of the house while Prof , Fantasy and Kung Fu read the aunt 's diary . They are interrupted by the giant @-@ sized head of Gorgeous . Gorgeous reveals that her aunt died many years ago waiting for her fiancée to return from World War II and that her spirit remains , eating unmarried girls who arrive at her home . The three girls are then attacked by household items . Prof shouts to Kung Fu to attack the aunt 's cat , Blanche . As Kung Fu lunges into a flying kick , she is eaten by a possessed light fixture . Kung Fu 's legs manage to escape and attack the painting of Blanche on the wall . The attacked Blanche portrait spurts blood , causing the room to flood . Prof tries to read the diary to solve the problem , but is pulled under the blood by a monster jar . Fantasy sees Gorgeous in the bridal gown and paddles towards her . Gorgeous appears as her aunt in the reflection in the blood and then cradles Fantasy . In the morning , Ryoko arrives at the house and finds Gorgeous in a classic kimono . Gorgeous tells Ryoko that her friends will wake up soon and that they will be hungry . She then shakes hands with Ryoko and burns her away to nothing . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Kimiko Ikegami as Gorgeous 
 Miki <unk> as Kung Fu 
 Ai <unk> as Prof 
 Kumiko Oba as Fantasy 
 Mieko Sato as Mac 
 Eriko Tanaka as Melody 
 Masayo Miyako as Sweet 
 Yōko Minamida as Auntie 
 Kiyohiko Ozaki as Keisuke <unk> 
 Saho <unk> as Father 
 Haruko Wanibuchi as Ryoko Ema 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Following the success of the American film Jaws , a proposition came from the Toho film studio for Nobuhiko Obayashi to develop a similar script . To find inspiration for the story , Obayashi discussed ideas with his pre @-@ teen daughter Chigumi Obayashi . Nobuhiko sought her ideas , believing that adults " only think about things they understand ... everything stays on that boring human level " while " children can come up with things that can 't be explained " . Several of Chigumi 's ideas were included in House such as a reflection in a mirror attacking the viewer , a watermelon being pulled out of a well appearing like a human head , and a house that eats girls . Other themes Chigumi suggested drew upon her own childhood fears . These fears included a pile of <unk> falling on her that felt like a monster attacking her , a large loud clock at her grandparents home , and getting her fingers caught in between her piano keys . Nobuhiko shared these story ideas with screenwriter <unk> Katsura . These ideas reminded Katsura of a short story by Walter de la Mare about an old woman who is visited by her granddaughters who then puts them in a trunk . 
 Obayashi incorporated themes of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki into the script . Obayashi was born in Hiroshima and lost all his childhood friends from these bombings . Obayashi applied these themes with the plot element of a woman 's ghost waiting for her lover 's return from World War II . The woman 's bitterness about the war turns her into an evil spirit that devours the girls who were unaffected by the bombings . Obayashi and Katsura had worked previously on a script titled <unk> before being assigned to House , which made the screenwriting process easy for both of them . Obayashi titled the script House as he felt that a foreign title for a Japanese film would be " taboo " . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 The script for House was green @-@ lit shortly after being presented to Toho . No directors at Toho were interested in directing the film as they felt it would end their career . Obayashi proposed that he would direct it but was turned down as he was not a staff member at Toho . House did not start filming until two years after the script 's completion . Toho allowed Obayashi to announce that film was green @-@ lit and began promoting the film by passing out business cards which advertised the film . In the 1960s , Obayashi created a short film titled Emotion that was popular at Japanese universities and event halls . Fans of his television commercial and film work helped him promote House before it was even in production . Products based on House that were released included manga , a novelization of the script and a radio drama . The soundtrack for the film was created and released before the film was made . <unk> Kobayashi , who worked with Obayashi on his television commercials , contributed the piano pieces for the film 's soundtrack . Kobayashi felt that younger people should contribute to the film 's soundtrack and suggested Mickie Yoshino and his band <unk> should contribute songs based on Yoshino 's piano pieces . 
 The majority of the cast of House were not established actors and were people Obayashi worked with on his commercials and independent films . During the two @-@ year waiting period to start filming House , Obayashi created several commercials and began casting the seven girls from models who were in his commercials . The most experienced members of the main cast were Kimiko Ikegami and Yōko Minamida . Obayashi was friends with Minamida who he filmed in commercials for <unk> . Ikegami was mostly working television and theater at the time and worried that taking the role of the older woman would have a negative effect on the roles she would be subsequently offered , but still agreed to play the part . The country music singer Kiyohiko Ozaki , who plays Mr. Togo in the film , was cast because he was friends with Obayashi through their shared hobby of horseback riding . Other roles were filled by members of the crew and their families ; for example , Nobuhiko Obayashi 's daughter Chigumi plays the little girl , and the film 's production designer plays the shoe maker . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
