 Obayashi recalled that his producer told him that Toho was tired of losing money on comprehensible films and were ready to let Obayashi direct the House script , which they felt was incomprehensible . Toho officially green @-@ lit the film 's production after the success of the radio drama based on House . Obayashi received special permission to direct the film despite not being a member of the Toho staff . 
 House was filmed on one of Toho 's largest sets , where Obayashi shot the film without a storyboard over a period of about two months . Obayashi described the attitude on the set as very upbeat as he often skipped , sang and played quiz games with the younger actresses on the set . Despite having fun on the set , members of the Toho crew felt the film was nonsense . Obayashi found the acting of the seven girls to be poor while trying to direct them verbally . He began playing the film 's soundtrack on set , which changed the way the girls were acting in the film as they got into the spirit of the music . Actress Kimiko Ikegami was uncomfortable about a nude scene in the film . To make her more comfortable , Yoko Minamida also took off her clothes . After Obayashi saw Minamida nude , he included a nude scene for her in the film which was not in the original script . 
 Obayashi already had experience with special effects from his work on television commercials . Obayashi and the cameraman oversaw the special effects for the film . Obayashi desired the special effects to look unrealistic , as if a child created them . For the scene in which Ai Matsubara 's character vanishes under the blood , Obayashi had her suspended nude , pouring buckets of blue paint on her to create a blue @-@ screen chroma key effect where the blue colored parts of her body would deteriorate on camera . The outcome of a lot of these effects would be unknown until the film was completed . Obayashi stated that sometimes the effects did not turn out how he originally envisioned them . 
 = = Release = = 
 House was released on July 30 , 1977 in Japan . It was originally released as a double feature with the romance film Pure Hearts in Mud . Toho did not expect House to be successful , but the film became a great hit . The film became specifically popular with a youth audience . House was never shown in the United States until the distribution rights were bought by Janus Films to be released as part of their Eclipse line of DVDs . Eclipse was originally conceived as a possible sub @-@ label for cult films for the company . Janus soon began getting requests for theatrical screenings of the film . Janus initiated a small tour of theatrical showings , including two sold @-@ out shows at the 2009 New York Asian Film Festival . In January 2010 , House began being shown theatrically across North America . 
 House was released by the Masters of Cinema label in the United Kingdom on DVD . Bonus features on the disc included interviews with the cast and crew and the theatrical trailer . House was released by The Criterion Collection on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on October 26 , 2010 . Bonus features on the disc included a making @-@ of feature with interviews with the crew , Obayashi 's short film Emotion ( 1966 ) , and an appreciation video featuring director Ti West . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film did not receive many reviews in Japan on its initial release . The general reception among Japanese critics who did review the film was negative . Nobuhiko Obayashi won the Blue Ribbon Award for Best New Director in 1978 for House , and , on House 's theatrical screenings across North America , the film began to receive generally favorable reviews . House was The New York Times critics pick stating that " Mr. Obayashi has created a true fever dream of a film , one in which the young female imagination – that of his daughter , Gorgeous or both – yields memorable results . " The Seattle Times gave House three out of four stars , stating that what the film " lacks in technical wizardry it more than makes up for in playful ingenuity , injecting cheesy effects into outrageously stylized set pieces . " Slant Magazine gave the film three stars out of four , calling it " equal parts brilliant , baffling , ridiculous , and unwatchable . " The New York Post gave the film three and a half stars out of four praising the film 's originality , comparing it to the work of directors Dario Argento and Guy <unk> indieWire included House in their list of " Haunted House films worth discussing " calling it " the <unk> , most infectious blood bath in cinematic history . " In 2009 , the Japanese film magazine Kinema Junpo placed House on at number 160 on their list of top 200 Japanese films . 
 The Austin Chronicle gave House a mixed review , saying that " there 's surprisingly little to recommend House as a film . But as an experience , well , that 's a whole other story . " The Village Voice gave the film a mixed review , saying that " Contemporary Japanese pop culture makes the <unk> nonsense of House look quaint by comparison ... though it plays like a retarded hybrid of Rocky Horror and Whispering Corridors , it is , moment to moment , its own kind of movie hijinks . " The Boston Globe gave the film two stars out of four , opining that films by Sam Raimi and Peter Jackson had attempted similar styled films with better success . 
 = Broke ( The Office ) = 
 " Broke " is the 25th episode of the fifth season of the television series The Office , and the 97th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 23 , 2009 . In this episode , Michael learns his paper company is broke , and tries to keep this fact a secret when Dunder Mifflin offers to buy out the Michael Scott Paper Company since the company has stolen most of Dunder Mifflin Scranton 's clients . 
 The episode was written by Charlie Grandy and directed by Steve Carell , marking his directorial debut . " Broke " was the last of a six @-@ episode arc involving Michael quitting to start the Michael Scott Paper Company ; it was also the last of six episodes to prominently feature Idris Elba as Dunder Mifflin V.P. Charles Miner . According to Nielsen ratings , it was watched by 7 @.@ 21 million viewers , and received the season 's lowest rating in the 18 – 49 age group during its regular timeslot to that point in the season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Michael ( Steve Carell ) , Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) and Ryan ( B. J. Novak ) make early morning paper deliveries in a used van . The van has Korean writing on it which translates to " Hallelujah Church of Scranton . " This routine , in addition to their regular duties at the Michael Scott Paper Company , takes such a toll on the group that they decide to look into hiring a delivery person . They are told by their accountant that because of their low prices and fixed @-@ cost pricing model , they not only cannot afford a delivery person , but will be completely bankrupt in another month . Pam reveals to her coworkers that she has committed a great deal of money to her upcoming wedding and has had no response to the weekend part @-@ time job applications she 's submitted . Ryan responds by confessing that he never actually went to Thailand . 
 At Dunder Mifflin , Charles Miner ( Idris Elba ) announces that the Scranton branch , previously the company 's most profitable office , has lost ten major clients to Michael 's company . Chief Financial Officer David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) visits Scranton to see what can be done to stem the losses . In a blatant about face from his no @-@ nonsense persona , Charles blatantly sucks up to David , which Jim notices . David calls a meeting with Charles and Jim ( John Krasinski ) , but Charles insists Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) also be present because he had been Charles 's right @-@ hand man . However , during the meeting Dwight embarrasses Charles with outlandish suggestions , such as unleashing a hive of bees . 
 David decides the cheapest option is for Dunder Mifflin to buy out the Michael Scott Paper Company . Jim has learned the company 's financial situation from Pam , but feigns uncertainty when asked if Michael is likely to be interested in a buyout . At David and Charles 's orders , Jim brings the idea of a buyout to Michael . While there he also reassures Michael that Dunder Mifflin is unaware of his company 's financial situation . Dwight learns from a past client that Michael has been begging customers for more money and informs Charles , but Charles refuses to listen , having been embarrassed by Dwight 's earlier ideas . 
 Michael , Pam and Ryan come in to discuss the terms of the buyout . After Michael rejects an initial offer of $ 12 @,@ 000 to buy the company , David suggests that he is bluffing , saying he knows that his company 's prices are too low to be sustainable . Michael keeps his cool and rebuts that Dunder Mifflin 's best branch is " bleeding " and David could be replaced during an upcoming major stockholder meeting as a result . David gives a second offer of $ 60 @,@ 000 , which is strongly considered , but Michael rejects this offer at the last second and demands the company give him his old job back and hire Ryan and Pam as salespeople . David is reluctant to hire three people with full benefits , especially given Ryan 's disastrous history with the company , and likens it to " a multimillion dollar buyout " . Michael refuses to back down , and David reluctantly agrees to his demands . 
 As Charles leaves Scranton , returning to corporate , Michael does not allow him to have any final words , mirroring Charles 's earlier treatment of Michael when he quit . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Broke " was written by Charlie Grandy and directed by Steve Carell , who made his directorial debut with the episode . It was the last of a six @-@ episode story arc involving Idris Elba 's character Charles Miner , although Elba has indicated the character would return in future episodes : " Mr. Charles doesn 't leave the picture . [ ... ] My storyline has come to an end , but there is a good indication that the writers see my character coming back . " Elba made an appearance in " Company Picnic " , the fifth season finale . Elba said he did not watch " Broke " after it aired because " I 'm hypercritical about my work , so I try not to torture myself . " 
 The official website for The Office included three cut scenes from " Broke " . In the first 90 @-@ second clip , Michael is running late because he overslept , and he instinctively runs into the Dunder Mifflin office by accident instead of his Michael Scott Paper Company office . In the second one @-@ minute clip , Andy is angry that he cannot find his personalized coffee mug with his face on it , and he and the others around the office complain about losing their clients to Michael 's new company . In the final 80 @-@ second clip , stress drives Ryan to the breaking point and he begins trashing the Michael Scott Paper Company Office , for which he quickly recovers and apologizes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on April 23 , 2009 , " Broke " was watched by 7 @.@ 21 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode received a 3 @.@ 7 rating / 10 share among viewers aged 18 – 49 , the lowest rating in that age group for the season during its regular timeslot . It received a 4 @.@ 0 rating / 12 share among viewers 18 @-@ 34 . 
 The episode received highly positive reviews . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger called " Broke " a " great , great " episode , although he said he wished the Michael Scott Paper Company arc could have lasted longer . Sepinwall praised touches such as the Korean women who were constantly getting into the sales van , and Michael 's moment of nervousness on the elevator , and said the ending when Michael came through was particularly satisfying . Will Leitch of New York magazine described " Broke " as " a rousing , exuberant episode that continues one of The Office 's best runs in history " . Leitch said the negotiations during the latter half of the episode had genuine tension , and that all the storylines of the Michael Scott Paper Company arc were wrapped up perfectly . Travis Fickett of IGN said the episode was strong enough that it could have served as the season finale . He said the episode had lots of good throw @-@ away moments , like Charles brown @-@ nosing to David and realizing Dwight is eccentric , as well as several clever twists , like Jim 's actions in tricking Dwight and helping the Michael Scott Paper Company get bought out . Eric <unk> of the City Newspaper said the episode was a strong finale to the Michael Scott Paper Company arc , which was " probably the best thing to happen to the show in the last two seasons " . <unk> praised Michael 's impressive actions in the episode and said he was curious to see how Michael 's relationship with several of the supporting characters would be recast as a result of this episode . 
 Margaret Lyons of Entertainment Weekly said , " ' Broke ' was an incredibly brisk episode that covered a lot of ground , so it worked as a good capstone on the whole Michael @-@ leaving @-@ the @-@ company plot . " She also said although the plot arc was a good one , she looked forward to future episodes focusing more on the Dunder Mifflin supporting cast . Rick Porter of Zap2it praised the episode , but expressed concern that the show would grow more stale now that Michael , Pam and Ryan were back to their old jobs at Dunder Mifflin ; Porter particularly complimented the new aspects of the Charles Miner character presented in " Broke " , including his interaction with David and his exasperation with Dwight . Dan Hopper of Best Week Ever praised the episode and Michael 's shrewdness , but also expressed worry that the quality of future episodes would dip now that Dunder Mifflin was back to normal . Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club said of the episode , " Elba 's stint on The Office went out on a high note . I 'll miss his joyless scold of a middle manager but it 's nice to have the gang reunited . " Rabin also said the moment when Charles fails to listen when Dwight learns Michael 's company is broke " rang a little false " , but praised the episode as a whole . Meghan Carlson of BuddyTV said she enjoyed seeing Michael so victorious at the end , and said , " as far as ends getting tied off cleanly , ' Broke ' was an inspired episode , full of tension , suspense , and yes , humor . " 
 " Broke " was voted the highest @-@ rated episode out of 26 from the fifth season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally ; the episode was rated 9 @.@ 17 out of 10 . For his work on this episode , Charlie Grandy was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay – Episodic Comedy . Steve Carell submitted this episode when he was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , which he lost to Alec Baldwin . 
 = Cyclone Megh = 
 Extremely Severe Cyclonic Storm Megh is regarded as the worst tropical cyclone to ever strike the Yemeni island of Socotra , causing additional destruction there after Cyclone Chapala hit the same island . Megh formed on November 5 , 2015 , in the eastern Arabian Sea , and followed a path similar to Chapala . After moving northward , the cyclone turned to the west , and fueled by warm water temperatures , it quickly intensified . On November 7 , the storm developed an eye in the center and began to rapidly intensify into a mature cyclone . By the next day , the India Meteorological Department estimated peak 3 minute sustained winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) , and the American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center estimated 1 minute winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) . Shortly thereafter , the cyclone brushed the northern coast of Socotra . The storm steadily weakened thereafter , especially after it skirted the northern Somalia coast . After entering the Gulf of Aden , Megh turned to the west @-@ northwest and struck southwestern Yemen on 10 November as a deep depression , dissipating shortly thereafter . 
 When Megh passed near Socotra , residents were just beginning to return after the previous cyclone , and many had to evacuate again . Additional heavy rainfall and high winds lashed the island , which destroyed 500 homes and damaged another 3 @,@ 000 . The consecutive storms damaged 785 fishing boats , left 80 % of the roads impassible , and caused an island @-@ wide power outage . Megh killed 18 people on Socotra and injured another 60 . The heavy damage on the island prompted nearby countries and international organizations to deliver relief goods and medical teams . Later , Megh brought torrential rainfall and high waves to northern Somalia , killing livestock and damaging schools . The storm 's final landfall in Yemen marked little rainfall or effects . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On November 3 , an area of scattered convection persisted about 860 km ( 535 mi ) southwest of Mumbai , India , in the central Arabian Sea . The thunderstorms were associated with a weak and broad circulation , located in an area of low wind shear and warm water temperatures over 29 ° C ( 84 ° F ) , both favorable conditions . At the time , the system was located east of Cyclone Chapala , which had recently struck Yemen . On November 4 , a distinct low pressure area developed in association with a mid- to upper @-@ level low , while the region was in an active Madden Julian Oscillation phase favorable for storm development . The circulation became better defined as outflow increased , amplified by an anticyclone over the system . Based on the organization , the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) classified the low as a depression at 00 : 00 UTC on November 5 . About six hours later , the IMD upgraded the system to a deep depression , and at 12 : 00 UTC that day the agency upgraded it to a cyclonic storm , naming it Megh . Earlier that day , the American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) initiated advisories on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 05A while the storm was about 1 @,@ 120 km ( 700 mi ) east of Socotra island offshore Yemen . 
 Upon forming , Megh was moving to the west @-@ southwest due to a ridge to the north . While Megh was in its formative stages , it developed broken rainbands that swirled into the circulation center , which was located beneath the blossoming convection . On November 6 , dry air began to become entrained into the circulation , although the unfavorable conditions did not disrupt the center . Instead , the convection became better organized , developing into a central dense overcast , as well as the beginnings of an eye feature . As the storm continued to develop , the radius of maximum winds shrank , resulting in a smaller storm than the previous Cyclone Chapala . At 12 : 00 UTC on November 7 , the JTWC upgraded Megh to the equivalent of a hurricane after a small defined eye became evident . The storm began rapid deepening that day due to the continued low shear and warm water temperatures , and the convection became more symmetric and circular . Such intensification was not anticipated by tropical cyclone forecast models , which emphasized that the external conditions , such as dry air from the west , would be unfavorable . At 06 : 00 UTC on November 7 , the IMD upgraded Megh to a severe cyclonic storm , and just nine hours later upgraded it to a very severe cyclonic storm – the equivalent to hurricane intensity with 3 minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . 
 Cyclone Megh continued to rapidly intensify while approaching the island of Socotra . It developed a small eye just 7 @.@ 4 km ( 4 @.@ 6 mi ) in diameter by early on November 8 , along with a convective core just 280 km ( 175 mi ) in diameter . At 03 : 00 UTC that day , the IMD upgraded the system to an extremely severe cyclonic storm , and three hours later estimated peak 3 minute winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . At the same time , the JTWC estimated peak 1 minute winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) . Since accurate record keeping began in the basin in 1990 , this marked the first time in the Arabian Sea that there were two cyclones in one season with 1 minute winds of at least 185 km / h ( 115 km / h ) . Between 06 : 00 – 12 : 00 UTC on November 8 , the eye of Megh crossed the northern coast of Socotra , with the resulting land interaction causing the eyewall to disappear and for the winds to diminish . After exiting the island , the cyclone began weakening further due to cooler water temperatures and drier air from the Arabian Peninsula to the northwest . Early on November 9 , the center of Megh passed 57 km ( 36 mi ) north of Cape Guardafui , and further land interaction with Somalia to the south increasingly degraded the storm 's structure . At 00 : 00 UTC that day , Megh weakened into a very severe cyclonic storm . 
 After passing just north of Somalia , Megh progressed westward into the Gulf of Aden , the waterway between Somalia and the Arabian Peninsula . This marked the first time on record when two storms entered the body of water in the same year . By 12 : 00 UTC on November 9 , the center was beginning to become exposed from the convection due to the unfavorable conditions . Throughout the day , the structure rapidly deteriorated as the storm curved to the west @-@ northwest . At 21 : 00 UTC on November 9 , Megh weakened further into a severe cyclonic storm , and degraded further to a cyclonic storm by six hours later . While just offshore Yemen , the circulation slowed and turned to the northeast , after the ridge to the north receded eastward . At 06 : 00 UTC on November 10 the storm weakened to a deep depression , and three hours later Megh made landfall in southwestern Yemen northeast of <unk> , with estimated winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) . The structure eroded significantly over land , prompting the JTWC to discontinue advisories . The circulation continued inland , and Megh degenerated into a low pressure area by 18 : 00 UTC on November 10 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Occurring just days after Cyclone Chapala bypassed the island , Cyclone Megh struck Socotra , bringing further winds , rainfall , and flash flooding . Residents who returned home after Chapala had to evacuate again due to Megh , and 800 people on the nearby island of Abd al Kuri evacuated to Hadhramaut Governorate on the Yemeni mainland . Some relief goods delivered after Chapala were damaged during Megh . The cyclone wrecked about 500 homes and damaged 3 @,@ 000 others , which displaced about 18 @,@ 000 people to schools and mosques . The storm disrupted entire villages – tainting water wells and affecting communication towers – while also damaging the main hospital and power station . This resulted in fuel shortages and an island wide power outage . The combination of high winds and rainfall caused the island 's main port to close , with 785 fishing boats and 1 @,@ 130 fishing nets damaged by Chapala and Megh . About 80 % of the roads on Socotra were left impassible . The storm also killed many livestock and downed thousands of palm trees . Two people died on Socotra when their homes collapsed . Overall , the storm killed 18 people on the island and injured 60 others . 
 After the storm , communication disruptions on Socotra made it difficult for relief workers to determine the needs of the affected residents . Due to the main port being damaged , residents built a makeshift pathway to assist relief distribution from a ship carrying 700 tons of supplies from the United Arab Emirates . Relief distribution was also disrupted by the heavy damage to Socotra 's infrastructure , including damaged roads and minimal power or fuel supply . After the storm , displaced residents stayed in public buildings or outside damaged houses . Due to the collective impacts of Chapala and Megh , various Persian Gulf countries sent 43 planes with supplies to the island by 19 November . The United Arab Emirates sent a ship and a plane , carrying 500 tons of food , 10 tons of blankets and tents , and 1 @,@ 200 barrels of food . The local Red Cross gave cooked meals and tarps to the island 's residents . The International Organization for Migration provided 2 @,@ 000 shelter kits as well as a medical team to Socotra . 
 While brushing the northern tip of Somalia , Megh dropped heavy rainfall to coastal regions of the nation , particularly in the <unk> region . There , stations recorded more than 300 % of the average annual rainfall . <unk> reported 160 mm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) of rainfall over 24 hours . Megh also lashed the coast with strong waves , and the combination with rainfall damaged several boats . The rains led to flash flooding that blocked roads . Megh damaged schools , police stations , and the main hospital in Alula District . The passage of Megh also resulted in the loss of livestock in the region , and many fruit and palm trees were knocked down . After the passages of earlier Cyclone Chapala and Megh , the local Red Cross chapter distributed blankets , sleeping mats , and mattresses to the affected families . 
 By the time Megh made landfall on the Yemen mainland , it had weakened enough to not produce any strong winds or heavy rainfall . 
 = Shishman of Vidin = 
 Shishman , Despot of Vidin ( Bulgarian : Шишман ; fl . 1270s / 1280s — before 1308 / 1313 ) was a Bulgarian noble ( boyar ) who ruled a semi @-@ independent realm based out of the Danubian fortress of Vidin in the late 13th and early 14th century . Shishman , who was bestowed the title of " despot " by Bulgarian emperor George Terter I , was a Cuman , and may have been established as lord of Vidin as early as the 1270s . 
 In 1291 , he came under Tatar suzerainty and in 1292 he was in charge of an unsuccessful campaign against neighbouring Serbia . Even though the Serbs captured Vidin in their counter @-@ offensive , perhaps thanks to Tatar influence Shishman was placed once more as the ruler of the region , this time as a Serbian vassal . However , he continued to rule his lands largely independently . As his son and successor as despot of Vidin Michael Shishman acceded to the Bulgarian throne in 1323 , Shishman was the progenitor of the last medieval Bulgarian royal dynasty , the Shishman dynasty . 
 = = Bulgarian despot and Tatar suzerainty = = 
 Shishman 's early life and rise through the ranks of the Bulgarian nobility are poorly documented . However , he is considered to have been a descendant of the wave of Cumans that settled in Bulgaria after 1241 , when ethnic conflicts with the Hungarians caused them to leave the Kingdom of Hungary . It has been accepted in Bulgarian historiography that Shishman 's first wife was an unnamed daughter of Anna – Theodora and sebastokrator Peter and thus a granddaughter of Emperor Ivan Asen II ( r . 1218 – 1241 ) of the Asen dynasty . In contemporary sources , Shishman is variously described as a prince ( <unk> ) , king or even emperor ( tsar ) of Bulgaria , though his only official title was that of " despot " . 
 According to historian John V. A. Fine , Shishman may have established his authority over the Vidin region as early as the 1270s , after the death of the previous lord of that area , Jacob Svetoslav . He was perhaps elevated to the position of despot of Vidin soon after the accession of another Bulgarian noble of Cuman origin , George Terter I ( r . 1280 – 1292 ) , to the Bulgarian throne in 1280 . Shishman was likely a close relative , perhaps even a brother , of George Terter I. 
 Shishman 's domain comprised " much of the Bulgarian land " as well as " adjacent countries " , as reported by the account of Serbian archbishop <unk> , his lands constituted the largest autonomous region of Bulgaria at the time . Bulgarian historian Yordan Andreev estimates the lands ruled by Shishman to have extended from the Iron Gates gorge of the Danube in the west to the towns of Lom and Vratsa in the east . Shishman also controlled territories north of the Danube , in western Wallachia ( Oltenia ) , as chroniclers describe the Danube River as running through the middle of his lands . 
 In 1285 , increasing Tatar pressure from the northeast had forced the Second Bulgarian Empire to come under the political dependence of Nogai Khan , the ruler of the Golden Horde . At the time Shishman 's realm centred at Vidin was largely independent from the Bulgarian tsars in Tarnovo , though he retained a degree of loyalty to Bulgaria and maintained friendly relations with Serbia . However , in 1291 Shishman too was forced to acknowledge the suzerainty of Nogai in order to counter the increasing Serbian pressure from the west . In the same year , the joint forces of Hungarian vassal Stephen Dragutin and Serbian king Stephen Milutin ( r . 1280 – 1321 ) had managed to oust two Cuman – Bulgarian nobles and allies of Shishman , Darman and <unk> , who were in control of the Braničevo region . 
 = = Anti @-@ Serbian campaign and Serbian vassalage = = 
 Encouraged by Nogai , in 1292 Shishman launched a major campaign against Milutin , his Serbian neighbour to the west . Thanks to the support of Tatar mercenaries , Shishman 's forces raided deeply into Serbian territory and reached <unk> in Kosovo . After attempting to conquer the fortress of <unk> near Peć to no avail and burning the <unk> monastery , Shishman 's troops returned to Vidin without any territorial gains . Milutin 's response to Shishman 's act of aggression was much more successful . His counter @-@ attack resulted in Serbian forces reaching Vidin and capturing Shishman 's capital after a brief siege . The despot , however , managed to escape north of the Danube to the safety of his Tatar suzerains . 
 Instead of annexing Shishman 's lands , Milutin reinstalled Shishman as the despot of Vidin and concluded an alliance with him . To confirm the alliance , Shishman married the daughter of Serbian Grand Prince <unk> . The future marriage of Shishman 's son and future Bulgarian emperor Michael Shishman ( r . 1323 – 1330 ) to Milutin 's daughter Anna Neda was also arranged at the time with the intention of further sealing the union . It is quite apparent that Shishman 's unlikely <unk> in Vidin and alliance with Serbia were dictated by Nogai , as at the same time Serbia also came under Tatar dependence . Milutin was even forced to send his son Stephen Dečanski into captivity in order to prevent a Tatar attack . 
 Although Shishman 's realm was nominally a Serbian client state for an unknown time , he retained his prior semi @-@ independence and he was completely in charge of his lands . He maintained good relations with Bulgaria and , according to Andreev , his political activity was mainly concentrated in dealing with Bulgaria . He also retained his close ties with Nogai and his descendants . In 1301 – 1302 , Shishman provided political refuge to several of Nogai 's relatives , including his grandson Qara @-@ <unk> , who fled to Vidin along with a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong cavalry and remained there until after 1325 . These Tatar nobles were fleeing from the persecution of the new khan , <unk> , who had defeated and murdered Nogai in 1299 – 1300 . Contrary to Andreev 's opinion , Fine believes that the death of Nogai increased Serbia 's influence over Vidin . 
 Shishman died in the early 14th century but before 1308 or 1313 . He was succeeded as ruler of Vidin by his son Michael , who in 1323 was elected to the Bulgarian throne due to the childless death of Emperor George Terter II ( r . 1321 – 1322 ) . Besides Michael , Shishman 's other progeny included Belaur , another despot of Vidin , and <unk> <unk> , the mother of Bulgarian emperor Ivan Alexander ( r . 1331 – 1371 ) . Bulgarian historian Ivan Bozhilov classifies all of Shishman 's known children as descendants of the Asen dynasty , thus indicating that they were born to his first wife , the daughter of Anna – Theodora . The descendants of Shishman of Vidin , known collectively as the Shishman dynasty , ruled the Second Bulgarian Empire from 1323 until it was ultimately subjugated by the Ottomans at the turn of the 15th century . 
 = Sea = 
 A sea is a large body of salt water that is surrounded in whole or in part by land . More broadly , " the sea " is the interconnected system of Earth 's salty , oceanic waters — considered as one global ocean or as several principal oceanic divisions . The sea moderates Earth 's climate and has important roles in the water cycle , carbon cycle , and nitrogen cycle . Although the sea has been travelled and explored since prehistory , the modern scientific study of the sea — oceanography — dates broadly to the British Challenger expedition of the 1870s . The sea is conventionally divided into up to five large oceanic sections — including the IHO 's four named oceans ( the Atlantic , Pacific , Indian , and Arctic ) and the Southern Ocean ; smaller , second @-@ order sections , such as the Mediterranean , are known as seas . 
 Owing to the present state of continental drift , the Northern Hemisphere is now fairly equally divided between land and sea ( a ratio of about 2 : 3 ) but the South is overwhelmingly oceanic ( 1 : 4 @.@ 7 ) . Salinity in the open ocean is generally in a narrow band around 3 @.@ 5 % by mass , although this can vary in more landlocked waters , near the mouths of large rivers , or at great depths . About 85 % of the solids in the open sea are sodium chloride . Deep @-@ sea currents are produced by differences in salinity and temperature . Surface currents are formed by the friction of waves produced by the wind and by tides , the changes in local sea level produced by the gravity of the Moon and Sun . The direction of all of these is governed by surface and submarine land masses and by the rotation of the Earth ( the Coriolis effect ) . 
 Former changes in the sea levels have left continental shelves , shallow areas in the sea close to land . These nutrient @-@ rich waters teem with life , which provide humans with substantial supplies of food — mainly fish , but also shellfish , mammals , and seaweed — which are both harvested in the wild and farmed . The most diverse areas surround great tropical coral reefs . Whaling in the deep sea was once common but whales ' dwindling numbers prompted international conservation efforts and finally a moratorium on most commercial hunting . Oceanography has established that not all life is restricted to the sunlit surface waters : even under enormous depths and pressures , nutrients streaming from hydrothermal vents support their own unique ecosystem . Life may have started there and aquatic microbial mats are generally credited with the oxygenation of Earth 's atmosphere ; both plants and animals first evolved in the sea . 
 The sea is an essential aspect of human trade , travel , mineral extraction , and power generation . This has also made it essential to warfare and left major cities exposed to earthquakes and volcanoes from nearby faults ; powerful tsunami waves ; and hurricanes , typhoons , and cyclones produced in the tropics . This importance and duality has affected human culture , from early sea gods to the epic poetry of Homer to the changes induced by the Columbian Exchange , from Viking funerals to Basho 's haikus to <unk> marine art , and inspiring music ranging from the shanties in The <unk> of Scotland to Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's " The Sea and Sinbad 's Ship " to A @-@ mei 's " Listen to the Sea " . It is the scene of leisure activities including swimming , diving , surfing , and sailing . However , population growth , industrialization , and intensive farming have all contributed to present @-@ day marine pollution . Atmospheric carbon dioxide is being absorbed in increasing amounts , lowering its pH in a process known as ocean acidification . The shared nature of the sea has made overfishing an increasing problem . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Both senses of sea date to Old English ; the larger sense has required a definite article since Early Middle English . As the term has been applied over time , there are no sharp distinctions between seas and oceans , although seas are smaller and are — with the notable exception of the Sargasso Sea created by the North Atlantic Gyre — usually bounded by land on a smaller scale than multiple continents . Seas are generally larger than lakes and contain salt water , but the Sea of Galilee is a freshwater lake . There is no accepted technical definition of " sea " among oceanographers . In international law , the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea states that all the ocean is " the sea " . 
 = = Physical science = = 
 Earth is the only known planet with seas of liquid water on its surface , although Mars possesses ice caps and similar planets in other solar systems may have oceans . It is still unclear where Earth 's water came from , but , seen from space , our planet appears as a " blue marble " of its various forms : oceans , ice caps , clouds . Earth 's 1 @,@ 335 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic kilometers ( 320 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu mi ) of sea contain about 97 @.@ 2 percent of its known water and cover more than 70 percent of its surface . Another 2 @.@ 15 % of Earth 's water is frozen , found in the sea ice covering the Arctic Ocean , the ice cap covering Antarctica and its adjacent seas , and various glaciers and surface deposits around the world . The remainder ( about 0 @.@ 65 % of the whole ) form underground reservoirs or various stages of the water cycle , containing the freshwater encountered and used by most terrestrial life : vapor in the air , the clouds it slowly forms , the rain falling from them , and the lakes and rivers spontaneously formed as its waters flow again and again to the sea . The sea 's dominance of the planet is such that the British author Arthur C. Clarke once noted that " Earth " would have been better named " Ocean " . 
 The scientific study of water and Earth 's water cycle is hydrology ; hydrodynamics studies the physics of water in motion . The more recent study of the sea in particular is oceanography . This began as the study of the shape of the ocean 's currents but has since expanded into a large and multidisciplinary field : it examines the properties of seawater ; studies waves , tides , and currents ; charts coastlines and maps the seabeds ; and studies marine life . The subfield dealing with the sea 's motion , its forces , and the forces acting upon it is known as physical oceanography . Marine biology ( biological oceanography ) studies the plants , animals , and other organisms inhabiting marine ecosystems . Both are informed by chemical oceanography , which studies the behavior of elements and molecules within the oceans : particularly , at the moment , the ocean 's role in the carbon cycle and carbon dioxide 's role in the increasing acidification of seawater . Marine and maritime geography charts the shape and shaping of the sea , while marine geology ( geological oceanography ) has provided evidence of continental drift and the composition and structure of the Earth , clarified the process of sedimentation , and assisted the study of volcanism and earthquakes . 
 = = = Seawater = = = 
 Seawater is invariably salty and , although its degree of saltiness ( salinity ) can vary , about 90 % of the water in the ocean has 34 – 35 g ( 1 @.@ 2 oz . ) of dissolved solids per liter , producing a salinity between 3 @.@ 4 and 3 @.@ 5 % . To easily describe small differences , however , oceanographers usually express salinity as a <unk> ( ‰ ) or part per thousand ( ppt ) instead of using percents . The surface salinity of waters in the Northern Hemisphere are generally closer to the 34 ‰ mark , while those in the South are closer to 35 ‰ . The solutes in ocean water come both from inflowing river water and from the ocean floor . The relative composition of the solutes is stable throughout the world 's oceans : sodium ( Na ) and chloride ( Cl ) make up about 85 % . Other solutes include metal ions such as magnesium ( Mg ) and calcium ( Ca ) and negative ions such as sulfate ( SO <unk> ) , carbonate ( CO ₃ ) , and bromides . In the absence of other pollution , seawater would not be harmful to drink except that it is much too saline ; similarly , it cannot be used for irrigating most plants without being desalinated . For scientific and technical purposes , a standardized form of artificial seawater is often used . 
 Variations in salinity are caused by many factors : currents flowing between the seas ; incoming freshwater from rivers and glaciers ; precipitation ; the formation and melting of sea ice ; and evaporation , which is in turn affected by temperature , winds , and waves . For example , the upper level of the Baltic Sea has a very low salinity ( 10 to 15 ‰ ) because the low temperatures of the surrounding climate produce minimal evaporation ; it has many inflowing rivers ; and its small connection to the North Sea tends to create a cold , dense under @-@ layer that hardly mixes with the surface waters . By contrast , the Red Sea lies between the Sahara and Arabian Deserts ; it has high evaporation but little precipitation ; it has few ( and mostly seasonal ) inflowing rivers ; and its connection to other seas — the Suez Canal in the north and the Bab @-@ el @-@ Mandeb in the south — are both very narrow . Its salinity averages 40 ‰ . The Mediterranean is a little lower , at 37 ‰ , while some landlocked lakes are much higher : The Dead Sea has 300 grams ( 11 oz ) of dissolved solids per liter ( 300 ‰ ) . 
 Sea temperature chiefly depends on the amount of solar radiation it absorbs . In the tropics where sunlight falls more directly , the temperature of the surface layers can rise to over 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) ; near the poles , the temperature is in equilibrium with the sea ice at its freezing point . Its salinity makes this lower than freshwater 's , usually about − 1 @.@ 8 ° C ( 28 @.@ 8 ° F ) . These temperature differences contribute to the continuous circulation of water through the sea . Warm surface currents cool as they move away from the tropics ; as the water becomes denser , it sinks . The cold water in the deep sea moves back towards the equator before welling up again to the surface . Deep seawater has a temperature between − 2 and 5 ° C ( 28 and 41 ° F ) in all parts of the globe . In freezing seas , ice crystals begin to form on the surface . These break into small pieces and coalesce into flat discs that form a thick suspension known as frazil . In calm conditions , frazil will freeze into a thin , flat sheet called <unk> , which thickens as new ice forms in the sea beneath it . In turbulent waters , frazil instead join together into larger flat discs known as " pancakes " . These slide over and under one another to form floes . During these processes , salt water and air are trapped amid the ice . <unk> forms with a salinity around 12 – 15 ‰ and is grayish in color but grows fresher over time : after a year , it is bluish and closer to 4 – 6 ‰ saline . 
 The amount of light that penetrates the sea depends on the angle of the sun , the local weather , and the sea 's turbidity . Of the light that reaches the surface of the sea , much of it is reflected at the surface and its red wavelengths are absorbed in the top few meters . Yellow and green reach greater depths , and the longer blue and violet wavelengths may penetrate as deep as 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . 
 The amount of oxygen present in seawater depends primarily upon its temperature and the photosynthetic organisms living in it , particularly algae , phytoplankton , and plants such as seagrass . During the day , their photosynthetic activity produces oxygen , which dissolves into the seawater and is used by marine animals . The water 's oxygen saturation is lower during the night and much lower in the deep sea . Below a depth of about 200 m ( 660 ft ) , there is insufficient light for photosynthesis and consequently little dissolved oxygen . Below this , anaerobic bacteria break down falling organic material , producing hydrogen sulfide ( H ₂ S ) . It is projected that global warming will reduce oxygen both in surface and deep waters , due to oxygen 's decreased solubility as temperatures increase and increased oceanic stratification . 
 = = = Waves = = = 
 Ocean surface waves are oscillations caused by the friction from air moving across the surface of the water . This friction transfers energy and forms surface waves in the water perpendicular to the direction of the wind . The top of a wave is known as its crest and its foot as its trough ; the distance between two crests is the wavelength . These waves are mechanical : as they approach , the water molecules at a given point rise up and , as they pass , the water molecules go down , tracing a roughly circular path . The energy is passed across the surface and does not represent a horizontal motion of the water itself . The sea state of the ocean is determined by the size of these waves , which — on the open ocean — depends upon the wind speed and the fetch , the distance over which the wind blows upon the water . The smallest waves are called ripples . As strong and prolonged winds push against ripples ' raised crests , larger and more irregular waves form , which known as seas . These waves reach their maximum height when the rate at which they are traveling nearly matches the speed of the wind and , over time , they naturally separate into long , powerful waves with a common direction and wavelength . These swells are particularly common in the Roaring Forties of the Southern Hemisphere where the wind blows continuously . When the wind dies down , ripples easily disappear owing to water 's surface tension , but seas and swells are only slowly reduced by gravity and destructive interference from other waves . Constructive interference , however , can also cause individual rogue waves much higher than normal . Most waves are less than 3 m ( 10 ft ) high and it is not unusual for strong storms to double or triple that height ; offshore construction such as wind farms and oil platforms use these measurements in computing the hundred @-@ year wave they are designed against . Rogue waves , however , have been documented at heights above 25 meters ( 82 ft ) . 
 As waves approach land and move into shallow water , they change their behavior . If approaching at an angle , waves may bend or wrap rocks and headlands . When the wave reaches a point where its deepest oscillating molecules contact the seabed , friction begins to slow the wave down . This pulls the crests closer together and increases the waves ' height . When the ratio of a wave 's height to its wavelength exceeds 1 : 7 , it " breaks " , toppling over in a mass of foaming water . This rushes in a sheet up the beach before retreating into the sea under the influence of gravity . 
 = = = Tsunami = = = 
 A tsunami is an unusual form of wave caused by a sudden and powerful event such as an underwater earthquake or landslide , a meteorite impact , a volcanic eruption , or a collapse of land into the sea . These events can temporarily lift or lower the surface of the sea in the affected area , usually by a few feet . The potential energy of the displaced seawater is turned into kinetic energy , creating a shallow wave radiating outwards at a velocity proportional to the square root of the depth of the water . <unk> , therefore , travel much faster in the open ocean than on a continental shelf . Despite traveling at speeds of over 600 mph ( 970 km / h ) , tsunamis in deep seas have wavelengths from 80 to 300 miles ( 130 to 480 km ) and an amplitude of less than three feet . Standard surface waves in the same region may only have wavelengths of a few hundred feet and speeds up to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) but , when compared to their possible amplitudes of up to 45 ft ( 14 m ) , tsunamis at this stage are often able to pass unnoticed . Tsunami warning systems rely on the fact that seismic waves caused by earthquakes travel around the world at around 14 @,@ 400 kilometers ( 8 @,@ 900 mi ) per hour , allowing threatened regions to be alerted to the possibility of a tsunami . Measurements from a network of sea @-@ level measuring stations make it possible to confirm or cancel a tsunami warning . A trigger event on the continental shelf may cause a local tsunami on the land side and a distant tsunami that travels out across the ocean . The energy of the wave is dissipated only gradually but is spread out over the wave front . As the wave radiates away from the source , the front gets longer and the average energy reduces , so distant shores will generally be hit by weaker waves . However , as the speed of the wave is controlled by the water depth , it does not travel at the same speed in all directions and this affects the direction of the wave front . This effect , known as refraction , can focus the strength of an advancing tsunami on some areas while weakening it in others , according to the undersea topography along its path . 
 Just as with other waves , moving into shallow water causes the tsunami to slow but grow in height . Either the trough or the crest of the tsunami can arrive at the coast first . In the former case , the sea draws back and leaves subtidal areas unusually exposed . When the crest arrives , it does not usually break but rushes inland , flooding all in its path . Much of the disaster 's destruction can be produced by these flood waters , which drain back into the sea while pulling people and debris along . Several tsunamis can be caused by a single geological event . In such cases , it is common for the later waves to arrive between eight minutes and two hours after the first , which may not be the biggest or most destructive . Occasionally , in a shallow bay or estuary , a tsunami may transform into a bore . 
 = = = Tides = = = 
 Tides are the regular rise and fall in water level experienced by seas and oceans in response to the gravitational influences of the Moon and the Sun , and the effects of the Earth 's rotation . At any given place , the water rises over the course of the tidal cycle to a maximum height known as " high tide " before ebbing away again to a minimum " low tide " level . As the water recedes , it uncovers more and more of the foreshore or intertidal zone . The difference in height between the high tide and low tide is known as the tidal range or tidal amplitude . Tidal bores can occur at the mouths of rivers , where the force of the incoming tide pushes waves of seawater upstream against the current . At Hangzhou in China , the bore can reach 9 meters ( 30 ft ) high and travel up to 40 km ( 25 mi ) per hour . 
 Most places experience two high tides each day , occurring at intervals of about 12 hours and 25 minutes , half the period that it takes for the Earth to make a complete revolution and return the Moon to its previous position relative to an observer . The Moon 's mass is some 27 million times smaller than the Sun , but it is 400 times closer to the Earth . Tidal force or tide @-@ raising force decreases rapidly with distance , so the moon has more than twice as great an effect on tides as the Sun . A bulge is formed in the ocean at the place where the Earth is closest to the Moon , because it is also where the effect of the Moon 's gravity is stronger . On the opposite side of the Earth , the lunar force is at its weakest and this causes another bulge to form . These bulges rotate around the Earth as the moon does . The Sun 's effect is less powerful but , when the Sun , Moon and Earth are all aligned at the full and new moons , the combined effect results in the high " spring tides " . In contrast , when the Sun is at 90 ° from the Moon as viewed from Earth , the combined gravitational effect on tides is correspondingly reduced , causing the lower " neap tides " . 
 Tidal flows of seawater are resisted by the water 's inertia and can be affected by land masses . In places like the Gulf of Mexico where land constrains the movement of the bulges , only one set of tides may occur each day . Inshore from an island , there may be a complex daily cycle with four high tides . The island straits at Chalkis on Euboea experience strong currents which abruptly switch direction , generally four times per day but up to 12 times per day when the moon and the sun are 90 degrees apart . Where there is a funnel @-@ shaped bay or estuary , the tidal range can be magnified . The Bay of Fundy in Canada can experience spring tides of 15 m ( 49 ft ) . Although tides are regular and predictable , the height of high tides can be lowered by offshore winds and raised by onshore winds . The high pressure at the center of an anticyclones pushes down on the water and is associated with abnormally low tides while low @-@ pressure areas may cause extremely high tides . A storm surge can occur when high winds pile water up against the coast in a shallow area and this , coupled with a low pressure system , can raise the surface of the sea at high tide dramatically . In 1900 , Galveston , Texas , experienced a 15 ft ( 5 m ) surge during a hurricane that overwhelmed the city , killing over 3 @,@ 500 people and destroying 3 @,@ 636 homes . 
 = = = Currents = = = 
 Wind blowing over the surface of the sea causes friction at the interface between air and sea . Not only does this cause waves to form but it also makes the surface seawater move in the same direction as the wind . Although winds are variable , in any one place they predominantly blow from a single direction and thus a surface current can be formed . Westerly winds are most frequent in the mid @-@ latitudes while easterlies dominate the tropics . When water moves in this way , other water flows in to fill the gap and a circular movement of surface currents known as a gyre is formed . There are five main gyres in the world 's oceans : two in the Pacific , two in the Atlantic , and one in the Indian Ocean . The North Atlantic gyre that produces the Sargasso Sea accumulates salinity levels as high as 38 ‰ . Other smaller gyres are found in lesser seas and a single gyre flows around Antarctica . These gyres have followed the same routes for millennia , guided by the topography of the land , the wind direction , and the Coriolis effect . The surface currents flow in a clockwise direction in the Northern Hemisphere and anticlockwise in the Southern Hemisphere . The water moving away from the equator is warm , while that flowing towards it has lost most of its heat . These currents tend to moderate the Earth 's climate , cooling the equatorial region , and warming regions at higher latitudes . Global climate and weather forecasts are powerfully affected by the world ocean , so global climate modelling makes use of ocean circulation models as well as models of other major components such as the atmosphere , land surfaces , aerosols , and sea ice . Ocean models make use of a branch of physics , geophysical fluid dynamics , that describes the large @-@ scale flow of fluids such as seawater . 
 Surface currents only affect the top few hundred meters ( yards ) of the sea , but there are also large @-@ scale flows in the ocean depths caused by the movement of deep water masses . A main deep ocean current flows through all the world 's oceans and is known as the thermohaline circulation or global conveyor belt . This movement is slow and is driven by differences in density of the water caused by variations in salinity and temperature . At high latitudes , the water is chilled by the low atmospheric temperature and becomes saltier as sea ice crystallizes out . Both these factors make it denser and the water sinks . From the deep sea near Greenland , such water flows southwards between the continental landmasses on either side of the Atlantic . When it reaches the Antarctic , it is joined by further masses of cold , sinking water and flows eastwards . It then splits into two streams that move northwards into the Indian and Pacific Oceans . Here it is gradually warmed , becomes less dense , rises towards the surface , and loops back on itself . Some flows back into the Atlantic . It takes a thousand years for this circulation pattern to be completed . 
 Besides gyres , there are temporary surface currents that occur under specific conditions . When waves meet a shore at an angle , a longshore current is created as water is pushed along parallel to the coastline . The water swirls up onto the beach at right angles to the approaching waves but drains away straight down the slope under the effect of gravity . The larger the breaking waves , the longer the beach , and the more oblique the wave 's approach , the stronger the longshore current is . These currents can shift great volumes of sand or pebbles , create spits , and make beaches disappear and water channels silt up . A rip current can occur when water piles up near the shore from advancing waves and is funnelled out to sea through a channel in the seabed . It may occur at a gap in a sandbar or near a man @-@ made structure such as a groyne . These strong currents can have a velocity of 1 m / s ( 3 @.@ 3 ft / s ) , can form at different places at different stages of the tide , and can carry away unwary swimmers . Temporary upwelling currents occur when the wind pushes water away from the land and deeper water rises to replace it . This cold water is often rich in nutrients and creates blooms of phytoplankton and a great increase in the productivity of the sea . 
 = = = Basins = = = 
 Bathymetry is the mapping and study of the topography of the ocean floor . Methods used for measuring the depth of the sea include single or multibeam <unk> , laser airborne depth sounders and the calculation of depths from satellite remote sensing data . This information is used for determining the routes of undersea cables and pipelines , for choosing suitable locations for siting oil rigs and offshore wind turbines and for identifying possible new fisheries . The Earth is composed of a magnetic central core , a mostly liquid mantle , and a hard rigid outer shell ( or lithosphere ) , which is composed of the Earth 's rocky crust and the deeper and mostly solid outer layer of the mantle . The crust below land is known as continental while that under the abyssal sea is called oceanic . The latter is composed of relatively dense basalt and is some five to ten kilometers ( three to six miles ) thick . The relatively thin lithosphere floats on the weaker and hotter mantle below and is fractured into a number of tectonic plates . In mid @-@ ocean , magma is constantly being thrust through the seabed between adjoining plates to form mid @-@ oceanic ridges and here convection currents within the mantle tend to drive the two plates apart . Parallel to these ridges and nearer the coasts , one oceanic plate may slide beneath another oceanic plate in a process known as subduction . Deep trenches are formed here and the process is accompanied by friction as the plates grind together . The movement proceeds in jerks which cause earthquakes . Heat is also produced and magma is forced up , creating underwater mountains , some of which grow into volcanic islands . Near some boundaries between the land and sea , the slightly denser oceanic plates slide beneath the continental plates and more subduction trenches are formed . As they grate together , the continental plates are deformed and buckle causing mountain building and seismic activity . 
 The Earth 's deepest trench is the Mariana Trench which extends for about 2 @,@ 500 kilometers ( 1 @,@ 600 mi ) across the seabed . It is near the Mariana Islands , a volcanic archipelago in the West Pacific . Though it averages just 68 km ( 42 mi ) wide , its deepest point is 10 @.@ 994 kilometers ( nearly 7 miles ) below the surface of the sea . An even longer trench runs alongside the coast of Peru and Chile , reaching a depth of 8 @,@ 065 m ( 26 @,@ 460 ft ) and extending for approximately 5 @,@ 900 km ( 3 @,@ 700 mi ) . It occurs where the oceanic Nazca Plate slides under the continental South American Plate and is associated with the upthrust and volcanic activity of the Andes . 
 = = = Coasts = = = 
 The zone where land meets sea is known as the coast and the part between the lowest spring tides and the upper limit reached by splashing waves is the shore . A beach is the accumulation of sand or shingle on the shore . A headland is a point of land jutting out into the sea and a larger promontory is known as a cape . The indentation of a coastline — especially between two headlands — is a bay ; a small bay with a narrow inlet is a cove and a large bay or bay @-@ shaped sea may be referred to as a gulf . <unk> are influenced by a number of factors including the strength of the waves arriving on the shore , the gradient of the land margin , the composition and hardness of the coastal rock , the inclination of the off @-@ shore slope , and the changes of the level of the land due to local uplift or submergence . Normally , waves roll towards the shore at the rate of six to eight per minute . These are known as constructive waves as they tend to move material up the beach and have little erosive effect . Storm waves arrive on shore in rapid succession and are known as destructive waves , as their swash moves beach material seawards . Under their influence , the sand and shingle on the beach is ground together and abraded . Around high tide , the power of a storm wave impacting on the foot of a cliff has a shattering effect as air in cracks and crevices is compressed and then expands rapidly with release of pressure . At the same time , sand and pebbles have an erosive effect as they are thrown against the rocks . Along with other weathering processes such as frost , this tends to undercut the cliff . Gradually , a wave @-@ cut platform develops at the foot of the cliff and this has a protective effect , reducing further wave @-@ erosion . 
 Material worn from the margins of the land eventually ends up in the sea , where it is subject to attrition as currents flowing parallel to the coast scour out channels and transport material away from its place of origin . Sediment carried to the sea by rivers settles on the seabed causing deltas to form in estuaries . All these materials move back and forth under the influence of waves , tides , and currents . Dredging removes material and deepens channels but may have unexpected effects elsewhere on the coastline . Governments make efforts to prevent flooding through building breakwaters , seawalls , and other defenses against the sea . In Britain , the Thames Barrier protects London from storm surges , while the failure of the dykes and levees around New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina created a humanitarian crisis in the United States . Land reclamation in Hong Kong permitted the construction of Hong Kong International Airport through the leveling and expansion of two smaller islands . 
 Following the adoption of the present UNCLOS , the coastline under international law is a state 's baseline , which is generally but not always equivalent to its low @-@ water line . 
 = = = Sea level = = = 
 Over most of geologic time , the sea level has been higher than it is today . The main factor affecting sea level over time is the result of changes in the oceanic crust , with a downward trend expected to continue in the very long term . At the last glacial maximum some 20 @,@ 000 years ago , the sea level was 120 meters ( 390 ft ) below its present @-@ day level . For at least the last 100 years , the sea level has been rising at an average rate of about 1 @.@ 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 071 in ) per year . Most of this rise can be attributed to an increase in the temperature of the sea and the resulting slight thermal expansion of the upper 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) of water . Additional contributions , as much as one quarter of the total , come from water sources on land , such as melting snow and glaciers and extraction of groundwater for irrigation and other agricultural and human needs . The rising trend from global warming is expected to continue until at least the end of the 21st century . 
 = = = The water cycle = = = 
 The sea plays a part in the water cycle , in which water evaporates from the ocean , travels through the atmosphere as vapor , condenses , falls ( usually as rain or snow ) again , and then largely returns to the sea . Even in the Atacama Desert , where little rain ever falls , dense clouds of fog known as the <unk> blow in from the sea and support plant life . In large land masses , geologic features can block the access of some regions to the main sea . These endorheic basins , particularly in central Asia , sometimes build up permanent salt lakes as inflowing waters evaporate and their dissolved minerals accumulate over time . The largest of these is the Caspian Sea , although it is sometimes counted as a proper sea owing to its basin of ( now @-@ landlocked ) oceanic crust . Other notable examples include the Aral Sea in central Asia and the Great Salt Lake in the western United States . The waters of these basins still eventually return to the sea through evaporation , the flow of ground water , and ( over geologic time ) the opening up of the basins by continental drift . 
 = = = The carbon cycle = = = 
 Oceans contain the greatest quantity of actively @-@ cycled carbon in the world and are second only to the lithosphere in the amount of carbon they store . The oceans ' surface layer holds large amounts of dissolved organic carbon that is exchanged rapidly with the atmosphere . The deep layer 's concentration of dissolved inorganic carbon is about 15 percent higher than that of the surface layer and it remains there for much longer periods of time . <unk> circulation exchanges carbon between these two layers . 
 Carbon enters the ocean as atmospheric carbon dioxide dissolves into the surface layers and is converted into carbonic acid , carbonate , and bicarbonate : CO2 ( aq ) + H2O ⇌ H2CO3 ⇌ <unk> − + H + ⇌ <unk> − + 2 H + . The process liberates hydrogen ions ( H + ) , decreasing ocean pH and increasing its acidity . 
 It can also enter as dissolved organic carbon through rivers and is converted by photosynthetic organisms into organic carbon . This can either be exchanged throughout the food chain or precipitated into the deeper , more carbon @-@ rich layers as dead soft tissue or in shells and bones as calcium carbonate . It circulates in this layer for long periods of time before either being deposited as sediment or being returned to surface waters through thermohaline circulation . 
 = = = Acidification = = = 
 Seawater is slightly alkaline and had a preindustrial pH of about 8 @.@ 2 . More recently , anthropogenic activities have steadily increased the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere ; about 30 – 40 % of the added CO2 is absorbed by the oceans , forming carbonic acid and lowering the pH ( now below 8 @.@ 1 ) through a process called ocean acidification . The pH is expected to reach 7 @.@ 7 ( representing a 3 @-@ fold increase in hydrogen ion concentration ) by the year 2100 , which is a significant change in a century . 
 One important element for the formation of skeletal material in marine animals is calcium , but calcium carbonate becomes more soluble with pressure , so carbonate shells and skeletons dissolve below its compensation depth . Calcium carbonate also becomes more soluble at lower pH , so ocean acidification is likely to have profound effects on marine organisms with calcareous shells , such as oysters , clams , sea urchins , and corals , because their ability to form shells will be reduced , and the carbonate compensation depth will rise closer to the sea surface . Affected planktonic organisms will include the snail @-@ like molluscs known as pteropods , and single @-@ celled algae called <unk> and foraminifera . All of these are important parts of the food chain and a diminution in their numbers will have significant consequences . In tropical regions , corals are likely to be severely affected as it becomes more difficult to build their calcium carbonate skeletons , in turn adversely impacting other reef dwellers . 
 The current rate of ocean chemistry change appears to be without precedent in Earth 's geological history , making it unclear how well marine ecosystems will be able to adapt to the shifting conditions of the near future . Of particular concern is the manner in which the combination of acidification with the expected additional stressors of higher temperatures and lower oxygen levels will impact the seas . 
 = = Marine life = = 
 The oceans are home to a diverse collection of life forms that use it as a habitat . Since sunlight illuminates only the upper layers , the major part of the ocean exists in permanent darkness . As the different depth and temperature zones each provide habitat for a unique set of species , the marine environment as a whole encompasses an immense diversity of life . Marine habitats range from surface water to the deepest oceanic trenches , including coral reefs , kelp forests , seagrass meadows , <unk> , muddy , sandy and rocky seabeds , and the open pelagic zone . The organisms living in the sea range from whales 30 meters ( 100 ft ) long to microscopic phytoplankton and zooplankton , fungi , bacteria and viruses , including recently discovered marine bacteriophages which live parasitically inside bacteria . Marine life plays an important part in the carbon cycle as photosynthetic organisms convert dissolved carbon dioxide into organic carbon and it is economically important to humans for providing fish for use as food . 
 Life may have originated in the sea and all the major groups of animals are represented there . Scientists differ as to precisely where in the sea life arose : the Miller @-@ Urey experiments suggested a dilute chemical " soup " in open water , but more recent suggestions include volcanic hot springs , fine @-@ grained clay sediments , or deep @-@ sea " black smoker " vents , all of which would have provided protection from damaging ultraviolet radiation which was not blocked by the early earth 's atmosphere . 
 = = = Habitats = = = 
 Marine habitats can be divided horizontally into coastal and open ocean habitats . Coastal habitats extend from the shoreline to the edge of the continental shelf . Most marine life is found in coastal habitats , even though the shelf area occupies only 7 percent of the total ocean area . Open ocean habitats are found in the deep ocean beyond the edge of the continental shelf . Alternatively , marine habitats can be divided vertically into pelagic ( open water ) , demersal ( just above the seabed ) , and benthic ( sea bottom ) habitats . A third division is by latitude : from tropical to temperate to polar waters . 
 Coral reefs , the so @-@ called " rainforests of the sea " , occupy less than 0 @.@ 1 percent of the world 's ocean surface , yet their ecosystems include 25 percent of all marine species . The best @-@ known are tropical coral reefs such as Australia 's Great Barrier Reef , but cold water reefs harbor a wide array of species including corals ( only six of which contribute to reef formation ) . 
 = = = Algae and plants = = = 
 Marine primary producers — plants and microscopic organisms in the plankton — are widespread and very diverse . Microscopic photosynthetic algae , phytoplankton , contribute a larger proportion of the world 's photosynthetic output than all the terrestrial forests combined . About 45 percent of the sea 's primary production of living material is contributed by diatoms . Much larger algae , commonly known as seaweeds , are important locally ; Sargassum forms floating drifts , while kelp form seabed forests . Flowering plants in the form of seagrasses grow in " meadows " in sandy shallows , mangroves line the coast in tropical and subtropical regions , and salt @-@ tolerant plants thrive in regularly inundated salt marshes . All of these habitats are able to sequester large quantities of carbon and support a biodiverse range of larger and smaller animal life . 
 Light is only able to penetrate the top 200 m ( 660 ft ) so this is the only part of the sea where plants can grow . The surface layers are often deficient in biologically @-@ active nitrogen compounds . The marine nitrogen cycle consists of complex microbial transformations which include the fixation of nitrogen , its assimilation , nitrification , <unk> , and denitrification . Some of these processes take place in deep water so that where there is an upwelling of cold waters or near estuaries where land @-@ sourced nutrients are present , plant growth is higher . This means that the most productive areas , rich in plankton and therefore also in fish , are mainly coastal . 
 = = = Animals and other life = = = 
 There is a broader spectrum of higher animal taxa in the sea than on land , many marine species have yet to be discovered , and the number known to science is expanding annually . Some vertebrates such as seabirds , seals , and sea turtles return to the land to breed but fish , cetaceans , and sea snakes have a completely aquatic lifestyle and many invertebrate phyla are entirely marine . In fact , the oceans teem with life and provide many varying microhabitats . One of these is the surface film which — despite being tossed about by the movement of waves — provides a rich environment and is home to bacteria , fungi , microalgae , protozoa , fish eggs , and various larvae . 
 The pelagic zone contains macro- and microfauna and myriad zooplankton which drift with the currents . Most of the smallest organisms are the larvae of fish and marine invertebrates which liberate eggs in vast numbers because the chance of any one embryo surviving to maturity is so minute . The zooplankton feed on phytoplankton and on each other and form a basic part of the complex food chain that extends through variously @-@ sized fish and other nektonic organisms , which are in turn eaten by larger squids , sharks , porpoises , dolphins , and whales . Some marine creatures make large migrations , either to other regions of the ocean on a seasonal basis or up and down its vertical layers , often ascending to feed at night before descending to safety by day . Ships can introduce or spread invasive species through the discharge of ballast water or through the transport of organisms that have accumulated as part of the fouling community on the hulls of vessels . 
 The demersal zone supports many animals that feed on benthic organisms or seek protection from predators . The seabed provides a range of habitats on or under the surface of the substrate which are used by creatures adapted to these conditions . The tidal zone with its periodic exposure to dehydrating air is home to barnacles , molluscs , and crustaceans . The neritic zone has many organisms that need light to flourish . Here , sponges , echinoderms , polychaete worms , sea anemones , and other invertebrates live among algal @-@ encrusted rocks . Corals often contain photosynthetic symbionts and live in shallow waters where light penetrates . The extensive calcareous skeletons they extrude build up into coral reefs which are an important feature of the seabed . These provide a diverse habitat for reef dwelling organisms . There is less sea life on the floor of deeper seas but marine life also flourishes around seamounts that rise from the depths , where fish and other animals congregate to spawn and feed . Close to the seabed live demersal fish that largely feed on pelagic organisms or benthic invertebrates . Exploration of the deep sea by submersibles revealed a new world of creatures living on the seabed that scientists had not previously expected . Some like the detritivores rely on organic material falling to the ocean floor . Others cluster round deep @-@ sea hydrothermal vents where mineral @-@ rich flows of water emerge , supporting communities whose primary producers are sulphide @-@ oxidizing chemoautotrophic bacteria and whose consumers include specialized bivalves , sea anemones , barnacles , crabs , worms , and fish . A dead whale sinking to the bottom of the ocean provides food for an assembly of organisms which similarly rely largely on the actions of sulphur @-@ reducing bacteria . Such places support unique biomes where many new microbes and other lifeforms have been discovered . 
 = = Humans and the sea = = 
 = = = Navigation and exploration = = = 
 Humans have travelled the sea since prehistoric times , originally on rafts and in dugout , reed , and bark canoes . Most of the early human migrations occurred over land : even areas now separated by open sea such as the Americas , Japan , and Britain were accessible by land bridges or fast ice during the last ice age . However , the dwarf Flores man probably needed to cross a 19 @-@ kilometer ( 12 mi ) wide strait from Sundaland to reach Komodo and , although the exact details remain uncertain , the ancestors of Australia 's Aborigines must have crossed the broader deep @-@ sea Wallace Line to Near Oceania tens of thousands of years ago . Despite earlier theories , modern bathymetric soundings now suggest that even the earliest settlement of the Philippines required crossing deep water at the Mindoro Strait or the <unk> Passage . 
 The hunter @-@ gatherer <unk> people began spreading through the Caribbean from Venezuela 's Orinoco valley by at least the 6th millennium BC . Around the same time , Mesopotamians were using bitumen to <unk> their reed boats and , a little later , masted sails . <unk> in India boasted the earliest known dock around 2400 BC . By c . 2000 BC , Austronesians on Taiwan had begun spreading into maritime Southeast Asia . From 1300 to 900 BC , the Austronesian " Lapita " peoples displayed great feats of navigation , reaching out from the Bismarck Archipelago to as far away as Fiji , Tonga , and Samoa . Their descendants continued to travel thousands of miles between tiny islands on outrigger canoes : the Austronesians of the Sunda Islands settled Madagascar off southeast Africa before AD 500 and the Polynesians settled the Hawaiian islands before 800 , Easter Island before 1200 , and New Zealand shortly after . The Egyptian pharaoh Necho II initiated construction on a canal which eventually linked the Mediterranean and Red Seas around 600 BC . Herodotus records Egyptian claims that he also commissioned a 3 @-@ year @-@ long expedition which circumnavigated Africa from the Red Sea to the Nile delta . Around 500 BC , the Carthaginian navigator Hanno left a detailed <unk> of an Atlantic journey that reached at least Senegal and possibly Mount Cameroon ; and the Greek Pytheas left another exploring the seas around Great Britain around 325 BC . The massive 3rd @-@ century BC Lighthouse of Alexandria was considered one of the Seven Wonders of the World . In the 2nd century , the Alexandrian Ptolemy mapped the known world , using the " Fortunate Isles " as his prime meridian and including details as distant as the Gulf of Thailand . A modified form was used by Columbus for his voyages . 
 In the Mediaeval era , the Vikings used clinker @-@ built ships to colonize Iceland , Greenland , Canada , and Russia . A compass showing magnetic north is first attested — in the form of a " south @-@ pointing spoon " — in the 1st @-@ century Chinese Lunheng . The first evidence of its use in Chinese maritime navigation , however , dates to Zhu Yu 's c . 1115 Pingzhou Table Talks . Alexander of <unk> 's De <unk> rerum , the first European mention of a magnetized needle , dates to 1190 and immediately notes its use among sailors . Latitude ( the ship 's position ranging from 0 ° at the equator to 90 ° north and south ) could be determined by <unk> — including the astrolabe , sextant , and Jacob 's staff — measuring the angle between the horizon and heavenly bodies like the sun or moon . <unk> determining longitude ( the ship 's position east or west of some fixed point ) proved much harder . 
 In the 15th century , West European mariners — beginning with Portugal — started making still longer voyages of exploration , using improvements on translated Islamic star charts and a variation on African fishing boats called the caravel . In 1473 , Lopes Gonçalves crossed the equator and disproved the Aristotelian notion that a ring of fire would bar exploration of the southern hemisphere . Bartolomeu Dias rounded the Cape of Good Hope in 1487 ; in 1498 , Vasco da Gama reached Malindi , where a local pilot showed him how to follow the monsoon to India . In 1492 , relying on incorrect estimates of the circumference of the Earth , the Genovese Christopher Columbus sailed from Cadiz to the Canaries and thence into the open Atlantic in a Spanish attempt to reach the Orient . Instead , he made landfall on an island in the Caribbean Sea . The resulting Columbian Exchange introduced potatoes , corn , and chili peppers to the Old World while smallpox epidemics devastated the indigenous peoples of the Americas . This disruption and depopulation permitted rapid Spanish conquests and led to the widespread adoption of African slavery to man lucrative tobacco , sugar , indigo , and cotton plantations . In 1519 , Juan Sebastián Elcano completed Magellan 's Spanish expedition to sail around the world . These and other voyages permitted European maps to attain a previously impossible degree of accuracy . In 1538 , Gerardus Mercator devised a map projection conveniently making constant bearings ( rhumb lines ) straight . In the Arctic , in 1594 , the Dutch captain Willem Barentsz reached Svalbard and the Barents Sea while , in the south , Anthony de la Roché crossed the Antarctic Convergence in 1675 and three separate expeditions — one British , one American , and one Russian — all claimed to have discovered Antarctica in 1820 . Not all voyages of discovery originated in Western Europe . Although accurate charting of the coasts of Russia only began in the 18th century and the archipelago of Severnaya Zemlya was not discovered until 1910 , Novgorodians had been sailing the White Sea since at least the 13th century . Despite a long @-@ standing preference for <unk> , China briefly opened up under the Song and Mongol Yuan dynasties . In the early 15th century , Zheng He 's fleet of treasure ships repeatedly sailed from Ming China with 37 @,@ 000 men aboard 317 ships , reaching as far as the African coast . Chinese exploration , however , was soon curtailed again and finally outlawed . The peoples of East Asia were introduced to the true shape of the other continents from the maps of Matteo Ricci . 
 Meanwhile , the determination of longitude continued to involve approximations and guesswork : its true calculation required an accurate clock which permitted comparison between noon aboard ship and the exact time at a fixed point , such as the Royal Observatory at Greenwich . Great Britain 's Longitude prize was effectively awarded in 1773 to the self @-@ educated John Harrison for his sea watch of 1761 . James Cook used a copy of this on his second and third voyages , which studied the Pacific and inspired studies from Russia , France , the Netherlands , and the United States . The completion of a submarine telegraphic cable across the English Channel in 1850 and subsequent links of the All Red Line led to greater interest in the deep sea . Earlier ideas that no life could exist below 300 fathoms ( 550 meters or 1 @,@ 800 feet ) were disproved in 1860 when a Mediterranean line failed and was pulled up from depths four times lower , completely encrusted with marine life . Michael Sars 's discovery of " living fossils " deep in Norway 's fjords helped spur British efforts including HMS Challenger ’ s expedition during the 1870s that effectively created modern oceanography . From 1878 to 1880 , the SS Vega successfully completed the Northeast Passage and went on to circumnavigate Eurasia for the first time . During the mid @-@ 1890s , Fridtjof Nansen used a specially @-@ designed ship to drift through the northern pack ice , establishing that the Arctic was an open sea . In 1898 & 1899 , Carl Chun raised and studied many new life forms from over 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) below the surface of the South Atlantic . 
 In the 20th century , the Gjøa was the first vessel to accomplish the Northwest Passage in 1906 . From 1921 , the International Hydrographic Organization in Monaco has standardized surveying and charting of the sea and , from 1924 , the Discovery Investigations studied whales and mapped the seas around Antarctica . The spherical Bathysphere was able to descend to 434 meters ( 1 @,@ 424 ft ) in 1930 on a cable and , in the 1940s , Jacques Cousteau helped develop the first successful scuba gear and popularize underwater diving . The Cold War and oil exploration funded further deep sea research : by 1960 , the self @-@ powered Trieste could take her crew 10 @,@ 915 m ( 35 @,@ 810 ft ) into the Mariana Trench and a US Navy diver in an atmospheric diving suit reached 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) below sea level in 2006 . 
 Today , the American Global Positioning System ( GPS ) enables accurate navigation worldwide using over thirty satellites and message timing so exact as to involve general relativity . Ongoing oceanographic research includes marine lifeforms , conservation , the marine environment , the chemistry of the ocean , the studying and modelling of climate dynamics , the air @-@ sea boundary , weather patterns , ocean resources , renewable energy , waves and currents , and the design and development of new tools and technologies for investigating the deep . Researchers make use of satellite @-@ based remote sensing for surface waters , with research ships , moored observatories and autonomous underwater vehicles to study and monitor all parts of the sea . 
 = = = Trade = = = 
 Water @-@ borne trade has been practiced since at least the dawn of civilization , when Sumeria was connected to Harappan India . Around 2000 BC , the Minoans of Crete established the earliest thalassocracy , a maritime empire heavily dependent upon its trade and naval power . The city @-@ states of the Phoenicians and Greeks then replaced them in the centuries after 1200 BC , ultimately establishing far @-@ flung colonial empires which spread from the Sea of Azov to the Atlantic coast of Morocco . Under the Romans , commerce continued to thrive . In the first centuries BC , steppe nomads ' interruption of India 's access to Siberian gold caused them to open up maritime routes to Malaysia and Indonesia , exposing them first to Hindu and then Muslim traders . With the collapse of the Roman Empire , European trade dwindled but it continued to flourish elsewhere . The Tamil Chola dynasty thrived on trade between Tang China , the Javanese Srivijaya Empire , and the Abbasid Caliphate in the west . Following further conquests , Arabians came to dominate maritime trade in the Indian Ocean , spreading Islam along the East African coast and , eventually , Southeast Asia . A major effect of the Age of Discovery was the unification of the world 's regional trade networks into a single world market , largely run by and for the European monarchs and the merchants of Amsterdam , London , and other Atlantic ports . From the 16th to the 19th centuries , about 13 million people were shipped across the Atlantic to be sold as slaves in the Americas . The Hales Trophy was an award for the fastest commercial crossing of the Atlantic and was won by the SS United States in 1952 for a crossing that took three days , ten hours , and forty minutes . 
 Nowadays , large quantities of goods are transported by sea , especially across the Atlantic and around the Pacific Rim . A major trade route passes through the Pillars of Hercules , across the Mediterranean and the Suez Canal to the Indian Ocean and through the Straits of Malacca ; much trade also passes through the English Channel . Shipping lanes are the routes on the open sea used by cargo vessels , traditionally making use of trade winds and currents . Over 60 percent of the world 's container traffic is conveyed on the top twenty trade routes . Increased melting of Arctic ice since 2007 enables ships to travel the Northwest Passage for some weeks in summer , avoiding the longer routes via the Suez Canal or the Panama Canal . Shipping is supplemented by air freight , a more expensive process mostly used for particularly valuable or perishable cargoes . Seaborne trade carries more than US $ 4 trillion worth of goods each year . 
 There are two main kinds of freight , bulk cargo and break bulk or general cargo , most of which is now transported in containers . Commodities in the form of liquids , powder or particles are carried loose in the holds of bulk carriers and include oil , grain , coal , ore , scrap metal , sand and gravel . Break bulk cargo is usually manufactured goods and is transported in packages , often stacked on pallets . Before the arrival of containerization in the 1950s , these goods were loaded , transported and unloaded piecemeal . The use of containers has greatly increased the efficiency and decreased the cost of moving them with most freight now traveling in standard sized , lockable containers loaded on purpose @-@ built container ships at dedicated terminals . Freight forwarding firms book cargo , arrange pickup and delivery , and manage documentation . The safety of shipping is regulated by the International Maritime Organization , based in London and first convened in 1959 . Its objectives include developing and maintaining a regulatory framework for shipping , maritime safety , environmental concerns , legal matters , technical co @-@ operation and maritime security . 
 = = = Fishing = = = 
 Humans in East Asia were consuming large amounts of freshwater fish around 40 000 years ago . <unk> with barbed harpoons along the coast was widespread by the Palaeolithic . Fish ponds surrounded Sumerian temples by 2 500 BC and a Chinese classical text credited to the 5th @-@ century BC businessman Fan Li is the earliest known work on fish farming . A surviving fragment of Isidore of Charax 's 1st @-@ century Parthian itinerary describes locals <unk> for pearls in the Persian Gulf , and Oppian 's 2nd @-@ century <unk> relates the four main Greek and Roman fishing methods as hook @-@ and @-@ line , netting , passive traps , and trident . Traditional fishing boats operate in near @-@ shore waters but , during the late Middle Ages and early Modern period , fishing on the open sea — particularly cod — became important to the economic and naval development of Northern Europe , New England , and Canada . Overfishing along the coasts of the North Sea spurred the development of deep @-@ sea fishers such as the Brixham and otter trawlers , which might serve as <unk> for <unk> dories ; in the 19th century , advances such as rail transport , canning , and refrigeration allowed fishing to become a full @-@ fledged industry . Improvements in sonar during the world wars were adapted as <unk> and , during the 1950s , great factory ships caught and processed as many fish in an hour as earlier trawlers had in a season . By the 1960s , the North Atlantic and North Pacific fisheries were close to maximal exploitation . After the catch from wild marine fisheries grew from 18 million metric tons ( 20 million tons ) in 1950 to around 85 million metric tons ( 93 1 ⁄ 2 million tons ) by the late 1980s , it has remained essentially constant since . Chinese economic reform led to massive growth of its fishing production , from 7 % of the world total in 1961 to 35 % by 2010 . Scientific studies of population dynamics and nationalization of formerly shared waters are both helping to cope with overexploitation but the success of modern commercial fishing has required major corrective actions : the collapse of the Grand Banks cod fishery to less than 1 % of its historic levels required a complete moratorium by Canada in 1992 and China has enforced a zero @-@ growth policy in its wild catch since 2000 , redirecting its industry towards aquaculture ; its annual months @-@ long bans on fishing in disputed areas of the South China Sea is enforced over the protest of neighboring states . 
 As of 2006 , there were an estimated 43 @.@ 5 million people involved in capturing or raising seafood , 85 @.@ 5 % of whom lived in Asia . About 3 ⁄ 4 were fishers and the remainder fish farmers . In 2012 , total global production of fish , crustaceans , molluscs , and other aquatic animals was a record 158 million metric tons ( 174 million tons ) , of which 91 @.@ 3 million metric tons ( 100 million tons ) were caught in the wild . This is also a record if ignoring the Peruvian anchovy , whose population can vary dramatically with the El Niño cycle . The overall trend remains increasing , but due to expanding aquaculture in inland waters and mariculture in the sea rather than higher catches in the wild . The exclusive economic zones around coastal countries under the UNCLOS regime have permitted states to institute quota and other management systems over the most productive regions of the sea , accounting for around 87 % of the annual harvest . The results are sometimes dramatic — the lull in fishing over the course of the First World War saw the North Sea 's 1919 catch double 1913 's — and sometimes much less so : two decades on , the levels of cod in the Grand Banks remain only 10 % of their peak . At present , the species most frequently landed are herring , cod , anchovy , tuna , flounder , mullet , squid , and salmon . A number of these , as well as large predatory fish , remain well below historical levels . 
 Over 3 million vessels are employed in sea fishing . Modern fishing vessels include fishing trawlers with a small crew , stern trawlers , purse <unk> , long @-@ line factory vessels , and large factory ships which are designed to stay at sea for weeks , processing and freezing great quantities of fish . The equipment used to capture the fish may be purse seines , other seines , trawls , dredges , gillnets , and long @-@ lines . The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations is encouraging the development of local fisheries to provide food security to coastal communities and help alleviate poverty . 
 As well as the wild stock , about 79 million metric tons ( 87 million tons ) of food and non @-@ food products were produced by sea farming in 2010 , an all @-@ time high . About six hundred species of plants and animals were cultured , some for use in seeding wild populations . The animals raised included finfish , aquatic reptiles , crustaceans , molluscs , sea cucumbers , sea urchins , sea squirts , and jellyfish . Integrated mariculture has the advantage that there is a readily @-@ available supply of planktonic food and waste is removed naturally ; in cases where the waste would otherwise be harmful , multi @-@ species techniques can used to , e.g. , feed farmed shellfish from the waste being produced by farmed salmon . Various methods are employed . Mesh enclosures for finfish can be suspended in the open seas , cages can be used in more sheltered waters , or ponds can be refreshed with water at each high tide . Shrimps can be reared in shallow ponds connected to the open sea . Ropes can be hung in water to grow algae , oysters , and mussels . Oysters can be reared on trays or in mesh tubes . Sea cucumbers can be <unk> on the seabed . Captive breeding programmes have raised lobster larvae for release of juveniles into the wild resulting in an increased lobster harvest in Maine . At least 145 species of seaweed — red , green , and brown algae — are eaten worldwide , some long farmed in Japan and other Asian countries ; there is great potential for additional <unk> . Few maritime flowering plants are widely used for food but one example is marsh samphire , which is eaten both raw and cooked . A major difficulty for aquaculture is the tendency towards monoculture and the associated risk of widespread disease . In the 1990s , disease wiped out China 's farmed Farrer 's scallop and white shrimp and required their replacement by other species . Shrimp farming has also caused the destruction of important mangrove forests throughout southeast Asia . 
 = = = Law = = = 
 Admiralty law is the particular body of national laws applied to maritime questions and offenses , as the uncertainty of sea voyages has caused the sea to be viewed as a unique jurisdiction since antiquity . Rhodian , Roman , Byzantine , Trani , and <unk> laws were important influences on the French , Genovese , and Hanseatic codes which established the first English courts of admiralty . Unlike the usual English common law system , the courts of admiralty hewed closer to Continental practice , leaving it open for abuse that contributed to the American Revolution . The adoption of the present constitution reintroduced admiralty law to the United States , but with a relatively larger sphere for trials by jury . 
 The Law of the Sea is the particular body international law applied to maritime questions and offenses . Empires such as Rome and China long claimed universal jurisdiction ; during the Middle Ages , Italian maritime republics such as Venice and Genoa recognized the existence of rival states but claimed the right to close the seas to their traffic . Portuguese and Spanish pursuit of similar rights over new seas and lands during the Age of Discovery and papal support of their claims was a factor in the Wars of Religion ; in 1609 , a jurist hired to defend a lucrative act of piracy by the Dutch East India Company penned Mare Liberum , an argument in favor of freedom of the seas that ultimately produced the compromise that territory extended as far as land @-@ based <unk> could reach , standardized to 3 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 556 m or 18 @,@ 228 ft ) , and that everything beyond was international waters . President Woodrow Wilson argued this principle as part of America 's entrance into World War I and as one of his Fourteen Points afterwards ; nonetheless , President Truman 's unilateral claim of jurisdiction over the oil reserves of America 's continental shelf in 1945 directly led to the end of the regime . The three rounds of the United Nations ' conferences on the Law of the Sea eventually reshaped international maritime law but the United States has not ratified the present treaty but instead adopted its policies piecemeal via presidential proclamations . 
 The present Convention on the Law of the Sea ( UNCLOS ) was drafted in 1982 and came into force in 1994 . It states that " the high seas are open to all states , whether coastal or land @-@ locked " and provides a non @-@ exhaustive list of freedoms including navigation , overflight , the laying of submarine cables , the building of artificial islands , fishing , and scientific research . It extended territorial waters up to 12 nautical miles ( 22 @.@ 2 km or 13 @.@ 8 mi ) from a baseline generally ( but not always ) equivalent to the low @-@ water line ; this area is subject to national laws but free to both innocent and transit passage . ( The " internal waters " landward of the baseline are solely under national control . ) A " contiguous zone " of a further 12 nmi are permitted for hot pursuit of vessels charged with violating customs , taxation , immigration , or pollution laws in the territorial waters . An " exclusive economic zone " or EEZ places all exploitation of marine life and minerals within 200 nmi ( 370 km or 230 mi ) of the baseline under national supervision . For legal purposes , the " continental shelf " is considered to be the actual continental shelf ( to a depth of 200 m or 660 ft ) contiguous to the baseline or 200 nmi , whichever is greater ; the marine life and minerals " attached to " ( or below ) the seabed within this area also fall under national supervision . 
 Ships may cross numerous time zones on a voyage , so nautical time , introduced in the 1920s , is used in international waters . Each such zone is uniformly 15 degrees of longitude wide , the ship 's clock going forward one hour per zone when travelling eastwards . 
 = = = War = = = 
 Since the development of coordinated fleets of ships capable of landing an invasion force , naval warfare has been an important aspect in the defense ( or conquest ) of maritime states . The first naval battle in recorded history saw <unk> II of the Hittites burn a Cypriot fleet at sea in 1210 BC . Shortly after , the fleets of the Sea Peoples disrupted the entire Eastern Mediterranean : over a period of about 50 years , raids and invasions violently destroyed nearly every coastal city between Pylos and Gaza . As empires grew and their armies became too large to live off the lands through which they passed , disruption of their supply fleets also became a powerful tactic . The 480 BC Battle of Salamis largely determined the course of the Persian Wars not because of its inherent damage ( however considerable ) but because Themistocles 's deception and superior strategy left the Athenians capable of disrupting sea @-@ borne supplies at will and potentially striking at the pontoon bridges across the Hellespont , cutting off the Persians ' line of retreat . During the age of wooden ships , however , great fleets were burdensome to maintain and always liable to destruction by contrary weather , most famously in the case of the two kamikaze typhoons that destroyed the Mongol invasions of Japan in AD 1274 and 1281 . 
 Piracy — both illicit in ancient Cilicia and China and state @-@ supported among the Cretans , Vikings , Japanese , English , and Berbers — has remained a problem into the present day , given the expense involved in securely protecting every merchant vessel or in policing extensive coastlines . 
 In the ancient world , in addition to Salamis , major naval engagements included the Battle of Actium , which permitted the establishment of Augustus 's empire . In the modern era , important naval battles include the English victories against the Armada in 1588 and at Trafalgar in 1805 , which broke the threats of invasion by the superior land forces of the Spanish and French empires . 
 With steam , mass @-@ produced steel plate , and exploding shells , European gunships permitted the New Imperialism of the 19th century , forcing open access to Africa , China , Korea , and Japan for their merchants on favorable terms . Although internal politics hampered Chinese modernization , American naval power produced a major reform in Japan which bore fruit during the 1905 Battle of Tsushima when the Japanese were able to decisively defeat Russia . The great navies initially focused their efforts on constructing great dreadnoughts and battleships , but these fought inconclusively in the First World War . By contrast , the much cheaper German U @-@ boats showed that submarines could cripple shipping even in waters nominally controlled by the enemy . Convoys , intelligence , and airborne ASW won a hard @-@ fought victory in the Second World War 's Battle of the Atlantic , but developments in applied physics meant that by the 1960s nuclear @-@ powered ballistic missile submarines were being maintained on constant patrol as a second @-@ strike force along with a second set of hunters intended to counter them . Meanwhile , the battles of the Mediterranean and Pacific theaters of the war had shown that air power was capable of overcoming the strongest warships . 
 = = = Travel = = = 
 Although the use of small private vessels for personal transport undoubtably extends back into prehistory , large ships capable of braving the open ocean were typically dedicated to trade or fishing for most of human history . Even military campaigns would often simply hire or commandeer these private fleets to serve as troop transports , as did the traders , pilgrims , and wealthy tourists of antiquity and the Middle Ages . The voyages of exploration and colonization were often provided for by the crown out of naval funds ; where they were not , they were usually chartered or else purchased and then used for shipping supplies after the initial settlement . Dedicated and scheduled local passenger services came to be offered in the 16th and 17th centuries , but the 1817 Black Ball was the first trans @-@ Atlantic passenger line . In the Age of Sail , the duration of such passages depended much on the prevailing winds and the weather . The 18th @-@ century coastal Margate hoys began the popularization of leisure travel in Britain and Ireland that later gathered steam with Thomas Cook 's package tours in the next century . During the 19th century , steam @-@ powered ocean liners connected the railroad networks of the world . By 1900 , the Atlantic crossing took about five days and the passenger lines competed to win the Blue Riband , an unofficial accolade accorded to the fastest liner in regular service . For twenty years from 1909 , the prize went to the RMS Mauretania for its average speed of 26 @.@ 06 knots ( 48 @.@ 26 km / h ) . This era waned as cheaper and faster intercontinental flights became available , most importantly the 1958 New York – Paris route . 
 The sea still remains a venue for recreational boating and large cruise ships . It is also a route for refugees and economic migrants , some traveling in small unseaworthy craft and others smuggled into shipping vessels . Some flee persecution while many are economic migrants attempting to reach countries where they believe their prospects are brighter . 
 = = = Leisure = = = 
 Use of the sea for leisure developed in the nineteenth century and became a significant industry in the twentieth century . Maritime leisure activities are varied and include self @-@ organized trips cruising , yachting , powerboat racing and fishing ; commercially organized voyages on cruise ships ; and trips on smaller vessels for ecotourism such as whale watching and coastal birdwatching . 
 Many humans enjoy venturing into the sea : children paddle and splash in the shallows , while others swim or relax on the beach . This was not always the case , with sea bathing becoming the vogue in Europe in the 18th century after Dr. William Buchan advocated the practice for health reasons . Surfing is a sport in which a wave is ridden by a surfer , with or without a surfboard . Other water sports include kite surfing , where a power kite propels a manned board across the water ; windsurfing , where the power is provided by a fixed , maneuverable sail ; and water skiing , where a powerboat is used to pull a skier . 
 Beneath the surface , <unk> is necessarily restricted to shallow descents . Pearl divers have traditionally greased their skins , put cotton in their ears and clips on their noses , and dived to 40 ft ( 12 m ) with baskets in order to collect pearl oysters . Human eyes are not adapted for use underwater , but vision can be improved by wearing a diving mask . Other useful equipment includes fins and snorkels . Scuba equipment allows underwater breathing , permitting hours of time beneath the surface . The depths that can be reached by divers and the length of time they can stay underwater is limited by the increase of pressure they experience as they descend and the need to prevent decompression sickness as they return to the surface . Recreational divers are advised to restrict themselves to depths of under 100 feet ( 30 m ) beyond which the danger of nitrogen narcosis increases . Deeper dives can be made with specialized equipment and training . 
 = = = Power generation = = = 
 The sea offers a very large supply of energy carried by ocean waves , tides , salinity differences , and ocean temperature differences which can be harnessed to generate electricity . Forms of ' green ' marine energy include tidal power , marine current power , osmotic power , ocean thermal energy and wave power . 
 Tidal power uses generators to produce electricity from tidal flows , sometimes by using a dam to store and then release seawater . The Rance barrage , 1 kilometer ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) long , near St Malo in Brittany opened in 1967 ; it generates about 0 @.@ 5 GW , but it has been followed by few similar schemes . 
 The large and highly variable energy of waves gives them enormous destructive capability , making affordable and reliable wave machines problematic to develop . A small 2 MW commercial wave power plant , " Osprey " , was built in Northern Scotland in 1995 about 300 meters ( 1000 ft ) offshore . It was soon damaged by waves , then destroyed by a storm . Marine current power could provide populated areas close to the sea with a significant part of their energy needs . In principle , it could be harnessed by open @-@ flow turbines ; sea bed systems are available , but limited to a depth of about 40 m ( 130 ft ) . 
 Offshore wind power is captured by wind turbines placed out at sea ; it has the advantage that wind speeds are higher than on land , though wind farms are more costly to construct offshore . The first offshore wind farm was installed in Denmark in 1991 , and the installed capacity of European offshore wind farms reached 3 GW in 2010 . 
 Electricity power stations are often located on the coast or beside an estuary so that the sea can be used as a heat sink . A colder heat sink enables more efficient power generation , which is important for expensive nuclear power plants in particular . 
 = = = Extractive industries = = = 
 There are large deposits of petroleum ( as oil and natural gas ) in rocks beneath the seabed . Offshore platforms and drilling rigs extract the oil or gas and store it for transport to land . Offshore oil and gas production can be difficult due to the remote , harsh environment . Drilling for oil in the sea has environmental impacts . Animals may be disorientated by seismic waves used to locate deposits , probably causing the beaching of whales . Toxic substances such as mercury , lead , and arsenic may be released . The infrastructure may cause damage and oil may be spilt . 
 The sea holds enormous quantities of valuable dissolved minerals . The most important , Salt for table and industrial use has been harvested by solar evaporation from shallow ponds since prehistoric times . <unk> , accumulated after being leached from the land , is economically recovered from the Dead Sea , where it occurs at 55 @,@ 000 parts per million ( ppm ) . Other minerals on or within the seabed can be exploited by dredging . This has advantages over land @-@ based mining in that equipment can be built at specialized shipyards and infrastructure costs are lower . Disadvantages include problems caused by waves and tides , the tendency for excavations to silt up , and the washing away of spoil heaps . There is a risk of coastal erosion and environmental damage . <unk> deposits are potential sources of silver , gold , copper , lead , zinc , and trace metals which were only discovered in the 1960s . They form when <unk> superheated water is emitted from deep sea hydrothermal vents known as " black smokers " : in contact with the cold waters of the deep ocean , the minerals precipitate and settle around the vent . The ores are of high quality but currently very costly to extract . Small scale mining of the deep sea floor is being developed off the coast of Papua New Guinea using robotic techniques , but the obstacles are formidable . 
 Desalination is the technique of removing salts from seawater to leave fresh water suitable for drinking or irrigation . The two main processing methods , vacuum distillation and reverse osmosis , use large quantities of energy . Desalination is normally only undertaken where fresh water from other sources is in short supply or energy is plentiful , as in the excess heat generated by power stations . The brine produced as a by @-@ product contains some toxic materials and is returned to the sea . 
 Large quantities of methane clathrate exist on the seabed and in ocean sediment at a temperature of around 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) and these are of interest as a potential energy source . Some estimates put the amount available at between one and 5 million cubic kilometers ( 0 @.@ 24 to 1 @.@ 2 million cubic miles ) . Also on the seabed are manganese nodules formed of layers of iron , manganese , and other hydroxides around a core . In the Pacific these may cover up to 30 percent of the deep ocean floor . The minerals precipitate from seawater and grow very slowly . Their commercial extraction for nickel was investigated in the 1970s but abandoned in favour of more convenient sources . In suitable locations , diamonds are gathered from the seafloor using suction hoses to bring gravel ashore . In deeper waters , mobile seafloor crawlers are used and the deposits are pumped to a vessel above . In Namibia , more diamonds are now collected from marine sources than by conventional methods on land . 
 = = = Pollution = = = 
 Many substances enter the sea as a result of human activities . Combustion products are transported in the air and deposited through precipitation . Agricultural , industrial , and sewage outflows contribute heavy metals , pesticides , PCBs , disinfectants , cleaning products , and other synthetic chemicals . These become concentrated in the surface film and in marine sediment , especially estuarine mud . The result of all this contamination is largely unknown because of the large number of substances involved and the lack of information on their biological effects . The heavy metals of greatest concern are copper , lead , mercury , cadmium , and zinc which may be accumulated by marine invertebrates . They are then passed up the food chain . 
 Run @-@ off of fertilizers from agricultural land is a major source of pollution in some areas and the discharge of raw sewage has a similar effect . The extra nutrients provided by these sources can cause excessive plant growth . Nitrogen is often the limiting factor in marine systems and the addition of nitrogen sparks algal blooms and red tides , which then may lower the oxygen level of the water to the point where it kills marine animals . Such events have created dead zones in the Baltic Sea and the Gulf of Mexico . Some algal blooms are caused by cyanobacteria that make shellfish that filter feed on them toxic , harming animals like sea otters . Nuclear facilities too can pollute . The Irish Sea was contaminated by radioactive caesium @-@ 137 from the former Sellafield nuclear fuel processing plant and nuclear accidents sometimes cause radioactive material to seep into the sea , as at the Fukushima in 2011 . 
 The dumping of waste ( including oil , noxious liquids , sewage , and garbage ) at sea is governed by international law . The London Convention ( 1972 ) is a United Nations agreement to control ocean dumping which had been ratified by 89 countries by 8 June 2012 . MARPOL 73 / 78 is a convention to minimize pollution of the seas by ships . By May 2013 , 152 maritime nations had ratified MARPOL . 
 Much floating plastic trash does not biodegrade , instead disintegrating over time and eventually breaking down to the molecular level . Rigid plastics may float for years . In the center of the Pacific gyre , there is a permanent floating accumulation of mostly plastic waste and there is a similar garbage patch in the Atlantic . Foraging sea birds such as the albatross and petrel may mistake debris for food and accumulate indigestible plastic in their digestive systems . Turtles and whales have been found with plastic bags and fishing line in their stomachs . <unk> may sink , threatening filter feeders on the seabed . 
 Most oil pollution in the sea comes from cities and industry . Oil is dangerous for marine animals . It can clog the feathers of sea birds , reducing their insulating effect and the birds ' buoyancy , or be ingested when they preen themselves in an attempt to remove the contaminant . Marine mammals are less seriously affected but may be chilled through the removal of their insulation , blinded , dehydrated , or poisoned . Benthic invertebrates are swamped when the oil sinks , fish are poisoned , and the food chain is disrupted . In the short term , oil spills result in wildlife populations being decreased and unbalanced , leisure activities being affected , and the livelihoods of people dependent on the sea being devastated . The marine environment has self @-@ cleansing properties and naturally @-@ occurring bacteria will act over time to remove oil from the sea . In the Gulf of Mexico , where oil @-@ eating bacteria are already present , they take only a few days to consume spilt oil . 
 = = = Indigenous sea peoples = = = 
 Several nomadic indigenous groups in Maritime Southeast Asia live in boats and derive nearly all they need from the sea . The <unk> people live on the coasts of Thailand and Burma and islands in the Andaman Sea . The Bajau people are originally from the Sulu Archipelago , Mindanao , and northern Borneo . Some Sea Gypsies are accomplished free @-@ divers , able to descend to depths of 30 m ( 98 ft ) , though many are adopting a more settled , land @-@ based way of life . 
 The indigenous peoples of the Arctic such as the Chukchi , Inuit , <unk> , and Yupik hunt marine mammals including seals and whales and the Torres Strait Islanders claim ownership of the Great Barrier Reef . They live a traditional life on the islands involving hunting , fishing , gardening , and trading with neighboring peoples in Papua New Guinea and Australia . 
 = = = In culture = = = 
 The sea appears in human culture in contradictory ways , as both powerful but serene and as beautiful but dangerous . It has its place in mythology and religion , literature , art , poetry , film , theater , and music . The Ancients personified it , believing it to be under the control of a being who needed to be appeased . It has been populated by fantastic creatures : the Leviathan of the Bible , Scylla in Greek mythology , <unk> in Japanese mythology , and the <unk> of late Norse mythology . The sea is especially common in Christian imagery , where several of Jesus 's disciples were said to have been fishermen on the Sea of Galilee . 
 The sea , its life , and its ships have been depicted in art ranging from the simple drawings on the walls of caves outside Les <unk> , France , to the early Christian <unk> to the Dutch Hendrik Vroom to Hokusai 's ukiyo @-@ e to seascapes by Winslow Homer . During the Golden Age of the Netherlands , artists such as Jan Porcellis , Hendrick <unk> , Willem van de Velde the Elder and his son , and Ludolf <unk> celebrated the sea and the Dutch navy at the peak of its military prowess . 
 Music too has been inspired by the ocean . Sea shanties were chanted by mariners to help coordinate arduous tasks and impressions in music have been created of calm waters , crashing waves , and storms at sea . Classical sea @-@ related music includes Richard Wagner 's The Flying Dutchman , Claude Debussy 's La mer ( 1903 – 05 ) , Charles Villiers Stanford 's Songs of the Sea ( 1904 ) and Songs of the Fleet ( 1910 ) , Edward Elgar 's Sea Pictures ( 1899 ) , and Ralph Vaughan Williams 's A Sea Symphony ( 1903 – 1909 ) . 
 As a symbol , the sea has for centuries played a role in literature and poetry . Sometimes , it is there just as a gentle background but often it introduces such themes as storm , shipwreck , battle , hardship , disaster , the dashing of hopes , or death . In his epic poem the Odyssey , written in the 8th century BC , Homer describes the ten @-@ year voyage of the Greek hero Odysseus who struggles to return home across the sea 's many hazards after the war described in the Iliad . The sea is a recurring theme in the Haiku poems of the Japanese poet Matsuo Bashō ( 1644 – 1694 ) . In modern literature , sea @-@ inspired novels have been written by the sailors Herman Melville , Joseph Conrad , and Herman Wouk . The psychiatrist Carl Jung argued that , in dream interpretation , the sea symbolizes the personal and the collective unconscious . Although the origin of life on Earth is still a matter of debate , naturalist Rachel Carson wrote in The Sea Around Us that " it is a curious situation that the sea , from which life first arose , should now be threatened by the activities of one form of that life . But the sea , though changed in a sinister way , will continue to exist : the threat is rather to life itself . " 
 = Japan = 
 Japan ( Japanese : 日本 Nippon [ nip ̚ <unk> ̞ ɴ ] or Nihon [ <unk> ̞ ɴ ] ; formally <unk> Nippon @-@ koku or Nihon @-@ koku , " State of Japan " ) is an island country in East Asia . Located in the Pacific Ocean , it lies to the east of the Sea of Japan , the East China Sea , China , Korea and Russia , stretching from the Sea of Okhotsk in the north to the East China Sea and Taiwan in the south . The kanji that make up Japan 's name mean " sun origin " , and it is often called the " Land of the Rising Sun " . 
 Japan is a stratovolcanic archipelago of 6 @,@ 852 islands . The four largest are Honshu , Hokkaido , Kyushu and Shikoku , which make up about ninety @-@ seven percent of Japan 's land area . The country is divided into 47 prefectures in eight regions . The population of 126 million is the world 's tenth largest . Japanese people make up 98 @.@ 5 % of Japan 's total population . Approximately 9 @.@ 1 million people live in the core city of Tokyo , the capital city of Japan , which is the sixth largest city proper in the OECD and the fourth leading global city in the world . The Greater Tokyo Area , which includes Tokyo and several surrounding prefectures , is the world 's largest metropolitan area with over 35 million residents and the world 's largest urban agglomeration economy . 
 Archaeological research indicates that Japan was inhabited as early as the Upper Paleolithic period . The first written mention of Japan is in Chinese history texts from the 1st century CE . Influence from other regions , mainly Imperial China , followed by periods of isolation , particularly from Western Europe , has characterized Japan 's history . From the 12th century until 1868 , Japan was ruled by successive feudal military shoguns who ruled in the name of the Emperor . Japan entered into a long period of isolation in the early 17th century , which was ended in 1853 when a United States fleet pressured Japan to open to the West . Nearly two decades of internal conflict and insurrection followed before the Meiji Emperor was restored as head of state in 1868 and the Empire of Japan was proclaimed , with the Emperor as a divine symbol of the nation . In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , victories in the First Sino @-@ Japanese War , the Russo @-@ Japanese War and World War I allowed Japan to expand its empire during a period of increasing militarism . The Second Sino @-@ Japanese War of 1937 expanded into part of World War II in 1941 , which came to an end in 1945 following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Since adopting its revised constitution in 1947 , Japan has maintained a unitary constitutional monarchy with an Emperor and an elected legislature called the National Diet . 
 Japan is a member of the UN , the G7 , the G8 , and the G20 and is considered a great power . The country has the world 's third @-@ largest economy by nominal GDP and the world 's fourth @-@ largest economy by purchasing power parity . It is also the world 's fourth @-@ largest exporter and fourth @-@ largest importer . Although Japan has officially renounced its right to declare war , it maintains a modern military with the world 's eighth largest military budget , used for self @-@ defense and peacekeeping roles . Japan is a developed country with a high standard of living and Human Development Index whose population enjoys the highest life expectancy , the third lowest infant mortality in the world , and ranked first in the number of Nobel laureates of any country in Asia . Japan is ranked first in the Country Brand Index , ranked sixth in the Global Competitiveness Report 2015 – 2016 and is the highest @-@ ranked Asian country in the Global Peace Index . Japan was the first country in Asia to host both the Summer and Winter Olympic Games . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The English word Japan possibly derives from the early Mandarin Chinese or Wu Chinese pronunciation of the Japanese name , 日本 , which in Japanese is pronounced Nippon listen or Nihon listen . Japanese people refer to themselves as <unk> ( <unk> ) and to their language as <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 From the Meiji Restoration until the end of World War II , the full title of Japan was Dai Nippon Teikoku ( <unk> ) , meaning " the Empire of Great Japan " . Today the name Nippon @-@ koku / Nihon @-@ koku ( <unk> ) is used as a formal modern @-@ day equivalent simply meaning " the State of Japan " ; countries like Japan whose long form does not contain a descriptive designation are generally given a name appended by the character koku ( <unk> ) , meaning " country " , " nation " or " state " . 
 The character <unk> ( 日 ) means " sun " or " day " ; hon ( <unk> ) means " base " or " origin " . The compound means " origin of the sun " or " sunrise " ( from a Chinese point of view , the sun rises from Japan ) ; it is a source for the popular Western description of Japan as the " Land of the Rising Sun " . Before Nihon came into official use , Japan was known as Wa ( <unk> ) or <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 The English word for Japan came to the West via early trade routes . The Old Mandarin or possibly early Wu Chinese pronunciation of Japan was recorded by Marco Polo as <unk> . In modern Shanghainese , a Wu dialect , the pronunciation of characters 日本 Japan is <unk> [ <unk> ] . The old Malay word for Japan , <unk> , was borrowed from a southern coastal Chinese dialect , probably <unk> or Ningpo , and this Malay word was encountered by Portuguese traders in Malacca in the 16th century . Portuguese traders were the first to bring the word to Europe . An early record of the word in English is in a 1565 letter , spelled <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory and ancient history = = = 
 A Paleolithic culture around 30 @,@ 000 BC constitutes the first known habitation of the Japanese archipelago . This was followed from around 14 @,@ 000 BC ( the start of the Jōmon period ) by a Mesolithic to Neolithic semi @-@ sedentary hunter @-@ gatherer culture , who include ancestors of both the contemporary Ainu people and Yamato people , characterized by pit dwelling and rudimentary agriculture . Decorated clay vessels from this period are some of the oldest surviving examples of pottery in the world . Around 300 BC , the Yayoi people began to enter the Japanese islands , intermingling with the Jōmon . The Yayoi period , starting around 500 BC , saw the introduction of practices like wet @-@ rice farming , a new style of pottery , and metallurgy , introduced from China and Korea . 
 Japan first appears in written history in the Chinese Book of Han . According to the Records of the Three Kingdoms , the most powerful kingdom on the archipelago during the 3rd century was called <unk> . Buddhism was first introduced to Japan from Baekje , Korea and was promoted by Prince Shōtoku , but the subsequent development of Japanese Buddhism was primarily influenced by China . Despite early resistance , Buddhism was promoted by the ruling class and gained widespread acceptance beginning in the Asuka period ( 592 – 710 ) . 
 The Nara period ( 710 – 784 ) of the 8th century marked an emergence of the centralized Japanese state centered on the Imperial Court in Heijō @-@ kyō ( modern Nara ) . The Nara period is characterized by the appearance of a nascent literature as well as the development of Buddhist @-@ inspired art and architecture . The smallpox epidemic of 735 – 737 is believed to have killed as much as one @-@ third of Japan 's population . In 784 , Emperor Kanmu moved the capital from Nara to Nagaoka @-@ kyō before relocating it to Heian @-@ kyō ( modern Kyoto ) in 794 . 
 This marked the beginning of the Heian period ( 794 – 1185 ) , during which a distinctly indigenous Japanese culture emerged , noted for its art , poetry and prose . Murasaki Shikibu 's The Tale of Genji and the lyrics of Japan 's national anthem Kimigayo were written during this time . 
 Buddhism began to spread during the Heian era chiefly through two major sects , Tendai by <unk> , and Shingon by Kūkai . Pure Land Buddhism ( Jōdo @-@ shū , Jōdo Shinshū ) became greatly popular in the latter half of the 11th century . 
 = = = Feudal era = = = 
 Japan 's feudal era was characterized by the emergence and dominance of a ruling class of warriors , the samurai . In 1185 , following the defeat of the Taira clan in the Genpei War , sung in the epic Tale of Heike , samurai Minamoto no Yoritomo was appointed shogun by Emperor Go @-@ Toba , and he established a base of power in Kamakura . After his death , the Hōjō clan came to power as regents for the shoguns . The Zen school of Buddhism was introduced from China in the Kamakura period ( 1185 – 1333 ) and became popular among the samurai class . The Kamakura shogunate repelled Mongol invasions in 1274 and 1281 , but was eventually overthrown by Emperor Go @-@ Daigo . Emperor Go @-@ Daigo was himself defeated by Ashikaga <unk> in 1336 . 
 Ashikaga <unk> established the shogunate in Muromachi , Kyoto . This was the start of the Muromachi period ( 1336 – 1573 ) . The Ashikaga shogunate achieved glory in the age of Ashikaga Yoshimitsu , and the culture based on Zen Buddhism ( art of Miyabi ) prospered . This evolved to Higashiyama Culture , and prospered until the 16th century . On the other hand , the succeeding Ashikaga shogunate failed to control the feudal warlords ( daimyo ) , and a civil war ( the Ōnin War ) began in 1467 , opening the century @-@ long Sengoku period ( " Warring States " ) . 
 During the 16th century , traders and Jesuit missionaries from Portugal reached Japan for the first time , initiating direct commercial and cultural exchange between Japan and the West . This allowed Oda Nobunaga to obtain European technology and firearms , which he used to conquer many other daimyo . His consolidation of power began what was known as the Azuchi – Momoyama period ( 1573 – 1603 ) . After he was assassinated in 1582 , his successor Toyotomi Hideyoshi unified the nation in 1590 and launched two unsuccessful invasions of Korea in 1592 and 1597 . 
 Tokugawa Ieyasu served as regent for Hideyoshi 's son and used his position to gain political and military support . When open war broke out , he defeated rival clans in the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600 . Tokugawa Ieyasu was appointed shogun by Emperor Go @-@ Yōzei in 1603 , and he established the Tokugawa shogunate in Edo ( modern Tokyo ) . The Tokugawa shogunate enacted measures including <unk> <unk> , as a code of conduct to control the autonomous daimyo ; and in 1639 , the isolationist <unk> ( " closed country " ) policy that spanned the two and a half centuries of tenuous political unity known as the Edo period ( 1603 – 1868 ) . The study of Western sciences , known as rangaku , continued through contact with the Dutch enclave at Dejima in Nagasaki . The Edo period also gave rise to <unk> ( " national studies " ) , the study of Japan by the Japanese . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 On March 31 , 1854 , Commodore Matthew Perry and the " Black Ships " of the United States Navy forced the opening of Japan to the outside world with the Convention of Kanagawa . Subsequent similar treaties with Western countries in the Bakumatsu period brought economic and political crises . The resignation of the shogun led to the Boshin War and the establishment of a centralized state nominally unified under the Emperor ( the Meiji Restoration ) . 
 Adopting Western political , judicial and military institutions , the Cabinet organized the Privy Council , introduced the Meiji Constitution , and assembled the Imperial Diet . The Meiji Restoration transformed the Empire of Japan into an industrialized world power that pursued military conflict to expand its sphere of influence . After victories in the First Sino @-@ Japanese War ( 1894 – 1895 ) and the Russo @-@ Japanese War ( 1904 – 1905 ) , Japan gained control of Taiwan , Korea , and the southern half of Sakhalin . Japan 's population grew from 35 million in 1873 to 70 million in 1935 . 
 The early 20th century saw a brief period of " Taishō democracy " overshadowed by increasing expansionism and militarization . World War I enabled Japan , on the side of the victorious Allies , to widen its influence and territorial holdings . It continued its expansionist policy by occupying Manchuria in 1931 ; as a result of international condemnation of this occupation , Japan resigned from the League of Nations two years later . In 1936 , Japan signed the Anti @-@ Comintern Pact with Nazi Germany , and the 1940 Tripartite Pact made it one of the Axis Powers . In 1941 , Japan negotiated the Soviet – Japanese Neutrality Pact , which lasted until 1945 with the Soviet invasion of Manchuria . 
 The Empire of Japan invaded other parts of China in 1937 , precipitating the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War ( 1937 – 1945 ) . The Imperial Japanese Army swiftly captured the capital Nanjing and conducted the Nanking Massacre . In 1940 , the Empire then invaded French Indochina , after which the United States placed an oil embargo on Japan . On December 7 – 8 , 1941 , Japanese forces carried out surprise attacks on Pearl Harbor , attacks on British forces in Malaya , Singapore , and Hong Kong and declared war , bringing the US and the UK into World War II in the Pacific . After the Soviet invasion of Manchuria and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 , Japan agreed to an unconditional surrender on August 15 . The war cost Japan and the rest of the Greater East Asia Co @-@ Prosperity Sphere millions of lives and left much of the nation 's industry and infrastructure destroyed . The Allies ( led by the US ) repatriated millions of ethnic Japanese from colonies and military camps throughout Asia , largely eliminating the Japanese empire and restoring the independence of its conquered territories . The Allies also convened the International Military Tribunal for the Far East on May 3 , 1946 to prosecute some Japanese leaders for war crimes . However , the bacteriological research units and members of the imperial family involved in the war were exonerated from criminal prosecutions by the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers despite calls for trials for both groups . 
 In 1947 , Japan adopted a new constitution emphasizing liberal democratic practices . The Allied occupation ended with the Treaty of San Francisco in 1952 and Japan was granted membership in the United Nations in 1956 . Japan later achieved rapid growth to become the second @-@ largest economy in the world , until surpassed by China in 2010 . This ended in the mid @-@ 1990s when Japan suffered a major recession . In the beginning of the 21st century , positive growth has signaled a gradual economic recovery . On March 11 , 2011 , Japan suffered the strongest earthquake in its recorded history ; this triggered the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster , one of the worst disasters in the history of nuclear power . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 Japan is a constitutional monarchy whereby the power of the Emperor is very limited . As a ceremonial figurehead , he is defined by the constitution as " the symbol of the State and of the unity of the people . " Power is held chiefly by the Prime Minister and other elected members of the Diet , while sovereignty is vested in the Japanese people . Akihito is the current Emperor of Japan ; Naruhito , Crown Prince of Japan , stands as next in line to the Chrysanthemum Throne . 
 Japan 's legislative organ is the National Diet , seated in Chiyoda , Tokyo . The Diet is a bicameral body , consisting of a House of Representatives with 480 seats , elected by popular vote every four years or when dissolved , and a House of Councillors of 242 seats , whose popularly elected members serve six @-@ year terms . There is universal suffrage for adults over 18 years of age , with a secret ballot for all elected offices . The Diet is dominated by the social liberal Democratic Party of Japan and the conservative Liberal Democratic Party ( LDP ) . The LDP has enjoyed near continuous electoral success since 1955 , except for a brief 11 @-@ month period between 1993 and 1994 , and from 2009 to 2012 . It holds 294 seats in the lower house and 83 seats in the upper house . 
 The Prime Minister of Japan is the head of government and is appointed by the Emperor after being designated by the Diet from among its members . The Prime Minister is the head of the Cabinet , and he appoints and dismisses the Ministers of State . Following the LDP 's landslide victory in the 2012 general election , Shinzō Abe replaced Yoshihiko Noda as the Prime Minister on December 26 , 2012 and became the country 's sixth prime minister to be sworn in during a span of six years . Although the Prime Minister is formally appointed by the Emperor , the Constitution of Japan explicitly requires the Emperor to appoint whoever is designated by the Diet . 
 Historically influenced by Chinese law , the Japanese legal system developed independently during the Edo period through texts such as <unk> <unk> . However , since the late 19th century the judicial system has been largely based on the civil law of Europe , notably Germany . For example , in 1896 , the Japanese government established a civil code based on a draft of the German <unk> <unk> ; with the code remaining in effect with post – World War II modifications . Statutory law originates in Japan 's legislature and has the rubber stamp of the Emperor . The Constitution requires that the Emperor promulgate legislation passed by the Diet , without specifically giving him the power to oppose legislation . Japan 's court system is divided into four basic tiers : the Supreme Court and three levels of lower courts . The main body of Japanese statutory law is called the Six Codes . 
 = = Foreign relations and military = = 
 Japan is a member of the G8 , APEC , and " ASEAN Plus Three " , and is a participant in the East Asia Summit . Japan signed a security pact with Australia in March 2007 and with India in October 2008 . It is the world 's fifth largest donor of official development assistance , donating US $ 9 @.@ 2 billion in 2014 . 
 Japan has close economic and military relations with the United States ; the US @-@ Japan security alliance acts as the cornerstone of the nation 's foreign policy . A member state of the United Nations since 1956 , Japan has served as a non @-@ permanent Security Council member for a total of 20 years , most recently for 2009 and 2010 . It is one of the G4 nations seeking permanent membership in the Security Council . 
 Japan is engaged in several territorial disputes with its neighbors : with Russia over the South Kuril Islands , with South Korea over the Liancourt Rocks , with China and Taiwan over the Senkaku Islands , and with China over the EEZ around Okinotorishima . Japan also faces an ongoing dispute with North Korea over the latter 's abduction of Japanese citizens and its nuclear weapons and missile program ( see also Six @-@ party talks ) . 
 Japan maintains one of the largest military budgets of any country in the world . Japan contributed non @-@ combatant troops to the Iraq War but subsequently withdrew its forces . The Japan Maritime Self @-@ Defense Force ( JMSDF ) is a regular participant in RIMPAC maritime exercises . 
 Japan 's military ( the Japan Self @-@ Defense Forces ) is restricted by Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution , which renounces Japan 's right to declare war or use military force in international disputes . Accordingly , Japan 's Self @-@ Defence force is a usual military that has never fired shots outside Japan . It is governed by the Ministry of Defense , and primarily consists of the Japan Ground Self @-@ Defense Force ( JGSDF ) , the Japan Maritime Self @-@ Defense Force ( JMSDF ) and the Japan Air Self @-@ Defense Force ( JASDF ) . The forces have been recently used in peacekeeping operations ; the deployment of troops to Iraq marked the first overseas use of Japan 's military since World War II . Japan Business Federation has called on the government to lift the ban on arms exports so that Japan can join multinational projects such as the Joint Strike Fighter . 
 In May 2014 Prime Minister Shinzō Abe said Japan wanted to shed the passiveness it has maintained since the end of World War II and take more responsibility for regional security . He said Japan wanted to play a key role and offered neighboring countries Japan 's support . 
 = = Administrative divisions = = 
 Japan consists of forty @-@ seven prefectures , each overseen by an elected governor , legislature and administrative bureaucracy . Each prefecture is further divided into cities , towns and villages . The nation is currently undergoing administrative reorganization by merging many of the cities , towns and villages with each other . This process will reduce the number of sub @-@ prefecture administrative regions and is expected to cut administrative costs . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Japan has a total of 6 @,@ 852 islands extending along the Pacific coast of East Asia . The country , including all of the islands it controls , lies between latitudes 24 ° and 46 ° N , and longitudes 122 ° and 146 ° E. The main islands , from north to south , are Hokkaido , Honshu , Shikoku and Kyushu . The Ryukyu Islands , which include Okinawa , are a chain to the south of Kyushu . Together they are often known as the Japanese archipelago . 
 About 73 percent of Japan is forested , mountainous , and unsuitable for agricultural , industrial , or residential use . As a result , the habitable zones , mainly located in coastal areas , have extremely high population densities . Japan is one of the most densely populated countries in the world . 
 The islands of Japan are located in a volcanic zone on the Pacific Ring of Fire . They are primarily the result of large oceanic movements occurring over hundreds of millions of years from the mid @-@ Silurian to the Pleistocene as a result of the subduction of the Philippine Sea Plate beneath the continental <unk> Plate and Okinawa Plate to the south , and subduction of the Pacific Plate under the Okhotsk Plate to the north . Japan was originally attached to the eastern coast of the Eurasian continent . The subducting plates pulled Japan eastward , opening the Sea of Japan around 15 million years ago . 
 Japan has 108 active volcanoes . During the twentieth century several new volcanoes emerged , including Shōwa @-@ <unk> on Hokkaido and Myōjin @-@ shō off the <unk> Rocks in the Pacific . Destructive earthquakes , often resulting in tsunami , occur several times each century . The 1923 Tokyo earthquake killed over 140 @,@ 000 people . More recent major quakes are the 1995 Great Hanshin earthquake and the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake , a 9 @.@ 0 @-@ magnitude quake which hit Japan on March 11 , 2011 , and triggered a large tsunami . Japan is substantially prone to earthquakes , tsunami and volcanoes due to its location along the Pacific Ring of Fire and has the highest natural disaster risk in the developed world . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The climate of Japan is predominantly temperate , but varies greatly from north to south . Japan 's geographical features divide it into six principal climatic zones : Hokkaido , Sea of Japan , Central Highland , Seto Inland Sea , Pacific Ocean , and Ryukyu Islands . The northernmost zone , Hokkaido , has a humid continental climate with long , cold winters and very warm to cool summers . Precipitation is not heavy , but the islands usually develop deep snowbanks in the winter . 
 In the Sea of Japan zone on Honshu 's west coast , northwest winter winds bring heavy snowfall . In the summer , the region is cooler than the Pacific area , though it sometimes experiences extremely hot temperatures because of the foehn wind . The Central Highland has a typical inland humid continental climate , with large temperature differences between summer and winter , and between day and night ; precipitation is light , though winters are usually snowy . The mountains of the Chūgoku and Shikoku regions shelter the Seto Inland Sea from seasonal winds , bringing mild weather year @-@ round . 
 The Pacific coast features a humid subtropical climate that experiences milder winters with occasional snowfall and hot , humid summers because of the southeast seasonal wind . The Ryukyu Islands have a subtropical climate , with warm winters and hot summers . Precipitation is very heavy , especially during the rainy season . 
 The average winter temperature in Japan is 5 @.@ 1 ° C ( 41 @.@ 2 ° F ) and the average summer temperature is 25 @.@ 2 ° C ( 77 @.@ 4 ° F ) . The highest temperature ever measured in Japan 40 @.@ 9 ° C ( 105 @.@ 6 ° F ) was recorded on August 16 , 2007 . The main rainy season begins in early May in Okinawa , and the rain front gradually moves north until reaching Hokkaido in late July . In most of Honshu , the rainy season begins before the middle of June and lasts about six weeks . In late summer and early autumn , typhoons often bring heavy rain . 
 = = = Biodiversity = = = 
 Japan has nine forest ecoregions which reflect the climate and geography of the islands . They range from subtropical moist broadleaf forests in the Ryūkyū and Bonin Islands , to temperate broadleaf and mixed forests in the mild climate regions of the main islands , to temperate coniferous forests in the cold , winter portions of the northern islands . Japan has over 90 @,@ 000 species of wildlife , including the brown bear , the Japanese macaque , the Japanese raccoon dog , the Large Japanese Field Mouse , and the Japanese giant salamander . A large network of national parks has been established to protect important areas of flora and fauna as well as thirty @-@ seven Ramsar wetland sites . Four sites have been inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List for their outstanding natural value . 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 In the period of rapid economic growth after World War II , environmental policies were downplayed by the government and industrial corporations ; as a result , environmental pollution was widespread in the 1950s and 1960s . Responding to rising concern about the problem , the government introduced several environmental protection laws in 1970 . The oil crisis in 1973 also encouraged the efficient use of energy because of Japan 's lack of natural resources . Current environmental issues include urban air pollution ( NOx , suspended particulate matter , and toxics ) , waste management , water eutrophication , nature conservation , climate change , chemical management and international co @-@ operation for conservation . 
 As of June 2015 , more than 40 coal @-@ fired power plants are planned or under construction in Japan . The NGO Climate Action Network announced Japan as the winner of its " Fossil of the Day " award for " doing the most to block progress on climate action . " 
 Japan ranks 39th in the 2016 Environmental Performance Index , which measures a nation 's commitment to environmental sustainability . As a signatory of the Kyoto Protocol , and host of the 1997 conference that created it , Japan is under treaty obligation to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions and to take other steps to curb climate change . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Economic history = = = 
 Modern Japan 's economic growth began in the Edo period . Some of the surviving elements of the Edo period are roads and water transportation routes , as well as financial instruments such as futures contracts , banking and insurance of the Osaka rice brokers . During the Meiji period from 1868 , Japan expanded economically with the embrace of the market economy . Many of today 's enterprises were founded at the time , and Japan emerged as the most developed nation in Asia . The period of overall real economic growth from the 1960s to the 1980s has been called the Japanese post @-@ war economic miracle : it averaged 7 @.@ 5 percent in the 1960s and 1970s , and 3 @.@ 2 percent in the 1980s and early 1990s . 
 Growth slowed in the 1990s during the " Lost Decade " due to after @-@ effects of the Japanese asset price bubble and government policies intended to wring speculative excesses from the stock and real estate markets . Efforts to revive economic growth were unsuccessful and further hampered by the global slowdown in 2000 . The economy recovered after 2005 ; GDP growth for that year was 2 @.@ 8 percent , surpassing the growth rates of the US and European Union during the same period . 
 As of 2012 , Japan is the third largest national economy in the world , after the United States and China , in terms of nominal GDP , and the fourth largest national economy in the world , after the United States , China and India , in terms of purchasing power parity . As of 2014 , Japan 's public debt was estimated at more than 200 percent of its annual gross domestic product , the largest of any nation in the world . In August 2011 , Moody 's rating has cut Japan 's long @-@ term sovereign debt rating one notch from <unk> to Aa2 inline with the size of the country 's deficit and borrowing level . The large budget deficits and government debt since the 2009 global recession and followed by the earthquake and tsunami in March 2011 caused the rating downgrade . The service sector accounts for three quarters of the gross domestic product . 
 = = = Exports = = = 
 Japan has a large industrial capacity , and is home to some of the largest and most technologically advanced producers of motor vehicles , electronics , machine tools , steel and nonferrous metals , ships , chemical substances , textiles , and processed foods . Agricultural businesses in Japan cultivate 13 percent of Japan 's land , and Japan accounts for nearly 15 percent of the global fish catch , second only to China . As of 2010 , Japan 's labor force consisted of some 65 @.@ 9 million workers . Japan has a low unemployment rate of around four percent . Some 20 million people , around 17 per cent of the population , were below the poverty line in 2007 . Housing in Japan is characterized by limited land supply in urban areas . 
 Japan 's exports amounted to US $ 4 @,@ 210 per capita in 2005 . As of 2012 , Japan 's main export markets were China ( 18 @.@ 1 percent ) , the United States ( 17 @.@ 8 percent ) , South Korea ( 7 @.@ 7 percent ) , Thailand ( 5 @.@ 5 percent ) and Hong Kong ( 5 @.@ 1 percent ) . Its main exports are transportation equipment , motor vehicles , iron and steel products , semiconductors and auto parts . Japan 's main import markets as of 2012 were China ( 21 @.@ 3 percent ) , the US ( 8 @.@ 8 percent ) , Australia ( 6 @.@ 4 percent ) , Saudi Arabia ( 6 @.@ 2 percent ) , United Arab Emirates ( 5 @.@ 0 percent ) , South Korea ( 4 @.@ 6 percent ) and Qatar ( 4 @.@ 0 percent ) . 
 = = = Imports = = = 
 Japan 's main imports are machinery and equipment , fossil fuels , foodstuffs ( in particular beef ) , chemicals , textiles and raw materials for its industries . By market share measures , domestic markets are the least open of any OECD country . <unk> Koizumi 's administration began some pro @-@ competition reforms , and foreign investment in Japan has soared . 
 Japan ranks 27th of 189 countries in the 2014 Ease of doing business index and has one of the smallest tax revenues of the developed world . The Japanese variant of capitalism has many distinct features : <unk> enterprises are influential , and lifetime employment and seniority @-@ based career advancement are relatively common in the Japanese work environment . Japanese companies are known for management methods like " The Toyota Way " , and shareholder activism is rare . 
 Some of the largest enterprises in Japan include Toyota , Nintendo , NTT DoCoMo , Canon , Honda , Takeda Pharmaceutical , Sony , Panasonic , Toshiba , Sharp , Nippon Steel , Nippon Oil , and Seven & I Holdings Co .. It has some of the world 's largest banks , and the Tokyo Stock Exchange ( known for its Nikkei 225 and <unk> indices ) stands as the second largest in the world by market capitalization . As of 2006 , Japan was home to 326 companies from the Forbes Global 2000 or 16 @.@ 3 percent . In 2013 , it was announced that Japan would be importing shale natural gas . 
 = = = Science and technology = = = 
 Japan is a leading nation in scientific research , particularly technology , machinery and biomedical research . Nearly 700 @,@ 000 researchers share a US $ 130 billion research and development budget , the third largest in the world . Japan is a world leader in fundamental scientific research , having produced twenty @-@ one Nobel laureates in either physics , chemistry or medicine , and three Fields medalists . Some of Japan 's more prominent technological contributions are in the fields of electronics , automobiles , machinery , earthquake engineering , industrial robotics , optics , chemicals , semiconductors and metals . Japan leads the world in robotics production and use , possessing more than 20 % ( 300 @,@ 000 of 1 @.@ 3 million ) of the world 's industrial robots as of 2013 — though its share was historically even higher , representing one @-@ half of all industrial robots worldwide in 2000 . 
 The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency ( JAXA ) is Japan 's space agency ; it conducts space , planetary , and aviation research , and leads development of rockets and satellites . It is a participant in the International Space Station : the Japanese Experiment Module ( Kibo ) was added to the station during Space Shuttle assembly flights in 2008 . Japan 's plans in space exploration include : launching a space probe to Venus , Akatsuki ; developing the Mercury Magnetospheric Orbiter to be launched in 2016 ; and building a moon base by 2030 . 
 On September 14 , 2007 , it launched lunar explorer " SELENE " ( <unk> and Engineering Explorer ) on an H @-@ IIA ( Model <unk> ) carrier rocket from Tanegashima Space Center . SELENE is also known as Kaguya , after the lunar princess of The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter . Kaguya is the largest lunar mission since the Apollo program . Its purpose is to gather data on the moon 's origin and evolution . It entered a lunar orbit on October 4 , flying at an altitude of about 100 km ( 62 mi ) . The probe 's mission was ended when it was deliberately crashed by JAXA into the Moon on June 11 , 2009 . 
 = = = Energy = = = 
 As of 2011 , 46 @.@ 1 % of energy in Japan was produced from petroleum , 21 @.@ 3 % from coal , 21 @.@ 4 % from natural gas , 4 @.@ 0 % from nuclear power , and 3 @.@ 3 % from hydropower . Nuclear power produced 9 @.@ 2 percent of Japan 's electricity , as of 2011 , down from 24 @.@ 9 percent the previous year . However , by May 2012 all of the country 's nuclear power plants had been taken offline because of ongoing public opposition following the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster in March 2011 , though government officials continued to try to sway public opinion in favor of returning at least some of Japan 's 50 nuclear reactors to service . As of November 2014 , two reactors at Sendai are likely to restart in early 2015 . Japan lacks significant domestic reserves and so has a heavy dependence on imported energy . Japan has therefore aimed to diversify its sources and maintain high levels of energy efficiency . 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 Japan 's road spending has been extensive . Its 1 @.@ 2 million kilometers of paved road are the main means of transportation . A single network of high @-@ speed , divided , limited @-@ access toll roads connects major cities and is operated by toll @-@ collecting enterprises . New and used cars are inexpensive ; car ownership fees and fuel levies are used to promote energy efficiency . However , at just 50 percent of all distance traveled , car usage is the lowest of all G8 countries . 
 Since privatisation in 1987 , dozens of Japanese railway companies compete in regional and local passenger transportation markets ; major companies include seven JR enterprises , <unk> Corporation , Seibu Railway and Keio Corporation . Some 250 high @-@ speed Shinkansen trains connect major cities and Japanese trains are known for their safety and punctuality . Proposals for a new Maglev route between Tokyo and Osaka are at an advanced stage . 
 There are 175 airports in Japan ; the largest domestic airport , Haneda Airport , is Asia 's second @-@ busiest airport . The largest international gateways are Narita International Airport , Kansai International Airport and Chūbu Centrair International Airport . Nagoya Port is the country 's largest and busiest port , accounting for 10 percent of Japan 's trade value . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Japan 's population is estimated at around 127 million , with 80 % of the population living on Honshū . Japanese society is one of the most ethnically , linguistically and culturally homogeneous societies in the world , composed of 98 @.@ 5 % ethnic Japanese , with small populations of foreign workers . Zainichi Koreans , Chinese , Filipinos , Brazilians mostly of Japanese descent , Peruvians mostly of Japanese descent and Americans are among the small minority groups in Japan . In 2003 , there were about 134 @,@ 700 non @-@ Latin American Western ( not including more than 33 @,@ 000 American military personnel and their dependents stationed throughout the country ) and 345 @,@ 500 Latin American expatriates , 274 @,@ 700 of whom were Brazilians ( said to be primarily Japanese descendants , or <unk> , along with their spouses ) , the largest community of Westerners . 
 The most dominant native ethnic group is the Yamato people ; primary minority groups include the indigenous Ainu and Ryukyuan peoples , as well as social minority groups like the burakumin . There are persons of mixed ancestry incorporated among the Yamato , such as those from Ogasawara Archipelago . In 2014 , foreign @-@ born non @-@ naturalized workers made up only 1 @.@ 5 % of the total population . Japan is widely regarded as ethnically homogeneous , and does not compile ethnicity or race statistics for Japanese nationals ; however , at least one analysis describes Japan as a multiethnic society . Most Japanese continue to see Japan as a <unk> society . Former Japanese Prime Minister and current Finance Minister Tarō Asō described Japan as being a nation of " one race , one civilization , one language and one culture " , which drew criticism from representatives of ethnic minorities such as the Ainu . <unk> analysis put the number of mixed race Japanese citizens to be around 0 @.@ 5 % of the population . 
 Japan has the second longest overall life expectancy at birth of any country in the world : 83 @.@ 5 years for persons born in the period 2010 – 2015 . The Japanese population is rapidly aging as a result of a post – World War II baby boom followed by a decrease in birth rates . In 2012 , about 24 @.@ 1 percent of the population was over 65 , and the proportion is projected to rise to almost 40 percent by 2050 . 
 The changes in demographic structure have created a number of social issues , particularly a potential decline in workforce population and increase in the cost of social security benefits like the public pension plan . A growing number of younger Japanese are not marrying or remain childless . In 2011 , Japan 's population dropped for a fifth year , falling by 204 @,@ 000 people to 126 @.@ 24 million people . This was the greatest decline since at least 1947 , when comparable figures were first compiled . This decline was made worse by the March 11 earthquake and tsunami , which killed nearly 16 @,@ 000 people with approximately another 2 @,@ 600 still listed as missing as of 2014 . 
 Japan 's population is expected to drop to 95 million by 2050 ; <unk> and government planners are currently in a heated debate over how to cope with this problem . Immigration and birth incentives are sometimes suggested as a solution to provide younger workers to support the nation 's aging population . Japan accepts a steady flow of 15 @,@ 000 new Japanese citizens by naturalization ( <unk> ) per year . According to the UNHCR , in 2012 Japan accepted just 18 refugees for resettlement , while the US took in 76 @,@ 000 . 
 Japan suffers from a high suicide rate . In 2009 , the number of suicides exceeded 30 @,@ 000 for the twelfth straight year . Suicide is the leading cause of death for people under 30 . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Japan has full religious freedom based on Article 20 of its Constitution . Upper estimates suggest that 84 – 96 percent of the Japanese population subscribe to Buddhism or Shinto , including a large number of followers of a syncretism of both religions . However , these estimates are based on people affiliated with a temple , rather than the number of true believers . Other studies have suggested that only 30 percent of the population identify themselves as belonging to a religion . According to Edwin Reischauer and Marius Jansen , some 70 – 80 % of the Japanese do not consider themselves believers in any religion . 
 Nevertheless , the level of participation remains high , especially during festivals and occasions such as the first shrine visit of the New Year . Taoism and Confucianism from China have also influenced Japanese beliefs and customs . Japanese streets are decorated on Tanabata , <unk> and Christmas . Fewer than one percent of Japanese are Christian . Other minority religions include Islam , Hinduism , Sikhism , and Judaism , and since the mid @-@ 19th century numerous new religious movements have emerged in Japan . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 More than 99 percent of the population speaks Japanese as their first language . Japanese is an agglutinative language distinguished by a system of honorifics reflecting the hierarchical nature of Japanese society , with verb forms and particular vocabulary indicating the relative status of speaker and listener . Japanese writing uses kanji ( Chinese characters ) and two sets of kana ( <unk> based on cursive script and radical of kanji ) , as well as the Latin alphabet and Arabic numerals . 
 Besides Japanese , the Ryukyuan languages ( Amami , Kunigami , Okinawan , Miyako , Yaeyama , Yonaguni ) , also part of the Japonic language family , are spoken in the Ryukyu Islands chain . Few children learn these languages , but in recent years the local governments have sought to increase awareness of the traditional languages . The Okinawan Japanese dialect is also spoken in the region . The Ainu language , which has no proven relationship to Japanese or any other language , is moribund , with only a few elderly native speakers remaining in Hokkaido . Public and private schools generally require students to take Japanese language classes as well as English language courses . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Primary schools , secondary schools and universities were introduced in 1872 as a result of the Meiji Restoration . Since 1947 , compulsory education in Japan comprises elementary and middle school , which together last for nine years ( from age 6 to age 15 ) . Almost all children continue their education at a three @-@ year senior high school , and , according to the <unk> , as of 2005 about 75 @.@ 9 percent of high school graduates attended a university , junior college , trade school , or other higher education institution . 
 The two top @-@ ranking universities in Japan are the University of Tokyo and Kyoto University . The Programme for International Student Assessment coordinated by the OECD currently ranks the overall knowledge and skills of Japanese 15 @-@ year @-@ olds as sixth best in the world . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 In Japan , health care is provided by national and local governments . Payment for personal medical services is offered through a universal health insurance system that provides relative equality of access , with fees set by a government committee . People without insurance through employers can participate in a national health insurance program administered by local governments . Since 1973 , all elderly persons have been covered by government @-@ sponsored insurance . Patients are free to select the physicians or facilities of their choice . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Japanese culture has evolved greatly from its origins . Contemporary culture combines influences from Asia , Europe and North America . Traditional Japanese arts include crafts such as ceramics , textiles , lacquerware , swords and dolls ; performances of bunraku , kabuki , noh , dance , and <unk> ; and other practices , the tea ceremony , <unk> , martial arts , calligraphy , origami , onsen , Geisha and games . Japan has a developed system for the protection and promotion of both tangible and intangible Cultural Properties and National Treasures . Nineteen sites have been inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List , fifteen of which are of cultural significance . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 The Shrines of Ise have been celebrated as the prototype of Japanese architecture . Largely of wood , traditional housing and many temple buildings see the use of tatami mats and sliding doors that break down the distinction between rooms and indoor and outdoor space . Japanese sculpture , largely of wood , and Japanese painting are among the oldest of the Japanese arts , with early figurative paintings dating back to at least 300 BC . The history of Japanese painting exhibits synthesis and competition between native Japanese aesthetics and adaptation of imported ideas . 
 The interaction between Japanese and European art has been significant : for example ukiyo @-@ e prints , which began to be exported in the 19th century in the movement known as Japonism , had a significant influence on the development of modern art in the West , most notably on post @-@ Impressionism . Famous ukiyo @-@ e artists include Hokusai and Hiroshige . Hokusai coined the term manga . Japanese comics now known as manga developed in the 20th century and have become popular worldwide . Japanese animation is called anime . Japanese @-@ made video game consoles have been popular since the 1980s . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Japanese music is eclectic and diverse . Many instruments , such as the koto , were introduced in the 9th and 10th centuries . The accompanied recitative of the Noh drama dates from the 14th century and the popular folk music , with the guitar @-@ like shamisen , from the sixteenth . Western classical music , introduced in the late 19th century , now forms an integral part of Japanese culture . The imperial court ensemble <unk> has influenced the work of some modern Western composers . 
 Notable classical composers from Japan include Toru Takemitsu and <unk> Taki . Popular music in post @-@ war Japan has been heavily influenced by American and European trends , which has led to the evolution of J @-@ pop , or Japanese popular music . Karaoke is the most widely practiced cultural activity in Japan . A 1993 survey by the Cultural Affairs Agency found that more Japanese had sung karaoke that year than had participated in traditional pursuits such as flower arranging ( <unk> ) or tea ceremonies . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The earliest works of Japanese literature include the Kojiki and Nihon Shoki chronicles and the Man 'yōshū poetry anthology , all from the 8th century and written in Chinese characters . In the early Heian period , the system of phonograms known as kana ( <unk> and Katakana ) was developed . The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter is considered the oldest Japanese narrative . An account of Heian court life is given in The Pillow Book by Sei Shōnagon , while The Tale of Genji by Murasaki Shikibu is often described as the world 's first novel . 
 During the Edo period , the <unk> ( " townspeople " ) overtook the samurai aristocracy as producers and consumers of literature . The popularity of the works of <unk> , for example , reveals this change in readership and authorship , while Bashō <unk> the poetic tradition of the Kokinshū with his haikai ( haiku ) and wrote the poetic travelogue Oku no Hosomichi . The Meiji era saw the decline of traditional literary forms as Japanese literature integrated Western influences . Natsume <unk> and Mori Ōgai were the first " modern " novelists of Japan , followed by Ryūnosuke <unk> , Jun 'ichirō Tanizaki , Yukio Mishima and , more recently , Haruki Murakami . Japan has two Nobel Prize @-@ winning authors — Yasunari Kawabata ( 1968 ) and <unk> Ōe ( 1994 ) . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Japanese cuisine is based on combining staple foods , typically Japanese rice or noodles , with a soup and <unk> — dishes made from fish , vegetable , tofu and the like – to add flavor to the staple food . In the early modern era ingredients such as red meats that had previously not been widely used in Japan were introduced . Japanese cuisine is known for its emphasis on seasonality of food , quality of ingredients and presentation . Japanese cuisine offers a vast array of regional specialties that use traditional recipes and local ingredients . The Michelin Guide has awarded restaurants in Japan more Michelin stars than the rest of the world combined . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Traditionally , sumo is considered Japan 's national sport . Japanese martial arts such as judo , karate and kendo are also widely practiced and enjoyed by spectators in the country . After the Meiji Restoration , many Western sports were introduced in Japan and began to spread through the education system . Japan hosted the Summer Olympics in Tokyo in 1964 . Japan has hosted the Winter Olympics twice : Sapporo in 1972 and Nagano in 1998 . Tokyo will host the 2020 Summer Olympics , making Tokyo the first Asian city to host the Olympics twice . Japan is the most successful Asian Rugby Union country , winning the Asian Five Nations a record 6 times and winning the newly formed IRB Pacific Nations Cup in 2011 . Japan will host the 2019 IRB Rugby World Cup . 
 Baseball is currently the most popular spectator sport in the country . Japan 's top professional league , now known as Nippon Professional Baseball , was established in 1936 . Since the establishment of the Japan Professional Football League in 1992 , association football has also gained a wide following . Japan was a venue of the Intercontinental Cup from 1981 to 2004 and co @-@ hosted the 2002 FIFA World Cup with South Korea . Japan has one of the most successful football teams in Asia , winning the Asian Cup four times . Also , Japan recently won the FIFA Women 's World Cup in 2011 . Golf is also popular in Japan , as are forms of auto racing like the Super GT series and Formula Nippon . The country has produced one NBA player , <unk> <unk> . 
 = Cristina Yang = 
 Cristina Yang , M.D. , Ph.D. , is a fictional character from the medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States . The character was created by series producer Shonda Rhimes , and is portrayed by actress Sandra Oh . Introduced as a surgical intern at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital , Yang worked her way up to resident level , eventually becoming a cardiothoracic surgical fellow , while her relationships with colleagues Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , George O 'Malley ( T. R. Knight ) , Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) , and Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) formed a focal point of the series . Yang earlier in the series got engaged to Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) , in the past had a relationship with renowned surgeon and mentor Colin Marlow , and wed but later divorced Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) . 
 Oh originally auditioned for the role of Miranda Bailey , although Chandra Wilson was ultimately cast in the part . Oh has received generally positive reviews for her portrayal , with Mark Perigard of the Boston Herald considering her friendship with Meredith to be " the secret core of Grey 's " . Oh has also garnered numerous awards and nominations for her role as Yang , including Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild Award wins in 2006 . She was additionally nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series each year , from 2005 to 2009 . <unk> the character , ABC noted her competitiveness , ambition , and intelligence as her main traits , while her aggressive , and tactless attitude was highlighted as her main weakness . In May 2012 , E ! Online reported that Oh had signed on for two more years , along with her fellow cast members . Oh left the show after season 10 and her character Cristina Yang was written out as a main cast member . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Cristina Yang is introduced as a fellow surgical intern to Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) , George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) , and Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) ; the five of them working under Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) . An atheistic competitive intern of Korean @-@ American ancestry , she first desired to become a doctor after a childhood car accident which killed her father . Yang also suffers from dyslexia , and was raised in Beverly Hills , California by her mother and supportive , Jewish stepfather . She has BA from Smith , an MD from Stanford and a PhD from UC Berkeley . While her emotional pragmatism , competitive perfectionism , and logical nature lead many to view her as a cutthroat " robot " , Cristina hits it off with Meredith on their first day and the pair soon become best friends and each other 's " person " , sharing the same " dark and twisty " sense of humor . She has on @-@ again , off @-@ again sexual encounters with chief of cardiothoracic surgery Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) as an intern that lead her to being pregnant . Yang schedules an abortion without telling him about the pregnancy due to Burke 's behavior towards their lack of relationship status . However , Yang experiences an ectopic pregnancy and Burke discovers the pregnancy after Yang collapses from a burst fallopian tube . Burke and Yang begin a relationship in the aftermath of her miscarriage . After Burke is shot in the arm and develops a hand tremor , Yang helps him cover it up by developing a covert partnership wherein she performs all of his surgeries . Yang initially denies involvement during a confrontation , but then confesses everything to Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) , the chief of surgery . Yang 's actions jeopardize Burke 's chances of becoming chief , which he sees as a huge betrayal . After a short breakup , Yang breaks the silence and Burke proposes marriage , which Yang accepts after eight days of hesitation . 
 Yang is pressured into elaborate wedding plans despite her reluctance . On their wedding day , Yang has a moment of panic , and Burke calls off the wedding , leaving Yang at the altar . Yang went on her honeymoon to Hawaii with Meredith to recover , returning to discover that Burke has disappeared from her life and transferred to a different hospital . Burke is replaced by Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) , who immediately dislikes Yang for her affairs with Marlow and Burke , refusing to let her scrub in on cardiac surgeries . Eventually , Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) moves in with Yang , and she still tries to earn Hahn 's approval . Hahn reveals that she dislikes Yang because she reminds her of an early version of herself and continues to cut Yang out of cardio surgeries and neglects to teach her . Yang first begins to doubt the purpose of remaining in her place at Seattle Grace when the program falls to twelfth on a list of the best teaching hospitals , and Burke wins the Harper @-@ Avery award without mentioning her at all , despite her saving his career . Yang tells the Chief that her current existence in the hospital is " unbearable " and that she has been turned into a ghost . 
 Yang meets Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) , an army trauma surgeon , when he patches her up from being stabbed in the stomach by a falling icicle . The pair are immediately attracted to each other and share a brief kiss . After Owen Hunt is honorably discharged , he is hired as Seattle Grace 's chief of trauma surgery and he and Yang begin a flirtation . Yang grows emotionally when she decides to support Meredith in her relationship with Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , despite her logical misgivings about their staying power and begins to be more emotionally open towards Hunt . However , Hunt has repressed memories of his time in Iraq and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder ( PTSD ) , which causes Hunt to behave erratically , and attack and strangle her while asleep . Yang ends their relationship as she is afraid of sleeping next to him . 
 Christina is unanimously chosen by the attending surgeons to be the first resident to perform a solo surgery due to her excellent skills . However , Yang is disciplined for not reporting the irresponsible behavior of the new interns , and must assign her surgery to another as her punishment . Meredith and Christina have a major falling out when Yang feels Grey failed to stand up for her during the intern scandal , allowing Yang to take the blame , and after Yang chooses Karev as her replacement for the solo surgery over Meredith . The friends eventually reconcile . When Izzie Stevens discovers her life @-@ threatening cancer , Yang is the one she confides in over her other friends due to Yang 's ability to remain emotionally distant . Yang saves Izzie 's life by coming up with a treatment plan and forcing Izzie to tell their friends of her diagnosis . 
 Hunt begins seeing a therapist , and Yang confesses her love for him . The pair begin a tentative relationship , hampered by Hunt 's therapeutic progress and his hot and cold professional behavior , wherein he frequently ignores or penalizes Yang to avoid the appearance of favoritism . With no new head of cardio to teach her and Hunt ignoring her , Yang attempts to find a new specialty in the face of a hospital merger and potential layoffs . None of the other specialties appeal to her and , after managing to anger the heads of several departments who ban her from their rotations , Yang becomes depressed with her lack of surgeries and wonders if it would be best for herself if she is laid off from Seattle Grace in order to find a new program with a cardio @-@ thoracic specialist who could teach her . Yang eventually breaks down and cries to Meredith , confessing that she has not touched a heart in surgery in months and that she misses Burke , not for the relationship , but because of what she could learn from him . As a result , Hunt asks an ex @-@ colleague from the Army , Teddy Altman ( Kim Raver ) , to become the chief of cardio @-@ thoracic surgery as a " gift " for Yang . Altman is insulted by this , and considers leaving , but Yang convinces Altman to stay by telling her that Yang would willingly give up on Hunt if it would mean Altman would teach her . Altman turns down her request and agrees to teach Yang , but Yang eventually decides to end her relationship with Hunt anyway after Hunt is unable to choose whom of the two women he loves . 
 When Meredith 's husband , Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) is shot by a deceased patient 's angry husband during a mass @-@ shooting rampage , Yang is the one who operates on him at gunpoint and saves his life by fooling the shooter into believing Derek is dead . She also rekindles her relationship with Hunt after he is injured by the same shooter . Following the attack on the hospital , the two decide to get married , but Yang refuses to return to work as a surgeon , being traumatized from the pressure of having to save her best friend 's husband and happiness under threat of being shot . Yang later returns to work , but collapses as a result of a stress disorder . Shepherd forces her through her issues by making her perform the same surgery she did on him to a cadaver , and after a push from Altman , she advocates the life of a lung transplant patient . However , Yang then blames Meredith for her trauma and quits her job at the hospital , stating that even though she could be a surgeon she no longer wants to . She takes a temporary bartending job at the Emerald City Bar , much to the shock of her colleagues . Shepherd unintentionally helps her to get back to work by talking to her during her housewarming party and taking her on a fishing trip where she feels other emotions besides fear . 
 Yang decides to go for the position of Chief Resident , but her hopes are brought to a halt when Hunt is in charge of choosing and wishes to avoid the appearance of favoritism . The position of Chief Resident is eventually given to April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) . Later , Yang discovers she is pregnant with Hunt 's child , and decides to get an abortion . Though Hunt accompanies her to the abortion , he is extremely angry with her decision . Yang then operates on Henry Burton ( Scott Foley ) , Altman 's husband , unknown of his identity . When the surgery fails and he dies , Yang is guilt stricken upon learning of her patient 's identity . She and Hunt distance themselves from each other as they keep fighting over the abortion , despite attending marriage counselling . Their marriage comes into serious trouble when Hunt has a one @-@ night stand with a patient 's friend , leaving Yang heartbroken . She decides to move on , unsure of her future with him . 
 As the end of the fifth year of residency is near , the surgical residents , including Yang , prepare for their medical boards for the different fellowships they plan on joining . After she passes her exams , Yang reconciles with Hunt and tells him she is leaving Seattle for the Mayo Clinic , Minnesota . Afterward , Yang , Meredith , Shepherd , Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) , Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , and Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) are involved in an aviation accident while on the way to Boise , Idaho to perform surgery on conjoined twins . Lexie tragically dies , leaving the other surgeons alone , with no sign of help on the way . Following their rescue , Yang , traumatized , suffers from brief reactive psychosis which provokes violent outbursts and makes her unresponsive . She becomes a cardiothoracic surgical fellow and goes , as planned , to the Mayo Clinic , but has difficulties adapting to her new colleagues ' way of working . As a result of her PTSD , she is unable to get on a plane to return to Seattle to say her final goodbye to Sloan who is dying . While in Minnesota , Yang develops a friendship with fellow cardio surgeon Craig Thomas ( William Daniels ) . She mainly teases him with comments regarding his old age . She also begins an affair with the head of surgery Dr. Parker ( Steven Culp ) who has issues with Thomas . After Thomas dies from a heart attack , Yang returns to Seattle Grace for good . 
 Initially things are fraught between her and Owen . She is confused as to why he hired her back as it seems he doesn 't want her there . She finds out ( by chance ) that he actually pushed for her to be back , causing her to see things in a new light . She finally admits to Meredith that she wants Owen back . She is about to tell Owen that she wants him back , when Owen asks her for a divorce . Taken aback , Cristina agrees , but later finds out that the potential conflict of interest regarding the plane crash lawsuit was a key motive behind Owen 's request and confronts him . Owen tells her that he ' feels responsible ' and was worried as he thought she was dead . After the confrontation , Cristina thinks things over and goes to see him before Bailey 's wedding , finally admitting to him that she wants to try again , which leads the two to having sex . They sign the divorce papers afterwards and kiss , hinting that things are not over between them . In the aftermath of the plane accident , the hospital is sued and eventually found guilty of negligence . The surviving doctors , including Yang , must receive $ 15 million of compensation each , which leads the hospital to a near bankruptcy as the insurers refuse to pay . Yang , Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) , and the other surviving doctors buy the hospital with the help of the Harper @-@ Avery Foundation to prevent it from closing , and each become members of the new directing board . After buying the hospital , Yang realizes that she was made for the O.R. and breaks up with Owen because he still wants kids . 
 After breaking up with Owen , Cristina continues to excel at surgery and tries to keep her distance from Owen . They have sex shortly after they break up but decide it is better to just start seeing other people . Although supportive of Meredith 's choice to become a mother , Cristina points out the fact that it has hurt Meredith 's career and clinical judgement . This causes a wedge in their friendship . After seeing Owen with a new girlfriend , Cristina complains to Alex that her work suffers when she 's not getting laid . When Dr. Shane Ross , a second @-@ year resident , stands up to Meredith for her , Cristina gives Shane a kiss . Later , she begins sleeping with him . Cristina is informed that she could be considered for the Harper Avery award from her 3 @-@ D printing of a conduit for baby Nathan even though she was not confident it would be a success initially . 
 While working on her heart trial Cristina continues to sleep with Owen and eventually helps him set up online dating . However , she realizes that all he wants is her . Cristina weighs the pros and cons of staying with Owen by looking at two very different outcomes ; one where she is married , has Owen 's kids and lets Shane take over her research and presents him with the Harper Avery , and one where Cristina and Owen have a ' no @-@ strings @-@ attached ' relationship with each other but Owen wants more and eventually ruins himself . 
 Cristina is nominated for the Harper Avery award and is a strong candidate however is passed over due to her relationship with the Harper @-@ Avery Foundation that co @-@ owns the hospital . Cristina goes to speak at a hospital in Zurich , Switzerland , orchestrated by Preston Burke who built his own hospital following his winning of the Harper Avery . He offers Cristina his job as the head of the hospital so that he can spend more time with his wife and kids . 
 Cristina accepts the offer and interviews candidates for her replacement position at the hospital , including Maggie Pierce . 
 At the end of season 10 she says goodbye to her fellow co @-@ workers she has come to know and love including Owen and Meredith . Cristina and Meredith share special moments together reminiscing about all the horrors they went through and dancing it out one last time . Cristina leaves for Zurich with surgical intern Shane Ross , who chooses to leave in order to study under her abroad . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 On the creation of Yang , Shonda Rhimes said the character contained " a little bit of [ her ] personality " . Speaking with talk show host Oprah Winfrey , Rhimes said : " Cristina was second , simply because she 's the kind of woman I know really well , and I like her . There 's something interesting about a person who is that driven , a little bit emotionally disconnected but still a caring , sweet , and smart individual you could be friends with . " Sandra Oh , initially auditioned for the character of Bailey , adding : " Thank God I did not get that part " , explaining the show would not be the same without fellow cast member , Wilson . Discussing casting Oh as Yang , Rhimes said : " She brought this energy that felt very fresh . From the beginning , I 've been shaping Cristina around Sandra a little bit . One of my favorite things to do is take as much of her dialogue out of a scene as possible because she does so much nonverbally . Then I just watch what she manages to do without having a word to say . " 
 The character of Yang was not originally supposed to be of Asian descent . Oh said her character was " a pert little blonde and the thing is the woman who runs the show , Shonda Rhimes , is a black woman , which makes a big [ expletive ] difference . " In 2009 , when asked why Oh signed on for Grey 's Anatomy , Oh said : " I 'm very proud of this show and I think it came along at the right time for me . It 's a changing time on television because five or ten years ago you wouldn 't have a major network show where half of the cast were not white . " Oh 's original contract with the show expired after season eight , however , E ! Online reported in May 2012 , that Oh , as well as all original cast members , have signed on for two more years . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 The American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) characterized Yang as " competitive " , " ambitious " , and " intelligent " , while also noting her weaknesses : " bossy " , " aggressive " , and " tactless " . Oh said of her character : " I 've always tried to play Cristina with a tremendous amount of focus and ambition — which is the reality for a female surgeon . I mean , in real life there aren 't many of them . But the ones you encounter are at the very top of their game . You have to have a kind of ascetic personality to survive . " James Pickens , Jr. who portrays Dr. Webber said : " That character itself set a bar in terms of how we look at millennial women : independent yet vulnerable , seriously competitive yet caring . " Rhimes referred to Yang 's relationship with Burke by the portmanteau " <unk> " , citing " Losing My Religion " as one of her favorite episodes featuring them because it shows their evolution from the beginning of the second season to its end . 
 Rhimes commented , " [ We see ] her struggle to suppress all of her humanity in pursuit of perfection . And in my mind , what we realize is that she is not cold . She is terrified . Scared that if she lets her emotions out , they will overtake her and she will be hurt . And you can ’ t hate her . Because it 's so incredibly human and understandable . " Yang 's friendship with Meredith has been looked upon as " sisterhood " , and Yang has repeatedly referred to the former as " her person " . This led to the two being dubbed " the twisted sisters " . At the conclusion of season three , the duo went on a " honeymoon " together , and Rhimes called it her favorite detail of the finale . 
 New York magazine wrote of the character : " There 's probably no woman on TV right now more single @-@ mindedly dedicated to her career than Cristina . It has long been her defining characteristic . If it occasionally makes her into a caricature , it has also unquestionably established that she would have an abortion in this circumstance . " Talking about Yang 's abortion in the eighth season , Rhimes explained she intended Yang to have an abortion already in the second season but changed it with an ectopic pregnancy at the suggestion of one of her writers because " that was so much more interesting , story @-@ wise " . As for the abortion in the eighth season , Rhimes commented : " I really wanted Cristina Yang to stay true to who Cristina Yang is . And I feel like that is a character who has never really wanted to be a mother . The idea that this woman would have a child that she did not want and resented for ruining her career and resented Owen for making her have [ it ] would have been hideous . [ The abortion ] made sense for the character . " 
 Discussing his onscreen relationship with Yang , McKidd said : " It 's not going to be easy for them . What I read when I read the season premiere , and this is just my take on it , is that it was very much two very analytical people , Owen and Cristina . They 're very similar in a way , I think , as people . Two analytical people see each other over a crowded ER room and their eyes meet . " On the topic of Yang 's triumphs and challenges in the eighth season , Oh said : " It has been an extremely challenging year that has had a lot of ups and downs , both challenging and exhilarating . We would shoot all our scenes for a day or two straight , and that was extremely challenging because emotionally and physically it becomes really exhausting . " 
 Oh said of Yang 's expressions of emotions during season eight : " You see her express her emotions with only two people : her best friend Meredith and her husband Owen . To see someone being pulled apart so intensely , which honestly most everyone goes through in their life in some ways , if you 're lucky you 're completely pulled apart and then you have to pull yourself together , which hopefully will be the exploration within hopefully the next season . " Although the characters ' marriage is tested , McKidd reported to The Hollywood Reporter : " I think they 're meant for each other . I hold out faith in Cristina and Owen , even though they go to the darkest places out of all the couples on the show . It 's going to get worse but it 's going to get better soon . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The character was well received by the critics at the time of its inception and as the series went on the reviews became increasingly positive and Cristina went on the become an iconic character not just for Grey 's but for television itself . Kelli Catana of The Huffington Post named Yang " the best damn character " of the series . Yang appeared in Comcast 's list of TV 's Most Intriguing Characters , with the website commenting that she is " an engaging yet comedic factor for the prime @-@ time soap Grey 's Anatomy . " Philadelphia Magazine included Yang in its list of the " 10 Best Doctors on Television " . However , the same periodical listed her as one of " The 12 Most Annoying Women on TV " . Mark Perigard of the Boston Herald considers her friendship with Meredith to be " the secret core of Grey 's and perhaps creator Shonda Rhimes ' greatest contribution to prime time . " The Huffington Post 's writer Kelli Catana agreed , saying : " the Meredith / Yang relationship is probably the most true friendship on network television . " Their friendship was listed in AOL TV 's " Top 20 : TV 's Best <unk> " and in Entertainment Weekly 's " 30 Best TV <unk> / Gal Pals " . Yahoo ! Voices also put Yang on their list of " The Most Loyal TV Best Friends of All Time " . Television Without Pity writer Lauren Shotwell claimed Yang is " the only one of these five [ residents ] that regularly acts like an actual doctor " . 
 Yang 's relationship with Burke was positively received ; it was considered as " one of the most interesting relationships on the show " . Similarly , The Orange County Register wrote that their romance became " one of the most touching and funny attractions of Grey 's Anatomy . " Christopher Monfette of IGN was critical of their wedding planning in the third season , saying : " The will @-@ they 's and won 't @-@ they 's fly and fall like hobbled pigeons until the season finale when the show solves both its personal and professional problems in the most obvious and least compelling of ways . " UGO.com placed their break @-@ up on its list of the most horrible TV breakups . In 2009 , Monfette said of Yang 's relationship with Owen : " [ Hunt 's ] interactions with Cristina were perfectly balanced for optimum drama , never together and never apart for so long that the back @-@ and @-@ forth became frustrating . Viewers could clearly see a softening of the typically hard @-@ edged Cristina , a pleasant change for what had become something of a one @-@ note character . " 
 Jennifer Armstrong of Entertainment Weekly also praised the pairing , especially in " Elevator Love Letter " , saying : " As good as they 've been at amping up the romance crackling between Owen and Cristina , Kevin McKidd and Sandra Oh brought the Emmy consideration tonight from scene 1 . " She also added : " I loved seeing Cristina at least try to stand by her man . " Of Yang and Owen 's wedding , Armstrong said : " Glad we made a clean disposal of the Teddy @-@ Owen @-@ Cristina love triangle , though , when he quipped to Teddy , " I heard there 's a guy , " and she said she was happy for him . " She also praised Owen 's proposal scene , giving it an " A " . Later , she praised their marriage , saying : " I am absolutely loving the stronger @-@ than @-@ ever lady @-@ bond between these two this season . Is it because they 're both married now ? Just growing up ? Whatever , it 's the opposite of Blair and Serena 's annoyingly fickle frenemy status on Gossip Girl , and I can ’ t get enough . " 
 New York Magazine praised the abortion storyline , saying that the show " was brave enough to do what almost no other series will : show this one particular , totally legal medical procedure on TV " and that the abortion was " the only plausible resolution " for Yang 's pregnancy . Tanner Stransky , also of Entertainment Weekly , said of Yang 's actions after Owen 's affair : " It alternately seems silly and not silly , when you really think about it . " Robert Bianco of USA Today praised Yang 's storylines in the eighth season , saying : " Their stories are effectively tied into that of a patient whose ability to move forward is complicated by a complex response to a hideous past . " HitFix writer Liane Bonin Starr applauded Yang 's brief departure from Seattle Grace to Mayo Clinic in the ninth season , which was " interesting " as " it showed us a new side of her -- and after so many seasons , that was some welcome insight . " 
 The relation between Meredith and Cristina has been acclaimed and been a highlight of the show . Mark Perigard of the Boston Herald considered the friendship to be " the secret core of Grey 's " . Aisha Harris of Slate called their relation The Best Female Friendship on TV adding that " With those two characters , showrunner Shonda Rhimes and her team of writers created one of the most nuanced and realistic portrayals of female friendship on television . " Samantha Highfill of Entertainment Weekly called Cristina and Meredith the best female friends on TV because " they don ’ t try to be " . There ’ s nothing fake about them , which is a rarity in how female friends are portrayed on television . She further went on to call them ' soulmates ' , " And even though they ’ d never dare get sappy enough to say it , they ’ re soul mates . Margaret Lyons of Vulture ( magazine ) called the friendship " dream BFF relationship . " and the primary focus of the show , " One of the series ' calling cards has been its depiction of female friendship and particularly the primacy that friendship enjoyed over romantic relationships . " 
 E ! at the time of Sandra Oh 's exit wrote , " In Grey 's Anatomy 's 10 @-@ year history , the doctor duo has been through a lot together : weddings , deaths , plane crashes , bomb threats , shooting , you name it , they 've lived ( and danced ) through it . " and added , " And with the three words , " You 're my person . " Cristina Yang and Meredith Grey solidified their status as the small screen 's best best friends ever . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Oh has received numerous awards and nominations for her portrayal of Yang . In 2005 , she was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , which she was nominated for every year until 2009 . Also in 2005 , she was nominated for Best Supporting Actress – Series , Miniseries or Television Film at the 10th Satellite Awards . The next year , the cast won the Satellite Award for Best Cast – Television Series . In 2006 , Oh won the award for Best Supporting Actress – Series , Miniseries or Television Film at the 63rd Golden Globe Awards . In 2006 , the cast was nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series , which they won in 2007 , and were nominated for again the following year . Also at the 12th Screen Actors Guild Awards , Oh won the award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series . In 2010 , Oh was nominated for Outstanding Actress in a Drama Series at the 41st NAACP Image Awards , which she was nominated for again in 2012 , and in 2011 , she was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series at the 42nd NAACP Image Awards . In 2011 , Oh was nominated for Favorite TV Drama Actress and Favorite TV Doctor at the 37th People 's Choice Awards an award she was nominated again for three years later at the 40th People 's Choice Awards and also the subsequent year at the 41st People 's Choice Awards . She was also nominated alongside Pompeo for the Favorite TV Gal Pals category . 
 = Mango Yellow = 
 Mango Yellow ( Portuguese : <unk> Manga ) is a 2002 Brazilian drama film directed by Cláudio Assis . It stars Matheus Nachtergaele , Jonas Bloch , <unk> Paes , Chico Díaz , and Leona Cavalli as working @-@ class people who engage in amorous and social encounters , with most of the action taking place in a hotel and a bar . The directorial debut of Assis , the film was partially inspired by his previous short film Texas Hotel . It was filmed on a low budget in the suburbs of Pernambuco . 
 Mango Yellow received several awards at various film festivals , both in Brazil and abroad , including Festival de Brasília and the Berlin Film Festival . The film was generally praised by domestic reviewers for its characters , soundtrack , cinematography , and depictions of Brazil , while English @-@ speaking critics were more mixed in their response . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens with Lígia , a barmaid who is fed up with her grueling routine and who is forced to routinely turn down the sexual propositions of the bar 's customers . One of the men who hits on Lígia is Isaac , a necrophiliac who enjoys <unk> corpses and drinking their blood . He lives at the Texas Hotel , where Dunga , a gay man , works as a handyman . Dunga is attracted to Wellington , a butcher who delivers meat to the hotel . Wellington , however , is married to Kika , a woman who is proud to be an evangelical Christian . However , Wellington cheats on his wife with a woman named Dayse . Dayse tires of being Wellington 's mistress and tells Dunga about the relationship . 
 Dunga anonymously reveals to Kika that her husband is cheating on her , thinking that if he can destroy their marriage , then he and Wellington can become lovers . Kika finds Wellington and Dayse together , attacks them , and then leaves for good . Wellington goes to the Texas Hotel to seek solace . Dunga wants to take Wellington up to his room , but Wellington is put off by the funeral of the recently deceased owner of the hotel . Meanwhile , Isaac is thrown out of the bar after trying to forcibly grab Lígia . He is then seen driving his car and when he meets Kika , he takes her to his apartment and they have sex . As the film concludes , Lígia is shown again complaining about her routine . This is followed by a montage of everyday city life , ending with Kika deciding to dye her hair the same shade that made Isaac so attracted to Lígia . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Themes = = 
 Writing for The New York Times , Stephen Holden interpreted the film 's message as follows : " This is how the lower half lives in Brazil , and by extension , humanity at its most basic , getting along without the rose @-@ colored protections that affluence affords . " As it deals with these kinds of themes , the film was labeled as " violent " . In response , Assis said that he " films life as it is " . Jose Solis of PopMatters declared that " despite its sorrowful appearance , the film is a celebration of life " . Assis tried to contrast the violence depicted by the Hollywood action films with the " small <unk> " which people face everyday , making it " poetic and violent at the same time " . Bloch 's character shooting corpses represents " a harmless , symbolic addiction " in the same way other aspects of the film " come from it , this violence within us " . 
 Writing in The New Yorker , Michael Sragow said that " The human content ... is the stuff of art @-@ house exploitation . " <unk> Gente 's <unk> Person wrote that the phrase " the human being is stomach and sex " , which is said by the priest in the film , is an apt summary of the film 's " spirit " . Writing in <unk> de Pernambuco , Luciana Veras declared that the film " talk [ s ] about the excluded [ people ] who also crave the same as the characters in the [ tele ] novela [ s ] , from Hollywood films or French novels : love and happiness " . Assis criticized the fact that several directors like to " glamorize poverty , " and as such , he characterized his characters to show the people 's vice . José Geraldo Couto of Folha de S. Paulo wrote that the film shows that " the miserable are not dear waiting for the mercy of others , but are full of life , willing to kill or die to fulfill their desires and instincts " . Deborah Young of Variety opined that the mango yellow color represents both " the jaundiced shade of their broken dreams " and their sense " of nonconformity and feeling alive . " 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Prior to Mango Yellow , Cláudio Assis worked as a production director on the 1996 film Perfumed Ball and as director on three short films . One of them , Texas Hotel , served as an inspiration to Mango Yellow ; Alessandro Giannini of O Estado de S. Paulo said Texas Hotel is " a kind of ' privileged test ' of Mango Yellow " , while TV Guide 's Ken Fox described Mango Yellow as an " expanded version " of Hotel Texas . Couto wrote that the " gratuitous series of aberrations " presented in Texas Hotel was turned into an " articulate narrative and full of meaning " . 
 The production cost was R $ 450 @,@ 000 . Assis was happy with this , noting that Brazilian films cost an average of R $ 3 million at the time . The filming took place in the suburbs of the cities of Recife and Olinda , both in the state of Pernambuco . It was shot with 35 mm cameras brought from São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro , and filming took place in five weeks between September and October 2001 . 
 One of the first ideas Assis had for the film was to show the mons pubis of a waitress he knew . Though he was unsure how to include this element , the yellow @-@ colored pubic hair matched the book Tempo <unk> ( " Yellow Time " ) , by sociologist Renato Carneiro Campos . The title of the film was borrowed from the book , in which the author describes the " rotten teeth of children , the color of poverty in the country " . Assis wanted to create a film to show " the face of the Brazilian people . We are from the Third World and we need to look at ourselves " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Mango Yellow 's premiere was held at the Festival do Rio on October 4 , 2002 , while it was released on domestic theaters on August 15 , 2003 . Despite receiving praise by film critics , it was moderately received by Brazilian audiences . Mango Yellow grossed R $ 769 @,@ 750 , with a viewership of 129 @,@ 021 people in the sixteen Brazilian theaters in which it was shown , representing the twelfth largest audience for a domestic film in 2003 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 35th Festival de Brasília , Mango Yellow was selected as Best Film by the official jury , the popular jury , and critics alike ; it also received the awards for Best Cinematography , Best Editing , Best Cast , and Best Actor ( Díaz ) . Assis won the award for Best Debut Film at the 25th Havana Film Festival , where the film also won the award for Best Cinematography . It also won for Best Cinematography at the Seventh Brazilian Film Festival of Miami . Mango Yellow won in every feature film category at the 13th Cine Ceará — Best Film , Best Director , Best Cinematography , Best Screenplay , Best Art Direction , Best Original Score , Best Actor ( for Nachtergaele ) , and Best Actress ( for Paes ) — and also received a special prize for its costume design . Although nominated in 13 categories at the 2004 Grande Prêmio do Cinema Brasileiro , it only won for Best Cinematography . At the 53rd Berlin International Film Festival , it won the award for Best Film in the Forum section , and received the Grand Prix at the 15th Toulouse Latin America Film Festival . It was also nominated for the Ariel Award for Best Ibero @-@ American Film . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film received generally positive reviews in Brazil . The characters , the actor performances , and the soundtrack were praised by Person and Veras , with Veras noting that the film 's characterizations avoided stereotypes . The film 's cinematography was praised by Person and Veras as well as by Marcelo Hessel from <unk> and <unk> Leite Netto from Folha de S. Paulo , with Netto appreciating that the imagery was neither " decorative " nor " spare " , but a part of the film . The film 's depiction of real life in Brazil was praised by Hessel and Veras , with both of them commenting that City of God is " <unk> " if compared to Mango Yellow , and the Hessel stating that Mango Yellow is " a testimony of documentary and sociological value " . <unk> critic Andrea Don declared it a film that viewers would either love or hate , concluding that " you will not leave the cinema 's room the same as you entered " . 
 Mango Yellow received mixed reviews from English @-@ speaking reviewers . On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a 60 % rating based on five reviews , with an average score of 5 @.@ 6 / 10 . On Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 based on reviews from critics , the film has a score of 40 ( indicating " mixed or average reviews " ) based on five reviews . A The Village Voice reviewer described the characters as " babbling caricatures " and the film as a " shallow Brazilian trifle " . Young called Nachtergaele a " standout " as " He embodies the film 's savage over @-@ the @-@ topness without flattening out as some of the other characters do . " Although praising its cinematography , Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club said it is " a film that has nothing to say " . Sragow , Young , and Fox also praised Carvalho 's work ; Fox said it is " [ t ] <unk> stuff ... but it 's glorious to look at " . In Sragow 's opinion , the penultimate scene — the montage — " boasts an eloquence that eclipses everything else in the movie " . Holden found the characters to be " robust , full @-@ dimensional people " and praised the film 's " surreal flavor " . Solis praised it , saying " the real pleasure " in the film is that Assis " doesn 't recur to exploitation to make these people memorable " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD in Brazil by <unk> <unk> in 2004 , while in the United States it was released by First Run Features in partnership with Global Film Initiative on the " Global Lens 2004 / 2003 " series in 2005 , and on the " The Best of Global Lens : Brazil " in 2011 . 
 = Star Ocean ( video game ) = 
 Star Ocean ( <unk> , Sutā <unk> ) is an action role @-@ playing video game developed by tri @-@ Ace and published by Enix for the Super Famicom . The first game in the Star Ocean series , it was released only in Japan in July 1996 , and was the first game developed by tri @-@ Ace , consisting of staff that had previously left Wolf Team due to being unhappy with the development process for Tales of Phantasia with Namco in 1995 . The game required a special compression chip in its cartridge to compress and store all of the game 's data due to possessing graphics that pushed the limits of the aging Super Famicom . Additionally , the game had voice acting for the game 's intro and voice clips that played during the game 's battle gameplay , a rarity for games on the system . 
 The story involves three friends who , while searching for the cure to a new disease , come into contact with a space @-@ faring federation that is locked in a war with another galactic power . Using advanced technologies and time travel , the group attempts to uncover the cause of the war and to find a cure for their planet . The game was never released outside Japan in this form , due to Enix closing its American branch shortly before the game was finished , and Nintendo 's focus on supporting the then @-@ upcoming Nintendo 64 video game console . However , the game was later remade by Tose for the PlayStation Portable under the title Star Ocean : First Departure , and released in English @-@ speaking regions in North America , Europe , and Australia in October 2008 . The game was the start of the entire Star Ocean series , featuring five games , two remakes , and a manga comic . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Star Ocean is a role @-@ playing video game that is played from a top @-@ down perspective . The player navigates a character throughout the game world , exploring towns and dungeons and interacting with non @-@ player characters . Unlike the original game , the PlayStation Portable remake includes a world map for the player to navigate . 
 = = = Party = = = 
 In progressing through the game , the player is able to recruit up to eight additional characters to travel alongside the protagonist ; some recruitments happen automatically , while others only happen depending on the previous actions and options taken by the player . Though only 8 characters can be recruited in a playthrough , ten characters are available to be recruited , and as a result not all characters can be recruited in one playthrough of the game . Certain characters cannot be recruited unless the players party is a specific size , or the players has made specific story decisions . In First Departure , players have the option of recruiting characters they did not previously have the option of adding to their party . 
 = = = Battle = = = 
 When players move their party in the game 's dungeons and paths , random battles occur . Combat is done in a 3D isometric point of view . Unlike games in the Final Fantasy or Dragon Quest series , the battles are not turn based , but play out in real time . Players also do not directly control all of their characters actions , but instead chose battle strategies beforehand for all but one of their characters who then move and attack their closest enemy automatically . Added to First Departure was a combo attack system where special attacks stack to become more powerful . Players can equip characters with four special abilities with " ranged " and " distance " slots , whereas the remake reduced that number to two . Up to four characters can participate in battles , but the player is only able to control one character at a time , leaving the others to be controlled by the computer 's artificial intelligence . The player can switch which character is being controlled in battle . All characters have a standard " attack " option , in which the character 's equipped item is used to attack whichever enemy the player has locked on to . Additionally , special techniques called <unk> can be used as well , which have the potential to deal more damage , but cost MP ( Mental Points ) , of which each character has a finite amount . Special attacks are assigned before combat begins . 
 = = = Customization = = = 
 Special Points ( abbreviated " SP " in game ) are also rewarded from battles , and are used to customize the character 's abilities . For instance , allotting SP to the cooking ability grants or improves a given character 's ability to make consumable foods out of raw materials in order to heal characters from damage taken in battles . Item creation can allow for characters to be able to create weapons and equipment that are stronger than those available to be bought in stores and towns . Individual items have a 20 item limit . 
 = = = Affection system = = = 
 Star Ocean has a game mechanic called " Private Actions " that plays a role in character development . While entirely optional , they often reveal additional backstory of particular characters or have other varying effects on gameplay . Upon arriving in a town , the player can opt to have all the characters in the party to temporarily split up and go their separate ways within the limitations of the town . The player retains control of just <unk> , and is able to look for the other characters . Upon finding other party members , various events may happen ; sometimes only small talk results , other times , larger events happen , that may even require a choice to be made by the player . Depending on the results , this can cause characters to either gain or lose " affinity " toward other characters in the party . For example , if one character loves another , the affinity level will be high , but if the former is mistreated , it will lower their feelings for the latter . A character 's affinity towards one another can have effects on the rest of the game . Affinity also affect which character 's endings players see . While the game 's overarching plot always largely ends the same , various parts of the ending are changed , added , or left out , depending on characters ' affinity at the end of the game . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game starts off in a small town of <unk> on the under @-@ developed planet of <unk> . There , a few of the local Fellpool ( cat @-@ like people ) youth , Roddick , Millie , and Dorne , are part of the village 's local " Defense Force " , who defend the village from minor threats such as thieves and robbers . However , one day , a neighboring town , <unk> , starts contracting a terrible disease that turns people into stone . The town healer , Millie 's father , contracts the disease while trying to get rid of it , leading the group to search Mt . <unk> for a herb that is rumored to cure any sickness . Dorne unintentionally contracts the disease as well after touching an infected pigeon . 
 When they reach the summit , they are confronted by Ronyx J. Kenny and Ilia Silvestri , two crew members of the Earth Federation ( Terran Alliance in the PSP remake ) starship Calnus . They inform them that the disease was sent to the planet by a foreign race called the <unk> , whom the Earth Federation has been at war with . Roddick and Millie go with them on their spacecraft to help them find a cure . They learn that Fellpool blood could be used to process a special , invisible material which could give them a massive advantage in the war . Upon coming in contact with <unk> , they reveal that they were being forced into war by a shadowy , powerful third party with a disgust for the Federation . 
 Before Dorne fully succumbs to the disease , they do tests on him to figure out a cure . They determined that the only possible way to fight it would be to make a vaccine that uses the original source of the disease . While the origin of the virus is tracked back to being on <unk> itself , it is from Asmodeus , the King of the Demon World , who had been killed 300 years prior to the spread of the disease . Ronyx talks the group into using a Time Gate on the <unk> Styx to go back 300 years into the past to track down Asmodeus back when he was still alive . While this works , Ilia trips while approaching the gate . As such , Ilia and Roddick have a delay from when they enter the time gate , and after the trip through time , they find themselves separated from Ronyx and Millie . The two groups work towards locating each other , and Asmodeus , in efforts to heal their family members and stop the war . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Roddick <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a 19 @-@ year @-@ old Fellpool swordsman and the game 's protagonist . A childhood friend of Mille and Dorne who served with them as town watchmen before being swept into adventure . He is voiced by Yuri Lowenthal in the English version , Mamoru Miyano in the Japanese remake , and Hiro Yuki in Super Famicom original . 
 Millie <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Milly <unk> ) is an 18 @-@ year @-@ old Fellpool practitioner of <unk> healing magic who wields a staff , and a longtime friend and romantic interest for Roddick . She is voiced by Katie Leigh in the English version , Hitomi <unk> in the Japanese remake , and Konami Yoshida in the Super Famicom original . 
 Ronyx J. Kenny ( <unk> ・ J ・ <unk> , <unk> J. Kenny ) is the 38 @-@ year @-@ old human captain of the starship Calnus , and uses a bow and arrows after leaving his phaser weapon behind . He is the father of Claude C. Kenny , the protagonist of Star Ocean : The Second Story . He is voiced by Sam Gold in the English version , Kenji Hamada in the Japanese remake , and Akira <unk> in the Super Famicom original . 
 Ilia Silvestri ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Iria <unk> ) is the 23 @-@ year @-@ old human head science officer on the Calnus , serving under Ronyx . She fights using martial arts supplemented by gloves or claws , and enjoys alcohol . She is voiced by Julie Maddalena in the English version , Sanae Kobayashi in the Japanese remake , and Wakana Yamazaki in the Super Famicom original . 
 <unk> Warren ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Cius Warren ) is a 20 @-@ year @-@ old Highlander who wields a large broadsword . Son of Lord Lias , one of the Three Heroes of the Demonic Wars , he dreams of becoming the greatest swordsman in the land . He is voiced by Grant George in the English version , and Hiroki Tochi in both Japanese versions . 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a 57 @-@ year @-@ old Highlander soldier wandering the world to find a successor in which to teach his sword skills . If recruited , he forms such a relationship with Roddick , and thus they share many of the same techniques . He is voiced by Michael <unk> in the English version , and Norio Wakamoto in the Japanese remake , and Kazuhiko Inoue in the Super Famicom original . 
 <unk> Melle ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Fear Mell ) is a 20 @-@ year @-@ old Highlander and the head of the Astral Knights who uses throwing daggers in combat with the <unk> @-@ ken style . She has feelings for <unk> , but hides them under her outward desire to be a great knight . She is voiced by Dorothy Fahn in the English version , Megumi Toyoguchi in the Japanese remake , and Konami Yoshida in the Super Famicom original . 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Marvel Frozen ) is a mysterious 19 @-@ year @-@ old sorceress who accompanies Ronyx and Millie to <unk> . Her weapon is an orb that she throws at the enemy . She is voiced by Tara Platt in the English version , <unk> Kuwashima in the Japanese remake , and Nozomi Nonaka in the Super Famicom original . 
 <unk> Jerand ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Jerand ) is a 20 @-@ year @-@ old magic @-@ using <unk> who is searching for his sister Erys , whom he was separated from after their parents were murdered . He despises combat , but realizes it as a necessary evil to survive in the world . He is voiced by Ezra Weisz in the English version , Jun Fukuyama in the Japanese remake , and Nobuyuki Hiyama in the Super Famicom original . 
 T <unk> Arcana ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a 18 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> who can transform into a dark blue werewolf in battle , and trains to become an excellent fighter and martial artist . He is voiced by Vic Mignogna in the English version , Chihiro Suzuki in the Japanese remake , and Takuya <unk> in the Super Famicom original . 
 <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a 16 @-@ year @-@ old Lesser Fellpool with more pronounced cat @-@ like features including feline ears and fangs . <unk> serves as comedic relief , starting with low stats but gains several powerful techniques . She is voiced by <unk> Packard in the English version , Yukari Tamura in the Japanese remake , and Wakana Yamazaki in the Super Famicom original . 
 Erys Jerand ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Eris Jerand ) is <unk> 's 17 @-@ year @-@ old sister who was kidnapped when they were children , and was brainwashed to be an assassin by the mysterious Crimson Shield . She later escaped and swapped her body with <unk> to search for her parents ' killer in secret . Erys does not appear in the original Super Famicom release , and is voiced by Stephanie <unk> in English , and Kana Ueda in Japanese . 
 Welch Vineyard ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Welch Vineyard ) is a mysterious 18 @-@ year @-@ old traveler who appears somewhat ditzy and interested in meeting guys . Welch , like Erys , is only available in the remake . She first appeared as a non @-@ playable character in Star Ocean : Till the End of Time , but has been retroactively added to the first two games . She is voiced by Melissa Fahn in the English version , and Tomoe <unk> in the Japanese version . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 1994 , video game developers Wolf Team signed a deal with publisher Namco to release the game that would be Tales of Phantasia , which was later released in 1995 in Japan for the Super Famicom . However , the development cycle for this game was plagued with creative disputes between the developers and publisher , leading to much of the development team leaving to form a new company , which would become tri @-@ Ace , which explains some of the common themes between the games , such as the similar battle systems . 
 After Tales of Phantasia was completed , some of the games designers felt that the core skill and item systems were too " generic " , and for their next game they would make a much deeper gameplay experience . To deepen the story , the " private action " system was created to reveal more of the characters history , personality and relationships , but the score the game generated from various choices was hidden from players since there was no " right " or " wrong " story path . In order to tell a " bigger " story , space was chosen as the setting . 
 Both Tales of Phantasia and Star Ocean stretched the power of the Super Famicom to its limits , with a total of 48 megabits of data . Additionally , Star Ocean was also one of two games that used a special S @-@ <unk> chip to aid in compression of almost all graphics and map data , meaning that it effectively stored even more data than Tales of Phantasia , though the compression lead to a lower audio quality . The game also featured special technology called a " Flexible Voice Driver " that allowed for the compression of sound , allowing for voice clips for characters when in battles , another trait that was both very rare for a Super Famicom game , and shared with Tales of Phantasia . Different voice clips would be played depending on the scenario ; if the characters were confronted by weak enemies , they may say something more confident , where as if confronted by strong enemies , they may say something more fearful or frantic . Mode 7 graphics were generated using software , and appear when items pop out of treasure chests ; the need for extra tiles , however , limited the graphical effects implementation . The game also featured surround sound . Planning for a sequel began as soon as development was completed on Star Ocean . Feedback about weak boss monsters later lead to more challenging battles in Star Ocean 2 . 
 The game was released on July 19 , 1996 . Despite appearing in North American video game magazine Nintendo Power in 1996 , the Super Famicom version was never officially released anywhere outside Japan . Enix America ceased to publish games in North America by the end of 1995 due to poor sales , and Nintendo had already passed on publishing Tales of Phantasia a year prior , instead choosing to focus on the then @-@ upcoming Nintendo 64 video game console . However , the game was unofficially translated into English by <unk> Translations , who created a patch that made the game fully playable in English via emulation . The game would not be officially available in English until 12 years later , when the game was remade for the PlayStation Portable as Star Ocean : First Departure in 2008 . 
 = = = First Departure = = = 
 Star Ocean : First Departure is an enhanced remake of the original Star Ocean , developed by TOSE . The first details of the game were revealed at the " Star Ocean Special Stage " during the Square Enix Party 2007 , alongside those of Star Ocean : The Second Story . Yoshinori Yamagishi , producer of the series , stated that he wants the remakes to feel as though they 're completely new games . 
 The game was released in Japan on December 27 , 2007 , and was released in North America and Europe on October 21 , 2008 and October 24 , 2008 respectively ; making it the first time that the original Star Ocean was officially released outside Japan . The English localization was handled by <unk> , Inc . , with voice @-@ over production services provided by Epcar Entertainment , Inc . First Departure uses a slightly altered version of the engine used for Star Ocean : The Second Story with similar features , including prerendered backgrounds , 3D battle fields and hand drawn facial animations . Production I.G provided new artwork and animated cutscenes for the game . New playable characters have been added as well . New voice actors and extensive amounts of new , fully voiced dialogue were included , with even some non @-@ player characters being voiced over as well . A limited edition called the Star Ocean : First Departure Eternal Edition was released exclusively in Japan alongside the standard version . It features alternate box art and was bundled with a Star Ocean @-@ themed PSP @-@ 2000 handheld and carrying pouch . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The scores for Star Ocean and First Departure were composed and arranged by Motoi Sakuraba , whose arranged soundtracks he also performed on . The Japanese music group <unk> composed the first song of the album entitled " Heart " , which is the games theme song . The album Star Ocean Perfect Sound Collection was released after the original soundtrack in both an arranged and drama album format . 
 Critics praised Sakuraba 's progressive rock style , and highlighted his musical experimentation throughout the original Star Ocean score and Final Departure . Tracks added from Star Ocean : The Second Story received mixed reviews on the First Departure album , adding some familiar Star Ocean themes but also some lesser known songs to the mix . Several musical pieces were missing from the original album and were added to the remakes release . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The original Super Famicom release of Star Ocean sold approximately 235 @,@ 000 copies in Japan , of which just over 175 @,@ 000 copies were sold during 1996 . In a 2009 retro review , NintendoLife praised the game 's technical aspects calling it " one of the best @-@ looking Super Nintendo games ever created " and that the soundtrack " never ceases to amaze " . It maintains a 93 % average rating from aggregate review website GameRankings . 
 Star Ocean : First Departure on the PlayStation Portable sold 115 @,@ 280 copies in its debut week in Japan , with lifetime sales of approximately 204 @,@ 996 copies in the region . It received a 31 out of 40 total score from Japanese magazine Weekly Famitsu , based on individual scores of 8 , 7 , 8 , and 8 , earning it the publication 's Silver Award . While the editors thought the title 's animation and characters were well done and the story was " charming " they lamented that players could only save their progress at certain points such as the world map , which they also felt too large and had a limited field of view . 
 The English version of First Departure received mixed to average reviews , earning a 77 % rating on GameRankings and a 74 out of 100 average from Metacritic . Many reviewers felt that despite the updated graphics and sound , the game still felt less refined than more modern role @-@ playing games . IGN found the game to have a " bland , awkwardly @-@ told narrative " with " weak characters " , but that it would appeal to fans of older games , stating " If you can look at First Departure and understand that it 's based on a very old title , you 'll likely be able to overlook the problems and get a fair amount of satisfaction " . GameSpot also stated that the title had " limited appeal " in addition to providing little challenge . Andrew Fitch of 1UP.com , however , called First Departure an " overlooked classic " with " ridiculously engrossing crafting minutiae " and numerous character party combinations that increase its replay value . GameSpy would additionally declare that " Despite a couple of minor hitches , Star Ocean : First Departure is one of the best remakes Square Enix has brought to portable consoles . " 
 = 1890 – 91 Sheffield United F.C. season = 
 The 1890 – 91 season was Sheffield United 's second , and their first and only season playing in the newly formed Midland Counties League , as the club sought to establish itself as a major footballing force . The team was selected by the club 's football committee and coached by a trainer , but day @-@ to @-@ day affairs were overseen by club secretary Joseph Wostinholm . The club saw a large influx of players during the season as it continued to bolster its numbers with amateurs loaned or signed from other teams in the local area , a policy that resulted in an unsettled side , indifferent league results , and a mid @-@ table finish . 
 United ( nicknamed the Blades ) entered the FA Cup once more but were lucky to reach the first round proper , losing to Burton Swifts during qualifying only to see the Staffordshire club disqualified . They also competed in the Wharncliffe Charity Cup and the Sheffield Challenge Cup , in which they were beaten finalists for the second year in succession . 
 The development of the playing squad continued with the signings of John Drummond and Billy Hendry from Preston North End , who brought experience and a solid professionalism . Harry Lilley was recruited in the early part of the season , and became a regular in United 's defence for several seasons . 
 = = Background = = 
 After a first season of mixed fortunes on the field the football committee recognised the appetite amongst the Sheffield public for the game , as attendances at Bramall Lane had steadily increased . They recognised that league football was essential to grow that interest and offer a better standard of opposition , and had therefore joined the recently created Midland Counties League , although still insisting on organising numerous friendly fixtures . The committee continued to select the team , although J. B. Wostinholm oversaw the day – to – day running of the club . 
 = = Kit = = 
 Although United 's jersey remained predominantly white , thin red vertical stripes were introduced for the first time , which evolved into the solid red and white stripes that the team still plays in today . The team retained the blue shorts and socks worn in the previous season . 
 = = Season overview = = 
 = = = Midland Counties League = = = 
 The previous season had been considered reasonably successful , but United still looked to improve the quality of players in the squad . The players recruited from Scotland during the previous summer had failed to live up to expectations and the majority of them were released ; only Calder and Robertson were retained . Billy Bridgewater and Edward Cross were signed from nearby Rotherham Town , and Harry Lilley arrived from Staveley during the close season , but the Blades persisted with their policy of utilising guest amateur players from the local area . 
 United were now playing in the Midland Counties League but results were indifferent , with the Blades winning only twice in their opening eight fixtures . Their fortunes began to improve in November and December however as they registered a series of victories including an impressive 4 – 0 win over Kidderminster at Bramall Lane and a 5 – 2 victory at Derby Midland . Despite the relative failure of their previous recruitment in Scotland , by the end of the year United had signed Gavin Crawford and Harry Munro from north of the border as the Blades entered 1891 in more positive form . 
 Following a league fixture break during January 1891 United resumed their campaign in February , but the form they had shown in the run up to Christmas deserted them , and results were inconsistent . In the midst of congested fixture list the Blades finished the season fifth in the league ( out of ten sides ) and once again resolved to improve the quality of players by recruiting established professionals ahead of the next season . They duly negotiated the transfers of John Drummond , Billy Hendry and Samuel Dobson from Preston North End , then one of the top sides in the country , and they arrived over a number of weeks through February and March to bolster United 's first team options . The most significant signing during the season was that of a young Ernest Needham from Staveley in February 1891 . Although he did not play for United in the 1890 – 91 season he went on to become one of the club 's greatest players , making more than 500 appearances . 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 Having had relative success during their first FA Cup campaign the previous season United struggled to replicate that form and were fortunate to make it past the qualifying rounds in 1890 . Having narrowly defeated Derby Junction they lost 2 – 1 to Burton Swifts in the next game , but the Staffordshire club was subsequently disqualified for fielding an ineligible player . Matlock and Loughborough were then easily despatched as United reached the first round proper of the cup for the second time . This was as far as the Blades would progress however , as they met Notts County at Bramall Lane in mid – January only to be trounced 9 – 1 by the visitors , a result that remains the club 's worst in the competition . 
 = = = Local cups = = = 
 United once again entered the Sheffield Challenge Cup and reached the final for the second season in succession . After a straightforward 7 – 1 victory over Attercliffe in round one the Blades made their way past Kilnhurst in the semi @-@ final at the second time of asking . On 21 March they met near neighbours Doncaster Rovers in the final , but despite having home advantage , with the game being played at Bramall Lane , United lost 2 – 1 . 
 The team entered the Wharncliffe Charity Cup at the semi @-@ final stage but were drawn against established cross @-@ city rivals The Wednesday . Despite increasing rivalry between the clubs , a relatively small crowd of just over 3 @,@ 000 spectators were present at Wednesday 's Olive Grove ground to watch them beat United 2 – 1 . 
 = = = Friendlies = = = 
 Despite now playing competitive league football United continued to fill the fixture list with numerous friendlies , which ultimately led to them playing 64 first @-@ team games over the course of eight months . There was a noticeable improvement in the quality of opposition however , as a number of the more established professional teams visited Bramall Lane during the first half of the season , drawing reasonable crowds in the process . Although there were early season losses to Everton and Preston North End , United secured victories against Bolton Wanderers and Derby County , both at the time members of the Football League First Division . 
 The second half of the season saw a continued run of exhibition games but the quality of opposition was , at times , not as high . Despite lesser opposition , results tailed off as the fixture congestion these games created began to take its toll on the squad , most notably at the point when United 's involvement in the Sheffield Challenge Cup meant that they had two first @-@ team games scheduled for the same day . Rather than cancelling the pre @-@ arranged friendlies the Blades went ahead with both fixtures , splitting the first team between them . The highlight of the fixture calendar did result from a friendly match however , as a then record 14 @,@ 000 <unk> were present at Bramall Lane in January to watch United beat local rivals The Wednesday for the first time , running out 3 – 2 victors . January also saw United take on their first ever non – English team when they played Scottish side <unk> , although the match was limited to only 35 minutes each way owing to poor light . 
 = = Squad = = 
 Source : 
 = = = First team = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Players leaving before end of the season = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = Transfers = = 
 = = = In = = = 
 = = = Out = = = 
 = = League table = = 
 Source : 
 = = Squad statistics = = 
 = = = Appearances and goals = = = 
 As of the end of the season 
 = = = Top Scorers = = = 
 = = Results = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Key = = = 
 Win Draw Loss Void 
 = = = Midland Counties League = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Sheffield Challenge Cup = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Wharncliffe Charity Cup = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Friendlies = = = 
 Source : 
 = Memento ( film ) = 
 Memento is a 2000 American neo @-@ noir psychological thriller film directed and written by Christopher Nolan , and produced by Suzanne and Jennifer Todd , based on a pitch by Jonathan Nolan , later becoming " Memento Mori " . It stars Guy Pearce , Carrie @-@ Anne Moss , and Joe Pantoliano . Memento is presented as two different sequences of scenes interspersed during the film : a series in black @-@ and @-@ white that is shown chronologically , and a series of color sequences shown in reverse order ( simulating in the audience the mental state of the protagonist , who suffers from anterograde amnesia ) . The two sequences " meet " at the end of the film , producing one complete and cohesive narrative . 
 Memento premiered on September 5 , 2000 , at the Venice International Film Festival and was released in European theaters starting in October . It became a blockbuster success , being acclaimed by critics who praised its nonlinear narrative structure and motifs of memory , perception , grief , and self @-@ deception , and was successful at the box office , earning $ 39 @.@ 7 million on a $ 9 million budget . It received numerous accolades , including Academy Award nominations for Best Original Screenplay and Best Film Editing . The film was subsequently ranked one of the best films of its decade by several critics and media outlets . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film starts with the Polaroid photograph of a dead man . As the sequence plays backwards the photo reverts to its undeveloped state , entering the camera before the man is shot in the head . This is followed by sequences of black and white chronologically and color reverse @-@ chronologically interspersed . 
 The black @-@ and @-@ white sequences begin with Leonard Shelby ( Guy Pearce ) in a motel room speaking to an unnamed telephone caller who is not shown on @-@ screen . Leonard has anterograde amnesia and is unable to store recent memories , the result of an attack by two men . Leonard explains that he killed the attacker who raped and strangled his wife ( Jorja Fox ) , but a second clubbed him and escaped . The police did not accept that there was a second attacker , but Leonard believes the attacker 's name is John or James , with a last name starting with G. Leonard conducts his own investigation using a system of notes , Polaroids , and tattoos . As an insurance investigator , Leonard recalls one Sammy Jankis ( Stephen Tobolowsky ) , also diagnosed with the same condition . Sammy 's diabetic wife ( Harriet Sansom Harris ) , who was not sure if his condition was genuine , repeatedly requested insulin injections to try to get him to break his act . He overdosed her , falling into a coma and dying as a result . 
 The color sequences are shown reverse @-@ chronologically . In the story 's chronology , Leonard gets a tattoo , based on self @-@ directed instructions , of John G 's license plate . Finding a note in his clothes , he meets Natalie ( Carrie @-@ Anne Moss ) , a bartender who resents Leonard as he wears the clothes and drives the car of her boyfriend , Jimmy . After understanding his condition , she uses it to get Leonard to drive a man named Dodd ( Callum Keith Rennie ) out of town and offers to run the license plate to help his investigation . Meanwhile , Leonard meets with a contact , Teddy ( Joe Pantoliano ) . Teddy helps with Dodd , but warns him about Natalie ; Leonard finds a photo written to not trust him , however . Natalie provides Leonard the driver 's license , which shows a John Edward Gammell , Teddy 's full name . Confirming Leonard 's information on " John G " and his warnings , Leonard meets Teddy and drives him to an abandoned building , killing him as shown in the opening . 
 In the final black @-@ and @-@ white sequence , prompted by the caller , Leonard meets Teddy in the motel lobby . Teddy is an undercover officer and has found Leonard 's " John G , " Natalie ’ s boyfriend , Jimmy <unk> ( Larry Holden ) , and directs Leonard to the same abandoned building outside of town . When Jimmy arrives , Leonard strangles him and takes a photo of the body . As it develops , the black @-@ and @-@ white transitions to color , thus beginning the color sequences . Leonard swaps clothes with Jimmy , hearing Jimmy whisper " Sammy . " As Leonard has only told Sammy 's story to those met , he doubts Jimmy is the attacker . Teddy arrives and asserts that Jimmy was John G , but when Leonard is not convinced , Teddy reveals that Leonard had killed the real attacker over a year ago , having helped Leonard find him . Teddy claims that since " John G " is a common name , he will continually forget , beginning his search again and that even Teddy himself has a " John G " name . Further , Teddy explains that Leonard 's wife was the diabetic who overdosed ; Sammy was actually single . After hearing Teddy 's exposition , Leonard consciously burns Jimmy 's photograph , drives off in Jimmy 's car and has Teddy 's license plate number tattooed on himself as the one of the second attacker , which will lead to the events of Teddy 's death . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Film structure = = 
 The <unk> ( <unk> ) , or the presentation of the film , is structured with two timelines : one in color and one in black @-@ and @-@ white . The color sequences are alternated with black @-@ and @-@ white sequences . The latter are put together in chronological order . The color ones , though shown forward ( except for the very first one , which is shown in reverse ) are ordered in reverse . Chronologically , the black @-@ and @-@ white sequences come first , the color sequences come next . 
 Using the numbering scheme suggested by Andy Klein in his article for Salon magazine who took numbers from 1 to 22 for the black @-@ and @-@ white sequences and letters A – V for the color ones the plotting of the film as presented is : Opening Credits ( shown " backward " ) , 1 , V , 2 , U , 3 , T , 4 , S , ... , 22 / A , Credits . 
 There is a smooth transition from the black @-@ and @-@ white sequence 22 to color sequence A and it occurs during the development of a Polaroid photograph . 
 The <unk> of the film ( the chronological order of the story ) can be viewed as a " Hidden feature " on the 2 @-@ Disc Limited Edition Region 1 DVD and the 3 @-@ Disc special Edition Region 2 DVD . In this special feature the chapters of the film are put together into the chronological order and is shown : Ending Credits ( run in reverse ) , 1 , 2 , 3 , ... , 22 , A , B , ... , V , then the opening title runs " backward " to what was shown ( the opening title sequence is run in reverse during the actual film , so it is shown forward in this version ) . 
 Stefano <unk> wrote an article in Film Anthology which discusses how Nolan provides the viewer with the clues necessary to decode the <unk> as we watch and help us understand the <unk> from it . The color sequences include a brief overlap to help clue the audience into the fact that they are being presented in reverse order . The purpose of the fragmented reverse sequencing is to force the audience into a sympathetic experience of Leonard 's defective ability to create new long @-@ term memories , where prior events are not recalled , since the audience has yet to see them . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In July 1996 , brothers Christopher and Jonathan Nolan took a cross @-@ country road trip from Chicago to Los Angeles , as Christopher was relocating his home to the West Coast . During the drive , Jonathan pitched the story for the film to his brother , who responded enthusiastically to the idea . After they arrived in Los Angeles , Jonathan left for Washington , D.C. , to finish college at Georgetown University . Christopher repeatedly asked Jonathan to send him a first draft , and after a few months , Jonathan complied . Two months later , Christopher came up with the idea to tell the film backwards , and began to work on the screenplay . Jonathan wrote the short story simultaneously , and the brothers continued to correspond , sending each other subsequent revisions of their respective works . Christopher initially wrote the script as a linear story , and then would " go back and reorder it the way it is on screen to check the logic of it . " 
 Jonathan 's short story , titled " Memento Mori " , is radically different from Christopher 's film , although it maintains the same essential elements . In Jonathan 's version , Leonard is instead named Earl and is a patient at a mental institution . As in the film , his wife was killed by an anonymous man , and during the attack on his wife , Earl lost his ability to create new long @-@ term memories . Like Leonard , Earl leaves notes to himself and has tattoos with information about the killer . However , in the short story , Earl convinces himself through his own written notes to escape the mental institution and murder his wife 's killer . Unlike the film , there is no ambiguity that Earl finds and kills the anonymous man . 
 In July 1997 , Nolan 's girlfriend ( later wife ) Emma Thomas showed his screenplay to Aaron Ryder , an executive for Newmarket Films . Ryder said the script was , " perhaps the most innovative script I had ever seen " , and soon after , it was optioned by Newmarket and given a budget of $ 4 @.@ 5 million . Pre @-@ production lasted seven weeks , during which the main shooting location changed from Montreal , Quebec to Los Angeles , California , to create a more realistic and noirish atmosphere for the film . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Brad Pitt was initially slated to play Leonard . Pitt was interested in the part , but passed due to scheduling conflicts . Other considered actors include Aaron Eckhart ( who would later work with Nolan on The Dark Knight ) and Thomas Jane , but the role went to Guy Pearce , who impressed Nolan the most . Pearce was chosen partly for his " lack of celebrity " ( after Pitt passed , they " decided to eschew the pursuit of A @-@ list stars and make the film for less money by using an affordable quality actor " ) , and his enthusiasm for the role , evidenced by a personal phone call Pearce made to Nolan to discuss the part . 
 After being impressed by Carrie @-@ Anne Moss ' performance as Trinity in the 1999 science fiction film The Matrix , Jennifer Todd suggested her for the part of Natalie . While Mary McCormack lobbied for the role , Nolan decided to cast Moss as Natalie , saying , " She added an enormous amount to the role of Natalie that wasn 't on the page " . For the corrupt police officer Teddy , " comedian Denis Leary was mentioned , though proved unavailable " . Moss suggested her co @-@ star from The Matrix , Joe Pantoliano . Although there was a concern that Pantoliano might be too villainous for the part , he was still cast , and Nolan said he was surprised by the actor 's subtlety in his performance . 
 The rest of the film 's characters were quickly cast after the three main leads were established . Stephen Tobolowsky and Harriet Sansom Harris play Sammy Jankis and his wife , respectively . Mark Boone Junior landed the role of Burt , the motel clerk , because Jennifer Todd liked his " look and attitude " for the part ( as a result he has re @-@ appeared in minor roles in other productions by Nolan ) . Larry Holden plays Jimmy <unk> , a drug dealer and Natalie 's boyfriend , while Callum Keith Rennie performs the part of Dodd , a thug to whom Jimmy owes money . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming took place from September 7 to October 8 , 1999 , a 25 @-@ day shooting schedule . Pearce was on set every day during filming , although all three principal actors ( including Pantoliano and Moss ) only performed together the first day , shooting exterior sequences outside Natalie 's house . All of Moss ' scenes were completed in the first week , including follow @-@ up scenes at Natalie 's home , Ferdy 's bar , and the restaurant where she meets Leonard for the final time . 
 Pantoliano returned to the set late in the second week to continue filming his scenes . On September 25 , the crew shot the opening scene in which Leonard kills Teddy . Although the scene is in reverse motion , Nolan used forward @-@ played sounds . For a shot of a shell casing flying upwards , the shell had to be dropped in front of the camera in forward motion , but it constantly rolled out of frame . Nolan was forced to blow the casing out of frame instead , but in the confusion , the crew shot it backwards . They then had to make an optical ( a copy of the shot ) and reverse the shot to make it go forward again . " That was the height of complexity in terms of the film " , Nolan said . " An optical to make a backwards running shot forwards , and the forwards shot is a simulation of a backwards shot . " 
 The next day , on September 26 , Larry Holden returned to shoot the sequence where Leonard attacks Jimmy . After filming was completed five days later , Pearce 's voice @-@ overs were recorded . For the black @-@ and @-@ white scenes , Pearce was given free rein to improvise his narrative , allowing for a documentary feel . 
 The Travel Inn in Tujunga , California , was repainted and used as the interior of Leonard 's and Dodd 's motel rooms and the exterior of the film 's Discount Inn . Scenes in Sammy Jankis ' house were shot in a suburban home close to Pasadena , while Natalie 's house was located in Burbank . The crew planned to shoot the derelict building set ( where Leonard kills Teddy and Jimmy ) in a Spanish @-@ styled brick building owned by a train company . However , one week before shooting began , the company placed several dozen train carriages outside the building , making the exterior unfilmable . Since the interior of the building had already been built as a set , a new location had to be found . An oil refinery near Long Beach was used instead , and the scene where Leonard burns his wife 's possessions was filmed on the other side of the refinery . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 David Julyan composed the film 's synthesized score . Julyan acknowledges several synthesized soundtracks that inspired him , such as Vangelis 's Blade Runner and Hans Zimmer 's The Thin Red Line . While composing the score , Julyan created different , distinct sounds to differentiate between the color and black @-@ and @-@ white scenes : " brooding and classical " themes in the former , and " oppressive and rumbly noise " in the latter . Since he describes the entire score as " Leonard 's theme " , Julyan says , " The emotion I was aiming at with my music was yearning and loss . But a sense of loss you feel but at the same time you don 't know what it is you have lost , a sense of being adrift . " Initially , Nolan wanted to use Radiohead 's " Paranoid Android " during the end credits , but he was unable to secure the rights . Instead , David Bowie 's " Something in the Air " is used , although another of Radiohead 's songs , an extended version of " <unk> " , is included on the film 's soundtrack . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film gained substantial word @-@ of @-@ mouth press from the film festival circuit . It premiered at the 2000 Venice International Film Festival , where it received a standing ovation , and afterwards played at Deauville American Film Festival and the Toronto International Film Festival . With the publicity from these events , Memento did not have trouble finding foreign distributors , opening in more than 20 countries worldwide . Its promotion tour ended at the Sundance Film Festival , where it played in January 2001 . 
 Finding American distributors proved more troublesome . Memento was screened for various studio heads ( including Miramax chief Harvey Weinstein ) in March 2000 . Although most of the executives loved the film and praised Nolan 's talent , all passed on distributing the picture , believing it was too confusing and would not attract a large audience . After famed independent film director Steven Soderbergh saw the film and learned it was not being distributed , he championed the film in interviews and public events , giving it even more publicity , although he did not secure a distributor . Newmarket , in a financially risky move , decided to distribute the film itself . After the first few weeks of distribution , Memento had reached more than 500 theaters and earned a domestic total of $ 25 million in its box @-@ office run . The film 's success was surprising to those who passed on the film , so much so that Weinstein realized his mistake and tried to buy the film from Newmarket . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Jonathan Nolan designed the film 's official website . As with the marketing strategy of The Blair Witch Project , the website was intended to provide further clues and hints to the story , while not providing any concrete information . After a short intro on the website , the viewer is shown a newspaper clipping detailing Leonard 's murder of Teddy . Clicking on highlighted words in the article leads to more material describing the film , including Leonard 's notes and photographs as well as police reports . The filmmakers employed another tactic by sending out Polaroid pictures to random people , depicting a bloody and shirtless Leonard pointing at an unmarked spot on his chest . Since Newmarket distributed the film themselves , Christopher Nolan edited the film 's trailers himself . Sold to inexpensive cable @-@ TV channels like Bravo and A & E , and websites such as Yahoo and MSN , the trailers were key to the film gaining widespread public notice . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Memento was released on DVD and VHS in the United States and Canada on September 4 , 2001 , and in the United Kingdom on January 14 , 2002 . The UK edition contains a hidden feature that allows the viewer to watch the film in chronological order . The Canadian version does not have this feature but the film chapters are set up to do this manually or through DVD programming . The original US release does not have the chronological feature nor are the chapters set up correctly to do it . 
 The film was later re @-@ released in a limited edition DVD that features an audio commentary by Christopher Nolan , the original short story by Jonathan Nolan on which the film was based , and a Sundance Channel documentary on the making of the film . The limited edition DVD also contains a hidden feature that allows the viewer to watch the film in chronological order . 
 The Limited Edition DVD is packaged to look like Leonard 's case file from a mental institution , with notes scribbled by " doctors " and Leonard on the inside . The DVD menus are designed as a series of psychological tests ; the viewer has to choose certain words , objects , and multiple choice answers to play the movie or access special features . Leonard 's " notes " on the DVD case offer clues to navigating the DVD . 
 Memento was re @-@ released in the UK on a 3 @-@ disc Special Edition DVD on December 27 , 2004 . This release contains all the special features that are on the two US releases in one package plus a couple of new interviews . The menus appear as tattoos on a body and are more straightforward than the US 2 @-@ disc limited edition DVD . 
 Memento was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on August 15 , 2006 . This release lacks the special features contained on the Limited Edition DVD , but does include the audio commentary by director Christopher Nolan . The single @-@ layer disc features an MPEG @-@ 2 1080p transfer and PCM 5 @.@ 1 surround audio . The film was also released on iTunes as a digital download . 
 The film was re @-@ released on the Blu @-@ ray and DVD in the USA on 22 February 2011 by Lionsgate following the 10th anniversary of the film . Both the Blu @-@ ray and DVD have a new transfer that was also shown in theaters recently . Aside from the transfer , the Blu @-@ ray contains a new special featurette by Nolan on the film 's legacy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Memento was a box office success . In the United States , during its opening weekend , it was released in only 11 theaters , but by week 11 it was distributed to more than 500 theaters . It grossed over $ 25 million in North America and $ 14 million in other countries , making the film 's total worldwide gross some $ 40 million as of August 2007 . During its theatrical run , it did not place higher than eighth in the list of highest @-@ grossing movies for a single weekend . 
 The film was nominated for Academy Awards in Original Screenplay and Film Editing , but did not win in either category . Because Jonathan Nolan 's short story was not published before the film was released , it was nominated for Original Screenplay instead of Adapted Screenplay and both Christopher and Jonathan received a nomination . It was also nominated for the Grand Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival , but lost to The Believer . However , it won 13 awards for Best Screenplay and five awards for Best Picture from various film critic associations and festivals , including the Chicago Film Critics Association and the Sundance Waldo Salt Screenwriting Award . Christopher Nolan was nominated for three Best Director awards including the Directors Guild of America Award and was awarded one from the Independent Spirit Awards . Pearce was accorded Best Actor from the San Diego Film Critics Society and the Las Vegas Film Critics Society . The film was also nominated for the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Memento was met with critical acclaim , earning a 92 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes . Online film critic James Berardinelli gave the film four out of four stars , ranking it number one on his year @-@ end Top Ten list and number sixty @-@ three on his All @-@ Time Top 100 films . In his review , he called it an " endlessly fascinating , wonderfully open @-@ ended motion picture [ that ] will be remembered by many who see it as one of the best films of the year " . Berardinelli praised the film 's backwards narrative , saying that " what really distinguishes this film is its brilliant , innovative structure " , and noted that Guy Pearce gives an " astounding ... tight , and thoroughly convincing performance " . In 2009 , Berardinelli chose Memento as his # 3 best movie of the decade . William Arnold of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer writes that Memento is a " delicious one @-@ time treat " , and emphasizes that director Christopher Nolan " not only makes Memento work as a non @-@ linear puzzle film , but as a tense , atmospheric thriller " . Rob <unk> noted that " Nolan has a crackerjack command over the intricacies of this story . He makes every single element of the film a clue to the larger picture ... as the story edges back toward the origins of [ Leonard 's ] quest " . 
 However , not all critics were impressed with the film 's structure . Marjorie Baumgarten wrote , " In forward progression , the narrative would garner little interest , thus making the reverse storytelling a filmmaker 's conceit . " Sean Burns of the Philadelphia Weekly commented that " For all its formal wizardry , Memento is ultimately an ice @-@ cold feat of intellectual gamesmanship . Once the visceral thrill of the puzzle structure begins to wear off , there 's nothing left to hang onto . The film itself fades like one of Leonard 's temporary memories . " While Roger Ebert gave the film a favorable three out of four stars , he did not think it warranted multiple viewings . After watching Memento twice , he concluded that " Greater understanding helped on the plot level , but didn 't enrich the viewing experience . Confusion is the state we are intended to be in . " Jonathan Rosenbaum disliked the film , and commented in his review of Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind that Memento is a " gimmicky and unpoetic counterfeit " of Alain Resnais 's 1968 film Je t 'aime , je t 'aime . 
 In 2005 , the Writers Guild of America ranked the screenplay # 100 on its list of 101 Greatest Screenplays ever written . 
 = = = Scientific response = = = 
 Many medical experts have cited Memento as featuring one of the most realistic and accurate depictions of anterograde amnesia in the history of motion pictures . Caltech neuroscientist Christof Koch called Memento " the most accurate portrayal of the different memory systems in the popular media " , while physician Esther M. Sternberg , Director of the Integrative Neural Immune Program at the National Institute of Mental Health , identified the film as " close to a perfect exploration of the neurobiology of memory . " 
 Sternberg concludes : " This thought @-@ provoking thriller is the kind of movie that keeps reverberating in the viewer 's mind , and each iteration makes one examine preconceived notions in a different light . Memento is a movie for anyone interested in the workings of memory and , indeed , in what it is that makes our own reality . " 
 Clinical neuropsychologist Sallie Baxendale writes in BMJ : 
 The overwhelming majority of amnesic characters in films bear little relation to any neurological or psychiatric realities of memory loss . ... Apparently inspired partly by the neuropsychological studies of the famous patient HM ( who developed severe anterograde memory impairment after neurosurgery to control his epileptic seizures ) and the temporal lobe amnesic syndrome , the film documents the difficulties faced by Leonard , who develops a severe anterograde amnesia after an attack in which his wife is killed . Unlike in most films in this genre , this amnesic character retains his identity , has little retrograde amnesia , and shows several of the severe everyday memory difficulties associated with the disorder . The fragmented , almost mosaic quality to the sequence of scenes in the film also reflects the ' perpetual present ' nature of the syndrome . 
 = = = Interpretations and analysis = = = 
 Since its release , Memento has been a widely noted topic of film discussion , both for its unique narrative structure and themes . Those searching for explanations of the film 's plot have either resorted to online forums , message boards or scholarly material , or have ignored the film 's official website and forums in order to maintain their own personal hypotheses . In an article for The Dissolve analyzing Nolan 's work , Mike D 'Angelo cites Memento as " a masterful study in deliberate self @-@ delusion , " alluding to Leonard 's own actions towards the end of the film and his role as an unreliable narrator . On the same topic of self @-@ deception , James Mooney of <unk> notes that the film suggests how " our memories deceive us , or rather , sometimes we deceive ourselves by ‘ choosing ’ to forget or by manipulating our memories of past events . " This is much in line with a psychological analysis of the film , specifically the act of <unk> . Leonard 's use of <unk> poses the dilemma , as explained by SUNY <unk> Medical Center Professor John <unk> for <unk> : " In Memento we are faced with the question of how much of Leonard ’ s memory of the past is real and how much constructed from beliefs and wishes .. " 
 Author Chuck Klosterman has written in @-@ depth about Memento in his essay collection Sex , Drugs , and Cocoa Puffs : A Low Culture Manifesto , specifically on the diner scene with Leonard and Natalie . 
 In an interview with Chuck Stephens for Filmmaker magazine in 2001 Nolan also stated : " The most interesting part of that for me is that audiences seem very unwilling to believe the stuff that Teddy ( Pantoliano ) says at the end and yet why ? I think its because people have spent the entire film looking at Leonard 's photograph of Teddy , with the caption : " Don 't believe his lies . " That image really stays in people 's heads , and they still prefer to trust that image even after we make it very clear that Leonard 's visual recollection is completely questionable . It was quite surprising , and it wasn 't planned . What was always planned was that we dont ever step completely outside Leonard 's head , and that we keep the audience in that interpretive mode of trying to analyze what they want to believe or not . For me , the crux of the movie is that the one guy who might actually be the authority on the truth of what happened is played by Joe Pantoliano ( The Matrix , Bound ) , who is so untrustworthy , especially given the baggage he carries in from his other movies : he 's already seen by audiences as this character actor who 's always unreliable . I find it very frightening , really , the level of uncertainty and malevolence Joe brings to the film . " 
 = = = Best film list appearances = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 AFI Awards : AFI Story of the Year ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy and Horror Films : Saturn Award for Best Action or Adventure Film . 
 Boston Society of Film Critics : Best Screenplay ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Bram Stoker Awards : Best Screenplay ( Christopher Nolan and Jonathan Nolan ) . 
 British Independent Film Awards : <unk> Award for Best Foreign Independent Film . 
 Broadcast Film Critics Association : Best Script ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Casting Society of America : Best casting ( John <unk> ) . 
 Chicago Film Critics Association : Best Script ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Dallas – Fort Worth Film Critics Association : Russell Smith Award ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Deauville American Film Festival : <unk> Award ( Christopher Nolan ) . Critics Awards ( Christopher Nolan ) . Special Jury Prize ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Edgar Allan Poe Awards : Best Motion Picture ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Florida Film Critics Circle : Best Screenplay ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Golden Trailer Awards : Best drama , originality . 
 Independent Spirit Awards : Best supporting actress ( Carrie @-@ Anne Moss ) , Best director ( Christopher Nolan ) . Best Screenplay ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Las Vegas Film Critics Society : Best film . Best actor ( Guy Pearce ) . Best script ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 London Film Critics ' Circle : British Director of the Year ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Los Angeles Film Critics Association : Best script ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 MTV Movie Awards : Best New Filmmaker ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Online Film Critics Society : Best film . Best Director ( Christopher Nolan ) . Best Adapted Screenplay ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 San Diego Film Critics Society : Best Actor ( Guy Pearce ) . 
 Southeastern Film Critics Association : Best Film . Best adapted Screenplay ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Sundance Film Festival : Waldo Salt Screenwriting Award ( Christopher Nolan and Jonathan Nolan ) . 
 Toronto Film Critics Association : Best Film . Best Screenplay ( Christopher Nolan ) . 
 Vancouver Film Critics Circle : Best Film . 
 = = Remake = = 
 AMBI Pictures announced in November 2015 that it plans to remake Memento , one of several film rights that AMBI acquired from its acquisition of Exclusive Media Group . Monika Bacardi , an executive for AMBI Pictures , stated that they plan to " stay true to Christopher Nolan ’ s vision and deliver a memorable movie that is every bit as edgy , iconic and award @-@ worthy as the original " . 
 Memento has been remade in various languages including , in Tamil as Ghajini ( 2005 ) , Hindi as Ghajini ( 2008 ) , and in Bangladesh as <unk> ( 2007 ) . Kannada as Aishwarya ( film ) . 
 = Ontario Highway 401 = 
 King 's Highway 401 , commonly referred to as Highway 401 and also known by its official name as the Macdonald – Cartier Freeway or colloquially as the four @-@ oh @-@ one , is a 400 @-@ series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . It stretches 828 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 514 @.@ 5 mi ) from Windsor in the west to the Ontario – Quebec border in the east . The part of Highway 401 that passes through Toronto is the busiest highway in the world , and one of the widest . Together with Quebec Autoroute 20 , it forms the road transportation backbone of the Quebec City – Windsor Corridor , along which over half of Canada 's population resides and is also a Core Route in the National Highway System of Canada . The entire route is maintained by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) and patrolled by the Ontario Provincial Police . The posted speed limit is 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) throughout its length , unless posted otherwise . 
 By the end of 1952 , three individual highways were numbered " Highway 401 " : the partially completed Toronto Bypass between Weston Road and Highway 11 ( Yonge Street ) ; Highway 2A between West Hill and Newcastle ; and the Scenic Highway between Gananoque and Brockville , now known as the Thousand Islands Parkway . These three sections of highway were 11 @.@ 8 , 54 @.@ 7 and 41 @.@ 2 km , ( 7 @.@ 3 , 34 @.@ 0 and 25 @.@ 6 mi ) , respectively . In 1964 , the route became fully navigable from Windsor to the Ontario – Quebec border . In 1965 it was given a second designation , the Macdonald – Cartier Freeway , in honour of the Fathers of Confederation . At the end of 1968 , the Gananoque – Brockville section was bypassed and the final intersection grade @-@ separated near Kingston , making Highway 401 a freeway for its entire 817 @.@ 9 @-@ km length . On August 24 , 2007 , the portion of the highway between Glen Miller Road in Trenton and the Don Valley Parkway / Highway 404 Junction in Toronto was designated the Highway of Heroes , as the road is travelled by funeral convoys for fallen Canadian Forces personnel from CFB Trenton to the coroner 's office in Toronto . On September 27 , 2013 , the Highway of Heroes designation was extended west to Keele Street in Toronto , to coincide with the move of the coroner 's office to the new Forensic Services and Coroner ’ s Complex at the Humber River Hospital . 
 In 2011 , construction began on a westward extension called the Right Honourable Herb Gray Parkway . This new route follows , but does not replace , former Highway 3 between the former end of the freeway and the E. C. Row Expressway , at which point it turns and parallels that route towards the site of the future Gordie Howe International Bridge . An 8 @-@ kilometre ( 5 mi ) section of the parkway , east of the E. C. Row interchange , opened on June 28 , 2015 , with the remaining section completed and opened on November 21 . Elsewhere in Ontario , plans are under way to widen the remaining four @-@ lane sections between Windsor and London to six lanes and to widen the route between Cambridge and Milton as well as through Oshawa . The expansive twelve @-@ plus @-@ lane collector – express system will also be extended west through Mississauga to Milton and east through Ajax and Whitby . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 401 extends across Southwestern , Central and Eastern Ontario . In anticipation of the future expansion of the highway , the transportation ministry purchased a 91 @.@ 4 @-@ metre @-@ wide ( 300 ft ) right @-@ of @-@ way along the entire length . Generally , the highway occupies only a portion of this allotment . It is one of the world 's busiest highways ; a 2008 analysis stated that the annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) count between Weston Road and Highway 400 in Toronto was approximately 450 @,@ 000 , while a second study estimates that over 500 @,@ 000 vehicles travel that section on some days . This makes it the busiest roadway in North America , surpassing the Santa Monica Freeway in Los Angeles and I @-@ 75 in Atlanta . The just @-@ in @-@ time auto parts delivery systems of the highly integrated automotive industry of Michigan and Ontario have contributed to the highway 's status as the busiest truck route in the world , carrying 60 percent of vehicular trade between Canada and the US . 
 Highway 401 also features the busiest multi @-@ structure bridge in North America , located at Hogg 's Hollow in Toronto . The four bridges , two for each direction with the collector and express lanes , carried an average of 373 @,@ 700 vehicles daily in 2006 . The highway is one of the major backbones of a network in the Great Lakes region , connecting the populous Quebec City – Windsor corridor with Michigan , New York and central Ontario 's cottage country . It is the principal connection between Toronto and Montreal , becoming Autoroute 20 at the Ontario – Quebec border . 
 = = = Southwestern Ontario = = = 
 Highway 401 does not yet extend the last few kilometres to Detroit ; an extension to Brighton Beach ( at the Canada – US border in Windsor ) was completed in November 2015 , after which the Gordie Howe International Bridge will extend Highway 401 across the Canada – United States border through Delray to Interstate 75 in Michigan by 2019 . At present , Highway 401 begins as a six @-@ lane freeway at the west end of the E. C. Row Expressway . At the Dougall Parkway , the highway turns east and exits Windsor . From here , Highway 401 mostly parallels the former route of Highway 98 from Windsor to Tilbury . 
 Southwestern Ontario is flat , primarily agricultural land , that takes advantage of the fertile clay soil deposited throughout the region . The main river through the region is the Thames River , which drains the second largest watershed in southern Ontario and largely influences the land use surrounding the highway ; It parallels the route to the north between Tilbury and Woodstock . 
 Near Tilbury , Highway 401 loses its tall wall median barrier and narrows to four lanes , following lot lines laid between concession roads in a plan designed to limit damage to the sensitive agricultural lands through which the highway runs . Here the highway 's flat and straight route is notorious for leading to driver inattention . The section from Windsor to London ( especially west of Tilbury ) has become known for deadly car accidents and pile @-@ ups , earning it the nickname Carnage Alley . As the highway approaches London , Highway 402 merges in , resulting in a six @-@ lane cross @-@ section . Within London , it intersects the city 's two municipal expressways , Highbury Avenue and the Veterans Memorial Parkway . 
 The section between London and Woodstock generally parallels the former Highway 2 but lies on the south side of the Thames River . This area is not as flat but the highway is generally straight . This part of Highway 401 often experiences heavy snowsqualls in early winter , sometimes extending as far east as Toronto . To the south of Woodstock , Highway 401 curves northeast and encounters the western terminus of Highway 403 . The highway heads towards Kitchener and Cambridge , where it encounters Highway 8 and returns to its eastward orientation . East of Kitchener , the highway meanders towards Milton , passing through hills and rock cuts along the way . 
 = = = Greater Toronto Area = = = 
 As Highway 401 approaches the Greater Toronto Area ( GTA ) , it descends through the ecologically protected Niagara Escarpment to the west of Milton . Upon entering the town , it enters the first urbanized section of the GTA , passing through two rural areas between there and Oshawa . The first rural gap is the western side of Toronto 's Greenbelt , a zone around Toronto protected from development . After this 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) gap , the highway interchanges with the Highway 407 Express Toll Route . Within the GTA , the highway passes several major shopping malls including <unk> Shopping Centre , Scarborough Town Centre and Pickering Town Centre . 
 Highway 401 widens into a collector @-@ express system as it approaches Hurontario Street in Mississauga , a concept inspired by the Dan Ryan Expressway in Chicago . The system divides each direction of travel into collector and express lanes , giving the highway a wide span and four carriageways . To avoid confusion between carriageways , blue signs are used for the collector lanes and green signs for the express lanes . Unlike the collector lanes , which provide access to every interchange , the express lanes only provide direct access to a select few interchanges . Access between the two is provided by transfers , which are strategically placed to prevent disruptions caused by closely spaced interchanges . The overall purpose of the collector @-@ express system is to maximize traffic flow for both local and long @-@ distance traffic . In addition , Highway 401 was equipped with a traffic camera system called COMPASS in early 1991 . Using closed @-@ circuit television cameras , vehicle detection loops and LED changeable @-@ message signs , COMPASS enables the MTO Traffic Operations Centre to obtain a real @-@ time assessment of traffic conditions and alert drivers of collisions , congestion and construction . The system currently stretches from the Highway 403 / 410 interchange in Mississauga to Harwood Avenue in Ajax . 
 Two sets of collector @-@ express systems exist in the GTA . The first set is 6 @.@ 6 km ( 4 @.@ 1 mi ) long and connects Highway 403 , Highway 410 and Highway 427 . This system primarily serves to accommodate and organize various traffic movements from the Highway 403 / 410 and Highway 427 interchanges along Highway 401 , replacing an earlier plan that would have run Highway 403 directly to Eglinton Avenue and the never @-@ built Richview Expressway . East of the interchange with Renforth Drive , the collector lanes diverge to become the on @-@ ramps to Highway 427 northbound and southbound . The second 43 @.@ 7 km ( 27 @.@ 2 mi ) system passes through the centre of Toronto and ends in Pickering to the east . The 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) gap between the two systems is a traffic bottleneck . However , the interchange cannot currently accommodate future widening of Highway 401 . 
 Highway 401 widens to 18 lanes south of Toronto Pearson International Airport . Progressing eastward , eight lanes are carried beneath the large spaghetti junction at Highway 427 . The highway curves northeast and follows a power transmission corridor to Highway 409 , which merges with the mainline and forms the collector lanes . It returns to its eastward route through Toronto , now carrying 12 – 16 lanes of traffic on four carriageways . Highway 401 is often congested in this section , with an average of 442 @,@ 900 vehicles passing between Weston Road and Highway 400 per day as of 2008 . In spite of this congestion , it is the primary commuting route in Toronto ; over 50 percent of vehicles bound for downtown Toronto use the highway . 
 East of Highway 400 is The <unk> , a criss @-@ crossing transfer between the express and collectors carriageways , beyond which is <unk> Centre . Twelve lanes pass beneath a complicated interchange with Allen Road , built to serve the cancelled Spadina Expressway . Further east , the highway crosses Hogg 's Hollow , over the West Don River and Yonge Street in the centre of Toronto , the busiest multi @-@ span bridge crossing in North America , surpassing the Brooklyn Bridge . It then crosses the East Don River and climbs toward the Don Valley Parkway , which provides access to downtown Toronto and Highway 404 , which provides access to the suburbs to the north . Progressing eastward , the highway continues through mostly residential areas in Scarborough , eventually reaching the Rouge Valley on the city 's eastern edge and crossing into Pickering . 
 West of Pickering , Highway 401 again meets former Highway 2 , which thereafter parallels it to the Ontario – Quebec border . As the highway approaches Brock Road in Pickering , the collector and express lanes converge , narrowing the 14 @-@ lane cross @-@ section to 10 , divided only at the centre . It remains this width as it passes into Ajax , before narrowing back to six lanes at Salem Road . Planned expansions east of Salem to accommodate an interchange with Highway 412 will see the highway widened to ten lanes east to Brock Street . 
 East of Ajax , the highway passes through the second 3 @.@ 5 km ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) rural gap , and enters Whitby . The stretch of Highway 401 through Whitby and Oshawa features several structures completed during the initial construction of the highway in the 1940s . Several of these structures are to be demolished , either due to their age , or to prepare for the planned widening of Highway 401 through this area . A former Canadian National Railway overpass , which was fenced off but commonly used by pedestrians during Highway of Heroes repatriations , was demolished on the night of June 11 , 2011 . A second structure in Bowmanville was demolished during two overnight closures on July 9 and 16 . At Harmony Road , the suburban surroundings quickly transition to agricultural land . The highway curves around the south side of Bowmanville and travels towards Highway 35 and Highway 115 . 
 = = = Eastern Ontario = = = 
 From east of Highway 35 and Highway 115 to Cobourg , Highway 401 passes through a mix of agricultural land and forests , maintaining a straight course . As the highway passes through Cobourg , it narrows to four lanes and the terrain becomes undulating , with the highway routed around hills and through valleys along the shores of Lake Ontario . At Trenton , the highway crosses the Trent Canal and returns to an agricultural setting . It then crosses the Moira River as it goes through Belleville before heading eastward to Kingston . The Kingston portion of the highway , originally named the Kingston @-@ Bypass , was one of the first sections of the highway to be completed ; it is now mostly three lanes each way . 
 East of Kingston , the highway continues through a predominantly agricultural area alongside the Saint Lawrence River to Gananoque , where it splits with the Thousand Islands Parkway , one of the original sections of the highway designated in 1952 . The current Highway 401 runs parallel to the parkway several kilometres inland from the river . The Canadian Shield , an ancient geological formation , appears through this heavily forested section of the highway . Highway 401 rejoins the Thousand Islands Parkway immediately southwest of Brockville , now heading northeast . 
 The remainder of the highway runs parallel to the former Highway 2 along the shore of the Saint Lawrence River within the Saint Lawrence Valley . Northeast of Brockville is the interchange with Highway 416 , which heads north to Ottawa . At the Ontario – Quebec border , Highway 401 becomes Autoroute 20 and continues to Montreal . 
 = = = Traffic = = = 
 The MTO publishes yearly traffic volume data for provincial highways , expressed as an average daily vehicle count over the span of a year ( AADT ) . The table below compares the AADT at several locations along Highway 401 using data from 1969 , 1988 and 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Predecessors = = = 
 Highway 401 's history predates its designation by over two decades . As automobile use in southern Ontario grew in the early 20th century , road design and construction advanced significantly . Following frequent erosion of Lake Shore Road , then macadamized , a concrete road known as the Toronto – Hamilton Highway was proposed in January 1914 . Construction began on November 8 of that year , following the onset of World War I. The highway was designed to run along the lake shore , instead of Dundas Street to the north , because the numerous hills encountered along Dundas would have increased costs without improving accessibility . Middle Road , a dirt lane named because of its position between the two , was not considered since Lake Shore and Dundas were both overcrowded and in need of serious repairs . The road was formally opened on November 24 , 1917 , 5 @.@ 5 m ( 18 ft ) wide and nearly 64 km ( 40 mi ) long . It was the first concrete road in Ontario , as well as one of the longest stretches of concrete road between two cities in the world . 
 Over the next decade , vehicle usage increased substantially , and by 1920 Lakeshore Road was again congested , particularly during weekends . In response , the Department of Highways examined improving another road between Toronto and Hamilton . The road was to be more than twice the width of Lakeshore Road at 12 m ( 39 ft ) and would carry two lanes of traffic in either direction . Construction on what was then known as the Queen Street Extension west of Toronto began in early 1931 . 
 Before the highway could be completed , Thomas McQuesten was appointed the new minister of the Department of Highways , with Robert Melville Smith as deputy minister , following the 1934 provincial elections . Smith , inspired by the German autobahns — new " dual @-@ lane divided highways " — modified the design for Ontario roads , and McQuesten ordered that the Middle Road be converted into this new form of highway . A 40 m ( 130 ft ) right @-@ of @-@ way was purchased along the Middle Road and construction began to convert the existing sections to a divided highway . Work also began on Canada 's first interchange at Highway 10 . 
 Beginning in 1935 , McQuesten applied the concept of a dual @-@ highway to several projects along Highway 2 , including along Kingston Road in Scarborough Township . When widening in Scarborough reached the Highland Creek ravine in 1936 , the Department of Highways began construction on a new bridge over the large valley , bypassing the former alignment around West Hill . From here the highway was constructed on a new alignment to Oshawa , avoiding construction on the congested Highway 2 . As grading and bridge construction neared completion on the new highway between West Hill and Oshawa in September 1939 , World War II broke out and gradually tax revenues were re @-@ allocated from highway construction to the war effort . 
 At the same time , between September 6 and 8 , 1939 , the Ontario Good Roads Association Conference was held at <unk> Inn , near Huntsville , drawing highway engineers from across North America to discuss the new concept of " Dual Highways " . On the first day of the convention , McQuesten announced his vision of the freeway : an uninterrupted drive through the scenic regions of Ontario , discouraging local business and local traffic from accessing the highway except at infrequent controlled @-@ access points . It was announced in the days thereafter that this concept would be applied to a new " trans @-@ provincial expressway " , running from Windsor to the Ontario – Quebec border . 
 Highway engineers evaluated factors such as grading , curve radius and the narrow median used along the Middle Road ( which was inaugurated on August 23 , 1940 , as the Queen Elizabeth Way ) , and began to plan the course of a new dual highway mostly parallel to Highway 2 , with precedence given to areas most hampered by congestion . Unlike the Queen Elizabeth Way ( QEW ) , this highway would not be built along an existing road , but rather on a new right @-@ of @-@ way , avoiding the need to provide access to properties . 
 Along with immense improvements to machinery and construction techniques over its six @-@ year course , the war provided planners an opportunity to conduct a survey of 375 @,@ 000 drivers , asking them about their preferred route to travel to their destination . Using this information , a course was plotted from Windsor to Quebec , bypassing all towns along the way . 
 Highway 2S ( S for Scenic ) , was the first completed section of new roadway . Built to connect with the Thousand Islands Bridge at Ivy Lea and opened as a gravel road in late 1941 or early 1942 , the road followed the shore of the Saint Lawrence River and connected with the western end of the twinned Highway 2 near Brockville . In addition , the highway between Highland Creek and Oshawa was opened as a gravel @-@ surfaced road in May 1942 . 
 Following the war , construction resumed on roadways throughout Ontario . The expressway between Highland Creek and Oshawa was completed in December 1947 , while other sections languished . The Toronto – Barrie Highway was the primary focus of the Department of Highways at the time , and the onset of the Korean War in 1950 stalled construction again . Despite the delays , highway minister George <unk> officially announced the plans for construction of the new trans @-@ provincial expressway that year , with the Toronto to Oshawa expressway serving as a model for the design . Work on the most important link , the Toronto Bypass , began in 1951 , but it would not open with that name . 
 = = = Assumption = = = 
 In July 1952 ( possibly July 1 , the same day Highway 400 was numbered ) , the Highland Creek to Oshawa expressway and Highway 2S were designated Controlled @-@ Access Highway No 401 , a move scorned by one critic because of the lack of thought into the numbered name . Construction was completed for several sections of the Toronto Bypass ; between Highway 400 and Dufferin Street in August , west to Weston Road in September , east to Bathurst Street in October and finally to Yonge Street in December . Extensions east and west began in 1953 ; the eastern extension to Bayview Avenue would open in April 1955 , the western extension was delayed by the damage caused by Hurricane Hazel on October 15 , 1954 , which nearly destroyed the new bridge over the Humber River . The reconstruction would take until July 8 , 1955 , and the highway was opened between Weston and Highway 27 in September 1955 . 
 The entire bypass , including the widening of Highway 27 into an expressway south of Highway 401 , was completed in August 1956 . Upon its opening , the bypass was described by one reporter as " a motorist 's dream " providing " some of the most soothing scenery in the Metropolitan area " . The reporter continued , with regard to the eastern section through Scarborough , that it " winds smoothly through pastures across streams and rivers , and beside green thickets . It seems a long way from the big city . " By 1959 however , the bypass was a lineup of cars , as 85 @,@ 000 drivers crowded the roadway , designed to handle a maximum of 48 @,@ 000 vehicles , on a daily basis . Motorists found the new road to be a convenient way of travelling across Toronto ; this convenience helped influence the suburban shift in the city and continues to be a driving force of urban sprawl today . 
 Meanwhile , beyond Toronto , the highway was being built in a patchwork fashion , focusing on congested areas first . Construction west from Highway 27 began in late 1954 , as did the Kingston Bypass in Eastern Ontario . Work began to connect the latter with the Scenic Highway in 1955 . After the 1954 New York State Thruway opened from Buffalo to New York City , Michigan officials encouraged Ontario to bypass Highway 3 as the most direct path from Detroit to Buffalo . By 1956 , construction had begun on a segment between Highway 4 in London and Highway 2 in Woodstock , as well as on the section between Windsor and Tilbury . 
 In 1958 , a section bypassing <unk> was opened to accommodate traffic displaced from a portion of Highway 2 through The Lost Villages of the Saint Lawrence Seaway . Highway 2 would ultimately be reopened on a new alignment which followed the CN rail right @-@ of @-@ way . 
 By the end of 1960 , the Toronto section of the highway was extended both eastwards and westwards : first , to the east between Newcastle and Port Hope on June 30 , then later to the west between Highway 25 in Milton and Highway 8 south of Kitchener on November 17 . By mid @-@ 1961 , the section between Brighton and Marysville had opened . The gap to the east , from Highway 28 in Port Hope to Highway 30 in Brighton was opened on July 20 , 1961 . 
 The gap between Woodstock and Kitchener was completed on November 9 , 1961 , while the gap between Tilbury and London was completed two lanes at a time ; the northbound lanes on October 22 , 1963 , the southbound on July 20 , 1965 . The gap between Marysville and Kingston was opened by 1962 . The final sections , from west of Cornwall to Lancaster , were opened between 1962 and 1964 ; two lanes opened to Lancaster on September 11 , 1962 , but the other two were not completed until July 31 , 1964 . The last segment , to the Ontario – Quebec border , was opened on November 10 , 1964 . Finally , on October 11 , 1968 , the Thousand Islands Bypass opened . This final piece was commemorated with a plaque to signify the completion of Highway 401 . 
 In Toronto , engineers and surveyors were examining the four @-@ lane bypass , while planners set about designing a way to handle the commuter highway . In 1963 , transportation minister Charles MacNaughton announced the widening of Highway 401 in Toronto from four to a minimum of 12 lanes between Islington Avenue and Markham Road . The design was taken from the Dan Ryan Expressway in Chicago , which was widened into a similar configuration around the same time . Construction began immediately . While the plan initially called for construction to end in 1967 , it continued for nearly a decade . At least four lanes were always open during the large reconstruction project , which included complex new interchanges at Highway 27 , Highway 400 , the planned Spadina Expressway and the Don Valley Parkway . The system was completed in 1972 , along with the Highway 27 ( renamed Highway 427 ) bypass between the QEW and Pearson Airport . Most of the interchanges in Toronto were reconstructed as partial cloverleafs and a continuous lighting system was installed . 
 On January 11 , 1965 , at the dinner celebration of Sir John A. Macdonald 's 150th birthday , John Robarts designated Highway 401 the Macdonald – Cartier Freeway to honour Macdonald and George @-@ Étienne Cartier , two of Canada 's Fathers of Confederation . Unlike other names later applied to the highway , the Macdonald – Cartier Freeway designation covers the entire length of Highway 401 . Signs designating the freeway and shields with the letters ' M @-@ C ' were installed , but these had been removed by 1997 . In 2003 , 38 years after Robarts ' naming of the highway , a Member of Provincial Parliament attempted to get the Macdonald @-@ Cartier Freeway highway name enshrined into law ; the bill only passed first reading and was not enacted . 
 In the 1970s , Highway 401 was widened to six lanes in Durham , but otherwise saw little improvement . The 1980s saw more sections widened , as well as a new collector @-@ express system between Highway 403 / 410 and Highway 427 completed in mid @-@ 1985 . Plans were made to extend the eastern system from Neilson Road to Brock Road in Pickering in the late 1980s , but took over a decade to reach fruition by 2000 . This was followed shortly thereafter by the widening of the highway through Ajax and a new interchange at Pickering Beach Road ( renamed Salem Road ) and Stevenson Road . 
 The 1990s also saw the first step in widening the highway to six lanes from Toronto to London . A project in the mid @-@ 1990s brought the highway up to a minimum of six lanes between Highway 8 in Kitchener and Highway 35 / 115 in Newcastle . Other projects prepared sections for eventual widening . 
 In 1993 , the stretch of Highway 401 eastbound near Milton and westbound near Whitby had chevrons painted in each lane in an effort to reduce tailgating , a concept borrowed from France and Britain . Signs advised motorists to keep at least two chevrons apart , in essence warning them not to follow too closely . Some of these chevrons remain intact in the westbound lanes in Whitby , though the signs stating their use have since been removed . 
 Beginning in 1998 , several projects were initiated on Highway 401 within Toronto . These included the addition of one lane through the Highway 427 interchange in 2005 , as well as the resurfacing of the pavement through the city . 
 = = = Advantage I @-@ 75 = = = 
 Between June 1990 and 1998 , Highway 401 and Interstate 75 were used for a pilot project named Advantage I @-@ 75 to test the reliability and versatility of an automated tracking system for transport trucks . Termed MACS for Mainline Automated Clearance System , it would allow a truck to travel from Florida to Ontario without a second inspection . MACS was initially tested out at two truck inspection stations in Kentucky , with transponders installed in 220 trucks . Exact time , date , location , weight and axle data were logged as a truck approached an equipped station . Following initial tests , MACS was deployed at every inspection station along I @-@ 75 from Miami to Detroit and along Highway 401 from Windsor to Belleville in 1994 . The project demonstrated the effectiveness of electronic systems in enforcing freight restrictions without delaying vehicles , while alleviating security fears that such systems could be easily compromised . The concept has since been applied to many parts of Canada , including Highway 407 's electronic tolling system . 
 = = = " Carnage Alley " = = = 
 The section of Highway 401 between Windsor and London has often been referred to as Carnage Alley , in reference to the numerous crashes that have occurred throughout its history . The term became more commonplace following several deadly <unk> during the 1990s . The narrow and open grass median was an ineffective obstacle in preventing cross @-@ median collisions . The soft shoulders consisted of gravel with a sharp slope which was blamed for facilitating vehicle <unk> . The nature of that section of highway , described as largely a straight road with a featureless agricultural landscape , was said to make drivers feel less involved and lose focus on the road . In winter , the area between Woodstock and Chatham is also subject to sudden snow squalls from lake @-@ effect snow . Several collisions have resulted from motorists deviating from their lane and losing control of their vehicles . 
 Various other names , including The Killer Highway circulated for a time , but Carnage Alley became predominant following an 87 @-@ vehicle pile @-@ up on September 3 , 1999 ( the start of Labour Day weekend ) , the worst in Canadian history , that resulted in eight deaths and 45 injured individuals . 
 Only a few days prior , then @-@ Transportation Minister David Turnbull had deemed the highway " pleasant " to drive . On the morning of September 3 , the local weather station reported clear conditions due to a malfunction , while a thick layer of fog rolled onto the highway . Dozens of vehicles including several semi @-@ trailers quickly crashed into each other shortly after 8 a.m. , one following another in the dense fog , and the accumulating wreckage caught traffic traveling in the opposite direction . Immediately following the crash , the MTO installed paved shoulders with rumble strips and funded additional police to patrol the highway , a move criticized as being insufficient . 
 Beginning in 2004 , 46 km ( 29 mi ) of the highway was widened from four asphalt lanes to six concrete lanes , paved shoulders were added , a concrete Ontario Tall Wall median was installed , which was the solution that the Canadian Automobile Association promoted in 1999 . Interchanges were improved and signage was upgraded as part of a five @-@ phase project to improve Highway 401 from Highway 3 in Windsor to Essex County Road 42 ( formerly Highway 2 ) on the western edge of Tilbury . 
 = = = Highway of Heroes = = = 
 On August 24 , 2007 , the MTO announced that the stretch of Highway 401 between Glen Miller Road in Trenton and the intersection of the Don Valley Parkway and Highway 404 in Toronto would bear the additional name Highway of Heroes ( French : Autoroute des héros ) , in honour of Canadian soldiers who have died , though Highway 401 in its entirety remains designated as the Macdonald – Cartier Freeway . This length of the highway is often travelled by a convoy of vehicles carrying a fallen soldier 's body , with his or her family , from CFB Trenton to the coroner 's office at the Centre for Forensic Sciences in Toronto . Since 2002 , when the first fallen Canadian soldiers were repatriated from Afghanistan , crowds have lined the overpasses to pay their respects as convoys pass . 
 The origin of the name can be traced to an article in the Toronto Sun on June 23 , 2007 , by columnist Joe Warmington , in which he interviewed Northumberland photographer Pete Fisher . Fisher , along with Bob Jenkins , an emergency dispatcher , were responsible for organizing the first bridge salutes following the loss of four soldiers on April 18 , 2002 . Warmington described the gathering of crowds on overpasses to welcome fallen soldiers as a " highway of heroes phenomena " . This led a Cramahe Township volunteer firefighter to contact Fisher on July 10 about starting a petition , leading Fisher to publish an article which was posted to the Northumberland Today website . The online article eventually caught the attention of London resident Jay Forbes . Forbes began a petition , which received over 20 @,@ 000 signatures before being brought to the Minister of Transportation on August 22 . Following the announcement on August 24 , the provincial government and MTO set out to design new signs . The signs were erected and unveiled on September 7 , and include a smaller reassurance marker ( shield ) , as well as a larger billboard version . 
 = = = Safety concerns and highway improvements = = = 
 On August 10 , 2008 , following a series of explosions at a propane facility in Toronto , Highway 401 was closed between Highway 400 and Highway 404 as a precautionary measure , the largest closure of the highway in its history . The highway remained closed until 8 p.m. , though several exits near the blast remained closed thereafter . 
 Between 2006 and 2008 , Highway 401 was widened from four to six lanes between Highway 402 and Wellington Road in London . This included replacing the original Wellington Road overpass . In Oshawa , Exit 416 ( Park Road ) was replaced by a new interchange at Exit 415 ( Stevenson Road ) . The contract , which began September 7 , 2005 , included the interchange and the resurfacing of 23 @.@ 4 km ( 14 @.@ 5 mi ) of the highway between Oshawa and Highway 35 / Highway 115 . The westbound ramps were opened in mid @-@ September 2007 and the eastbound ramps in mid @-@ 2009 . The resurfacing was completed mid @-@ 2010 . 
 In November 2010 , the widening of Highway 401 from four to six lanes between Woodstock and Kitchener was completed after many years of planning and construction . The project included the installation of a tall @-@ wall median barrier , straightening curves and adding additional interchanges on the freeway , allowing it to be easily vacated in an emergency event . 
 = = = Rt. Hon. Herb Gray Parkway = = = 
 In 2004 , a joint announcement by the federal government of the United States and Government of Canada confirmed that a new border crossing would be constructed between Detroit and Windsor . The Detroit River International Crossing ( DRIC ) was formed as a bi @-@ national committee to manage the project . The MTO took advantage of this opportunity to extend Highway 401 to the Canada – US border and began an environmental impact assessment on the entire project in late 2005 . The City of Windsor also hired New York traffic consultant Sam Schwartz to design a parkway to the border . Schwartz 's proposal would eventually inspire the DRIC 's own design , but his route was not chosen , with the DRIC opting instead to take a northern route . On February 8 , 2008 , the MTO announced that it had begun purchasing property south of the E.C. Row Expressway , upsetting many area residents who had purchased properties in the years prior . 
 On March 3 , 2008 , the Michigan Department of Transportation and the MTO ( in partnership with Transport Canada , the Federal Highway Administration of the United States and the Detroit River International Crossing group ) completed a joint assessment on the soils along the Detroit River and determined that they could indeed support the weight of a new bridge ; the stability of the underlying soil and clay and the impact of the nearby Windsor Salt Mine had caused concern for all parties involved in the project . 
 Despite protest from area residents , as well as a dismissed lawsuit from Ambassador Bridge owner Matty <unk> , it was announced on May 1 , 2008 , that a preferred route had been selected and that the new route would be named the Windsor – Essex Parkway . The new parkway is below @-@ grade and has six through @-@ lanes . It follows ( but does not replace ) Talbot Road and Huron Church Road from a new interchange at the former end of Highway 401 to the E. C. Row Expressway , where it runs concurrently westward for 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) . From there , it turns northwest and follows a new alignment to the border . Initial construction of a noise barrier from North Talbot Road to Howard Avenue began in March 2010 ; full construction began on August 19 , 2011 . 
 On November 28 , 2012 , the Ministry of Transportation announced that a Federal Order in Council was passed to change the name of the parkway to the Right Honourable Herb Gray Parkway , after the long @-@ time Windsor MP . In early 2015 , it was announced that the parkway would open to traffic between Highway 3 and Labelle Street ( near the E. C. Row Expressway ) in the spring ; an 8 @-@ kilometre ( 5 mi ) section was opened to traffic on June 28 , extending Highway 401 as far west as the E. C. Row Expressway . It was the first new segment of the highway to be opened since the Thousand Islands Bypass in 1968 . The stretch to Ojibway Parkway was opened on November 21 , completing the parkway as far as the planned bridge approach and border plaza . Construction of the Gordie Howe International Bridge is set to begin in 2015 for completion in 2019 – 20 . 
 = = Future = = 
 In 2007 Minister of Transportation Donna <unk> commented that the MTO intends to widen all of the remaining four @-@ lane sections to a minimum of six . With no dates set for construction or completion , this is a tentative announcement for the long @-@ term future . 
 = = = Southwestern Ontario = = = 
 In Southwestern Ontario , several improvements are under way to provide six lanes on Highway 401 from Windsor to Toronto , in response to the Carnage Alley pile @-@ up in 1999 . West of Manning Road , the highway has been widened in anticipation of the Windsor – Essex Parkway . Between Tilbury and Highway 402 , the highway remains four lanes wide with a grass median . The widening and upgrading of this section is in the planning stages , with construction possibly beginning in 2017 and lasting for several years . Several interchanges are slated to be upgraded as part of this construction . 
 Within the London area , traffic volumes are expected to increase considerably , leading to poor highway conditions . The province has put in place an extensive plan to widen and reconstruct the London corridor between 2006 and 2021 . This included building a new interchange with Wonderland Road which opened in November 2015 to help improve access to Highway 401 westbound from the city 's southwest end and involved replacing the Westminster Drive overpass to allow the highway to be widened . The Westminster Drive overpass was demolished on July 5 , 2014 . This project will coincide with reconstructing the outdated cloverleaf interchange at Colonel Talbot Road and widening Highway 401 from four to six lanes between Highway 4 and Highway 402 . These projects start in 2017 . The MTO is also planning on widening Highway 401 from six to eight lanes through part of the London corridor . 
 Long @-@ term plans call for Highway 401 in the Waterloo region to be widened to eight to ten lanes as well . Work began on June 8 , 2015 to widen the highway from six to ten lanes between Highway 8 and Hespeler Road in Cambridge . The interchange between Highway 401 and Highway 8 ( King Street ) is to be reconstructed to make it free @-@ flowing for all directions of travel . 
 = = = Central Ontario = = = 
 In its 2007 plan for southern Ontario , the MTO announced long @-@ term plans to create high @-@ occupancy vehicle ( HOV ) lanes from Mississauga Road west to Milton ; these plans have since been expanded in scope to as far west as Hespeler Road in Cambridge . 
 Construction recently completed widening Highway 401 to a collector @-@ express system from Highway 403 and Highway 410 west to Hurontario Street , a distance of 2 @.@ 8 km ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) . Plans have been unveiled to lengthen the Mavis Road overpass and add ramps to the 401 / 403 / 410 interchange to prepare for the ' ultimate widening ' of Highway 401 between the Credit River and Highway 410 . 
 Within Toronto , some projects have been completed during overnight construction projects , including the widening and rehabilitation of the Hogg 's Hollow bridge , the replacement of the original gantries throughout the collector @-@ express system , and reconstructing the Highway 401 / 400 interchange . 
 Current expansion plans in Durham include the construction of two new freeways north from Highway 401 . Highway 412 is directly east of Lakeridge Road , while Highway 418 will lie to the east of Courtice Road . Alongside the extension of Highway 407 , Highway 401 is being widened to 12 lanes , forming an extension to the current collector @-@ express system , from its current end at Brock Road in Pickering to Brock Street in Whitby . In addition , a partial interchange is being constructed at Lakeridge Road , with westbound entrance and eastbound exit ramps . In order to accommodate the ramps for Highway 412 , the highway is being shifted north at the interchange , currently under construction . Long @-@ term plans also call for HOV lanes to run from Brock Road to Harmony Road , though no planning has commenced . However , there has been an environmental assessment on widening highway 401 , extending the collector @-@ express system east towards Salem Road in Ajax and to 10 lanes from Brock Street in Whitby , to Courtice Road in the Clarington township . The assessment was completed in March 2015 . 
 All the original World War II era overpasses dating back in the 1940s and 1950s built between Whitby and Oshawa will gradually be replaced with new overpasses as part of modern highway safety standards and to allow highway widening sometime in the future . 
 = = = Eastern Ontario = = = 
 East of Durham , the MTO is planning to widen parts of Highway 401 to six lanes . Preliminary work includes the widening of the bridge over the Trent River in Trenton , as well as the realignment of some roads alongside the highway . By 2012 , the highway was widened to six lanes for 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) through Kingston between exits 611 and 619 . 
 = = Services = = 
 Highway 401 features 19 service centres controlled by the MTO . These service centres were announced in 1961 following public outcry over the lack of rest stops . They provide a place to park , rest , eat and refuel 24 hours a day . 
 The centres were originally leased to and operated by several major gasoline distributors ; however , those companies have chosen not to renew their leases as the terms end . In response , the MTO put the operation of the full network of service centres out for tender , resulting in a 50 @-@ year lease with Host Kilmer Service Centres , a joint venture between hospitality company HMSHost ( a subsidiary of Autogrill ) and Larry Tanenbaum 's investment company Kilmer van Nostrand , which operates the rest areas under the <unk> brand . 
 Seventeen of the centres along Highway 401 have been reconstructed entirely . Two centres that were rebuilt in the late 1990s , specifically Newcastle and Ingersoll , will not be redeveloped at this time . Work on 15 of the 17 service centres to be reconstructed began in late 2009 or early 2010 . The new service centres , opening in phases beginning in July 2010 , feature a Canadian Tire gas station , an HMSHost @-@ operated convenience store known as " The Market " , as well as fast food brands such as Tim Hortons , A & W , Pizza Pizza , Extreme Pita , KFC , Taco Bell , Big Smoke Burger and Burger King . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 401 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Metal corset = 
 Metal corsets ( also known as iron corsets ) are a type of historical corset or bodice made entirely out of metal , usually iron or steel . The metal corset was popularly claimed to have been introduced to France by Catherine de ' Medici in the 16th century , although this is now considered a myth . The idea that such garments were worn for fashionable purposes is debatable , with fashion historians now regarding such claims sceptically . Many of the original metal bodices that have survived are now believed to have been intended for medical purposes as orthopaedic support garments and back braces . Such garments were described by the French army surgeon Ambroise Paré in the sixteenth century as a remedy for the " <unk> of the Bodie . " 
 Some of the more extreme examples of metal corsets that have survived are now generally thought to be later reproductions designed to appeal to <unk> , rather than garments intended for fashionable wear . 
 Metal medical corsets were still being made in the twentieth century , whilst , since the late 20th century , fashion designers such as Alexander McQueen and Issey Miyake have made contemporary metal bodices and corsets from wire and aluminium coils . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Early fashion historians and writers have often attributed the introduction of fashionable corset @-@ wearing to Catherine de ' Medici , who is said to have brought metal corsets to France from Italy in the 16th century . The fashion historian Valerie Steele noted that after 19th @-@ century writers catering to audiences for <unk> and sexual fetishism played up the sadomasochistic idea of a " cruel , tortuous fashion " enforced by a dominant queen who demanded unrealistically small waists from her subjects , this mythical royal connection captured public imagination and became part of fashion mythology . 
 It is now widely believed that authentic metal corsets were intended as a form of orthopaedic brace to address spinal issues such as scoliosis . The 16th @-@ century French army surgeon Ambroise Paré described metal corsets as intended " to amend the <unk> of the Bodie , " recommending that the iron should be perforated in order to make the garments lighter , and that they be made to fit and padded for comfort . Paré criticised the concept of corsetry as a waist @-@ training device , warning that such a practice risked deforming the figure . 
 = = 16th and 17th centuries = = 
 A steel corset in the <unk> Museum , Florence , Italy , is dated to the mid @-@ 16th century , and thought to be similar to the metal stays recorded as having been made by a <unk> <unk> ( master armour @-@ maker ) for Eleanor of Toledo and delivered to her on 28 February 1549 . However , as Eleanor 's wardrobe records do not list any boned or stiffened corsets , it is thought that her steel bodice was designed for medical or therapeutic reasons rather than worn as a fashionable garment . 
 Although surviving metal bodices are usually dated to the late 16th and early 17th century , Steele has stated that some of the more extreme and elaborate examples are fakes created from the 19th century onwards to cater to fetishistic " fantasies about women imprisoned in metal corsets . " For example , Herbert Norris claimed in Tudor Costume and Fashion ( 1938 ) that a misbehaving wife would be locked into a metal corset by her husband until she promised to behave . One such iron corset , with a 14 @-@ inch waist , was acquired by the FIT Museum as dating from 1580 – 1600 , but is now considered to be a forgery from the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries . Steele noted suspicious similarities between this corset and an illustration first published in 1868 in The Corset and the <unk> , a " fetishistic " book claiming to offer a historical overview of fashion , and draws parallels between such corsets and fake medieval chastity belts . Harold Koda , curator of the Costume Institute , states that the excessive , mechanically @-@ produced regularity of the garment 's structure is evidence for its being a 19th @-@ century fabrication . Koda 's take on the significant percentage of extant nineteenth century metal corsets made in emulation of purported sixteenth @-@ century models is that they were created to cater to a specialist market , perhaps for inclusion in collector 's cabinets . 
 The fashion historians C. Willett Cunnington and his wife Phillis also stated firmly that surviving " iron bodies , " when not medical garments , were usually " fanciful ' reproductions ' " with no proof of their having genuinely been worn . Despite the explicit scepticism of fashion historians such as Steele and the <unk> , scholars outside the field of dress history sometimes treat these corsets as legitimate fashion garments . The anthropologist Marianne <unk> concluded that because such bodices fit the fashionable silhouette of their alleged period , they were probably authentic , and served the same purpose as other corsets . 
 = = 18th and 19th century = = 
 In Fashion and Fetishism , David Kunzle noted that in Peter Rondeau 's 1739 French @-@ German dictionary , the French term corps de fer is explained in German as " <unk> , mit <unk> <unk> <unk> , für <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( A bodice , with small iron plates , for badly @-@ grown ( i.e. , deformed ) girls ) . He reads this as implying that the iron plates would have been part of a fabric corset , rather than an all @-@ metal garment . 
 Kunzle has noted the absence of literary evidence for showing that metal corsets were also worn for fashion purposes . He has suggested that surviving metal garments , if not specifically medical in purpose , might have served the same <unk> gratifying purpose as the deliberately uncomfortable , tortuous hair shirt , combining a fashionable silhouette with penance , and as such , might have been worn in convents . To support his " pure speculation " , Kunzle cites a 1871 newspaper report from The Times reporting that during the Paris Commune , the National Guard found two iron corsets , a rack , and other instruments in the Convent of the White Nuns in Picpus . The claim by the Mother Superior that the instruments were for orthopaedic purposes was dismissed at the time as " a superficial falsehood . " 
 Metal corsets for medical purposes continued to be used in the 18th and early 19th century , although equivalent garments made from canvas were increasingly used in their place . In 1894 , A.M. Phelps of the American Orthopaedic Association recommended an aluminium corset coated with waterproof enamel for sufferers of Pott disease or curvature of the spine . Made from a cast of the patient 's body , the advantages of such a garment were that aluminium was lightweight , durable , thin enough to be worn beneath clothing , and could be worn while bathing . Such corsets were still being recommended in the early 20th century as cheaper and more durable in the longer run than plaster moulds , although their initial expense was greater . 
 = = 20th and 21st centuries = = 
 Since the 20th century , actual metal corsets have occasionally been made for contemporary wear , although such instances are rare . Steele notes that alongside a 1930s metal corset made for and worn by a fetish <unk> called Cayne , the late 20th- and early 21st @-@ century tight @-@ <unk> Cathie Jung had a silver corset @-@ cover made to wear over her actual laced corset . Between 1933 and 1940 Mrs. Cayne advertised a booklet describing her 14 @-@ inch waistline and offered other services in the Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News . 
 As a medical garment , metal corsets endured well into the 20th century . The Mexican painter Frida Kahlo was a notable wearer of such medical corsets , following ongoing problems as a result of a serious road crash she experienced as a teenager . By 1944 , Kahlo 's doctors had recommended that she wear a steel corset instead of the plaster ones she had mainly worn since the accident ; and Kahlo , whose paintings were heavily autobiographical , used the new corset as the basis for one of her best known self @-@ portraits , The Broken Column . In the painting , Kahlo portrays herself weeping with agony , her torso split open revealing that her spine is a crumbling Ionic column , and her damaged body held together by the steel corset . A form of metal corset or orthopaedic brace used in the second half of the 20th century is called a Harris brace after its inventor , R.I. Harris . Harris braces are designed to immobilise the waist whilst healing , and are made with two bendable metal bands worn above and below the waist , and connected with rigid metal supports . 
 20th and 21st century designers have sometimes offered metal corsets and bodices as part of their presentations , including Alexander McQueen , Issey Miyake , and Thierry Mugler . One of McQueen 's most famous pieces was a 1999 aluminium corset , called the Coiled Corset , created in collaboration with the jeweller Shaun Leane and the artist Kees van der Graaf . Built around a cast of the model Laura Morgan 's torso , the garment had a 15 @-@ inch waist and was composed of 97 stacked coils , which had to be screwed together onto Morgan 's body . The Coiled Corset was inspired by the neck rings worn by Ndebele women , extended to encase the wearer 's torso . In 2001 , the corset formed part of a live presentation at the Victoria and Albert Museum showcasing McQueen and Leane 's collaborations . <unk> and bustiers can also be made using wire , such as a 1983 aluminium wire bustier by Miyake which was cuffed around the torso over a feathered garment , offering a pun on the theme of <unk> . 
