 = = In museums = = 
 Metal corsets are found in a number of museum collections around the world . Some museums , including the Museo <unk> , and the Kyoto Costume Institute in Japan , present their metal bodices as fashionable late 16th @-@ century garments . The Victoria and Albert Museum in London describes their iron corset ( formerly owned by the painter Talbot Hughes ) as dating from the 18th century and likely intended for orthopaedic purposes . Others , such as the iron corset in the Fashion Institute of Technology , are presented as fakes . 
 = Geastrum triplex = 
 Geastrum triplex is an inedible fungus which is found in the detritus and leaf litter of hardwood forests in many parts of the world . It is commonly known as the collared earthstar , the <unk> earthstar , or the triple earthstar — and less commonly by the alternative species name Geastrum indicum . It is the largest member of the genus Geastrum ( or earthstar fungi ) and expanded mature specimens can reach a tip @-@ to @-@ tip length of up to 12 centimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) . 
 Immature fruit bodies are spherical — somewhat resembling puffballs with pointed beaks — and are partially or completely buried in the ground . As the fungus matures , the outer layer of tissue ( the exoperidium ) splits into four to eight pointed segments that spread outwards and downwards , lifting and exposing the spherical inner spore sac . The spore sac contains the gleba , a mass of spores and fertile mycelial tissue that when young is white and firm , but ages to become brown and powdery . Often , a layer of the exoperidium splits around the perimeter of the spore sac so that it appears to rest in a collar or saucer . Atop the spore sac is a small pointed beak , the peristome , which has a small hole from which spores may be released . 
 The species is widespread and can be found in Asia , Australasia , Europe , and both North and South America . The fungus has a history of use in the traditional medicines of native North America and China . Fruit bodies have been analyzed chemically to determine their lipid content , and various chemical derivatives of the fungal sterol ergosterol have been identified . 
 = = Taxonomy and classification = = 
 The species was first described scientifically , by German botanist Franz Wilhelm Junghuhn , as Geaster triplex in 1840 . The earlier genus name Geaster , introduced by Italian botanist Pier Antonio Micheli in 1727 in Nova Plantarum Genera , is considered an orthographical variant of Geastrum . Junghuhn , who was living in Indonesia and extensively surveyed its fungal flora , discovered the type specimen on Mount <unk> on the island Java , at an elevation between 3 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 to 1 @,@ 520 m ) . Today , the type specimen is kept at the National Herbarium of the Netherlands in Leiden . The morphological feature used by Junghuhn to differentiate G. triplex from other similar earthstars was the collar @-@ like structure of the inner layer of the exoperidium . American mycologist Curtis Gates Lloyd would later erroneously suggest that the species was a " giant form " of Geastrum saccatum . 
 Several authors have regarded Geastrum indicum as the correct name for G. triplex . This is because G. indicum — a species described by Johann Friedrich Klotzsch in 1832 as <unk> indicum and then moved to Geastrum by Stephan <unk> in 1959 — may be the same species as Geastrum triplex . If it is in fact the same species , the first published name ( i.e. , G. indicum ) has nomenclatorial priority according to the rules of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature . More recently , several authors argue that G. indicum should be rejected as a nomen dubium and G. triplex maintained as the correct name for the species . 
 Stellan Sunhede 's 1989 monograph of European species of Geastrum follows V. J. <unk> 's concept for the infrageneric ( below the level of genus ) placement of Geastrum , and places G. triplex with species that do not incorporate and encrust forest debris ( section <unk> ) . G. triplex is further categorized in subsection Laevistomata , which includes species with a fibrillose peristome — that is , made of parallel , thin , thread @-@ like filaments . Within subsection Laevistomata it is in stirps Triplex , due to its delimited ( with a distinct restricting edge ) or irregularly torn peristome . 
 The specific epithet triplex means " threefold " , and refers to the three @-@ layered peridium . Geastrum triplex has acquired several vernacular names , including the collared earthstar , the <unk> earthstar , and the triple earthstar . 
 = = Description = = 
 Like all mushrooms , the fruit body of Geastrum triplex is the visible part of a larger organism . Hidden from sight are masses of nearly invisible fungal threads called mycelium , which form the active feeding and growing structures of the fungus . The fruit body — created when environmental conditions such as temperature , moisture , and nutrient availability are optimal — is designed to produce and disseminate spores . Geastrum triplex has the largest fruit body of the earthstar mushrooms . The immature fruit body is typically 1 to 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , and up to 8 to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 to 3 @.@ 5 in ) broad ( Roody gives a larger value here , up to 11 @.@ 5 cm ) after the rays have spread out . It is composed of a roughly spherical to egg @-@ shaped structure , the endoperidium , topped by an opening , the ostiole , covered by fragments of tissue that form a small pointed beak ( a peristome ) . The endoperidium is typically lacking any sort of stem ( it is sessile ) grayish @-@ brown to " wood brown " when young but light yellow @-@ brown in dried , unopened specimens . The outer tissue layer , the exoperidium , develops splits which radiate from the apex and form between four and eight rays that separate from the endoperidium . The latter 's thin and papery envelope surrounds a mass of spores and fertile tissue known as the gleba . The central part of the gleba contains a <unk> ( a columella not attached to the stalk ) , that is typically cylindrical or club @-@ shaped , and extends up from the base . Because of the variability in columella persistence , size , structure and shape within the genus , its value for identification is limited . 
 The exoperidium 's rays are 2 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) long and up to 4 mm ( 3 / 16 in ) thick . The outer surface of the rays ( the lower surface , after expansion ) and unopened specimens have a rough texture . In several Geastrum species , dirt and debris adhere to the underside , this is not the case in G. triplex . The inner fleshy layers ( upper surface ) of these rays are near " wood brown " in color when dried , and have a layer of surface tissue that cracks into patches . There is a great deal of variation , however , to the extent in which the upper surface tissue of the rays crack : this tissue layer may also remain closely attached as a sheet over the unsegmented part of the outer wall with the part adhering to the rays variously cracked and sometimes finally peeling off in places . 
 In G. triplex , the bases of the rays usually break around the perimeter of the endoperidium to form a <unk> platform or receptacle in which the endoperidium rests . However , not all specimens form this receptacle , leading to possible confusion with other Geastrum species . Curtis Gates Lloyd claimed that in tropical regions , with an abundance of high temperatures and humidity , the fungus expands rapidly , which is more conducive to the fleshy layer breaking away to form a receptacle ; in more temperate areas this effect would not be as pronounced and " usually does not occur at all " . 
 The endoperidium is 1 to 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter by 0 @.@ 9 to 2 @.@ 0 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 8 in ) high , sessile , and a dull grayish @-@ brown . The peristome is made of radially arranged fibrils that clump together at the apex in groups of unequal length to form an opening that appears jagged or torn . The circular area bordering the peristome is a paler color . Spores are thought to be dispersed by the wind sucking them out when it blows over the hole , or when falling raindrops hit the flexible endoperidium , creating a puff of air that forces the spores through the ostiole . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spore sac contains the gleba , which is composed of a <unk> , unbranched threads ( the capillitium ) , the spore @-@ bearing cells ( basidia ) and the spores themselves ; all of these microscopic elements have certain characteristic features that help distinguish G. triplex from other superficially similar earthstars . 
 The spores are spherical , and 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 µm in diameter . They are covered with short narrow abruptly terminating projections of a translucent ( hyaline ) substance , which turn a pale cinnamon brown in potassium hydroxide , and a dark dull brown ( nearly sepia ) when stained with iodine . The capillitium is made of what appears to be encrusted cylindrical filaments 3 – 6 µm in diameter , of a color varying from hyaline to dull yellowish brown in potassium hydroxide , and yellowish in iodine ; its walls are thickened to the point where the interior ( lumen ) appears as only a line . Either two or four spores are attached to the basidia , and the sterigmata ( extensions of the basidia that attach the spores ) are long , up to 20 µm . Geastrum triplex does not have cystidia . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Geastrum triplex may be confused with G. saccatum or G. fimbriatum , as the rays do not always crack around the perimeter to form a bowl under the spore case . However , it is larger than either of these species . The combination of characteristics which distinguish G. triplex from other earthstars include the lack of debris adhering to the outer surfaces , the saucer @-@ like base in which the spore case is seated , the relatively large size , the fibrillose peristome and the paler area surrounding the peristome separating it from the rest of the endoperidium . Unlike some other Geastrum species , the rays of G. triplex are not hygroscopic : they do not open and close in response to changes in humidity . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Geastrum triplex is a saprobic fungus : it derives nutrients from decomposing organic matter . The fruit bodies are usually found growing singly or more commonly in groups in hardwood forests where much humus has accumulated ; in Mexico , they have been collected in tropical deciduous forest . Fruit bodies are often found around well @-@ rotted tree stumps ; they are initially almost buried in the loose duff , but emerge during maturity as the downward curling of the rays exposes the spore sac . Old fruit bodies are persistent , and may survive the winter to be found the following spring or summer . A Dutch study reported a propensity for G. triplex to grow on soil made calcium @-@ rich from washed @-@ out chalk of crushed shells on bicycling paths . It is described as common in North America and Europe . One author states it is commonly found under beech trees . 
 Geastrum triplex has a widespread distribution , and has been collected in Asia ( China , Korea Iran , and Turkey ) , Australia , Europe ( Belgium , Czech Republic , Sweden , and the Canary Islands ) , and Africa ( Congo , South Africa ) . In North America , its range extends north to Canada and south to Mexico , including the whole continental United States and Hawaii . In Central and South America the fungus has been reported from Panama , Trinidad and Tobago , Argentina , Brazil , and Chile . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Although the fruit bodies of Geastrum triplex are <unk> , they are tough and fibrous , and of " no alimentary interest " . Mycologist David Arora says that they are reputed to be edible when immature — when the gleba is still white and firm — but adds that they are rarely found in this form . 
 = = = In traditional medicine = = = 
 <unk> were used medicinally by Native American Indians . The Blackfoot called them ka @-@ ka @-@ <unk> , meaning " fallen stars " , and according to legend , they were an indication of supernatural events . The Cherokee put fruit bodies on the navels of babies after childbirth until the withered umbilical cord fell off , " both as a prophylactic and a therapeutic measure " . In traditional Chinese medicine , G. triplex is used to reduce inflammation in the respiratory tract , and to staunch bleeding and reduce swelling . 
 = = = Chemistry = = = 
 The fruit bodies of Geastrum triplex have been chemically analyzed and shown to contain a number of bioactive compounds , including fungal sterols such as ergosta @-@ 4 @,@ 6 @,@ 8 , ( 14 ) , 22 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 @-@ one , 5 @,@ 6 @-@ <unk> , ergosterol , and <unk> . The fungus also contains various fatty acids , notably myristic , palmitic , stearic , oleic , alpha @-@ linolenic , and <unk> acid . 
 = Gadsden Purchase = 
 The Gadsden Purchase ( known in Mexico as Spanish : Venta de La Mesilla , " Sale of La Mesilla " ) is a 29 @,@ 670 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 76 @,@ 800 km2 ) region of present @-@ day southern Arizona and southwestern New Mexico that was purchased by the United States in a treaty signed on December 30 , 1853 by James Gadsden who was the American ambassador to Mexico at that time . It was then ratified , with changes , by the U.S. Senate on April 25 , 1854 , and signed by 14th President Franklin Pierce , with final approval action taken by Mexico 's government and their General Congress or Congress of the Union on June 8 , 1854 . The purchase was the last territorial acquisition in the contiguous United States to add a large area to the country . 
 The purchase included lands south of the Gila River and west of the Rio Grande ; it was largely so that the U.S. could construct a transcontinental railroad along a deep southern route . ( This happened with the transcontinental railroad , constructed by the Southern Pacific Railroad in 1881 / 1883 ) . It also aimed to reconcile outstanding border issues between the U.S. and Mexico following the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo , which ended the earlier Mexican – American War of 1846 – 48 . 
 As the railroad age evolved , business @-@ oriented Southerners saw that a railroad linking the South with the Pacific Coast would expand trade opportunities . They thought the topography of the southern portion of the original boundary line to the Mexican Cession ( future states of California , Nevada , Utah , Arizona , New Mexico , western Colorado ) of 1848 after the Mexican – American War was too mountainous to allow a direct route . Projected southern railroad routes tended to run to the North at their eastern ends , which would favor connections with northern railroads and ultimately favor northern seaports . Southerners saw that to avoid the mountains , a route with a southeastern terminus might need to swing south into what was still then Mexican territory . 
 The administration of President Franklin Pierce , strongly influenced by Secretary of War Jefferson Davis , ( later President of the southern seceding Confederate States ) saw an opportunity to acquire land for the railroad , as well as to acquire significant other territory from northern Mexico . In the end , territory for the railroad was purchased for $ 10 million ( $ 260 million today ) , but Mexico balked at any large @-@ scale sale of territory . In the United States , the debate over the treaty became involved in the sectional dispute over slavery , ending progress before the American Civil War in the planning or construction of a transcontinental railroad . 
 = = Southern route for the Transcontinental Railroad = = 
 = = = Southern commercial conventions = = = 
 In January 1845 Asa Whitney of New York state presented the United States Congress with the first plan to construct a transcontinental railroad . Although Congress took no action on his proposal , a commercial convention of 1845 in Memphis took up the issue . Prominent attendees included John C. Calhoun , Clement C. Clay , Sr. , John Bell , William Gwin , and Edmund P. Gaines , but it was James Gadsden of South Carolina who was influential in the convention 's recommending a southern route for the proposed railroad . It was to begin in Texas and end in San Diego or Mazatlán . Southerners hoped that such a route would ensure southern prosperity while opening the “ West to southern influence and settlement . ” 
 Southern interest in railroads in general , and the Pacific railroad in particular , accelerated after the conclusion of the Mexican – American War in 1848 . During that war , topographical officers William H. Emory and James W. Abert had conducted surveys that demonstrated the feasibility of a railroad 's originating in El Paso or western Arkansas and ending in San Diego . J. D. B. DeBow , the editor of DeBow 's Review , and Gadsden both publicized within the South the benefits of building this railroad . 
 Gadsden had become the president of the South Carolina Canal and Rail Road Company in 1839 ; about a decade later , the company had laid 136 miles ( 219 km ) of track extending west from Charleston , South Carolina , and it was 3 million dollars in debt . Gadsden wanted to connect all Southern railroads into one sectional network . He was concerned that the increasing railroad construction in the North was shifting trade in lumber , farm goods , and manufacturing goods from the traditional north @-@ south route based on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers to an east @-@ west axis that would bypass the South . He also saw Charleston , his home town , losing its prominence as a seaport . In addition , many Southern business interests feared that a northern transcontinental route would cut the South off from trade with the Orient . Other Southerners argued for diversification from a plantation economy to keep the South independent from northern bankers . 
 In October 1849 a convention to discuss railroads was held in Memphis , in response to a separate convention called in St. Louis earlier in the fall , which had discussed a northern route . The Memphis convention overwhelmingly advocated the construction of a route beginning there , to connect with an El Paso to San Diego line . Disagreement arose only over the issue of financing . The convention president , Matthew Fontaine Maury of Virginia , preferred strict private financing , whereas John Bell and others thought that federal land grants to railroad developers would be necessary . 
 = = = James Gadsden and California = = = 
 Gadsden supported nullification in 1831 . When California was admitted to the Union as a free state in 1850 , he advocated secession by South Carolina . Gadsden considered slavery “ a social blessing ” and abolitionists “ the greatest curse of the nation . ” 
 When the secession proposal failed , Gadsden , working with his cousin Isaac Edward Holmes , a lawyer in San Francisco since 1851 , and the California state senator Thomas Jefferson Green , attempted to divide California in two . They proposed that the southern half of the state allow slavery . Gadsden planned to establish a slave @-@ holding colony there based on rice , cotton , and sugar . He would use slave labor to build a railroad and highway that originated in either San Antonio or the Red River . The railway or highway would transport people to the California gold fields . Toward this end , on December 31 , 1851 , Gadsden asked Green to secure from the California state legislature a large land grant located between the 34th and 36th parallels , along the proposed dividing line for the two California states . 
 A few months after this , Gadsden and 1 @,@ 200 potential settlers from South Carolina and Florida submitted a petition to the California legislature for permanent citizenship and permission to establish a rural district that would be farmed by " not less than Two Thousand of their African Domestics . " The petition stimulated some debate , but it finally died in committee . 
 = = = Stephen Douglas and land grants = = = 
 The Compromise of 1850 , which created the Utah Territory and the New Mexico Territory , would facilitate a southern route to the West Coast since all territory for the railroad was now organized and would allow for federal land grants as a financing measure . Competing northern or central routes championed , respectively , by U.S. Senators Stephen Douglas of Illinois and Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri , would still need to go through unorganized territories . A precedent for using federal land grants had been established when Millard Fillmore signed a bill promoted by Douglas that allowed a south to north , Mobile to Chicago railroad to be financed by " federal land grants for the specific purpose of railroad construction " . To satisfy Southern opposition to the general principle of federally supported internal improvements , the land grants would first be transferred to the appropriate state or territorial government , which would oversee the final transfer to private developers . 
 By 1850 , however , the majority of the South was not interested in exploiting its advantages in developing a transcontinental railroad or railroads in general . Businessmen like Gadsden , who advocated economic diversification , were in the minority . The Southern economy was based on cotton exports , and then @-@ current transportation networks met the plantation system 's needs . There was little home market for an intra @-@ South trade . In the short term , the best use for capital was to invest it in more slaves and land rather than in taxing it to support canals , railroads , roads , or in dredging rivers . Historian Jere W. Roberson wrote : 
 Southerners might have gained a great deal under the 1850 land grant act had they concentrated their efforts . But continued opposition to Federal aid , filibustering , an unenthusiastic President , the spirit of " Young America " , and efforts to build railroads and canals across Central America and the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in Mexico divided their forces , leaving a lot of time for the Pacific railroad . Moreover , the Compromise of 1850 encouraged Southerners not to antagonize opponents by resurrecting the railroad controversy . 
 = = Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo = = 
 The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ( 1848 ) ended the Mexican – American War , but there were issues affecting both sides that still needed to be resolved : possession of the Mesilla Valley , protection for Mexico from Indian raids , and the right of transit in the Isthmus of Tehuantepec . 
 = = = Mesilla Valley = = = 
 The treaty provided for a joint commission , made up of a surveyor and commissioner from each country , to determine the final boundary between the United States and Mexico . The treaty specified that the Rio Grande Boundary would veer west eight miles ( 13 km ) north of El Paso . The treaty was based on the attached 1847 copy of a twenty @-@ five @-@ year @-@ old map . Surveys revealed that El Paso was 36 miles ( 58 km ) further south and 100 miles ( 160 km ) further west than the map showed . Mexico favored the map , but the United States put faith in the results of the survey . The disputed territory involved a few thousand square miles and about 3 @,@ 000 residents ; more significantly , it included the Mesilla Valley . Bordering the Rio Grande , the valley consisted of flat desert land measuring about 50 miles ( 80 km ) , north to south , by 200 miles ( 320 km ) , east to west . This valley was essential for the construction of a transcontinental railroad using a southern route . 
 John Bartlett of Rhode Island , the United States negotiator , agreed to allow Mexico to retain the Mesilla Valley ( setting the boundary at 32 ° 22 ′ N , north of the American claim 31 ° 52 ′ and at the easternmost part , also north of the Mexican @-@ claimed boundary at 32 ° 15 ′ ) in exchange for a boundary not turning north until 110 ° W in order to include the Santa Rita Mountains , which were believed to have rich copper deposits , and some silver and gold which had not yet been mined . Southerners opposed this alternative because of its implication for the railroad , but it was supported by President Fillmore . Southerners in Congress prevented any action on the approval of this separate border treaty and eliminated further funding for surveying of the disputed borderland . Bartlett was replaced with Robert Blair Campbell , a pro @-@ railroad politician from Alabama . Mexico asserted that the commissioners ' determinations were valid and prepared to send in troops to enforce the unratified agreement . 
 = = = Indian raids = = = 
 Article XI of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo contained a guarantee that the United States would protect Mexicans by preventing cross @-@ border raids by local Comanche and Apache tribes . At the time the treaty was ratified , Secretary of State James Buchanan had believed that the United States had both the commitment and resources to enforce this promise . Historian Richard Kluger , however , described the difficulties of the task : 
 In the five years after approval of the Treaty , the United States spent $ 12 million ( $ 320 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 today ) in this area , and General @-@ in @-@ Chief Winfield Scott estimated that five times that amount would be necessary to police the border . Mexican officials , frustrated with the failure of the United States to effectively enforce its guarantee , demanded reparations for the losses inflicted on Mexican citizens by the raids . The United States argued that the Treaty did not require any compensation nor did it require any greater effort to protect Mexicans than was expended in protecting its own citizens . During the Fillmore administration , Mexico claimed damages of $ 40 million ( $ 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 today ) but offered to allow the U.S. to buy out Article XI for $ 25 million ( $ 660 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 today ) . President Fillmore had proposed a settlement that was $ 10 million less . 
 = = = Isthmus of Tehuantepec = = = 
 During negotiations of the treaty , Americans had failed to secure the right of transit across the 125 @-@ mile ( 201 km ) -wide Isthmus of Tehuantepec in southern Mexico . The idea of building a railroad here had been considered for a long time . In 1842 Mexican President Antonio López de Santa Anna sold the rights to build a railroad or canal across the isthmus . The deal included land grants 300 miles ( 480 km ) -wide along the right @-@ of @-@ way for future colonization and development . In 1847 a British bank bought the rights , raising US fears of British colonization in the hemisphere , in violation of the precepts of the Monroe Doctrine . United States interest in the right @-@ of @-@ way was increased by the 1848 finding of gold in the Sierra Nevada , the finding the impetus for the California Gold Rush . 
 The Memphis commercial convention of 1849 recommended that the United States pursue the trans @-@ isthmus route , since it appeared unlikely that a transcontinental railroad would be built anytime soon . Interests in Louisiana were especially adamant about this option , as they believed that any transcontinental railroad would divert commercial traffic away from the Mississippi and New Orleans , and they at least wanted to secure a southern route . Also showing interest was Peter A. Hargous of New York who ran an import @-@ export business between New York and Vera Cruz . Hargous purchased the rights to the route for $ 25 @,@ 000 ( $ 700 @,@ 000 today ) , but realized that the grant had little value unless it was supported by the Mexican and American governments . 
 In Mexico , topographical officer George W. Hughes reported to Secretary of State John M. Clayton that a railroad across the isthmus was a “ feasible and practical ” idea . Clayton then instructed Robert P. Letcher , the minister to Mexico , to negotiate a treaty to protect Hargous ' rights . The United States ' proposal gave Mexicans a 20 % discount on shipping , guaranteed Mexican rights in the zone , allowed the United States to send in military if necessary , and gave the United States most @-@ favored @-@ nation status for Mexican cargo fees . This treaty , however , was never finalized . 
 The Clayton – Bulwer Treaty between the United States and Great Britain , which guaranteed the neutrality of any such canal , was finalized in April 1850 . Mexican negotiators refused the treaty because it would eliminate Mexico 's ability to play the US and Britain against each other . They eliminated the right of the United States to unilaterally intervene militarily . The United States Senate approved the treaty in early 1851 , but the Mexican Congress refused to accept the treaty . 
 In the meantime , Hargous proceeded as if the treaty would be approved eventually . Judah P. Benjamin and a committee of New Orleans businessmen joined with Hargous and secured a charter from the Louisiana legislature to create the Tehuantepec Railroad Company . The new company sold stock and sent survey teams to Mexico . Hargous started to acquire land even after the Mexican legislature rejected the treaty , a move that led to the Mexicans canceling Hargous ' contract to use the right of way . Hargous put his losses at $ 5 million ( $ 142 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 today ) and asked the United States government to intervene . President Fillmore refused to do so . 
 Mexico sold the canal franchise , without the land grants , to A. G. Sloo and Associates in New York for $ 600 @,@ 000 ( $ 17 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 today ) . In March 1853 Sloo contracted with a British company to build a railroad and sought an exclusive contract from the new Franklin Pierce Administration to deliver mail from New York to San Francisco . However , Sloo soon defaulted on bank loans and the contract was sold back to Hargous . 
 = = Pierce administration = = 
 The Pierce administration , which took office in March 1853 , had a strong pro @-@ southern , pro @-@ expansion mindset . Louisiana Senator Pierre Soulé was sent to Spain to negotiate the acquisition of Cuba . <unk> John Y. Mason of Virginia and Solon Borland of Arkansas were appointed as ministers , respectively , to France and Nicaragua . Pierce 's Secretary of War , Jefferson Davis , was already on record as favoring a southern route for a transcontinental railroad , so southern rail enthusiasts had every reason to be encouraged . 
 The South as a whole , however , remained divided . In January 1853 Senator Thomas Jefferson Rusk of Texas introduced a bill to create two railroads , one with a northern route and one with a southern route starting below Memphis on the Mississippi River . Under the Rusk legislation , the President would be authorized to select the specific termini and routes as well as the contractors who would build the railroads . Some southerners , however , worried that northern and central interests would leap ahead in construction and opposed any direct aid to private developers on constitutional grounds . Other southerners preferred the isthmian proposals . An amendment was added to the Rusk bill to prohibit direct aid , but southerners still split their vote in Congress and the amendment failed . 
 This rejection led to legislative demands , sponsored by William Gwin of California and Salmon P. Chase of Ohio and supported by the railroad interests , for new surveys for possible routes . Gwin expected that a southern route would be approved — both Davis and Robert J. Walker , former secretary of the treasury , supported it . Both were stockholders in a Vicksburg @-@ based railroad that planned to build a link to Texas to join up with the southern route . Davis argued that the southern route would have an important military application in the likely event of future troubles with Mexico . 
 = = = Gadsden and Santa Anna = = = 
 On March 21 , 1853 , a treaty initiated in the Fillmore administration , that would provide joint Mexican and United States protection for the Sloo grant was signed in Mexico . At the same time that this treaty was received in Washington , Pierce learned that New Mexico Territorial Governor William C. Lane had issued a proclamation claiming the Mesilla Valley as part of New Mexico , leading to protests from Mexico . Pierce was also aware of efforts by France , through its consul in San Francisco , to acquire the Mexican state of Sonora . 
 Pierce recalled Lane in May and replaced him with David Meriwether of Kentucky . Meriwether was given orders to stay out of the Mesilla Valley until negotiations with Mexico could be completed . With the encouragement of Davis , Pierce also appointed James Gadsden to negotiate with Mexico over the acquisition of additional territory . Secretary of State William L. Marcy gave Gadsden clear instructions : he was to secure the Mesilla Valley for the purposes of building a railroad through it , convince Mexico that the US had done its best regarding the Indian raids , and elicit Mexican cooperation in efforts by US citizens to build a canal or railroad across the <unk> Isthmus . Supporting the Sloo interests was not part of the instructions . 
 The Mexican government was going through political and financial turmoil . In the process , Santa Anna had been returned to power about the same time that Pierce was inaugurated . Santa Anna was willing to deal because he needed money to rebuild the Mexican Army for defense against the United States , but he initially rejected the extension of the border further south to the Sierra Madre Mountains . He initially insisted on reparations for the damages caused by American Indian raids , but agreed to let an international tribunal resolve this . Gadsden realized that Santa Anna needed money and passed this information along to Secretary Marcy . 
 Marcy and Pierce responded with new instructions . Gadsden was authorized to purchase any of six parcels of land with a price fixed for each . The price would include the settlement of all Indian damages and relieve the United States from any further obligation to protect Mexicans . $ 50 million ( $ 1 @.@ 4 billion today ) would have bought the Baja California Peninsula and a large portion of its northwestern Mexican states while $ 15 million ( $ 430 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 today ) was to buy the 38 @,@ 000 square miles ( 98 @,@ 000 km2 ) of desert necessary for the railroad plans . 
 Santa Anna was put off by " Gadsden 's antagonistic manner " . Gadsden had advised Santa Anna that " the spirit of the age " would soon lead the northern states to secede so he might as well sell them now . The Mexican President felt threatened by William Walker 's attempt to capture Baja California with 50 troops and annex Sonora . Gadsden disavowed any government backing of Walker , who was expelled by the US and placed on trial as a criminal . Santa Anna worried that the US would allow further aggression against Mexican territory . Santa Anna needed to get as much money for as little territory as possible . When Great Britain rejected Mexican requests to assist in the negotiations , Santa Anna opted for the $ 15 million package . 
 = = = Ratification = = = 
 Pierce and his cabinet began debating the treaty in January 1854 . Although disappointed in the amount of territory secured and some of the terms , they submitted it to the Senate on February 10 . Gadsden , however , suggested that northern senators would block the treaty in order to deny the South a railroad . 
 Although signed by Pierce and Santa Anna , the treaty needed to be ratified by a 2 / 3 vote of the US Senate , where it met strong opposition . Antislavery senators opposed further acquisition of slave territory . Lobbying by speculators gave the treaty a bad reputation . Some senators objected to furnishing Santa Anna financial assistance . 
 The treaty had reached the Senate as that body was focused on the debate over the Kansas – Nebraska Act . On April 17 , after much debate , the Senate voted 27 to 18 in favor of the treaty , falling three votes short of the necessary two @-@ thirds required for treaty approval . After this defeat , Secretary Davis and southern senators pressed Pierce to add more provisions to the treaty including : 
 protection for the Sloo grant ; 
 a requirement that Mexico " protect with its whole power the prosecution , preservation , and security of the work [ referring to the isthmian canal ] " ; 
 permission for the United States to intervene unilaterally " when it may feel sanctioned and warranted by the public or international law " ; and 
 a reduction of the territory to be acquired by 9 @,@ 000 square miles ( 23 @,@ 000 km2 ) and dropping the price from $ 15 million ( $ 395 @,@ 055 @,@ 556 ) to $ 10 million ( $ 263 @,@ 370 @,@ 370 ) . 
 This version of the treaty successfully passed the US Senate April 25 , 1854 , by a vote of 33 to 12 . The reduction in territory was an accommodation of northern senators who opposed the acquisition of additional slave territory . In the final vote , northerners split 12 to 12 . Gadsden took the revised treaty back to Santa Anna , who accepted the changes . The treaty went into effect June 30 , 1854 . 
 While the land was available for construction of a southern railroad , the issue had become too strongly associated with the sectional debate over slavery to receive federal funding . Roberson wrote : 
 The unfortunate debates in 1854 left an indelible mark on the course of national politics and the Pacific railroad for the remainder of the antebellum period . It was becoming increasingly difficult , if not outright impossible , to consider any proposal that could not somehow be construed as relating to slavery and , therefore , sectional issues . Although few people fully realized it at the close of 1854 , sectionalism had taken such a firm , unrelenting hold on the nation that completion of an antebellum Pacific railroad was prohibited . Money , interest , and enthusiasm were devoted to emotion @-@ filled topics , not the Pacific railroad . 
 The effect was such that railroad development , which accelerated in the North , stagnated in the South . 
 = = = Post @-@ ratification controversy = = = 
 As originally envisioned , the purchase would have encompassed a much larger region , extending far enough south to include most of the current Mexican states of Baja California , Baja California Sur , Coahuila , Chihuahua , Sonora , Nuevo León , and Tamaulipas . The Mexican people opposed such boundaries , as did anti @-@ slavery US Senators , who saw the purchase as acquisition of more slave territory . Even the sale of a relatively small strip of land angered the Mexican people , who saw Santa Anna 's actions as a betrayal of their country . They watched in dismay as he squandered the funds generated by the Purchase . Contemporary Mexican historians continue to view the deal negatively and believe that it has defined the American – Mexican relationship in a deleterious way . 
 The purchased lands were initially appended to the existing New Mexico Territory . To help control the new land , the US Army established Fort Buchanan on Sonoita Creek in present @-@ day southern Arizona on November 17 , 1856 . The difficulty of governing the new areas from the territorial capital at Santa Fe led to efforts as early as 1856 to organize a new territory out of the southern portion . Many of the early settlers in the region were , however , pro @-@ slavery and sympathetic to the South , resulting in an impasse in Congress as to how best to reorganize the territory . 
 The shifting of the course of the Rio Grande would cause a later dispute over the boundary between Purchase lands and those of the state of Texas , known as the Country Club Dispute . Pursuant to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo , the Gadsden Treaty and subsequent treaties , the International Boundary and Water Commission which was established in 1889 to maintain the border , and pursuant to still later treaties its duties expanded to allocation of river waters between the two nations , and providing for flood control and water sanitation . Once viewed as a model of international cooperation , in recent decades the <unk> has been heavily criticized as an institutional anachronism , by @-@ passed by modern social , environmental and political issues . 
 = = Growth of the region after 1854 = = 
 = = = Army control = = = 
 The residents of the area gained full US citizenship and slowly assimilated into American life over the next half @-@ century . The principal threat to the peace and security of settlers and travelers in the area were raids by Apache Indians . The US Army took control of the purchase lands in 1854 but not until 1856 were troops stationed in the troubled region . In June 1857 it established Fort Buchanan south of the Gila at the head of the Sonoita Creek Valley . The fort protected the area until it was evacuated and destroyed in July 1861 . The new stability brought miners and ranchers . By the late 1850s , mining camps and military posts had not only transformed the Arizona countryside ; they had also generated new trade linkages to the state of Sonora , Mexico . Magdalena , Sonora , became a supply center for <unk> , wheat from nearby <unk> fed the troops at Fort Buchanan , and the town of Santa Cruz sustained the Mowry mines , just miles to the north . 
 = = = Civil War = = = 
 In 1861 , during the American Civil War , the Confederate States of America formed the Confederate Territory of Arizona , including in the new territory mainly areas acquired by the Gadsden Purchase . In 1863 , using a north @-@ to @-@ south dividing line , the Union created its own Arizona Territory out of the western half of the New Mexico Territory . The new American Arizona Territory also included most of the lands acquired in the Gadsden Purchase . This territory would be admitted into the Union as the State of Arizona on February 14 , 1912 , the last area of the Lower 48 States to receive statehood . 
 = = = Social development = = = 
 After the Gadsden Purchase , southern Arizona 's social elite , including the Estevan Ochoa , Mariano Samaniego , and Leopoldo Carillo families , remained primarily Mexican American until the coming of the railroad in the 1880s . When the Sonora Exploring and Mining Company opened silver mines in southern Arizona , it sought to employ educated , middle @-@ class Americans who shared a work ethic and leadership abilities to operate the mines . A biographical analysis of some 200 of its employees , classed as capitalists , managers , laborers , and general service personnel , reveals that the resulting work force included Europeans , Americans , Mexicans , and Indians . This mixture failed to stabilize the remote area , which lacked formal social , political , and economic organization in the years from the Gadsden Purchase to the Civil War . 
 = = = Economic development = = = 
 From the late 1840s into the 1870s Texas stockmen drove their beef cattle over southern Arizona on the Texas – California trail . Texans were impressed with the grazing possibilities offered by the Gadsden Purchase country of Arizona . By the last third of the century they were moving their herds into Arizona and establishing the range cattle industry there . Not only did the Texans contribute their proven range methods to the new grass country of Arizona but their problems as well . Texas rustlers brought lawlessness , poor management resulted in overstocking , and carelessness introduced destructive diseases . But these difficulties did force laws and associations in Arizona to curb and resolve them . The Anglo @-@ American cattleman frontier in Arizona was an extension of the Texas experience . 
 When the Arizona Territory was formed in 1863 out of the southern portion of the New Mexico Territory , Pima County and later Cochise County — created from the easternmost portion of Pima County in January 1881 — were subject to ongoing border @-@ related conflicts . The area was characterized by rapidly growing boomtowns , ongoing Apache raids , smuggling and cattle rustling across the United States @-@ Mexico border , growing ranching operations , and the expansion of new technologies in mining , railroading , and telecommunications . 
 In the 1860s , conflict between the Apaches and the Americans was at its height . There was until 1886 almost constant warfare in the region adjacent to the Mexican border . The illegal cattle operations kept beef prices in the border region lower and provided cheap stock that helped small ranchers get by . Many early Tombstone residents looked the other way when it was " only Mexicans " being robbed . 
 Outlaws derisively called " Cowboys " frequently robbed stagecoaches and brazenly stole cattle in broad daylight , scaring off the legitimate cowboys watching the herds . Bandits used the border between the United States and Mexico to raid across in one direction and use the other as sanctuary . In December , 1878 , and again the next year , Mexican authorities complained about American outlaw Cowboys who stole Mexican beef and resold it in Arizona . The Arizona Citizen reported that both U.S. and Mexican bandits were stealing horses from the Santa Cruz Valley and selling the livestock in Sonora , Mexico . Arizona Territorial Governor Fremont investigated the Mexican government 's allegations and accused them in turn of allowing outlaws to use Sonora as a base of operations for raiding into Arizona . 
 In the 1870s and 1880s , there was considerable tension between the rural residents who were for the most part Democrats from the <unk> Confederate States and town residents and business owners who were largely Republicans from the industrial Union States . The tension culminated into what has been called the Cochise County feud , or the Earp @-@ Clanton feud , which ended with the historic Gunfight at the O.K. Corral and Wyatt Earp 's Vendetta Ride . 
 = = = Railroad development = = = 
 The Southern Pacific Railroad from Los Angeles reached Yuma , Arizona , in 1877 , Tucson in March 1880 , El Paso in May 1881 , and this completed the second transcontinental railroad in December 1881 . The portion in Arizona was originally largely in the Gadsden Purchase but the western part was later rerouted north of the Gila River to serve the city of Phoenix . The portion in New Mexico runs largely through the territory that had been disputed between Mexico and the United States after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo had gone into effect , and before the time of the Gadsden Purchase . The Santa Fe Railroad Company also completed a railroad across Northern Arizona , via Prescott , Winslow , Flagstaff and Kingman in August 1883 . 
 The remainder of the Gila Valley pre @-@ Purchase border area was traversed by the Arizona Eastern Railway by 1899 and the Copper Basin Railway by 1904 . Excluded was a 20 @-@ mile ( 32 km ) section 33 @.@ 1 ° N 110 @.@ 6 ° W ﻿ / 33 @.@ 1 ; <unk> in the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation , from today 's San Carlos Lake to Winkelman at the mouth of the San Pedro River , including the Needle 's Eye Wilderness . 
 The section of US Highway 60 about 20 miles ( 32 km ) to the northwest , between Superior and Miami via Top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ World , takes an alternate route ( 17 @.@ 4 road miles ) between the Magma Arizona Railroad and the Arizona Eastern Railway railheads on each side of this gap . This highway is well north of the Gadsden Purchase . Given the elevations of those three places , at least a 3 % grade would have been required . 
 = = Population = = 
 Sunland Park ( pop . 13 @,@ 309 in 2000 ) , a suburb of El Paso , Texas , in Doña Ana County , New Mexico , is the largest community of New Mexico in the Gadsden Purchase . Lordsburg , New Mexico ( pop . 3 @,@ 379 in 2000 ) , the county seat of Hidalgo County , was in the disputed area before the Gadsden Purchase , and Deming , New Mexico , the county seat of Luna County , was north of both the Mexican and American land claims before the Gadsden Purchase , though the proposed Bartlett – Conde compromise of 1851 would have left it in Mexico . 
 The boundaries of most counties in Arizona do not follow the northern boundary of the Gadsden Purchase , but six counties in Arizona do have most of their populations within the land of the Gadsden Purchase . Four of these also contain areas north of the Gadsden Purchase , but these areas do have low population densities , with the exception of northeastern Pinal County , Arizona , including the towns of Apache Junction and Florence . Maricopa County also extends south into the area of the Gadsden Purchase , but this area is also thinly populated . Tucson is the largest city in the Gadsden Purchase . 
 The <unk> point of the Gadsden Purchase , and also along the American – Mexican border during the period of 1848 – 53 , is at approximately 33 ° 23 ′ 30 ″ N 112 ° 23 ′ 0 ″ W in the town of Goodyear , Arizona , about 30 miles ( 48 km ) southwest of Phoenix . 
 = Treasure Planet = 
 Treasure Planet is a 2002 American animated science fiction film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios , and released by Walt Disney Pictures on November 27 , 2002 . It is the 43rd animated feature in the Walt Disney Animated Classics series . The film is a science fiction adaptation of Robert Louis Stevenson 's adventure novel Treasure Island and was the first film to be released simultaneously in regular and IMAX theaters . The film employs a novel technique of hand @-@ drawn 2D traditional animation set atop 3D computer animation . 
 The film was co @-@ written , co @-@ produced and directed by Ron Clements and John Musker , who had pitched the concept for the film at the same time that they pitched Disney 's other animated feature The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , the film is also an animated remake of the 1987 Italian mini @-@ series Treasure Island in Outer Space . Treasure Planet features the voices of Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt , Brian Murray , David Hyde Pierce , Martin Short , Roscoe Lee Browne , Emma Thompson , Laurie Metcalf , and Patrick McGoohan ( in his final film role ) . The musical score was composed by James Newton Howard , while the songs were written and performed by John Rzeznik . Despite positive critical reception , the film performed poorly in the United States box office , costing $ 140 million to create while earning $ 38 million in the United States and Canada and just shy of $ 110 million worldwide . It was nominated for the 2002 Academy Award for Best Animated Feature . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A young Jim Hawkins is enchanted by stories of the legendary pirate Captain Flint and his ability to appear from nowhere , raid passing ships , and disappear in order to hide the loot on the mysterious " Treasure Planet " . Twelve years later , Jim has grown into an aloof and isolated teenager , long abandoned by his father . He reluctantly helps his mother Sarah run The Benbow Inn and derives amusement from " <unk> solar cruising " , a hybrid of skysurfing and windsurfing atop a board attached to a solar sail @-@ powered rocket . 
 One day , a spaceship crashes near the inn . The dying pilot , Billy Bones , gives Jim a sphere and tells him to " beware the cyborg " . After this , a gang of pirates raid and burn the inn . Jim , his mother , and their dog @-@ like friend Dr. Delbert Doppler flee . At Doppler 's study , Jim realizes that that sphere is a holographic projector , showing a star map that leads to the location of Treasure Planet . 
 Doppler commissions a ship called the RLS Legacy , on a mission to find Treasure Planet . The ship is commanded by the cat @-@ like , sharp @-@ witted Captain Amelia along with her stone @-@ skinned and disciplined First Mate , Mr. Arrow . The crew is a motley bunch , secretly led by the half robot cook John Silver , who Jim suspects is the cyborg of whom he was warned . Jim is sent down to work in the galley , where he is supervised by Silver and his shape @-@ shifting pet , Morph . Despite Jim 's mistrust of Silver , they soon form a tenuous father @-@ son relationship . 
 During the voyage , the ship encounters a supernova . Jim , while securing all lifelines of all crew members , saves Silver from falling just in time . The supernova then devolves into a black hole , where Arrow dies . The burst of shock waves and maximum engine power enable Amelia to pilot the ship to safety . The crew mourns for the loss of Arrow , and begins to suspect Jim of failing to secure the lifelines . Jim blames himself for the mistake , while in fact Arrow 's line was cut by a ruthless insectoid crew member named Scroop . 
 As the ship reaches Treasure Planet , mutiny erupts , led by Silver . Jim , Doppler , Amelia , and Morph abandon the ship , accidentally leaving the map behind . Thinking that Jim has the map , Silver has a chance to kill Jim , but refuses to do so because of his attachment to the boy . The fugitives are shot down by a mutineer during their escape , injuring Amelia . 
 While exploring Treasure Planet 's forests , the fugitives meet B.E.N. , an abandoned , whimsical robot , who says that he has literally lost his mind as part of his brain is missing , and invites them to his house to care for the wounded Amelia . The pirates corner the group here ; using a back @-@ door , Jim , B.E.N. , and Morph return to the ship in an attempt to recover the map . Scroop , aboard the ship as lookout , stalks and fights Jim . While working to sabotage the ship 's artillery , B.E.N. inadvertently turns off the artificial gravity , whereupon Jim and Scroop almost float off into space . Scroop grabs the mast while Jim grabs the flag at the top of the mast . Scroop partially cuts the flag 's halyard , but Jim grabs the mast , and kicks Scroop into the flag , breaking the halyard and causing Scroop to float away to his death . Jim and B.E.N. then obtain the map . Upon their return , they are captured by Silver , who has already captured Doppler and Amelia . 
 When Jim is forced to use the map , the group finds their way to a portal that can be opened to any place in the universe ; this being the means by which Flint conducted his raids . The treasure is at the center of the planet , accessible only via the portal . Treasure Planet is revealed to be a large space station built by unknown architects and commandeered by Flint . In the stash of treasure , Jim comes across the skeletal remains of Flint himself , holding a missing part of <unk> 's cognitive computer . Jim replaces this piece , causing B.E.N. to remember that the planet is set to explode if the treasure is ever discovered . In the ensuing catastrophe , Silver finds himself torn between holding onto a literal boat @-@ load of gold and saving Jim , who hangs from a precipice after a fall . Silver saves Jim , and the group escapes to the Legacy , which is damaged and lacks the power required to leave the planet in time to escape . Jim attaches a rocket to a narrow plate of metal and rides it toward the portal to open it to a new location , while Doppler pilots the ship behind him . Jim manages to open the portal to his home world 's spaceport , through which all escape the destruction of Treasure Planet . 
 After the escape , Amelia has the surviving pirates imprisoned aboard the ship and offers to recommend Jim to the Interstellar Academy for his heroic actions . Silver sneaks below deck , where Jim finds him preparing his escape . Jim lets him go , and Silver asks Jim to keep Morph . Silver predicts that Jim will " rattle the stars " , then tosses him a handful of jewels and gold he had taken from Treasure Planet to pay for rebuilding The Benbow Inn before flying off . Jim returns to <unk> Spaceport and reunites with his mother . A short time later , a party is hosted at the rebuilt inn , where Doppler and Amelia , married , have children of their own , and Jim is a military cadet . He looks to the skies and sees an image of Silver in the clouds . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt as Jim Hawkins , a teenage adolescent pining for adventure . 
 Austin Majors as young Jim Hawkins 
 David Hyde Pierce as Delbert Doppler , an alien doctor who slightly resembles a dog . 
 Emma Thompson as Captain Amelia , the captain of the RLS Legacy ; Amelia slightly resembles a cat . 
 Martin Short as <unk> , a robot who literally " lost his mind " ; abandoned on Treasure Planet by Captain Flint . 
 Brian Murray as John Silver , a cyborg who leads the mutiny on the RLS Legacy . 
 Roscoe Lee Browne as Mr. Arrow , Captain Amelia 's first mate . 
 Laurie Metcalf as Sarah Hawkins , Jim <unk> 's mother who runs the Benbow Inn . 
 Dane Davis as Morph , a small creature that can morph into any form . 
 Michael Wincott as Scroop , a vicious , spider / crab @-@ like crewman on the RLS Legacy . 
 Patrick McGoohan as Billy Bones , a sailor who owned the map to Treasure Planet . 
 Tony Jay as the Narrator 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Treasure Planet took roughly four and a half years to create , but the concept for Treasure Planet ( which was called " Treasure Island in Space " at the time ) was originally pitched by Ron Clements in 1985 during the meeting wherein he and John Musker also pitched The Little Mermaid . Clements stated that Jeffrey Katzenberg , who was the chief of Walt Disney Studios at the time , " just wasn 't interested " in the idea . Since Musker and Clements wanted to be able to move " the camera around a lot like Steven Spielberg or James Cameron , " the delay in production was beneficial since " the technology had time to develop in terms of really moving the camera . " Principal animation for the film began in 2000 with roughly 350 crew members working on it . In 2002 , Roy Conli estimated that there were around 1 @,@ 027 crew members listed in the screen credits with " about four hundred artists and computer artists , about a hundred and fifty musicians and another two hundred technologists " . 
 According to Conli , Clements wanted to create a space world that was " warm and had more life to it than you would normally think of in a science fiction film " , as opposed to the " stainless steel , blue , smoke coming from the bowels of heavily pipe laden " treatment of science fiction . In order to make the film " fun " by creating more exciting action sequences and because they believed that having the characters wear space suits and helmets " would take all the romance out of it " , the crew created the concept of the " <unk> , " an " outer space filled with atmosphere " . 
 Several changes were made late in the production to the film . The prologue of the film originally featured an adult Jim Hawkins narrating the story of Captain Flint in first person , but the crew considered this to be too " dark " and felt that it lacked character involvement . The crew also intended for the film to include a sequence showing Jim working on his solar surfer and interacting with an alien child , which was intended to show Jim 's more sensitive side and as homage to The Catcher in the Rye . Because of the intention to begin the film with a scene of Jim solar surfing , the sequence had to be cut . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Writer Rob Edwards stated that " it was extremely challenging " to take a classic novel and set it in outer space , and that they did away with some of the science fiction elements ( " things like the metal space ships and the coldness " ) early on . Edwards goes on to say that they " did a lot of things to make the film more modern " and that the idea behind setting the film in outer space was to " make the story as exciting for kids now as the book was for kids then " . 
 With regard to adapting the characters from the book to film , Ron Clements mentioned that the Jim Hawkins in the book is " a very smart , very capable kid " , but they wanted to make Jim start out as " a little troubled kid " who " doesn 't really know who he is " while retaining the aforementioned characteristics from the original character . The " mentor figures " for Jim Hawkins in the novel were Squire Trelawney and Dr. Livesey , whom John Musker described as " one is more comic and the other 's very straight " ; these two characters were fused into Dr. Doppler . Clements also mentions that though the father @-@ son relationship between Jim Hawkins and John Silver was present " to some degree " in the book , they wanted to emphasize it more in the film . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting director Ruth Lambert held a series of casting auditions for the film in New York , Los Angeles and London , but the crew already had some actors in mind for two of the major characters . The character of Dr. Doppler was written with David Hyde Pierce in mind , and Pierce was given a copy of the Treasure Planet script along with preliminary sketches of the character and the film 's scenic elements while he was working on A Bug 's Life . He stated that " the script was fantastic , the look was so compelling " that he accepted the role . Likewise , the character of Captain Amelia was developed with the idea that Emma Thompson would be providing her voice . " We offered it to her and she was really excited , " Clements said . Musker said , " This is the first action adventure character that Emma has ever played and she was pregnant during several of the sessions . She was happy that she could do all this action and not have to train for the part " There were no actors initially in mind for the characters of John Silver and Jim Hawkins ; Brian Murray ( John Silver ) and Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt ( Jim Hawkins ) were signed after months of auditions . Gordon @-@ Levitt stated that he was attracted to the role because " it 's a Disney animated movie and Disney animated movies are in a class by themselves , " and that " to be part of that tradition is unbelievable to me " . Musker mentioned that Gordon @-@ Levitt " combined enough vulnerability and intelligence and a combination of youthfulness but incompleteness " and that they liked his approach . 
 Among the lead actors , only Pierce had experience with voice acting prior to the making of Treasure Planet . Conli explained that they were looking for " really the natural voice of the actor " , and that sometimes it was better to have an actor with no experience with voice work as he utilizes his natural voice instead of " affecting a voice " . The voice sessions were mostly done without any interaction with the other actors , but Gordon @-@ Levitt expressed a desire to interact with Brian Murray because he found it difficult to act out most of the scenes between Jim Hawkins and John Silver alone . 
 = = = Design and animation = = = 
 While designing for Treasure Planet , the crew operated on rule they call the " 70 / 30 Law " ( an idea that art director Andy Gaskill has credited to Ron Clements ) , which meant that the overall look of the film 's artwork should be 70 % traditional and 30 % sci @-@ fi . The overall look of Treasure Planet was based on the art style promoted by illustrators associated with the Brandywine School of Illustration ( such as Howard Pyle and N.C. Wyeth ) , whose illustrations have been described by the film 's crew as being the " classic storybook illustration , " having a painterly feel to it , and being composed of a warm color palette . The animators took Deep Canvas , a technology which they had initially developed for Tarzan , and came up with a process they called " Virtual Sets , " wherein they created entire 360 degree sets before they began staging the scenes . They combined this process with traditionally @-@ drawn characters in order to achieve a " painted image with depth perception " and enabled the crew to place the camera anywhere in the set and maneuver it as they would maneuver a camera for a live @-@ action film . In order to test how a computer @-@ generated body part ( specifically John Silver 's cyborg arm ) would mesh with a traditionally animated character , the crew took a clip of Captain Hook from Peter Pan and replaced his arm with the cyborg arm . 
 There were around forty animators on the crew , and were further divided into teams ; for example , sixteen animators were assigned to Jim Hawkins because he appeared on the screen the most , and twelve were assigned to John Silver . To ensure " solidity " in illustration and personality , each major character in the film had a team of animators led by one supervisor . Conli mentioned that the personalities of the supervisors affect the final character , citing Glen Keane ( the supervisor for John Silver ) as well as John Ripa ( the supervisor for Jim Hawkins ) as examples . The physical appearance , movements , and facial expressions of the voice actors were infused into the characters as well . 
 When asked if they drew inspiration from the previous film adaptations of Treasure Island for the character designs , Glen Keane stated that he disliked looking at previous portrayals of the character in order to " clear his mind of stereotypes " , but that he drew some inspiration for the manner by which Silver spoke from actor Wallace Beery , whom he " loved because of the way he talked out of the side of his mouth . " For the characterization and design for Jim Hawkins , John Ripa cited James Dean as an important reference because " there was a whole attitude , a posture " wherein " you felt the pain and the youthful innocence " , and he also cited the film Braveheart because " there are a lot of close @-@ ups on characters ... who are going through thought processes , just using their eyes . " 
 Animators also used maquettes , small statues of the characters in the film , as references throughout the animation process . Character sculptor Kent Melton mentioned that the first Disney film to use maquettes was Pinocchio , and that this paved the way to the formation of an entire department devoted to character sculpting . Keane noted that maquettes are not just supposed to be " like a mannequin in a store " , but rather has to be " something that tells you [ the character 's ] personality " and that maquettes also helped inspire the way actors would portray their roles . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 This " 70 / 30 Law " was not only applied to the visual designs for the film , but also for the sound effects and music . Sound designer Dane Davis mentioned that he and his team " scoured hobby shops and junk stores for antique windup toys and old spinning mechanisms " in order to create the sound effects for John Silver to " avoid sounding slick or sci @-@ fi " . The team did some experimentation with the sound used in dialogues , especially with the robot B.E.N. , but opted to keep Short 's natural voice because everything they tried " affected his comedy " , and " the last thing you want to do in a story like this is affect performances " . 
 The music from the film is largely orchestral in nature , although it includes two moderately successful pop singles ( " I 'm Still Here " and " Always Know Where You Are " ) from The Goo Goo Dolls frontman John Rzeznik and British pop @-@ rock group , BBMak . Both songs were written and performed by John Rzeznik in the film , but BBMak recorded " Always Know Where You Are " for the soundtrack . The score was composed by James Newton Howard , who said that the score is " very much in the wonderful tradition of Korngold and Tiomkin and Steiner . " The score has been described as a mixture of modern music in the spirit of Star Wars and Celtic music . Scottish fiddler Alasdair Fraser is credited as the co @-@ composer of the track " Silver Leaves " , and is also listed as a soloist in the film 's credits . Walt Disney Records released the film 's soundtrack album on November 19 , 2002 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Prior to and during its theatrical run , Treasure Planet had promotional support from McDonald 's , Pepsi @-@ Cola , Dreyer 's , and Kellogg Company . McDonald 's included promotional items such as action figures and puzzles in their Happy Meals and Mighty Meals , Pepsi @-@ Cola placed promotional film graphics onto the packaging of a number of their soft drinks ( Mountain Dew , Code Red Sierra Mist , Mug Root Beer , Orange Slice and Lipton Brisk ) , Dreyer 's used their delivery truck panels to promote ice cream flavors inspired by the film ( such as " Galactic Chocolate " and " Vanilla Treasure " ) , and <unk> included film @-@ branded spoons in their cereal boxes . Hasbro also released a line @-@ up of Treasure Planet action figures and toys . 
 = = Release = = 
 Treasure Planet held its world premiere at the Cinerama Dome in Hollywood on November 17 , 2002 , though it was also screened in Paris , France on November 6 , 2002 . The film is " the first major studio feature " to be released in regular and IMAX theaters simultaneously ; this was done in the light of the success of Disney films that were re @-@ released in IMAX format , such as Fantasia 2000 and Beauty and the Beast . Dick Cook , then @-@ chairman of Walt Disney Studio Entertainment , also mentioned that the simultaneous release was a good way to distinguish themselves during the competitive holiday season . 
 Treasure Planet was released in DVD and VHS format in the United States and Canada on April 29 , 2003 . The DVD includes behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes , a visual commentary , deleted scenes , teaser and theatrical trailers , the music video for the song " I 'm Still Here " by John Rzeznik , and a virtual tour of the RLS Legacy . The DVD retained the number one spot in Billboard 's top sales for two weeks and the VHS was number one in sales for three weeks . From April to July 2003 , Treasure Planet brought in $ 64 Million in DVD sales . 
 Disney released a 10th Anniversary special edition Blu @-@ ray / DVD combo on July 3 , 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film has a 69 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 147 reviews . The site 's critical consensus states " Though its characterizations are weaker than usual , Treasure Planet offers a fast @-@ paced , beautifully rendered vision of outer space . " 
 Stephen Hunter of The Washington Post , who gave it 4 stars out of 5 , stated that the film " boasts the purest of Disney raptures : It unites the generations , rather than driving them apart " . Leah Rozen of People stated that the film " has imagination , humor aplenty and moves briskly " , and that " the animation , combining traditional and digital techniques , is ravishing . " Claudia Puig of USA Today said that the film 's most noteworthy feature is " the artful way it combines the futuristic and the retro " , and went on to say that the film doesn 't have the " charm of Lilo & Stitch " nor the " dazzling artistry of Spirited Away " , but concluded that Treasure Planet is " a capable and diverting holiday season adventure for a family audience . " Kim Hollis of Box Office Prophets stated that " there 's plenty to recommend the film – the spectacular visuals alone make Treasure Planet a worthwhile watch , " though expressing disappointment because she felt that the characters were " not all that creatively rendered " . 
 There were also many who criticized the film . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave it 2 @.@ 5 stars out of 4 ; he felt that a more traditional take on the story would have been " more exciting " and " less gimmicky " . Andy Klein of Daily Variety Gotham complained about the script , describing it as " listless " and remarked , " If only its script were as amusing as its visuals . " A. O. Scott of The New York Times described the film as " less an act of homage than a clumsy and cynical bit of piracy " , and went on to say that it is " not much of a movie at all " and a " brainless , mechanical picture " . Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly described the film as " all cutesy updated fripperies and zero momentum . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was an American box office bomb , grossing only $ 38 million in the United States and Canada and $ 110 million worldwide . In 2014 , the LA Times listed the film as one of the most expensive box office flops of all time . Consequently , Disney 's Buena Vista Distribution arm reduced its fourth @-@ quarter earnings by $ 47 million within a few days of the film 's release . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature , but lost to Spirited Away ( 2001 ) . It was also nominated for a number of Annie Awards . 
 = = Canceled sequel = = 
 Before Treasure Planet was shown in cinemas , Thomas Schumacher , then @-@ president of Walt Disney Feature Animation , mentioned the possibilities of having direct @-@ to @-@ video releases for Treasure Planet as well as a television series . He stated that they already had " a story and some storyboards and concepts up and a script for what a sequel to [ Treasure Planet ] could be , " and that they also had a " notion " of what the series would be . 
 Director Jun Falkenstein and screenwriter Evan Spiliotopoulos began early development on Treasure Planet 2 . In the sequel , Jim Hawkins and Kate , his love interest and classmate at the Royal Interstellar Academy , must team with Long John Silver to stop the villainous <unk> from freeing the inmates of Botany Bay Prison Asteroid . Willem Dafoe was set to voice <unk> . The sequel was canceled when Treasure Planet disappointed at the box office . 
 = = Video games = = 
 Several Treasure Planet video games were released . Disney Interactive released the naval strategy game Treasure Planet : Battle at Procyon for the PC in October 2002 , while Sony Computer Entertainment America released a Treasure Planet action video game for the PlayStation , PlayStation 2 and Game Boy Advance in November , developed by Bizarre Creations . The company used Softimage 's XSI engine for modeling , texturing and animation , and released a Making @-@ of video on their Facebook page in 2008 . 
 A series of games collectively called Disney 's Treasure Planet : Training Academy ( or Disney 's Treasure Planet Collection ) was also released in 2002 . It was composed of three games ( Broadside Blast , Treasure Racer , and <unk> Rescue ) , and players with all three games could unlock a fourth game ( Ship Shape ) . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The game was met with mixed to negative reception upon release . GameRankings and Metacritic gave it a score of 66 @.@ 43 % and 68 out of 100 for the Game Boy Advance version ; 64 % and 61 out of 100 for the PlayStation 2 version ; and 57 @.@ 14 % and 44 out of 100 for the PlayStation version . 
 = Gump Roast = 
 " Gump Roast " is the seventeenth episode of The Simpsons ’ thirteenth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 21 , 2002 . In the episode , Homer Simpson is honored by the townspeople at a Friars ' Club Roast , until it is interrupted by Kang and Kodos . 
 The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland and was written by Dan Castellaneta and his wife Deb Lacusta . The plot idea for the episode came about when The Simpsons cast members were on hiatus following a payment dispute . This is the fifth and , so far , the last clip show The Simpsons has produced . Instead , the series implements one " trilogy episode " each season . When it was first broadcast , " Gump Roast " received a 5 @.@ 7 rating and was watched by 12 @.@ 2 million viewers , making it the 16th most watched television show of the night . However , following its release on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , the episode received negative reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer Simpson sits on a park bench holding a box of chocolates , when Chief Wiggum appears to arrest him for impersonating a movie character . Homer tells Wiggum a story that he is not interested in at first , but becomes more intrigued when Homer uses flashbacks to help him tell the story . The Simpson family then arrives to take Homer to the Friars ’ Club , where he is roasted by Krusty the Clown and other prominent citizens of Springfield . Among those roasting him are his son Bart , his daughter Lisa , and his boss Mr. Burns who tries to warn the people of Springfield of Homer 's incompetence which , much to his dismay , they think is a joke . The roasters utilize more clips from previous episodes . 
 Soon , Kang and Kodos arrive at the roast and declare that humans are stupid , as demonstrated by more clips . However , when they probe Homer 's baby daughter Maggie 's brain and see her memories through a monitor , the emotional impact is too much for them that they cry with joy , but angrily attempt to hide it by saying that they were vomiting from their eyes . However , Maggie 's mind also reveals more clips , this time consisting of various celebrities . Kang and Kodos and the citizens make a deal , they agree to spare the Earth if everyone agrees to give them a place in the People 's Choice Awards . They do , and Kang and Kodos enjoy the award ceremony . The episode ends with the song " They ’ ll Never Stop the Simpsons " , which recounts additional past plots , possible future plots , and an apology for airing this clip show . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Gump Roast " was co @-@ written by Dan Castellaneta and his wife Deb Lacusta , while Mark Kirkland served as director . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on April 21 , 2002 . The idea for the episode came about when Castellaneta and the other main Simpsons cast members were on hiatus while renegotiating their salaries . During the hiatus , Lacusta and Castellaneta were discussing the film Forrest Gump and questioned whether the stories Gump told actually happened , or if he made them up . They then compared the character to Homer , since they are both dimwitted and have " fumbled into " many different situations . Writing ensued , and when the cast members had settled the payment issue , Castellaneta and Lacusta presented the script to show runner Al Jean , who put the script into production . 
 The clip in which Homer skis down a mountain is one of the most used clips during events , according to Jean . One of the plot turns in the episode sees Kang and Kodos interrupting the roast . These characters normally only appear in Halloween episodes , however since " Gump Roast " is a clip show and therefore not in The Simpsons canon , Kang and Kodos were included in the episode . Since " Gump Roast " , there has not been any more clip shows of The Simpsons . Jean stated in the DVD commentary for the episode , that since the show now produces " trilogy episodes " ( episodes that have three separate stories for each act ) each season after season 13 , making a clip show would be unnecessary . 
 The song " They 'll Never Stop The Simpsons " playing at the end of the episode was written by Simpsons writer Matt Selman and sung by Castellaneta . It is a parody on the song “ We Didn 't Start the Fire ” by Billy Joel , and was originally the same length as the song it was based on . However , because the episode was too long , the song had to be cut to its current length . In 2011 , the song was re @-@ recorded with alternative lyrics as a promotional video after The Simpsons was renewed for an additional 24th and 25th season . Castellaneta came in and recorded eight new takes , which was mixed together with some of the original vocals . 
 = = Referenced clips = = 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The opening scene , which shows Homer sitting on a bench holding a box of chocolates , is a reference to the movie Forrest Gump . At one point Homer drunkenly quotes the film Secrets & Lies . The act that Ned Flanders and Reverend Lovejoy are performing at the roast is an homage to the Smothers Brothers , who would later appear on The Simpsons in the episode “ O Brother , Where Bart Thou ? ” . Moe dresses as Austin Powers from the comedy film series . Dr. Hibbert wears a costume of the character Darth Vader from the Star Wars series , and Mr. Burns approaches the podium to the sound of " The Imperial March " , aka " Darth Vader 's Theme " . The song " They 'll Never Stop The Simpsons " is a parody of Billy Joel 's song " We Didn 't Start The Fire " . Agnes Skinner wears a green dress similar to the dress worn by Jennifer Lopez at the 42nd Grammy Awards in 2000 . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on April 21 , 2002 , " Gump Roast " was watched by 12 @.@ 2 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , making it the 16th most watched television show of the night , as well as the highest @-@ ranked show on the Fox network . It received , along with a new episode of Malcolm in the Middle , a 5 @.@ 7 rating among adult viewers between ages 18 and 49 , meaning it was seen by 5 @.@ 7 % of the population in said demographic . 
 Following the home video release of the thirteenth season of The Simpsons , " Gump Roast " received overwhelmingly negative reviews from critics . Both Ron Martin of 411Mania and Adam Rayner of Obsessed with Film wrote that the episode 's premise is " lazy " , and Rayner added that he felt " cheated " . Andre Dellamorte of Collider was negative as well , writing that the episode “ does a very poor job at justifying its existence " . The episode 's plot was criticized by reviewers ; Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict called the plot " lackluster " and added that it " doesn 't really make sense — and I mean that last part in a bad way ! " Nate Boss of Project @-@ Blu held a similar view , stated that the plot " made no sense " and that the episode as a whole was " complete lameness . " James Greene of Nerve.com put the clip show third on his list Ten Times The Simpsons Jumped the Shark , stating that " You 'd think by 2002 The Simpsons would 've generated enough cash for FOX that they were no longer beholden to archaic penny @-@ saving concepts like the clip show . " Some reviewers considered the episode to be the worst of the season . However , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide stated that , even though he thought the episode was " a cheap excuse for a new episode " , he found that it " provokes more laughs than many of the other season 13 episodes since it quotes better programs from the past . " Furthermore , the song at the end of the episode was well received by Malkowski , who described it as the best moment of the episode . 
 = Io ( moon ) = 
 Io ( pronunciation : / <unk> / ) is the innermost of the four Galilean moons of the planet Jupiter . It is the fourth @-@ largest moon , has the highest density of all the moons , and is the driest known object in the Solar System . It was discovered in 1610 and was named after the mythological character Io , a priestess of Hera who became one of Zeus 's lovers . 
 With over 400 active volcanoes , Io is the most geologically active object in the Solar System . This extreme geologic activity is the result of tidal heating from friction generated within Io 's interior as it is pulled between Jupiter and the other Galilean satellites — Europa , Ganymede and Callisto . Several volcanoes produce plumes of sulfur and sulfur dioxide that climb as high as 500 km ( 300 mi ) above the surface . Io 's surface is also dotted with more than 100 mountains that have been uplifted by extensive compression at the base of Io 's silicate crust . Some of these peaks are taller than Mount Everest . Unlike most satellites in the outer Solar System , which are mostly composed of water ice , Io is primarily composed of silicate rock surrounding a molten iron or iron @-@ sulfide core . Most of Io 's surface is composed of extensive plains coated with sulfur and sulfur @-@ dioxide frost . 
 Io 's volcanism is responsible for many of its unique features . Its volcanic plumes and lava flows produce large surface changes and paint the surface in various subtle shades of yellow , red , white , black , and green , largely due to allotropes and compounds of sulfur . Numerous extensive lava flows , several more than 500 km ( 300 mi ) in length , also mark the surface . The materials produced by this volcanism make up Io 's thin , patchy atmosphere and Jupiter 's extensive magnetosphere . Io 's volcanic ejecta also produce a large plasma torus around Jupiter . 
 Io played a significant role in the development of astronomy in the 17th and 18th centuries . It was discovered in January 1610 by Galileo Galilei , along with the other Galilean satellites . This discovery furthered the adoption of the Copernican model of the Solar System , the development of Kepler 's laws of motion , and the first measurement of the speed of light . From Earth , Io remained just a point of light until the late 19th and early 20th centuries , when it became possible to resolve its large @-@ scale surface features , such as the dark red polar and bright equatorial regions . In 1979 , the two Voyager spacecraft revealed Io to be a geologically active world , with numerous volcanic features , large mountains , and a young surface with no obvious impact craters . The Galileo spacecraft performed several close flybys in the 1990s and early 2000s , obtaining data about Io 's interior structure and surface composition . These spacecraft also revealed the relationship between Io and Jupiter 's magnetosphere and the existence of a belt of high @-@ energy radiation centered on Io 's orbit . Io receives about 3 @,@ 600 rem ( 36 Sv ) of ionizing radiation per day . 
 Further observations have been made by Cassini – Huygens in 2000 and New Horizons in 2007 , as well as from Earth @-@ based telescopes and the Hubble Space Telescope . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 Although Simon Marius is not credited with the sole discovery of the Galilean satellites , his names for the moons were adopted . In his 1614 publication Mundus <unk> anno <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , he proposed several alternative names for the innermost of the large moons of Jupiter , including " The Mercury of Jupiter " and " The First of the Jovian Planets " . Based on a suggestion from Johannes Kepler in October 1613 , he also devised a naming scheme whereby each moon was named for a lover of the Greek mythological Zeus or his Roman equivalent , Jupiter . He named the innermost large moon of Jupiter after the Greek mythological figure Io . Marius ' names were not widely adopted until centuries later , and in much of the earlier astronomical literature , Io was generally referred to by its Roman numeral designation ( a system introduced by Galileo ) as " Jupiter I " , or as " the first satellite of Jupiter " . 
 Features on Io are named after characters and places from the Io myth , as well as deities of fire , volcanoes , the Sun , and thunder from various myths , and characters and places from Dante 's Inferno : names appropriate to the volcanic nature of the surface . Since the surface was first seen up close by Voyager 1 , the International Astronomical Union has approved 225 names for Io 's volcanoes , mountains , plateaus , and large albedo features . The approved feature categories used for Io for different types of volcanic features include patera ( " saucer " ; volcanic depression ) , <unk> ( " flow " ; lava flow ) , <unk> ( " valley " ; lava channel ) , and active eruptive center ( location where plume activity was the first sign of volcanic activity at a particular volcano ) . Named mountains , plateaus , layered terrain , and shield volcanoes include the terms mons , <unk> ( " table " ) , <unk> , and <unk> ( " rotunda " ) , respectively . Named , bright albedo regions use the term regio . Examples of named features are Prometheus , Pan Mensa , Tvashtar Paterae , and <unk> <unk> Fluctus . 
 = = Observational history = = 
 The first reported observation of Io was made by Galileo Galilei on 7 January 1610 using a 20x @-@ power , refracting telescope at the University of Padua . However , in that observation , Galileo could not separate Io and Europa due to the low power of his telescope , so the two were recorded as a single point of light . Io and Europa were seen for the first time as separate bodies during Galileo 's observations of the Jupiter system the following day , 8 January 1610 ( used as the discovery date for Io by the IAU ) . The discovery of Io and the other Galilean satellites of Jupiter was published in Galileo 's Sidereus Nuncius in March 1610 . In his Mundus Jovialis , published in 1614 , Simon Marius claimed to have discovered Io and the other moons of Jupiter in 1609 , one week before Galileo 's discovery . Galileo doubted this claim and dismissed the work of Marius as plagiarism . Regardless , Marius ' first recorded observation came from 29 December 1609 in the Julian calendar , which equates to 8 January 1610 in the Gregorian calendar , which Galileo used . Given that Galileo published his work before Marius , Galileo is credited with the discovery . 
 For the next two and a half centuries , Io remained an unresolved , 5th @-@ magnitude point of light in astronomers ' telescopes . During the 17th century , Io and the other Galilean satellites served a variety of purposes , including early methods to determine longitude , validating Kepler 's third law of planetary motion , and determining the time required for light to travel between Jupiter and Earth . Based on ephemerides produced by astronomer Giovanni Cassini and others , Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace created a mathematical theory to explain the resonant orbits of Io , Europa , and Ganymede . This resonance was later found to have a profound effect on the <unk> of the three moons . 
 Improved telescope technology in the late 19th and 20th centuries allowed astronomers to resolve ( that is , see as distinct objects ) large @-@ scale surface features on Io . In the 1890s , Edward E. Barnard was the first to observe variations in Io 's brightness between its equatorial and polar regions , correctly determining that this was due to differences in color and albedo between the two regions and not due to Io being egg @-@ shaped , as proposed at the time by fellow astronomer William Pickering , or two separate objects , as initially proposed by Barnard . Later telescopic observations confirmed Io 's distinct reddish @-@ brown polar regions and yellow @-@ white equatorial band . 
 Telescopic observations in the mid @-@ 20th century began to hint at Io 's unusual nature . Spectroscopic observations suggested that Io 's surface was devoid of water ice ( a substance found to be plentiful on the other Galilean satellites ) . The same observations suggested a surface dominated by evaporates composed of sodium salts and sulfur . <unk> observations revealed Io 's influence on the Jovian magnetosphere , as demonstrated by decametric wavelength bursts tied to the orbital period of Io . 
 = = = Pioneer = = = 
 The first spacecraft to pass by Io were the twin Pioneer 10 and 11 probes on 3 December 1973 and 2 December 1974 , respectively . Radio tracking provided an improved estimate of Io 's mass , which , along with the best available information of Io 's size , suggested that Io had the highest density of the four Galilean satellites , and was composed primarily of silicate rock rather than water ice . The Pioneers also revealed the presence of a thin atmosphere at Io and intense radiation belts near the orbit of Io . The camera on board Pioneer 11 took the only good image of Io obtained by either spacecraft , showing its north polar region . Close @-@ up images were planned during Pioneer 10 's encounter with Io , but those observations were lost because of the high @-@ radiation environment . 
 = = = Voyager = = = 
 When the twin probes Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 passed by Io in 1979 , their more advanced imaging system allowed for far more detailed images . Voyager 1 flew past Io on 5 March 1979 from a distance of 20 @,@ 600 km ( 12 @,@ 800 mi ) . The images returned during the approach revealed a strange , multi @-@ colored landscape devoid of impact craters . The highest @-@ resolution images showed a relatively young surface punctuated by oddly shaped pits , mountains taller than Mount Everest , and features resembling volcanic lava flows . 
 Shortly after the encounter , Voyager navigation engineer Linda A. Morabito noticed a plume emanating from the surface in one of the images . Analysis of other Voyager 1 images showed nine such plumes scattered across the surface , proving that Io was volcanically active . This conclusion was predicted in a paper published shortly before the Voyager 1 encounter by Stan Peale , Patrick <unk> , and R. T. Reynolds . The authors calculated that Io 's interior must experience significant tidal heating caused by its orbital resonance with Europa and Ganymede ( see the " Tidal heating " section for a more detailed explanation of the process ) . Data from this flyby showed that the surface of Io is dominated by sulfur and sulfur dioxide frosts . These compounds also dominate its thin atmosphere and the torus of plasma centered on Io 's orbit ( also discovered by Voyager ) . 
 Voyager 2 passed Io on 9 July 1979 at a distance of 1 @,@ 130 @,@ 000 km ( 702 @,@ 000 mi ) . Though it did not approach nearly as close as Voyager 1 , comparisons between images taken by the two spacecraft showed several surface changes that had occurred in the four months between the encounters . In addition , observations of Io as a crescent as Voyager 2 departed the Jovian system revealed that seven of the nine plumes observed in March were still active in July 1979 , with only the volcano Pele shutting down between flybys . 
 = = = Galileo = = = 
 The Galileo spacecraft arrived at Jupiter in 1995 after a six @-@ year journey from Earth to follow up on the discoveries of the two Voyager probes and ground @-@ based observations taken in the intervening years . Io 's location within one of Jupiter 's most intense radiation belts precluded a prolonged close flyby , but Galileo did pass close by shortly before entering orbit for its two @-@ year , primary mission studying the Jovian system . Although no images were taken during the close flyby on 7 December 1995 , the encounter did yield significant results , such as the discovery of a large iron core , similar to that found in the rocky planets of the inner Solar System . 
 Despite the lack of close @-@ up imaging and mechanical problems that greatly restricted the amount of data returned , several significant discoveries were made during Galileo 's primary mission . Galileo observed the effects of a major eruption at Pillan Patera and confirmed that volcanic eruptions are composed of silicate magmas with magnesium @-@ rich mafic and ultramafic compositions . Distant imaging of Io was acquired for almost every orbit during the primary mission , revealing large numbers of active volcanoes ( both thermal emission from cooling magma on the surface and volcanic plumes ) , numerous mountains with widely varying morphologies , and several surface changes that had taken place both between the Voyager and Galileo eras and between Galileo orbits . 
 The Galileo mission was twice extended , in 1997 and 2000 . During these extended missions , the probe flew by Io three times in late 1999 and early 2000 and three times in late 2001 and early 2002 . Observations during these encounters revealed the geologic processes occurring at Io 's volcanoes and mountains , excluded the presence of a magnetic field , and demonstrated the extent of volcanic activity . In December 2000 , the Cassini spacecraft had a distant and brief encounter with the Jupiter system en route to Saturn , allowing for joint observations with Galileo . These observations revealed a new plume at Tvashtar Paterae and provided insights into Io 's aurorae . 
 = = = Subsequent observations = = = 
 Following Galileo 's planned destruction in Jupiter 's atmosphere in September 2003 , new observations of Io 's volcanism came from Earth @-@ based telescopes . In particular , adaptive optics imaging from the Keck telescope in Hawaii and imaging from the Hubble telescope have allowed astronomers to monitor Io 's active volcanoes . This imaging has allowed scientists to monitor volcanic activity on Io , even without a spacecraft in the Jupiter system . 
 The New Horizons spacecraft , en route to Pluto and the Kuiper belt , flew by the Jupiter system and Io on 28 February 2007 . During the encounter , numerous distant observations of Io were obtained . These included images of a large plume at Tvashtar , providing the first detailed observations of the largest class of Ionian volcanic plume since observations of Pele 's plume in 1979 . New Horizons also captured images of a volcano near <unk> Patera in the early stages of an eruption , and several volcanic eruptions that have occurred since Galileo . 
 There are currently two forthcoming missions planned for the Jupiter system . Juno , launched on 5 August 2011 , has limited imaging capabilities , but it could monitor Io 's volcanic activity using its near @-@ infrared spectrometer , <unk> . The Jupiter Icy Moon Explorer ( JUICE ) is a planned European Space Agency mission to the Jupiter system that is intended to end up in Ganymede orbit . JUICE has a launch scheduled for 2022 , with arrival at Jupiter planned for January 2030 . JUICE will not fly by Io , but it will use its instruments , such as a narrow @-@ angle camera , to monitor Io 's volcanic activity and measure its surface composition during the two @-@ year Jupiter @-@ tour phase of the mission prior to Ganymede orbit insertion . The Io Volcano Observer ( <unk> ) is a proposal for a Discovery @-@ class mission that would launch in 2021 . It would involve multiple flybys of Io while in orbit around Jupiter beginning in 2026 . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Io orbits Jupiter at a distance of 421 @,@ 700 km ( 262 @,@ 000 mi ) from Jupiter 's center and 350 @,@ 000 km ( 217 @,@ 000 mi ) from its cloudtops . It is the innermost of the Galilean satellites of Jupiter , its orbit lying between those of Thebe and Europa . Including Jupiter 's inner satellites , Io is the fifth moon out from Jupiter . It takes Io about 42 @.@ 5 hours to complete one orbit around Jupiter ( fast enough for its motion to be observed over a single night of observation ) . Io is in a 2 : 1 mean @-@ motion orbital resonance with Europa and a 4 : 1 mean @-@ motion orbital resonance with Ganymede , completing two orbits of Jupiter for every one orbit completed by Europa , and four orbits for every one completed by Ganymede . This resonance helps maintain Io 's orbital eccentricity ( 0 @.@ 0041 ) , which in turn provides the primary heating source for its geologic activity ( see the " Tidal heating " section for a more detailed explanation of the process ) . Without this forced eccentricity , Io 's orbit would circularize through tidal dissipation , leading to a geologically less active world . 
 Like the other Galilean satellites and the Moon , Io rotates synchronously with its orbital period , keeping one face nearly pointed toward Jupiter . This synchronicity provides the definition for Io 's longitude system . Io 's prime meridian intersects the equator at the sub @-@ Jovian point . The side of Io that always faces Jupiter is known as the <unk> hemisphere , whereas the side that always faces away is known as the <unk> hemisphere . The side of Io that always faces in the direction that Io travels in its orbit is known as the leading hemisphere , whereas the side that always faces in the opposite direction is known as the trailing hemisphere . 
 = = Interaction with Jupiter 's magnetosphere = = 
 Io plays a significant role in shaping Jupiter 's magnetic field , acting as an electric generator that can develop 400 @,@ 000 volts across itself and create an electric current of 3 million amperes , releasing ions that give Jupiter a magnetic field more than twice the size it would otherwise have . The magnetosphere of Jupiter sweeps up gases and dust from Io 's thin atmosphere at a rate of 1 tonne per second . This material is mostly composed of ionized and atomic sulfur , oxygen and chlorine ; atomic sodium and potassium ; molecular sulfur dioxide and sulfur ; and sodium chloride dust . These materials originate from Io 's volcanic activity , but the material that escapes to Jupiter 's magnetic field and into interplanetary space comes directly from Io 's atmosphere . These materials , depending on their ionized state and composition , end up in various neutral ( non @-@ ionized ) clouds and radiation belts in Jupiter 's magnetosphere and , in some cases , are eventually ejected from the Jovian system . 
 Surrounding Io ( at a distance of up to six Io radii from its surface ) is a cloud of neutral sulfur , oxygen , sodium , and potassium atoms . These particles originate in Io 's upper atmosphere and are excited by collisions with ions in the plasma torus ( discussed below ) and by other processes into filling Io 's Hill sphere , which is the region where Io 's gravity is dominant over Jupiter 's . Some of this material escapes Io 's gravitational pull and goes into orbit around Jupiter . Over a 20 @-@ hour period , these particles spread out from Io to form a banana @-@ shaped , neutral cloud that can reach as far as six Jovian radii from Io , either inside Io 's orbit and ahead of it or outside Io 's orbit and behind it . The collision process that excites these particles also occasionally provides sodium ions in the plasma torus with an electron , removing those new " fast " neutrals from the torus . These particles retain their velocity ( 70 km / s , compared to the 17 km / s orbital velocity at Io ) , and are thus ejected in jets leading away from Io . 
 Io orbits within a belt of intense radiation known as the Io plasma torus . The plasma in this doughnut @-@ shaped ring of ionized sulfur , oxygen , sodium , and chlorine originates when neutral atoms in the " cloud " surrounding Io are ionized and carried along by the Jovian magnetosphere . Unlike the particles in the neutral cloud , these particles co @-@ rotate with Jupiter 's magnetosphere , revolving around Jupiter at 74 km / s . Like the rest of Jupiter 's magnetic field , the plasma torus is tilted with respect to Jupiter 's equator ( and Io 's orbital plane ) , so that Io is at times below and at other times above the core of the plasma torus . As noted above , these ions ' higher velocity and energy levels are partly responsible for the removal of neutral atoms and molecules from Io 's atmosphere and more extended neutral cloud . The torus is composed of three sections : an outer , " warm " torus that resides just outside Io 's orbit ; a vertically extended region known as the " ribbon " , composed of the neutral source region and cooling plasma , located at around Io 's distance from Jupiter ; and an inner , " cold " torus , composed of particles that are slowly spiraling in toward Jupiter . After residing an average of 40 days in the torus , particles in the " warm " torus escape and are partially responsible for Jupiter 's unusually large magnetosphere , their outward pressure inflating it from within . Particles from Io , detected as variations in magnetospheric plasma , have been detected far into the long magnetotail by New Horizons . To study similar variations within the plasma torus , researchers measure the ultraviolet light it emits . Although such variations have not been definitively linked to variations in Io 's volcanic activity ( the ultimate source for material in the plasma torus ) , this link has been established in the neutral sodium cloud . 
 During an encounter with Jupiter in 1992 , the Ulysses spacecraft detected a stream of dust @-@ sized particles being ejected from the Jupiter system . The dust in these discrete streams travels away from Jupiter at speeds upwards of several hundred kilometres per second , has an average particle size of 10 μm , and consists primarily of sodium chloride . Dust measurements by Galileo showed that these dust streams originate from Io , but exactly how these form , whether from Io 's volcanic activity or material removed from the surface , is unknown . 
 Jupiter 's magnetic field lines , which Io crosses , couple Io 's atmosphere and neutral cloud to Jupiter 's polar upper atmosphere by generating an electric current known as the Io flux tube . This current produces an auroral glow in Jupiter 's polar regions known as the Io footprint , as well as aurorae in Io 's atmosphere . Particles from this auroral interaction darken the Jovian polar regions at visible wavelengths . The location of Io and its auroral footprint with respect to Earth and Jupiter has a strong influence on Jovian radio emissions from our vantage point : when Io is visible , radio signals from Jupiter increase considerably . The Juno mission , currently en route to Jupiter with a planned orbital insertion in June 2016 , should help to shed light on these processes . The Jovian magnetic field lines that do get past Io 's ionosphere also induce an electric current , which in turn creates an induced magnetic field within Io 's interior . Io 's induced magnetic field is thought to be generated within a partially molten , silicate magma ocean 50 kilometers beneath Io 's surface . Similar induced fields were found at the other Galilean satellites by Galileo , generated within liquid water oceans in the interiors of those moons . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Io is slightly larger than the Moon . It has a mean radius of 1 @,@ 821 @.@ 3 km ( 1 @,@ 131 @.@ 7 mi ) ( about 5 % greater than the Moon 's ) and a mass of 8 @.@ <unk> × 1022 kg ( about 21 % greater than the Moon 's ) . It is a slight ellipsoid in shape , with its longest axis directed toward Jupiter . Among the Galilean satellites , in both mass and volume , Io ranks behind Ganymede and Callisto but ahead of Europa . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 Composed primarily of silicate rock and iron , Io is closer in bulk composition to the terrestrial planets than to other satellites in the outer Solar System , which are mostly composed of a mix of water ice and silicates . Io has a density of 3 @.@ <unk> g / cm3 , the highest of any moon in the Solar System ; significantly higher than the other Galilean satellites ( Ganymede and Callisto in particular , whose densities are around 1 @.@ 9 g / cm3 ) and slightly higher than the Moon . Models based on the Voyager and Galileo measurements of Io 's mass , radius , and quadrupole gravitational coefficients ( numerical values related to how mass is distributed within an object ) suggest that its interior is differentiated between a silicate @-@ rich crust and mantle and an iron- or iron @-@ sulfide @-@ rich core . Io 's metallic core makes up approximately 20 % of its mass . Depending on the amount of sulfur in the core , the core has a radius between 350 and 650 km ( 220 – 400 mi ) if it is composed almost entirely of iron , or between 550 and 900 km ( 340 – 560 mi ) for a core consisting of a mix of iron and sulfur . Galileo 's magnetometer failed to detect an internal , intrinsic magnetic field at Io , suggesting that the core is not convecting . 
 Modeling of Io 's interior composition suggests that the mantle is composed of at least 75 % of the magnesium @-@ rich mineral <unk> , and has a bulk composition similar to that of L @-@ chondrite and LL @-@ chondrite meteorites , with higher iron content ( compared to silicon ) than the Moon or Earth , but lower than Mars . To support the heat flow observed on Io , 10 – 20 % of Io 's mantle may be molten , though regions where high @-@ temperature volcanism has been observed may have higher melt fractions . However , re @-@ analysis of Galileo magnetometer data in 2009 revealed the presence of an induced magnetic field at Io , requiring a magma ocean 50 km ( 31 mi ) below the surface . Further analysis published in 2011 provided direct evidence of such an ocean . This layer is estimated to be 50 km thick and to make up about 10 % of Io 's mantle . It is estimated that the temperature in the magma ocean reaches 1 @,@ 200 ° C. It is not known if the 10 – 20 % partial melting percentage for Io 's mantle is consistent with the requirement for a significant amount of molten silicates in this possible magma ocean . The lithosphere of Io , composed of basalt and sulfur deposited by Io 's extensive volcanism , is at least 12 km ( 7 mi ) thick , and likely less than 40 km ( 25 mi ) thick . 
 = = = Tidal heating = = = 
 Unlike Earth and the Moon , Io 's main source of internal heat comes from tidal dissipation rather than radioactive isotope decay , the result of Io 's orbital resonance with Europa and Ganymede . Such heating is dependent on Io 's distance from Jupiter , its orbital eccentricity , the composition of its interior , and its physical state . Its Laplace resonance with Europa and Ganymede maintains Io 's eccentricity and prevents tidal dissipation within Io from circularizing its orbit . The resonant orbit also helps to maintain Io 's distance from Jupiter ; otherwise tides raised on Jupiter would cause Io to slowly spiral outward from its parent planet . The vertical differences in Io 's tidal bulge , between the times Io is at periapsis and apoapsis in its orbit , could be as much as 100 m ( 330 ft ) . The friction or tidal dissipation produced in Io 's interior due to this varying tidal pull , which , without the resonant orbit , would have gone into circularizing Io 's orbit instead , creates significant tidal heating within Io 's interior , melting a significant amount of Io 's mantle and core . The amount of energy produced is up to 200 times greater than that produced solely from radioactive decay . This heat is released in the form of volcanic activity , generating its observed high heat flow ( global total : 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 6 × 1014 W ) . Models of its orbit suggest that the amount of tidal heating within Io changes with time ; however , the current amount of tidal dissipation is consistent with the observed heat flow . Models of tidal heating and convection have not found consistent planetary viscosity profiles that simultaneously match tidal energy dissipation and mantle convection of heat to the surface . 
 Although there is general agreement that the origin of the heat as manifested in Io 's many volcanoes is tidal heating from the pull of gravity from Jupiter and its moon Europa , the volcanoes are not in the positions predicted with tidal heating . They are shifted 30 to 60 degrees to the east . A study published by Tyler et al . ( 2015 ) suggests that this eastern shift may be caused by an ocean of molten rock under the surface . The movement of this magma would generate extra heat through friction due to its viscosity . The study 's authors believe that this subsurface ocean is a mixture of molten and solid rock . 
 Other moons in the Solar System are also tidally heated , and they too may generate additional heat through the friction of subsurface magma or water oceans . This ability to generate heat in a subsurface ocean increases the chance of life on bodies like Europa and Enceladus . 
 = = = Surface = = = 
 Based on their experience with the ancient surfaces of the Moon , Mars , and Mercury , scientists expected to see numerous impact craters in Voyager 1 's first images of Io . The density of impact craters across Io 's surface would have given clues to Io 's age . However , they were surprised to discover that the surface was almost completely lacking in impact craters , but was instead covered in smooth plains dotted with tall mountains , pits of various shapes and sizes , and volcanic lava flows . Compared to most worlds observed to that point , Io 's surface was covered in a variety of colorful materials ( leading Io to be compared to a rotten orange or to pizza ) from various sulfurous compounds . The lack of impact craters indicated that Io 's surface is geologically young , like the terrestrial surface ; volcanic materials continuously bury craters as they are produced . This result was spectacularly confirmed as at least nine active volcanoes were observed by Voyager 1 . 
 = = = = Surface composition = = = = 
 Io 's colorful appearance is the result of materials deposited by its extensive volcanism , including silicates ( such as orthopyroxene ) , sulfur , and sulfur dioxide . Sulfur dioxide frost is ubiquitous across the surface of Io , forming large regions covered in white or grey materials . Sulfur is also seen in many places across Io , forming yellow to yellow @-@ green regions . Sulfur deposited in the mid @-@ latitude and polar regions is often radiation damaged , breaking up normally stable cyclic 8 @-@ chain sulfur . This radiation damage produces Io 's red @-@ brown polar regions . 
 Explosive volcanism , often taking the form of umbrella @-@ shaped plumes , paints the surface with sulfurous and silicate materials . Plume deposits on Io are often colored red or white depending on the amount of sulfur and sulfur dioxide in the plume . Generally , plumes formed at volcanic vents from degassing lava contain a greater amount of S2 , producing a red " fan " deposit , or in extreme cases , large ( often reaching beyond 450 km or 280 mi from the central vent ) red rings . A prominent example of a red @-@ ring plume deposit is located at Pele . These red deposits consist primarily of sulfur ( generally 3- and 4 @-@ chain molecular sulfur ) , sulfur dioxide , and perhaps sulfuryl chloride . Plumes formed at the margins of silicate lava flows ( through the interaction of lava and pre @-@ existing deposits of sulfur and sulfur dioxide ) produce white or gray deposits . 
 Compositional mapping and Io 's high density suggest that Io contains little to no water , though small pockets of water ice or hydrated minerals have been tentatively identified , most notably on the northwest flank of the mountain Gish Bar Mons . Io has the least amount of water of any known body in the Solar System . This lack of water is likely due to Jupiter being hot enough early in the evolution of the Solar System to drive off volatile materials like water in the vicinity of Io , but not hot enough to do so farther out . 
 = = = = Volcanism = = = = 
 The tidal heating produced by Io 's forced orbital eccentricity has made it the most volcanically active world in the Solar System , with hundreds of volcanic centres and extensive lava flows . During a major eruption , lava flows tens or even hundreds of kilometres long can be produced , consisting mostly of basalt silicate lavas with either mafic or ultramafic ( magnesium @-@ rich ) compositions . As a by @-@ product of this activity , sulfur , sulfur dioxide gas and silicate pyroclastic material ( like ash ) are blown up to 200 km ( 120 mi ) into space , producing large , umbrella @-@ shaped plumes , painting the surrounding terrain in red , black , and white , and providing material for Io 's patchy atmosphere and Jupiter 's extensive magnetosphere . 
 Io 's surface is dotted with volcanic depressions known as paterae which generally have flat floors bounded by steep walls . These features resemble terrestrial calderas , but it is unknown if they are produced through collapse over an emptied lava chamber like their terrestrial cousins . One hypothesis suggests that these features are produced through the exhumation of volcanic sills , and the overlying material is either blasted out or integrated into the sill . Examples of paterae in various stages of exhumation have been mapped using Galileo images of the <unk> @-@ <unk> region . Unlike similar features on Earth and Mars , these depressions generally do not lie at the peak of shield volcanoes and are normally larger , with an average diameter of 41 km ( 25 mi ) , the largest being Loki Patera at 202 km ( 126 mi ) . Whatever the formation mechanism , the morphology and distribution of many paterae suggest that these features are structurally controlled , with at least half bounded by faults or mountains . These features are often the site of volcanic eruptions , either from lava flows spreading across the floors of the paterae , as at an eruption at Gish Bar Patera in 2001 , or in the form of a lava lake . Lava lakes on Io either have a continuously overturning lava crust , such as at Pele , or an episodically overturning crust , such as at Loki . 
 Lava flows represent another major volcanic terrain on Io . Magma erupts onto the surface from vents on the floor of paterae or on the plains from fissures , producing inflated , compound lava flows similar to those seen at Kilauea in Hawaii . Images from the Galileo spacecraft revealed that many of Io 's major lava flows , like those at Prometheus and Amirani , are produced by the build @-@ up of small breakouts of lava flows on top of older flows . Larger outbreaks of lava have also been observed on Io . For example , the leading edge of the Prometheus flow moved 75 to 95 km ( 47 to 59 mi ) between Voyager in 1979 and the first Galileo observations in 1996 . A major eruption in 1997 produced more than 3 @,@ 500 km2 ( 1 @,@ 400 sq mi ) of fresh lava and flooded the floor of the adjacent Pillan Patera . 
 Analysis of the Voyager images led scientists to believe that these flows were composed mostly of various compounds of molten sulfur . However , subsequent Earth @-@ based infrared studies and measurements from the Galileo spacecraft indicate that these flows are composed of basaltic lava with mafic to ultramafic compositions . This hypothesis is based on temperature measurements of Io 's " hotspots " , or thermal @-@ emission locations , which suggest temperatures of at least 1300 K and some as high as 1600 K. Initial estimates suggesting eruption temperatures approaching 2000 K have since proven to be overestimates because the wrong thermal models were used to model the temperatures . 
 The discovery of plumes at the volcanoes Pele and Loki were the first sign that Io is geologically active . Generally , these plumes are formed when volatiles like sulfur and sulfur dioxide are ejected skyward from Io 's volcanoes at speeds reaching 1 km / s ( 0 @.@ 6 mps ) , creating umbrella @-@ shaped clouds of gas and dust . Additional material that might be found in these volcanic plumes include sodium , potassium , and chlorine . These plumes appear to be formed in one of two ways . Io 's largest plumes , such as those emitted by Pele , are created when dissolved sulfur and sulfur dioxide gas are released from erupting magma at volcanic vents or lava lakes , often dragging silicate pyroclastic material with them . These plumes form red ( from the short @-@ chain sulfur ) and black ( from the silicate pyroclastics ) deposits on the surface . Plumes formed in this manner are among the largest observed at Io , forming red rings more than 1 @,@ 000 km ( 620 mi ) in diameter . Examples of this plume type include Pele , Tvashtar , and <unk> . Another type of plume is produced when encroaching lava flows vaporize underlying sulfur dioxide frost , sending the sulfur skyward . This type of plume often forms bright circular deposits consisting of sulfur dioxide . These plumes are often less than 100 km ( 62 mi ) tall , and are among the most long @-@ lived plumes on Io . Examples include Prometheus , Amirani , and Masubi . The erupted sulfurous compounds are concentrated in the upper crust from a decrease in sulfur solubility at greater depths in Io 's lithosphere . 
 = = = = Mountains = = = = 
 Io has 100 to 150 mountains . These structures average 6 km ( 4 mi ) in height and reach a maximum of 17 @.@ 5 ± 1 @.@ 5 km ( 10 @.@ 9 ± 0 @.@ 9 mi ) at South <unk> Montes . Mountains often appear as large ( the average mountain is 157 km or 98 mi long ) , isolated structures with no apparent global tectonic patterns outlined , as is the case on Earth . To support the tremendous topography observed at these mountains requires compositions consisting mostly of silicate rock , as opposed to sulfur . 
 Despite the extensive volcanism that gives Io its distinctive appearance , nearly all its mountains are tectonic structures , and are not produced by volcanoes . Instead , most Ionian mountains form as the result of compressive stresses on the base of the lithosphere , which uplift and often tilt chunks of Io 's crust through thrust faulting . The compressive stresses leading to mountain formation are the result of subsidence from the continuous burial of volcanic materials . The global distribution of mountains appears to be opposite that of volcanic structures ; mountains dominate areas with fewer volcanoes and vice versa . This suggests large @-@ scale regions in Io 's lithosphere where compression ( supportive of mountain formation ) and extension ( supportive of patera formation ) dominate . Locally , however , mountains and paterae often abut one another , suggesting that magma often exploits faults formed during mountain formation to reach the surface . 
 Mountains on Io ( generally , structures rising above the surrounding plains ) have a variety of morphologies . Plateaus are most common . These structures resemble large , flat @-@ topped mesas with rugged surfaces . Other mountains appear to be tilted crustal blocks , with a shallow slope from the formerly flat surface and a steep slope consisting of formerly sub @-@ surface materials uplifted by compressive stresses . Both types of mountains often have steep scarps along one or more margins . Only a handful of mountains on Io appear to have a volcanic origin . These mountains resemble small shield volcanoes , with steep slopes ( 6 – 7 ° ) near a small , central caldera and shallow slopes along their margins . These volcanic mountains are often smaller than the average mountain on Io , averaging only 1 to 2 km ( 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 2 mi ) in height and 40 to 60 km ( 25 to 37 mi ) wide . Other shield volcanoes with much shallower slopes are inferred from the morphology of several of Io 's volcanoes , where thin flows radiate out from a central patera , such as at Ra Patera . 
 Nearly all mountains appear to be in some stage of degradation . Large landslide deposits are common at the base of Ionian mountains , suggesting that mass wasting is the primary form of degradation . <unk> margins are common among Io 's mesas and plateaus , the result of sulfur dioxide sapping from Io 's crust , producing zones of weakness along mountain margins . 
 = = Atmosphere = = 
 Io has an extremely thin atmosphere consisting mainly of sulfur dioxide ( SO 
 2 ) , with minor constituents including sulfur monoxide ( SO ) , sodium chloride ( NaCl ) , and atomic sulfur and oxygen . The atmosphere has significant variations in density and temperature with time of day , latitude , volcanic activity , and surface frost abundance . The maximum atmospheric pressure on Io ranges from 3 @.@ 3 × 10 − 5 to 3 × 10 − 4 <unk> ( Pa ) or 0 @.@ 3 to 3 nbar , spatially seen on Io 's anti @-@ Jupiter hemisphere and along the equator , and temporally in the early afternoon when the temperature of surface frost peaks . Localized peaks at volcanic plumes have also been seen , with pressures of 5 × 10 − 4 to 40 × 10 − 4 Pa ( 5 to 40 nbar ) . Io 's atmospheric pressure is lowest on Io 's night side , where the pressure dips to 0 @.@ 1 × 10 − 7 to 1 × 10 − 7 Pa ( 0 @.@ 0001 to 0 @.@ 001 nbar ) . Io 's atmospheric temperature ranges from the temperature of the surface at low altitudes , where sulfur dioxide is in vapor pressure equilibrium with frost on the surface , to 1800 K at higher altitudes where the lower atmospheric density permits heating from plasma in the Io plasma torus and from Joule heating from the Io flux tube . The low pressure limits the atmosphere 's effect on the surface , except for temporarily redistributing sulfur dioxide from frost @-@ rich to frost @-@ poor areas , and to expand the size of plume deposit rings when plume material re @-@ enters the thicker dayside atmosphere . The thin Ionian atmosphere also means any future landing probes sent to investigate Io will not need to be encased in an <unk> @-@ style heatshield , but instead require <unk> for a soft landing . The thin atmosphere also necessitates a rugged lander capable of enduring the strong Jovian radiation , which a thicker atmosphere would attenuate . 
 Gas in Io 's atmosphere is stripped by Jupiter 's magnetosphere , escaping to either the neutral cloud that surrounds Io , or the Io plasma torus , a ring of ionized particles that shares Io 's orbit but co @-@ rotates with the magnetosphere of Jupiter . Approximately one ton of material is removed from the atmosphere every second through this process so that it must be constantly replenished . The most dramatic source of SO 
 2 are volcanic plumes , which pump 104 kg of sulfur dioxide per second into Io 's atmosphere on average , though most of this condenses back onto the surface . Much of the sulfur dioxide in Io 's atmosphere sustained by sunlight @-@ driven sublimation of SO 
 2 frozen on the surface . The day @-@ side atmosphere is largely confined to within 40 ° of the equator , where the surface is warmest and most active volcanic plumes reside . A sublimation @-@ driven atmosphere is also consistent with observations that Io 's atmosphere is densest over the anti @-@ Jupiter hemisphere , where SO 
 2 frost is most abundant , and is densest when Io is closer to the Sun . However , some contributions from volcanic plumes are required as the highest observed densities have been seen near volcanic vents . Because the density of sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere is tied directly to surface temperature , Io 's atmosphere partially collapses at night or when Io is in the shadow of Jupiter . The collapse during eclipse is limited somewhat by the formation of a diffusion layer of sulfur monoxide in the lowest portion of the atmosphere , but the atmosphere pressure of Io 's nightside atmosphere is two to four orders of magnitude less than at its peak just past noon . The minor constituents of Io 's atmosphere , such as NaCl , SO , O , and S derive either from : direct volcanic outgassing ; photodissociation , or chemical breakdown caused by solar ultraviolet radiation , from SO 
 2 ; or the sputtering of surface deposits by charged particles from Jupiter 's magnetosphere . 
 High @-@ resolution images of Io acquired when Io is experiencing an eclipse reveal an aurora @-@ like glow . As on Earth , this is due to particle radiation hitting the atmosphere , though in this case the charged particles come from Jupiter 's magnetic field rather than the solar wind . Aurorae usually occur near the magnetic poles of planets , but Io 's are brightest near its equator . Io lacks an intrinsic magnetic field of its own ; therefore , electrons traveling along Jupiter 's magnetic field near Io directly impact Io 's atmosphere . More electrons collide with its atmosphere , producing the brightest aurora , where the field lines are tangent to Io ( i.e. near the equator ) , because the column of gas they pass through is longest there . Aurorae associated with these tangent points on Io are observed to rock with the changing orientation of Jupiter 's tilted magnetic dipole . Fainter aurora from oxygen atoms along the limb of Io ( the red glows in the image at right ) , and sodium atoms on Io 's night @-@ side ( the green glows in the same image ) have also been observed . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 = 1956 FA Cup Final = 
 The 1956 FA Cup Final was the final match of the 1955 – 56 staging of English football 's primary cup competition , the Football Association Challenge Cup , better known as the FA Cup . The showpiece event was contested between Manchester City and Birmingham City at Wembley Stadium in London on Saturday 5 May 1956 . Two @-@ time winners Manchester City were appearing in their sixth final , whereas Birmingham City were seeking to win the competition for the first time , having lost their only previous final in 1931 . 
 Each club needed to win five matches to reach the final . Manchester City 's victories were close affairs , each settled by the odd goal , and they needed a replay to defeat fifth @-@ round opponents Liverpool . Birmingham City made more comfortable progress : they scored eighteen goals while conceding only two , and won each match at the first attempt despite being drawn to play on their opponents ' ground in every round . They became the first team to reach an FA Cup final without playing at home . 
 Birmingham City entered the match as favourites , in a contest billed as a contrast of styles . Watched by a crowd of 100 @,@ 000 and a television audience of five million , Manchester City took an early lead through Joe Hayes , but Noel Kinsey equalised midway through the first half . Second half goals from Jack Dyson and Bobby Johnstone gave Manchester City a 3 – 1 victory . The match is best remembered for the heroics of Manchester City goalkeeper , Bert Trautmann , who continued playing despite breaking a bone in his neck in a collision with Birmingham City 's Peter Murphy . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 As both Birmingham City and Manchester City were First Division clubs , they entered the competition in the third round . Manchester City 's cup run started with a home tie against Blackpool . The visitors took the lead after only 10 seconds ( their fastest goal ever ) , but midway through the match , fog enveloped Maine Road . The match was abandoned during the second half , immediately after City had scored an equalising goal , and replayed the following Wednesday ; City won 2 – 1 . In the fourth round Manchester City faced Southend United at Roots Hall . The Essex club 's ground had only opened five months previously , and was suffering from drainage problems . Torrential rainfall meant that in the week before the match a trench was dug across the pitch , and sand added . Though Southend were a Third Division team , their familiarity with the uneven pitch meant the match was closely contested . Southend pressured the Manchester City goal , requiring Bert Trautmann to make several saves , but Joe Hayes scored the only goal of the game on a City counter @-@ attack to earn a fifth @-@ round tie against Liverpool . 
 In the fifth @-@ round match , the teams saw out a 0 – 0 draw at Maine Road , and the match was replayed at Anfield . Goals from Jack Dyson and Bobby Johnstone gave Manchester City a 2 – 1 lead , but the game finished in controversial circumstances when the referee blew his whistle for full time as Liverpool 's Billy Liddell was bearing down on goal . Liddell put the ball in the net , but unbeknown to him the goal did not count as the match was already over . In the quarter final Manchester City again played opposition from Liverpool , facing Everton at Maine Road . Trailing 1 – 0 at half @-@ time after a Jimmy Harris goal , City overcame the deficit in the second half with goals from Hayes and Johnstone . Further controversy followed in the semi @-@ final against Tottenham Hotspur , when in the final minutes of the match , with the score at 1 – 0 to Manchester City , Tottenham were denied a penalty after goalkeeper Trautmann grabbed forward George Robb 's leg . No further goalscoring opportunities occurred , and City hung on for the victory . 
 = = = Birmingham City = = = 
 Manager Arthur Turner called on his team to match their Third Division opponents Torquay United for fighting spirit and to produce a " 90 @-@ minute performance " . The players complied ; leading 4 – 0 at half @-@ time , they finished as comfortable 7 – 1 winners . In the fourth round , Leyton Orient , who had beaten Birmingham at the same stage four years earlier , posed more of a potential problem . In reality the win was equally comfortable : Eddy Brown added two goals to his hat @-@ trick at Torquay . A tight local derby game followed on a snow @-@ covered frozen pitch at The Hawthorns . In the first half , goalkeeper Gil Merrick and his defence did well to keep West Bromwich Albion out ; Trevor Smith had to clear an Ronnie Allen header from under the crossbar . In the second half , Birmingham wasted several chances before a one @-@ two with Brown allowed Peter Murphy to score from the edge of the penalty area . 
 In the sixth round , Birmingham faced Arsenal on a muddy pitch . In order to relieve the tension on the way to important matches , manager Turner used to encourage the players to sing . Scotsman Alex Govan 's contribution , Harry Lauder 's rousing " Keep right on to the end of the road " , was adopted by his team @-@ mates . As the team coach approached Highbury with the windows wound down , the fans joined in , continuing their rendition during the game . After first @-@ half goals from Gordon Astall and Murphy , Birmingham went 3 – 0 up through Brown with twenty minutes left . Two minutes later , Arsenal scored from 30 yards ( 27 m ) , Birmingham were unsettled , and Merrick needed to make a fine save from Vic Groves to prevent a second Arsenal goal . Turner felt the motivation from such a powerful song played a significant part in the day 's victory . 
 Semi @-@ final opponents Sunderland found Birmingham without " hard @-@ man " left @-@ half Roy Warhurst , who had injured a thigh against Arsenal , but in Jack Badham they had an effective replacement . The club 's official history describes this as " probably the finest team performance against top class opposition ever produced " by a Birmingham team . They attacked from the kick @-@ off and nullified Sunderland 's pressure and the threat of Len Shackleton . Noel Kinsey scored early and the second goal came from a passing move down the left side finished by Astall . As Sunderland threw everyone forward , which left them open at the back , Brown picked up a long through ball and lobbed the goalkeeper . Astall said afterwards that he was surprised they had not scored five , and Brown wrote in his newspaper column : 
 Now Sunderland found out how hard it is to score against this terrific defence of ours . Not for nothing have we scored 18 goals against two ( both of them freaks ) conceded in five ties all away from home . What can I say to do justice to that brilliant goalkeeper Gil Merrick , to wonderful young Trevor Smith and to the matchless Jeff Hall and Ken Green ? Once again they mixed the old cement and constructed that brilliant wall of a defence . Sunderland would have needed to call in a firm of demolition contractors to destroy it . 
 Birmingham City thus reached the final without playing a single tie at home , a feat which had never previously been accomplished . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 The 1956 final was the second time that Birmingham had reached the showpiece match , having lost 2 – 1 to West Bromwich Albion in 1931 . Manchester City were appearing in the final for the sixth time , and for the second consecutive year . They had won the cup twice previously ( in 1904 and 1934 ) , and had been beaten in the final three times ( in 1926 , 1933 and 1955 ) . Though Birmingham had less pedigree in the competition , the press viewed them as favourites . The Daily Telegraph contrasted Birmingham 's " dazzling Cup run " with the manner in which Manchester City " scraped through " , describing the Midlanders as " firm favourites " . Interviews with players were typically bullish in tone . Manchester City 's Bobby Johnstone opined that " Even an unbiased fan must regard Manchester City with favour " , whereas Birmingham 's Len Boyd gauged opinion quite differently : " They say Birmingham City are the hottest Cup favourites since Wolves crashed to Portsmouth in 1939 " . 
 During the 1950s the FA Cup final was the only football match to be televised nationally , resulting in heightened media attention for the players and clubs involved . The Players ' Union successfully requested an additional £ 5 per man for appearing in a televised match , the first time such appearance money had been paid . Birmingham 's players signed an exclusive contract with the BBC committing them to appear only on BBC programmes in the weeks leading up to the final , though their post @-@ match celebration would be covered live by the regional commercial station ATV . The match itself attracted a television audience of five million , a high figure for the period . 
 Each club received 15 @,@ 000 tickets for the final from the Football Association . Birmingham distributed their share by ballot among those supporters who had followed the team in the earlier rounds of the competition ; 22 @,@ 000 had attended the semi @-@ final , so many thousands were left disappointed . Of the remaining tickets , 4 @,@ 640 were allocated to the FA , 40 @,@ 640 to County Associations , 20 @,@ 090 to Football League clubs , 2 @,@ 550 to FA members and 2 @,@ 080 to the FA Council and stadium authorities . An enquiry into the black market held following the previous year 's Cup Final meant ticket touts kept a lower profile than usual . However , in the week leading up to the game , the cheapest standing tickets , originally sold for 3s 6d , were changing hands in Birmingham for twenty times face value , or 35 % of a manual worker 's weekly earnings . 
 Manchester City spent the week preceding the final at a training camp in Eastbourne . Two days before the final Bert Trautmann , who had originally arrived in England as a prisoner of war , was named Footballer of the Year . Eight players who had played in the previous year 's final were selected in the starting line @-@ up . Press speculation in the run @-@ up to the match pondered which of Don Revie and Bobby Johnstone would be selected , as Johnstone had been suffering from a calf problem . Bill Leivers was also an injury doubt due to a twisted ankle , and Billy <unk> had a boil on his left arm lanced on the eve of the final . Consequently , the Manchester City line @-@ up was not named until the morning of the match . Leivers was passed fit after having two pain @-@ killing injections , but contrary to press expectations <unk> missed out . This meant both Revie and Johnstone appeared in the line @-@ up , Johnstone switching to outside right . 
 Birmingham also had doubts over their selection . Captain Len Boyd had for some time been suffering from a debilitating back problem , and relied on injections to keep him playing . He missed five of the last seven games of the season , but was passed fit on the Wednesday before the game . Fellow wing half Roy Warhurst had injured his thigh in the sixth @-@ round match and played no further part in the season , while Badham , who damaged an ankle three weeks before the final , travelled on the Thursday with the rest of the team to their base in Twyford , Berkshire . Jeff Hall was struggling with a virus . When manager Turner announced his team on the eve of the match , Boyd took Warhurst 's position at left @-@ half , Badham , who had proved an able deputy in the semi @-@ final , was omitted , and the inexperienced 22 @-@ year @-@ old Johnny Newman came in on the right . 
 British Railways laid on 38 special trains to take some 19 @,@ 000 supporters to London , the first of which arrived at St Pancras station from Manchester shortly after 3 a.m. For the first time , the official programmes were on sale from early morning in an attempt to thwart sellers of unofficial versions . The Birmingham Mail set up a temporary press in a Wembley car park to produce a special edition of their Saturday sports paper , the Sports Argus , on blue paper rather than the usual pink . As the teams prepared in the dressing rooms , the crowd was led in communal singing , including songs with resonance for each of the two teams , " She 's a lassie from Lancashire " and " Keep right on to the end of the road " , and the hymn " Abide with Me " , traditionally sung before every FA Cup final . As the teams emerged from the tunnel , Manchester City captain Roy Paul seized one last opportunity to stir emotion within the players by stopping , raising his fist and shouting " If we don 't fucking win , you 'll get some of this " . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Both teams employed the formation typical of the era : two full @-@ backs , a centre @-@ half , two wing @-@ halves , two outside @-@ forwards , two inside @-@ forwards and a centre @-@ forward . However , their tactical approaches differed . Birmingham , described by The Times as using " iron determination , powerful tackling and open direct methods " , employed the traditional English approach of getting the ball to the outside @-@ forwards as quickly as possible , whereas Manchester City adopted tactics inspired by the Hungarian team which had soundly beaten England at Wembley three years before . The system involved using Don Revie in a deeper position than a traditional centre @-@ forward in order to draw a defender out of position , and was therefore known as the " Revie Plan " . As both teams ' first @-@ choice colours were blue , each team wore their change strip to prevent confusion . Manchester City therefore wore maroon , and Birmingham City wore white . 
 Birmingham won the toss and Manchester City kicked off . The Birmingham goal came under pressure almost immediately . Within a minute a far post cross from Roy Clarke narrowly eluded Hayes . Two corners followed , the second resulting in a shot by Roy Paul . The next attack , in the third minute , resulted in the opening goal . Revie began the move , exchanging passes with Clarke , and back @-@ heeling for the unmarked Hayes to sweep the ball past Gil Merrick to put Manchester City ahead . Birmingham 's confidence was shaken , resulting in a series of Manchester City corners and a chance for Hayes , but they fought back to equalise in the 15th minute . Astall slipped the ball to Brown , who helped it forward . It rebounded off a Manchester City defender into the path of Welsh international inside ‑ forward Noel Kinsey , who fired home via Trautmann 's far post . For the remainder of the first half Birmingham had most of the play , exerting pressure on Manchester City full @-@ back Leivers , but were unable to make a breakthrough . Though Birmingham put the ball in the net twice , Brown was adjudged to be offside on both occasions . With Warhurst missing and Boyd out of position and not fully fit , Birmingham 's strength and balance was disrupted , leaving them particularly vulnerable to Manchester City 's unconventional style . 
 During the half @-@ time interval , a row erupted between the Birmingham manager and some of his players about their fitness ; in the Manchester City dressing room , a heated exchange took place between Barnes and Revie . Barnes had played defensively in the first half to counter the threat of Peter Murphy , but Revie urged him to play further forward . Meanwhile , manager Les McDowall exhorted his players to keep possession and make their opponents chase the ball . 
 The period immediately after half ‑ time saw few chances , but then , after just over an hour 's play , Manchester City regained their stride and suddenly went two goals ahead . A throw @-@ in to Revie led to interplay on the right wing involving Barnes , Dyson , and Johnstone , resulting in a through @-@ ball which put Dyson clear of the defence to score . Two minutes later , Trautmann collected the ball at the end of a Birmingham attack and kicked the ball long to Dyson , over the heads of the retreating Birmingham players . Dyson flicked the ball on to Bobby Johnstone , who scored Manchester City 's third , becoming the first player ever to score in consecutive Wembley finals in the process . 
 With 17 minutes remaining , a Birmingham chance arose when Murphy outpaced Dave Ewing . Goalkeeper Trautmann dived at the feet of Murphy to win the ball , but in the collision Murphy 's right knee hit Trautmann 's neck with a forceful blow . Trautmann was knocked unconscious , and the referee stopped play immediately . Trainer Laurie Barnett rushed onto the pitch , and treatment continued for several minutes . No substitutes were permitted , so Manchester City would have to see out the game with ten men if Trautmann was unable to continue . Captain Roy Paul felt certain that Trautmann was not fit to complete the match , and wished to put Roy Little in goal instead . However , Trautmann , dazed and unsteady on his feet , insisted upon keeping his goal . He played out the remaining minutes in great pain , with the Manchester City defenders attempting to clear the ball well upfield or into the stand whenever it came near . Trautmann was called upon to make two further saves to deny Brown and Murphy , the second causing him to recoil in agony due to a collision with Ewing , which required the trainer to revive him . 
 No further goals were scored , and the referee blew for full time with the final score 3 – 1 to Manchester City . As the players left the field , the crowd sang a chorus of " For he 's a jolly good fellow " in tribute to Trautmann 's bravery . Roy Paul led his team up the steps to the royal box to receive Manchester City 's third FA Cup . Trautmann 's neck continued to cause him pain , and Prince Philip commented on its crooked state as he gave Trautmann his winner 's medal . Three days later , an examination revealed that Trautmann had broken a bone in his neck . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Trautmann attended the evening 's post @-@ match banquet ( where Alma Cogan sang to the players ) despite being unable to move his head , and went to bed expecting his injury to heal with rest . As the pain did not recede , the following day he went to St George 's Hospital , where he was told he merely had a <unk> in his neck which would go away . Three days later , he got a second opinion from a doctor at Manchester Royal Infirmary . An X @-@ ray revealed he had dislocated five vertebrae in his neck , the second of which was cracked in two . The third vertebra had wedged against the second , preventing further damage which could have cost Trautmann his life . 
 When Manchester City 's train from London reached Manchester , the team were greeted by cameras from Granada TV and an open @-@ top bus . They embarked on a journey from London Road station to the town hall in Albert Square , taking a route along some of Manchester 's main shopping streets . The size and spirit of the crowds led the Manchester Evening Chronicle to make comparisons with VE Day . The boisterousness of the crowds in Albert Square meant the Lord Mayor struggled to make his speech heard above chants of " We want Bert " . After the civic reception at the Town Hall and a banquet at a Piccadilly restaurant , the team returned to the open @-@ top bus and headed to Belle Vue Pleasure Gardens , near the club 's former home of Hyde Road in east Manchester , where the Chronicle held a function . 
 An estimated 10 @,@ 000 people met the Birmingham City party on their return to Snow Hill station . The players , in the first of a convoy of four coaches , waved to the assembled crowds through the open sun @-@ roof as they proceeded to the Council House , where the Lord Mayor welcomed them on behalf of the city . Len Boyd addressed the crowds from the balcony before the coaches continued through the city centre and back to St Andrew 's , Birmingham City 's home ground . The following Wednesday , a dinner was held to honour the club 's achievements . Guests included the 84 @-@ year @-@ old Billy Walton , who had joined the club in 1888 , six members of Birmingham 's 1931 cup final team , and a trade delegation from the Soviet city of Sverdlovsk . 
 Though the thousands gathered outside the Council House roared " No ! " when Boyd said the team felt they had let the supporters down , there were recriminations concerning Birmingham 's performance and team selection . The local press suggested that attempts to combat " Wembley nerves " had resulted in an " over @-@ casual approach to the game " . The row at half @-@ time had done little for second @-@ half morale , but speaking fifty years later , Gil Merrick placed the blame less on Boyd 's questionable fitness than on a failure to discuss how to stop Revie . Alex Govan , convinced that " if Roy Warhurst had been fit then there would only have been one winner " , blamed " bad team selection " , saying that even without Warhurst he firmly believed " that if Badham had been in we would have won that game . He would never have given Don Revie the room to run the match . " Warhurst himself thought the selection of Newman " meant the team had to adapt its style and in the end we used different tactics to those that had been successful all season " . 
 = Italian cruiser Caprera = 
 Caprera was a torpedo cruiser of the Partenope class built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s . She was built by the Cantiere navale fratelli Orlando shipyard ; her keel was laid in July 1891 , she was launched in May 1894 , and was commissioned in December 1895 . Her main armament were her five torpedo tubes , which were supported by a battery of eleven small @-@ caliber guns . Caprera spent most of her career in the main Italian fleet , where she was primarily occupied with training exercises . She served in the Red Sea during the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , where she conducted shore bombardments and blockaded Ottoman ports in the area . Caprera did not remain in service long after the war , being sold for scrap in May 1913 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Caprera was 73 @.@ 1 meters ( 239 ft 10 in ) long overall and had a beam of 8 @.@ 22 m ( 27 ft 0 in ) and an average draft of 3 @.@ 48 m ( 11 ft 5 in ) . She displaced 833 metric tons ( 820 long tons ; 918 short tons ) normally . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of horizontal triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . Specific figures for Caprera 's engine performance have not survived , but the ships of her class had top speeds of 18 @.@ 1 to 20 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 5 to 38 @.@ 5 km / h ; 20 @.@ 8 to 23 @.@ 9 mph ) at 3 @,@ 884 to 4 @,@ 422 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 896 to 3 @,@ 297 kW ) . The ship had a cruising radius of about 1 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of between 96 and 121 personnel . 
 Caprera was armed with a main battery of two 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / 40 guns and six 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) / 43 guns mounted singly.α She was also equipped with three 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) / 20 guns in single mounts . Her primary offensive weapon was her five 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 1 @.@ 6 in ( 41 mm ) thick ; her conning tower was armored with the same thickness of steel plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Caprera was laid down at the Cantiere navale fratelli Orlando ( Orlando Brothers ' Shipyard ) in Livorno on 27 July 1891 , originally under the name Clio . She was renamed Caprera on 23 February 1893 and was launched on 6 May 1894 , the last member of her class to enter the water . After fitting @-@ out work was completed , she underwent sea trials in mid @-@ 1895 . While testing the engines with forced draft , the ship reached 17 @.@ 75 knots ( 32 @.@ 87 km / h ; 20 @.@ 43 mph ) . The ship was commissioned into the fleet on 12 December 1895 . Upon entering service , Caprera was initially stationed in the 2nd Maritime Department , split between Taranto and Naples , along with most of the torpedo cruisers in the Italian fleet . These included her sister ships Partenope , Aretusa , Euridice , Iride , Minerva , and Urania , the four Goito @-@ class cruisers , and Tripoli . Shortly thereafter , she was transferred to Italian East Africa . She departed with the protected cruiser Etna in late December , passing through the Suez Canal on 30 December , along with a transport carrying a battalion of infantry . The rest of the Red Sea Squadron , which included the protected cruisers Dogali and Etruria , met Caprera and Etna in Massawa . 
 The ship was assigned to the Atlantic Naval Division in 1899 , along with the armored cruiser Marco Polo and the protected cruisers Etna , Dogali , and Giovanni Bausan . By 1907 , Caprera had been transferred to the Reserve Squadron , along with four of the older ironclad battleships . The following year , she was stationed in Italian East Africa . While there , an Italian meteorologist conducted several experiments aboard the ship with a hot air balloon to study the monsoon winds in the region , beginning in Zanzibar . The tests , which were conducted in the last week of July , were unsuccessful , as the weather was unfavorable . 
 At the start of the Italo @-@ Turkish War in September 1911 , Caprera was stationed in Italy , alternating between the ports of La Spezia and Naples , along with her sister ships Urania and Iride . The threat of an Ottoman attack from the Arabian Peninsula across the Red Sea to Italian Eritrea led the Italian High Command to reinforce the Red Sea Squadron . Caprera and several destroyers were sent to strengthen the Italian defenses . The protected cruiser Piemonte and two destroyers annihilated a force of seven Ottoman gunboats in the Battle of Kunfuda Bay on 7 January 1912 , wiping out the core of Ottoman naval forces in the area . Caprera and the rest of the Italian ships then commenced a bombardment campaign against the Turkish ports in the Red Sea before declaring a blockade of the city of Al Hudaydah on 26 January . On 27 July and 12 August , Caprera , her sister ship Aretusa , and the protected cruiser Piemonte conducted two bombardments of Al Hudaydah . During the second attack , they destroyed an Ottoman ammunition dump . On 14 October , the Ottoman government agreed to sign a peace treaty , ending the war . Caprera did not remain in service long after the end of the war . She was sold for scrap in May 1913 and thereafter broken up . 
 = India at the 2011 Commonwealth Youth Games = 
 India competed at the 2011 Commonwealth Youth Games ( officially known as the IV Commonwealth Youth Games ) held in the Isle of Man from 7 to 13 September 2011 . India has participated in all the editions of the Commonwealth Youth Games . The nation was represented by the Indian Olympic Association , which is responsible for the Commonwealth Games and Commonwealth Youth Games in India . 
 The delegation of India consisted of 20 competitors , participating in four — athletics , badminton , boxing and cycling — out of the seven sports of the programme , and 11 officials . Durgesh Kumar , Navjetdeep Singh and Pusarla Sindhu won gold medals for India in 400 m hurdles , shot put , and women 's singles event of badminton , respectively . Badminton player Srikanth Kidambi became the only Indian athlete to win multiple medals , including a silver in mixed doubles ( paired with <unk> <unk> ) and a bronze in men 's doubles ( paired with Hema <unk> ) . India devolved from the top position in the previous Games to the ninth position with total of nine medals ( equally distributed in all medal categories ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 India is participating in the Commonwealth Games since their second revision in 1934 ( the then @-@ British Empire Games ) , held in London , England . The Indian Olympic Association , the country 's National Olympic Committee , is responsible for the Commonwealth and Commonwealth Youth Games in India . The nation has sent its delegation to all the editions of the Commonwealth Youth Games . India has hosted the Commonwealth and Commonwealth Youth Games in 2010 and 2008 in New Delhi and Pune , respectively . In the 2008 Commonwealth Youth Games , India won the most gold ( 33 ) , silver ( 26 ) and total medals , and finished first in the final medal table standings . In the 2011 Commonwealth Youth Games , Indian Olympic Association sent a delegation consisted of twenty athletes ( twelve men and eight women ) and eleven officials ( including coaches and supporting staff ) . 
 = = Medalists = = 
 Indian athletes won a total of nine medals at the Games , equally distributed among all categories of medals . India devolved to ninth position in the final medal table standings , behind Malaysia ; India was ranked first in the medal table of the previous Commonwealth Youth Games , with total 76 medals . 
 Pusarla Venkata Sindhu , supported by the Olympic Gold Quest , won a gold for India in the women 's singles event of badminton . The other two gold medals came from Durgesh Kumar and Navjetdeep Singh , who finished on the top of the podium of 400 m hurdles and shot put , respectively . Badminton player Srikanth Kidambi was the only multiple medal winning Indian athlete at the Games , winning a silver in mixed doubles and a bronze in men 's doubles . Two pugilists , Rahul Poonia and <unk> Singh , won medals in their respective weight categories . Poonia won silver in light flyweight and Singh won bronze in middleweight . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 <unk> Kaur Dhillon was one of seven athletes to participate in the women 's discus throw event . With a throw of 45 @.@ 27 m , Dhillon won a bronze medal . Durgesh Kumar completed his heat of 400 m hurdles with a time of 53 @.@ 15 and qualified for final . He won a gold in the final after finishing race with a time of 51 @.@ 76 . Another medallist from the Indian side was Navjetdeep Singh , who won a gold medal in shot put event with a throw of 18 @.@ 81 m . 
 Women 
 Men 
 = = Badminton = = 
 Seven Indian badminton players went to the Games , competing in all five badminton events . Malaysia dominated in the sport , winning all but one of the five gold medals , the only other gold was won by Pusarla Sindhu in women 's singles . Sindhu defeated Malaysian Sonia <unk> in the final match by 22 – 20 , 21 – 8 . Sameer Verma won silver after losing to <unk> <unk> of Malaysia by 16 – 21 , 21 – 17 , 15 – 21 in the final of men 's singles . In men 's doubles , the pair Srikanth Kidambi / Hema <unk> won a bronze after defeating Canadian pair Nathan Choi / <unk> <unk> . Kidambi , pairing with <unk> <unk> , also won silver in mixed doubles event . 
 = = Boxing = = 
 Indian Boxing Federation selected four boxers to represent India in the Games . The boxing delegation was also accompanied by two coaches . Rahul Poonia ( light flyweight ) and <unk> Singh ( middle weight ) won medals for India . Poonia , winning all his preliminary bouts by large margins , lost to Jack Bateson of England with a point difference of 6 – 13 in the final bout , and won a silver medal . In Singh 's middleweight event , only eight pugilists competed , making first round a quarterfinal match . Singh defeated Nathan Thorley of Wales in his first bout . In the semifinal match , Singh lost to Scottish boxer Grant Quigley , but his semifinal appearance guaranteed him a bronze medal , which he shared with Cody Crowley of Canada . 
 = = Cycling = = 
 Two entrants competed for India in the cycling events : <unk> Bhosale and <unk> <unk> . Bhosale was ranked 37 in his time trial event and drove 11 @.@ 24 . <unk> did not finish her time trial event . She was expected to participate in the road race , but she did not start the event . 
 Men 
 Women 
 = Oblation Run = 
 The Oblation Run ( sometimes referred to as the Ritual Dance of the Brave ) is an annual event held by the University of the Philippines ( UP ) chapters of Alpha Phi Omega ( APO ) in the different UP campuses . The runners are male , and traditionally run completely naked in public places , with their genitals fully visible , on a designated route . The event was first organized in 1977 at University of the Philippines Diliman to promote Hubad na Bayani ( Tagalog for Naked Hero ) , a film . It draws its name from the Oblation , a statue of a nude man located in every University of the Philippines campus , which symbolizes " a selfless offering of one 's self to the country . " The event is usually done on December 16 , and serves as a protest to contemporary national issues . 
 Participants of the Diliman Oblation Run are male APO members numbering 24 on average . Women participating in the event , however , is not unheard of . Runners usually bear masks to hide their identities , and may wear leaves to cover their genitals . They usually hand roses to a number of female spectators . Additional runs are sometimes held in special events , such as the Centennial Run in 2008 where 100 members ran to celebrate the 100th anniversary of UP . 
 The run has been criticized by Aquilino Pimentel , Jr . , a Philippine senator , calling it a " blatant display of male genitals " and a " wanton disregard of the rules of decent society , " and comparing it with exhibitionist behaviors that are prohibited by the Revised Penal Code of the Philippines . In line with this , he called for an investigation on March 2009 to determine if the event violates that law . 
 = = History = = 
 Alpha Phi Omega is a fraternity founded on December 16 , 1925 at Lafayette College in Easton , Pennsylvania , United States . The first Philippine APO chapter was chartered on March 2 , 1950 at the Far Eastern University in Manila . The Eta chapter was established on February 10 , 1953 at UP Diliman . UP Diliman is the main campus of the University of the Philippines , a Philippine state university founded in June 1908 . It is particularly known for its student activism . 
 = = = Inception = = = 
 Despite inconsistencies , sources generally agree that the Oblation Run started in 1977 . Also known as the Ritual Dance of the Brave , it takes its name from the Oblation , a statue of a nude man unveiled in 1939 . Originally completely nude , a fig leaf was added to cover its genitals during UP President Jorge <unk> 's term ( 1934 – 1939 ) . It is found in every UP campus , and has since become UP 's identifying symbol . The run has since spread to other UP campuses , including Baguio , Los Baños , Manila and Visayas , and non @-@ UP colleges and universities , such as the Polytechnic University of the Philippines , Far Eastern University and Bulacan State University . 
 According to a 1996 article published by the UP Diliman APO website , the run originated when an unnamed APO member ran naked inside the campus to promote an APO @-@ sponsored play called Hubad na Bayani ( Tagalog for Naked Hero ) . The play is dedicated to Rolly Abad , an APO member who was killed in a brawl a few months earlier . The run was a success so APO decided to stage it every year on the fraternity 's anniversary , December 16 . This view is supported by a GMA News and Public Affairs report . 
 A newer account by <unk> , a student newspaper of University of the Philippines Baguio , gives a different story . According to a 2011 article of the paper , the first Oblation Run was done by Rolly Abad himself to protest the Ferdinand Marcos 's banning of Hubad na Bayani , a play detailing human rights violations during his martial law regime . Rolly Abad would be killed a few months later in a brawl . In his honor , APO decided to stage the run annually and voice contemporary socio @-@ political issues along with it . 
 Meanwhile , the Philippine Daily Inquirer notes an APO member , <unk> <unk> , saying " We [ I and four others ] started it as a prank when the Marcos dictatorship did not allow the showing of the play , Hubad na Bayani . " The play was a political satire against Marcos . 
 An Associated Press article likewise details a different version of the story . According to Oliver <unk> who wrote the article , the run started as a stunt to promote Hubad na Bayani , a film that depicted oppressed plantation workers . Similar to the account by <unk> , the film was banned by Marcos . Similarly , the Internet Movie Database lists Hubad na Bayani as 1977 film directed by Robert Arevalo . It reportedly won the 1978 <unk> <unk> Awards for best picture , best production design and best screenplay . 
 = = = Participation of women = = = 
 During the December 2005 Oblation Run at UP Diliman , two unidentified naked women , reportedly Koreans , were seen tailing 30 members who were part of the event . This is the first ever instance that women took part in the occasion . The two , wearing masks to hide their identities , held banners promoting equal rights for women . After posing for photographers , they entered a car which then sped off . The act was condemned by APO . 
 We are condemning their act not on gender issues because they are women , they can do run naked if they want to . But the event [ Oblation Run ] was supposed to be ours . 
 = = = Centennial Run = = = 
 To celebrate the University of the Philippines centennial , 100 APO members ran half a mile around the Diliman campus on June 18 , 2008 . This is the largest Oblation Run in its history in terms of number of participants . The participants started running on 11 AM PST from Vinzons Hall to the Oblation statue in front of Quezon Hall , the UP administration building . Several runners carried placards stating " Serve the People " and raised social issues , including appeals for greater state subsidy of education and ouster of then @-@ President of the Philippines Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo . The event was observed by senior APO alumni , including <unk> <unk> who was the mayor of Makati . He is currently the Vice President of the Philippines . 
 = = Event = = 
 The Oblation Run is usually held on December 16 , in honor of the international founding of Alpha Phi Omega on December 16 , 1925 . The date may be changed if December 16 falls on a weekend . The run may also be held in concurrence with other significant events , such as APO 's national anniversary on March , an APO chapter 's anniversary , and occasions significant to their home university . Runners usually bear masks to hide their identities , and may wear leaves to cover their genitals . They usually hand roses to a number of female spectators . 
 Contrary to popular belief , neophytes are forbidden to run . 
 All those who run are full pledged [ sic ] members who have volunteered . There is a misconception that the Oblation Run is something our neophytes have to undergo as part of their initiation . That ’ s not true . We never allow our applicants to join [ the Oblation Run ] . 
 As a sign of protest , it has called attention to several national issues including appeals for the ouster of former President Joseph Estrada , justice for the victims of the Maguindanao massacre and the 2010 Philippine Bar exam bombing . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Themes at UP Diliman Campus . 
 2013 Better disaster risk reduction and management 
 2012 Free , fair and clean 2013 national elections 
 2011 " A Run for Philippine Rivers " 
 2010 Justice for the victims of the 2010 Philippine Bar exam bombing . 
 2009 Justice for the victims of the Maguindanao massacre 
 2008 Opposing Charter Change particularly to any extension of the term of President Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo 
 2007 Ouster of President Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo and others . 
 2006 Protest against the University of the Philippines tuition increase , Charter change , and the withholding of funds of the Philippine Collegian 
 2005 " Merry Christmas ? ? ? " , three question marks represent the budget cut for the tuition of the " Scholars of the Nation " ( " <unk> ng Bayan " ) the <unk> and cost of living allowance woes of the University of the Philippines employees ; and the implementation of the <unk> 
 2004 " Environment Restoration and Social Justice for Hacienda Luisita Victims " 
 2003 Clean and peaceful elections ( and others ) 
 2002 " No to Budget Cuts " 
 2001 " Stop Corruption ! Transparency in the Government " / " <unk> Ku @-@ Corrupt " 
 2000 " <unk> <unk> " / Ouster of President Joseph Estrada 
 1999 Calling attention to University of the Philippines Budget Cuts 
 1995 Stop Fraternity Violence 
 = = Criticism = = 
 On March 2009 , the Oblation Run was criticized by Aquilino Pimentel , Jr . , a Philippine senator , calling it a " blatant display of male genitals " and a " wanton disregard of the rules of decent society . " He noted that the Oblation Run , being a public event , was being viewed by young children and " innocent audiences , young and old , " comparing it with exhibitionist behaviors that are prohibited by the Revised Penal Code of the Philippines . He also said that it was discriminatory against women . 
 Pimentel 's position was supported by officials of the Catholic Church . For instance , Tagbilaran Bishop Leonardo <unk> identified it as " malicious " and " morally lacking . " Like <unk> , he cited that " innocent youths " are among the spectators of the run . He said that " it could be done in a more decent way without showing their nude bodies " ( trans ) . Lingayen @-@ Dagupan Archbishop Oscar V. Cruz supports this view . 
 In line with this , he called for an investigation on March 2009 to determine if the event violates the said law . He sought " to sanction the parties responsible , including the university authorities , for failure to exercise their bounden duty to see it that the laws and rules of this country prevail . " The Oblation Run was defended by Senator Francis <unk> , a former UP Student Council president . He argued that the run is not obscene because the runners were merely exercising their freedom of expression . 
 In 2010 , Salvador <unk> of the Institute of the Incarnate Word banned De La Salle Araneta University students from participating in the run . Two years prior to banning it in 2010 , the APO chapter of De La Salle held the Oblation Run after obtaining a permit from the city government of Malabon . This was in celebration of its 50th anniversary since the university recognized the fraternity . In response to the ban , the chapter held a luncheon on its 2010 anniversary instead of a nude run . 
 Similarly , there used to be an Oblation Run conducted in Taft Avenue , Manila in support of the APO members taking the bar examinations . However , it has been of prohibited since 2008 by the city government of Manila due to complaints from examinees and their guests regarding " the unnecessary noise and obscenity of the said oblation run . " 
 = Tropical Storm Norman ( 2006 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Norman was a weak tropical cyclone that brought heavy rainfall to southwestern Mexico in October 2006 . The twelfth named storm of the 2006 Pacific hurricane season , Norman developed on October 9 from a tropical wave well to the southwest of Mexico . Unfavorable conditions quickly encountered the system , and within two days of forming , Norman dissipated as its remnants turned to the east . Thunderstorms gradually increased again , as it interacted with a disturbance to its east , and on October 15 the cyclone regenerated just off the coast of Mexico . The center became disorganized and quickly dissipated , bringing a large area of moisture which dropped up to 6 inches ( 150 mm ) of rainfall to southwestern Mexico . Rainfall from the storm flooded about 150 houses , of which 20 were destroyed . One person was injured , and initially there were reports of two people missing due to the storm ; however , it was not later confirmed . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on September 21 , moving across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea with little development . On October 1 it entered the eastern Pacific Ocean , and continuing westward it developed an area of persistent convection on October 5 . Initially the system was disorganized , although gradual development was expected as conditions in the upper @-@ levels of the atmosphere were expected to become more favorable . On October 7 it developed a broad low pressure area , and by the next day it was located in the eastern portion of a large area of disturbed weather ; the western portion of the system later developed into Tropical Storm Olivia . The eastern system developed organized convection near its center , and developed into Tropical Depression Fifteen @-@ E at 0000 UTC on October 9 , about 765 mi ( 1235 km ) southwest of the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula . 
 Upon first becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression was moving north @-@ northwestward , around the western periphery of a weak ridge ; the first forecast advisory by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) forecast the depression to gradually intensify before weakening and crossing the Baja California Peninsula . Located over warm water temperatures , the system developed an area of organized , deep convection near the center ; with satellite intensity estimates of tropical storm force using the Dvorak technique , the NHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Norman about 12 hours after it first formed . Strengthening continued , and Norman attained peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) early on October 10 . At the time , it was officially forecast to strengthen further and continue northeastward . However , some hurricane prediction models anticipated quick weakening and a sharp turn to the southeast . Shortly after peaking in intensity , southwesterly wind shear increased , which led to a decrease in convection coverage . At the same time , a trough extending from California southward caused Norman to stall and turn to the east . The convection rapidly became separated from the center ; by late on October 10 , the center was located about 115 miles ( 185 km ) from the nearest thunderstorms . By then , it had weakened to tropical depression status , and early on October 11 Norman degenerated into a remnant low about 530 miles ( 855 km ) southwest of Cabo San Lucas , Mexico . 
 The remnants of Norman continued to the east , and later to the east @-@ southeast as it interacted with a tropical disturbance off the coast of Mexico . Initially , re @-@ development of Norman was not expected , as the disturbance was instead given the possibility for further development . On October 13 , the NHC noted that the remnants of Norman were merging with the disturbance to its east ; during the interaction , convection redeveloped and organized around the remnant low of Norman , and early on October 15 it reformed into a tropical depression , near the coast of southwestern Mexico . With warm waters and favorable upper @-@ level conditions , Norman was predicted to re @-@ attain tropical storm status before moving ashore . However , the center quickly became less @-@ organized , turning northward and northwestward within the larger tropical disturbance . Late on October 15 , it is estimated Tropical Depression Norman dissipated 23 miles ( 37 km ) south and offshore of Manzanillo , Colima , although satellite imagery suggested the center may have dissipated inland . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 When Norman redeveloped into a tropical cyclone , the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning from Lázaro Cárdenas to Cabo Corrientes . 
 The storm brought heavy rainfall to southwestern Mexico , peaking at 6 @.@ 35 inches ( 161 mm ) in La Villita , Michoacán . Flooding from four days of rainfall caused officials to close schools in and around Acapulco . The rainfall resulted in downed trees and mudslides . About 150 homes became flooded , resulting in military personnel to assist in evacuating the flooded houses . In total , 20 homes were destroyed , and 20 villages were left without power . A transport vehicle carrying 15 people was swept away by a flooded stream , resulting in one injury ; the truck was later rescued by police workers . About 300 hectares ( 740 acres ) of crop fields sustained damage ; however , little crop damage was reported , as the storm occurred after harvesting had ended . Across Mexico , the storm affected about 500 @,@ 000 people , and initially there were two people missing ; however , a subsequent report indicated there were no casualties associated with the storm . 
 = Rhodocene = 
 Rhodocene , formally known as bis ( η5 @-@ cyclopentadienyl ) rhodium ( II ) , is a chemical compound with the formula [ Rh ( C5H5 ) 2 ] . Each molecule contains an atom of rhodium bound between two planar aromatic systems of five carbon atoms known as cyclopentadienyl rings in a sandwich arrangement . It is an organometallic compound as it has ( haptic ) covalent rhodium – carbon bonds . The [ Rh ( C5H5 ) 2 ] radical is found above 150 ° C or when trapped by cooling to liquid nitrogen temperatures ( − 196 ° C ) . At room temperature , pairs of these radicals join via their cyclopentadienyl rings to form a dimer , a yellow solid . 
 The history of organometallic chemistry includes the 19th @-@ century discoveries of Zeise 's salt and nickel tetracarbonyl . These compounds posed a challenge to chemists as the compounds did not fit with existing chemical bonding models . A further challenge arose with the discovery of ferrocene , the iron analogue of rhodocene and the first of the class of compounds now known as metallocenes . <unk> was found to be unusually chemically stable , as were analogous chemical structures including rhodocenium , the unipositive cation of rhodocene and its cobalt and iridium counterparts . The study of organometallic species including these ultimately led to the development of new bonding models that explained their formation and stability . Work on sandwich compounds , including the rhodocenium @-@ rhodocene system , earned Geoffrey Wilkinson and Ernst Otto Fischer the 1973 Nobel Prize for Chemistry . 
 Owing to their stability and relative ease of preparation , rhodocenium salts are the usual starting material for preparing rhodocene and substituted rhodocenes , all of which are unstable . The original synthesis used a cyclopentadienyl anion and tris ( <unk> ) rhodium ( III ) ; numerous other approaches have since been reported , including gas @-@ phase redox transmetalation and using half @-@ sandwich precursors . <unk> ( a derivative with eight phenyl groups attached ) was the first substituted rhodocene to be isolated at room temperature , though it decomposes rapidly in air . X @-@ ray crystallography confirmed that octaphenylrhodocene has a sandwich structure with a staggered conformation . Unlike cobaltocene , which has become a useful one @-@ electron reducing agent in research , no rhodocene derivative yet discovered is stable enough for such applications . 
 Biomedical researchers have examined the applications of rhodium compounds and their derivatives in medicine and reported one potential application for a rhodocene derivative as a radiopharmaceutical to treat small cancers . Rhodocene derivatives are used to synthesise linked metallocenes so that metal – metal interactions can be studied ; potential applications of these derivatives include molecular electronics and research into the mechanisms of catalysis . The value of rhodocenes tends to be in the insights they provide into the bonding and dynamics of novel chemical systems , rather than their applications . 
 = = History = = 
 Discoveries in organometallic chemistry have led to important insights into chemical bonding . Zeise 's salt , K [ <unk> ( C2H4 ) ] · H2O , was reported in 1831 and Mond 's discovery of Ni ( CO ) 4 occurred in 1888 . Each contained a bond between a metal centre and small molecule , ethylene in the case of Zeise 's salt and carbon monoxide in the case of nickel tetracarbonyl . The space @-@ filling model of the anion of Zeise 's salt ( image at left ) shows direct bonding between the platinum metal centre ( shown in blue ) and the carbon atoms ( shown in black ) of the ethylene ligand ; such metal – carbon bonds are the defining characteristic of organometallic species . Bonding models were unable to explain the nature of such metal – alkene bonds until the Dewar @-@ <unk> @-@ Duncanson model was proposed in the 1950s . The original formulation covered only metal – alkene bonds but the model was expanded over time to cover systems like metal carbonyls ( including [ Ni ( CO ) 4 ] ) where π <unk> is important . 
 <unk> , [ Fe ( C5H5 ) 2 ] , was first synthesised in 1951 during an attempt to prepare the <unk> ( <unk> ) by oxidative dimerization of cyclopentadiene ; the resultant product was found to have molecular formula <unk> and reported to exhibit " remarkable stability " . The discovery sparked substantial interest in the field of organometallic chemistry , in part because the structure proposed by <unk> and <unk> ( shown at right ) was inconsistent with then @-@ existing bonding models and did not explain its unexpected stability . Consequently , the initial challenge was to definitively determine the structure of ferrocene in the hope that its bonding and properties would then be understood . The sandwich structure was deduced and reported independently by three groups in 1952 : Robert Burns Woodward and Geoffrey Wilkinson investigated the reactivity in order to determine the structure and demonstrated that ferrocene undergoes similar reactions to a typical aromatic molecule ( such as benzene ) , Ernst Otto Fischer deduced the sandwich structure and also began synthesising other metallocenes including cobaltocene ; Eiland and <unk> provided X @-@ ray crystallographic confirmation of the sandwich structure . Applying valence bond theory to ferrocene by considering an Fe2 + centre and two cyclopentadienide anions ( C5H5 − ) , which are known to be aromatic according to <unk> 's rule and hence highly stable , allowed correct prediction of the geometry of the molecule . Once molecular orbital theory was successfully applied , the reasons for ferrocene 's remarkable stability became clear . 
 The properties of cobaltocene reported by Wilkinson and Fischer demonstrated that the unipositive cobalticinium cation [ Co ( C5H5 ) 2 ] + exhibited stability similar to that of ferrocene itself . This observation is not unexpected given that the cobalticinium cation and ferrocene are isoelectronic , although the bonding was not understood at the time . Nevertheless , the observation led Wilkinson and F. Albert Cotton to attempt the synthesis of rhodocenium and iridocenium salts . They reported the synthesis of numerous rhodocenium salts , including those containing the tribromide ( [ Rh ( C5H5 ) 2 ] <unk> ) , perchlorate ( [ Rh ( C5H5 ) 2 ] ClO4 ) , and <unk> ( [ Rh ( C5H5 ) 2 ] [ Cr ( <unk> ) 4 ( NH3 ) 2 ] · H2O ) anions , and found that the addition of <unk> produced a compound of composition [ Rh ( C5H5 ) 2 ] [ N ( <unk> ) 2 ] . In each case , the rhodocenium cation was found to possess high stability . Wilkinson and Fischer went on to share the 1973 Nobel Prize for Chemistry " for their pioneering work , performed independently , on the chemistry of the organometallic , so called sandwich compounds " . 
 The stability of metallocenes can be directly compared by looking at the reduction potentials of the one @-@ electron reduction of the unipositive cation . The following data are presented relative to the saturated calomel electrode ( SCE ) in acetonitrile : 
 [ Fe ( C5H5 ) 2 ] + / [ Fe ( C5H5 ) 2 ] + 0 @.@ 38 V 
 [ Co ( C5H5 ) 2 ] + / [ Co ( C5H5 ) 2 ] − 0 @.@ 94 V 
 [ Rh ( C5H5 ) 2 ] + / [ Rh ( C5H5 ) 2 ] − 1 @.@ 41 V 
 These data clearly indicate the stability of neutral ferrocene and the cobaltocenium and rhodocenium cations . Rhodocene is ca . 500 mV more reducing than cobaltocene , indicating that it is more readily oxidised and hence less stable . An earlier <unk> investigation of rhodocenium perchlorate at neutral pH showed a cathodic wave peak at − 1 @.@ 53 V ( versus SCE ) at the dropping mercury electrode , corresponding to the formation rhodocene in solution , but the researchers were unable to isolate the neutral product from solution . In the same study , attempts to detect iridocene by exposing iridocenium salts to oxidising conditions were unsuccessful even at elevated pH . These data are consistent with rhodocene being highly unstable and may indicate that iridocene is even more unstable still . 
 = = Speciation = = 
 The 18 @-@ electron rule is the equivalent of the octet rule in main group chemistry and provides a useful guide for predicting the stability of organometallic compounds . It predicts that organometallic species " in which the sum of the metal valence electrons plus the electrons donated by the ligand groups total 18 are likely to be stable . " This helps to explain the unusually high stability observed for ferrocene and for the cobalticinium and rhodocenium cations – all three species have analogous geometries and are isoelectronic 18 @-@ valence electron structures . The instability of rhodocene and cobaltocene are also understandable in terms of the 18 @-@ electron rule , in that both are 19 @-@ valence electron structures ; this explains early difficulties in isolating rhodocene from rhodocenium solutions . The chemistry of rhodocene is dominated by the drive to attain an 18 @-@ electron configuration . 
 Rhodocene exists as [ Rh ( C5H5 ) 2 ] , a paramagnetic 19 @-@ valence electron radical monomer only at or below − 196 ° C ( liquid nitrogen temperatures ) or above 150 ° C in the gas phase . It is this monomeric form that displays the typical staggered metallocene sandwich structure . At room temperature ( 25 ° C ) , the lifetime of the monomeric form in acetonitrile is less than two seconds ; and rhodocene forms [ Rh ( C5H5 ) 2 ] 2 , a diamagnetic 18 @-@ valence electron bridged dimeric <unk> @-@ metallocene structure . Electron spin resonance ( ESR ) , nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) and infrared spectroscopic ( IR ) measurements point to the presence of an equilibrium <unk> the monomeric and dimeric forms . ESR evidence confirms that the monomer possesses a high order axis of symmetry ( Cn , n > 2 ) with a mirror plane ( σ ) perpendicular to it as symmetry elements ; this experimentally demonstrates that the monomer does possess the typical sandwich structure of a metallocene although the interpretation of the ESR data has been questioned . The decomposition pathway of the monomer has also been studied by mass spectrometry . The dimerisation is a redox process ; the dimer is a rhodium ( I ) species and the monomer has a rhodium ( II ) centre . Rhodium typically occupies oxidation states + I or + III in its stable compounds . 
 This dimerisation process has the overall effect of decreasing the electron count around the rhodium centre from 19 to 18 . This occurs because the oxidative coupling of the two cyclopentadienyl ligands produces a new ligand with lower hapticity and which donates fewer electrons to the metal centre . The term hapticity is used to indicate the " number of carbon ( or other ) atoms through which [ a ligand ] binds ( n ) " to a metal centre and is symbolised as <unk> . For example , the ethylene ligand in Zeise 's salt is bound to the platinum centre through both carbon atoms , and it hence formally has the formula K [ <unk> ( η2 @-@ C2H4 ) ] · H2O . The carbonyl ligands in nickel tetracarbonyl are each bound through only a carbon atom and are hence described as <unk> ligands , but η1 @-@ notations are typically omitted in formulae . The cyclopentadienyl ligands in many metallocene and half @-@ sandwich compounds are <unk> ligands , hence the formula [ Rh ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) 2 ] for the rhodocene monomer . In the rhodocene dimer , the coupled cyclopentadienyl ligands are 4 @-@ electron <unk> donors to each rhodium ( I ) metal centre , in contrast to the 6 @-@ electron <unk> cyclopentadienyl donors . The increased stability of the 18 @-@ valence electron rhodium ( I ) dimer species as compared to the 19 @-@ valence electron rhodium ( II ) monomer likely explains why the monomer is only detected under extreme conditions . 
 Cotton and Wilkinson demonstrated that the 18 @-@ valence electron rhodium ( III ) rhodocenium cation [ Rh ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) 2 ] + can be reduced in aqueous solution to the monomeric form ; they were unable to isolate the neutral product as not only can it dimerise , the rhodium ( II ) radical monomer can also spontaneously form the mixed @-@ hapticity stable rhodium ( I ) species [ ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) Rh ( η4 @-@ C5H6 ) ] . The differences between rhodocene and this derivative are found in two areas : ( 1 ) One of the bound cyclopentadienyl ligands has formally gained a hydrogen atom to become cyclopentadiene , which remains bound to the metal centre but now as a 4 @-@ electron <unk> donor . ( 2 ) The rhodium ( II ) metal centre has been reduced to rhodium ( I ) . These two changes make the derivative an 18 @-@ valence electron species . Fischer and colleagues hypothesised that the formation of this rhodocene derivative might occur in separate protonation and reduction steps , but published no evidence to support this suggestion . ( η4 @-@ <unk> ) ( η5 @-@ cyclopentadienyl ) rhodium ( I ) , the resulting compound , is an unusual organometallic complex in that it has both a cyclopentadienyl anion and cyclopentadiene itself as ligands . It has been shown that this compound can also be prepared by sodium borohydride reduction of a rhodocenium solution in aqueous ethanol ; the researchers who made this discovery characterised the product as <unk> hydride . 
 Fischer and co @-@ workers also studied the chemistry of iridocene , the third transition series analogue of rhodocene and cobaltocene , finding the chemistry of rhodocene and iridocene are generally similar . The synthesis of numerous iridocenium salts including the tribromide and hexafluorophosphate have been described . Just as with rhodocene , iridocene <unk> at room temperature but a monomer form can be detected at low temperatures and in gas phase and IR , NMR , and ESR measurements indicate a chemical equilibrium is present and confirm the sandwich structure of the iridocene monomer . The complex [ ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) Ir ( η4 @-@ C5H6 ) ] , the analogue of rhodocene derivative reported by Fischer , has also been studied and demonstrates properties consistent with a greater degree of π @-@ <unk> in iridium ( I ) systems than is found in the analogous cobalt ( I ) or rhodium ( I ) cases . 
 = = Synthesis = = 
 Rhodocenium salts were first reported within two years of the discovery of ferrocene . These salts were prepared by reacting the carbanion Grignard reagent <unk> bromide ( <unk> ) with tris ( <unk> ) rhodium ( III ) ( Rh ( acac ) 3 ) . More recently , gas @-@ phase rhodocenium cations have been generated by a redox transmetalation reaction of rhodium ( I ) ions with ferrocene or <unk> . 
 Rh + + [ ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) 2M ] → M + [ ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) 2Rh ] + M = Ni or Fe 
 Modern microwave synthetic methods have also been reported . Rhodocenium hexafluorophosphate forms after reaction of cyclopentadiene and rhodium ( III ) chloride hydrate in methanol following work @-@ up with <unk> ammonium hexafluorophosphate ; the reaction yield exceeds 60 % with only 30 seconds of exposure to microwave radiation . 
 <unk> + 2 C5H6 + <unk> → [ ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) 2Rh ] PF6 + 2 HCl + <unk> + <unk> 
 Rhodocene itself is then formed by reduction of rhodocenium salts with molten sodium . If a rhodocenium containing melt is treated with sodium or potassium metals and then <unk> onto a liquid nitrogen @-@ cooled cold finger , a black polycrystalline material results . Warming this material to room temperature produces a yellow solid which has been confirmed as the rhodocene dimer . A similar method can be used to prepare the iridocene dimer . 
 = = Substituted rhodocenes and rhodocenium salts = = 
 = = = The [ ( η5 @-@ C5tBu3H2 ) Rh ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) ] + cation = = = 
 Novel approaches to synthesising substituted cyclopentadienyl complexes have been developed using substituted <unk> starting materials . Ring @-@ enlarging <unk> rearrangement reactions to produce <unk> are well known and serve as precedent for <unk> rearranging to <unk> . The [ ( η5 @-@ C5tBu3H2 ) Rh ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) ] + cation has been generated by a reaction sequence beginning with addition of the <unk> ( I ) dimer , [ ( η2 @-@ C2H4 ) 2Rh ( μ @-@ Cl ) ] 2 , to 1 @,@ 2 @,@ 3 @-@ tri @-@ tert @-@ butyl @-@ 3 @-@ vinyl @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> followed by reaction with thallium cyclopentadienide : 
 The 18 @-@ valence electron rhodium ( III ) <unk> species generated by this reaction demonstrates again the instability of the rhodocene moiety , in that it can be refluxed in toluene for months without 1 @,@ 2 @,@ 3 @-@ tri @-@ tert @-@ <unk> forming but in oxidising conditions the 1 @,@ 2 @,@ 3 @-@ tri @-@ tert @-@ butylrhodocenium cation forms rapidly . Cyclic voltammetry has been used to investigate this and similar processes in detail . The mechanism of the reaction has been shown to involve a loss of one electron from the <unk> ligand followed by a fast rearrangement ( with loss of a hydrogen atom ) to form the 1 @,@ 2 @,@ 3 @-@ tri @-@ tert @-@ butylrhodocenium cation . Both the tetrafluoroborate and hexafluorophosphate salts of this cation have been structurally characterised by X @-@ ray crystallography . 
 [ ( η5 @-@ C5tBu3H2 ) Rh ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) ] BF4 forms a colourless centrosymmetric monoclinic crystal belonging to the <unk> / c space group , and with a density of 1 @.@ 486 g cm − 3 . Looking at the <unk> diagram of the structure of the cation ( at right ) , it is evident that it possesses the typical geometry expected of a rhodocene or rhodocenium cation . The two cyclopentadienyl rings are close to parallel ( the centroid – Rh – centroid angle is 177 @.@ 2 ° ) and the rhodium centre is slightly closer to the substituted cyclopentadienyl ring ( Rh – centroid distances are 1 @.@ 819 Å and 1 @.@ 795 Å ) , an observation attributed to the greater inductive effect of the tert @-@ butyl groups on the substituted ligand . The <unk> diagram shows that the cation adopts an eclipsed conformation in the solid state . The crystal structure of the hexafluorophosphate salt shows three <unk> independent cations , one eclipsed , one staggered , and one which is rotationally disordered . This suggests that the conformation adopted is dependent on the anion present and also that the energy barrier to rotation is low – in ferrocene , the rotational energy barrier is known to be ~ 5 kJ mol − 1 in both solution and gas phase . 
 The diagram above shows the rhodium – carbon ( in red , inside pentagons on the left ) and carbon – carbon ( in blue , outside pentagons on the left ) bond distances for both ligands , along with the bond angles ( in green , inside pentagons on the right ) within each cyclopentadienyl ring . The atom labels used are the same as those shown in the crystal structure above . Within the unsubstituted cyclopentadienyl ligand , the carbon – carbon bond lengths vary between 1 @.@ 35 Å and 1 @.@ 40 Å and the internal bond angles vary between 107 ° and 109 ° . For comparison , the internal angle at each vertex of a regular pentagon is 108 ° . The rhodium – carbon bond lengths vary between 2 @.@ 16 Å and 2 @.@ 18 Å . These results are consistent with η5 @-@ coordination of the ligand to the metal centre . In the case of the substituted cyclopentadienyl ligand , there is somewhat greater variation : carbon – carbon bond lengths vary between 1 @.@ 39 Å and 1 @.@ 48 Å , the internal bond angles vary between 106 ° and 111 ° , and the rhodium – carbon bond lengths vary between 2 @.@ 14 Å and 2 @.@ 20 Å . The greater variation in the substituted ligand is attributed to the distortions necessary to relieve the steric strain imposed by neighbouring tert @-@ butyl substituents ; despite these variations , the data demonstrate that the substituted cyclopentadienyl is also η5 @-@ coordinated . 
 The stability of metallocenes changes with ring substitution . Comparing the reduction potentials of the cobaltocenium and <unk> cations shows that the <unk> species is ca . 600 mV more reducing than its parent metallocene , a situation also observed in the ferrocene and rhodocene systems . The following data are presented relative to the <unk> / ferrocene redox couple : 
 The differences in reduction potentials is attributed in the cobaltocenium system to the inductive effect of the alkyl groups , further stabilising the 18 @-@ valence electron species . A similar effect is seen in the rhodocenium data shown above , again consistent with inductive effects . In the substituted iridocenium system , cyclic voltammetry investigations shows irreversible reductions at temperatures as low as − 60 ° C ; by comparison , the reduction of the corresponding rhodocenes is quasi @-@ reversible at room temperature and fully reversible at − 35 ° C. The irreversibility of the substituted iridocenium reductions is attributed to the extremely rapid dimerisation of the resulting 19 @-@ valence electron species , which further illustrates that <unk> are less stable than their corresponding rhodocenes . 
 = = = Penta @-@ substituted cyclopentadienyl ligands = = = 
 The body of knowledge concerning compounds with <unk> @-@ substituted cyclopentadienyl ligands is extensive , with organometallic complexes of the pentamethylcyclopentadienyl and <unk> ligands being well @-@ known . Substitutions on the cyclopentadienyl rings of rhodocenes and rhodocenium salts produce compounds of higher stability as they allow for the increased <unk> of positive charge or electron density and also provide steric hindrance against other species approaching the metal centre . Various mono- and di @-@ substituted rhodocenium species are known , but substantial stabilisation is not achieved without greater substitutions . Known highly substituted rhodocenium salts include <unk> hexafluorophosphate [ ( η5 @-@ C5Me5 ) 2Rh ] PF6 , <unk> hexafluorophosphate [ ( η5 @-@ <unk> ) 2Rh ] PF6 , and <unk> hexafluorophosphate [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph4H ) 2Rh ] PF6 . <unk> tetrafluoroborate can be synthesised from the tris ( acetone ) complex [ ( η5 @-@ C5Me5 ) Rh ( <unk> ) 3 ] ( BF4 ) 2 by reaction with <unk> , and the analogous iridium synthesis is also known . <unk> hexafluorophosphate was synthesised in 1 @,@ 2 @-@ <unk> ( solvent ) in an unusual one @-@ pot synthesis that involves the formation of 20 carbon – carbon bonds : 
 In a similar reaction , <unk> hexafluorophosphate [ ( η5 @-@ <unk> ) Rh ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) ] PF6 can be synthesised from <unk> hexafluorophosphate [ ( η5 @-@ C5Me5 ) Rh ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) ] PF6 in 80 % yield . These reactions demonstrate that the acidity of the methyl hydrogens in a pentamethylcyclopentadienyl complex can be considerably increased by the presence of the metal centre . <unk> , the reaction proceeds with potassium hydroxide deprotonating a methyl group and the resulting carbanion undergoing nucleophilic substitution with methyl iodide to form a new carbon – carbon bond . 
 The compounds <unk> tetrafluoroborate [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph5 ) Rh ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) ] BF4 , and <unk> tetrafluoroborate [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph5 ) Rh ( η5 @-@ C5Me5 ) ] BF4 have also been reported . They demonstrate that rhodium sandwich compounds can be prepared from half @-@ sandwich precursors . For example , in an approach broadly similar to the tris ( acetone ) synthesis of <unk> tetrafluoroborate , <unk> tetrafluoroborate has been synthesised from the tris ( acetonitrile ) salt [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph5 ) Rh ( <unk> ) 3 ] ( BF4 ) 2 by reaction with sodium cyclopentadienide : 
 [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph5 ) Rh ( MeCN ) 3 ] ( BF4 ) 2 + NaC5H5 → [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph5 ) Rh ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) ] BF4 + <unk> + 3 MeCN 
 <unk> , [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph4H ) 2Rh ] , is the first rhodocene derivative to be isolated at room temperature . Its olive green crystals decompose rapidly in solution , and within minutes in air , demonstrating a dramatically greater air sensitivity than the analogous cobalt complex , although it is significantly more stable than rhodocene itself . This difference is attributed to the relatively lower stability of the rhodium ( II ) state as compared to the cobalt ( II ) state . The reduction potential for the [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph4H ) 2Rh ] + cation ( measured in <unk> relative the <unk> / ferrocene couple ) is − 1 @.@ 44 V , consistent with the greater thermodynamic stabilisation of the rhodocene by the <unk> ligand compared with the C5H5 or C5Me5 ligands . Cobaltocene is a useful one @-@ electron reducing agent in the research laboratory as it is soluble in non @-@ polar organic solvents , and its redox couple is sufficiently well behaved that it may be used as an internal standard in cyclic voltammetry . No substituted rhodocene yet prepared has demonstrated sufficient stability to be used in a similar way . 
 The synthesis of octaphenylrhodocene proceeds in three steps , with a <unk> reflux followed by workup with <unk> acid , then a sodium amalgam reduction in tetrahydrofuran : 
 Rh ( acac ) 3 + 2 <unk> → [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph4H ) 2Rh ] + + 2 K + + 3 acac − 
 [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph4H ) 2Rh ] + + 3 acac − + 3 <unk> → [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph4H ) 2Rh ] PF6 + 3 <unk> + 2 PF6 − 
 [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph4H ) 2Rh ] PF6 + Na / Hg → [ ( η5 @-@ C5Ph4H ) 2Rh ] + <unk> 
 The crystal structure of octaphenylrhodocene shows a staggered conformation ( similar to that of ferrocene , and in contrast to the eclipsed conformation of ruthenocene ) . The rhodium – centroid distance is 1 @.@ 904 Å and the rhodium – carbon bond lengths average 2 @.@ 26 Å ; the carbon – carbon bond lengths average 1 @.@ 44 Å . These distances are all similar to those found in the 1 @,@ 2 @,@ 3 @-@ tri @-@ tert @-@ butylrhodocenium cation described above , with the one difference that the effective size of the rhodium centre appears larger , an observation consistent with the expanded ionic radius of rhodium ( II ) compared with rhodium ( III ) . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Biomedical use of a derivative = = = 
 There has been extensive research into <unk> , including discussion of rhodium compounds in medicine . A substantial body of research has examined using metallocene derivatives of ruthenium and iron as <unk> . One area of such research has utilised metallocenes in place of the <unk> group in haloperidol , which is a pharmaceutical classified as a typical antipsychotic . The <unk> – haloperidol compound investigated has structure ( C5H5 ) Fe ( C5H4 ) – C ( = O ) – ( CH2 ) 3 – N ( <unk> ) 2C ( OH ) – <unk> and can be converted to the ruthenium analog via a transmetalation reaction . Using the radioactive isotope 103Ru produces a <unk> – haloperidol radiopharmaceutical with a high affinity for lung but not brain tissue in mice and rats . Beta @-@ decay of 103Ru produces the metastable isotope 103mRh in a rhodocenyl – haloperidol compound . This compound , like other rhodocene derivatives , has an unstable 19 @-@ valence electron configuration and rapidly <unk> to the expected cationic rhodocenium – haloperidol species . The separation of the <unk> – haloperidol and the rhodocenium – haloperidol species and the distributions of each amongst bodily organs has been studied . 103mRh has a half @-@ life of 56 min and emits a gamma ray of energy 39 @.@ 8 keV , so the gamma @-@ decay of the rhodium isotope should follow soon after the beta @-@ decay of the ruthenium isotope . Beta- and gamma @-@ emitting radionuclides used medically include <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , and 103mRh has been proposed for use in radiotherapy for small tumours . 
 = = = Metal – metal interactions in linked metallocenes = = = 
 The original motivation for research investigations of the rhodocene system was to understand the nature of and bonding within the metallocene class of compounds . In more recent times , interest has been rekindled by the desire to explore and apply the metal – metal interactions that occur when metallocene systems are linked . Potential applications for such systems include molecular electronics , semi @-@ conducting ( and possibly ferromagnetic ) metallocene polymers ( an example of a molecular wire ) , and exploring the threshold between heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis . Examples of known <unk> and <unk> that possess the rhodocenyl moiety include the hexafluorophosphate salts of <unk> , 1 @,@ 1 ' <unk> , and 1 @-@ cobaltocenyl @-@ 1 ' <unk> , each shown at right . Linked metallocenes can also be formed by introducing several <unk> substituents onto a single cyclopentadienyl ligand . 
 Structural studies of termetallocene systems have shown they typically adopt an " eclipsed double <unk> " " crankshaft " geometry . Taking as an example the 1 @-@ cobaltocenyl @-@ 1 ' <unk> cation shown above , this means that the cobaltocenyl and rhodocenyl moieties are eclipsed , and thus carbon atoms 1 and 1 ' on the central ferrocene core are as close to vertically aligned as is possible given the staggered conformation of the cyclopentadienyl rings within each metallocene unit . Viewed from side @-@ on , this means <unk> resemble the down – up – down pattern of a crankshaft . The synthesis of this termetallocene involves the combining of rhodocenium and cobaltocenium solutions with 1 @,@ 1 ' <unk> . This produces an uncharged intermediate with linked cyclopentadienyl – cyclopentadiene ligands whose bonding resembles that found in the rhodocene dimer . These ligands then react with the <unk> <unk> to generate the termetallocene salt , [ ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) Rh ( μ @-@ η5 : η5 @-@ C5H4 – C5H4 ) Fe ( μ @-@ η5 : η5 @-@ C5H4 – C5H4 ) Co ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) ] ( PF6 ) 2 . This synthetic pathway is illustrated below : 
 = = = Rhodocenium @-@ containing polymers = = = 
 The first rhodocenium @-@ containing side @-@ chain polymers were prepared through controlled polymerization techniques such as reversible addition − fragmentation chain @-@ transfer polymerization ( <unk> ) and ring @-@ opening metathesis polymerisation ( <unk> ) . 
 = Crash Holly = 
 Michael John " Mike " Lockwood ( August 25 , 1971 – November 6 , 2003 ) was an American professional wrestler . He was best known for his appearances with the World Wrestling Federation / World Wrestling Entertainment from 1999 to 2003 under the ring names Crash Holly or simply Crash . 
 Lockwood debuted in 1989 and spent a decade wrestling on the independent circuit before joining the World Wrestling Federation in 1999 as Crash Holly . He formed a tag team with his kayfabe cousin Hardcore Holly , with whom he won the WWF World Tag Team Championship . The Holly Cousins was expanded into a stable with the addition of Molly Holly in 2000 . During his WWF / WWE career , Lockwood held the WWF / WWE Hardcore Championship on 22 occasions , with many of his reigns coming during a period when the title was defended " 24 / 7 " . After being released from WWE in June 2003 , Lockwood joined NWA Total Nonstop Action as Mad Mikey , where he remained until his death later that year . 
 In addition to his 22 reigns as WWF / WWE Hardcore Champion and single reign as WWF World Tag Team Champion , Lockwood was a one @-@ time WWF European Champion , and one @-@ time WWF Light Heavyweight Champion . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1989 @-@ 1999 ) = = = 
 Lockwood debuted in 1989 , as Johnny Pearson in Bay Area Wrestling , where he wrestled until 1994 . He dislocated his shoulder about five times , and took 18 months off to recover . He then wrestled on the independent circuit as " Irish " Erin O 'Grady . In 1996 , he joined All Pro Wrestling ( APW ) , where he became known as " The Leprechaun " Erin O 'Grady and had several matches with Vic Grimes . 
 After viewing a tape of a match between O 'Grady and Michael Modest , Extreme Championship Wrestling ( ECW ) wrestler Taz referred Lockwood to ECW owner , Paul Heyman . Erin O 'Grady lost four untelevised matches in November 1997 , including a dark match at November to Remember . 
 O 'Grady wrestled Grimes in a try @-@ out match for the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) on January 20 , 1998 , and both were signed to contracts . They were sent to Power Pro Wrestling , the WWF 's developmental promotion , to train . Here , they won the PPW Tag Team Championship together and O 'Grady won the PPW Young Guns Championship . 
 WWF Talent Coordinator Bruce Prichard sent Lockwood to Mexico , to prepare him for the style of the WWF 's lucha libre show , WWF Super Astros . He wrestled in Monterrey for three months , under a mask , as The Green Ghost ( a play on the word " gringo " ) . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment ( 1999 @-@ 2003 ) = = = 
 Lockwood debuted as Crash Holly , the storyline cousin of Bob " Hardcore " Holly , on the August 16 , 1999 episode of Raw is War They became known as The Holly Cousins . Their relationship was a strained one , and Hardcore frequently threatened Crash . When they took the gimmick of claiming to be " super heavyweights " , over 400 lb each , Crash would carry a scale to ringside to " weigh in " before matches . 
 Crash made his pay @-@ per @-@ view debut at SummerSlam in August , where The Holly Cousins wrestled in a Tag Team Turmoil match , won by the Acolytes Protection Agency . 
 On October 17 , at No Mercy , The Holly Cousins defeated The New Age Outlaws by disqualification . The next night on Raw is War , they defeated The Rock ' n ' Sock Connection for the Tag Team Championship . They held the title until the November 4 SmackDown ! , when they lost it to Mankind and his new partner , Al Snow . 
 In early 2000 , Crash Holly joined the hardcore division . On the February 24 episode of SmackDown ! , he defeated Test to begin his first of 22 Hardcore Championship reigns . He decreed that he must defend the championship twenty four hours a day , seven days a week , which later became known as the " 24 / 7 Rule " . This meant that the title was permanently contested , not just in sanctioned matches , and could change hands anywhere , anytime anyone pinned the champion , so long as a WWF referee counted the fall . Holly was frequently attacked by other wrestlers in unlikely locations , including an airport , a funhouse , a circus , and his hotel room . Though he was often pinned , he usually immediately regained the title . His most common tactic was to sneak a pin , often after the champion had been beaten down by someone else , and quickly run backstage , away from possible challengers . This turned him into a crowd favorite and earned him the nickname " The Houdini of Hardcore " . He frequently defended the championship against non @-@ wrestlers , including referees and road agents , like Gerald Brisco and Pat Patterson . He had a long feud with The Mean Street Posse ( Pete Gas , Rodney and Joey Abs ) over the title . He even lost , and quickly regained , the title against one of the Godfather 's hos . At Rebellion , Crash defeated William Regal to win the WWF European Championship . He re @-@ lost the title to Regal two days later . 
 In late 2000 , another of Crash 's storyline cousins , Molly Holly , was introduced . In 2001 , The Holly Cousins feuded with The Dudley Boyz . In the course of this feud , Molly began a romantic relationship with Spike Dudley , leading to internal disputes within each family , as well as a Romeo and Juliet @-@ style angle between the six of them . 
 On the March 18 , 2001 episode of Heat , Crash defeated Dean Malenko to win the Light Heavyweight Championship . He defended it on two episodes of Heat , against Funaki and Grandmaster <unk> , before dropping it to the debuting Jerry Lynn on the April 29 episode . In May 2001 , Holly and Hardcore briefly reunited as a lower card team . 
 When the WWF was renamed World Wrestling Entertainment and divided into two Raw and SmackDown brands , Holly was assigned to the Raw roster , where he had little success . He jumped ship to SmackDown ! on the September 2 , 2002 episode of Raw during a match with Jeff Hardy . Earlier , Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff was informed that a Raw wrestler would leave to reunite with a relative on SmackDown ! , and ordered a beatdown on Hardy , who he wrongly suspected of planning to join his brother , Matt Hardy . 
 In his first SmackDown ! match , on September 5 , he defeated The Hurricane . He then feuded with Cruiserweight Champion Jamie Noble . On the October 3 SmackDown ! , Noble defeated Holly to retain the title . 
 On the December 19 SmackDown ! , Holly teamed with Bill DeMott to defeat Noble and Nunzio . After the match , DeMott turned on Holly and attacked him . This led to a match on the next SmackDown ! , which DeMott won . 
 After being sidelined for four months , Holly returned on the April 24 , 2003 episode of SmackDown ! . He soon joined Matt Hardy and Shannon Moore in the Mattitude Followers ( abbreviated " MF 'er " ) stable . As Crash was Moore 's alleged apprentice , Hardy also referred to him as a " Moore @-@ on " . His last several matches with the company were tag matches with Moore , as well as house show matches against newcomer Orlando Jordan . 
 On June 30 , 2003 , Lockwood was released from WWE . 
 = = = NWA Total Nonstop Action and independent circuit ( 2003 ) = = = 
 Lockwood signed a contract with NWA Total Non @-@ Stop Action ( later known as Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ) in July 2003 and debuted as Mad Mikey on July 23 , accepting an open challenge from Elix Skipper and losing the match . Mad Mikey was angry at many things , on which he elaborated in promos . He wrestled on nine NWA @-@ TNA weekly PPVs , lastly on October 1 . 
 He briefly wrestled for Pro Wrestling Iron in Hayward , California . In late 2003 , Mad Mikey and Rory Fox defeated <unk> Lee and The Human Time Bomb for the Heartland Wrestling Association in what turned out to be Lockwood 's final match . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Lockwood was born in Anaheim , California , and raised in Pacifica , California , where he graduated from Terra Nova High School . He became interested in professional wrestling in the eighth grade , inspired by Brady Boone . While training as a wrestler and working on the independent circuit , he worked a second job at Safeway . 
 Lockwood met his wife , N <unk> Wheeler , when she escorted Mark Henry to the ring at Unforgiven 1999 , in Charlotte , North Carolina . They married on New Year 's Eve , 1999 . In 2002 , he opened " Crash Holly 's School of Professional Wrestling " in Salisbury , North Carolina , where N <unk> grew up . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Lockwood died on November 6 , 2003 , at his friend and fellow wrestler Stevie Richards ' house in Florida . He was found partially clothed with a pool of vomit around his face . Empty bottles of the prescription drug <unk> and a partially consumed bottle of alcohol were found nearby . He had recently received divorce papers from his wife . His death , caused by choking on his own vomit , was officially ruled a suicide . He was buried in China Grove in Rowan County , North Carolina . 
 In August 2005 , Nora Greenwald , who performed alongside Lockwood as Molly Holly , released an autobiographical DVD titled " Nora Greenwald : <unk> ' the Shi Crap " , and a portion of the profits from the sale of the DVD went to Lockwood 's daughter 's education fund . In March 2005 , the New Breed Wrestling Association held the " Mike Lockwood Memorial Tournament " , which was won by Michael Modest . At ECW One Night Stand in 2005 , Lockwood was one of the deceased former ECW wrestlers honored in a video package . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 As Mad Mikey 
 CST – Crash Stole This ( Lifting double underhook DDT ) – parodied from Stevie Richards 
 As Crash Holly 
 Crash Course ( Over the shoulder back to belly piledriver ) 
 Crash Landing / Bottom Feeder ( Belly to back inverted mat slam ) 
 Corner springboard bulldog 
 Flowing DDT 
 As Erin O 'Grady 
 Hop Splash ( Dives off the top rope before landing on his feet and performing a standing splash ) 
 <unk> ( Hurricanrana ) – Independent circuit ; used as a signature move in WWF / E 
 Signature moves 
 Dropkick 
 Preschool ( Bottom rope arm twist ropewalk chop ) – TNA ; parodied from The Undertaker 
 Roll @-@ up 
 Running one @-@ handed bulldog 
 Tornado DDT 
 Nicknames 
 " Elroy " 
 " The Houdini of Hardcore " 
 " Irish " 
 " The Leprechaun " 
 " The Super @-@ Heavyweight " 
 Entrance music 
 " Slow Death " by Zack Tempest 
 " System Clash " by Jim Johnston ( While along with Matt Hardy ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 All Pro Wrestling 
 APW Junior Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 International Wrestling Association 
 IWA Hardcore Championship ( 1 time ) 
 IWA World Junior Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Mid @-@ Eastern Wrestling Federation 
 <unk> Cruiserweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Power Pro Wrestling 
 PPW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Vic Grimes 
 PPW Young Guns Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 36 in the PWI 500 in 2000 
 Supreme Pro Wrestling 
 SPW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Hook <unk> 
 World Wrestling Federation / World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWF European Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWF / E Hardcore Championship ( 22 times ) 
 WWF Light Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWF Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Hardcore Holly 
 = Elbridge Gerry = 
 Elbridge Thomas Gerry ( / <unk> <unk> / ; July 17 , 1744 ( O.S. July 6 , 1744 ) – November 23 , 1814 ) was an American statesman and diplomat . As a Democratic @-@ Republican he was selected as the fifth Vice President of the United States ( 1813 – 14 ) , serving under James Madison . He is known best for being the namesake of gerrymandering , a process by which electoral districts are drawn with the aim of aiding the party in power , although its initial " g " has softened to / dʒ / from the hard / ɡ / of his name . 
 Born into a wealthy merchant family , Gerry vocally opposed British colonial policy in the 1760s , and was active in the early stages of organizing the resistance in the American Revolutionary War . Elected to the Second Continental Congress , Gerry signed both the Declaration of Independence and the Articles of Confederation . He was one of three men who attended the Constitutional Convention in 1787 but refused to sign the United States Constitution because it did not then include a Bill of Rights . After its ratification he was elected to the inaugural United States Congress , where he was actively involved in drafting and passage of the Bill of Rights as an advocate of individual and state liberties . 
 Gerry was at first opposed to the idea of political parties , and cultivated enduring friendships on both sides of the political divide between Federalists and Democratic @-@ Republicans . He was a member of a diplomatic delegation to France that was treated poorly in the XYZ Affair , in which Federalists held him responsible for the breakdown in negotiations . Gerry thereafter became a Democratic @-@ Republican , running unsuccessfully for Governor of Massachusetts several times before winning the office in 1810 . During his second term , the legislature approved new state senate districts that led to the coining of the word " gerrymander " ; he lost the next election , although the state senate remained Republican . Chosen by Madison as his vice presidential candidate in 1812 , Gerry was elected , but died a year and a half into his term . He is the only signer of the Declaration of Independence who is buried in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Early life = = 
 Elbridge Gerry was born on July 17 , 1744 , in Marblehead , Massachusetts . His father , Thomas Gerry , was a merchant operating ships out of Marblehead , and his mother , Elizabeth ( Greenleaf ) Gerry , was the daughter of a successful Boston merchant . Gerry 's first name came from John Elbridge , one of his mother 's ancestors . Gerry 's parents had eleven children in all , although only five survived to adulthood . Of these , Elbridge was the third . He was first educated by private tutors , and entered Harvard College shortly before turning fourteen . After receiving a B.A. in 1762 and an M.A. in 1765 , he entered his father 's merchant business . By the 1770s the <unk> numbered among the wealthiest Massachusetts merchants , with trading connections in Spain , the West Indies , and along the North American coast . Gerry 's father , who had migrated from England in 1730 , was active in local politics and had a leading role in the local militia . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Gerry was from an early time a vocal opponent of Parliamentary efforts to tax the colonies after the French and Indian War ended in 1763 . In 1770 he sat on a Marblehead committee that sought to enforce importation bans on taxed British goods . He frequently communicated with other Massachusetts opponents of British policy , including Samuel Adams , John Adams , Mercy Otis Warren , and others . 
 In May 1772 he won election to the General Court of the Province of Massachusetts Bay ( its legislative assembly ) . There he worked closely with Samuel Adams to advance colonial opposition to Parliamentary colonial policies . He was responsible for establishing Marblehead 's committee of correspondence , one of the first to be set up after that of Boston . However , an incident of mob action prompted him to resign from the committee the next year . Gerry and other prominent <unk> had established a hospital for performing smallpox inoculations on Cat Island ; because the means of transmission of the disease were not known at the time , fears amongst the local population led to protests which escalated into violence that wrecked the facilities and threatened the proprietors ' other properties . 
 Gerry reentered politics after the Boston Port Act closed that city 's port in 1774 , and Marblehead became a port to which relief supplies from other colonies could be delivered . As one of the town 's leading merchants and Patriots , Gerry played a major role in ensuring the storage and delivery of supplies from Marblehead to Boston , interrupting those activities only to care for his dying father . He was elected as a representative to the First Continental Congress in September 1774 , but refused , still grieving the loss of his father . 
 = = Congress and Revolution = = 
 Gerry was elected to the provincial assembly , which reconstituted itself as the Massachusetts Provincial Congress after Governor Thomas Gage dissolved the body in October 1774 . He was assigned to its committee of safety , responsible for assuring that the province 's limited supplies of weapons and gunpowder remained out of British Army hands . His actions were partly responsible for the storage of weapons and ammunition in Concord ; these stores were the target of the British raiding expedition that sparked the start of the American Revolutionary War with the Battles of Lexington and Concord in April 1775 . ( Gerry was staying at an inn at Menotomy , now Arlington , when the British marched through on the night of April 18 . ) During the Siege of Boston that followed , Gerry continued to take a leading role in supplying the nascent Continental Army , something he would continue to do as the war progressed . He leveraged business contacts in France and Spain to acquire not just munitions , but supplies of all types , and was involved in the transfer of financial subsidies from Spain to Congress . He sent ships to ports all along the American coast , and dabbled in financing privateering operations . 
 Unlike some merchants , there is no evidence that Gerry <unk> from this activity ( he spoke out against it , and in favor of price controls ) , although his war @-@ related merchant activities notably increased the family 's wealth . His gains were tempered to some extent by the precipitous decline in the value of paper currencies , which he held in large quantities and speculated in . 
 Gerry served in the Second Continental Congress from February 1776 to 1780 , when matters of the ongoing war occupied the body 's attention . He was influential in convincing a number of delegates to support passage of the United States Declaration of Independence in the debates held during the summer of 1776 ; John Adams wrote of him , " If every Man here was a Gerry , the Liberties of America would be safe against the Gates of Earth and Hell . " He was implicated as a member of the so @-@ called " Conway Cabal " , a group of Congressmen and military officers who were dissatisfied with the performance of General George Washington during the 1777 military campaign . However , Gerry took Pennsylvania leader Thomas Mifflin , one of Washington 's critics , to task early in the episode , and specifically denied knowledge of any sort of conspiracy against Washington in February 1778 . 
 Gerry 's political philosophy was one of limited central government , and he regularly advocated for the maintenance of civilian control of the military . He held these positions fairly consistently throughout his political career ( wavering principally on the need for stronger central government in the wake of the 1786 – 87 Shays 's Rebellion ) and was well known for his personal integrity . In later years he was against the idea of political parties , remaining somewhat distant from the developing Federalist and Democratic @-@ Republican parties until later in his career . It was not until 1800 that he would formally associate with the Democratic @-@ Republicans in opposition to what he saw as attempts by the Federalists to centralize too much power in the national government . In 1780 he resigned from the Continental Congress over the issue , and refused offers from the state legislature to return to the Congress . He also refused appointment to the state senate , claiming he would be more effective in the state 's lower chamber , and also refused appointment as a county judge , comparing the offer by Governor John Hancock to those made by royally appointed governors to benefit their political allies . He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1781 . 
 Gerry was convinced to rejoin the Confederation Congress in 1783 , when the state legislature agreed to support his call for needed reforms . He served in that body until September 1785 , during which time it met in New York City . The following year he married Ann Thompson , the daughter of a wealthy New York merchant who was twenty years his junior ; his best man was his good friend James Monroe . The couple had ten children between 1787 and 1801 , straining Ann 's health . 
 The war made Gerry sufficiently wealthy that when it ended he sold off his merchant interests , and began investing in land . In 1787 he purchased the Cambridge , Massachusetts estate of the last royal lieutenant governor of Massachusetts , Thomas Oliver , which had been confiscated by the state . This 100 @-@ acre ( 40 ha ) property , known as Elmwood , became the family home for the rest of Gerry 's life . He continued to own property in Marblehead , and bought a number of properties in other Massachusetts communities . He also owned shares in the Ohio Company , prompting some political opponents to characterize him as an owner of vast tracts of western lands . 
 = = Constitutional Convention = = 
 Gerry played a major role in the U.S. Constitutional Convention , held in Philadelphia during the summer of 1787 . In its deliberations he consistently advocated for a strong delineation between state and federal government powers , with state legislatures shaping the membership of federal government positions . Gerry 's opposition to popular election of representatives was rooted in part by the events of Shays 's Rebellion , a populist uprising in western Massachusetts in the year preceding the convention . Despite this position , he also sought to maintain individual liberties by providing checks on government power that might abuse or limit those freedoms . He supported the idea that the Senate composition should not be determined by population ; the view that it should instead be composed of equal numbers of members for each state prevailed in the Connecticut Compromise . The compromise was adopted on a narrow vote in which the Massachusetts delegation was divided , Gerry and Caleb Strong voting in favor . Gerry further proposed that senators of a state , rather than casting a single vote on behalf of the state , instead vote as individuals . Gerry was also vocal in opposing the Three @-@ Fifths Compromise , which counted slaves as 3 / 5 of a person for the purposes of apportionment in the House of Representatives and gave southern states a decided advantage . 
 = = = Advocating indirect elections = = = 
 Because of his fear of demagoguery and belief the people of the United States could be easily misled , Gerry also advocated indirect elections . Although he was unsuccessful in obtaining them for the lower house of Congress , Gerry did obtain such indirect elections for the U.S. Senate , whose members were to be elected by the state legislatures . Gerry also advanced numerous proposals for indirect elections of the President of the United States , most of them involving limiting the right to vote to the state governors and electors . 
 = = = Voting against proposed constitution = = = 
 Gerry was also unhappy about the lack of expression of any sort of individual liberties in the proposed constitution , and generally opposed proposals that strengthened the central government . He was one of only three delegates who voted against the proposed constitution in the convention ( the others were George Mason and Edmund Randolph ) , citing a concern about the convention 's lack of authority to enact such major changes to the nation 's system of government , and to the constitution 's lack of " federal features " . 
 = = = State ratification ; Bill of Rights = = = 
 During the ratification debates that took place in the states following the convention , Gerry continued his opposition , publishing a widely circulated letter documenting his objections to the proposed constitution . In this document he cited the lack of a Bill of Rights as his primary objection , but also expressed qualified approval of the constitution , indicating that he would accept it with some amendment . Strong pro @-@ Constitution forces attacked him in the press , comparing him unfavorably to the Shaysites . Henry Jackson was particularly vicious : " [ Gerry has ] done more injury to this country by that infamous Letter than he will be able to make atonement in his whole life " , and Oliver Ellsworth , a convention delegate from Connecticut , charged him with deliberately courting the Shays faction . One consequence of the furor over his letter was that he was not selected as a delegate to the Massachusetts ratifying convention , although he was later invited to attend by the convention 's leadership . The convention leadership was dominated by Federalists , and Gerry was not given any formal opportunity to speak ; he left the convention after a shouting match with convention chair Francis Dana . The state ratified the constitution by a vote of 187 to 168 . The debate had the result of estranging Gerry from a number of previously friendly politicians , including chairman Dana and Rufus King . 
 = = United States House of Representatives = = 
 Anti @-@ Federalist forces nominated Gerry for governor in 1788 , but he was predictably defeated by the popular incumbent John Hancock . Following ratification , Gerry recanted his opposition to the Constitution , noting that a number of state ratifying conventions had called for amendments that he supported . He was nominated by friends ( over his own opposition to the idea ) for a seat in inaugural House of Representatives , where he then served two terms . 
 In June 1789 Gerry proposed that Congress consider all of the proposed constitutional amendments that various state ratifying conventions had called for ( notably those of Rhode Island and North Carolina , which had at the time still not ratified the constitution ) . In the debate that followed , he led opposition to some of the proposals , arguing that they did not go far enough in ensuring individual liberties . He successfully lobbied for inclusion of freedom of assembly in the First Amendment , and was a leading architect of the Fourth Amendment protections against search and seizure . He sought unsuccessfully to insert the word " expressly " into the Tenth Amendment , which might have more significantly limited the federal government 's power . He was successful in efforts to severely limit the federal government 's ability to control state militias . In tandem , with this protection , he had once argued against the idea of the federal government controlling a large standing army , comparing it – most memorably and mischievously – to a standing penis : " An excellent assurance of domestic tranquility , but a dangerous temptation to foreign adventure . " 
 Gerry vigorously supported Alexander Hamilton 's reports on public credit , including the assumption at full value of state debts , and supported Hamilton 's new Bank of the United States , positions consistent with earlier calls he had made for economic centralization . Although he speculated in depreciated Continental bills of credit ( the IOUs at issue ) , there is no evidence he participated in large @-@ scale speculation that attended the debate when it took place in 1790 , and he became a major investor in the new bank . He used the floor of the House to speak out against aristocratic and monarchical tendencies he saw as threats to republican ideals , and generally opposed laws and their provisions that he perceived as limiting individual and state liberties . He opposed any attempt to give officers of the executive significant powers , specifically opposing establishment of the Treasury Department because its head might gain more power than the President . He opposed measures that strengthened the Presidency ( such as the ability to fire cabinet officers ) , seeking instead to give the legislature more power over appointments . 
 Gerry did not stand for re @-@ election in 1792 , returning home to raise his children and care for his sickly wife . He agreed to serve as a presidential elector for John Adams in the 1796 election . During Adams ' term in office , Gerry maintained good relations with both Adams and Vice President Thomas Jefferson , hoping that the divided executive might lead to less friction . His hopes were not realized : the split between Federalists ( Adams ) and Democratic @-@ Republicans ( Jefferson ) widened . 
 = = XYZ Affair = = 
 President Adams appointed Gerry to be a member of a special diplomatic commission sent to Republican France in 1797 . Tensions had risen between the two nations after the 1796 ratification of the Jay Treaty , made between the US and Great Britain . It was seen by French leaders as signs of an Anglo @-@ American alliance , and France had consequently stepped up seizures of American ships . Adams chose Gerry , over his cabinet 's opposition ( on political grounds that Gerry was insufficiently Federalist ) , because of their long @-@ standing relationship ; Adams described Gerry as one of the " two most impartial men in America " ( Adams himself being the other ) . 
 Gerry joined co @-@ commissioners Charles Cotesworth Pinckney and John Marshall in France in October 1797 and met briefly with Foreign Minister Talleyrand . Some days after that meeting , the delegation was approached by three French agents ( at first identified as " X " , " Y " , and " Z " in published papers , leading the controversy to be called the " XYZ Affair " ) who demanded substantial bribes from the commissioners before negotiations could continue . The commissioners refused , and sought unsuccessfully to engage Talleyrand in formal negotiations . Believing Gerry to be the most approachable of the commissioners , Talleyrand successively froze first Pinckney and then Marshall out of the informal negotiations , and they left France in April 1798 . Gerry , who sought to leave with them , stayed behind because Talleyrand threatened war if he left . Gerry refused to make any significant negotiations afterward and left Paris in August . By then dispatches describing the commission 's reception had been published in the United States , raising calls for war . The undeclared naval Quasi @-@ War ( 1798 – 1800 ) followed . Federalists , notably Secretary of State Timothy Pickering , accused Gerry of supporting the French and abetting the breakdown of the talks , while Adams and Republicans such as Thomas Jefferson supported him . The negative press damaged Gerry 's reputation , and he was burned in effigy by protestors in front of his home . He was only later vindicated , when his correspondence with Talleyrand was published . In response to the Federalist attacks on him , and because of his perception that the Federalist @-@ led military buildup threatened republican values , Gerry formally joined the Democratic @-@ Republican Party in early 1800 , standing for election as Governor of Massachusetts . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 For four years Gerry unsuccessfully sought the governorship of Massachusetts . His opponent in these races , Caleb Strong , was a popular moderate Federalist , whose party dominated the state 's politics despite a national shift toward the Republicans . In 1803 Republicans in the state were divided , and Gerry only had regional support of the party . He decided not to run in 1804 , returning to semi @-@ retirement and to deal with a personal financial crisis . His brother Samuel Russell had mismanaged his own business affairs , and Gerry had propped him up by guaranteeing a loan that was due . The matter ultimately ruined Gerry 's finances for his remaining years . 
 Republican James Sullivan won the governor 's seat from Strong in 1807 , but his successor was unable to hold the seat in the 1809 election , which went to Federalist Christopher Gore . Gerry stood for election again in 1810 against Gore , and won a narrow victory . Republicans cast Gore as an ostentatious British @-@ loving Tory who wanted to restore the monarchy ( his parents had remained Loyal during the Revolution ) , and Gerry as a patriotic American , while Federalists described Gerry as a " French <unk> " and Gore as an honest man devoted to ridding the government of foreign influence . A temporary lessening in the threat of war with Britain aided Gerry . The two battled again in 1811 , with Gerry once again victorious in a highly acrimonious campaign . 
 Gerry 's first year as governor was less controversial than his second , because the Federalists controlled the state senate . He preached moderation in the political discourse , noting that it was important that the nation present a unified front in its dealings with foreign powers . In his second term , with full Republican control of the legislature , he became notably more partisan , purging much of the state government of Federalist appointees . The legislature also enacted " reforms " of the court system that resulted in an increase in the number of judicial appointments , which Gerry filled with Republican partisans . Infighting within the party and a shortage of qualified candidates , however , played against Gerry , and the Federalists scored points by complaining vocally about the partisan nature of the reforms . 
 Other legislation passed during Gerry 's second year included a bill broadening the membership of Harvard 's Board of Overseers to diversify its religious membership , and another that liberalized religious taxes . The Harvard bill had significant political slant because the recent split between orthodox Congregationalists and Unitarians also divided the state to some extent along party lines , and Federalist Unitarians had recently gained control over the Harvard board . 
 In 1812 the state adopted new constitutionally mandated electoral district boundaries . The Republican @-@ controlled legislature had created district boundaries designed to enhance their party 's control over state and national offices , leading to some oddly shaped legislative districts . Although Gerry was unhappy about the highly partisan districting ( according to his son @-@ in @-@ law , he thought it " highly disagreeable " ) , he signed the legislation . The shape of one of the state senate districts in Essex County resembled a salamander , leading a local Federalist newspaper to print a political cartoon calling it a " Gerry @-@ <unk> " . Ever since , the creation of such districts has been called gerrymandering . Gerry also engaged in partisan investigations of potential libel against him by elements of the Federalist press , further damaging his popularity with moderates . The redistricting controversy , along with the libel investigation and the impending War of 1812 , contributed to Gerry 's defeat in 1812 ( once again at the hands of Caleb Strong , whom the Federalists had brought out of retirement ) . The gerrymandering of the state senate was a notable success in the 1812 election : the body was thoroughly dominated by Republicans , even though the house and the governor 's seat went to Federalists by substantial margins . 
 = = Vice Presidency and death = = 
 Gerry 's financial difficulties prompted him to ask President James Madison for a federal position after his loss in the 1812 election ( which was held early in the year ) . He was chosen by the Democratic @-@ Republican party congress to be Madison 's vice presidential running mate in the 1812 presidential election , although the nomination was first offered to John Langdon . He was viewed as a relatively safe choice who would attract Northern votes but not pose a threat to James Monroe , who was thought likely to succeed Madison . Madison easily won reelection , and Gerry took the oath of office at Elmwood in March 1813 . At that time the office of vice president was largely a sinecure ; Gerry 's duties included advancing the administration 's agenda in Congress and dispensing patronage positions in New England . Gerry 's actions in support of the War of 1812 had a partisan edge : he expressed concerns over a possible Federalist seizure of Fort Adams ( as Boston 's Fort Independence was then known ) as a prelude to Anglo @-@ Federalist cooperation , and sought the arrest of printers of Federalist newspapers . 
 On November 23 , 1814 , he fell seriously ill while visiting Joseph Nourse of the treasury department , and died not long after returning to his home in the Seven Buildings . He is buried in the Congressional Cemetery in Washington , D. C. , with a memorial by John Frazee . He is the only signer of the Declaration buried in the nation 's capital . The estate he left his wife and children was rich in land and poor in cash ; he had managed to repay his brother 's debts with his pay as vice president . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Gerry is generally remembered for the use of his name in the word gerrymander , for his refusal to sign the United States Constitution , and for his role in the XYZ Affair . His path through the politics of the age has been difficult to characterize ; early biographers , including his son @-@ in @-@ law James T. Austin and Samuel Eliot Morison , struggled to explain his apparent changes in position . Biographer George Athan Billias posits that Gerry was a consistent advocate and practitioner of republicanism as it was originally envisioned , and that his role in the Constitutional Convention had a significant impact on the document it eventually produced . 
 Gerry had ten children , of which seven survived into adulthood : Gerry 's son , James Thompson Gerry , commanded the USS Albany ( 1846 ) , a United States Navy war sloop , which went down with all hands in 1854 . 
 Catharine ( 1787 – 1850 ) 
 Eliza ( 1791 – 1882 ) 
 Ann ( 1791 – 1883 ) 
 Elbridge , Jr . ( 1793 – 1867 ) 
 Thomas Russell ( 1794 – 1848 ) 
 Helen Maria ( 1796 – 1864 ) 
 James Thompson Gerry ( 1797 – 1854 ) left West Point upon his father 's death and was Commander of the war @-@ sloop USS Albany ( 1846 ) ; the sloop disappeared with all hands 28 or 29 September 1854 near the West Indies . 
 Gerry 's grandson , Elbridge Gerry ( 1813 – 1886 ) , was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from <unk> and another grandson Elbridge Thomas Gerry became a distinguished lawyer and philanthropist in New York . His great @-@ grandson , Peter G. Gerry ( 1879 – 1957 ) , was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives and a United States Senator from Rhode Island . 
 Gerry is depicted in John Trumbull 's Declaration of Independence . The painting was reproduced on the reverse of the two @-@ dollar bill beginning in 1976 . 
 The upstate New York town of Elbridge is believed to have been named in his honor , as is the western New York town of Gerry , in Chautauqua County . The town of <unk> , Massachusetts was originally incorporated in 1786 under the name Gerry in his honor , but was changed to its present name after the town submitted a petition in 1812 , citing Democratic @-@ Republican support for the War of 1812 . 
 Gerry 's Landing Road in Cambridge , Massachusetts is located near the Eliot Bridge not far from Elmwood . During the 19th century , the area was known as Gerry 's Landing ( formerly known as Sir Richard 's Landing ) , and was used by a Gerry relative for a short time as a landing and storehouse . The supposed house of his birth , the Elbridge Gerry House ( it is uncertain whether he was born in the house currently standing on the site or an earlier structure ) stands in Marblehead , and that town 's Elbridge Gerry School is named in his honor . 
 = No. 1 Operational Training Unit RAAF = 
 No. 1 Operational Training Unit ( No. 1 OTU ) was an operational conversion unit of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) during World War II . Formed in December 1941 at Nhill , Victoria , it relocated to Bairnsdale in mid @-@ 1942 , and then to East Sale the following year . No. 1 OTU 's primary role was to train aircrew for multi @-@ engined aircraft operations . At its peak of activity in August 1944 , it was operating over 130 aircraft , the most numerous being Bristol Beauforts . Its aircraft and personnel also conducted transport missions in New Guinea and maritime patrols in southern Australian waters . Following the end of hostilities , the unit was disbanded in December 1945 . 
 = = History = = 
 During World War II , the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) established several operational training units to convert recently graduated pilots from advanced trainers to combat aircraft , and to add fighting ability to the flying skills they had already learned . No. 1 Operational Training Unit ( No. 1 OTU ) was formed at Nhill , Victoria , on 8 December 1941 , under the control of Southern Area Command . Its inaugural commanding officer was Wing Commander <unk> Carr . The unit 's purpose was to train pilots , air observers and wireless air gunners for multi @-@ engine aircraft operations . The first courses commenced on 22 December . After preliminary training , pilots went through a six @-@ week conversion to Lockheed Hudsons and Bristol Beauforts , while observers and gunners underwent instruction on Airspeed Oxfords and Avro Ansons . Their training included bombing , gunnery , navigation , evasive action , ship recognition and maritime reconnaissance . 
 Nhill was always meant to be a temporary location for No. 1 OTU , whose home was to be East Sale , also in Victoria . As accommodation at East Sale would not be available until October 1942 , the school 's 1 @,@ 630 personnel were relocated to Bairnsdale in June and July . The base 's living quarters , recreational buildings and 88 tents could not fully accommodate this influx , so the RAAF rented hotels in Bairnsdale for 320 airmen . On 10 December 1942 , No. 1 OTU Detached Flight , consisting of 15 Hudsons and 108 personnel including air and maintenance crews , was sent to North @-@ Eastern Area Command to help fulfill urgent transport requirements in New Guinea . This force joined a military Douglas DC @-@ 2 and eleven civil aircraft pressed into service to form RAAF Special Transport Flight , which operated out of Wards Airfield from 14 December 1942 to 11 January 1943 . The Hudsons flew 645 sorties , carrying some 1 @,@ 100 troops and almost 800 tons of equipment . Two of the Hudsons were lost , one to enemy action and one to friendly fire , and several were damaged . 
 By April 1943 , No. 1 OTU 's complement had grown to 2 @,@ 411 personnel . Over a four @-@ day period beginning 20 April , the unit relocated to East Sale , utilising 110 tenders in 535 trips along the Princes Highway . Its fleet of aircraft included 55 Beauforts , 35 Oxfords , 25 Hudsons , 14 Fairey Battles and one de Havilland Tiger Moth . Training courses commenced at the new base the day after the move was completed . One of the students on the first course at East Sale was future Prime Minister Gough Whitlam . Group Captain Bill Garing served as commanding officer from August 1943 to February 1944 . He set an Australian record on 19 January 1944 , when he landed a Tiger Moth atop the 5 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) Mount Wellington , to retrieve an injured stockman . Garing also took measures to allay concerns among crews regarding the Australian @-@ built Beaufort , which appeared to have a mysterious fault that caused many fatalities . By the time No. 1 OCU moved to East Sale , it had suffered 47 accidents involving Beauforts . Garing organised an aerobatic display by a Beaufort for the benefit of students , and an open day at the base on 16 October 1943 ; he also ordered extensive ground testing on the aircraft . Accidents continued to occur , however , and it was ultimately through the efforts of Wing Commander Charles Learmonth immediately prior to his death in a Beaufort off the Western Australian coast that the nature of the problem was recognised and overcome . 
 As well as maintaining its training program , No. 1 OTU was required to periodically release instructors , students and aircraft for maritime patrols to protect Australian shipping lanes . In April 1943 , six Hudsons were attached to No. 32 Squadron at Camden , New South Wales , for convoy escort and anti @-@ submarine duties . A year later , four Beauforts were deployed to Mount Gambier , South Australia , to carry out a two @-@ day escort for the Dutch transport ship Van <unk> . Beauforts from No. 1 OTU were also ordered to locate and destroy the German U @-@ Boat U @-@ 862 , which had shelled the Greek tanker <unk> off Kingston , South Australia , on 9 December 1944 . Although the submarine was not sunk , it was apparently frightened off by the presence of the Beauforts and aircraft from other RAAF units in the vicinity . No. 1 OTU 's intensive training regime included night flying , so that it operated almost round the clock . Flying effort reached a peak in August 1944 , when 132 aircraft made 2 @,@ 479 flights , instructing 221 students . The unit had by this time logged over 100 @,@ 000 flying hours . It trained a total of 2 @,@ 150 aircrew on Beauforts during the war , and suffered 147 aircraft accidents on instructional and operational fights in Australia and New Guinea , resulting in the loss of 131 aircrew killed or missing . Post @-@ war demobilisation saw the disbandment of all the RAAF 's operational training units ; No. 1 OTU was dissolved in December 1945 . 
 = A Hero 's Song = 
 A Hero 's Song ( Czech : <unk> <unk> ) , Op. 111 , B. 199 , also called Heroic Song for Orchestra , is a symphonic poem for orchestra composed by Antonín Dvořák between August 4 and October 25 , 1897 . It was premiered in Vienna in on December 4 , 1898 , with Gustav Mahler conducting the Vienna Philharmonic , and was later published in Berlin in 1899 . Unlike Dvořák 's other symphonic poems , this work is not based upon a specific text , and it may have been intended to be autobiographical . The piece is mostly energetic and triumphant , but it includes a slower section containing a funeral march . A typical performance lasts approximately 22 minutes . 
 = = Instrumentation = = 
 The symphonic poem is scored for an orchestra of two flutes , two oboes , two clarinets , two bassoons , four horns , two trumpets , three trombones , one tuba , timpani , bass drum , cymbals , triangle and strings . The piece 's instrumentation is significant because it lacks harp , unusual percussion , and nonstandard woodwinds – a simpler orchestra than most of Dvořák 's other orchestral works . This is because the piece does not attempt to convey a story , but merely portrays two contrasting moods : despair ( during the lacrimosa section ) and triumph . 
 = = History = = 
 A Hero 's Song was Dvořák 's last orchestral work and the final of his five symphonic poems , the others being The Water Goblin , The Noon Witch , The Golden Spinning Wheel , and The Wild Dove ( Opp . 107 – 110 ) . It is also the last instance of him writing purely instrumental music , as he dedicated himself to vocal and operatic works after its completion . He began working on the piece on August 4 , 1897 , immediately after revising the third act of his opera The Jacobin . The work was completed in three months , during which time Dvořák lived at his summer residence in his hometown of <unk> , and spent time at his chateau of the patron Josef <unk> in <unk> . The piece was completed on October 25 of the same year , and was published in 1899 by Fritz Simrock in Berlin . The symphonic poem coincidentally anticipated Richard Strauss 's similar tone poem Ein Heldenleben ( A Hero 's Life ) , which was composed a year later . In fact , Dvořák originally intended to title the piece A Hero 's Life , a name which had been suggested to him by his pupil Vítězslav Novák . 
 The work was premiered by the Vienna Philharmonic on December 4 , 1898 , conducted by Gustav Mahler , a friend and supporter of Dvořák . Mahler wrote to Dvořák before the premiere , " I have just received your second work ' The Hero 's Song ' and , as with [ The Wild Dove ] , am quite enchanted with it . " Dvořák was present at the premier and had planned to conduct it himself with the Berlin Philharmonic on November 14 , 1899 , but cancelled his plans due to a sudden nervous breakdown – in Dvořák 's words , " I was so indisposed that I had to leave Berlin with my wife without even seeing Simrock . " The piece had been performed the previous day , conducted by Arthur Nikisch . It was also performed in London , Hamburg , Boston and Leipzig in October and November 1899 . Dvořák was finally able to personally conduct the piece in Budapest in December of that year . 
 = = Content = = 
 Dvořák often adapted Bohemian folklore for his compositions , and his previous four symphonic poems were based on actual poems by the Czech poet Karel Jaromír Erben , especially Erben 's collection of ballads <unk> . A Hero 's Song broke away from this pattern of programmatic symphonic works , as Dvořák did not specify a specific accompanying text , and he only roughly outlined its plot in a later letter . The lack of a fixed programme has been hypothesized as a reason for its relative neglect when compared to Dvořák 's other symphonic works . It has also been suggested that the work was intended to be autobiographical , an unusual approach for Dvořák . This was Dvořák 's only symphonic poem that pursued Franz Liszt 's idealized view of the genre , as Dvořák 's other four works were based on eerie subjects not appropriate to Liszt 's conception . 
 A Hero 's Song is musically structured like a four @-@ movement symphony , beginning with an allegro con fuoco , transitioning to a slow poco adagio lacrimosa , then including a scherzo and concluding with a coda . The piece is based on a short , energetic theme in B @-@ flat minor played in the violas , cellos , and basses at the start of the piece . This theme is featured in various forms throughout the first section . Following this , a slow section is marked by quiet music which symbolizes the hero 's grief . It includes a funeral march , a musical form Dvořák also used in his Requiem , Stabat Mater , and Piano Quintet No. 2 . The hero recovers from his grief as the mood of the music gradually brightens and goes into B @-@ flat major , leading into the dance @-@ like scherzo . Finally , the triumph of the hero is represented by the victorious coda . The piece has a run time of approximately 22 minutes . 
 Although it is much less popular than Dvořák 's other symphonic poems , A Hero 's Song has been described as " an uninhibited outpouring of joyous energy " and " musically as rich as its siblings written one year earlier " , while its lacrimosa section is " full of sadness and longing . " Its character has been described as " a variation on Beethoven 's style , " Mahler 's slight influence has been noted in the funeral march , and the ending has been compared to the patriotic music of Edward Elgar . 
 = George S. Patton = 
 George Smith Patton Jr . ( November 11 , 1885 – December 21 , 1945 ) was a senior officer of the United States Army , who commanded the U.S. Seventh Army in the Mediterranean and European Theaters of World War II , but is best known for his leadership of the U.S. Third Army in France and Germany following the Allied invasion of Normandy in June 1944 . 
 Born in 1885 to a family with an extensive military background ( with members serving in the United States Army and Confederate States Army ) , Patton attended the Virginia Military Institute , and later the U.S. Military Academy at West Point . He participated in the 1912 Olympic Modern Pentathlon , where he placed fifth . After the Olympics Patton studied in France with M. L ’ Adjutant Clery , reputed to be the finest Fencing Master in Europe . Patton also designed the <unk> Cavalry Saber , more commonly known as the “ Patton Sword . ” The War Department ordered 20 @,@ 000 of them in 1913 . Later the same year Patton was assigned as a student and “ Master of the Sword , ” the top instructor in a new course in swordsmanship , at the Mounted Service School in Fort Riley , Kansas . It was here he wrote “ Saber Exercise 1914 , ” using easy @-@ to @-@ follow steps accompanied by detailed illustrations . The following year he wrote a more informal guide , “ Diary of the Instructor in <unk> , ” at the request of his students who wanted more detailed training guidance . Patton first saw combat during the Pancho Villa Expedition in 1916 , taking part in America 's first military action using motor vehicles . He later joined the newly formed United States Tank Corps of the American Expeditionary Forces and saw action in World War I , commanding the U.S. tank school in France before being wounded while leading tanks into combat near the end of the war . In the interwar period , Patton remained a central figure in the development of armored warfare doctrine in the U.S. Army , serving in numerous staff positions throughout the country . Rising through the ranks , he commanded the U.S. 2nd Armored Division at the time of the U.S. entry into World War II . 
 Patton led U.S. troops into the Mediterranean theater with an invasion of Casablanca during Operation Torch in 1942 , where he later established himself as an effective commander through his rapid rehabilitation of the demoralized U.S. II Corps . He commanded the U.S. Seventh Army during the Allied invasion of Sicily , where he was the first Allied commander to reach Messina . There he was embroiled in controversy after he slapped two shell @-@ shocked soldiers under his command , and was temporarily removed from battlefield command for other duties such as participating in Operation Fortitude 's disinformation campaign for Operation Overlord . Patton returned to command the Third Army following the invasion of Normandy in 1944 , where he led a highly successful , rapid armored drive across France . He led the relief of beleaguered American troops at Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge , and advanced his army into Nazi Germany by the end of the war . 
 After the war , Patton became the military governor of Bavaria , but he was relieved of this post because of his statements on denazification . He commanded the U.S. Fifteenth Army for slightly more than two months . Patton died in Germany on December 21 , 1945 , as a result of injuries from an automobile accident there twelve days earlier . 
 Patton 's colorful image , hard @-@ driving personality and success as a commander were at times overshadowed by his controversial public statements , including private racist and antisemitic remarks . His philosophy of leading from the front and his ability to inspire troops with vulgarity @-@ ridden speeches , such as a famous address to the Third Army , attracted favorable attention . His strong emphasis on rapid and aggressive offensive action proved effective . While Allied leaders held sharply differing opinions on Patton , he was regarded highly by his opponents in the German High Command . A popular , award @-@ winning biographical film released in 1970 helped transform Patton into an American folk hero . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Patton was born on November 11 , 1885 , in San Gabriel , California , to George Smith Patton Sr. and his wife Ruth Wilson . Patton had a younger sister , Anne . The family was of Irish , Scots @-@ Irish , English , and Welsh ancestry . His great grandmother came from an aristocratic Welsh family , descended from many Welsh lords of Glamorgan , which had an extensive military background . Patton 's ancestry was far more than genealogy to him . It included his heroes and role models ; he <unk> with them in times of crisis , emulated them , and sensed that they beckoned him to his destiny . His imagination blended past and present ; he believed he had former lives as a soldier and took pride in deep mystical ties with his warrior ancestors . 
 Though not directly descended from George Washington , Patton traced some of his English colonial roots to George Washington 's great @-@ grandfather . He was also descended from England 's King Edward I ( aka " Longshanks " ) through Edward 's son Edmund of Woodstock , 1st Earl of Kent . Family belief held the Pattons were descended from no less than sixteen barons who had signed the Magna Carta . 
 The first Patton in America was born Robert Patton in Ayr , Ayrshire , Scotland , and emigrated to Culpeper , Virginia from Glasgow , Scotland in either 1769 or 1770 . George Patton also descended from Hugh Mercer , who had been killed in the Battle of Princeton during the American Revolution . Patton 's paternal grandfather was Colonel George Smith Patton , who commanded the Confederate 22nd Virginia Infantry under Jubal Early in the Civil War and was killed in the Third Battle of Winchester , while his great uncle Colonel Waller T. Patton was killed while leading the Confederate 7th Virginia Infantry in Pickett 's Charge during the Battle of Gettysburg . 
 Patton 's father graduated from the Virginia Military Institute ( VMI ) , became a lawyer and later the district attorney of Los Angeles County . Patton 's maternal grandfather was Benjamin Davis Wilson , who had been Mayor of Los Angeles and a successful merchant . The family was prosperous , and George Patton spent his childhood on the family 's 2 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 810 ha ) estate . 
 As a child , Patton had difficulty learning to read and write , but eventually overcame this and was known in his adult life to be an avid reader . He was tutored from home until the age of eleven , when he was enrolled in Stephen Clark 's School for Boys , a private school in Pasadena , for six years . Patton was described as an intelligent boy and was widely read on classical military history , particularly the exploits of Hannibal , Scipio Africanus , Julius Caesar , Joan of Arc , and Napoleon Bonaparte , as well as family friend John Singleton Mosby , who frequently stopped by the Patton family home when George S. Patton was a child . He was also a devoted horseback rider . During a family summer trip to Catalina Island in 1902 , Patton met Beatrice Banning Ayer , the daughter of Boston industrialist Frederick Ayer . The two wed on May 26 , 1910 in Beverly Farms , Massachusetts . They had three children , Beatrice Smith ( born March 1911 ) , Ruth Ellen ( born February 1915 ) , and George Patton IV ( born December 1923 ) . 
 Patton never seriously considered a career other than the military . At the age of seventeen he wrote a letter to Senator Thomas R. Bard , seeking an appointment to the United States Military Academy . Bard required Patton to complete an entrance exam . Fearing a poor performance , Patton and his father applied to several universities with Reserve Officer 's Training Corps programs . Patton was accepted to Princeton University but eventually decided on the Virginia Military Institute . He attended VMI from 1903 to 1904 and struggled with reading and writing but performed exceptionally in uniform and appearance inspection as well as military drill , earning the admiration of fellow cadets and the respect of upperclassmen . While at VMI , Patton became a member of the Kappa Alpha Order fraternity . On March 3 , 1904 , after Patton continued letter @-@ writing and good performance in the entrance exam , Bard recommended him for West Point . 
 In his plebe year at West Point , Patton adjusted easily to the routine . Still , his academic performance was so poor that he was forced to repeat his first year after failing mathematics . Studying throughout his summer break , Patton returned and showed substantial academic improvement . For the remainder of his career at the academy , Patton excelled at military drills though his academic performance remained average . He was cadet sergeant major his junior year , and cadet adjutant his senior year . He also joined the football team but injured his arm and ceased playing on several occasions , instead trying out for the Sword Team and track and field , quickly becoming one of the best swordsmen at the academy . Patton graduated from the academy ranked 46 out of 103 . He graduated from West Point on June 11 , 1909 and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the cavalry . 
 = = Junior officer = = 
 Patton 's first posting was with the 15th Cavalry at Fort Sheridan , Illinois , where he established himself as a hard @-@ driving leader who impressed superiors with his dedication . In late 1911 , Patton was transferred to Fort Myer , Virginia , where many of the Army 's senior leaders were stationed . Befriending Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson , Patton served as his aide at social functions on top of his regular duties as quartermaster for his troop . 
 = = = 1912 Olympics = = = 
 For his skill with running and fencing , Patton was selected as the Army 's entry for the first @-@ ever modern pentathlon for the 1912 Olympic Games in Stockholm , Sweden . Of 42 competitors , Patton placed twenty @-@ first on the pistol range , seventh in swimming , fourth in fencing , sixth in the equestrian competition , and third in the footrace , finishing fifth overall and the first non @-@ Swede . There was some controversy concerning his performance in the pistol shooting competition , where he used a .38 caliber pistol while most of the other competitors chose .22 caliber firearms . He claimed that the holes in the paper from his early shots were so large that some of his later bullets passed through them , but the judges decided he missed the target completely once . Modern competitions on this level frequently now employ a moving background to specifically track multiple shots through the same hole . If his assertion was correct , Patton would likely have won an Olympic medal in the event . The judges ' ruling was upheld . Patton 's only comment on the matter was : 
 The high spirit of sportsmanship and generosity manifested throughout speaks volumes for the character of the officers of the present day . There was not a single incident of a protest or any unsportsmanlike quibbling or fighting for points which I may say , marred some of the other civilian competitions at the Olympic Games . Each man did his best and took what fortune sent them like a true soldier , and at the end we all felt more like good friends and comrades than rivals in a severe competition , yet this spirit of friendship in no manner detracted from the zeal with which all strove for success . 
 = = = Sword design = = = 
 Following the 1912 Olympics , Patton traveled to Saumur , France , where he learned fencing techniques from Adjutant Charles Cléry , a French " master of arms " and instructor of fencing at the cavalry school there . Bringing these lessons back to Fort Meyer , Patton redesigned saber combat doctrine for the U.S. cavalry , favoring thrusting attacks over the standard slashing maneuver and designing a new sword for such attacks . He was temporarily assigned to the Office of the Army Chief of Staff , and in 1913 , the first 20 @,@ 000 of the Model 1913 Cavalry Saber — popularly known as the " Patton sword " — were ordered . Patton then returned to Saumur to learn advanced techniques before bringing his skills to the Mounted Service School at Fort Riley , Kansas , where he would be both a student and a fencing instructor . He was the first Army officer to be designated " Master of the Sword , " a title denoting the school 's top instructor in swordsmanship . Arriving in September 1913 , he taught fencing to other cavalry officers , many of whom were senior to him in rank . Patton graduated from this school in June 1915 . He was originally intended to return to the 15th Cavalry , which was bound for the Philippines . Fearing this assignment would dead @-@ end his career , Patton traveled to Washington , D.C. during 11 days of leave and convinced influential friends to arrange a reassignment for him to the 8th Cavalry at Fort Bliss , Texas , anticipating that instability in Mexico might boil over into a full @-@ scale civil war . In the meantime , Patton was selected to participate in the 1916 Summer Olympics , but those Games were cancelled due to World War I. 
 = = Pancho Villa Expedition = = 
 In 1915 Patton was assigned to border patrol duty with A Company of the 8th Cavalry , based in Sierra Blanca . During his time in this rough border town , Patton took to wearing his M1911 Colt .45 in his belt rather than a holster . This firearm discharged one night in a saloon , so he swapped it for an ivory @-@ handled Colt Single Action Army revolver , a weapon that would later become an icon of Patton 's image . He transferred to Fort Leonard Wood , Missouri , for a brief time later in 1915 . 
 In March 1916 Mexican forces loyal to Pancho Villa crossed into New Mexico and raided the border town of Columbus . The violence in Columbus killed several Americans . In response , the U.S. launched a punitive expedition into Mexico against Villa . <unk> to discover that his unit would not participate , Patton appealed to expedition commander John J. Pershing , and was named his personal aide for the expedition . This meant Patton would have some role in organizing the effort , and his eagerness and dedication to the task impressed Pershing . Patton modeled much of his leadership style after Pershing , who favored strong , decisive actions and commanding from the front . As an aide , Patton oversaw the logistics of Pershing 's transportation and acted as his personal courier . 
 In mid @-@ April , Patton asked Pershing for the opportunity to command troops , and was attached to Troop C of the 13th Cavalry to assist in the manhunt for Villa and his subordinates . His initial combat experience came on May 14 , 1916 in what would become the first motorized attack in the history of U.S. warfare . A force under his command of ten soldiers and two civilian guides with the 6th Infantry in three Dodge touring cars surprised three of Villa 's men during a foraging expedition , killing Julio Cárdenas and two of his guards . It was not clear if Patton personally killed any of the men , but he was known to have wounded all three . The incident garnered Patton both Pershing 's good favor and widespread media attention as a " bandit killer . " Shortly after , he was promoted to first lieutenant while a part of the 10th Cavalry on May 23 , 1916 . Patton remained in Mexico until the end of the year . President Woodrow Wilson forbade the expedition from conducting aggressive patrols deeper into Mexico , so it remained encamped for much of that time . In October Patton briefly retired to California after being burned by an exploding gas lamp . He returned from the expedition permanently in February 1917 . 
 = = World War I = = 
 After the Villa Expedition , Patton was detailed to Front Royal , Virginia , to oversee horse procurement for the Army , but Pershing intervened on his behalf . After the U.S. entered World War I , and Pershing was named commander of the American Expeditionary Forces ( AEF ) , Patton requested to join his staff . Patton was promoted to captain on May 15 , 1917 and left for Europe , among the 180 men of Pershing 's advance party which departed May 28 and arrived in Liverpool on 8 June . Taken as Pershing 's personal aide , Patton oversaw the training of American troops in Paris until September , then moved to Chaumont and assigned as a post adjutant , commanding the headquarters company overseeing the base . Patton was dissatisfied with the post and began to take an interest in tanks , as Pershing sought to give him command of an infantry battalion . While in a hospital for jaundice , Patton met Colonel Fox Conner , who encouraged him to work with tanks over infantry . 
 On November 10 , 1917 Patton was assigned to establish the AEF Light Tank School . He left Paris and reported to the French Army 's tank training school at <unk> near <unk> , where he drove a Renault FT light tank . On November 20 , the British launched an offensive towards the important rail center of Cambrai , using an unprecedented number of tanks . At the conclusion of his tour on December 1 , Patton went to Albert , 30 miles ( 48 km ) from Cambrai , to be briefed on the results of this attack by the chief of staff of the British Tank Corps , Colonel J. F. C. Fuller . On the way back to Paris , he visited the Renault factory to observe the tanks being manufactured . Patton was promoted to major on January 26 , 1918 . He received the first ten tanks on March 23 , 1918 at the Tank School at Langres , Haute @-@ Marne département . The only soldier with tank @-@ driving experience , Patton personally backed seven of the tanks off the train . In the post , Patton trained tank crews to operate in support of infantry , and promoted its acceptance among reluctant infantry officers . He was promoted to lieutenant colonel on April 3 , 1918 , and attended the Army General Staff College in Langres . 
 In August 1918 , he was placed in charge of the U.S. 1st Provisional Tank Brigade ( re @-@ designated the 304th Tank Brigade on November 6 , 1918 ) . Patton 's Light Tank Brigade was part of Colonel Samuel <unk> 's Tank Corps , part of the First United States Army . Personally overseeing the logistics of the tanks in their first combat use by U.S. forces , and reconnoitering the target area for their first attack himself , Patton ordered that no U.S. tank be surrendered . Patton commanded American @-@ crewed Renault FT tanks at the Battle of Saint @-@ Mihiel , leading the tanks from the front for much of their attack , which began on September 12 . He walked in front of the tanks into the German @-@ held village of <unk> , and rode on top of a tank during the attack into <unk> , seeking to inspire his men . 
 Patton 's brigade was then moved to support U.S. I Corps in the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive on September 26 . He personally led a troop of tanks through thick fog as they advanced 5 miles ( 8 km ) into German lines . Around 09 : 00 , Patton was wounded while leading six men and a tank in an attack on German machine guns near the town of Cheppy . His orderly , Private First Class Joe Angelo , saved Patton , for which he was later awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . Patton commanded the battle from a shell hole for another hour before being evacuated . He stopped at a rear command post to submit his report before heading to a hospital . Sereno E. Brett , commander of the U.S. 326th Tank Battalion , took command of the brigade in Patton 's absence . Patton wrote in a letter to his wife : " The bullet went into the front of my left leg and came out just at the crack of my bottom about two inches to the left of my rectum . It was fired at about 50 m so made a hole about the size of a [ silver ] dollar where it came out . " 
 While recuperating from his wound , Patton was promoted to colonel in the Tank Corps of the U.S. National Army on October 17 . He returned to duty on October 28 but saw no further action before hostilities ended with the armistice of November 11 , 1918 . For his actions in Cheppy , Patton received the Distinguished Service Cross . For his leadership of the brigade and tank school , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal . He was also awarded the Purple Heart for his combat wounds after the decoration was created in 1932 . 
 = = Inter @-@ war years = = 
 Patton left France for New York City on March 2 , 1919 . After the war he was assigned to Camp Meade , Maryland , and reverted to his permanent rank of captain on June 30 , 1920 , though he was promoted to major again the next day . Patton was given temporary duty in Washington D.C. that year to serve on a committee writing a manual on tank operations . During this time he developed a belief that tanks should be used not as infantry support , but rather as an independent fighting force . Patton supported the M1919 tank design created by J. Walter Christie , a project which was shelved due to financial considerations . While on duty in Washington , D.C. , in 1919 , Patton met Dwight D. Eisenhower , who would play an enormous role in Patton 's future career . During and following Patton 's assignment in Hawaii , he and Eisenhower corresponded frequently . Patton sent Eisenhower notes and assistance to help him graduate from the General Staff College . With Christie , Eisenhower , and a handful of other officers , Patton pushed for more development of armored warfare in the interwar era . These thoughts resonated with Secretary of War Dwight Davis , but the limited military budget and prevalence of already @-@ established Infantry and Cavalry branches meant the U.S. would not develop its armored corps much until 1940 . 
 On September 30 , 1920 he relinquished command of the 304th Tank Brigade and was reassigned to Fort Myer as commander of 3rd Squadron , 3rd Cavalry . Patton , loathing duty as a peacetime staff officer , spent much time writing technical papers and giving speeches on his combat experiences at the General Staff College . In July 1921 Patton became a member of the American Legion Tank Corps Post No. 19 . From 1922 to mid @-@ 1923 he attended the Field Officer 's Course at the Cavalry School at Fort Riley , then he attended the Command and General Staff College from mid @-@ 1923 to mid @-@ 1924 , graduating 25th out of 248 . In August 1923 , Patton saved several children from drowning when they fell off a yacht during a boating trip off Salem , Massachusetts . He was awarded the Silver Lifesaving Medal for this action . He was temporarily appointed to the General Staff Corps in Boston , Massachusetts , before being reassigned as G @-@ 1 and G @-@ 2 of the Hawaiian Division at Schofield Barracks in Honolulu in March 1925 . 
 Patton was made G @-@ 3 of the Hawaiian Division for several months , before being transferred in May 1927 to the Office of the Chief of Cavalry in Washington , D.C. , where he began to develop the concepts of mechanized warfare . A short @-@ lived experiment to merge infantry , cavalry and artillery into a combined arms force was cancelled after U.S. Congress removed funding . Patton left this office in 1931 , returned to Massachusetts and attended the Army War College , becoming a " Distinguished Graduate " in June 1932 . 
 In July 1932 , Patton was executive officer of the 3rd Cavalry , which was ordered to Washington by Army Chief of Staff General Douglas MacArthur . Patton took command of the 600 troops of the 3rd Cavalry , and on July 28 , MacArthur ordered Patton 's troops to advance on protesting veterans known as the " Bonus Army " with tear gas and bayonets . Patton was dissatisfied with MacArthur 's conduct , as he recognized the legitimacy of the veterans ' complaints and had himself earlier refused to issue the order to employ armed force to disperse the veterans . Patton later stated that , though he found the duty " most distasteful " , he also felt that putting the marchers down prevented an insurrection and saved lives and property . He personally led the 3rd Cavalry down Pennsylvania Avenue , dispersing the protesters . Patton also encountered his former orderly as one of the marchers and forcibly ordered him away , fearing such a meeting might make the headlines . 
 Patton was promoted to lieutenant colonel in the regular Army on March 1 , 1934 , and was transferred to the Hawaiian Division in early 1935 to serve as G @-@ 2 . Patton followed the growing hostility and conquest aspirations , of the militant Japanese leadership . He wrote a plan to intern the Japanese living in the islands in the event of an attack , as a result of the atrocities carried out by Japanese on the Chinese in the Sino @-@ Japanese war . In 1937 , he wrote a paper with the title " Surprise " which predicted , with what D 'Este termed " chilling accuracy , " a surprise attack by the Japanese on Hawaii . Depressed at the lack of prospects for new conflict , Patton took to drinking heavily and began a brief affair with his 21 @-@ year @-@ old niece by marriage , Jean Gordon . 
 Patton continued playing polo and sailing in this time . After sailing back to Los Angeles for extended leave in 1937 , he was kicked by a horse and fractured his leg . Patton developed phlebitis from the injury , which nearly killed him . The incident almost forced Patton out of active service , but a six @-@ month administrative assignment in the Academic Department at the Cavalry School at Fort Riley helped him to recover . Patton was promoted to colonel on July 24 , 1938 and given command of the 5th Cavalry at Fort Clark , Texas , for six months , a post he relished , but he was reassigned to Fort Myer again in December as commander of the 3rd Cavalry . There , he met Army Chief of Staff George C. Marshall , who was so impressed with him that Marshall considered Patton a prime candidate for promotion to general . In peacetime , though , he would remain a colonel to remain eligible to command a regiment . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Following the invasion of Poland and the outbreak of World War II in Europe in 1939 , the U.S. military entered a period of mobilization , and Patton sought to build up the power of U.S. armored forces . During maneuvers the Third United States Army conducted in 1940 , Patton served as an umpire , where he met Adna R. Chaffee Jr. and the two formulated recommendations to develop an armored force . Chaffee was named commander of this force , and created the U.S. 1st Armored Division and U.S. 2nd Armored Division as well as the first combined arms doctrine . He named Patton commander of the 2nd Armored Brigade , 2nd Armored Division . The division was one of few organized as a heavy formation with a large number of tanks , and Patton was in charge of its training . Patton was promoted to brigadier general on October 2 , made acting division commander in November , and on April 4 , 1941 was promoted again to major general and made division commander of the 2nd Armored Division . As Chaffee stepped down from command of the U.S. I Armored Corps , Patton became the most prominent figure in U.S. armor doctrine . In December 1940 , he staged a high @-@ profile mass exercise in which 1 @,@ 000 tanks and vehicles were driven from Columbus , Georgia , to Panama City , Florida , and back . He repeated the exercise with his entire division of 1 @,@ 300 vehicles the next month . Patton earned a pilot 's license and , during these maneuvers , observed the movements of his vehicles from the air to find ways to deploy them effectively in combat . His exploits earned him a spot on the cover of Life Magazine . 
 Patton led the division during the Tennessee Maneuvers in June 1941 , and was lauded for his leadership , executing 48 hours ' worth of planned objectives in only nine . During the September Louisiana Maneuvers , his division was part of the losing Red Army in Phase I , but in Phase II was assigned to the Blue Army . His division executed a 400 @-@ mile ( 640 km ) end run around the Red Army and " captured " Shreveport , Louisiana . During the October – November Carolina Maneuvers , Patton 's division captured Hugh Drum , commander of the opposing army . On January 15 , 1942 he was given command of I Armored Corps , and the next month established the Desert Training Center in the Imperial Valley to run training exercises . He commenced these exercises in late 1941 and continued them into the summer of 1942 . Patton chose a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 40 km2 ) expanse of desert area about 50 miles ( 80 km ) southeast of Palm Springs . From his first days as a commander , Patton strongly emphasized the need for armored forces to stay in constant contact with opposing forces . His instinctive preference for offensive movement was typified by an answer Patton gave to war correspondents in a 1944 press conference . In response to a question on whether the Third Army 's rapid offensive across France should be slowed to reduce the number of U.S. casualties , Patton replied , " Whenever you slow anything down , you waste human lives . " It was around this time that a reporter , after hearing a speech where Patton said that it took " blood and brains " to win in combat , began calling him " blood and guts . " The nickname would follow him for the rest of his life . Soldiers under his command at were known at times quipped , " our blood , his guts " . Nonetheless , he was known to be admired widely by the men under his charge . Patton was also known simply as " The Old Man " among his troops . 
 = = = North African Campaign = = = 
 Under Eisenhower , Patton was assigned to help plan the invasion of French North Africa as part of Operation Torch in the summer of 1942 . Patton commanded the Western Task Force , consisting of 33 @,@ 000 men in 100 ships , in landings centered on Casablanca , Morocco . The landings , which took place on November 8 , 1942 , were opposed by Vichy French forces , but Patton 's men quickly gained a beachhead and pushed through fierce resistance . Casablanca fell on November 11 and Patton negotiated an armistice with French General Charles <unk> . The Sultan of Morocco was so impressed that he presented Patton with the Order of Ouissam Alaouite , with the citation " Les Lions dans leurs <unk> <unk> en le <unk> <unk> " ( The lions in their dens tremble at his approach ) . Patton oversaw the conversion of Casablanca into a military port and hosted the Casablanca Conference in January 1943 . 
 On March 6 , 1943 , following the defeat of the U.S. II Corps by the German Afrika Korps at the Battle of Kasserine Pass , Patton replaced Major General Lloyd Fredendall as commander of the II Corps and was promoted to lieutenant general . Soon thereafter , he had Omar Bradley reassigned to his corps as its deputy commander . With orders to take the battered and demoralized formation into action in 10 days ' time , Patton immediately introduced sweeping changes , ordering all soldiers to wear clean , pressed and complete uniforms , establishing rigorous schedules , and requiring strict adherence to military protocol . He continuously moved throughout the command talking with men , seeking to shape them into effective soldiers . He pushed them hard , and sought to reward them well for their accomplishments . His uncompromising leadership style is evidenced by his orders for an attack on a hill position near <unk> which are reported to have ended " I expect to see such casualties among officers , particularly staff officers , as will convince me that a serious effort has been made to capture this objective . " 
 Patton 's training was effective , and on March 17 , the U.S. 1st Infantry Division took <unk> , winning the Battle of El Guettar , and pushing a German and Italian armored force back twice . In the meantime , on April 5 , he removed Major General Orlando Ward , the commander of the 1st Armored Division , after its lackluster performance at <unk> against numerically inferior German forces . Advancing on Gabès , Patton 's corps pressured the Mareth Line . During this time , he reported to British Army commander Harold Alexander , and came into conflict with Air Vice Marshal Arthur Coningham about the lack of close air support being provided for his troops . When Coningham dispatched three officers to Patton 's headquarters to persuade him that the British were providing ample air support , they came under German air attack mid @-@ meeting , and part of the ceiling of Patton 's office collapsed around them . Speaking later of the German pilots who had struck , Patton remarked , " if I could find the sons of bitches who flew those planes , I 'd mail each of them a medal . " By the time his force reached Gabès , the Germans had abandoned it . He then relinquished command of II Corps to Bradley , and returned to the I Armored Corps in Casablanca to help plan Operation Husky . Fearing U.S. troops would be sidelined , he convinced British commanders to allow them to continue fighting through to the end of the Tunisia Campaign before leaving on this new assignment . 
 = = = Sicily Campaign = = = 
 For Operation Husky , the invasion of Sicily , Patton was to command the Seventh United States Army , dubbed the Western Task Force , in landings at Gela , Scoglitti and Licata to support landings by Bernard Montgomery 's British Eighth Army . Patton 's I Armored Corps was officially redesignated the Seventh Army just before his force of 90 @,@ 000 landed before dawn on D @-@ Day , July 10 , 1943 , on beaches near the town of Licata . The armada was hampered by wind and weather , but despite this the three U.S. infantry divisions involved , the 3rd , 1st , and 45th , secured their respective beaches . They then repulsed counterattacks at Gela , where Patton personally led his troops against German reinforcements from the Hermann Göring Division . 
 Initially ordered to protect the British forces ' left flank , Patton was granted permission by Alexander to take Palermo after Montgomery 's forces became bogged down on the road to Messina . As part of a provisional corps under Major General Geoffrey Keyes , the 3rd Infantry Division under Major General Lucian Truscott covered 100 miles ( 160 km ) in 72 hours , arriving at Palermo on July 21 . He then set his sights on Messina . He sought an amphibious assault , but it was delayed by lack of landing craft , and his troops did not land at Santo Stefano until August 8 , by which time the Germans and Italians had already evacuated the bulk of their troops to mainland Italy . He ordered more landings on August 10 by the 3rd Infantry Division , which took heavy casualties but pushed the German forces back , and hastened the advance on Messina . A third landing was completed on August 16 , and by 22 : 00 that day Messina fell to his forces . By the end of the battle , the 200 @,@ 000 @-@ man Seventh Army had suffered 7 @,@ 500 casualties , and killed or captured 113 @,@ 000 Axis troops and destroyed 3 @,@ 500 vehicles . Still , 40 @,@ 000 German and 70 @,@ 000 Italian troops escaped to Italy with 10 @,@ 000 vehicles . 
 Patton 's conduct in this campaign met with several controversies . When Alexander sent a transmission on July 19 limiting Patton 's attack on Messina , his chief of staff , Brigadier General Hobart R. Gay , claimed the message was " lost in transmission " until Messina had fallen . On July 22 he shot and killed a pair of mules that had stopped while pulling a cart across a bridge . The cart was blocking the way of a U.S. armored column which was under attack from German aircraft . When their Sicilian owner protested , Patton attacked him with a walking stick and pushed the two mules off of the bridge . When informed of the massacre of Italian prisoners at Biscari by troops under his command , Patton wrote in his diary , " I told Bradley that it was probably an exaggeration , but in any case to tell the officer to certify that the dead men were snipers or had attempted to escape or something , as it would make a stink in the press and also would make the civilians mad . Anyhow , they are dead , so nothing can be done about it . " Bradley refused Patton 's suggestions . Patton later changed his mind . After he learned that the 45th Division 's Inspector General found " no provocation on the part of the prisoners . . . . They had been slaughtered " Patton is reported to have said : " Try the bastards " . Patton also came into frequent disagreements with Terry de la Mesa Allen Sr. and Theodore Roosevelt Jr. and acquiesced to their relief by Bradley . 
 = = = <unk> incidents and aftermath = = = 
 Two high @-@ profile incidents of Patton striking subordinates during the Sicily campaign attracted national controversy following the end of the campaign . On August 3 , 1943 , Patton slapped and verbally abused Private Charles H. Kuhl at an evacuation hospital in Nicosia after he had been found to suffer from " battle fatigue " . On August 10 , Patton slapped Private Paul G. Bennett under similar circumstances . Ordering both soldiers back to the front lines , Patton railed against cowardice and issued orders to his commanders to discipline any soldier making similar complaints . 
 Word of the incident reached Eisenhower , who privately reprimanded Patton and insisted he apologize . Patton apologized to both soldiers individually , as well as to doctors who witnessed the incidents , and later to all of the soldiers under his command in several speeches . Eisenhower suppressed the incident in the media , but in November journalist Drew Pearson revealed it on his radio program . Criticism of Patton in the United States was harsh , and included members of Congress and former generals , Pershing among them . The views of the general public remained mixed on the matter , and eventually Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson stated that Patton must be retained as a commander because of the need for his " aggressive , winning leadership in the bitter battles which are to come before final victory . " 
 Patton did not command a force in combat for 11 months . In September , Bradley , who was Patton 's junior in both rank and experience , was selected to command the First United States Army forming in England to prepare for Operation Overlord . This decision had been made before the slapping incidents were made public , but Patton blamed them for his being denied the command . Eisenhower felt the invasion of Europe was too important to risk any uncertainty , and the slapping incidents had been an example of Patton 's inability to exercise discipline and self @-@ control . While Eisenhower and Marshall both considered Patton to be a skilled combat commander , they felt Bradley was less impulsive or prone to making mistakes . On January 26 , 1944 Patton was formally given command of the Third United States Army in England , a newly arrived unit , and assigned to prepare its inexperienced soldiers for combat in Europe . This duty kept Patton busy in early 1944 preparing for the pending invasion . 
 = = = Phantom Army = = = 
 The German High Command had more respect for Patton than for any other Allied commander and considered him central to any plan to invade Europe from the United Kingdom . Because of this , Patton was made a prominent figure in the deception operation , Fortitude , in early 1944 . The Allies fed German spies a steady stream of false intelligence that Patton had been named commander of the First United States Army Group ( FUSAG ) and was preparing this command for an invasion of Pas de Calais . The FUSAG command was in reality an intricately constructed " phantom " army of decoys , props , and fake signals traffic based around Dover to mislead German aircraft and to make Axis leaders believe a large force was massing there to mask the real location of the invasion in Normandy . Patton was ordered to keep a low profile to deceive the Germans into thinking he was in Dover throughout early 1944 , when he was actually training the Third Army . As a result of Operation Fortitude , the German 15th Army remained at Pas de Calais to defend against Patton 's supposed attack . This formation held its position even after the invasion of Normandy on June 6 , 1944 . Patton flew into France a month later and returned to combat duty . 
 = = = Normandy breakout offensive = = = 
 Sailing to Normandy throughout July , Patton 's Third Army formed on the extreme right ( west ) of the Allied land forces . Patton 's Third Army became operational at noon on August 1 , 1944 , under Bradley 's Twelfth United States Army Group . The Third Army simultaneously attacked west into Brittany , south , east toward the Seine , and north , assisting in trapping several hundred thousand German soldiers in the Falaise Pocket between Falaise and Argentan . 
 Patton 's strategy with his army favored speed and aggressive offensive action , though his forces saw less opposition than did the other three Allied field armies in the initial weeks of its advance . The Third Army typically employed forward scout units to determine enemy strength and positions . Self @-@ propelled artillery moved with the spearhead units and was sited well forward , ready to engage protected German positions with indirect fire . Light aircraft such as the Piper L @-@ 4 Cub served as artillery spotters and provided airborne reconnaissance . Once located , the armored infantry would attack using tanks as infantry support . Other armored units would then break through enemy lines and exploit any subsequent breach , constantly pressuring withdrawing German forces to prevent them from regrouping and reforming a cohesive defensive line . The U.S. armor advanced using reconnaissance by fire , and the .50 caliber M2 Browning heavy machine gun proved effective in this role , often flushing out and killing German <unk> teams waiting in ambush as well as breaking up German infantry assaults against the armored infantry . 
 The speed of the advance forced Patton 's units to rely heavily on air reconnaissance and tactical air support . The Third Army had by far more military intelligence ( G @-@ 2 ) officers at headquarters specifically designated to coordinate air strikes than any other army . Its attached close air support group was XIX Tactical Air Command , commanded by Brigadier General Otto P. Weyland . Developed originally by General Elwood Quesada of IX Tactical Air Command for the First Army in Operation Cobra , the technique of " armored column cover " , in which close air support was directed by an air traffic controller in one of the attacking tanks , was used extensively by the Third Army . Each column was protected by a standing patrol of three to four P @-@ 47 and P @-@ 51 fighter @-@ bombers as a combat air patrol ( CAP ) . 
 In its advance from Avranches to Argentan , the Third Army traversed 60 miles ( 97 km ) in just two weeks . Patton 's force was supplemented by Ultra intelligence for which he was briefed daily by his G @-@ 2 , Colonel Oscar W. Koch , who apprised him of German counterattacks , and where to concentrate his forces . Equally important to the advance of Third Army columns in northern France was the rapid advance of the supply echelons . Third Army logistics were overseen by Colonel Walter J. Muller , Patton 's G @-@ 4 , who emphasized flexibility , improvisation , and adaptation for Third Army supply echelons so forward units could rapidly exploit a breakthrough . Patton 's rapid drive to Lorraine demonstrated his keen appreciation for the technological advantages of the U.S. Army . The major U.S. and Allied advantages were in mobility and air superiority . The U.S. Army had a greater number of trucks , more reliable tanks , and better radio communications , which all contributed to a superior ability to operate at a rapid offensive pace . 
 = = = Lorraine Campaign = = = 
 Patton 's offensive came to a halt on August 31 , 1944 , as the Third Army ran out of fuel near the Moselle River , just outside Metz . Patton expected that the theater commander would keep fuel and supplies flowing to support successful advances , but Eisenhower favored a " broad front " approach to the ground @-@ war effort , believing that a single thrust would have to drop off flank protection , and would quickly lose its punch . Still within the constraints of a very large effort overall , Eisenhower gave Montgomery and his Twenty First Army Group a higher priority for supplies for Operation Market Garden . Combined with other demands on the limited resource pool , this resulted in the Third Army exhausting its fuel supplies . Patton believed his forces were close enough to the Siegfried Line that he remarked to Bradley that with 400 @,@ 000 gallons of gasoline he could be in Germany within two days . In late September , a large German Panzer counterattack sent expressly to stop the advance of Patton 's Third Army was defeated by the U.S. 4th Armored Division at the Battle of <unk> . Despite the victory , the Third Army stayed in place as a result of Eisenhower 's order . The German commanders believed this was because their counterattack had been successful . 
 The halt of the Third Army during the month of September was enough to allow the Germans to strengthen the fortress of Metz . In October and November , the Third Army was mired in a near @-@ stalemate with the Germans during the Battle of Metz , with heavy casualties on both sides . An attempt by Patton to seize Fort Driant just south of Metz was defeated . By mid @-@ November , however , Metz had fallen to the Americans . Patton 's decisions in taking this city were criticized . German commanders interviewed after the war noted he could have bypassed the city and moved north to Luxembourg where he would have been able to cut off the German Seventh Army . The German commander of Metz , General Hermann Balck , also noted that a more direct attack would have resulted in a more decisive Allied victory in the city . Historian Carlo D 'Este later wrote that the Lorraine Campaign was one of Patton 's least successful , faulting him for not deploying his divisions more aggressively and decisively . With supplies low and priority given to Montgomery until the port of Antwerp could be opened , Patton remained frustrated at the lack of progress of his forces . From November 8 to December 15 , his army advanced no more than 40 miles ( 64 km ) . 
 = = = Battle of the Bulge = = = 
 In December 1944 , the German army , under the command of German Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt , launched a last @-@ ditch offensive across Belgium , Luxembourg , and northeastern France . On December 16 , 1944 , it massed 29 divisions totaling 250 @,@ 000 men at a weak point in the Allied lines , and during the early stages of the ensuing Battle of the Bulge , made significant headway towards the Meuse River during the worst winter Europe had seen in years . Eisenhower called a meeting of all senior Allied commanders on the Western Front to a headquarters near Verdun on the morning of December 19 to plan strategy and a response to the German assault . 
 At the time , Patton 's Third Army was engaged in heavy fighting near Saarbrücken . Guessing the intent of the Allied command meeting , Patton ordered his staff to make three separate operational contingency orders to disengage elements of the Third Army from its present position and begin offensive operations toward several objectives in the area of the bulge occupied by German forces . At the Supreme Command conference , Eisenhower led the meeting , which was attended by Patton , Bradley , General Jacob Devers , Major General Kenneth Strong , Deputy Supreme Commander Air Chief Marshal Arthur Tedder , and a large number of staff officers . When Eisenhower asked Patton how long it would take him to disengage six divisions of his Third Army and commence a counterattack north to relieve the U.S. 101st Airborne Division which had been trapped at Bastogne , Patton replied , " As soon as you 're through with me . " Patton then clarified that he had already worked up an operational order for a counterattack by three full divisions on December 21 , then only 48 hours away . Eisenhower was incredulous : " Don 't be fatuous , George . If you try to go that early you won 't have all three divisions ready and you 'll go piecemeal . " Patton replied that his staff already had a contingency operations order ready to go . Still unconvinced , Eisenhower ordered Patton to attack the morning of December 22 , using at least three divisions . 
 Patton left the conference room , phoned his command , and uttered two words : " Play ball . " This code phrase initiated a prearranged operational order with Patton 's staff , mobilizing three divisions – the 4th Armored Division , the U.S. 80th Infantry Division , and the U.S. 26th Infantry Division – from the Third Army and moving them north toward Bastogne . In all , Patton would reposition six full divisions , U.S. III Corps and U.S. XII Corps , from their positions on the Saar River front along a line stretching from Bastogne to <unk> and to Echternach . Within a few days , more than 133 @,@ 000 Third Army vehicles were re @-@ routed into an offensive that covered an average distance of over 11 miles ( 18 km ) per vehicle , followed by support echelons carrying 62 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 61 @,@ 000 long tons ; 68 @,@ 000 short tons ) of supplies . 
 On December 21 Patton met with Bradley to review the impending advance , starting the meeting by remarking , " Brad , this time the Kraut 's stuck his head in the meat grinder , and I 've got hold of the handle . " Patton then argued that his Third Army should attack toward Koblenz , cutting off the bulge at the base and trap the entirety of the German armies involved in the offensive . After briefly considering this , Bradley vetoed this proposal , as he was less concerned about killing large numbers of Germans than he was in arranging for the relief of Bastogne before it was overrun . Desiring good weather for his advance , which would permit close ground support by U.S. Army Air Forces tactical aircraft , Patton ordered the Third Army chaplain , Colonel James Hugh O 'Neill , to compose a suitable prayer : " Almighty and most merciful Father , we humbly beseech Thee , of Thy great goodness , to restrain these immoderate rains with which we have had to contend . Grant us fair weather for Battle . <unk> hearken to us as soldiers who call upon Thee that , armed with Thy power , we may advance from victory to victory and crush the oppression and wickedness of our enemies , and establish Thy justice among men and nations . Amen . " When the weather cleared soon after , Patton awarded O 'Neill a Bronze Star Medal on the spot . 
 On December 26 , 1944 , the first spearhead units of the Third Army 's 4th Armored Division reached Bastogne , opening a corridor for relief and resupply of the besieged forces . Patton 's ability to disengage six divisions from front line combat during the middle of winter , then wheel north to relieve Bastogne was one of his most remarkable achievements during the war . He later wrote that the relief of Bastogne was " the most brilliant operation we have thus far performed , and it is in my opinion the outstanding achievement of the war . This is my biggest battle . " 
 = = = Advance into Germany = = = 
 By February , the Germans were in full retreat . On February 23 , 1945 , the U.S. 94th Infantry Division crossed the Saar and established a vital bridgehead at <unk> through which Patton pushed units into the Saarland . Patton had insisted upon an immediate crossing of the Saar River against the advice of his officers . Historians such as Charles Whiting have criticized this strategy as unnecessarily aggressive . 
 Once again , however , Patton found other commands given priority on gasoline and supplies . To obtain these , Third Army ordnance units passed themselves off as First Army personnel and in one incident they secured thousands of gallons of gasoline from a First Army dump . Between January 29 and March 22 , the Third Army took Trier , Coblenz , Bingen , Worms , Mainz , Kaiserslautern , and Ludwigshafen , killing or wounding 99 @,@ 000 and capturing 140 @,@ 112 German soldiers , which represented virtually all of the remnants of the German First and Seventh Armies . An example of Patton 's sarcastic wit was broadcast when he received orders to by @-@ pass Trier , as it had been decided that four divisions would be needed to capture it . When the message arrived , Trier had already fallen . Patton rather caustically replied : " Have taken Trier with two divisions . Do you want me to give it back ? " 
 The Third Army began crossing the Rhine River after constructing a pontoon bridge on March 22 , and he slipped a division across the river that evening . Patton later boasted he had urinated into the river as he crossed . 
 On March 26 , 1945 , Patton sent Task Force Baum , consisting of 314 men , 16 tanks , and assorted other vehicles , 50 miles ( 80 km ) behind German lines to liberate a prisoner of war camp , <unk> XIII @-@ B near Hammelburg . Patton knew that one of the inmates was his son @-@ in @-@ law , Lieutenant Colonel John K. Waters . The raid was a failure , and only 35 men made it back ; the rest were either killed or captured , and all 57 vehicles were lost . Another prisoner liberated from the Oflag was Lt. Donald Prell who was recaptured and was sent to a POW camp south of Nuremberg . Patton reported this attempt to liberate Oflag XIII @-@ B as the only mistake he made during World War II . When Eisenhower learned of the secret mission , he was furious . Patton later said he felt the correct decision would have been to send a Combat Command , a force about three times larger . 
 By April , resistance against the Third Army was tapering off , and the forces ' main efforts turned to managing some 400 @,@ 000 German prisoners of war . On April 14 , 1945 Patton was promoted to general , a promotion long advocated by Stimson in recognition of Patton 's battle accomplishments during 1944 . Later that month , Patton , Bradley and Eisenhower toured the Merkers salt mine as well as the Ohrdruf concentration camp , and seeing the conditions of the camp firsthand caused Patton great disgust . Third Army was ordered toward Bavaria and Czechoslovakia , anticipating a last stand by Nazi German forces there . He was reportedly appalled to learn the Red Army would take Berlin , feeling the Soviet Union was a threat to the U.S. Patton 's army advanced to Pilsen , but was stopped by Eisenhower from reaching Prague before V @-@ E Day on May 8 and the end of the war in Europe . 
