 Buckton Castle lies 340 metres ( 1 @,@ 120 ft ) above sea level on Buckton Hill , a steep sandstone ridge ( grid reference <unk> ) . To the south is the valley of the Carr Brook , and to the west is the valley of the River Tame . Buckton Vale Quarry is close to the east of the castle . Stalybridge is about 4 kilometres ( 2 mi ) south @-@ east of the site . The castle 's positioning may have been to allow its garrison to guard the Tame Valley ; both castle and valley were in the medieval manor of Tintwistle . A manor was a division of land and administered by a Lord of the Manor or his representative ; in the case of Tintwistle , it was part of the larger lordship of Longdendale . 
 = = History = = 
 Buckton Castle was probably built in the late 12th century by William de Neville , Lord of Longdendale , although it is possible that it was constructed for the Earls of Chester before Longdendale was given to de Neville . A late 12th @-@ century date would make it contemporary with other castles in Greater Manchester such as Dunham , Manchester , Stockport , and <unk> . It is common for castles to be built first in timber and then rebuilt in stone , but Buckton was a stone structure from the start . It is likely that it was the centre of the lordship of Longdendale , as it is the only castle within its boundaries ; however , a dearth of artefacts from the site suggests that construction may never have been completed . 
 The earliest documented evidence dating the castle was in 1360 , when an estate survey recorded that " there is one ruined castle called <unk> and of no value " ; At the time , the lordship of Longdendale was the property of Edward , the Black Prince , and the castle lay derelict . That the castle had fallen out of use by this period is consistent with the use of other castles in the Greater Manchester area ; by the 13th century , apart from at Dunham Castle , there was no indication of activity in castles in Greater Manchester . During the 16th century , the site was used as a beacon during the Pilgrimage of Grace . 
 The castle has been the subject of antiquarian studies since the 18th century , and was originally thought to have been the location of an Iron Age hill fort . The interior of the castle has been damaged by the random insertion of trenches by treasure hunters since the early 18th century . Quarrying in the nearby Buckton Vale Quarry threatened to encroach onto the site and led to the castle 's protection as a Scheduled Ancient Monument on 9 July 1924 . It is the oldest ruined building in the Tame Valley . During the Second World War the castle was used as an anti @-@ aircraft decoy until 1943 , when it was felt to be no longer necessary . 
 Excavations at the site have been undertaken by the University of Manchester Archaeological Unit ( <unk> ) on behalf of Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council since 1996 . The work was partly funded by a £ 300 @,@ 000 grant from Tameside Council . Initial excavations were to repair some of the holes made by treasure hunters and included test @-@ pits , but in 2007 the unit began more extensive work to investigate the site and determine its use and a date for its construction . The final season of the excavation will be completed in 2009 . Trenches have revealed that the castle had a stone wall and a gateway with a tower , but no internal buildings have been discovered . The first dating evidence was found in 2008 , underneath the collapsed gateway ; it consisted of some animal bones and shards of locally produced pottery from the 12th – 13th centuries . Today , the site is overgrown with heather and peat . 
 = = Layout = = 
 Buckton Castle is a ringwork castle , which is a roughly circular area enclosed by defences such as a ditch ; a ringwork is similar to a bailey from a motte and bailey castle . The castle is oval , measuring 35 metres ( 115 ft ) across the minor axis and 45 metres ( 148 ft ) along the major . It is surrounded by a 10 @-@ metre ( 33 ft ) wide and 6 @-@ metre ( 20 ft ) deep ditch dug into the sandstone . The entrance to the ringwork is to the northwest of the site . Near the entrance are the possible remains of a stone tower . On the south @-@ facing side of the site are the remains of a stone curtain wall 3 metres ( 10 ft ) thick . Excavations in 1996 by the University of Manchester Archaeological Unit have shown that what was thought to be the bailey was in fact of recent origin – probably part of the anti @-@ aircraft decoy – and did not date back to the medieval period . The north @-@ west gateway was protected by a stone tower 5 by 4 metres ( 16 by 13 ft ) , with 1 @.@ 2 @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) thick walls ; the wall thickness suggests the tower was probably two storeys high . 
 The interior of the castle is artificially raised 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 5 ft ) above ground level . <unk> were an uncommon form of fortification in medieval England , with the majority of castles being motte @-@ and @-@ baileys , as demonstrated by the fact that Buckton Castle was one of only three ringworks in the historic counties of Cheshire and Lancashire . Buckton may be a ringwork because the local soil was too thin to build a motte . According to a 1360 survey of property in Longdendale , Buckton Castle may have had a hall and a chapel . In the 18th century , antiquarian Thomas Percival recorded a well within the castle , and walls of buildings inside the castle still standing to a height of 2 metres ( 7 ft ) . However , these features were no longer obvious when George Ormerod wrote about the castle in 1817 , and have not been discovered by archaeological excavations . 
 = Ringerike Line = 
 The Ringerike Line ( Norwegian : <unk> or <unk> ) is a proposed 40 @-@ kilometre ( 25 mi ) extension of the Bergen Line from Hønefoss to Sandvika , Norway . It would reduce travel from Oslo to Bergen by 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) and 50 minutes . Currently trains from the Bergen Line to Oslo must run via Drammen on the Randsfjord Line and the Drammen Line , or via Roa on the Roa – Hønefoss Line and the Gjøvik Line . 
 The project was presented as part of the original proposal of the Bergen Line when approved by Parliament in 1894 , but due to the narrow gauge on the Drammen Line at the time , a temporary solution via Roa was chosen instead . Later proposals have been launched , and parliament has voted over it in 1954 , 1978 , 1984 and 1992 ; only the last being passed , but not followed up by funding , and the Norwegian National Rail Administration has not allocated any date to start construction ; detailed plans have however been produced . 
 = = Route = = 
 The line would branch off from the Asker Line just west of Sandvika Station , and continue mostly in tunnel to Hønefoss Station , with an intermediate station at <unk> . While only single track , sufficient passing loops every six to eight kilometers , each at 750 metres ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) , would be built allowing 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) long freight trains . Capacity would be eight trains per hour operating at 200 kilometres per hour ( 120 mph ) permitting both freight and passenger trains through 22 @.@ 5 tonne axle load and maximum 1 @.@ 2 % gradient ; electrification would be at the Norwegian standard 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC . In 2002 a route over Åsa was preferred to a route over <unk> by parliament ; despite less passenger potential for local traffic and NOK 700 million more expensive , this would give a smaller environmental impact . Travel time for the quickest trains from Hønefoss to Oslo would be 30 minutes , compared to 60 minutes by bus or 95 minutes by current trains . 
 The Norwegian National Rail Administration has proposed a number of upgrades to the Bergen Line that would allow total travel time between the termini to reduce to four and a half hours . The Ringerike Line is seen as the hallmark of this attempt , that was first launched by the director of NSB in 1954 ; sixty years later travel time remains at six and a half hours . The project is estimated to cost NOK 7 billion , of which NOK 4 billion would be for the line . 
 Prior to 1989 there were four local trains in each direction from Oslo to Hønefoss ; followed by on rush hour service each , but this single service has since been terminated ; mainly due to quicker travel times by coaches . The Ringerike Line would allow the Oslo Commuter Rail once again to serve Ringerike ; other places served usually have one hourly service , with additional services in rush hour . Reducing travel time from Hønefoss to Oslo to 30 minutes would probably cause larger population growth in Ringerike . 
 = = History = = 
 Initial proposals for the Bergens Line route went from Hønefoss via Sandvika to Oslo <unk> ( Oslo V ) , but the proposal met technical and political restrictions . At the time Norway had two rail gauges : 1 @,@ 435 mm ( 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ) standard gauge and narrow gauge 3 ft 6 in ( 1 @,@ 067 mm ) . The former was taking predominance over the latter , with among others the Voss Line , the initial stage of the Bergen Line from Bergen to Voss , being converted from narrow to standard gauge . <unk> , that connected Sandvika to Oslo , was narrow gauge , as was most of the rest of the western network , including the Vestfold Line ; hundreds of kilometers of railway would have to be converted . 
 On the other side of Oslo , the North Line ( now named the Gjøvik Line ) was being built as standard gauge ; it was considered the new mainline northwards , and was to be connected to the mainline through Gudbrandsdalen . By building a branch line from Roa to Hønefoss , the Bergens Line could be connected to <unk> , allowing standard gauge trackage all the way to Oslo <unk> ( Oslo Ø ) . This also gave another advantage , as Oslo Ø was seen as superior to Oslo V ; the latter only served limited commuter routes west of town while Oslo Ø was the main station for long @-@ distance trains to Trondheim , as well as Gothenburg and Stockholm in Sweden , with whom Norway was in a union with at the time . Only by terminating at Oslo Ø would direct transfer to trains to other parts of the country be possible . 
 When parliament passed the building of the Bergen Line in 1894 , the Roa – Hønefoss branch line was made part of the plans ; but the line was given a separate name indicating that the Bergen Line would continue from Hønefoss to Oslo in a more direct route . But after the finish of the Bergen Line , other important mainline routes , in particular the Dovre Line , Sørland Line and Nordland Line , combined with the effort to convert narrow gauge line , took precedence . Ideas for the additional construction of the Ringerike Line were pressed by commercial interests in Ringerike in both 1890 and 1906 , but failed both times . 
 In 1955 the Bergen businessperson Fritz Rieber launched an idea for the shortening of Bergensbanen ; the Ulriken Tunnel through the Bergen mountains , electrification from Voss to Bergen , and the construction of the Ringerike Line . Private financing would be provided through a dedicated limited company taking a surcharge on tickets , equal to the reduction in fare induced by the shorter line ; within twenty years the debt would be covered . Passed by parliament in 1955 , a year later they had changed their minds and only the investments around Bergen were supported ; removing the support for Ringerike . Prime Minister Trygve Bratteli commented that private debt financing would have to compete with the debt taken up by the government on other railway projects , since politicians had to see the national economy as a whole , and that private financing would not allow more lines to be built . The cost was estimated at NOK 100 million . 
 New proposals were debated in parliament in 1978 , and again in 1984 , but failing to be passed . The final decision to build the line was taken in 1992 as part of a political swap between the Labour Party and the Socialist Left Party ; the Labour Party would support the line if the Socialist Left Party would support building European route E16 via the Lærdal Tunnel and Valdres , instead of via Hol or <unk> . Initially the agreement involved the completion of the Ringerike Line in 1997 , but as of 2008 no date or funding has been set . Director of the Rail Administration , Steinar Killi , stated in 2008 that the period 2010 @-@ 19 would be a natural time for completion , but only if more overall funding for railway infrastructure is provided . As either an alternative or supplement to the line , expansion of European Road E16 from Sandvika to Hønefoss has been proposed . It would involve increasing from two to four lanes on the first 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) from <unk> to <unk> , estimating to cost NOK 3 @.@ 5 billion ; local politicians have suggested toll road financing . 
 The Ministry of Transport and Communications started an evaluation of the Ringerike Line , carried out by the National Rail Administration , in 2006 . The first edition was completed in 2009 , but was found to be insufficient , resulting in the process being restarted . A new report was published in June 2011 . In September 2012 , the ministry concluded that also the second report was insufficient and that it would be discarded . There were two main concerns with the report . Firstly , it was based on a single @-@ track line which would not be built to the standards of high @-@ speed rail . The ministry stated that all new railway plans in Norway were to have double track and be optimized for high @-@ speed rail . Secondly , the report had a simplified economic analysis which was not sufficient to be used for political evaluation . The result of the discard was that the planning of E16 was no longer tied to the planning of the railway . 
 = Master of Puppets = 
 Master of Puppets is the third studio album by American heavy metal band Metallica , released on March 3 , 1986 by Elektra Records . Recorded at the Sweet Silence Studios with producer Flemming Rasmussen , it was the first Metallica album released on a major label . Master of Puppets was the band 's last album to feature bassist Cliff Burton , who died in a bus crash in Sweden during the album 's promotional tour . The album peaked at number 29 on the Billboard 200 and became the first thrash metal album to be certified platinum . It was certified 6 × platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in 2003 for shipping six million copies in the United States . The album was eventually certified 6 × platinum by Music Canada and gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . 
 Master of Puppets was released to critical acclaim and has been included in several publications ' best album lists . Its driving , virtuosic music and angry , political lyrics drew praise from critics outside the metal community . The album is considered the band 's strongest effort of the period and is one of the most influential heavy metal albums . Critics credit it for consolidating the American thrash metal scene with its atmospheric and meticulously performed songs . Many bands from all genres of heavy metal have covered the album 's songs , including tribute albums . Master of Puppets was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " enough for preservation in the National Recording Registry by the United States Library of Congress in 2016 . Only 450 recordings have earned this distinction , with Master of Puppets being the first metal selection . 
 The cover was designed by Metallica and Peter Mensch and painted by Don Brautigam . It depicts a cemetery field of white crosses tethered to strings , manipulated by a pair of hands in a blood @-@ red sky . Instead of releasing a single or video in the US to promote Master of Puppets , Metallica embarked on a five @-@ month American tour in support of Ozzy Osbourne . The European leg was canceled after Burton 's death in September 1986 , and the band returned home to audition a new bassist . Metallica honored the album 's 20th anniversary on the Escape from the Studio ' 06 tour , by playing it in its entirety . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Metallica 's 1983 debut Kill ' Em All laid the foundation for thrash metal with its aggressive musicianship and vitriolic lyricism . The album revitalized the American underground scene , and records by contemporaries followed in similar manner . The band 's second album Ride the Lightning extended the limits of the genre with its more sophisticated songwriting and improved production . The album caught the attention of Elektra Records representative Michael Alago , who signed the group to an eight @-@ album deal in the fall of 1984 , halfway through the album 's promotional tour . Elektra reissued Ride the Lightning on November 19 , and the band began touring larger venues and festivals throughout 1985 . After parting with manager Jon Zazula , Metallica hired Q Prime executives Cliff Burnstein and Peter Mensch . During the summer , the band played the Monsters of Rock festival at Castle Donington , alongside Bon Jovi and Ratt in front of 70 @,@ 000 fans . Metallica was motivated to make an album that would impress critics and fans , and began writing new material in mid @-@ 1985 . Drummer Lars Ulrich and frontman James Hetfield were the main songwriters on the album , already titled Master of Puppets . The two developed ideas at a garage in El Cerrito , California , before inviting bassist Cliff Burton and guitarist Kirk Hammett for rehearsals . Hetfield and Ulrich described the songwriting process as starting with " guitar riffs , assembled and reassembled until they start to sound like a song " . After that , the band came up with a song title and topic , and Hetfield wrote lyrics to match the title . Master of Puppets was Metallica 's first album not to feature songwriting contributions from former lead guitarist Dave Mustaine . Mustaine claimed he had co @-@ written " Leper Messiah " , based on an old song called " The Hills Ran Red " . The band denied this , though admitting that a section incorporated ideas of Mustaine 's . 
 The band was not satisfied with the acoustics of the American studios they considered , and decided to record in Ulrich 's native Denmark . Ulrich took drum lessons , and Hammett worked with Joe Satriani to learn how to record more efficiently . Ulrich was in talks with Geddy Lee to produce the album , but the collaboration never materialized because of different schedules . Metallica recorded the album with producer Flemming Rasmussen at Sweet Silence Studios in Copenhagen , Denmark , from September 1 to December 27 , 1985 . The writing of all the songs except " Orion " and " The Thing That Should Not Be " was completed before the band 's arrival in Copenhagen . Rasmussen stated that the band brought well @-@ prepared demos of the songs , and only slight changes were made to the compositions in the studio . The recording took longer than the previous album because Metallica had developed a sense of perfectionism and had higher ambitions for this one . Metallica eschewed the slick production and synthesizers of contemporary hard rock and heavy metal albums by Bon Jovi , Iron Maiden , and Judas Priest . Despite a reputation for drinking , the band stayed dry on recording days . Hammett recalled that the group was " just making another album " at the time and " had no idea that the record would have such a range of influence that it went on to have " . He also said that the group was " definitely peaking " at the time and that the album had " the sound of a band really gelling , really learning how to work well together " . 
 Rasmussen and Metallica did not manage to complete the mixtapes as planned . Instead , the master tapes were sent in January 1986 to Michael Wagener , who finished the album 's mixing . The cover was designed by Metallica and Peter Mensch and painted by Don Brautigam . It depicts a cemetery field of white crosses tethered to strings , manipulated by a pair of hands in a blood @-@ red sky . Ulrich explained that the artwork summarized the lyrical content of the album — people being subconsciously manipulated . The original artwork was sold at Rockefeller Plaza , New York City for $ 28 @,@ 000 in 2008 . The band mocked the warning stickers promoted by the PMRC with a facetious Parental Advisory label on the cover : " The only track you probably won 't want to play is ' Damage , Inc . ' due to the multiple use of the infamous ' F ' word . Otherwise , there aren 't any ' shits ' , ' fucks ' , ' pisses ' , ' cunts ' , ' motherfuckers ' , or ' cocksuckers ' anywhere on this record " . The album was recorded with the following equipment : Hammett 's guitars were a black 1974 Gibson Flying V , a black Jackson Randy Rhoads , and a black Fernandes Stratocaster nicknamed " Edna " ; Hetfield used a Jackson King V played through a Mesa Boogie Mark C + amplifier modified as a pre @-@ amp ; Burton played an Aria Pro II <unk> through Mesa Boogie amplifier heads and cabinets ; Ulrich played Tama drum equipment , and borrowed a rare <unk> Black Brass from Def Leppard drummer Rick Allen , who had lost his arm in a car accident . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Master of Puppets features dynamic music and thick arrangements . Metallica delivered a more refined approach and performance compared to the previous two albums , with multilayered songs and technical dexterity . This album and its predecessor Ride the Lightning follow a similar track sequencing : both open with an up @-@ tempo song with an acoustic intro , followed by a lengthy title track , and a fourth track with ballad qualities . Although both albums are similarly structured , the musicianship on Master of Puppets is more powerful and epic in scope , with tight rhythms and delicate guitar solos . According to music writer Joel McIver , Master of Puppets introduced a new level of heaviness and complexity in thrash metal , displaying atmospheric and precisely executed songs . Hetfield 's vocals had matured from the hoarse shouting of the first two albums to a deeper , in @-@ control yet aggressive style . The songs explore themes such as control and the abuse of power . The lyrics describe the consequences of alienation , oppression , and feelings of powerlessness . Author Ryan Moore thought the lyrics depicted " ominous yet unnamed forces of power wielding total control over helpless human subjects " . The lyrics were considered perceptive and harrowing , and were praised for being honest and socially conscious by writer Brock <unk> . Referring to the epic proportions of the songs , BBC Music 's Eamonn Stack stated that " at this stage in their careers Metallica weren 't even doing songs , they were telling stories " . The compositions and arrangements benefited from Burton 's classical training and understanding of harmony . 
 " Battery " is about anger and refers to the term in the sense of " assault and battery " . Some critics contended that the title actually refers to an artillery battery , and interpreted it as " Hetfield [ singing ] of a war tactic as the aggressor " personifying destruction . The song begins with bass @-@ heavy acoustic guitars that build layer by multitracked @-@ layer until they are joined by a wall of distorted electric guitars . It then breaks into fast , aggressive riffing featuring off @-@ beat rhythms and heavily distorted minor dyads where root @-@ fifth power chords might be expected . Hetfield improvised the riff while relaxing in London . " Master of Puppets " consists of several riffs with odd meters and a cleanly picked middle section with melodic solo . The song shares a similar structure with " The Four Horsemen " from the band 's first album : two verse @-@ chorus sets lead to a lengthy interlude to another verse @-@ chorus set . The opening and pre @-@ verse sections feature fast <unk> chromatic riffing at 220 beats per minute . The persistent and precise eight @-@ note riffing of the verse is made more intense by switching to an off @-@ kilter 58 time signature on each fourth bar . A lengthy interlude follows the second chorus , beginning with a clean , arpeggiated section over which Hetfield contributes a melodic solo ; the riffing becomes distorted and progressively more heavy and Hammett provides a more virtuosic solo before the song returns to the main verse . The song closes with a fade @-@ out of sinister laughter . The theme is cocaine addiction , a topic considered taboo at the time . 
 " The Thing That Should Not Be " was inspired by H. P. Lovecraft 's short story " The Shadow over Innsmouth " , whose protagonist battles unearthly forces . It is considered the heaviest track on the album , whose main riff emulates a beast dragging itself into the sea . The Black Sabbath @-@ influenced guitars are downtuned , creating slow and moody ambiance . " Welcome Home ( Sanitarium ) " was based on Ken Kesey 's novel One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest and conveys the thoughts of a patient unjustly caged in a mental institution . The song opens with a section of undistorted single strings and harmonics . The clean , arpeggiated main riff is played in alternating 44 and 64 time signatures . The song is structured with alternating somber clean guitars in the verses , and distorted heavy riffing in the choruses , unfolding into an aggressive finale . This structure follows a pattern of power ballads Metallica set with " Fade to Black " on Ride the Lightning and was to revisit with " One " on ... And Justice for All . 
 " Disposable Heroes " is an anti @-@ war song about a young soldier whose fate is controlled by his superiors . With sections performed at 220 beats per minute , it is one of the most intense tracks on the record . The guitar passage at the end of each verse was Hammett 's imitation of the sort of music he found in war films . The syncopated riffing of " Leper Messiah " challenges the hypocrisy of the televangelism that had emerged in the 1980s . The song describes how people are willingly turned into blind religious followers who mindlessly do whatever they are told . The 136 beats per minute mid @-@ tempo riffing of the verses culminates in a descending chromatic riff in the chorus ; it increases to a galloping 184 beats per minute for the middle section that climaxes in a distorted scream of " Lie ! " . The title derives from the lyrics to the David Bowie song " Ziggy Stardust " . " Orion " is a multipart instrumental highlighting Burton 's bass playing . It opens with a fade @-@ in bass section , heavily processed to resemble an orchestra . It continues with mid @-@ tempo riffing , followed by a bass solo at half . The tempo accelerates during the latter part , and ends with music fading out . Burton arranged the middle section , which features its moody bass line and multipart guitar harmonies . " Damage , Inc . " rants about senseless violence and reprisal at an unspecified target . It starts with a series of reversed bass chords based on the chorale prelude of Bach 's " Come , Sweet Death " . The song then jumps into a rapid rhythm with a pedal @-@ point riff in E that Hammett says was influenced by Deep Purple . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Master of Puppets received widespread critical acclaim from music critics . Editor Tom King said Metallica was at an " incredible song @-@ writing peak " during the recording sessions , partially because Burton contributed to the songwriting . The album was hailed as a masterpiece by critics outside of the heavy metal audience and cited by some as the genre 's greatest album . In a contemporary review , Tim Holmes of Rolling Stone asserted that the band had redefined heavy metal with the technical skill and subtlety showcased on the album , which he described as " the sound of global paranoia " . Kerrang ! wrote that Master of Puppets " finally put Metallica into the big leagues where they belong " . By contrast , Spin magazine 's Judge I @-@ Rankin was disappointed with the album and said , although the production is exceptional and Metallica 's experimentation is commendable , it eschews the less " intellectual " approach of Kill ' Em All for a MDC @-@ inspired direction that is inconsistent . 
 In a retrospective review , AllMusic 's Steve Huey viewed Master of Puppets as Metallica 's best album and remarked that , although it was not as unexpected as Ride the Lightning , Master of Puppets is a more musically and thematically consistent album . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune said the songs were the band 's most intense at that point , despite veering towards " the progressive tendency of Rush . " Adrien Begrand of PopMatters praised the production as " a metal version of Phil Spector 's Wall of Sound " and felt none of Metallica 's subsequent albums could match its passionate and intense musical quality . BBC Music 's Eamonn Stack called the album " hard , fast , rock with substance " and likened the songs to stories of " biblical proportions " . In a less enthusiastic review , Robert Christgau said the band 's energy and political motivations are respectable , but believed they evoke clichéd images of " revolutionary heroes " who are " male chauvinists too inexperienced to know better " . 
 Released on March 3 , 1986 , the album had a 72 @-@ week run on the Billboard 200 album charts and earned the band its first gold certification . The album debuted on March 29 , 1986 , at number 128 and peaked at number 29 on the Billboard 200 chart . Billboard reported that the album sold 300 @,@ 000 copies in its first three weeks . Despite virtually no radio airplay and no music videos , the album sold more than 500 @,@ 000 copies in its first year . In 2003 , Master of Puppets was certified 6 × platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , having shipped six million copies in the United States . Between the beginning of the Nielsen SoundScan era in 1991 and 2009 , the album sold 5 @,@ 050 @,@ 000 copies . The album was less successful on an international level , entering the top 40 on the German and Swiss album charts in its inaugural year . In 2004 , it peaked within the top 10 in Finland and into the top 15 in Sweden . In 2008 , the album reached the top 40 on the Australian and Norwegian album charts . Master of Puppets received 6 × platinum certification from Music Canada and a golden award from the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipments of 600 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 copies , respectively . 
 = = Accolades and legacy = = 
 Master of Puppets has appeared in several publications ' best album lists . It was ranked number 167 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . Time included the album in its list of the 100 best albums of all time . According to the magazine 's Josh Tyrangiel , Master of Puppets reinforced the velocity of playing in heavy metal and diminished some of its clichés . Slant Magazine placed the album at number 90 on its list of the best albums of the 1980s , saying Master of Puppets is not only Metallica 's best recording , but also their most sincere . The album is featured in Robert Dimery 's book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . IGN named Master of Puppets the best heavy metal album of all time . The website stated it was Metallica 's best because it " built upon and perfected everything they had experimented with prior " and that " all the pieces come together in glorious cohesion " . Music journalist Martin Popoff also ranked it the best heavy metal album . The album was voted the fourth greatest guitar album of all time by Guitar World in 2006 , and the title track ranked number 61 on the magazine 's list of the 100 greatest guitar solos . Total Guitar ranked the main riff of the title track at number 7 among the top 20 guitar riffs . The April 2006 edition of Kerrang ! was dedicated to the album and gave away readers the cover album Master of Puppets : Remastered . 
 Master of Puppets became thrash metal 's first platinum album and by the early 1990s thrash metal successfully challenged and redefined the mainstream of heavy metal . Metallica and a few other bands headlined arena concerts and appeared regularly on MTV , although radio play remained <unk> with their popularity . Master of Puppets is widely accepted as the genre 's most accomplished album , and paved the way for subsequent development . The album , in the words of writer Christopher Knowles , " ripped Metallica away from the underground and put them atop the metal mountain " . David Hayter from Guitar Planet recognized the album as one of the most influential records ever made and a benchmark by which other metal albums should be judged . MTV 's Kyle Anderson had similar thoughts , saying that 25 years after its release the album remained a " stone cold classic " . Carlos Ramirez from Noisecreep believes that Master of Puppets stands as one of the most representative albums of its genre . 
 1986 is seen as a pinnacle year for thrash metal in which the genre broke out of the underground thanks to albums such as Megadeth 's Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? and Slayer 's Reign in Blood . Anthrax released Among the Living the following year , and by the end of 1987 these bands , alongside Metallica , were being called the " Big Four " of thrash metal . Master of Puppets frequently tops critic and fan polls of favorite thrash metal albums — the most frequent rival is Slayer 's Reign in Blood , also released in 1986 and also considered that band 's peak . The rivalry partially stemmed from a contrast in approaches on the two albums , between the sophistication of Master of Puppets and the velocity of Reign in Blood . Histories of the band tend to position Ride the Lightning , Master of Puppets , and ... And Justice for All as a trilogy over the course of which the band 's music progressively matured and became more sophisticated . In 2016 , the album was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Recording Registry . 
 = = Touring = = 
 Metallica opted for extensive touring instead of releasing a single or video to promote the album . Metallica spent March to August 1986 touring as the opening act for Ozzy Osbourne in the United States , the first tour Metallica played to arena @-@ sized audiences . The group used to play Black Sabbath riffs during sound checks , which Osbourne perceived as a mockery toward him . Referring to that occasion , Ulrich stated that Metallica was honored to play with Osbourne , who treated the band well on the tour . Metallica was noted by the media for its excessive drinking habit while touring and earned the nickname " <unk> " . The band members occasionally wore satirical T @-@ shirts reading " <unk> / Drank ' Em All " . The band usually played a 45 @-@ minute set often followed by an encore . According to Ulrich , the audiences in bigger cities were already familiar with Metallica 's music , unlike in the smaller towns they 've visited . " In the B @-@ markets , people really don 't know what we 're all about . But after 45 or 50 minutes we can tell we 've won them over . And fans who come to hear Ozzy go home liking Metallica . " Metallica won over Osbourne 's fans and slowly began to establish a mainstream following . 
 The tour , however , was notable for several incidents . Hetfield broke his wrist in a mid @-@ tour skateboarding accident , and his guitar technician John Marshall played rhythm guitar on several dates . The European leg of the Damage , Inc . Tour commenced in September , with Anthrax as the supporting band . After the September 26 performance in Stockholm , the band 's bus rolled over on a stretch of icy road the following morning . Burton was thrown through a window and killed instantly . The driver maintained that he hit a patch of black ice , but Hetfield disputed that . The driver was charged with manslaughter but was not convicted . The band returned to San Francisco and hired Flotsam and Jetsam bassist Jason Newsted to replace Burton . Many of the songs that appeared on the band 's next album , ... And Justice for All , were composed while Burton was still alive . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 All of the songs have been performed live and some became permanent setlist features . Four tracks were featured on the nine @-@ song setlist for the album 's promotional tour : " Battery " as opener , " Master of Puppets " , " Welcome Home ( Sanitarium ) " , and " Damage , Inc . " The title track , which was issued as a single in France , became a live staple and the most played Metallica song . When played live , the crowd fills in some of the vocal parts while the group performs the instrumentals . Loudwire 's Chad Childers characterized the band 's performance as " furious " and the song as the set 's highlight . Rolling Stone described the live performance as " a classic in all its eight @-@ minute glory " . While filming its 3D movie Metallica : Through the Never ( 2013 ) at the Rogers Arena in Vancouver , crosses were rising from the stage during the song , reminiscent of the album 's cover art . 
 " Welcome Home ( Sanitarium ) " is the second @-@ most performed song from the album . The live performance is often accompanied by lasers , pyrotechnical effects and film screens . " Battery " is usually played at the beginning of the setlist or during the encore , accompanied by lasers and flame plumes . " Disposable Heroes " is featured in the video album Orgullo , Pasión , y Gloria : Tres Noches en la Ciudad de México ( 2009 ) filmed in Mexico City , in which the song was played on the second of three nights at the Foro Sol . " Orion " is the least @-@ performed song from the album . Its first live performance was during the Escape from the Studio ' 06 tour , when the band performed the album in its entirety , honoring the 20th anniversary of its release . The band performed the album in the middle of the set . " Battery " , " Welcome Home ( Sanitarium ) " , " Damage , Inc . " and the full @-@ length " Master of Puppets " were revived for the band 's concerts in 1998 and 1999 , after having been retired for a number of years . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by James Hetfield . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Metallica = = = 
 James Hetfield – lead vocals , rhythm guitar , co @-@ lead guitar on " Master of Puppets " and " Orion " 
 Kirk Hammett – lead guitar 
 Cliff Burton – bass , backing vocals 
 Lars Ulrich – drums 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Flemming Rasmussen – producer , engineer 
 Metallica – producers , cover concept 
 Andy Wroblewski – assistant engineer 
 Michael Wagener – mixing 
 Mark <unk> – assistant mixing engineer 
 Mike Gillies – mixing of digital reissue bonus tracks 
 George Marino – mastering , remastering on 1995 reissue 
 Michael Alago – A & R executive 
 = = = Packaging = = = 
 Peter Mensch – cover concept 
 Don Brautigam – cover illustration 
 Ross Halfin ; Rich <unk> ; Rob <unk> – photography 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = William Hely = 
 Air Vice Marshal William Lloyd ( Bill ) Hely , CB , CBE , AFC ( 24 August 1909 – 20 May 1970 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1930 before transferring to the RAAF as a cadet pilot . Hely came to public attention in 1936 – 37 , first when he crashed on a survey flight in the Northern Territory , and later when he undertook two successful missions to locate missing aircraft in the same vicinity . His rescue efforts earned him the Air Force Cross . After occupying staff positions during the early years of World War II , Hely was appointed Officer Commanding No. 72 Wing in Dutch New Guinea in May 1944 . Later that year he formed No. 84 ( Army Cooperation ) Wing , commanding it during the Bougainville Campaign until the end of the Pacific War . 
 Hely spent the immediate post @-@ war period on the staff of RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne . From 1951 to 1953 he served as Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) Western Area Command in Perth , after which he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . He was Deputy Chief of the Air Staff from 1953 to 1956 , AOC Training Command from 1956 to 1957 , and Head of the Australian Joint Services Staff in Washington , D.C. from 1957 to 1960 . He then served as Air Member for Personnel ( AMP ) for six years , his tenure coinciding with a significant increase in manpower to meet commitments in South East Asia and the demands of a major re @-@ equipment program . Having been promoted acting air vice marshal in 1953 ( substantive in 1956 ) , he was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1964 for his service as AMP . He retired from the Air Force in 1966 and made his home in Canberra , where he died in 1970 at the age of sixty . 
 = = Early career = = 
 The third child of Prosper Frederick Hely , a storekeeper , and his wife Alice ( née Lloyd ) , William Lloyd ( Bill ) Hely was born on 24 August 1909 at Wellington , New South Wales . He was educated to Intermediate Certificate level at Mudgee , Wollongong and Rozelle Public Schools , and at Fort Street High School , Petersham . Leaving school in 1926 , he worked as a clerk and studied accountancy in his spare time . On 16 February 1927 , Hely entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon , as one of four cadets sponsored that year by the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , which did not yet have its own officer training college . He graduated as a lieutenant on 9 December 1930 , and the following day enlisted in the RAAF . As well as the four graduates the Air Force had enrolled in 1927 , budgetary constraints imposed during the Great Depression necessitated the transfer from Duntroon to Point Cook of eight other RAAF @-@ sponsored cadets midway through their four @-@ year course , including Alister Murdoch , Bill Garing and Douglas Candy . Initially ranked pilot officer , Hely commenced his flying training course at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , on 15 January 1931 , graduating on 10 December . His early postings as a pilot in 1932 and 1933 were to RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , and RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria . Qualifying in aerial photography , he served at Point Cook from 1933 to 1936 . He was then transferred to No. 3 Squadron at Richmond , receiving promotion to flight lieutenant . 
 In April 1936 , Hely took command of No. 3 Squadron 's North Australia Survey Flight , one of two such flights formed by the Air Force that month to carry out photographic surveys . Flying a twin @-@ engined de Havilland Dragon Rapide ( serial number A3 @-@ 2 ) , Hely departed Richmond on 11 April for Port Hedland , which was to be the flight 's base for its initial survey work in Western Australia . Over the Northern Territory , between Newcastle Waters and Wave Hill , he became lost , ran out of fuel , and had to crash land . He and his crew of two were found by RAAF search aircraft ten days later , on 22 April . The Argus had reported that " grave fears " were held for their safety , but they were largely uninjured , Hely having suffered cuts and abrasions to his head and leg . The aircraft was badly damaged and had to be transported back to Richmond in pieces . In February 1937 , Hely took part in the search for a missing Stinson airliner that was eventually found in the McPherson Range , Queensland , five of its seven passengers and crew dead . 
 For its 1937 aerial survey program , the RAAF formed the Communications and Survey Flight under No. 1 Aircraft Depot 's Recruit Training Squadron at Laverton on 3 May . The flight was divided into Western and Eastern Air Detachments , the former under Hely . Flying a Tugan Gannet , Hely 's first task became searching for survey director Sir Herbert Gepp , whose Rapide ( A3 @-@ 2 , the same one Hely crash landed the previous year ) had gone missing on an inspection flight in the Northern Territory between Tennant Creek and <unk> . Hely located the downed Rapide on 23 May , guiding in a ground party that was able to clear a makeshift runway and allow Gepp and his team to take off and resume their journey . On 25 September , Hely was again diverted from survey work to search for a lost plane , this time the de Havilland Gipsy Moth of flying doctor Clyde Fenton , who had gone missing north @-@ east of Newcastle Waters . Hely , once more piloting Rapide A3 @-@ 2 , found the Moth three days later and landed to rescue the lost doctor . Fenton was subsequently quoted as saying " I have only the highest praise for the efficient manner in which Hely conducted a difficult search and the skilful way in which he located me and picked me up " . The rescue efforts made Hely one of the RAAF 's best @-@ known public figures . Completing his posting to the survey flight , he served as adjutant at Laverton in 1938 . He was awarded the Air Force Cross on 9 June for " zeal and initiative in searching for Sir Herbert Gepp 's party and later for Dr. Fenton when lost in Central Australia " . On 29 November 1938 , he married secretary Jean McDonald at St Aidan 's Anglican Church in Launceston , Tasmania ; the couple would have two daughters . Hely spent the following year in Britain , attending the Royal Air Force Staff College , Andover , and was promoted to squadron leader in September . 
 = = World War II = = 
 At the outbreak of World War II , Hely was attached to the operations room at RAF Coastal Command . On his return to Australia in January 1940 , he was appointed Staff Officer Plans at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne . In October , he joined the Deputy Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal Bill Bostock , as a delegate to a defence conference in Singapore . The Australian contingent found the local forces ill @-@ prepared for an attack by the Japanese and recommended significant increases in air capability , both in Australia and the Pacific Islands , to meet the threat . Hely was promoted to temporary wing commander the following January , and was the ranking Air Force delegate at a series of staff talks in Batavia and Singapore regarding the defence of the Dutch East Indies . He became Director of Operations at RAAF Headquarters in August . His promotion to acting group captain was announced on 17 February 1942 . Two days later , the Japanese bombed Darwin , Northern Territory ; Hely circulated a memo early the next month to all commands on the lessons learnt from the raid . He was posted to Darwin in May to join North @-@ Western Area headquarters as senior air staff officer , and was granted the temporary rank of group captain in January 1943 . Hely returned to RAAF Headquarters in March to become Director of Air Staff Plans . 
 In May 1944 , Hely assumed command of No. 72 Wing at Merauke , Dutch New Guinea , succeeding Group Captain Allan Walters . Comprising fighter and dive @-@ bomber squadrons , the wing had been established to undertake air defence and patrol tasks in and around western New Guinea . Hely departed Merauke in September 1944 to establish an army cooperation formation , No. 84 Wing , in Cairns , Queensland . It was one of two such wings formed by the RAAF in the South West Pacific Theatre late in World War II . They were , as described by the official history of the RAAF in the Pacific , " essentially non @-@ offensive in character " , responsible for reconnaissance , artillery spotting , supply drops to ground forces , spraying DDT to combat malaria , and guiding close support aircraft to their objectives . The wing could also carry out its own strikes on " targets of opportunity " . No. 84 Wing comprised No. 5 ( Tactical Reconnaissance ) Squadron , No. 17 Air Observation Post Flight , No. 10 Communication Unit ( subsequently renamed No. 10 Local Air Supply Unit ) , and No. 39 Operational Base Unit . It deployed to Torokina in October to support Australian troops during the Bougainville Campaign . No. 5 Squadron , equipped with CAC Boomerangs and Wirraways , was assigned to mark targets for F4U Corsairs of the Royal New Zealand Air Force . Between December 1944 and January 1945 , the wing lost one Auster , one Wirraway , and one Boomerang on operations . Despite shortages of pilots and equipment , Hely 's formation was generally able to keep pace with the army 's requirements . By the end of June 1945 , it had flown over 4 @,@ 000 sorties . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Hely relinquished command of No. 84 Wing on 12 August 1945 and returned to RAAF Headquarters in October . He was by this time among a coterie of officers at group captain level , including Val Hancock , Alister Murdoch and Bill Garing , earmarked by the Australian Air Board for leadership roles in the post @-@ war RAAF , which was to shrink rapidly with demobilisation . At RAAF Headquarters , Hely was appointed Deputy Director of Operations , in which capacity he served on a committee to investigate proposals for an officer training college , later established as RAAF College , Point Cook . Along with Hely , all officers associated with the proposal 's examination were former Duntroon students , including the Deputy Chief of the Air Staff , Air Commodore Frank Bladin , the Director of Postings , Group Captain Murdoch , and the Director of Training , Group Captain Paddy Heffernan . Another Duntroon graduate , Air Commodore Hancock , became the college 's first commandant . Hely was appointed Director of Organisation and Staff Duties in 1946 . That November , he became Director of Postings . The following year , he took up the position of Director of Personal Services , before departing for Britain in December 1948 to study at the Imperial Defence College , London . 
 Returning to Melbourne , Hely served as deputy to the Air Member for Personnel from January 1950 . He became an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to King George VI in June 1951 . In September , he was appointed Officer Commanding Western Area , Perth , taking up his new post in mid @-@ October . He was promoted to acting air commodore in July 1952 , becoming Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) Western Area . His rank was made permanent in September , and the same month he was appointed aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Queen Elizabeth II . Among Hely 's duties as AOC Western Area was coordinating air support for the British atomic test on Montebello in October 1952 , including supply and observation flights by Dakotas of No. 86 ( Transport ) Wing . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the Queen 's Coronation Honours promulgated on 1 June 1953 , for his war service and his work during the Montebello test . In August , he was named Deputy Chief of the Air Staff ( DCAS ) , with the acting rank of air vice marshal , effective from October ; he replaced Air Vice Marshal Hancock . Between October 1953 and February 1954 , the RAAF underwent major organisational change , as it transitioned from a geographically based command @-@ and @-@ control system to one based on function , resulting in the establishment of Home ( operational ) , Training , and Maintenance Commands . At the same time , RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne was absorbed by the Department of Air in Canberra . Hely was acting Air Member for Personnel from 3 January to 7 March 1955 , between the terms of Air Vice Marshals Val Hancock and Fred Scherger . On 24 January 1956 , he became AOC Training Command , taking over from Air Vice Marshal Murdoch . He was succeeded as DCAS by Air Vice Marshal Douglas Candy . Hely 's rank of air vice marshal became substantive on 5 September . In January 1957 , Point Cook retired its last de Havilland Tiger Moth trainers , signalling the end of the biplane era in the RAAF . That May , Hely was seconded to the Department of Defence and posted to Washington , D.C. , to head up the Australian Joint Services Staff . He was succeeded as AOC Training Command by Air Vice Marshal Ian McLachlan . 
 Hely became Air Member for Personnel ( AMP ) on 28 March 1960 , taking over from the acting AMP , Air Commodore Frank Headlam . Responsible for the Personnel Branch of the RAAF , the position of AMP occupied a seat on the Air Board , the service 's controlling body that comprised its senior officers and was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) . The Air Force expanded greatly during Hely 's term as AMP , owing to Australia 's increasing commitment to the security of South East Asia , and the most significant rearmament program the RAAF had undertaken outside of World War II . Its permanent establishment increased from a steady 15 @,@ 000 or so in the 1950s to over 18 @,@ 000 by 1966 . Hely himself initiated a scheme to attract staff from the Royal Air Force , which was suffering cutbacks , by opening a recruitment office in London and taking advantage of the Australian government 's assisted passage scheme to import trained personnel and their families . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) in the 1964 New Year Honours for his " tactful and careful handling of personnel matters " , and for having " done much to improve the manning level of the Air Force " . As AMP , Hely put forward proposals to increase the number of diploma @-@ qualified engineering and equipment officers in the Air Force . He was also closely involved in deliberations concerning the balance of academic and military studies at the RAAF Academy ( previously RAAF College ) , the outcome of which is considered to have left the course biased towards pure science , rather than its applications to air power . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Hely retired on 24 August 1966 , after almost forty years in the military . He was succeeded the following day as AMP by Air Vice Marshal Candy . In retirement , Hely was active in the Canberra branch of the Air Force Association . He died of cancer in Canberra on 20 May 1970 . Survived by his wife and children , he was accorded an Air Force funeral at St John the Baptist Church and cremated at Norwood Park Crematorium , Gungahlin . The official mourning party included Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee ( CCOSC ) General Sir John Wilton , former CCOSC Air Chief Marshal Sir Frederick Scherger , Secretary of Defence Sir Arthur Tange , CAS Air Marshal Colin Hannah , former CAS Air Marshal Sir Alister Murdoch , Vice Admiral Sir Victor Smith , Air Vice Marshal Brian Eaton , and Group Captain John Waddy . The guns at Duntroon were fired in salute as the cortege left the church . 
 = Carrot soup = 
 Carrot soup ( referred to in French as Potage de Crécy , Potage Crécy , Potage à la Crécy , Purée à la Crécy and Crème à la Crécy ) is a soup prepared with carrot as a primary ingredient . It may be prepared as a cream- or broth @-@ style soup . Additional vegetables , root vegetables and various other ingredients may be used in its preparation . It may be served hot or cold , and several recipes exist . 
 Carrot soup has been described as a " classic " dish in French cuisine . The soup was eaten by King Edward VII every year on 26 August to commemorate the 1346 Battle of Crécy . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Carrot soup may be prepared as a cream @-@ style soup and as a broth @-@ style soup . Vegetable stock or chicken stock may be used as ingredients in both styles of soup . Other vegetables may be used in the dish , including root vegetables , the latter of which may include garlic onion , shallot , potato , turnip and others . Carrot juice and orange juice may be used in its preparation , and some versions are prepared using puréed carrot . After cooking , the dish may be run through a sieve to strain it . The carrots used may be peeled or <unk> , and the use of peeled carrots can lend to increased smoothness in puréed versions of the dish . Those prepared with puréed carrot may have a thick consistency while also being smooth in texture . The soup 's color can vary based upon the coloration of the carrots used . Young carrots tend to make the soup sweeter and imbue it with a bright orange coloration , while older , larger carrots provide less sweetness and may imbue a yellow coloration . The use of old , cracked carrots that have a woody texture in their interior can produce a soup of inferior quality . 
 Several ingredient variations exist in carrot soup preparations . Some carrot soups are prepared using coconut milk , coconut water , coconut cream , coconut butter or coconut pieces . Some versions include ginger as an ingredient , and some include curry . Green carrot leaves ( greens ) from the top of carrots may be used as an ingredient in the dish . Chopped mint leaves are used in some versions . It may be served hot or chilled . Salt and pepper may be used to season the dish , and nutmeg is sometimes used as a seasoning . It is sometimes topped with yogurt , a yogurt sauce , crème <unk> , sour cream , and other ingredients . 
 The zest of orange may be used as a garnish , as an ingredient within the dish itself , and in both ways . Additional garnishes can include dill , carrot leaves , grated , minced or diced carrot , chives , other fresh , chopped herbs , <unk> , and toast squares , among others . Carrot soup can be prepared as a vegan food , and can also be prepared as a bisque . 
 Carrot soup may contain a significant amount of nitrite . 
 Carrot soups 
 = = In French cuisine = = 
 Carrot soup ( Potage de Crécy , Potage Crécy , et al . ) is a dish in French cuisine , and has been described as a " classic " and " famous " dish in the country 's cuisine . Potage is a variety of soups that have a thick consistency . Potage Crécy is named after Crécy @-@ en @-@ Ponthieu , a commune in Northern France that has been purported to produce carrots with the best flavor within the country . 
 In French cuisine , Crécy soup is typically prepared with rice , which may also be served as a side dish . Rice may be used as an ingredient to thicken the dish , and barley has also been used . 
 = = History = = 
 Although the modern sweet orange carrot was not developed until the 16th century , in the Low Countries , it has been represented as a tradition , and it was once customary for English people to eat Crécy soup annually on 26 August in commemoration of the anniversary of the Battle of Crécy , which occurred in Crécy , France on that date in 1346 . 
 Crécy soup was eaten annually by King Edward VII , King of the United Kingdom between 1901 and 1910 , on the battle 's anniversary day , in honour of his ancestor , Edward , the Black Prince , who led the battle . It has also been suggested that the soup was served to triumphant English soldiers after the battle concluded , using carrots from Crécy . 
 = Wishology = 
 Wishology is a trilogy of television specials and the ninth special of the animated television series The Fairly OddParents . The first part of the trilogy , " The Big Beginning " , originally aired on the cable network Nickelodeon in the United States on May 1 , 2009 ; the second part , " The Exciting Middle Part " , aired on May 2 ; and the last of the three parts , " The Final Ending " , aired on May 3 . The trilogy was written by Kevin Sullivan , Scott Fellows , and Butch Hartman , and was directed by Gary Conrad . According to Nielsen ratings , the first and third parts of the trilogy were viewed by 4 million people , while its second part garnered 3 @.@ 6 million viewers . Critical reviewers displayed mixed reactions to how three @-@ dimensional objects interact via computer animation with the series ' usual two @-@ dimensional artwork in the trilogy . Composer Guy Moon , who has worked throughout the series , won an Annie Award for his music in the first part of the trilogy in 2010 . 
 Wishology Wishology centers on the show 's main character , 10 @-@ year @-@ old Timmy Turner , his fairy godparents Cosmo and Wanda , and his baby fairy <unk> Poof , all of whom grant Timmy 's wishes . Robots known as Eliminators appear in Timmy 's hometown , Dimmsdale , to destroy the " chosen one " , Timmy himself . Jorgen von Strangle , a non @-@ floating fairy general who uses an oversized wand , takes him to the Cave of Destiny , a cave that contains prophecies for the " chosen one " . The cave is located in Fairy World , a place that sits on a cloud in space and is connected to Earth by a rainbow bridge . Jorgen explains a legend inscribed on the cave wall about the ancient fairy warriors who fought Eliminators and their master , a giant black hole called The Darkness . To defeat The Darkness and Eliminators , Timmy must retrieve and use three special wands : the fire wand , the wind wand , and the ice wand . 
 In addition to the main cast , the trilogy features guest performances , most notably , Gene Simmons and Paul Stanley from the rock band Kiss , who serve as protectors of the white wand . Patrick Warburton provides his voice for the agents of the Military Extraterrestrial Research Facility ( abbreviated M.E.R.F. ) , and Brendan Fraser voices Turbo Thunder , a warrior who believes he is the true chosen one . In addition to its cultural references to various media , Wishology contains parodies of fantasy and science fiction films : The Matrix , The Lord of the Rings , Harry Potter , The Terminator , Men in Black , and Star Wars . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = " The Big Beginning " = = = 
 Timmy makes a wish to star in his own movie trilogy ( In parodies of The Matrix , Lord of the Rings , and Harry Potter ) . He is interrupted by Jorgen , who takes his fairy godparents away and sends Timmy home . When he gets there , Timmy 's parents and school friends don 't remember him , and an Eliminator appears after Timmy calls out his own name . In an alley , the Eliminator projects a space vortex through its mouth to inhale Timmy . Jorgen saves him , and the two arrive at Fairy World . Meanwhile , the fairies are hidden as gumballs inside a truck stop bar by Jorgen . After being blown into a bubble from a kid 's mouth , Cosmo takes Wanda and Poof with him as he floats away . The rest of the fairies use Cosmo 's method as their escape plan . 
 At the Cave of Destiny , Jorgen explains to Timmy the cave prophecy , where in ancient times fairy warriors , represented by stars in space , fought and eliminated The Darkness with light . The ancient fairies also hid a powerful white wand , which is to be found and possessed by the chosen one , Timmy Turner . As stars in space disappear and The Darkness approaches , Timmy arrives back on Earth and tracks his godparents down in Las Vegas , where the Middle @-@ Aged Rock Festival ( M.A.R.F. ) is held . The M.A.R.F. features the rock band Kiss , who reveal to Timmy that they are the galactic protectors of the white wand , which is their star @-@ shaped guitar . The Darkness and Eliminators arrive at the venue , and the fairies arrive to defeat Eliminators while Timmy defeats The Darkness with a rock solo performance on the white wand . A celebration follows at Fairy World , where Turbo Thunder , the person who was supposed to be the chosen one , appears and takes the white wand from Timmy . 
 = = = " The Exciting Middle Part " = = = 
 Eliminators and The Darkness invade <unk> — a planet that is home to squid @-@ like aliens called <unk> — and steal " fake @-@ i @-@ <unk> " , belts that allow users to transform into anyone else . <unk> prince Mark Chang goes to Earth . Meanwhile in <unk> , Timmy and Cosmo are watching Timmy Turners Chosen One movie . Then Poof get interested and copies what Timmy is doing on the big screen and when Wanda turns off the TV , Poof gets angry and kicks her across the room . Then Timmy calls the front office for a bunch of stuff . When Cosmo eats a cocktail <unk> , and Poof hits him too and Wanda gets him super angry so he kicks her again harder . Mark arrives and notifies Timmy that The Darkness is back , and the group discovers that there is a second part to the cave prophecy : Timmy must find the second wand , located at the Blue Moon . Timmy and Mark teleport back to Dimmsdale , only to discover Timmy 's parents and friends are now Eliminators in disguise . Because his real parents and friends have been kidnapped by Eliminators , Timmy seeks help from people who hate him : Mr. Crocker , Dark Laser , and Vicky . Setting their differences aside , everyone cooperates and boards Dark Laser 's death pod and depart into space . During their rest stop at planet <unk> , the aliens inside the cantina are Eliminators who send Timmy 's enemies to the Abracatraz Prison in Fairy World . Turbo Thunder saves Timmy and Mark from the corrupting planet , and the three eventually arrive at the Blue Moon , where the rock guardian grants Timmy the second wand . 
 Meanwhile , Eliminators incarcerate the fairies at the Abracatraz Prison and put Timmy 's friends and family in the same cell with Timmy 's godparents and Jorgen . After Poof frees the group and locates the wands , Jorgen takes everyone to the Blue Moon . Timmy 's friends , enemies , family , and the fairies defeat Eliminators with a combined magical attack and have a reunion with Timmy , which is interrupted when The Darkness tries to inhale him . The second wand produces no effect , and Timmy realizes he has no other choice , so he sacrifices himself into The Darkness , after sharing a kiss with his long @-@ term crush Trixie , leaving the others to mourn . 
 = = = " The Final Ending " = = = 
 Timmy wakes up in what looks like his bedroom ; in reality he is still inside The Darkness , and the world is merely an illusion to him . Timmy 's fairy godparents and Jorgen come to rescue him , and they exit The Darkness successfully . Back on Earth , the Lead Eliminator uses Jorgen 's wand to poof Timmy 's friends and family away into The Darkness . Military Extraterrestrial Research Facility ( M.E.R.F. ) agents launch an array of military weapons at the Eliminator , but he absorbs the ordnance and turns into a more powerful version , the Destructinator . He surrounds the Earth with a steel casing , which transforms the M.E.R.F. agents into his henchmen . They plant explosives inside Earth and give the Destructinator a detonation remote . 
 Timmy and his fairies return to the Blue Moon via M.E.R.F. ' s escape pod to retrieve the second wand . A weakened Turbo Thunder reveals the second wand only opens underneath a secret cave , which contains magical wands and the final part of the cave prophecy : to find the ice wand . The group returns to Fairy World with the wands to free the imprisoned fairies before everyone heads back to Earth . The fairies arrive and use their magic to remove the Earth 's metal casing . Timmy heads into space with the Destructinator following him ; the Destructinator attacks him , which sends him back down to the Earth , at its north polar region . After Timmy tricks the Destructinator into inhaling the explosives , he reveals that he stole the detonator remote from him back in space and uses it to obliterate him . 
 A polar bear — the guardian of the ice wand — raises the ice wand from beneath the ocean . The fairies add an ice wand to each planet of the Solar System . Along with the white wand at Fairy World , the ice wands create a celestial smile that projects its light into The Darkness . The smile transforms it into a bright sun , The Kindness , and Timmy concludes The Darkness was only looking for a friend . The group returns to Dimmsdale , where an Eliminator , dubbed a ' Hug <unk> by Cosmo , crashes in front of them and spews out everyone who had been sucked in . Everyone parties in Fairy World and celebrates the chosen one 's accomplishment . 
 = = Production = = 
 Series creator and executive producer Butch Hartman wrote Wishology , along with head writer and executive producer Scott Fellows and writer Kevin Sullivan , who joined the series beginning its fifth season . Gary Conrad , who has directed several episodes of the series since its second season , served as the director for Wishology . Composer Guy Moon , who has worked on the music for The Fairly OddParents since its inception , composed the music . Like the entire series , Wishology was produced in hand @-@ drawn animation mixed with computer animation by Frederator and <unk> Studios for Nickelodeon . The production of the trilogy required 18 months to complete , according to Toon Zone 's interview with Hartman . 
 Initial plans were to broadcast Wishology on Nickelodeon for three consecutive Fridays starting on May 1 , 2009 . In the end , Nickelodeon decided to show the specials from 8 : 00 to 9 : 00 pm , Friday to Sunday , May 1 – 3 and was advertised as " Wishology Weekend . " Wishology was also released on DVD , containing all three parts , on June 3 , 2011 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The cast of Wishology includes all of the main characters of The Fairly <unk> . Timmy Turner and Poof are voiced by Tara Strong . Cosmo , Jorgen von Strangle , and Timmy 's dad Mr. Turner , are voiced by Daran Norris . Wanda and Timmy 's mom Mrs. Turner , are voiced by Susanne Blakeslee . Grey DeLisle voices Timmy 's babysitter , Vicky , and Dionne Quan voices Trixie Tang . Jason Marsden and Gary <unk> Gray provide voice roles for Timmy 's friends Chester <unk> and A.J. , respectively . Timmy 's school teacher , Mr. Denzel Crocker , who has an obsession with proving that fairies are real , is voiced by Carlos Alazraqui . 
 The rock band Kiss made a guest appearance in the trilogy . The band plays the role of the galactic guardians of the white wand in " The Big Beginning " , and makes a cameo appearance in " The Final Ending " . However , only two of the band 's four members — Gene Simmons and Paul Stanley — provided voice roles of their Kiss personas , " The Demon " and " The Starchild " , respectively . Hartman and Fellows pitched the idea of a rock band in the storyline , where the band guards the white wand that Timmy seeks . The writers originally did not intend to feature Kiss in Wishology . Rather , they initially planned to create the rock band " <unk> " , with its members with heart @-@ shaped make @-@ up on their faces , as an allusion to the original Kiss band . Nevertheless , they asked and received permission from Gene Simmons to feature Kiss , drawn as animated two @-@ dimensional figures to blend in with the series ' customary appearance . Wishology features a performance of the Kiss song " Rock and Roll All Nite " , which is played towards the end of " The Big Beginning " , during a concert party at Fairy World . 
 In addition to the regular cast and Kiss , Wishology features other guest performances . Actor Gary Sturgis guest stars as the Lead Eliminator . Actor Patrick Warburton guest stars as the M.E.R.F. agents , and Brendan Fraser guest stars as Turbo Thunder . Recurring voice actors Jim Ward and Kevin Michael Richardson reprise their roles as Dimmsdale news reporter Chet <unk> and space villain Dark Laser , respectively . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 At the beginning of the first episode , Wishology includes references from three recent films : The Matrix , The Lord of the Rings , and Harry Potter . In Timmy 's first trilogy wish , Timmy — under his alias Teo — is dressed as Neo from The Matrix , while his school teacher , Mr. Crocker , is dressed as Neo 's antagonist , Agent Smith . Timmy dodges Mr. Crocker 's lasers in a style similar to that seen in The Matrix . After doing so , he jumps off a building and lands on , and crushes , a Volkswagen New Beetle . In his second trilogy wish , the group arrives at Middle @-@ earth . Timmy is dressed as Frodo ; Wanda and Poof are dressed as Hobbits ; and Cosmo takes the appearance of Gollum . In the third , Harry Potter @-@ themed trilogy wish , where everyone is in a Quidditch match , Timmy is dressed as the film 's main character , Harry Potter , and Poof takes the form of a quidditch snitch . 
 Throughout Timmy 's travel in space with Mark and Timmy 's enemies in " The Exciting Middle Part " and during the beginning of " The Final Ending " , Wishology focuses its media references on George Lucas ' film series Star Wars . On their way to Planet <unk> in " The Exciting Middle Part " , the group dresses up as the main characters of Star Wars : Timmy is dressed as Luke Skywalker , Mark as R2 @-@ D2 , Crocker as Chewbacca , and Vicky as Princess Leia . Inside the cantina , Crocker clears his throat in a way that sounds like Chewbacca 's voice . All the aliens inside resemble other characters from Star Wars . The opening sequence of " The Final Ending " features text that briefly recaps the conclusion of the previous part of the Wishology story in the style of the Star Wars opening crawl . 
 Wishology contains a number of other cultural references . In " The Big Beginning " , when he grabs a muffin before he leaves his house , Timmy accidentally chooses but then rejects the Fairy @-@ <unk> muffin , the magic muffin used in the first The Fairly OddParents television film Abra @-@ Catastrophe ! . During Jorgen 's and Timmy 's journey throughout Fairy World to find the Cave of Destiny , Jorgen swings through the trees in a manner similar to Tarzan . The Lead Eliminator 's attire of a black coat and sunglasses is similar to those worn by The Terminator . The weapons M.E.R.F. agents use while fighting Timmy are similar to those used by the Men in Black . At Dimmsdale , when he tries to figure out the chosen one riddle in order to find the white wand , Timmy is chased down by the police for allegedly becoming a quarter thief and smashing a statue at the Dimmsdale museum . To remain undetected , he uses a Mona Lisa painting to disguise his face , and one of the cops make note of his " Renaissance smile " . Towards the end of Timmy 's rock solo performance at the M.A.R.F. , Gene Simmons notes Timmy 's long tongue when Timmy licks the guitar , a tribute to Simmons ' own long tongue . 
 At the beginning of " The Exciting Middle Part " , while Eliminators destroy <unk> , Timmy is in Fairy World in front of fairy game geeks . He plays The Chosen One Video Game , which utilizes a white wand guitar controller that imitates the actual white wand , like a Guitar Hero controller that imitates a real guitar . When Mark 's space pod plunges into the Earth and destroys an Eliminator disguised as Mark , the Eliminator 's feet curl up in a way reminiscent of the Wicked Witch of the East from the Wizard of Oz . At the site of the Abracatraz Prison where the kidnapped fairies are held hostage , its front gate contains an inscription that reads " Abandon all hope , ye who here enter " , which when translated into Latin reads " <unk> <unk> speranza , voi ch <unk> " , the phrase used at the entrance gate to Hell in the Inferno chapter of Dante Alighieri 's Divine Comedy . In order to get Dark Laser to come to Earth so Timmy , along with Mr. Crocker and Vicky , can board on his Death Ball and blast off into space , Timmy posts a video that ridicules him onto a video @-@ sharing website called " <unk> " , whose name and logo are similar to those of YouTube . Before heading to the Blue Moon , Turbo Thunder flies Timmy and Mark from <unk> to another planet , Thunder World . The planet features a " thunder wonderland " , an amusement park with a Las Vegas Strip theme , evidenced by hotels and palm trees . 
 In " The Final Ending " , Cosmo is angry with the Lead Eliminator , who constantly attacks his family and godchild , so he transforms into a giant creature named " Cos @-@ <unk> " , a reference to the Japanese movie monster Godzilla . During Timmy 's and his fairies ' revisit the Blue Moon , they run into Turbo Thunder , who tells them how alone in the universe he was after the rock guardian threw him over the planet 's horizon . Since then , he made a personified friend , a rock with a happy face , similar to Chuck Noland 's companion Wilson the volleyball in the 2000 drama film Cast Away . In his flashback , Turbo Thunder receives an invitation flyer to the " Chosen One Competition " in Fairy World . On the flyer , the phrase " Chosen One " is printed in American Idol font . At the competition venue , the four fairy elders sit as judges behind a table in front of the auditioners like the American Idol judges do . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Nielsen ratings , Wishology received 4 @.@ 012 million viewers for " The Big Beginning " , about 3 @.@ 6 million viewers for " The Exciting Middle Part " , and 4 @.@ 071 million viewers for its last night , " The Final Ending " . " The Final Ending " and " The Big Beginning " ranked twelfth and thirteenth overall , respectively , on the list of top twenty television shows on the cable network for the week ending May 3 , 2009 . The Fairly OddParents became the highest @-@ rated cable network series that Friday for " The Big Beginning " . However , " The Exciting Middle Part " was topped by the teen sitcom and drama series Jonas , which premiered simultaneously on the Disney Channel . " The Final Ending " ranked in third place for Sunday night . The trilogy 's ratings were highest for The Fairly OddParents since its preceding special . Fairly <unk> , which attained 8 @.@ 809 million viewers during its premiere and ranked the highest in the top 20 cable network shows for the week ending February 24 , 2008 . Wishology remains the second @-@ highest rated special in terms of viewership numbers since the premiere of the following special , A Fairly Odd Movie : Grow Up , Timmy Turner ! , a live @-@ action adaptation television film of the same series , which attracted 5 @.@ 8 million viewers in its original airing on July 10 , 2011 . Composer Guy Moon won an Annie Award for his music in " The Big Beginning " in the " Individual Achievement Category " of " Music in a Television Production " on February 6 , 2010 . 
 Wishology received mixed reception from critics . Eileen Cruz of Toon Zone mainly praised it . Specifically , she observes that it " manages to remain largely fresh the entire time for an animated comedy episode over two hours long " . Aaron Bynum of The Animation Insider , however , gave a more negative review . He suggested it was only " moderately entertaining " , saying it is " just another over @-@ exerted animated epic of an over @-@ extended property . " Cruz commented positively on the show 's usage of a mix of standard and computer animation ; however , she noted the blend between special 3D objects and their surroundings was " not perfect " , though " not distracting either " . Bynum stated the animated trilogy 's usage of computer animation was " rather needless " , and its cultural parodies were " tired and forgettable " . While he finds " The Final Ending " interesting enough to keep the viewer engaged , he also criticized the series as a whole . He said , " it would appear that the cartoon is no longer an exclusive journey into one child 's ever @-@ changing imagination ; now , it 's just a fanciful what @-@ if " . Cruz praised the role of the band Kiss . She cannot think of too many other bands that " could exist in such a universe with such an exaggerated reality " . However , she criticized the voice portrayal of Turbo Thunder , finding it to be " entirely unattractive " and " off @-@ putting , " and thus " it simply didn 't work for me . " Bynum , however , had a more positive reaction to the character . He noted Turbo Thunder was " hilariously pretentious and self @-@ serving " , and he " ultimately makes the second chapter [ " The Exciting Middle Part " ] a whole lot better by acting as a frenemy with similar goals . " 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 The Fairly OddParents : " Wishology : The Big Beginning " full episode at Nick.com 
 The Fairly OddParents : " Wishology : The Exciting Middle Part " full episode at Nick.com 
 The Fairly OddParents : " Wishology : The Final Ending " episode clip at Nick.com 
 = = = Scripts = = = 
 Wishology " The Big Beginning " script 
 Wishology " The Exciting Middle Part " script 
 Wishology " The Final Ending " script 
 = Metallica = 
 Metallica is an American heavy metal band formed in Los Angeles , California . Metallica was formed in 1981 when vocalist / guitarist James Hetfield responded to an advertisement posted by drummer Lars Ulrich in a local newspaper . The band 's current line @-@ up comprises founding members Hetfield and Ulrich , longtime lead guitarist Kirk Hammett and bassist Robert Trujillo . Guitarist Dave Mustaine and bassists Ron McGovney , Cliff Burton and Jason Newsted are former members of the band . 
 The band 's fast tempos , instrumentals , and aggressive musicianship placed them as one of the founding " big four " bands of thrash metal , alongside Anthrax , Megadeth , and Slayer . Metallica earned a growing fan base in the underground music community and won critical acclaim with its first four albums ; their third album Master of Puppets ( 1986 ) was described as one of the most influential and heaviest of thrash metal albums . The band expanded its musical direction and achieved substantial commercial success with its eponymous fifth album Metallica ( 1991 ) , which resulted in an album that appealed to a more mainstream audience . The album was also their first to debut at number one on the Billboard 200 , a feat that they also achieved on their following four studio albums . In 2000 , Metallica was among a number of artists who filed a lawsuit against Napster for sharing the band 's copyright @-@ protected material for free without consent from any band member . A settlement was reached and Napster became a pay @-@ to @-@ use service . The release of St. Anger ( 2003 ) alienated fans with the exclusion of guitar solos and the " steel @-@ sounding " snare drum , and a film titled Some Kind of Monster documented the recording of St. Anger and the tensions within the band during that time . The band returned to its original musical style with the release of Death Magnetic ( 2008 ) , and in 2009 , Metallica was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . 
 Metallica has released nine studio albums , four live albums , five extended plays , 26 music videos , and 37 singles . The band has won eight Grammy Awards and five of its albums have consecutively debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 . The band 's eponymous 1991 album has sold over 16 million copies in the United States , making it the best @-@ selling album of the SoundScan era . Metallica ranks as one of the most commercially successful bands of all time , having sold over 110 million records worldwide . Metallica has been listed as one of the greatest artists of all time by many magazines , including Rolling Stone , which ranked them 61st on its list of The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time . As of December 2012 , Metallica is the third @-@ best @-@ selling music artist since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking sales in 1991 , selling a total of 54 @.@ 26 million albums in the U.S. Metallica collaborated over a long period with producer Bob Rock , who produced four of the band 's studio albums between 1990 and 2003 and served as a temporary bassist during the production of St. Anger . In 2012 , Metallica formed the independent record label Blackened Recordings and took full ownership of its albums and videos . As of 2016 , the band is in production of its tenth studio album , which is expected to be released later in the year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early years ( 1981 – 82 ) = = = 
 Metallica was formed in Los Angeles , California , in late 1981 when Danish @-@ born drummer Lars Ulrich placed an advertisement in a Los Angeles newspaper The Recycler , which read , " Drummer looking for other metal musicians to jam with Tygers of Pan Tang , Diamond Head and Iron Maiden . " Guitarists James Hetfield and Hugh Tanner of Leather Charm answered the advertisement . Although he had not formed a band , Ulrich asked Metal Blade Records founder Brian Slagel if he could record a song for the label 's upcoming compilation album Metal Massacre . Slagel accepted and Ulrich recruited Hetfield to sing and play rhythm guitar . The band was officially formed in October 1981 , five months after Ulrich and Hetfield first met . 
 Ulrich talked to his friend Ron Quintana , who was brainstorming names for a fanzine . Quintana had proposed the names <unk> and Metallica . Ulrich named his band Metallica . A second advertisement was placed in The Recycler for a position as lead guitarist . Dave Mustaine answered ; Ulrich and Hetfield recruited him after seeing his expensive guitar equipment . In early 1982 , Metallica recorded its first original song " Hit the Lights " for the Metal Massacre I compilation . Hetfield played bass on the song and Lloyd Grant was credited with a guitar solo . Metal Massacre I was released on June 14 , 1982 ; early pressings listed the band incorrectly as " <unk> " . Although angered by the error , Metallica created enough " buzz " with the song and the band played its first live performance on March 14 , 1982 at Radio City in Anaheim , California , with newly recruited bassist Ron McGovney . The band 's first taste of live success came early ; they were chosen to open for British heavy metal band Saxon at one gig of their 1982 US tour . This was Metallica 's second gig . Metallica recorded its first demo , Power Metal , a name inspired by Quintana 's early business cards in early 1982 . 
 The term " thrash metal " was coined by Kerrang ! ' s journalist Malcolm Dome in reference to Anthrax 's song " Metal Thrashing Mad " in Kerrang ! ' s issue 62 , page 8 , published on February 23 , 1984 . Prior to this , James Hetfield referred to Metallica 's sound as " power metal " . In late 1982 , Ulrich and Hetfield attended a show at the West Hollywood nightclub Whisky a Go Go , which featured bassist Cliff Burton in a band called Trauma . The two were " blown away " by Burton 's use of a wah @-@ wah pedal and asked him to join Metallica . Hetfield and Mustaine wanted McGovney to leave because they thought he " didn 't contribute anything , he just followed " . Although Burton initially declined the offer , by the end of the year he had accepted on the condition the band move to El Cerrito in the San Francisco Bay Area . Metallica 's first live performance with Burton was at the nightclub The Stone in March 1983 , and the first recording to feature Burton was the Megaforce demo ( 1983 ) . 
 Metallica was ready to record their debut album , but when Metal Blade was unable to cover the cost , the band began looking for other options . Concert promoter Johny " Z " Zazula , who had heard the demo No Life ' til Leather ( 1982 ) , offered to broker a record deal between Metallica and New York City @-@ based record labels . After those record labels showed no interest , Zazula borrowed enough money to cover the recording budget and signed Metallica to his own label , Megaforce Records . 
 = = = Kill ' Em All and Ride the Lightning ( 1983 – 85 ) = = = 
 In May 1983 , Metallica traveled to Rochester , New York to record its debut album , Metal Up Your Ass , which was produced by Paul Curcio . The other members decided to eject Mustaine from the band because of his drug and alcohol abuse , and violent behavior just before the recording sessions on April 11 , 1983 . Exodus guitarist Kirk Hammett replaced Mustaine the same afternoon . 
 Mustaine , who went on to found Megadeth , has expressed his dislike for Hammett in interviews , saying Hammett " stole " his job . Mustaine was " pissed off " because he believes Hammett became popular by playing guitar leads that Mustaine himself had written . In a 1985 interview with Metal Forces , Mustaine said , " it 's real funny how Kirk Hammett ripped off every lead break I 'd played on that No Life ' til Leather tape and got voted No. 1 guitarist in your magazine " . On Megadeth 's debut album Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! ( 1985 ) , Mustaine included the song " Mechanix " , which Metallica reworked and retitled " The Four Horsemen " on Kill ' Em All . Mustaine said he did this to " straighten Metallica up " because Metallica referred to Mustaine as a drunk and said he could not play guitar . Metallica 's first live performance with Hammett was on April 16 , 1983 , at a nightclub in Dover , New Jersey called The <unk> ; the support act was Anthrax 's original line @-@ up , which included Dan <unk> and Neil <unk> . This was the first time the two bands performed live together . 
 Because of conflicts with its record label and the distributors ' refusal to release an album titled Metal Up Your Ass , the album was renamed Kill ' Em All . It was released on Megaforce Records in the U.S. and on Music for Nations in Europe , and peaked at number 155 on the Billboard 200 in 1986 . [ 1 ] Although the album was not initially a financial success , it earned Metallica a growing fan base in the underground metal scene . To support the release , Metallica embarked on the Kill ' Em All for One tour with Raven . In February 1984 , Metallica supported Venom on the Seven Dates of Hell tour , during which the bands performed in front of 7 @,@ 000 people at the Aardschok Festival in Zwolle , Netherlands . 
 Metallica recorded its second studio album , Ride the Lightning , at Sweet Silence Studios in Copenhagen , Denmark . It was released in August 1984 and reached number 100 on the Billboard 200 . A French printing press mistakenly printed green covers for the album , which are now considered collectors ' items . Mustaine received writing credit for " Ride the Lightning " and " The Call of Ktulu " . 
 Elektra Records A & R director Michael Alago , and co @-@ founder of Q @-@ Prime Management Cliff Burnstein , attended a Metallica concert in September 1984 . They were impressed with the performance , signed Metallica to Elektra , and made the band as a client of Q @-@ Prime Management . Metallica 's growing success was such that the band 's British label Music for Nations released Creeping Death as a limited edition single , which sold 40 @,@ 000 copies as an import in the U.S. Two of the three songs on the record — cover versions of Diamond Head 's " Am I Evil ? " and Blitzkrieg 's " Blitzkrieg " — appeared on the 1989 Elektra reissue of Kill ' Em All . Metallica embarked on its first major European tour with Tank to an average crowd of 1 @,@ 300 . Returning to the U.S. , it embarked upon a tour co @-@ headlining with W.A.S.P. and supported by Armored Saint . Metallica played its largest show at the Monsters of Rock festival at Donington Park , England , on August 17 , 1985 , with Bon Jovi and Ratt , playing to 70 @,@ 000 people . At a show in Oakland , California , at the Day on the Green festival , the band played to a crowd of 60 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Master of Puppets and Burton 's death ( 1986 – 87 ) = = = 
 Metallica 's third studio album , Master of Puppets , was recorded at Sweet Silence Studios and was released in March 1986 . The album reached number 29 on the Billboard 200 and spent 72 weeks on the chart . It was the band 's first album to be certified gold on November 4 , 1986 , and was certified six times platinum in 2003 . Steve Huey of AllMusic considered the album " the band 's greatest achievement " . Following the release of the album , Metallica supported Ozzy Osbourne on a U.S. tour . Hetfield broke his wrist while skateboarding ; he continued with the tour , performing vocals , with guitar technician John Marshall playing rhythm guitar . 
 On September 27 , 1986 , during the European leg of Metallica 's Damage , Inc . Tour , members drew cards to determine which bunks on the tour bus they would sleep in . Burton won and chose to sleep in Hammett 's bunk . At around sunrise near <unk> , Sweden , the bus driver lost control and skidded , which caused the bus to overturn several times . Ulrich , Hammett , and Hetfield sustained no serious injuries ; however , bassist Burton was pinned under the bus and died . Hetfield said : 
 I saw the bus lying right on him . I saw his legs sticking out . I freaked . The bus driver , I recall , was trying to yank the blanket out from under him to use for other people . I just went , ' Don 't fucking do that ! ' I already wanted to kill the [ bus driver ] . I don 't know if he was drunk or if he hit some ice . All I knew was , he was driving and Cliff wasn 't alive anymore . 
 Burton 's death left Metallica 's future in doubt . The three remaining members decided Burton would want them to carry on , and with the Burton family 's blessings the band sought a replacement . Roughly 40 people , including Hammett 's childhood friend , Les Claypool of Primus , Troy Gregory of Prong , and Jason Newsted , formerly of Flotsam and Jetsam , auditioned for the band . Newsted learned Metallica 's entire set list ; after the audition Metallica invited him to Tommy 's Joynt in San Francisco . Hetfield , Ulrich , and Hammett decided on Newsted as Burton 's replacement ; Newsted 's first live performance with Metallica was at the Country Club in Reseda , California . The members initiated Newsted by tricking him into eating a ball of wasabi . 
 After Newsted joined Metallica , the band left its El Cerrito practice space — a suburban house formerly rented by sound engineer Mark Whitaker dubbed " the <unk> @-@ mansion " — and relocated to the adjacent cities of Berkeley and Albany before eventually settling in the Marin County city of San Rafael , north of San Francisco . 
 Metallica finished its tour in the early months of 1987 . In March 1987 , Hetfield again broke his wrist while skateboarding , forcing the band to cancel an appearance on Saturday Night Live . In August 1987 , an all @-@ covers extended play ( EP ) titled The $ 5 @.@ 98 E.P. : Garage Days Re @-@ Revisited was released . The EP was recorded in an effort to use the band 's newly constructed recording studio , test Newsted 's talents , and to relieve grief and stress following the death of Burton . A video titled Cliff ' Em All commemorating Burton 's three years in Metallica was released in 1987 ; the video included bass solos , home videos , and pictures . 
 = = = ... And Justice for All and Metallica ( 1988 – 93 ) = = = 
 Metallica 's first studio album since Burton 's death , ... And Justice for All , was released in 1988 . The album was a commercial success , reaching number six on the Billboard 200 , and was the band 's first album to enter the top 10 . The album was certified platinum nine weeks after its release . Newsted 's bass on the album was purposely attenuated as part of the continuous " hazing " he received , and his musical ideas were ignored — though he received writing credit for the track " Blackened " . There were complaints about the production ; Steve Huey of AllMusic said Ulrich 's drums were clicking more than thudding , and the guitars " buzz thinly " . To promote the album , Metallica embarked on a tour called Damaged Justice . 
 In 1989 , Metallica received its first Grammy Award nomination for ... And Justice for All in the new Best Hard Rock / Metal Performance Vocal or Instrument category . Metallica was the favorite to win but the award was given to Jethro Tull for the album Crest of a Knave . The award was controversial with fans and the press ; Metallica was standing off @-@ stage waiting to receive the award after performing the song " One " . Jethro Tull had been advised by its manager not to attend the ceremony because he was expecting Metallica to win . The award was named in Entertainment Weekly 's " Grammy 's 10 Biggest <unk> " . 
 Following the release of ... And Justice for All , Metallica released its debut music video for the song " One " , which the band performed in an abandoned warehouse . The footage was remixed with the film Johnny Got His Gun . Rather than organize an ongoing licensing deal , Metallica purchased the rights to the film . The remixed video was submitted to MTV with an alternative , performance @-@ only version that was held back in case MTV banned the remixed version . MTV accepted the remixed version ; the video was viewers ' first exposure to Metallica . In 1999 it was voted number 38 in 1999 in MTV 's " Top 100 Videos of All Time " countdown ; it was featured in the network 's 25th Anniversary edition of ADD Video , which showcased the most popular videos on MTV in the last 25 years . 
 In October 1990 , Metallica entered One on One Recording 's studio in North Hollywood to record its next album . Bob Rock , who had worked with Aerosmith , The Cult , Bon Jovi , and Mötley Crüe , was hired as the producer . Metallica — also known as The Black Album — was remixed three times , cost US $ 1 million , and ended three marriages . Although the release was delayed until 1991 , Metallica debuted at number one in ten countries , selling 650 @,@ 000 units in the U.S. during its first week . The album brought Metallica mainstream attention ; it has been certified 16 times platinum in the U.S. , which makes it the 25th @-@ best @-@ selling album in the country . The making of Metallica and the following tour was documented in A Year and a Half in the Life of Metallica . The tour in support of the album , called the Wherever We May Roam Tour , lasted 14 months and included dates in the U.S. , Japan , and the UK . In April 1992 , Metallica appeared at The Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert and performed a three @-@ song set . Hetfield later performed " Stone Cold Crazy " with the remaining members of Queen and Tony Iommi . 
 On August 8 , 1992 , during the co @-@ headlining Guns N ' Roses / Metallica Stadium Tour , Hetfield suffered second and third degree burns to his arms , face , hands , and legs . There had been some confusion with the new pyrotechnics setup , which resulted in Hetfield walking into a 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) flame during " Fade to Black " . Newsted said Hetfield 's skin was " bubbling like on The Toxic Avenger " . Guitar technician John Marshall , who had previously filled in on rhythm guitar and was now playing in Metal Church , replaced Hetfield for the remainder of the tour ; Hetfield was unable to play guitar , although he was able to sing . Later in 1993 , Metallica went on the Nowhere Else to Roam Tour , playing five shows in Mexico City . Live Shit : Binge & Purge , the band 's first box set , was released in November 1993 . The collection contained three live CDs , three home videos , and a book filled with riders and letters . 
 = = = Load , Reload , Garage Inc. and S & M ( 1994 – 99 ) = = = 
 After almost three years of touring to promote the album Metallica , including a headlining performance at Woodstock ' 94 , Metallica returned to the studio to write and record its sixth studio album . The band went on a brief hiatus in the summer of 1995 and played three outdoor shows that included headlining at Donington Park , where it was supported by Slayer , Skid Row , Slash 's Snakepit , Therapy ? , and Corrosion of Conformity . The short tour was titled Escape from the Studio ' 95 . The band spent about a year writing and recording new songs , resulting in the release of Load in 1996 . Load debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and ARIA Charts ; it was the band 's second number one album . The cover art of Load , called Blood and Semen III , was created by Andres Serrano , who pressed a mixture of his own semen and blood between sheets of plexiglass . The release marked a change in the band 's musical direction and a new image ; band members ' hair was cut . Metallica headlined the alternative rock festival Lollapalooza in mid @-@ 1996 . 
 During early production of the album , the band had recorded enough material to fill a double album . It was decided that half of the songs were to be released ; the band would continue to work on the remaining songs and release them the following year . This resulted in the follow @-@ up album , Reload . The cover art was again created by Serrano , this time using a mixture of blood and urine . Reload debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and reached number two on the Top Canadian Album chart . Hetfield said in the 2004 documentary film Some Kind of Monster that the band initially thought some of the songs on these albums were of average quality ; these were " polished and reworked " until judged to be releasable . To promote Reload , Metallica performed " Fuel " and " The Memory Remains " with Marianne Faithfull on NBC 's Saturday Night Live in December 1997 . 
 In 1998 , Metallica compiled a double album of cover songs titled Garage Inc . The first disc contained newly recorded covers of songs by Diamond Head , Killing Joke , the Misfits , Thin Lizzy , Mercyful Fate , Black Sabbath , and others . The second disc featured the original version of The $ 5 @.@ 98 E.P. : Garage Days Re @-@ Revisited , which had become a scarce collectors ' item . The album entered the Billboard 200 at number two . 
 On April 21 and 22 , 1999 , Metallica recorded two performances with the San Francisco Symphony conducted by Michael Kamen , who had previously worked with producer Rock on " Nothing Else Matters " . Kamen approached Metallica in 1991 with the idea of pairing the band 's music with a symphony orchestra . Kamen and his staff of over 100 composed additional orchestral material for Metallica songs . Metallica wrote two new Kamen @-@ scored songs for the event , " No Leaf Clover " and " <unk> " . The audio recording and concert footage were released in 1999 as the album and concert film S & M. It entered the Billboard 200 at number two , and the Australian ARIA charts and Top Internet Albums chart at number one . 
 = = = Napster controversy , Newsted 's departure and St. Anger ( 2000 – 05 ) = = = 
 In 2000 , Metallica discovered that a demo of its song " I Disappear " , which was supposed to be released in combination with the Mission : Impossible II soundtrack , was receiving radio airplay . Tracing the source of the leak , the band found the file on the Napster peer @-@ to @-@ peer file @-@ sharing network , and also found that the band 's entire catalogue was freely available . Legal action was initiated against Napster ; Metallica filed a lawsuit at the U.S. District Court , Central District of California , alleging that Napster violated three areas of the law : copyright infringement , unlawful use of digital audio interface device , and the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act ( RICO ) . 
 Ulrich provided a statement to the Senate Judiciary Committee regarding copyright infringement on July 11 , 2000 . Federal Judge Marilyn Hall Patel ordered the site to place a filter on the program within 72 hours or be shut down . A settlement between Metallica and Napster was reached when German media conglomerate Bertelsmann BMG showed interest in purchasing the rights to Napster for $ 94 million . Under the terms of settlement , Napster agreed to block users who shared music by artists who do not want their music shared . On June 3 , 2002 , Napster filed for Chapter 11 protection under U.S. bankruptcy laws . On September 3 , 2002 , an American bankruptcy judge blocked the sale of Napster to Bertelsmann and forced Napster to liquidate its assets according to Chapter 7 of the U.S. bankruptcy laws . 
 At the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards , Ulrich appeared with host Marlon Wayans in a skit that criticized the idea of using Napster to share music . Marlon played a college student listening to Metallica 's " I Disappear " . Ulrich walked in and asked for an explanation . Ulrich responded to Wayans ' excuse that using Napster was just " sharing " by saying that Wayans ' idea of sharing was " borrowing things that were not yours without asking " . He called in the Metallica road crew , who proceeded to confiscate all of Wayans ' belongings , leaving him almost naked in an empty room . Napster creator Shawn Fanning responded later in the ceremony by presenting an award wearing a Metallica shirt , saying , " I borrowed this shirt from a friend . Maybe , if I like it , I 'll buy one of my own . " Ulrich was later booed on stage at the award show when he introduced the final musical act , Blink @-@ 182 . 
 Newsted left Metallica on January 17 , 2001 , as plans were being made to enter the recording studio . His said he left the band for " private and personal reasons , and the physical damage I have done to myself over the years while playing the music that I love " . During a Playboy interview with Metallica , Newsted said he wanted to release an album with his side project , <unk> . Hetfield was opposed to the idea and said , " When someone does a side project , it takes away from the strength of Metallica " , and that a side project is " like cheating on your wife in a way " . Newsted said Hetfield had recorded vocals for a song used in the film South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut , and appeared on two Corrosion of Conformity albums . Hetfield replied , " My name isn 't on those records . And I 'm not out trying to sell them " , and pondered questions such as , " Where would it end ? Does he start touring with it ? Does he sell shirts ? Is it his band ? " 
 In April 2001 , filmmakers Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky began following Metallica to document the recording process of the band 's next studio album . Over two years they recorded more than 1 @,@ 000 hours of footage . On July 19 , 2001 , before preparations to enter the recording studio , Hetfield entered rehab to treat his " alcoholism and other addictions " . All recording plans were put on hold and the band 's future was in doubt . Hetfield left rehab on December 4 , 2001 , and the band returned to the recording studio on April 12 , 2002 . Hetfield was required to limit his work to four hours a day between noon and 4 pm , and to spend the rest of his time with his family . The footage recorded by Berlinger and Sinofsky was compiled into the documentary Some Kind of Monster , which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2004 . In the documentary , Newsted said his former bandmates ' decision to hire a therapist to help solve their problems which he felt they could have solved on their own was " really fucking lame and weak " . 
 For the duration of the recording period , producer Bob Rock played bass on the album and in several live shows at which Metallica performed during that time . Once the record was completed in early 2003 , the band started to hold auditions for Newsted 's permanent replacement . Bassists Pepper Keenan , Jeordie White , Scott Reeder , Eric Avery , Danny Lohner , and Chris Wyse — among others — auditioned for the role . After three months of auditions , Robert Trujillo , formerly of Suicidal Tendencies and Ozzy Osbourne 's band , was chosen as the new bassist . As Metallica moved on , Newsted joined Canadian thrash metal band Voivod in 2002 , and was Trujillo 's replacement in Osbourne 's band during the 2003 Ozzfest tour , which included Voivod . 
 In June 2003 , Metallica 's eighth studio album , St. Anger , debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , and drew mixed reactions from critics . Ulrich 's " steely " sounding snare drum and the absence of guitar solos received particular criticism . Kevin Forest Moreau of <unk> said , " the guitars stumble in a monotone of mid @-@ level , processed rattle ; the drums don 't propel as much as struggle to disguise an all @-@ too @-@ turgid pace ; and the rage is both unfocused and leavened with too much narcissistic navel @-@ gazing " . Brent DiCrescenzo of Pitchfork Media described it as " an utter mess " . However , Blender magazine called it the " <unk> and grimmest of the band 's Bob Rock productions " , and New York Magazine called it " utterly raw and rocking " . The title track , " St. Anger " , won the Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance in 2004 ; it was used as the official theme song for WWE 's SummerSlam 2003 . 
 Before the band 's set at the 2004 Download Festival , Ulrich was rushed to the hospital after having an anxiety seizure and was unable to perform . Hetfield searched for last @-@ minute volunteers to replace Ulrich . Slayer drummer Dave Lombardo and Slipknot drummer Joey Jordison volunteered . Lombardo performed " Battery " and " The Four Horsemen " , Ulrich 's drum technician Flemming Larsen performed " Fade to Black " , and Jordison performed the remainder of the set . Having toured for two years in support of St. Anger on the Summer Sanitarium Tour 2003 and the Madly in Anger with the World Tour , with multi @-@ platinum rock band Godsmack in support , Metallica took a break from performing and spent most of 2005 with friends and family . The band opened for The Rolling Stones at AT & T Park in San Francisco on November 13 and 15 , 2005 . 
 = = = Death Magnetic , Lulu and Beyond Magnetic ( 2006 – 11 ) = = = 
 In December 2006 , Metallica released a DVD titled The Videos 1989 – 2004 , which sold 28 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and entered the Billboard Top Videos chart at number three . Metallica recorded a guitar @-@ based interpretation of Ennio Morricone 's " The Ecstasy of Gold " for a tribute album titled We All Love Ennio Morricone , which was released in February 2007 . The track received a Grammy nomination at the 50th Grammy Awards for the category " Best Rock Instrumental Performance " . A recording of " The Ecstasy of Gold " has been played to introduce Metallica 's performances since the 1980s . Earlier that year , Metallica announced on its official website that after 15 years , long @-@ time producer Bob Rock would not be producing the band 's next studio album . Instead , the band chose to work with producer Rick Rubin . Metallica scheduled the release of Death Magnetic as September 12 , 2008 , and the band filmed a music video for the album 's first single , " The Day That Never Comes " . 
 On September 2 , 2008 , a record store in France began selling copies of Death Magnetic nearly two weeks before its scheduled worldwide release date , which resulted in the album being made available on peer @-@ to @-@ peer clients . This prompted the band 's UK distributor Vertigo Records to officially release the album on September 10 , 2008 . Rumors of Metallica or Warner Bros. taking legal action against the French retailer were unconfirmed , though drummer Lars Ulrich responded to the leak by saying , " ... We 're ten days from release . I mean , from here , we 're golden . If this thing leaks all over the world today or tomorrow , happy days . Happy days . Trust me " , and , " By 2008 standards , that 's a victory . If you 'd told me six months ago that our record wouldn 't leak until 10 days out , I would have signed up for that . " 
 Death Magnetic debuted at number one in the U.S. selling 490 @,@ 000 units ; Metallica became the first band to have five consecutive studio albums debut at number one in the history of the Billboard 200 . A week after its release , Death Magnetic remained at number one on the Billboard 200 and the European album chart ; it also became the fastest selling album of 2008 in Australia . 
 Death Magnetic remained at number one on the Billboard 200 album chart for three consecutive weeks . Metallica was one of two artists whose album — the other being Jack Johnson 's album Sleep Through the Static — remained on the Billboard 200 for three consecutive weeks at number one in 2008 . Death Magnetic also remained at number one on Billboard 's Hard Rock , Modern Rock / Alternative and Rock album charts for five consecutive weeks . The album reached number one in 32 countries outside the U.S. , including the UK , Canada , and Australia . In November 2008 , Metallica 's record deal with Warner Bros. ended and the band considered releasing its next album through the internet . 
 On January 14 , 2009 , it was announced that Metallica would be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on April 4 , 2009 , and that former bassist Jason Newsted — who left the band in 2001 — would perform with the band at the ceremony . Initially , it was announced that the matter had been discussed and that bassist Trujillo had agreed not to play because he " wanted to see the Black Album band " . However , during the band 's set of " Master of Puppets " and " Enter Sandman " , both Trujillo and Newsted were on stage . Ray Burton , father of the late Cliff Burton , accepted the honor on his behalf . Although he was not to be inducted with them , Metallica invited Dave Mustaine to take part in the induction ceremony . Mustaine declined because of his touring commitments in Europe . 
 Metallica , Slayer , Megadeth , and Anthrax performed on the same bill for the first time on June 16 , 2010 , at Warsaw <unk> Airport , Warsaw , as a part of the Sonisphere Festival series . The show in Sofia , Bulgaria , on June 22 , 2010 , was broadcast via satellite to cinemas . The bands also played concerts in Bucharest on June 26 , 2010 , and Istanbul on June 27 , 2010 . On June 28 , 2010 , Death Magnetic was certified 2X platinum by the RIAA . 
 Metallica 's World Magnetic Tour ended in Melbourne on November 21 , 2010 . The band had been touring for over two years in support of Death Magnetic . To accompany the final tour dates in Australia and New Zealand , a live , limited edition EP of past performances in Australia called Six Feet Down Under was released . The EP was followed by Six Feet Down Under ( Part II ) , which was released on November 12 , 2010 . Part 2 contains a further eight songs recorded during the first two Oceanic Legs of the World Magnetic Tour . 
 On November 26 , 2010 , Metallica released a live EP titled Live at <unk> 's , which was recorded in June 2008 at <unk> 's Record Store , just before the band 's appearance at Bonnaroo Music Festival that year . 
 In a June 2009 interview with Italy 's Rock TV , Ulrich said Metallica was planning to continue touring until August 2010 , and that there were no plans for a tenth album . He said he was sure the band would collaborate with producer Rick Rubin again . According to Blabbermouth.net , the band was considering recording its next album in the second half of 2011 . In November 2010 , during an interview with The Pulse of Radio , Ulrich said Metallica would return to writing in 2011 . Ulrich said , " There 's a bunch of balls in the air for 2011 , but I think the main one is we really want to get back to writing again . We haven 't really written since , what , ' 06 , ' 07 , and we want to get back to kind of just being creative again . Right now we are going to just chill out and then probably start up again in , I 'd say , March or April , and start probably putting the creative cap back on and start writing some songs . " 
 In an interview at the April 2011 Big Four concert , Robert Trujillo said Metallica will work with Rick Rubin again as producer for the new album and were " really excited to write some new music . There 's no shortage of riffage in Metallica world right now . " He added , " The first album with Rick was also the first album for me , so in a lot of ways , you 're kind of testing the water . Now that we 're comfortable with Rick and his incredible engineer , Greg Fidelman , who worked with Slayer , actually , on this last record — it 's my hero — it 's a great team . And it 's only gonna better ; I really believe that . So I 'm super @-@ excited . " In June 2011 , Rubin said Metallica had begun writing its new album . On November 9 , 2010 , Metallica announced it would be headlining the Rock in Rio festival in Rio de Janeiro on September 25 , 2011 . 
 On December 13 , 2010 , the band announced it would again play as part of the " big four " during the Sonisphere Festival at Knebworth House , Hertfordshire , on July 8 , 2011 . It was the first time all of the " big four " members played on the same stage in the UK . On December 17 , 2010 , Another " big four " Sonisphere performance that would take place in France on July 9 was announced . On January 25 , 2011 , another " big four " performance on April 23 , 2011 , at the Empire Polo Club in Indio , California , was announced . It was the first time all of the " big four " members played on the same stage in the U.S. On February 17 , 2011 , a show in Gelsenkirchen , Germany , on July 2 , 2011 , was announced . On February 22 , a " big four " show in Milan on July 6 , 2011 , was announced . On March 2 , 2011 , another " big four " concert , which took place in Gothenburg on July 3 , 2011 , was announced . The final " big four " concert was in New York City , at Yankee Stadium , on September 14 , 2011 . 
 On June 15 , 2011 , Metallica announced that recording sessions with singer @-@ songwriter Lou Reed had concluded . The album , which was titled Lulu , was recorded over several months and comprised ten songs based on Frank Wedekind 's " Lulu " plays Earth Spirit and Pandora 's Box . The album was released on October 31 , 2011 . The recording of the album was problematic at times ; Lars Ulrich later said Lou Reed challenged him to a " street fight " . On October 16 , 2011 , Robert Trujillo confirmed that the band was back in the studio and writing new material . He said , " The writing process for the new Metallica album has begun . We 've been in the studio with Rick Rubin , working on a couple of things , and we 're going to be recording during the most of next year . " 
 Metallica was due to make its first appearance in India at the " India Rocks " concert , supporting the 2011 Indian Grand Prix . However , the concert was canceled when the venue was proven to be unsafe . Fans raided the stage during the event and the organizers were later arrested for fraud . Metallica made its Indian debut in Bangalore on October 30 , 2011 . On November 10 , it was announced that Metallica would headline the main stage on Saturday June 9 , 2012 , at the Download Festival at Donington Park and that the band would play the The Black Album in its entirety . Metallica celebrated its 30th anniversary by playing four shows at the Fillmore in San Francisco in December 2011 . The shows were exclusive to Met Club members and tickets were charged at $ 6 each or $ 19 @.@ 81 for all four nights . The shows consisted of songs from the band 's career and featured guest appearances by artists who had either helped or had influenced Metallica . These shows were notable because Lloyd Grant , Dave Mustaine , Jason Newsted , Glenn Danzig , Ozzy Osbourne , Jerry Cantrell , Apocalyptica , members of Diamond Head , and King Diamond joined Metallica on stage for all appropriate songs . In December 2011 , Metallica began releasing songs that were written for Death Magnetic but were not included on the album online . On December 13 , 2011 , the band released Beyond Magnetic , a digital EP release exclusively on iTunes . It was released on CD in January 2012 . 
 = = = Metallica : Through the Never and tenth studio album ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 On February 7 , 2012 , Metallica announced that it would start a new music festival called Orion Music + More , which took place on June 23 and 24 , 2012 , in Atlantic City . Metallica also confirmed that it would headline the festival on both days and would perform two of its most critically acclaimed albums in their entirety : The Black Album on one night , and Ride the Lightning on the other . In a July 2012 interview with Canadian radio station 99 @.@ 3 The Fox , Ulrich said Metallica would not release its new album until at least early 2014 . In November 2012 , Metallica left Warner Bros. Records and launched an independent record label , Blackened Recordings , which will produce the band 's future releases . The band has acquired the rights to all of its studio albums , which will be reissued through the new label . Blackened releases will be distributed through Warner subsidiary Rhino Entertainment in the U.S. and elsewhere through Universal Music . On September 20 , 2012 , Metallica announced via its official website that a new DVD containing footage of shows it performed in Quebec in 2009 would be released that December ; fans would get the chance to vote for two setlists that would appear on the DVD . The film , titled Quebec Magnetic , was released in the U.S. on December 10 , 2012 . 
 In an interview with Classic Rock on January 8 , 2013 , Ulrich said regarding the band 's upcoming album , " What we 're doing now certainly sounds like a continuation [ of Death Magnetic ] " . He also said , " I love Rick [ Rubin ] . We all love Rick . We 're in touch with Rick constantly . We 'll see where it goes . It would stun me if the record came out in 2013 . " Also in 2013 , the band starred in a 3D concert film titled Metallica : Through the Never , which was directed by Antal <unk> and was released in IMAX theaters on September 27 . In an interview dated July 22 , 2013 , Ulrich told Ultimate Guitar , " 2014 will be all about making a new Metallica record " ; he said the album will most likely be released during 2015 . Kirk Hammett and Robert Trujillo later confirmed the band 's intention to enter the studio . At the second Orion Music + More festival held in Detroit , the band played under the name " <unk> " — a reference to actor Dane DeHaan , who starred in Metallica : Through the Never . The band performed its debut album Kill ' Em All in its entirety , celebrating the 30th anniversary of its release . On December 8 , 2013 , the band played a show called " Freeze ' Em All " in Antarctica , becoming the first band to play on all seven continents . The performance was filmed and released as a live album the same month . 
 At the 56th Annual Grammy Awards in January 2014 , Metallica performed " One " with Chinese pianist Lang Lang . In March 2014 , Metallica began a tour called " Metallica By Request " , in which fans request songs for the band to perform . A new song , titled " Lords of Summer " was written for the concerts and released as a " first take " demo in June 2014 . In June 2014 , the band headlined the Glastonbury Festival in an attempt to attract new fans . Ulrich said , " We have one shot , you never know if you 'll be invited back " . In November 2014 , Metallica performed at the closing ceremony of BlizzCon 2014 . In January 2015 , Metallica announced a " Metallica Night " with the San Jose Sharks , which featured a Q & A session with the band and a charity auction benefiting the San Francisco Bay Chapter of the Sierra Club , but no performances . They were announced to headline Lollapalooza in March 2015 , returning to perform there for the first time in 20 years . On May 2 , 2015 , Metallica performed their third annual Metallica Day at AT & T Park . Metallica were also announced to play at X Games for the first time at X Games Austin 2015 in Austin , Texas . On June 14 , 2015 , Hetfield and Hammett performed The Star @-@ Spangled Banner live via electric guitars prior to game 5 of the NBA Finals between the Cleveland Cavaliers and Golden State Warriors at Oracle Arena in Oakland , California . In late October , the band unveiled a new website with an introduction from Ulrich containing footage from the studio of the band working on new material . On November 2 , Metallica were announced to play " The Night Before " Super Bowl 50 at AT & T Park . Metallica announced they would be opening the U.S. Bank Stadium on August 20 , 2016 , with Avenged Sevenfold and Volbeat as support . 
 In April 2016 , during the week leading up to Record Store Day , for which the band was its ambassador for 2016 , Ulrich told Billboard that the band 's expanded role within the music industry had played a part in the amount of time that it had taken to write and record the album . " The way we do things now is very different than the way we did things back in the days of Kill ' Em All and Ride the Lightning . Nowadays we like to do so many different things . " Ulrich was also optimistic that production of the album had almost reached its completion . " Unless something radical happens it would be difficult for me to believe that it won 't come out in 2016 " . 
 = = Style and lyrical themes = = 
 Metallica was influenced by early heavy metal and hard rock bands and artists Black Sabbath , Deep Purple , Kiss , Led Zeppelin , Queen , Ted Nugent , AC / DC , Rush , Aerosmith , Judas Priest , and Scorpions . New wave of British heavy metal bands Venom , Motörhead , Saxon , Diamond Head , Blitzkrieg , and Iron Maiden , and early punk rock bands Ramones , Sex Pistols , and the Misfits also influenced Metallica 's style as did post @-@ punk band Killing Joke . The band 's early releases contained fast tempos , harmonized leads , and nine @-@ minute instrumental tracks . Steve Huey of AllMusic said Ride the Lightning featured " extended , progressive epics ; tight , concise groove @-@ rockers " . Huey said Metallica expanded its compositional technique and range of expression to take on a more aggressive approach in following releases , and lyrics dealt with personal and socially conscious issues . Religious and military leaders , rage , insanity , monsters , and drugs — among other themes — were explored on Master of Puppets . 
 In 1991 , Huey said Metallica with new producer Bob Rock simplified and streamlined its music for a more commercial approach to appeal to mainstream audiences . Robert Palmer of Rolling Stone said the band abandoned its aggressive , fast tempos to expand its music and expressive range . The change in direction proved commercially successful ; Metallica was the band 's first album to peak at number one on the Billboard 200 . Metallica noticed changes to the rock scene created by the grunge movement of the early 1990s . In Load — an album that has been described as having " an almost alternative rock " approach — the band changed musical direction and focused on non @-@ metal influences . Metallica 's new lyrical approach moved away from drugs and monsters , and focused on anger , loss , and retribution . Some fans and critics were not pleased with this change , which included haircuts , the cover art of Load , and headlining the alternative rock concert Lollapalooza . David Fricke of Rolling Stone described the move as " goodbye to the moldy stricture and dead @-@ end Puritanism of no @-@ frills thrash " , and called Load the heaviest record of 1996 . With the release of ReLoad in 1997 , the band displayed blues and early hard rock influences , incorporating more rhythm and harmony in song structures . 
 St. Anger marked another large change in the band 's sound . Guitar solos were excluded from the album , leaving a " raw and unpolished sound " . The band used drop C tuning ; Ulrich 's snare drum received particular criticism . New York Magazine 's Ethan Brown said it " reverberates with a <unk> " . The album 's lyrics deal with Hetfield 's drug rehabilitation and include references to the devil , anti @-@ drug themes , claustrophobia , impending doom , and religious hypocrisy . At the advice of producer Rick Rubin , for its ninth studio album Death Magnetic , the band returned to standard tuning and guitar solos . As a return to Metallica 's thrash roots , Death Magnetic was a riff @-@ oriented album featuring intense guitar solos and subtle lyrics dealing with suicide and redemption . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Metallica has become one of the most influential heavy metal bands of all time , and is credited as one of the " big four " of thrash metal , along with Slayer , Anthrax , and Megadeth . The band has sold more than 110 million records worldwide , including an RIAA @-@ certified 66 million and Nielsen SoundScan @-@ reported 53 @,@ 642 @,@ 000 in the U.S. , making Metallica one of the most commercially successful bands of all time . The writers of The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll said Metallica gave heavy metal " a much @-@ needed charge " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine and Greg Prato of Allmusic said Metallica " expanded the limits of thrash , using speed and volume not for their own sake , but to enhance their intricately structured compositions " , and called the band " easily the best , most influential heavy metal band of the ' 80s , responsible for bringing the music back to Earth " . 
 Jonathan Davis of Korn said he respects Metallica as his favorite band ; he said , " I love that they 've done things their own way and they 've persevered over the years and they 're still relevant to this day . I think they 're one of the greatest bands ever . " Godsmack drummer Shannon Larkin said Metallica has been the biggest influence on the band , stating , " they really changed my life when I was 16 years old — I 'd never heard anything that heavy " . Vocalist and guitarist Robb Flynn of Machine Head said that when creating the band 's 2007 album , The Blackening , " What we mean is an album that has the power , influence and epic grandeur of that album Master of Puppets — and the staying power — a timeless record like that " . Trivium guitarists Corey Beaulieu and Matt Heafy said that when they heard Metallica they wanted to start playing guitar . M. Shadows of Avenged Sevenfold said touring with Metallica was the band 's career highlight , and said , " Selling tons of records and playing huge shows will never compare to meeting your idols Metallica " . God Forbid guitarists Doc and Dallas Coyle were inspired by Metallica as they grew up , and the band 's bassist John <unk> admires Burton as a " rocker " . Ill Niño drummer Dave <unk> said he finds early Metallica releases are " heavy , raw , rebellious . It said , ' fuck you ' " , and Adema drummer Kris Kohls said the band is influenced by Metallica . 
 Kerrang ! released a tribute album titled Master of Puppets : Remastered with the April 8 , 2006 , edition of the magazine to celebrate the 20th anniversary of Master of Puppets . The album featured cover versions of Metallica songs by Machine Head , Bullet for My Valentine , Chimaira , Mastodon , <unk> , and Trivium — all of which are influenced by Metallica . At least 15 Metallica tribute albums have been released . On September 10 , 2006 , Metallica guest starred on The Simpsons ' eighteenth season premiere , " The Mook , the Chef , the Wife and Her Homer " . Hammett 's and Hetfield 's voices were used in three episodes of the animated television series Metalocalypse . Finnish cello metal band Apocalyptica released a tribute album titled Plays Metallica by Four <unk> , which features eight Metallica songs played on cellos . A parody band named Beatallica plays music using a combination of The Beatles and Metallica songs . Beatallica faced legal troubles when Sony , which owns The Beatles ' catalog , issued a cease and desist order , claiming " substantial and irreparable injury " and ordering the group to pay damages . Ulrich , a fan of Beatallica , asked Metallica 's lawyer Peter Paterno to help settle the case . 
 MTV ranked Metallica the third " Greatest Heavy Metal Band in History " , was listed fifth on VH1 's 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock , and the band was number one on VH1 's 20 Greatest Metal Bands list . Rolling Stone placed the band 61st on its list of " The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " ; its albums Master of Puppets and Metallica were ranked at numbers 167 and 252 respectively on the magazine 's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . Master of Puppets was named in Q Magazine 's " 50 Heaviest Albums of All Time " , and was ranked number one on IGN 's " Top 25 Metal Albums " , and number one on Metal @-@ <unk> 's " Top 100 Heavy Metal Albums " list . " Enter Sandman " was ranked number 399 on Rolling Stone 's " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . 
 On March 7 , 1999 , Metallica was inducted into the San Francisco Walk of Fame . The mayor of San Francisco , Willie Brown , proclaimed the day " Official Metallica Day " . The band was awarded the MTV Icon award in 2003 , and a concert paying tribute to the band with artists performing its songs was held . Performances included Sum 41 and a medley of " For Whom the Bell Tolls " , " Enter Sandman " , and " Master of Puppets " . Staind covered " Nothing Else Matters " , Avril Lavigne played " Fuel " , hip @-@ hop artist Snoop Dogg performed " Sad but True " , Korn played " One " , and Limp Bizkit performed " Welcome Home ( Sanitarium ) " . 
 The Guitar Hero video game series included several of Metallica 's songs . " One " was used in Guitar Hero III . The album Death Magnetic was later released as purchasable , downloadable content for the game . " Trapped Under Ice " was featured in the sequel , Guitar Hero World Tour . In 2009 , Metallica collaborated with the game 's developers to make Guitar Hero : Metallica , which included a number of Metallica 's songs . Harmonix ' video game series Rock Band included " Enter Sandman " ; " Ride the Lightning " , " Blackened " , and " ... And Justice for All " were released as downloadable tracks . In 2013 , due to expiring content licenses , " Ride the Lightning " , " Blackened " , and " ... And Justice for All " are no longer available for download . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 Grammy Awards 
 1990 : Best Metal Performance – " One " 
 1991 : Best Metal Performance – " Stone Cold Crazy " 
 1992 : Best Metal Performance – Metallica 
 1999 : Best Metal Performance – " Better than You " 
 2000 : Best Hard Rock Performance – " Whiskey in the Jar " 
 2001 : Best Rock Instrumental Performance – " The Call of Ktulu " 
 2004 : Best Metal Performance – " St. Anger " 
 2009 : Best Metal Performance – " My Apocalypse " 
 2009 : Best Recording Package – Death Magnetic 
 = = Discography = = 
 Kill ' Em All ( 1983 ) 
 Ride the Lightning ( 1984 ) 
 Master of Puppets ( 1986 ) 
 ... And Justice for All ( 1988 ) 
 Metallica ( 1991 ) 
 Load ( 1996 ) 
 Reload ( 1997 ) 
 St. Anger ( 2003 ) 
 Death Magnetic ( 2008 ) 
 Untitled tenth album ( 2016 ) 
 = Patrick Hastings = 
 Sir Patrick Gardiner Hastings KC ( 17 March 1880 – 26 February 1952 ) was a British barrister and politician noted for his long and highly successful career as a barrister and his short stint as Attorney General . He was educated at Charterhouse School until 1896 , when his family moved to continental Europe . There he learnt to shoot and ride horses , allowing him to join the Suffolk Imperial Yeomanry after the outbreak of the Second Boer War . After demobilisation he worked briefly as an apprentice to an engineer in Wales before moving to London to become a barrister . Hastings joined the Middle Temple as a student on 4 November 1901 , and after two years of saving money for the call to the Bar he finally qualified as a barrister on 15 June 1904 . 
 Hastings first rose to prominence as a result of the Case of the Hooded Man in 1912 , and became noted for his skill at cross @-@ examinations . After his success in Gruban v Booth in 1917 , his practice steadily grew , and in 1919 he became a King 's Counsel ( KC ) . Following various successes as a KC in cases such as Sievier v Wootton and Russell v Russell , his practice was put on hold in 1922 when he was returned as the Labour Member of Parliament for Wallsend . Hastings was appointed Attorney General for England and Wales in 1924 , by the first Labour government , and knighted . His authorisation of the prosecution of J. R. Campbell in what became known as the Campbell Case , however , led to the fall of the government after less than a year in power . 
 Following his resignation in 1926 to allow Margaret Bondfield to take a seat in Parliament , Hastings returned to his work as a barrister , and was even more successful than before his entry into the House of Commons . His cases included the Savidge Inquiry and the Royal Mail Case , and before his full retirement in 1948 he was one of the highest paid barristers at the English Bar . As well as his legal work , Hastings also tried his hand at writing plays . Although these had a mixed reception , The River was made into a silent film in 1927 named The Notorious Lady . Following strokes in 1948 and 1949 , his activities became heavily restricted , and he died at home on 26 February 1952 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hastings was born on 17 March 1880 in London to Alfred Gardiner Hastings and Kate Comyns Carr , a painter and the sister of J. Comyns Carr . Having been born on Saint Patrick 's Day Hastings was named after the saint . His father was a solicitor with " somewhat seedy clients " , and the family were repeatedly bankrupted . Despite financial difficulties , there was enough money in the family to send Hastings to a private preparatory school in 1890 and to Charterhouse School in 1894 . Hastings disliked school , saying " I hated the bell which drove us up in the morning , I hated the masters ; above all I hated the work , which never interested me in the slightest degree " . He was bullied at both the preparatory school and at Charterhouse , and did not excel at either sports or his studies . 
 By 1896 the family had hit another period of financial trouble , and Hastings left Charterhouse to move to continental Europe with his mother and older brother Archie until there was enough money for the family to return to London . The family initially moved to Ajaccio in Corsica , where they bought several old guns and taught Hastings and his brother how to shoot . After six months in Ajaccio the family moved again , this time to the Ardennes , where they also learnt how to fish and ride horses . 
 While they were in the Ardennes , Hastings and his brother were arrested and briefly held for murder . While attending a fête in a nearby village Archie got into a disagreement with the local priest , who accused him of insulting the French church after misunderstanding one of his comments . The brothers returned to see the priest the next day to demand an apology , and after receiving it , they began to return home . On the way there they were stopped by two gendarmes who arrested them for murder , informing them that the priest had been found dead ten minutes after they left his house . As the gendarmes prepared to take the Hastings to the police station , two more officers turned up with a villager in handcuffs . It transpired that the priest had been having an affair with the villager 's sister , and after waiting for the <unk> to leave he had entered the priest 's house and killed him with a brick . The <unk> were quickly released . 
 Soon after this incident , the family moved from the Ardennes to Brussels after a message from their father that the financial problems had ended . When they reached Brussels they found that the situation was actually worse than previously , and the family moved between cheap hotels , each one worse than the one before . Desperate for a job , Hastings accepted the offer of an apprenticeship with an English engineer who claimed to have made a machine to extract gold in North Wales . After about a year and a half of work they discovered that there was no gold to be found in that part of Wales , and Hastings was informed that his services would no longer be needed . 
 = = Military service and call to the Bar = = 
 Hastings left the failed mining operation in 1899 , and travelled to London . Just after he arrived , the Second Boer War broke out , and the British government called for volunteers to join an expeditionary force . The only qualifications required were that the recruit could ride and shoot , and Hastings immediately applied to join the Suffolk Imperial Yeomanry . He was accepted , and after two weeks of training the regiment were given horses and boarded the S.S. Goth Castle to South Africa . The ship reached Cape Town after three weeks , and the regiment disembarked . Their horses were considered too weak to be ridden , and so they were instead discharged and either put down or given to other soldiers . Hastings did not enjoy his time in the army ; the weather was poor , the orders given were confusing and they were provided with minimal equipment . 
 Hastings was made a scout , a duty he thoroughly enjoyed ; it meant that he got to the targeted farms first , and had time to steal chickens and other food before the Royal Military Police arrived ( as looting was a criminal offence ) . Hastings was not a model soldier ; as well as looting , he estimated that by the time he left the army he had " been charged and tried upon almost every offence known to military law " . After two years of fighting , the Treaty of Vereeniging was signed in 1902 , bringing an end to the Second Boer War , and his regiment was returned to London and demobilised . 
 By the time Hastings returned , he had decided to become a barrister . There were various problems with this aim : in particular , he had no money , and the training for barristers was extremely expensive . Despite this , he refused to consider a change of career , and joined the Middle Temple as a student on 4 November 1901 . It is uncertain why he chose this particular Inn of Court ( his uncle J. Comyns Carr , his only connection with the Bar , was a member of the Inner Temple ) , but the most likely explanation was that the Middle Temple was popular with Irish barristers , and Hastings was of Irish ancestry . The examinations required to become a barrister were not particularly difficult or expensive , but once a student passed all the exams he would be expected to pay the then @-@ enormous sum of £ 100 when he was called to the Bar – £ 100 in 1901 would be worth approximately £ 9 @,@ 800 in 2015 – and Hastings was literally penniless . 
 As soon as he joined the Middle Temple , Hastings began saving money for his call to the Bar , starting with half a crown from the sale of his Queen 's South Africa Medal to a pawnbroker . The rules and regulations of the Inns of Court meant that a student was not allowed to work as a " <unk> " but there was no rule against working as a journalist , and his cousin Philip Carr , a drama critic for the Daily News , got him a job writing a gossip column for the News for one pound a week . This job lasted about three months ; both he and Carr were fired after Hastings wrote a piece for the paper that should have been done by Carr . Despite this , his new contacts within journalism allowed him to get temporary jobs writing play reviews for the Pall Mall Gazette and the Ladies ' Field . After two years of working eighteen @-@ hour days he had saved £ 60 of the £ 100 needed to be called to the Bar , but had still not studied for the examinations as he could not afford to buy any law books . Over the next year his income decreased , as he was forced to study for the examinations rather than work for newspapers . By the end of May 1904 he had the £ 100 needed , and he was called to the bar on 15 June . 
 = = Career as a barrister = = 
 At the time , there was no organised way for a new barrister to find a pupil master or set of chambers , and in addition the barrister would be expected to pay the pupil master between 50 and 100 guineas ( equivalent to between £ 5 @,@ 100 and £ 10 @,@ 200 in 2015 ) . This was out of the question for Hastings ; thanks to the cost of his call to the Bar , he was so poor that his wig and robes had to be bought on credit . Instead he wandered around Middle Temple and by chance ran into Frederick Corbet , the only practising barrister he knew . After Hastings explained his situation , Corbet offered him a place in his set of chambers , which Hastings immediately accepted . Although he now had a place in chambers , Hastings had no way of getting a pupillage ( Corbet only dealt with Privy Council cases ) and he instead decided to teach himself by watching cases at the Royal Courts of Justice . Hastings was lucky : the first case he saw involved Rufus Isaacs , Henry Duke and Edward Carson , three of the most distinguished English barristers of the early 20th century . For the next six weeks until the court vacation , Hastings followed these three barristers from court to court " like a faithful hound " . 
 = = = Finding a tenancy = = = 
 At the start of the court vacation in August 1904 , Hastings decided that it would be best to find a tenancy in a more prestigious set of chambers ; Corbet only dealt with two or three cases a year , and solicitors were unlikely to give briefs to a barrister of whom they had never heard . The set of chambers below Corbet 's was run by Charles Gill , a well @-@ respected barrister . Hastings would be able to improve his career through an association with Gill , but Gill did not actually know Hastings and had no reason to offer him a place in his chambers . Hastings decided he would spend the court vacation writing a law book , and introduce himself to Gill by asking if he would mind having the book dedicated to him . Hastings wrote the book on the subject of the law relating to money @-@ lending , something he knew very little about . He got around this by including large extracts from the judgements in cases related to money @-@ lending , which increased the size of the book and reduced how much he would actually have to write . 
 Hastings finished the book just before the court vacation ended , and presented the draft to Gill immediately . Gill did not offer Hastings a place in his chambers but instead gave him a copy of a brief " to see if he could make a note on it that would be any use to [ Gill ] " . He spent hours writing notes and " did everything to the brief except set it to music " , before returning it to a pleased Gill , who let him take away another brief . Over the next two years Gill allowed him to work on nearly every case he appeared in . Eventually he was noticed by solicitors , who left briefs for him rather than for Gill . By the end of his first year as a barrister , he had earned 60 guineas , and by the end of his second year he had earned £ 200 ( equivalent to approximately £ 6 @,@ 100 and £ 19 @,@ 400 respectively in 2015 ) . 
 On 1 June 1906 , Hastings married Mary Grundy , the daughter of retired Lieutenant Colonel F. L. Grundy , at All Saints ' Church , Kensington . They had met through his uncle J. Comyns Carr 's family , who had brought Hastings to dinner at the <unk> ' house . After several meetings Hastings proposed , but the wedding was put off for a long time due to his lack of money . In January 1906 , Hastings became the temporary secretary of John Simon , who had just become a Member of Parliament , and when he left the position Simon gave him a cheque for £ 50 . Hastings and his fiancée had " never had so much money before " , and on the strength of this they decided to get married . His marriage changed his outlook on life : he now realised that to provide for his wife he would need to work a lot harder at getting cases . To do that he would need to join a well @-@ respected set of chambers ; although Gill was giving him briefs he was still in Corbet 's chambers , which saw little business . 
 Hastings approached Gill and asked him for a place in his chambers . Gill 's chambers were full but he did suggest a well @-@ respected barrister named F. E. Smith , and Hastings went to see him with a letter of recommendation from Gill . Smith was out and Hastings instead spoke to his clerk ; the two did not get on , and Hastings left without securing a place . Hastings later described this as " the most fortunate moment of my whole career " . Directly below Smith 's chambers were those of Horace Avory , one of the most noted barristers of the 19th and early 20th centuries . As he prepared to return home , Hastings was informed that Chartres Biron ( one of the barristers who occupied Avory 's chambers ) had been appointed a Metropolitan Magistrate , which freed up a space in the chambers . He immediately went to Avory 's clerk and got him to introduce Hastings to Avory . Avory initially refused to give Hastings a place in the chambers , but after Hastings lost his temper and exclaimed that " if he didn 't want me to help him it would leave me more time to myself " , Avory laughed and changed his mind . 
 = = = His own chambers = = = 
 In 1910 , Horace Avory became a judge . Hastings first found out when he read the report in the morning newspapers , and was dismayed that he would again have to search for a tenancy at another chambers . He instead had the idea that he could take over Avory 's chambers himself , allowing him to avoid the trouble of finding a new tenancy . Maintaining a set of chambers was very expensive , however ; as well as paying the rent , the head of chambers would be expected to pay the clerks . Hastings suggested to Avory that Avory could pay the rent , and Hastings would then pay him back when he had the money . Despite Avory 's reputation as " cold and hard " he agreed to this idea , and even let Hastings keep the furniture , including Avory 's valuable chair which had once belonged to Harry Poland . 
 Although this was a good start , Hastings was not a particularly well @-@ known barrister , and cases were few and far between . To get around the lack of funds Hastings accepted a pupil , and for the next year Hastings lived almost exclusively off the fees that the pupil paid him . To maintain the appearance of an active and busy chamber Hastings had his clerk borrow papers from other barristers and give them to the pupil to work on , claiming that they were cases of Hastings . 
 = = = = The Case of the Hooded Man = = = = 
 His first major case was " The Case of the Hooded Man " . On 9 October 1912 , the driver of a horse @-@ drawn carriage noticed a crouching man near the front door of the house of Countess Flora Sztaray in Eastbourne . Sztaray was known to possess large amounts of valuable jewellery and to be married to a rich Hungarian nobleman , and assuming that the crouching man was a burglar the driver immediately called the police . Inspector Arthur Walls was sent to investigate , and ordered the man to come down . The man fired two shots , the first of which struck and killed Walls . 
 A few days after the murder , a former medical student named Edgar Power contacted the police , showing them a letter that he claimed had been written by the murderer . It read " If you would save my life come here at once to 4 Tideswell Road . Ask for Seymour . Bring some cash with you . Very Urgent . " Power told the police that the letter had been written by a friend of his called John Williams , who he claimed had visited Sztaray 's house to burgle it before killing the policeman and fleeing . Williams then met with his girlfriend Florence Seymour and explained what had happened . The two decided to bury the gun on the beach and send a letter to Williams ' brother asking for money to return to London , which was then given to Powers . 
 Powers helped the police perform a sting operation , telling Seymour that the police knew what had happened and that the only way to save Williams was to dig up the gun and move it to somewhere more safe . When Seymour and Powers went to do this , several policemen ( who had been lying in wait ) immediately arrested her and Powers ( who was released a few hours later ) . Seymour was in a poor condition both physically and mentally , and after a few hours she wrote and signed a statement which incriminated Williams . Powers again helped the police , convincing Williams to meet him at Moorgate station , where Williams was arrested by the police and charged with the murder of Arthur Walls . Williams maintained that he was innocent of the murder and burglary . 
 Williams ' case came to trial on 12 December 1912 at Lewes Assizes , with Hastings for the defence . Despite a strong argument and little direct evidence against Williams , he was found guilty and sentenced to death . The case generated large amounts of publicity , as well as an appeal hearing at which Hastings demonstrated his legal skills . The case established him as an excellent barrister , particularly when it came to cross @-@ examination . He was commended by both the initial judge , Arthur Channell , and the presiding judge hearing the appeal , Lord Alverstone , for his skill in his defence of Williams . The advertisement this case gave of his skills allowed him to move some of his practice from the county courts to the High Court of Justice , where his work slowly increased in value and size . 
 The case made his name well @-@ known and helped bring him work , but he still mainly worked on cases in the county courts . These did not pay particularly well , and to get around this lack of money his clerk had him take on six new pupils at once . The short length of county court cases and the number of cases Hastings got meant that he dealt with up to six cases in a single day , running from court to court with his pupils in a " Mafeking procession " which he later described as " the forerunners of the modern Panzer division " . 
 = = = = First World War = = = = 
 Shortly before the outbreak of the First World War , Hastings and his family were preparing to travel to Germany for a holiday . On the day of departure he received a note from a client , which read " You tell me you are going to Germany . Don 't go , we shall be at war within forty @-@ eight hours " . Hastings heeded this warning , and remained in England – war was declared between Britain and Germany less than two days later . Hastings himself volunteered to serve in the armed forces , but was rejected as medically unfit . 
 = = = = Gruban v Booth = = = = 
 His next noted civil case was that of Gruban v Booth . John Gruban was a German @-@ born businessman , originally named Johann Wilhelm Gruban , who had come to England in 1893 to work for an engineering company , Haigh and Company . By 1913 he had turned the business from an almost @-@ bankrupt company to a successful manufacturer of machine tools , and at the outbreak of the First World War it was one of the first companies to produce machine tools used to make munitions . This made Gruban a major figure in a now @-@ large market , and he attempted to raise £ 5 @,@ 000 to expand his business ( equivalent to approximately £ 432 @,@ 700 in 2015 ) . On independent advice , he contacted Frederick Handel Booth , a noted Liberal Member of Parliament who was chairman of the Yorkshire Iron and Coal Company and had led the government inquiry into the Marconi scandal . When Gruban contacted Booth , Booth told him that he could do " more for [ your ] company than any man in England " , claiming that David Lloyd George ( at the time Minister of Munitions ) and many other important government officials were close friends . With £ 3 @,@ 500 borrowed from his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Booth immediately invested in Gruban 's company . 
 Booth worked his way into the company with a string of false claims about his influence , and finally became chairman of the Board of Directors by claiming that it was the only way to avoid Gruban being interned due to his German origin . As soon as this happened , he cut Gruban out of the company , leaving him destitute , and eventually arranged for him to be interned . Gruban successfully appealed against the internment , and brought Booth to court . 
 The case of Gruban v Booth opened on 7 May 1917 in the King 's Bench Division of the High Court of Justice in front of Mr Justice Coleridge . Patrick Hastings and Hubert Wallington represented Gruban , while Booth was represented by Rigby Swift KC and Douglas Hogg . The trial attracted such public interest that on the final day the barristers found it physically difficult to get through the crowds surrounding the Law Courts . While both Rigby Smith and Douglas Hogg were highly respected barristers , Booth 's cross @-@ examination by Hastings was so skilfully done that the jury took only ten minutes to find that he had been fraudulent ; they awarded Gruban £ 4 @,@ 750 ( about £ 240 @,@ 100 in 2015 ) . 
 = = = King 's Counsel = = = 
 His success in Gruban v Booth allowed Hastings to switch his practice from the county courts to the High Court , and at the beginning of Hilary term 1919 he applied to become a King 's Counsel ( KC ) . Becoming a KC was a risk ; he would go from competing with other junior barristers to coming up against the finest minds in the profession . Despite this he decided to take the risk , and he was accepted later that year . 
 = = = = Select Committee of the House of Lords = = = = 
 His first major case as a King 's Counsel was representing a Colonel Bersey at the Select Committee of the House of Lords on the Women 's Royal Air Force . Bersey was a senior officer of the Women 's Royal Air Force ( WRAF ) , and along with several other officers he had been accused of conspiring to have the WRAF Commandant , Violet Douglas @-@ Pennant , removed from office to cover up " rife immorality " going on at WRAF camps . Lord Stanhope formed a House of Lords Select Committee to investigate these claims , and it began sitting on 14 October 1918 . 
 Hastings took the lead in cross @-@ examining Douglas @-@ Pennant . She accused Bersey and others of promoting this " rife immorality " and not having the best interests of the WRAF at heart . When cross examined , however , she was unable to provide any evidence of this " rife immorality " or any kind of a conspiracy , saying that she could not find any specific instance of " immorality " at the camps she visited and that it was " always rumour " . After three weeks the committee dismissed all witnesses . The final report was produced in December 1919 , and found that Douglas @-@ Pennant had been completely unable to substantiate her claims and was deserving " of the gravest censure " . As a result , Douglas @-@ Pennant was never again employed by the government . 
 = = = = Libel and divorce = = = = 
 During his time at the Bar , Hastings was involved in a variety of libel cases and in a divorce case which significantly changed the law relating to the admission of evidence from spouses regarding the legitimacy or illegitimacy of a child . His first significant libel case was <unk> v Wootton . Robert Sievier was a well @-@ known horse racing journalist and owner with a reputation for brushes with the law and underhanded dealings , having previously been tried for blackmail and acquitted on a technicality . In 1913 he accused Richard Wootton , a noted trainer of racehorses , of ordering his jockeys to withdraw from races if he had bet on another horse so as to allow him to make large amounts of money . Wootton sued him for libel and won , but was granted only a symbolic farthing in damages because the jury thought that Sievier had not intended to cause harm . As a result of this pyrrhic victory , Wootton held a grudge against Sievier for many years . 
 As revenge , Wootton wrote a pamphlet titled Incidents in the Public Life of Robert Standish Sievier in which he claimed that Sievier had been expelled from the Victoria Racing Club , twice been declared bankrupt , cheated a man of £ 600 in a game of billiards and blackmailed another for £ 5 @,@ 000 . The pamphlet was released on the day of the Grand National and distributed widely through the crowds , and in response Sievier sued Wootton for libel . Sievier appeared without a lawyer , while Wotton was represented by Sir Edward Carson KC , Hastings , and E. H. Spence . After the second day of the trial , Carson was called away to Ireland on political business , and Hastings was forced to act as the primary counsel for Wootton . Hastings destroyed Sievier 's reputation in cross @-@ examination , and the jury decided in Wootton 's favour . 
 In 1922 , he became involved in Russell v Russell , which eventually went to the House of Lords , who set a common law rule that evidence about the legitimacy or illegitimacy of children born in marriage is inadmissible if it is given by either spouse . Mr Russell , later Lord Ampthill , married Mrs Russell in 1918 , with both spouses agreeing that they did not want to have children . In October 1921 Mrs Russell gave birth to a son , Geoffrey Russell , and Mr Russell immediately filed for divorce and to have the child declared a bastard . He claimed that the child could not be his because he had not had sexual intercourse with his wife since August 1920 . 
 Hastings represented Mrs Russell in the initial trial at the High Court and lost ; the decision was appealed to the Court of Appeal , where he again lost . The case was then sent to the House of Lords , who by a majority of three to two ( with Lord Birkenhead giving the leading judgment ) overturned the previous judgments and said that Mr Russell 's evidence as to the legitimacy of his son was inadmissible . Hastings did not represent Mrs Russell in the House of Lords case , however , because by this point he was already Attorney General . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Hastings first became involved in politics after the First World War , when he joined the Liberal Party to help improve social conditions for the poorer people of the United Kingdom . He was being prepared to be the Liberal candidate for Ilford in the 1918 general election but grew disheartened by the Liberal alliance with the Conservative Party , and also by the divisions in the party ; as a result , he gave up the candidacy . 
 Hastings eventually switched sides and joined the Labour Party . His conversion , especially in the light of later events , was regarded by some as suspect : his entry in the Dictionary of Labour Biography reports speculation that Hastings foresaw that Labour may come to Government and had few senior lawyers to fill the Law Officer posts . John Paton , after speaking from the same Independent Labour Party ( ILP ) platform as Hastings , came to the conclusion that Hastings gave political speeches using his skill as a lawyer to master a brief ; on the train home , Hastings appeared not to have heard of the ILP . 
 After an interview with Sidney and Beatrice Webb he became the Labour candidate for Wallsend in December 1920 . Beatrice Webb was later to write in her diaries that Hastings was " without any sincerely held public purpose " and " an unpleasant type of clever pleader and political arriviste , who jumped into the Labour Party just before the 1922 election , when it had become clear that the Labour Party was the alternative government and it had not a single lawyer of position attached to it " . However Hastings was returned for Wallsend with a majority of 2 @,@ 823 in the 1922 general election . 
 After returning to London from Wallsend , he attended a full meeting of Labour MPs to decide who would become the Party Chairman . This effectively meant choosing the leader of Her Majesty 's Loyal Opposition , because Labour was the largest opposition party in the House of Commons . The two candidates were Ramsay MacDonald and J. R. <unk> , and Hastings , who supported MacDonald , persuaded six new MPs to support him . MacDonald was elected by a margin of only five votes , and Hastings later regretted his support . 
 Hastings was indeed Labour 's only experienced barrister in the House of Commons at that time , and immediately became a frontbencher and the party 's main spokesman on legal matters . He made his debut speech on 22 February 1923 against the Rent Restrictions Bill , an amendment to the Rent Act 1921 . He attacked it as " a monstrous piece of legislation " , and was repeatedly shouted down by Conservative MPs as a " traitor to his class " . As a result of this and the slow workings of Parliament , Hastings quickly became frustrated by politics . 
 = = = Internment orders = = = 
 Following the Irish War of Independence the Irish Free State was set up as an independent British Dominion covering most of the island of Ireland . After a brief civil war between the pro @-@ Free State forces and members of the Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) who wanted any independent nation to cover the entire island , the status of the Irish Free State was confirmed , and the IRA was forced underground . The IRA had supporters in the United Kingdom , working openly as the Irish Self @-@ Determination League ( ISDL ) , and the Free State government shared the names of these supporters with the British authorities , who kept a close eye on them . Between February and March the Free State government provided information on individuals that they said were part of widespread plots against the Irish Free State being prepared on British soil . On 11 March 1923 the police in Britain arrested IRA sympathisers living in Britain including Art O 'Brien , the head of the ISDL . Sources disagree on numbers , giving either approximately eighty or approximately 100 . The arrested men were placed on special trains and sent to Liverpool , where they were transferred to Dublin via a Royal Navy destroyer . It later transpired that not only were many British citizens ( Art O 'Brien himself had been born in England ) , at least six had never even been to Ireland before . 
 The next day the arrests were publicly queried in the House of Commons , and a Labour backbencher Jack Jones started a debate on the subject in the afternoon . W. C. Bridgeman , the Home Secretary , said that he had directly ordered the police to arrest the ISDL members under the Restoration of Order in Ireland Act 1920 , and that he had consulted the Attorney General who considered it perfectly legal . Hastings immediately stood and protested , saying that the Act was " one of the most dreadful things that has been done in the history of our country " and that the internments and deportations were effectively illegal . 
 A few days later , the solicitors for O 'Brien got in contact with Hastings . On 23 March 1923 he appeared in R v Secretary of State for Home Affairs ex parte O 'Brien [ 1923 ] 2 KB 361 at a Divisional Court consisting of Mr Justice Avory and Mr Justice Salter to apply for a writ of habeas corpus for O 'Brien as a test case to allow the release of the others . The initial hearing was ineffective because Hastings was unable to provide an affidavit from O 'Brien , which was required for a writ of habeas corpus to be considered , but by the time the hearing was resumed on 10 April he had managed to obtain one . Hastings argued that because the Irish Free State was an independent nation the British laws governing it , such as the 1920 Act , were effectively repealed . 
 The court eventually declared that they could not issue a writ , because the Habeas Corpus Act 1862 prevented them from issuing a writ to any colony possessing a court which could also issue a writ . Since Ireland possessed such a court , the English Divisional Court could not act . Hastings attempted to argue that the writ could be issued against the Home Secretary but this also failed , since the Home Secretary did not actually possess O 'Brien . Three days later , Hastings took the case to the Court of Appeal , who declared that the internment orders were invalid since the Restoration of Order Act was no longer applicable . The Government was forced to introduce a Bill to Parliament giving itself retrospective immunity for having exceeded its authority , and the whole incident was a political and legal triumph for the party and for Hastings personally . 
 = = = Attorney @-@ General = = = 
 When the new Parliament opened in 1923 , the Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin suggested that tariff reform was the best way to solve Britain 's economic difficulties . Unfortunately Bonar Law , his predecessor , had promised that there would be no tariff reforms introduced during the current Parliament . Baldwin felt that the only solution was to call a new general election . In the ensuing election Baldwin 's Conservatives lost 88 seats , with the Labour Party gaining 47 and the Liberal Party gaining 41 . This produced a hung parliament , and Labour and the Liberals formed a coalition government with Labour as the main party . Hastings himself was re @-@ elected without difficulty , increasing his majority . 
 With Ramsay Macdonald as the new Prime Minister in the first Labour government , Hastings was appointed Attorney @-@ General for England and Wales . This was not surprising - Labour had only two <unk> in Parliament , and the other ( Edward <unk> ) was " unsuitable for personal reasons " . Hastings hesitated before accepting the appointment , despite the knighthood and appointment as head of the Bar that came with the post , and later said that " if I had known what the next year was to bring forward I should almost certainly have [ declined ] " . 
 Hastings described his time as Attorney General as " my idea of hell " - he was the only Law Officer available , since the Solicitor General was not a Member of Parliament , and as a result had to answer all queries about points of law in Parliament . In addition , he had his normal duties of dealing with the legal problems of government departments , and said that the day was " one long rush between the law courts , government departments and the House of Commons " . His working hours were regularly between 7am and 5am the following morning , and the policemen on duty at the House of Commons complained to him that he was working too long , since they were required to stay on duty as long as he was . 
 = = = Campbell Case = = = 
 In 1924 Hastings became involved in the Campbell Case , a prosecution which eventually led to the downfall of the Labour government . On 30 June 1924 , he was met by Archibald Bodkin , the Director of Public Prosecutions , who brought with him a copy of the communist newspaper Workers ' Weekly . The newspaper contained an article which urged members of the military to refuse to shoot their " fellow workers " in a time of war . Hastings approved the prosecution of the newspaper 's editor , J. R. Campbell , for violating the Incitement to Mutiny Act 1797 . 
 On 6 August Campbell 's house was raided , and he was arrested by the police . On the same day John Scurr , a Labour backbencher , asked the Home Secretary why Campbell had been detained and on whose orders . Hastings himself read out a reply , which said that the Director of Public Prosecutions had complained that the article was inciting troops to mutiny . Another Labour backbencher , Jimmy Maxton , rose and asked the Prime Minister " if he has read the article , and if he is aware that the article contains mainly a call to the troops not to allow themselves to be used in industrial disputes , and that that point of view is shared by a large number of Members sitting on these benches ? " This statement lead to uproar , and the Speaker was forced to intervene and halt further discussions . 
 The next day Hastings called for both the Solicitor General , Sir Henry Slesser , and Jimmy Maxton , to ask their opinion on the prosecution . Maxton knew Campbell , and revealed that he was only the temporary editor and had not written the article – the article had actually been copied from another newspaper . Along with Guy Stevenson , the Assistant Director of Public Prosecutions , Hastings then visited Ramsay MacDonald to explain the facts of the case . MacDonald blamed the Director of Public Prosecutions for starting the case , although Hastings intervened and admitted to Macdonald that it was entirely his fault . The Prime Minister said that he felt they should go through with the case now they had started , but Hastings suggested that a member of the Treasury Counsel appear at Bow Street Magistrates Court and withdraw the prosecution . MacDonald agreed , and the next morning Travers Humphreys appeared for the Crown at the Magistrates Court and had Campbell discharged . 
 The reaction of the public and the press was that the case had been thrown out because of direct pressure from the government , and that this had happened behind closed doors . MacDonald was " furious " , and the opinion of the Liberal and Conservative parties was that the government was attempting to pervert the course of justice . On 30 September Sir Kingsley Wood , a Conservative MP , asked the Prime Minister in Parliament whether he had instructed the Director of Public Prosecutions to withdraw the case . MacDonald replied that " I was not consulted regarding either the institution or the subsequent withdrawal of these proceedings " . 
 A Parliamentary debate and motion to censure the Labour government on this was set for 8 October , but before this MacDonald called Hastings into his office and suggested a way to solve the problem . Hastings would accept all the blame and resign as Attorney General , and in exchange MacDonald and the rest of the cabinet would speak for Hastings at the resulting by @-@ election . Hastings refused the general suggestion , but planned to make a speech at the upcoming debate explaining his actions . 
 Immediately after the debate began the Prime Minister rose to speak , and said that he " sought to correct the impression [ I ] gave " that he knew nothing about the prosecution . This was followed by a motion of censure pushed forward by Robert Horne , and after Horne had presented the motion Hastings rose to speak , and explained the facts of the case . His speech took over an hour , and was frequently interrupted by Conservative MPs . In his speech , Hastings took full responsibility for both the decision to prosecute and the subsequent decision to withdraw the prosecution , asking whether a censure was merited for correcting a mistake . His speech quieted the Conservatives and made it clear that a censure for the entire Parliament was going to be difficult for the Whips to enforce . The Liberal spokesman John Simon stood to speak , however , and called for the appointment of a Select Committee to investigate the case . This was rejected by MacDonald , and MPs continued to speak for several more hours . 
 The Conservative leader Stanley Baldwin privately wrote to MacDonald offering to withdraw the motion of censure in exchange for the government 's support for the appointment of a Select Committee . MacDonald consulted with Jimmy Thomas and Hastings ( whose reply was simply " Go to hell " ) and decided to reject the offer . Although the motion of censure failed , the motion to appoint a Select Committee passed the House over the opposition of the government , and the Labour government was forced out of office . Hastings was embittered by the disaster , and considered immediately quitting politics altogether , although he did not do so . His plight was depicted on the cover of Time Magazine , along with a quotation ( " What have I done wrong ? " ) from his speech . 
 = = = Remaining time in politics = = = 
 Hastings was again returned for Wallsend at the ensuing election , despite the crisis caused by the Zinoviev Letter , although with a reduced majority . Although Hastings remained on the Labour frontbench he rarely spoke in the House of Commons , and attended less and less frequently . After suffering from kidney problems during 1925 , he left Parliament by accepting the nominal position of Steward of the Manor of <unk> — a legal fiction office with the same effect as , but less well known than , the Stewardship of the Chiltern Hundreds ) on 29 June 1926 ; this enabled Margaret Bondfield , who had lost her seat in the previous election , to return to Parliament in his place at the ensuing by @-@ election . He never returned to politics . 
 = = Return to the Bar = = 
 After leaving politics , Hastings returned to his work as a barrister , and eventually surpassed even his previous reputation and success as an advocate . His first major case after returning was representing F. A. Mitchell @-@ Hedges , a noted professional explorer , in his libel action against London Express Newspapers , the owner of the Daily Express . The Daily Express had published two articles saying that he was a liar , and had planned out a bogus robbery to advertise a device known as the <unk> . The case opened on 9 February 1928 in front of Lord Hewart , with Hastings and Norman Birkett representing Mitchell @-@ Hedges and William Jowitt and J.B. Melville representing London Express Newspapers . Despite the skills of both Hastings and Birkett , who later became a much @-@ lauded barrister in his own right , Mitchell @-@ Hedges lost his case and had his reputation destroyed as a result . 
 = = = Savidge Inquiry = = = 
 In 1928 , Hastings became involved in the Savidge Inquiry . Sir Leo <unk> Money was a noted journalist , economist and former Liberal MP . On 23 April 1928 , he and Miss Irene Savidge were sitting in Hyde Park in London when they were arrested by two plain @-@ clothes police officers and taken to the nearest police station , where they were charged under the Parks Regulation Act 1872 with committing an indecent offence . The next morning , they were remanded for a week at Great Marlborough Street Police Court . At the next hearing a week later , the case was dismissed by the magistrate , who criticised the police for failing to contact a man seen running through the park to establish some kind of corroborative evidence , and failing to report at once to Scotland Yard to avoid having to charge the defendants immediately . 
 After his release , Money immediately spoke to his official contacts , and the next morning the matter was raised in the House of Commons . It was suggested that the police evidence was perjured , and as a result the Home Secretary William Joynson @-@ Hicks instructed Sir Archibald Bodkin , the Director of Public Prosecutions , to investigate the possibility of perjury . Bodkin had the Metropolitan Police Commissioner appoint Chief Inspector Collins , one of his most experienced CID officers , to investigate the claims and interview Savidge . 
 The next day , two police officers ( Inspector Collins and Sergeant Clarke ) and one policewoman ( Lilian Wyles ) called at Savidge 's workplace and took her to Scotland Yard , where she was questioned . The events of that day were brought up two days later in the House of Commons , where it was alleged that Savidge had been given a " third degree " interview by Collins lasting for five hours . A public outcry followed , and the Home Secretary appointed a tribunal to investigate . 
 The tribunal ( led by Sir John Eldon Bankes , a former Lord Justice of Appeal ) began sitting on 15 May 1928 ; Hastings , Henry Curtis @-@ Bennett and Walter Frampton represented Savidge , and Norman Birkett represented the police . When called as a witness , Savidge testified that she had not wanted to go to Scotland Yard and had been persuaded to do so by the presence of a female police officer , Miss Wyles . After they arrived at Scotland Yard , Collins told Wyles that he was going to send Savidge home , and Wyles could leave . After Wyles had left , Collins began interviewing Savidge , threatening that she and Money would " suffer severely " if she did not tell the truth . Savidge said that Collins ' manner had become more and more familiar during the interview , and that at several points he and Sergeant Clarke had implied that they wanted her to have sexual intercourse with them . Savidge spent almost six hours in the witness box , and her testimony left Collins looking guilty in the eyes of the tribunal . Collins , Clarke and Wyles were all interviewed , along with the Metropolitan Police Commissioner and Archibald Bodkin himself . 
 The final report of the tribunal was released on 13 June 1928 and consisted of both a majority report and a minority one , since not all of the tribunal members agreed on the validity of Savidge 's evidence . The majority report said that Savidge was not intimidated into answering questions , nor treated inappropriately , and that " we are unable therefore to accept Miss Savidge 's statement . We are satisfied that the interrogation followed the lines indicated to [ Collins ] by the Director of Public Prosecutions and was not unduly extended " . The minority report blamed the police , particularly Collins , for the method in which Savidge was interviewed . The inquiry resulted in three changes to police procedure , however : firstly , that anyone interrogated should be told beforehand about the possible consequences and purpose of the statement ; secondly , that the statement should normally be taken at home ; and thirdly , that in cases " involving matters intimately affecting [ a woman 's ] morals " another woman should always be present for any interviews . 
 = = = United Diamond Fields v Joel = = = 
 Hastings was next involved in United Diamond Fields of British Guiana Ltd v Joel and Others , which he considered both his most difficult and most interesting case . Following the discovery of the diamond mines in South Africa , men such as Solly Joel had established a diamond syndicate to restrict the amount of diamonds on the market . For this to work , they had to control the entire output of diamonds in the world , which they planned to do by acquiring interests in all of the diamond mines . In 1925 , British Guiana began producing enough diamonds to attract the attention of the syndicate , and in November 1925 a Mr Oppenheimer , representing the syndicate , entered into a contract with Mr Perez , the operator of the Guiana mines , to have 12 @,@ 000 carats ( 2 @.@ 4 kg ) worth of diamonds provided to the syndicate over a twelve @-@ month period . 
 A few months later , United Diamond Fields of British Guiana was incorporated as a limited company . The company used Oppenheimer as a technical adviser , and immediately arranged to have its diamonds sold to the syndicate . The price was to be fixed for six months , with an auditor 's certificate at the end of that time used to negotiate a new price . Oppenheimer was the only one with access to the accounting information , and the rest of the company had no way of checking that his figures were correct . In the same time frame , a new deposit of diamonds was discovered in South Africa , forcing the syndicate to acquire several million pounds worth of these new diamonds to prevent their control over the market being destroyed . This strained their finances and the new diamonds forced the price down . 
 To correct this , the syndicate were forced to reduce the flow of diamonds from British Guiana , which they did by getting Oppenheimer to reduce the price of Guianan diamonds to the point where the company output dropped from 2 @,@ 000 carats ( 0 @.@ 40 kg ) a month to less than 300 carats ( 0 @.@ 060 kg ) per month . Oppenheimer then claimed that the profits were only five percent , forcing the company to reduce the price yet again . As a result of this the company was forced into liquidation in September 1927 . 
 A company board member , Victor Coen , was convinced that the company had been treated wrongly and insisted in bringing it before the courts . In May 1929 , he convinced the rest of the board to issue a writ against the syndicate and Oppenheimer , alleging fraudulent conspiracy , and began instructing Hastings . Hastings worried that the case would become unmanageable , with the syndicate relying on over 4 @,@ 000 documents for their defence , but luckily found a certificate showing that the company profits , rather than the five percent Oppenheimer had reported , were in fact seventeen percent . 
 The trial began before Mr Justice McCardie on 4 March 1930 , with Hastings for the company , and Stuart Bevan and Norman Birkett for the syndicate . The first witness called was Coen himself , who Hastings later described as " the best witness without exception that I have ever seen in the witness @-@ box " . He was interviewed over seven days by Hastings , then Bevan and then Birkett . Eight days into the trial the matter of the certificate came up , and Oppenheimer was unable to provide an explanation . As a result , the jury found against the syndicate - they were ordered to pay back all of the company 's costs , and all of its losses . 
 = = = Royal Mail Case = = = 
 In 1931 , Hastings represented John Morland in the Royal Mail Case . The director of the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company , Lord Kylsant , had falsified a trading prospectus with the aid of the company accountant , John Morland , to make it look as if the company was profitable and to entice potential investors . At the same time , he had been falsifying accounting records by drawing money from the reserves and having it appear on the records as profit . Following an independent audit instigated by the Treasury , Kylsant and John Morland , the company auditor , were arrested and charged with falsifying both the trading prospectus and the company records and accounts . 
 The trial began at the Old Bailey on 20 July 1931 before Mr Justice Wright , with Sir William Jowitt , D. N. Pritt and Eustace Fulton for the prosecution , Sir John Simon , J. E. Singleton and Wilfred Lewis for Lord Kylsant , and Hastings , Stuart Bevan , Frederick Tucker and C. J. Conway for John Morland . Both defendants pleaded not guilty . 
 The main defence on the use of secret reserve accounting came with the help of Lord Plender . Plender was one of the most important and reliable accountants in Britain , and under cross @-@ examination stated that it was routine for firms " of the very highest repute " to use secret reserves in calculating profit without declaring it . Hastings said that " if my client ... was guilty of a criminal offence , there is not a single accountant in the City of London or in the world who is not in the same position . " Both Kylsant and Morland were acquitted of falsifying records on this account , but Kylsant was found guilty of " making , circulating or publishing a written statement which he knew to be false " , namely the 1928 prospectus , and was sentenced to 12 months in prison . 
 = = = Elvira Barney = = = 
 Well known to dislike appearing in capital cases and having a heavy workload , Hastings hesitated in 1932 when approached by Sir John Mullens , a trustee of the Stock Exchange , to defend his daughter Elvira Barney on a charge of murder . Mrs Barney , who led a dissolute life of partying and drug @-@ taking , was accused of shooting her lover in the Knightsbridge mews house they shared ; she insisted that her gun had gone off by accident in a struggle . Hastings was persuaded to take the case by his wife who remembered that their children had shared a governess who had also cared for " dear little Elvira " . He appeared at the Magistrates ' Court , where he cross @-@ examined the forensic scientist Sir Bernard Spilsbury and at a three @-@ day trial in the Old Bailey where Hastings was described by Peter Cotes in his book about the case as " the star performer " . 
 At the Old Bailey one of the principal crown witnesses was firearms expert Robert Churchill , who testified that the trigger of Mrs Barney 's gun had a strong pull . When Hastings rose to cross @-@ examine , he took up the gun , pointed it to the ceiling and repeatedly pulled the trigger over and over again . One crown witness had said that on another occasion she saw Elvira Barney firing the gun while holding it in her left hand ; when he called his client Hastings had the gun placed in front of her . After a pause he shouted at her to pick up the gun and she spontaneously picked it up in her right hand . The Judge ( Mr Justice Humphreys ) described Hastings ' final address as " certainly one of the finest speeches I have ever heard at the Bar " and Elvira Barney was found not guilty both of murder and manslaughter . 
 = = = Oswald Mosley = = = 
 Hastings appeared for Sir Oswald Mosley in several cases during the 1930s , having become friends with him while in Parliament . The first was a libel case against The Star , who had written a comment on one of Mosley 's speeches implying that he advocated an armed revolution to overthrow the British government . The case opened at the Royal Courts of Justice on 5 November 1934 in front of Lord Hewart , with Hastings representing Mosley , and Norman Birkett The Star . Birkett argued that The Star article was nothing more than a summary of Mosley 's speech , and that any comments implying the overthrow of the British government were found in the speech itself . Hastings countered that The Star was effectively accusing Mosley of high treason , and said that " there is really no defence to this action ... I do ask for such damages as will mark [ the jury 's ] sense of the injustice which has been done to Sir Oswald " . The jury eventually decided that The Star had libelled Mosley , and awarded him £ 5 @,@ 000 in damages ( approximately £ 320 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . 
 Several weeks later , Hastings represented Mosley and three other members of the British Union of Fascists ( BUF ) in a criminal case after they were indicted for " causing a riotous assembly " on 9 October 1934 at a BUF meeting . The trial opened at the Sussex Assizes on 18 December 1934 in front of Mr Justice Branson , with Hastings for the defence and John Flowers KC prosecuting . According to Mosley , Hastings told him that Flowers , a former cricketer , had a poor reputation at the bar , and that Mosley should not show him up too much . The prosecution claimed that after a BUF meeting , Mosley and the other defendants had marched around Worthing , threatening and assaulting civilians . Hastings argued that the defendants had been deliberately provoked by a crowd of civilians , and several witnesses testified that the crowd had been throwing tomatoes and threatening Mosley . The judge eventually directed the jury to return a verdict of " not guilty " . Hastings and Mosley were less successful in another libel action , against the Secretary of the National Union of Railwaymen who had accused him of instructing his blackshirts to arm themselves . The defence , led by D. N. Pritt KC , called several witnesses to a fight in Manchester between blackshirts and their opponents . Hastings , taking the view that the incident was too long in the past to be relevant , did not call any rebutting evidence . Although Mosley won the case , he was awarded only a farthing in damages , traditionally a way for the jury to indicate that the case should not have been brought . 
 = = Work as a playwright = = 
 As well as his work as a barrister , Hastings also tried his hand at writing plays . His first play was The Moscow Doctor , based on a novel by Seton Merriman which he had rewritten ; it ran for over a week in Brighton . He desired to have an original work performed , however , and to this end wrote The River over a period of 20 years before taking it to St James 's Theatre , where it was accepted and performed in June 1925 . The play starred Owen Nares and initially went well , but foundered in the second act due to the plot requiring the most popular actors to be taken off stage - the character played by Nares , for example , broke his leg . Reviews compared the plot to something out of the ' Boy 's Own Paper . The play lasted only a month before being cancelled , but Hastings was able to sell the film rights for £ 2 @,@ 000 , and it was turned into a Hollywood film called The Notorious Lady starring Lewis Stone and Barbara Bedford . 
 His next play was titled Scotch Mist , and was put on at St Martin 's Theatre on 26 January 1926 starring Tallulah Bankhead and Godfrey Tearle . After a reviewer named <unk> Ervine wrote a review starting " this is the worst play I have ever seen " , the performances bizarrely sold out for weeks later . The play was later called " scandalous and immoral " by the Bishop of London , Arthur Winnington @-@ Ingram , and as a result sold out for many months . Emboldened by this success Hastings wrote The Moving Finger , which despite moderately good reviews was not popular , and was withdrawn as a result . In 1930 he wrote Slings and Arrows , which never made it to the West End because when his family , who were familiar with the play , attended the shows , they read out the lines of the characters in bored and dreary voices just before the actors themselves spoke . As a result , the play was reduced to chaos . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 Hastings retired from most of his work as a barrister in 1938 , but soon found a way to occupy himself after the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 . Although , at fifty @-@ nine , far past the age at which he could join the armed forces , Hastings wrote to the Secretary of State for War offering his services , and was eventually contacted by Kingsley Wood , the Secretary of State for Air , who offered him a commission in the Royal Air Force as a squadron leader in Administrative and Special Duties Branch , serving with Fighter Command . His commission was dated 25 September 1939 . He then started work at RAF Stanmore Park , but found his work " very depressing " - most of the other officers were over thirty years younger than he was , and he suffered from continuous bad health while there . His one major contribution was to create a scheme allowing the purchase of small models of German aircraft , allowing the British forces on the ground an easy way to identify incoming planes and avoiding friendly fire situations . Due to his ill @-@ health he relinquished his commission on 7 December 1939 . 
 In Spring 1940 he was elected Treasurer of the Middle Temple . He participated in only a few cases following his war service . One was a high @-@ profile case in November and December 1946 in which he was engaged by the Newark Advertiser in defence of a libel action brought by Harold Laski , who was seeking to clear his name from the newspaper 's claim that he had called for socialism " even if it means violence " . Cross @-@ examining Laski , the following exchange occurred : 
 <unk> : Are there any privileged in the Socialist Party ? 
 <unk> : Why , indeed , Sir Patrick , when you were a member — THE LORD <unk> <unk> : No , Mr. Laski . 
 <unk> : Do not be rude . 
 Laski 's counsel later said that he hoped that Hastings would at least have said " Touché " . Laski lost the case , unable to counter the questioning from Hastings which referred to his previous written works . However the stress of the case told on Hastings . 
 In 1948 , Hastings published his autobiography , simply titled The Autobiography of Sir Patrick Hastings , and the following year published Cases in Court , a book giving his views on 21 of his most noted cases . The same year he published Famous and Infamous Cases , a book on noted trials through history , such as those at Nuremberg . In early 1948 , he suffered a small stroke which forced him to retire permanently from work as a barrister . On 11 November 1949 , he and his wife travelled to Kenya , where their son Nicky had moved to start a new life after the end of the Second World War . While there , he suffered a second stroke due to the air pressure , and he never fully recovered . Hastings spent the next two years of his life living in a flat in London , before dying on 26 February 1952 of cerebral thrombosis . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hastings married Mary Grundy on 1 June 1906 . The couple had two sons , David and Nicholas , and three daughters . David died in the Second World War fighting in the Pacific Theatre , and Nicholas became a farmer in Kenya . One daughter , Barbara , married Nicolas Bentley , a cartoonist . 
 = Drapier 's Letters = 
 Drapier 's Letters is the collective name for a series of seven pamphlets written between 1724 and 1725 by the Dean of St Patrick 's Cathedral in Dublin , Jonathan Swift , to arouse public opinion in Ireland against the imposition of a privately minted copper coinage that Swift believed to be of inferior quality . William Wood was granted letters patent to mint the coin , and Swift saw the licensing of the patent as corrupt . In response , Swift represented Ireland as constitutionally and financially independent of Britain in the Drapier 's Letters . Since the subject was politically sensitive , Swift wrote under the pseudonym M. B. , Drapier , to hide from retaliation . 
 Although the letters were condemned by the Irish government , with prompting from the British government , they were still able to inspire popular sentiment against Wood and his patent . The popular sentiment turned into a nationwide boycott , which forced the patent to be withdrawn ; Swift was later honoured for this service to the people of Ireland . Many Irish people recognised Swift as a hero for his defiance of British control over the Irish nation . Beyond being a hero , many critics have seen Swift , through the persona of the Drapier , as the first to organise a " more universal Irish community " , although it is disputed as to who constitutes that community . Regardless of whom Swift is actually appealing to or what he may or may not have done , the nickname provided by Archbishop King , " Our Irish Copper @-@ Farthen Dean " , and his connection to ending the controversy stuck . 
 The first complete collection of the Drapier 's Letters appeared in the 1734 George Faulkner edition of the Works of Jonathan Swift along with an allegorical frontispiece offering praise and thanks from the Irish people . Today , the Drapier 's Letters are an important part of Swift 's political writings , along with Gulliver 's Travels ( 1726 ) , A Tale of a Tub ( 1704 ) , and A Modest Proposal ( 1729 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1722 , hardware manufacturer William Wood was granted letters patent to produce copper coinage of up to £ 108 @,@ 000 ( approximately £ 15 @,@ 322 @,@ 700 as of 2016 ) for use in Ireland . The patent was secured by a bribe of £ 10 @,@ 000 ( approximately £ 1 @,@ 418 @,@ 800 as of 2016 ) to the Duchess of Kendal , mistress to King George I. Although Wood 's copper coins were subsequently alleged to be underweight , undersized , and made from inferior materials , assays had found they were not so , prior to their approval by the British Parliament for use in Ireland . 
 The Irish complaint against Wood was not that they had enough copper coins , but that this would introduce too many coins of inferior quality into the Irish economy . These coins would remove valuable silver and gold coins from circulation in the Irish economy , and since the new copper coins would not be minted under Irish authority , there was no way for the Irish to control the quality and amount . Also , Wood 's coin was only one example of allegedly unfavourable economic practices that hurt Ireland ; the Irish wanted to have their own national bank and authority to mint their own coinage , and Wood 's coin became a way to express their economic @-@ nationalist desires . 
 The patent issue soon became a struggle between Prime Minister Robert Walpole ( with the authority of the British Parliament ) and the leaders of Ireland . All attempts by the Irish Privy Council and the Church of Ireland to prevent the release of the coinage proved fruitless . It was soon thought by many that William Conolly ’ s Commissioners of the Revenue might pay the soldiers stationed in Ireland with the new coin ; if the soldiers were paid with the coin , then the merchants of Ireland would be forced to accept the coin from the soldiers or risk military reprisal or a loss of business . This worried the leadership of Ireland and they requested help in challenging Wood 's patent and leading a boycott of the coin . Swift was asked by Archbishop King and Lord Chancellor Midleton to contribute to a pamphleteering campaign against Wood 's coin . 
 During this time , Lord Carteret , the British Secretary of State whose remit included Ireland , publicly pushed Walpole into defending Wood 's patent . However , Carteret privately attempted to destroy the patent to damage Walpole 's reputation . Thus , Carteret appeared to the British as a defender of the patent because he seemingly tried to prevent an Irish uprising against British rule ( especially by finding the " Drapier " ) , but he was really furthering his anti @-@ Walpole agenda and aiding the Irish cause . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Jonathan Swift , then Dean of St Patrick 's Cathedral in Dublin , was already known for his concern for the Irish people and for writing several political pamphlets . One of these , Proposal for the Universal use of Irish Manufacture ( 1720 ) , had so inflamed the British authorities that the printer , John Harding , was prosecuted , although the pamphlet had done little more than recommend that the Irish use the materials they produce rather than export them to England . It was also known by the Irish authorities that Swift 's political pamphleteering had been employed by the Tory government of Queen Anne , and that he would use his abilities to undermine the Whig government of Walpole . 
 Swift analysed the forensic and economic disadvantages of Wood 's inferior coinage and the effects it would have over Ireland in the first of the pamphlets , A Letter to the Shop @-@ keepers ( 1724 ) . In the pamphlet , Swift adopted the persona of the " Drapier " : a common Irishman , a talented and skilled draper , a religiously devout individual who believes in scripture , and a man loyal to both the Church of Ireland and to the King of Ireland . Swift 's pseudonymous choice served two essential purposes : it provided him with an alternate persona which he could use to hide from potential political reprisals , and it allowed him to create an identity that was closely aligned with the common people of Ireland . 
 According to 20th century Swift scholar Irvin Ehrenpreis , there is debate in the academic community over how much Swift may have wished his audience to identify him as the Drapier , especially since the Drapier constantly includes religious imagery that was common to Swift 's sermons . However , it is possible that the religious rhetoric used to justify an Irish rebellion against the coinage is merely meant as an important aspect of the Drapier 's identity without it being meant as evidence that Swift was the author . Regardless of how secret Swift may have wanted his identity to be , it is certain that most people in Ireland , including members of the Irish Privy Council , knew that Swift was the author of the letters . Unfortunately for the Walpole administration , there was little legal proof of a relationship between the two that would justify them trying Swift as the " Drapier . 
 Over the course of a year , four more pamphlets , filled with invective and complaints against both Wood and his patent , followed the first . The pamphlet was successful , and public opinion became so hostile against Wood 's coinage that the patent was withdrawn by 1725 . At one point , Lord Carteret and the Irish Privy Council offered a significant reward of £ 300 for information that would verify the identity of the pamphlet 's author , but Swift was neither arrested nor charged for the works . The lack of an arrest and the unity of the Irish people behind the " Drapier " was an important motivating factor behind Walpole 's withdrawal of the patent . 
 = = = Irish Independence = = = 
 Although Swift knew that the Duchess of Kendal was responsible for selling the patent to Wood , he rarely mentions this fact in the Letters . Instead , his first three letters describe Wood as the mastermind behind the patent . Although the Drapier constantly asserts his loyalty to the King , his words did not prevent accusations of treason from being levelled against him in response to the third and fourth letters . 
 In the third and fourth letters , Swift argues that the Irish deserve independence from England but not from the king . This , of all of the Drapier 's arguments , is what agitated Walpole , as the head of the British Parliament , the most . Thus , the Drapier was condemned like William Molyneux , whose Case of Ireland ( 1698 ) pleaded for Irish independence using the same arguments . The claims of treason levelled against the Drapier were of " treason to the English Parliament " , which only caused more resentment among the Irish people , who sided with Swift 's constitutional argument that the Irish people owed their allegiance only to the king . 
 = = Pamphlets = = 
 The first three pamphlets were written as a set intended to conclude the matter . However , when Lord Carteret was sent to control Ireland and placed a bounty on the Drapier 's head , Swift felt that a fourth pamphlet was necessary . The fifth ( in this list ) was written at the height of the controversy over Wood 's coin , and constitutes the final public writing of " the Drapier " . The letter To the Lord Chancellor Middleton was signed with Swift 's name and not collected until Faulkner 's 1735 edition . The last letter , An Humble Address , was also published after the conflict had ended . 
 = = = To the Shop @-@ keepers = = = 
 The Drapier 's first letter , To the Shop @-@ keepers , Tradesmen , Farmers , and Common @-@ People of Ireland , was printed in March 1724 . Shortly afterwards , a copy of the first letter was forwarded by Swift to Lord Carteret on 28 April 1724 , and knowledge of the letter 's contents had spread all the way to London . By April 1724 , the letter was popular and Swift claimed that over 2 @,@ 000 copies had been sold in Dublin . The letter was retitled " Fraud Detected : or , The Hibernian Patriot " by Faulkner 's Dublin Journal , which published the piece in 1725 . " Fraud Detected " was later used by Faulkner as the title of the collection of the first five letters , published after the patent controversy ended . 
 The Drapier introduces his subject by invoking the duty of his readers as " Christians , as parents , and as lovers of your country " . His purpose is to introduce the background of Wood 's coin and then he suggests a boycott similar to the one in his Proposal for the Universal Use of Irish Manufacture . Throughout his monetary arguments , the Drapier constantly acknowledges how humble his station in life is , and incorporates theological and classical allusions to mock Wood . The Drapier places the blame for the coin upon Wood , stating : " It is no treason to rebel against Mr Wood . " 
 There are many religious overtones similar to Swift 's sermons , such as the Drapier 's combination of a duty to God with duty to one 's king and country . Many critics compare the language and rhetorical style of the first letter to a Hebrew prophet or to an evangelical preacher who warns the masses of an imminent threat to their soul . However , the final judgment had not yet come , so the Drapier also included arguments claiming that Wood 's halfpence would destroy the Irish economy and the souls of the citizenry . 
 One of the concerns of the Irish discussed in the first letter was over what is now known as Gresham 's law : debased coins would cause silver and gold coinage to be hoarded or removed from the country , which would further debase the currency . Tenant farmers would no longer be able to pay their landlords , and , after the tenants were removed , there would be fewer crops grown in Ireland ; the increase of poverty and the decrease of food supply would completely ruin Ireland 's economy . 
 Although some critics and historians view the language and examples employed by the Drapier to describe the possible economic harms as over the top , others consider that Swift 's imagery was grounded in truth . Even Swift 's satire of Wood 's character is based on actual evidence and added very little to what Wood provided the public through his words and actions . Although the Drapier emphasises Wood 's involvement and not the king 's , glosses of the first letter reveal allusions to Wood bribing the Duchess of Kendal that obscure the distinction to the careful reader . However , the Drapier always respects the king as leader of the Irish nation and the Irish church , although some critics see his bold language and free use of the king 's name and title as undermining those positions . The Drapier makes sure that Wood appears to be the primary target , which , when combined with only an indirect attack upon people at the top of the British political system , reassured the people of Ireland that they could rebel against an " insignificant hardware man " . 
 = = = To Mr Harding = = = 
 The Drapier 's second letter , A Letter to Mr. Harding the Printer , upon Occasion of a Paragraph in his News @-@ Paper of 1 August , relating to Mr. Wood 's Half @-@ Pence , was printed on 4 August 1724 , in response to the British Privy Council 's testing of Wood 's coin . 
 The Drapier alludes to the involvement of the Duchess of Kendall in his first letter ; in the second , the Drapier de @-@ emphasises her involvement and shifts his focus to blame the Whig party . According to the Drapier , the Whigs are the ones who Wood bribed in securing his patent . The central target for this letter is the Privy Council 's report produced under the authority of Walpole . It was necessary for the Drapier to attack the report to ensure that the people would be willing to resist the coin and deny the " truth " that Wood 's supporters issued . Therefore , the Drapier describes them as " only a few <unk> of their Country , Confederates with Woods " . 
 The Drapier does not directly attack Isaac Newton 's assay of Wood 's coin , but instead attacks the process behind the assay and the witnesses who testified before the Privy Council . In his criticism of the Privy Council 's report , the Drapier claims that the report is part of Wood 's propaganda and lies , because Wood released three proposals concurrent with the report : lowering the patent production quota from £ 100 @,@ 800 to £ 40 @,@ 000 worth ; that no one is obliged to accept more than five pence halfpenny per transaction ; and to sell the coin at 2s 1d a pound or his raw copper at 1s 8d a pound . Wood 's choice of wording , that the Irish would be " obliged " to accept the coin , was criticised by the Drapier who then accused Wood of " perfect High Treason " for obliging the people to take any copper coin when the king lacked the constitutional authority to do such a thing . 
 In the second letter , the Drapier walks a careful line between openly indicting the king and merely hinting at his relationship with Wood 's patent ; while the Drapier accuses Wood , he constantly refers to the king 's authority and power to issue legal tender ( this is called " the King 's Prerogative " ) . In particular , the Drapier claims that the king is unable to force his people to accept any copper based currency . As the Drapier points out , the constitution establishing Ireland as a kingdom limits the authority of the monarch because it forces the people of Ireland to use only gold or silver coins as official currency . Throughout this argument , the Drapier compares the king 's ability to print money with the petty amount of political power held by Wood , which undermines the image of the king as the supreme authority in Ireland while hinting that the king is not protecting the rights of the Irish people . The Drapier stops himself before he commits treason , and he instead argues that the king would never accept a patent that could harm Ireland ; to the Drapier , the king would never act in such a way as to help Wood harm the people of Ireland . 
 In response to calls for action from the Drapier in the second letter , a group of bankers joined together on 17 August 1724 , agreeing in writing that they would not accept the coin produced under Wood 's patent . Other merchants and tradesmen followed in a similar fashion . However , this did not stop Walpole from ordering the Commissioners of the Revenue in Ireland to enter the coin into the Irish economy . Regardless of Walpole 's orders , the Irish Lord Justices did not act , Lord Shannon did not command that his troops should be issued Wood 's coin , and Middleton 's House of Lords and Conolly 's House of Commons did not pass any resolution backing up Walpole 's order , which effectively prevented the coin from being distributed . 
 = = = To the Nobility and Gentry = = = 
 The Drapier 's third letter , To the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom of Ireland : Some Observations Upon a Paper , Call 'd , The Report of the Committee of the Most Honourable the Privy @-@ Council in England relating to Wood 's Half @-@ pence , was printed on 25 August 1724 . 
 The subject matter of the third letter is similar to that of the second letter , and some scholars have explained this as a result of Swift being forced to respond so quickly to the Privy @-@ council 's report . The Drapier emphasises his humble nature and simple understanding when appealing to the pride of his audience , the nobility . 
 The Drapier spends most of his letter responding to the " Report of the Committee of the Most Honourable the Privy @-@ <unk> in England " . This document released by Walpole served as a defence of Wood 's coin ; the report argued that the coin was important to the people of Ireland . However , the report was not officially released by Walpole in the Parliament 's Gazette , but published without Parliament 's authority in the London Journal in August 1724 . Some scholars have speculated that Walpole had the report published in a non @-@ Parliamentary magazine so that he would not be connected directly to Wood 's coin . However , the lack of Parliamentary authority behind the report allowed the Drapier to undermine the credibility of the report 's content . 
 The Drapier claims , " Mr. Wood in publishing this paper would insinuate to the world , as if the Committee had a greater concern for his credit and private emolument , than for the honour of the Privy @-@ council and both Houses of Parliament here ... For it seems intended as a vindication of Mr. Wood , not without several severe remarks on the Houses of Lords and Commons of Ireland . " To the Drapier , Wood has utter contempt for the political authority of Ireland , and would use his coin and the report to mock them . However , the attack extends beyond Wood to encompass a dispute about the authority of England to rule over the kingdom of Ireland . 
 The central argument in the letter is that the British have negated the rights of the Irish people by relying on a completely British system to pass the patent without allowing the Irish Parliament a say . William Wood , according to the Drapier , was already involved in a similar dispute with a coin he minted for Massachusetts . Wood , the Drapier claims , " hath already tried his Faculty in New @-@ England , and I hope he will meet with an EQUAL <unk> here ; what That was I leave to the Publick Intelligence . " The response to Wood 's coin was a complete boycott of the coin . 
 The Drapier does not blame the production of the coining on Walpole 's policies , in regard to England 's colonies , but on Wood 's ( and his accomplice 's ) actions This criticism of Wood 's actions allows the Drapier to attack the patent process in such a way that could not be used directly against the British Parliament . In referring to this point , the Drapier asks , " Were not the People of Ireland born as Free as those of England ? " 
 The final image of this letter is that of the small but brave David versus the giant Goliath . Wood is the giant invader who wears his brass coin as armour and the Drapier is just the small merchant who is not big enough to fill the king 's armour . This image resonated with the people , and a sign was displayed by people of Dublin which read : 
 And the people said unto Saul , Shall Jonathan die , who hath wrought this great salvation in Israel ? God forbid : as the Lord liveth , there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground ; for he hath wrought with God this day . So the people rescued Jonathan , that he died not . 
 The third letter openly incorporates Swift 's argument that political authority stems from the consent of a population . As such , the third letter has been seen as a response in part to the Declaratory Act , which had undermined the independence and the authority of Irish legislature and judiciary in favour of the British . The Declaratory Act removed the ability for any in Ireland to speak for the people of Ireland , and it was necessary for the act to be removed before the people could be heard . 
 However , such an attack on the Declaratory Act was common in Swift 's works , and he constantly argued against the act by promoting Irish autonomy . This does not mean that the Irish independence is to be taken lightly , because Swift viewed the self @-@ reliance as " the only means of halting their [ the Irish / Irish Protestant ] self @-@ destructive complicity – of which they were inadequately aware – in England 's ongoing consumption of Ireland . " 
 = = = To the Whole People of Ireland = = = 
 The Drapier 's fourth letter , To the Whole People of Ireland , A Word or Two to the People of Ireland , A Short Defense of the People of Ireland , was written on 13 October 1724 and was either published on 21 October 1724 or on 22 October 1724 , the day Lord Carteret arrived in Dublin . Throughout the letter , the Drapier pretends that Carteret 's transfer to Ireland to enforce Wood 's patent was a rumour produced by Wood 's allies , although Swift had knowledge to the contrary . 
 The fourth letter was written in response to the many charges put forth by the British supporters of Wood 's patent against the Irish , including claims of papal influence and of treason . A large portion of the letter is a response to these accusations and to refuting further arguments that Wood 's coin could be beneficial to the Irish people . The tone of the letter is clear : Wood 's allies are promoting an evil that will harm Ireland . However , Wood is only a secondary target — figures like Walpole are mocked for their role in the controversy . 
 The majority of the fourth letter is devoted to an argument revolving around the political liberty of the Irish people . It is for this argument that the Drapier was persecuted , because his words were seen as a call to challenge British authority and possibly to declare independence from the king . The Drapier walks a fine line between loyalty and disloyalty , because he charges that the Irish are loyal only to their king , who had the title " King of Ireland " , but not to England . To this the Drapier states : 
 Let whoever think otherwise , I M.B. Drapier , desire to be excepted , for I declare , next under God , I depend only on the King my sovereign , and on the laws of my own country ; and I am so far from depending upon the people of England , that if they should ever rebel against my sovereign ( which God forbid ) I would be ready at the first command from His Majesty to take arms against them , as some of my countrymen did against theirs at Preston . And if such a rebellion should prove so successful as to fix the Pretender on the throne of England , I would venture to transgress that statute so far as to lose every drop of my blood to hinder him from being King of Ireland . 
 In defence of his nation , the Drapier turns around claims of treason and papal loyalty against Wood and his defenders ( especially Walpole ) , calling them as treasonous as the Jacobite rebels and the Parliamentary rebels . The Drapier believed that God 's providence supported the people of Ireland , but his will required the people of Ireland to stand up against the treasonous British . 
 The most famous and controversial statement of the Drapier 's Letters follows claims of loyalty to the Irish king : 
 I have digressed a little to refresh and continue that spirit so seasonably raised amongst you , and to let you see that by the laws of GOD , of <unk> , of <unk> , and of your own COUNTRY , you ARE and <unk> to be as FREE a people as your brethren in England . 
 This line of argument follows the political philosophy of John Locke in the Two Treatises on Government ( 1689 ) . Locke wrote that the people had the right to resist their government when their property rights were violated , and that nations have the same sovereign rights even when they have been conquered by another . 
 A secondary rhetorical battle began between Walpole and the Irish in regard to Wood 's patent ; the rest of the constitutional debate was over the nature of Poynings ' Law , a law that was brought back into use through the Declaratory Act ( 1720 ) . Poyning 's Law was a law that the British claimed allowed them to control all of Ireland 's legal actions and to revoke the Irish parliamentary independence . Traditionally , the rulers of Ireland viewed themselves as a kingdom and not a colony that would be controlled by Poyning 's Law . The Drapier agreed with the Irish interpretation of the law and incorporated aspects of Molyneux 's arguments that combined proof the law was misinterpreted and Locke 's political philosophy . 
 Lord Carteret read passages from the fourth letter about Irish constitutional independence to the Irish Privy Council and claimed that they were treasonable . It was then that Harding was arrested for printing the letters and a reward of £ 300 was offered for the identity of the Drapier . Lord Carteret wrote that the arrest and bounty were the result of an " unfortunate accident " and he did not want to respond in such a way . Lord Midleton was also forced to denounce his previous ally , the Drapier , when did so when he wrote , " to provoke England to that degree as some have endeavoured to do , is not the true way to keep them out " . Archbishop King responded to the letters by saying they were " ludicrous and <unk> writ " . However , the Archbishop publicly supported the constitutional actions more than the other three , and his support caused others important officials to criticise him . 
 Regardless of the proclamation against the Drapier and the words issued by important Irish officials , the people of Ireland had stood by the writer , and it was their support that protected Swift . Some critics have viewed this support as resulting from the letter 's appeal to the " mob " , or common people , of Ireland . 
 = = = To Viscount Molesworth = = = 
 The Drapier 's fifth letter , A Letter To the Honourable the Lord Viscount Molesworth , at his House at <unk> , near Swords was published on 31 December 1724 . The letter includes the most pseudo @-@ biographical information on the Drapier . 
 This letter is seen as the final salvo in the Drapier 's fight against Wood 's patent . Although there was a possible agreement between Carteret and Walpole over ending the patent , Swift found it necessary to publish this defence of the fourth letter to ensure that Walpole would not back down from his promise of removing the patent . It has also been seen as a letter celebrating Harding 's release from being tried for printing the Drapier 's letters . 
 The Drapier begins his letter with three quotations : Psalm 109 , Ecclesiasticus / Sirach 7 , and Virgil 's Aeneid Book Five . With these passages , he sets the tone for his own defence by appealing to both the reason and the religious sentiments of his audience to prove his innocence : 
 I foolishly disdained to have <unk> to <unk> , Lamenting , and Crying for Mercy , but rather chose to appeal to Law and Liberty and the common Rights of Mankind , without considering the Climate I was in . 
 Some critics argue that Swift did not need to defend himself , and To Viscount Molesworth was written to gloat . However , the essence of the letter encourages the Irish to remember the actions of Walpole , Wood , and the British Parliament . By willingly throwing himself before the judgement of his fellow Irishmen and before the final judgement of God , the Drapier claims that he is and always will be on the correct side of the argument . 
 Other critics emphasise that the letter 's object , Lord Molesworth , was targeted to bind the higher and lower classes together . Using Molesworth , a religious dissenter , a nobleman , and the opposite of Swift , the Drapier unites all of the various people of Ireland in a common nationalist cause . Instead of defending charges against himself , the Drapier is calling up more support for the Irish cause ; he seeks attention so that the greater liberty of Ireland will be respected . 
 The letter serves one other purpose : to delight in the Drapier 's lack of being captured and his victory over Whitshed . William Whitshed , Lord Chief Justice of the King 's Bench in Ireland , was the one who actually arrested Harding and sought to convict him of printing treasonous materials . A letter written anonymously by Swift , " <unk> Advice to the Grand @-@ Jury " , motivated the Irish jury to stand up against Whitshed and release the printer . The Drapier hints at the letter and the freeing of Harding when he lists many other works written by Jonathan Swift , and , in the process , nearly reveals his own identity . However , his tone may not be mocking , as he could just be flaunting his own position , and some have credited this idea to the incorporation of so many Biblical and Classical allusions beyond the three that begin the letter . Scholar Herbert Davis declared this letter is " in some ways the best written of all the Letters " . 
 = = = To the Lord Chancellor Middleton = = = 
 The sixth letter during the Drapier 's campaign , To the Lord Chancellor Middleton , is dated 26 October 1724 , and was written as a private letter from Jonathan Swift to Alan Brodrick , Lord Midleton ( with the misspelling of his title ) . It is not a true " Drapier " letter , because the author professes to be different from the Drapier , although he was known to be one and the same by Lord Midleton . Sir Walter Scott includes this letter as number five , although Faulkner , Sheridan , Deane Swift , Hawkesworth and Nichols label it as number six . 
 The purpose of the sixth letter was to ensure that Midleton would stay true to his opposition of Wood 's patent . Although the extent to which Midleton was influenced by the letter cannot be known , it is certain that Midleton believed that the patent would harm Ireland and that he would resist it at all costs . Regardless , Swift wrote the letter to express himself in a way that the Drapier could not : as the dean of a great , Irish cathedral . He asserts his status to verify that the Drapier 's intentions must be good . In essence , the letter rehashes many of the previous letters ' arguments to draw Midleton into openly supporting the Drapier 's actions . Swift also admits to actively working against the patent , and mentions how his " On Doing Good " sermon is similar to the ideas expressed by the Drapier . 
 = = = An Humble Address = = = 
 The Drapier 's last letter , An Humble Address to Both Houses of Parliament , was completed in June 1725 . It was written before Wood 's patent was defeated , and it was stopped from being printed when word reached Swift that the patent had been withdrawn . This letter remained unpublished for 10 years . 
 The letter challenges the Ireland 's parliament to investigate how Wood originally attained the patent , even though most in power knew that the patent was the result of bribery . Although nothing new would be discovered in an investigation , the letter served the purpose of trying to unite the people of Ireland to fight for further economic freedom . The Drapier refers to Ireland 's lack of economic freedom when he claims , the Irish " are altogether Losers , and England a Gainer " . Swift 's intentions behind the letter are uncertain , and some critics believe that Swift did not desire such an investigation into Wood 's supporters while others contend that Swift was serious about promoting a public inquiry into the matter . 
 The topics the Drapier addresses span from absentee land owners to importing of goods from Britain to the favouring of Englishmen over Irishmen for Irish governmental positions . These issues were the many issues that Swift cared about and saw as threatening Ireland before Wood 's halfpence controversy . However , these individual issues were not as important as the independence and unity of Ireland : the specifics of independence were less important than self @-@ rule . Some argue that Swift , after Wood 's patent was withdrawn , removed himself from the political landscape to focus on writing Gulliver 's Travels , in which he picked up many of the same ideas . 
 = = Publication = = 
 John Harding published the first four letters before he was arrested and the fifth after his release . After Harding 's death , George Faulkner became Swift 's primary publisher in Ireland , and A Letter to the Lord Chancellor Middleton and An Humble Address were copied from manuscript copies provided by the author to Faulkner and then printed with the other letters . The Drapier 's Letters were first collected and published in their entirety by Faulkner in 1735 . 
 On 9 February 1733 , Faulkner advertised his future publication of Swift 's collected works in four volumes , the first containing the Drapier 's Letters , in the Dublin Journal . However , this edition led to the Motte v Faulkner ( 1735 ) lawsuit , since the London bookseller Benjamin Motte had publication rights , under British copyright legislation , to many of the works included in Faulkner 's edition . Although the Drapier 's Letters were not under copyright , the complete work was legally brought to a halt from being published in England by a ruling on 28 November 1735 . It is uncertain if Swift allowed Faulkner to publish the works to allow an Irish publisher to compete against a British publisher or if Swift had no say in the matter and Faulkner published the works against Swift 's will . In a letter to Motte in May 1736 , Swift did not defend Faulkner 's legal right to publish the works . Instead , Swift admonished Motte for prosecuting Faulkner instead of coming to an agreement that would allow Faulkner to reprint the copyrighted material . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although the original printing of the Drapier 's Letters resulted in the arrest of Harding and a bounty placed upon the Drapier 's head , Swift 's actions in defending Ireland were deemed heroic among the Irish citizenry . He was titled the " Hibernian patriot " for his actions . Some residents of Dublin placed banners and signs in the city to recognise Swift 's deeds , and images from the letters , such as the Drapier comparing his campaign to David fighting Goliath , became themes in popular literature . Scholar Herbert Davis claims that by the end of 1725 , Swift was " the Darling of the populace ; His Image and <unk> on a great many Sign @-@ Posts " in Ireland . 
 Swift did not fully embrace his popularity , but he enjoyed it . On his birthday , 30 November 1727 , a large group of men came to St. Patrick 's Cathedral to pray and afterwards celebrate throughout the city . This gathering commemorated Swift and his letters and also protested against the harsh British treatment of Ireland . 
 According to Robert Mahony , the Drapier 's Letters , especially the fourth , were later praised by Irish nationalists . However , as he continued , many recent critics have re @-@ examined this nationalistic claim and asserted a counterclaim that Swift is speaking more for the Protestants of Ireland than for the entire nation . Many critics , including Carol Fabricant , have asked who " the Whole People of Ireland " are , " who " the Drapier 's Letters are speaking " to " , and if Swift has the right , as a Protestant Englishman , to speak for the entire nation . R. F. Foster believes that Swift represented " Ascendancy attitudes , " but this view is not held by all . Some critics , like Joep <unk> , believe that Swift 's work contributed greatly to a common Irish nationalism regardless of religious affiliation , and that Swift was able to relate to all of Ireland through a unified suffering under the British rule . In overall effect , Fabricant argued that Swift 's ability to speak for the whole populace is further suggested by the wide consensus opposed to the coinage plan . Along with this , Swift was able to rhetorically extend natural rights , in the Drapier 's Letters , to all people of Ireland without any regard to restriction . 
 = Third attack on Anzac Cove = 
 The third attack on Anzac Cove ( 19 May 1915 ) was an engagement during the Gallipoli Campaign of the First World War . The attack was conducted by the forces of the Ottoman Turkish Empire , against the forces of the British Empire defending the cove . 
 On 25 April 1915 , the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZAC ) landed on the western side of the Gallipoli Peninsula , at what thereafter became known as Anzac Cove . The first Turkish attempts to recapture the ANZAC beachhead were two unsuccessful attacks in April . Just over two weeks later , the Turks had gathered a force of 42 @,@ 000 men ( four divisions ) to conduct their second assault against the ANZAC 's 17 @,@ 300 men ( two divisions ) . The ANZAC commanders had no indication of the impending attack until the day before , when British aircraft reported a build @-@ up of troops opposite the ANZAC positions . 
 The Turkish assault began in the early hours of 19 May , mostly directed at the centre of the ANZAC position . It had failed by midday ; the Turks were caught by enfilade fire from the defenders ' rifles and machine @-@ guns , which caused around ten thousand casualties , including three thousand deaths . The ANZACs had less than seven hundred casualties . 
 Expecting an imminent continuation of the battle , three Allied brigades arrived within twenty @-@ four hours to reinforce the beachhead , but no subsequent attack materialised . Instead , on 20 and 24 May two truces were declared to collect the wounded and bury the dead in no man 's land . The Turks never succeeded in capturing the bridgehead ; instead the ANZACs evacuated the position at the end of the year . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Beachhead = = = 
 On 25 April , at the start of the Gallipoli Campaign , the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZAC ) , commanded by Lieutenant @-@ General William Birdwood , landed at Beach Z , later to become known as Anzac Cove . The beachhead was not a large position . Including two isolated outposts in the north , No.1 Post and No.2 Post , it stretched south only 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to Chatham 's Post , and at the most had a depth of 750 yards ( 690 m ) . Other sources put the dimensions as 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long , and 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) deep . Two of the central positions , Quinn 's and <unk> 's Posts , had a steep cliff to the rear of the ANZAC trenches . In places the Turkish trenches were dug as close as ten yards ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) from the Allied lines . 
 The First Turkish counter @-@ attack on Anzac Cove in April , by the 19th Infantry Division ( 57th , 72nd and 77th Infantry Regiments ) commanded by Colonel Mustafa Kemal , had initially pierced the ANZAC line but was eventually repulsed . On 5 May the Turkish Army commander , the German officer Otto Liman von Sanders , ordered his troops to adopt a defensive posture . However , the Turkish General Staff considered the ANZAC beachhead to be such a precarious position that even a small Turkish success would " drive them back into the sea " . Another consideration was that eliminating the ANZAC position would release four or five divisions to move against the British and French beachhead at Cape Helles . 
 = = = Turkish forces = = = 
 The Ottoman Turkish Army of the First World War was badly underestimated by the Allies , and during the war it would defeat forces from the British , French and Russian armies . Before the landings , the Gallipoli peninsula was defended by several divisions , based on infantry battalion strong @-@ points overlooking the potential landing beaches . By April 1915 , they had 82 fixed and 230 mobile artillery pieces sited to defend the peninsula . Virtually all the Turkish Army commanders , down to company commander level , were very experienced , being veterans of the Balkan Wars . But their command structure was weaker at the non commissioned officer ( NCO ) level , with only one NCO in each company . One advantage that the Turkish Army had over the British supplied forces was their hand grenades , which were not used by the British forces . The British also acknowledged that the Turkish snipers ' " marksmanship was generally superior " to that of the Allies . 
 The assault was under the direct command of Major @-@ General Essad Pasha . The plan was to gather the assault force secretly behind the Turkish lines on 18 May . Then at 03 : 30 19 May , while it was still dark , the Turkish forces would simultaneously attack all along the ANZAC perimeter . The aim was to force the defenders out of their trenches and back into the sea . To maintain surprise the attack would not be preceded by an artillery bombardment ; but the previous day all the available Turkish artillery bombarded the ANZAC lines between 17 : 00 and midnight . This was something they had done twice before that month . The signal to start the attack was supposed to have been the detonation of a large mine at Quinn 's Post , in the centre of the ANZAC lines , but by 19 May the tunnel for the mine had not been completed . The attacking force , from north to south , comprised the 19th Division ( now made up of the 27th , 57th and 72nd Infantry Regiments ) , 5th Division ( 13th and 14th Infantry Regiments ) , 2nd Division ( 1st , 5th and 6th Infantry Regiments ) , 16th Division ( 33rd , 47th , 48th and 125th Infantry Regiments ) and the now independent 77th Infantry Regiment . In total this was around 42 @,@ 000 men . The 2nd and 16th Divisions were fresh , having just arrived on the peninsula , while the other two had taken part in some of the previous counter @-@ attacks at Anzac Cove . 
 = = = ANZAC forces = = = 
 By now the ANZAC Corps comprised two divisions , with around 17 @,@ 300 men and 43 artillery pieces . The New Zealand and Australian Division defended the northern half of the beachhead , while the 1st Australian Division defended the southern half . The perimeter was divided into four sections , from north to south , the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade in No.4 Section , the 1st Light Horse Brigade and the 4th Australian Brigade in No.3 Section , the 1st Australian Brigade in No.2 Section , and finally the 3rd Australian Brigade in No.1 Section . The understrength 2nd Australian Brigade , the only corps reserve , was held where Shrapnel Valley met Monash Valley , and was ordered to deploy two battalions to form a reserve defence line . The New Zealand Infantry Brigade had been sent to Cape Helles to support the British . 
 The ANZAC command had no inkling of the impending attack , and as late as 16 May they recorded that they were opposed by only between 15 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 troops . On 18 May an aircraft from the Royal Naval Air Service was sent to direct naval gunfire , and flew across the peninsula on its return . The aircraft 's crew observed that the valleys opposite the ANZAC position were " densely packed with Turkish troops " . A second aircraft , sent to confirm the sighting , also reported that even more troops were being landed at <unk> on the peninsula 's eastern coast , only around five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from the ANZAC beachhead . At 17 : 15 the news was relayed to the two ANZAC divisions , who were told to expect an attack that night . Just after dark the British battleship HMS Triumph reported seeing a " considerable " number of mounted troops and artillery moving north from Krithia . 
 At about 23 : 45 18 May , a Turkish bomb detonated at Quinn 's Post , and the Turks opened fire with their small arms until around 00 : 10 19 May . With all the evidence pointing to an impending Turkish assault , the ANZAC troops were ordered to stand @-@ to at 03 : 00 , half an hour earlier than normal , and they improvised defences by throwing out rolls of barbed wire on rests to the front of their lines . 
 = = Attack = = 
 = = = No.2 Section = = = 
 The first sign of the coming battle was shortly after stand @-@ to at No.2 Section , where the Australian 4th Battalion reported seeing movement , and light reflecting off bayonets , in the valley between Johnston 's Jolly and German Officers ' Ridge . The 5th Division started attacking without , as was normal , blowing their bugles and shouting war cries . Their trenches were only two hundred yards ( 180 m ) from the Australians ' trench , and the Australian 1st and 4th Battalions opened fire on the advancing Turks . The 5th Division was closely followed by the 2nd and 16th Divisions . The 2nd Division , coming from Johnson 's Jolly , advanced diagonally across the 4th Battalion 's front , and the 4th Battalion engaged them in their flank with rifle and machine @-@ gun fire . The Turks that survived the enfilade fire moved either into Wire Gully or back to their own lines . Waves of Turkish reinforcements attempted to follow the first line , but they were also mown down and by daylight the only movement seen was the wounded trying to reach help . 
 To the immediate south , opposite Lone Pine , the Australian 2nd and 3rd Battalions had been digging a new trench into no man 's land . It was intended to provide a better firing position and , starting from both battalions ' lines , headed into no man 's land at an angle of forty @-@ five degrees to the old line . Eventually it was expected that the two extensions would meet in the middle , but by the time of the attack there was still a gap of around fifty yards ( 46 m ) between them . It was here the Turkish 16th Division attacked . At first the Turks were in a gully which sheltered them from Australian fire . The 48th Infantry Regiment , moving through the heavy Australian fire , advanced into the gap between the two battalions . Despite one of the 3rd Battalion 's machine @-@ guns jamming , this assault and the following waves were beaten back , although some Turks did reach the Australian trenches . The Turks came so close to the supporting Australian artillery that the artillerymen disabled their guns , so they could not be used against them , and joined the infantry in the trenches . The 16th Division attempted four successive assaults , but each wave was mown down by the Australian fire . At Wire Gully a group of Turks got close enough to a 2nd Battalion machine @-@ gun to destroy it with a hand grenade , allowing them to move forward and reach the Australian trench . Some individual Turkish soldiers also reached the trench before they were all shot down . This continued until around 05 : 00 , when the surviving Turks started withdrawing to German Officers ' Ridge . 
 = = = No.1 Section = = = 
 Part of the 16th Division also attacked the 3rd Brigade in No.1 Section from Lone Pine southwards . They advanced in two waves through a field of wheat , but only three men survived the Australian fire to reach the 10th Battalion 's trench , and were then shot on the parapet . Turkish wounded and survivors could be seen moving back to a gully , but in the growing light they were in full view of an 11th Battalion machine @-@ gun , which caused devastation amongst their ranks . The Australians continued firing at targets until around noon , but it was obvious the assault by the 16th Division had failed here . In the extreme south of the ANZAC beachhead the 9th Battalion trench was attacked by the independent 77th Infantry Regiment . However , here as elsewhere , the attacking Turks were whittled down by the Australian fire , the last of them as they reached the belt of barbed wire in front of the Australian trenches . 
 = = = No.3 Section = = = 
 Another part of the 5th Division had gathered unseen below <unk> 's Post , which was held by the 14th Battalion , and at 04 : 00 they rushed the trench , throwing hand grenades . The post was only defended by an Australian section , two of whom were killed and another two wounded ; as the Turks occupied that part of the post the surviving Australians retreated . The Turks were now in a position to observe and bring fire down on Monash Valley . However , from another section of the post Private Albert Jacka led a small group of men in a counter @-@ attack on the Turks . Jacka shot five of the Turks , bayoneted another two , and chased the rest out of the post . For this feat he was awarded the Victoria Cross . 
 Next in the line , to the north , was Quinn 's Post , defended by the 15th Battalion and the 2nd Light Horse Regiment . For some time after the start of the Turkish attack , the Turks opposite Quinn 's just threw hand grenades at the post . Around 03 : 30 the Turks ' machine @-@ guns and rifles opened fire at the Australians . This lasted for about an hour when the Turks went over the top and assaulted the post . As elsewhere , they were stopped by the weight of the Australian fire , not only from the trench they were attacking , but also by the defenders at Pope 's and from the 2nd New Zealand Artillery Battery . Three more Turkish attacks were also repulsed in a similar fashion . 
 On the other side of Monash Valley , the right flank of the 5th Division and the 19th Division attacked Pope 's . Sentries from the 1st Light Horse Regiment opened fire on a group of Turks moving down the valley ; this group , several hundred strong , started an attack on Pope 's . The defenders from the 1st and 3rd Light Horse Regiments opened fire , and only three Turkish soldiers reached the Australian positions before being shot . 
 = = = No.4 Section = = = 
 On Russell 's Top the Auckland Mounted Rifles were in a precarious position ; their trenches were still far from being fully constructed , and three saps heading towards The Nek had yet to be joined up . The 19th Division , using hand grenades , attacked the New Zealanders ' position in three waves . The Wellington Mounted Rifles to the north were able to bring their machine @-@ guns to bear on the attackers . The flanking fire caused devastation amongst the Turkish ranks . At the same time the Aucklands charged them in a counter @-@ attack , forcing the survivors to withdraw . 
 = = = Daylight = = = 
 All along the ANZAC perimeter , Turkish troops continued trying to advance using fire and manoeuvre . This gradually petered out as the morning progressed , and the Turks tried to regain their own lines instead . The Australians and New Zealanders continued to fire on them , sometimes showing themselves above their trenches . The Turks were now able to return fire , which caused the majority of the ANZAC casualties . It was now clear to the Australians and New Zealanders that the Turkish attack was a failure . However , a report arrived at Turkish headquarters suggesting that some objectives had been captured . So the Turkish commanders issued orders , at 05 : 00 , for a second assault , this time to be supported by an artillery bombardment . Over the next few hours several new attacks began . At 05 : 25 the 2nd and 5th Divisions attacked again , but instead of moving directly at the Australian lines , they advanced at an angle , and were again mown down . At No.1 Post in the No.4 Section the Canterbury Mounted Rifles observed the Turks forming in Malone 's Gully , in preparation for another assault on Russell 's Top . The location of the post was such that they could turn their machine @-@ gun and engage the Turks from the rear , which broke up the attack . The Turks attacked Quinn 's four more times , and on one occasion an officer and around thirty men managed to reach the junction of Courtney 's and Quinn 's before being killed . This pattern of attack was kept up until around 10 : 00 , when Allied observers reported a reluctance among the Turkish troops to leave their trenches . 
 The seriousness of the Turkish defeat gradually dawned on the ANZAC commanders . At 05 : 25 Birdwood suggested to his junior commanders that they counter @-@ attack against the Turkish flanks . But he was convinced that any attack into the Turkish artillery was doomed to failure . However , at 15 : 35 British General Headquarters ( GHQ ) ordered him to exploit the situation and use any opportunity to attack . Birdwood replied that anything less than a general assault would be futile . In the northern sector Major @-@ General Alexander Godley , commanding the New Zealand and Australian Division , decided to attack . The Wellington Mounted Rifles was ordered to attack the Turkish trenches at The Nek . The trench that was their first objective was one hundred yards ( 91 m ) across no man 's land with no cover at all . The regiment prepared to obey the order , but arranged the attack so that no single squadron would be wiped out . The men were selected in equal proportion from all three squadrons , and Captain William Hardham VC was chosen to command them . Brigadier @-@ General Andrew Russell , commanding the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , contacted Godley to advise him of the circumstances of such an attack , and Russell was told to " use his own judgement " so promptly called it off . The Turks kept up their artillery bombardment on the beachhead for the remainder of the day . That , along with a prisoner disclosing that another attack was imminent , persuaded GHQ to recall the New Zealand Infantry Brigade from Cape Helles to Anzac Cove that night . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By the end of the day the ANZAC artillery had expended 1 @,@ 361 18 @-@ pounder rounds , 143 howitzer rounds , 1 @,@ 410 smaller mountain artillery rounds , and 948 @,@ 000 rifle and machine @-@ gun rounds . Turkish figures are not known , but the attacking Turkish forces had around ten thousand casualties , including three thousand dead . The heaviest casualties were amongst the 5th Division , and the least for the relatively inactive 19th Division , which still had over one thousand casualties . Talking about the failed attack , one Turkish soldier described the scene " [ c ] <unk> dead , countless ! It was impossible to count . " The ANZACs had only 160 killed and 468 wounded . Among the Australian dead was Private John Simpson Kirkpatrick , whose exploits in the campaign earned him a place in Australian folklore as " the Man with the Donkey " . 
 The next day , 20 May , the smell of rotting corpses in no man 's land and the numerous wounded still located between the lines convinced the New Zealand and Australian Division staff to suggest an armistice . Soon an informal truce began under the flags of the Red Cross and Red Crescent . Turkish stretcher @-@ bearers headed into no man 's land to collect the dead and wounded . Just after 19 : 00 it appeared that the Turks were massing troops for an attack while gathering their wounded , so the 9th Battalion opened fire on them . The Turks responded with their artillery bombarding the Australian trenches . 
 By now the beachhead had been reinforced ; the New Zealand Infantry Brigade , the 2nd Light Horse Brigade and the 3rd Light Horse Brigade had all arrived during the day . Communication between the two sides resulted in a more formal truce on 24 May . At 07 : 30 all firing ceased and parties moved out to bury the dead . This lasted until 16 : 30 when the truce ended and both sides returned to their own lines . Firing recommenced at 16 : 45 . The Turkish commanders now realised just what would be required to capture the beachhead . Instead of trying again they left two of their depleted divisions , the 16th and 19th , to man their lines while the others were withdrawn . The still independent 77th Infantry Regiment also remained behind , in the same position covering the south . 
 The Turks never succeeded in capturing the beachhead , and at the end of the year the ANZAC forces were evacuated to Egypt . During the 260 days of the Gallipoli Campaign , the British Empire forces took 213 @,@ 980 casualties . 35 @,@ 000 of those were from the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps , which included 8 @,@ 709 Australian and 2 @,@ 721 New Zealand dead . The exact number of Turkish casualties is not known , but has been estimated at 87 @,@ 000 dead from a total of around 250 @,@ 000 casualties . 
 = Great Britain at the 1992 Winter Paralympics = 
 Great Britain competed at the 1992 Winter Paralympics held in <unk> and Albertville , France , the first Winter Paralympics to be celebrated concurrently with the Winter Olympic Games . 
 The British team entered athletes in all three disciplines contested at the Games ; eleven in alpine skiing , four in biathlon and three in cross @-@ country skiing . Five medals were won by British athletes , one silver and four bronze , meaning Britain placed fifteenth in the medal table . This remains Great Britain 's second best Winter Paralympic medal total after the 1984 Winter Paralympics in Innsbruck , Austria , where the team won ten medals . All five medals were won in alpine skiing events , two by Richard Burt and three by Matthew Stockford . In addition to the medal performances the team had fourteen top ten finishes . The achievements of the British Paralympic team at the 1992 Winter Games helped to raise awareness of sports for disabled athletes . 
 = = Medallists = = 
 The following British athletes won medals at the Games . In total five medals were won , all in alpine skiing , and the team finished fifteenth in the medal table . This was the best medal total by Great Britain at a Winter Paralympics since 1984 in Innsbruck . In the ' by discipline ' sections below , medallists ' names are in bold . 
 = = Team selection and funding = = 
 The team was made up of athletes from the whole United Kingdom ; athletes from Northern Ireland , who could later elect to hold Irish citizenship under the pre @-@ 1999 article 2 of the Irish constitution , were only eligible to represent Great Britain at this time . However no Northern Irish athletes took part in the Winter Paralympics until 2010 in Vancouver . 
 These were the first Games , along with the Summer Games in Barcelona , to be coordinated by the British Paralympic Association . Funding for elite training programmes came from the Paralympics Trust , which was set up with a £ 500 @,@ 000 government grant . 
 = = Disability classification = = 
 Every participant at the Paralympics has their disability grouped into one of five disability categories ; amputation , the condition may be congenital or sustained through injury or illness ; cerebral palsy ; wheelchair athletes , there is often overlap between this and other categories ; visual impairment , including blindness ; Les autres , any physical disability that does not fall strictly under one of the other categories , for example dwarfism or multiple sclerosis . Each Paralympic sport then has its own classifications , dependent upon the specific physical demands of competition . Events are given a code , made of numbers and letters , describing the type of event and classification of the athletes competing . Events with " B " in the code are for athletes with visual impairment , codes LW1 to LW9 are for athletes who stand to compete and LW10 to LW12 are for athletes who compete sitting down . In biathlon events , which contain a target shooting component , blind and visually impaired athletes are able to compete through the use of acoustic signals , whose signal intensity varies dependent upon whether or not the athlete is on target . 
 = = Alpine skiing = = 
 Eleven British alpine skiers took part in the Games , ten in the men 's events and one in the women 's . All five of Britain 's medals at the Games were won in alpine skiing events . The team 's only silver medal was won by Richard Burt in the giant slalom B3 classification and he also won a bronze in the super @-@ G B3 . Burt almost missed his silver medal run when race officials started prematurely resetting the slalom course , but Burt 's sighted guide Keith Hockley noticed and took him up the mountain to complete the race . Matthew Stockford , the reigning world champion in downhill , won three bronze medals in the downhill , super @-@ G and giant slalom events of the LW10 classification . After Stockford won the bronze in downhill , the British delegation filed a protest claiming that the two American skiers ahead of him should not have been in the LW10 category . The medical committee rejected the protest on the grounds that all classifications had been determined at the start of the competition . Both Burt and Stockford would go on to win medals at the 1994 Winter Paralympics in Lillehammer . 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Biathlon = = 
 Four British men competed in biathlon events , all of them in the visually impaired classifications . None of the athletes won a medal , the highest placed finisher being Peter Young who came sixth in the B1 7 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) . Young , James Brown and James Denton also competed in cross @-@ country skiing events at the Games . 
 Men 
 = = Cross @-@ country skiing = = 
 Three British men took part in cross @-@ country skiing at the 1992 Games ; all three also competed in biathlon events . Each athlete entered both the 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) and 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) for their classification and all three teamed up for the B1 @-@ 3 3 × 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) relay , in which the team finished last out of the five competing nations . Peter Young achieved the best finish in an individual event , sixth place in the 10 km B1 , he had previously won a bronze medal in the event at the 1984 Innsbruck Games . Both Brown and Denton failed to place in the top ten in their individual events . 
 Men 
 = The Great Ziegfeld = 
 The Great Ziegfeld is a 1936 American musical drama film directed by Robert Z. Leonard and produced by Hunt Stromberg . It stars William Powell as the theatrical impresario Florenz " Flo " Ziegfeld , Jr . , Luise Rainer as Anna Held , and Myrna Loy as Billie Burke . 
 The film , shot at MGM Studios in Culver City , California in the fall of 1935 , is a fictionalized tribute to Florenz Ziegfeld , Jr. and a cinematic adaption of Broadway 's Ziegfeld Follies , with highly elaborate costumes , dances and sets . Many of the performers of the theatrical Ziegfeld Follies were cast in the film as themselves , including Fanny Brice and Harriet Hoctor , and Billie Burke acted as a supervisor for the film . The " A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody " set alone was reported to have cost US $ 220 @,@ 000 ( US $ 3 @,@ 751 @,@ 607 in 2016 dollars ) , featuring a towering rotating volute of 70 ft ( 21 m ) diameter with 175 spiral steps , weighing 100 tons . The music to the film was provided by Walter Donaldson , Irving Berlin , and lyricist Harold Adamson , with choreographed scenes . The extravagant costumes were designed by Adrian , taking some 250 tailors and seamstresses six months to prepare them using 50 pounds ( 23 kg ) of silver sequins and 12 yards ( 11 m ) of white ostrich plumes . Over a thousand people were employed in the production of the film , which required 16 reels of film after the cutting . 
 One of the biggest successes in film in the 1930s and the pride of MGM at the time , it was acclaimed as the greatest musical biography to be made in Hollywood and still remains a standard in musical film making . It won three Academy Awards , including Best Picture for producer Hunt Stromberg , Best Actress for Luise Rainer , and Best Dance Direction for Seymour Felix , and was nominated for four others . Although the film is still praised for its lavish production and as a symbol of glamor and excess during the Golden Age of Hollywood , today The Great Ziegfeld is generally seen less favorably and is considered by many critics to be excessively showy and long at just under three hours . 
 MGM made two more Ziegfeld films – one entitled Ziegfeld Girl ( 1941 ) , starring James Stewart , Judy Garland , Hedy Lamarr , and Lana Turner , which recycled some footage from The Great Ziegfeld , and in 1946 , Ziegfeld Follies by Vincente Minnelli . In 1951 , they produced their Technicolor remake of Show Boat , which Ziegfeld had presented as a stage musical . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The son of a highly respected music professor , Florenz " Flo " Ziegfeld , Jr. yearns to make his mark in show business . He begins by promoting Eugen Sandow , the " world 's strongest man " , at the 1893 Chicago World 's Fair , overcoming the competition of rival Billings and his popular attraction , belly dancer Little Egypt , with savvy marketing ( allowing women to feel Sandow 's muscles ) . 
 Ziegfeld returns to his father and young Mary Lou at the Chicago Musical College , and departs to San Francisco , where he and Sandow are deemed frauds for putting on a show in which Sandow faces a lion who falls asleep as soon as it is let out of the cage . Flo travels to England on an ocean liner , where he runs into Billings again who is laughing at a newspaper article denouncing him as a fraud . 
 Flo discovers that Billings is on his way to sign a contract with beautiful French star , Anna Held . Despite losing all his money gambling at Monte Carlo , Flo charms Anna into signing with him instead , pretending that he doesn 't know Billings . Anna twice almost sends him away for his rudeness and for being broke , before revealing that she appreciates his honesty . Ziegfeld promises to give her " more publicity than she ever dreams of " and to feature her alongside America 's most prominent theatrical performers . 
 At first , Anna 's performance at the Herald Square Theatre is not a success . However , Flo manages to generate publicity by sending 20 gallons of milk to Anna every day for a fictitious milk bath beauty treatment , then refusing to pay the bill . The newspaper stories soon bring the curious to pack his theater , and Ziegfeld introduces eight new performers to back her . Audience members comment on how the milk must make her skin beautiful and the show is a major success . Flo sends Anna flowers and jewelry and a note saying " you were magnificent my wife " , and she agrees to marry him , flaunting her new diamonds to her fellow performers . 
 However , one success is not enough for the showman . He has an idea for an entirely new kind of show featuring a bevy of blondes and brunettes , one that will " glorify " the American girl . The new show , the Ziegfeld Follies , an opulent production filled with beautiful women and highly extravagant costumes and sets , is a smash hit , and is followed by more versions of the Follies . 
 Ziegfeld tries to make a star out of Audrey Dane , who is plagued with alcoholism and lures Fanny Brice away from vaudeville , showering both with lavish gifts . He gives stagehand Ray Bolger his break as well . Mary Lou , now a young woman , visits Ziegfeld , who doesn 't recognize her initially , and hires her as a dancer . 
 The new production upsets Anna , who realizes that Flo 's world does not revolve around just her , and she becomes envious of the attention he pays to Audrey . She divorces him after walking in on Flo and a drunk Audrey at the wrong moment . Audrey walks out on Flo and the show after an angry confrontation . Broke , Flo borrows money from Billings for a third time for the new show . 
 Flo meets the red @-@ headed Broadway star Billie Burke and soon marries her . When she hears the news , a heartbroken Anna telephones Flo and pretends to be glad for him . Flo and Billie eventually have a daughter named Patricia . 
 Flo 's new shows are a success , but after a while , the public 's taste changes , and people begin to wonder if the times have not passed him by . After a string of negative reviews in the press , Flo overhears three men in a barber 's shop saying that he 'll " never produce another hit " . Stung , he vows to have four hits on Broadway at the same time . 
 He achieves his goal , with the hits Show Boat ( 1927 ) , Rio Rita ( 1927 ) , Whoopee ! ( 1928 ) , and The Three Musketeers , and invests over $ 1 million ( US $ 13 @,@ 781 @,@ 008 in 2016 dollars ) of his earnings in the stock market . However , the stock market crash of 1929 bankrupts him , forcing Billie to return to the stage . 
 Shaken by the reversal of his financial fortunes and the growing popularity of movies over live stage shows , he becomes seriously ill . Billings pays him a friendly visit , and the two men agree to become partners in a new , even grander production of The Ziegfeld Follies . But the reality is that both men are broke and Ziegfeld realizes this . In the final scene in his apartment overlooking the Ziegfeld Theatre , in a half @-@ delirium , he recalls scenes from several of his hits , exclaiming , " I 've got to have more steps , higher , higher " , before slumping over dead in his chair . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Ziegfeld 's widow , Billie Burke , was keen to pay off Ziegfeld 's debts without filing for bankruptcy , and sold the rights to a biopic of him to Universal Pictures in late 1933 . As a result , the film went into the pre @-@ production phase in January 1934 . Macguire had initially proposed the biographical film to them in the form of a " <unk> entertainment " set in a " theatrical tradition " and William Powell was cast as Ziegfeld . However , by February 1935 , Macguire had fallen into disagreement with Universal over financial problems at the studio , and the entire production , including some already constructed sets and musical arrangements , were sold to MGM for US $ 300 @,@ 000 ( US $ 5 @,@ 177 @,@ 913 in 2016 dollars ) . As part of the deal however , Universal retained the services of Powell for the classic screwball comedy My Man Godfrey , which was released the same year as The Great Ziegfeld . 
 The film was shot at MGM Studios in Culver City , California mostly in the latter half of 1935 under a budget of US $ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 ( US $ 25 @,@ 889 @,@ 563 in 2016 dollars ) , produced by Hunt Stromberg . The cost exceeded US $ 2 million ( US $ 34 @,@ 519 @,@ 417 in 2016 dollars ) by the end of the production in early 1936 , exorbitant for the period , and it was MGM 's most expensive film to date after Ben Hur ( 1925 ) . The principal cinematography was shot by Oliver T. Marsh , and George Folsey and Karl Freund were brought in to shoot the Ziegfeld Roof numbers . Ray June shot the " Melody " number and Merritt B. <unk> is credited for the Hoctor Ballet . 
 In the advertising for the film , MGM boasted of the film 's ostentatious nature , bragging that it was " SO BIG that only MGM could handle it " , with its " countless beauties , trained lions , ponies , dogs and other animals " . Busby Berkeley , who had led Warner Brothers to become the leading producer of musicals in Hollywood in the 1930s , was a major influence on the producers which had " glamorous , excessive 1930s cinematic musical numbers " . The film also came at a time when producers had begun seeing the economic and cultural importance of the cinematic medium in comparison to theater . Variety notes that the film producers were likely very concerned with the presentation of the film after production was wrapped up , and that the long length of the film at 176 minutes was understandable in that they probably " wanted to preserve as much footage as possible " . William S. Gray was responsible for the editing of the film . Over a thousand people were employed in the production , and The Great Ziegfeld required 16 reels of film after the cutting . 
 By coincidence , Universal 's 1936 film version of the Ziegfeld musical " Show Boat " , the most faithful of all the film versions of the stage production , was filmed at the same time as The Great Ziegfeld and released in the same year . 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 The screenplay by William Anthony McGuire was a " novelty " to many audiences who were familiar with the theatrical Broadway shows of the follies . The script , although fictionalized with embellishments needed for the motion picture , did show some accuracies in the life of Ziegfeld . Frank S. Nugent of The New York Times said of the script : " What William Anthony McGuire has attempted in his screen play , and with general success , is to encompass not merely the fantastic personal history of Ziegfeld but the cross @-@ sectional story of the development of the Follies , the Midnight Frolic on the New Amsterdam Roof and the other theatrical enterprises floated under the <unk> 's aegis during a span of about forty years . The two biographies — of the man and of his creations — are , naturally , inseparable ; but both have been told with such wealth of detail and circumstance ( real and imaginative ) that even the three @-@ hour film narrative is fragmentary and , in some places , confused . " 
 Although it has some accuracies , The Great Ziegfeld takes many key liberties with Ziegfeld 's life and the history of the Follies , resulting in many inaccuracies . The earlier scenes with Sandow , the milk bath advertising scenario , and many other sequences including several of the dramatic ups and downs of the film were fictional . George Gershwin 's Rhapsody in Blue was never featured in the Follies , and the number " A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody " was written for the 1919 Follies , not the first edition of the revue , as shown in the film . Ray Bolger was never cast in a " Follies " show , and although she was born in the U.S , Billie Burke grew up in England and spoke with a Mid @-@ Atlantic accent throughout her life ; Loy who portrays her clearly has an American accent in the film . 
 In the film , the last few lines of the song " Ol ' Man River " ( from Show Boat ) are sung by what sounds like a tenor , while the song was intended for bass Paul Robeson and sung in the original production by bass @-@ baritone Jules Bledsoe . Further , the screenplay also gives the impression that the successful original production of Show Boat , which Ziegfeld produced , closed because of the Great Depression . In fact Show Boat ended its original 1927 run in the spring of 1929 and the stock market crash did not occur until October of that year . It was the 1932 revival of the show ( also produced by Ziegfeld shortly before his death ) , not the original production , that was affected by the Depression . 
 In real life , <unk> did not die in his room at the Hotel Warwick ( not mentioned ) which stood in front of the Ziegfeld Theatre ; he actually died in Los Angeles and had not even spent his last years in New York . However , McGuire did capture a number of Ziegfeld 's traits , such as sending telegrams to people even in close proximity , his belief that elephants were a symbol of good luck , his exquisite taste in costumes and design , and perfectionism over his productions , especially lighting and rostrum <unk> . McGuire 's script , now in the Henry E. Huntington Library , San Marino , California , is dated September 21 , 1935 , probably the date when it was finalized . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Initially , the main cast proposed for the film included Marilyn Miller , Gilda Gray , Ann Pennington , and Leon Errol . Featured in the film are William Powell as Ziegfeld , Myrna Loy as Billie Burke , Luise Rainer as Anna Held , Nat Pendleton as Eugen Sandow , and Frank Morgan . Powell admitted to being " amazed " with the film after viewing it and was very grateful at having had the privilege to portray Ziegfeld , considering it to be a very important moment in his career . He said , " After seeing this film I can see that most of the characters I have played before were contrived . They had no ' folks ' , as the character of Ziegfeld had in this picture . Their father was a pen and their mother was a bottle of ink . Here was a character with flesh , blood and sinews . I felt for the first time in my acting career I had tried the full measure of a man , regardless of my shortcomings in playing him . " 
 Many of the performers of the earlier Broadway version of the Ziegfeld Follies were cast in the film as themselves , including Fanny Brice and Harriet Hoctor , the ballet dancer and contortionist . The Great Ziegfeld marked Rainer 's second Hollywood film role after Escapade ( also with Powell ) . Fanny Brice appears as a comedian in the abridged song sequence " My Man " and played an effective version of herself in addition to her routine comic role as the funny girl . Nat Pendleton , a freestyle wrestler who had won the silver medal at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp and had appeared alongside Powell in The Thin Man ( 1934 ) , was cast as the circus strongman Eugen Sandow . 
 Billie Burke objected to her role being cast with another actress ( Myrna Loy ) since she was also an actress under contract to the studio and could play herself , but the producers concluded that at that point she was not a big enough star to play herself in The Great Ziegfeld . However , according to Emily W. Leider , Burke was not keen on playing her younger self and says that Billie Burke 's biographer stated that Miriam Hopkins would have been her first choice to play her part , not Loy . Burke herself worked as technical consultant , and although she did not object to Marilyn Miller performing a number , she was influential in the studio 's refusal to give her the higher billing and salary she had demanded , which led to Miller walking away from the film . 
 Both Miller and Lillian Lorraine threatened legal action if so much as their names were mentioned in the film . Thus Miller 's character was renamed " Sally Manners " , and Lorraine 's character was renamed " Audrey Dane " ( played by Virginia Bruce ) . In real life , Ziegfeld had reportedly been obsessed with Miller , and was involved in numerous sex scandals . In 1922 Miller had given an interview in which she accused him of " making love to chorus girls " and sending her a diamond ring as " big as her hand " ; this essence of Ziegfeld 's character is captured in the film . Incidentally , Miller died from toxicity complications after surgery just before the release of the film on April 7 , 1936 , which led one reviewer writing in Liberty to denounce an urban legend which had arisen surrounding the timing of her death , saying , " It 's not true that Marilyn Miller died of a broken heart at not getting the lead in this . " Another myth surrounding her untimely death at the age of 37 is that she had contracted syphilis . 
 Frank Morgan , a stage and film character actor , played the role of promoter Billings in the film . Dennis Morgan , in an uncredited role , performs in " A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody " ( dubbed by Allan Jones ) . Pat Ryan , the future Pat Nixon , wife of Richard Nixon and First Lady of the United States , was an extra in the film . Will Rogers was to appear in the film , but he was killed in a plane crash in August 1935 . He was played by stand @-@ in A. A. Trimble . 
 = = = Costumes = = = 
 The extravagant costumes , which even Ziegfeld initially considered too flamboyant , were designed by Adrian , who had worked with many of the greatest actresses of the period including Greta Garbo , Norma Shearer , Jeanette MacDonald , Jean Harlow , Katharine Hepburn and Joan Crawford , and later designed for films such as Marie Antoinette ( 1938 ) , The Women ( 1939 ) , and The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) . Howard <unk> documents that due to MGM 's wealth and the high budget , Adrian was able to indulge in " sheer lavishness " in making the costumes , surpassing anything he had done previously . It took 250 tailors and seamstresses six months to sew the costumes that Adrian had designed for the film , using 50 pounds ( 23 kg ) of silver sequins and 12 yards ( 11 m ) of white ostrich plumes . The costumes worn by women in the film are diverse , varying from " puffy hooped skirts to catlike leotards " to " layers of tulle and <unk> " , with the men mostly wearing black tuxedos . 
 = = = Mise en scène and music = = = 
 Leonard , a film director who specialized in melodrama and musicals , anchored the music for the film , working with Walter Donaldson , Irving Berlin , and lyricist Harold Adamson . The extravagant dances and ensemble sequences were choreographed by Seymour Felix and Harold Adamson , including the song sequence of " A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody " ( it was Irving Berlin 's 13th annual edition in 1919 ) . The " A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody " set , known as the " Wedding Cake " , involved several weeks of shooting time and was reported to have cost US $ 220 @,@ 000 ( US $ 3 @,@ 751 @,@ 607 in 2016 dollars ) . As many as 180 performers were involved in the scenes which included singers , dancers and musicians . The sequence presented started with the " Rhapsody in Blue " and concluded with Virginia Bruce descending from the volute as it rotated , a satin curtain being lowered from the top enclosing the volute . 
 The curtains , made of rayon silk , measured 4 @,@ 300 yards ( 3 @,@ 900 m ) . Sheldon Hall and Stephen Neale note the theatrical sense that the cinematographers achieved through shooting the sequence in virtually a single take . They mention that " the camera traverses an enormous platform set contained within a curtained proscenium ( also enormous ) " , and that the " set itself revolves to meet the camera , rather than the camera entering the space of the set . " Linda <unk> , author of a book on the Ziegfeld girls , argues that the Pretty Girl sequence is more than just about being showy ; it is symbolic of womanhood which " powerfully visualizes women as the raw material for male aesthetic vision and design " . In the film she believes that womanhood is defined by the " young , white , blond and slender " female , which in the sequence are " delineated as the fluffy , artificial tiers of costuming and staging " . 
 The Harriet Hoctor ballet music was scored by Con Conrad to lyrics written by Herb Magidson . The circus ballet was an adaptation from the old Ziegfeld stage shows . Variety called the Hoctor ballet " in itself intricate with its maneuverings of six Russian <unk> in <unk> formations " , and said that the " A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody " sequence in the film is a " nifty Berlin tune [ which ] becomes the fulcrum for one of Frank Skinner 's best arrangements as Arthur Lange batons the crescendos into a mad , glittering potpourri of Saint @-@ Saëns and Gershwin , Strauss and Verdi , beautifully blended against the <unk> background . It 's a scenic flash which makes the auditor wonder ' What can they do to follow that ? ' meaning in this or future film production . " Juan Antonio Ramírez refers to the wedding cake as a " famous spiral column " , citing it as one of the best known pieces of mobile architecture in film , but notes that in design the cake was not exclusive to The Great Ziegfeld , explaining that a wedding cake , albeit less flamboyant , had appeared in previous films such The King of Jazz ( 1930 ) , The Kid from Spain ( 1932 ) , Top Hat ( 1935 ) , and Follow the Fleet ( 1935 ) . Ramírez describes the film 's Mise en scène as representing " the last word in flashy vulgarity , Surrealist kitsch , or perhaps both at once " . 
 Selected songs 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Farida <unk> filed a lawsuit against the filmmakers shortly before her death , claiming that they " presented Little Egypt as a lewd character " . 14 witnesses who had seen the act at the 1893 Chicago World Fair supported this , although the lawsuit was dropped after <unk> died from a heart attack . Burke caused much controversy and upset among many of Ziegfeld 's friends and colleagues when she sold the rights to a production on Broadway , the Ziegfeld Follies , also starring Fanny Brice , at the time the film was released in 1936 , due to the fact that the show was produced by the Shubert brothers , whom Ziegfeld detested . Worse still for his associates , was that the show was a bigger success than Ziegfeld 's last production of the Follies in 1931 . The Ziegfeld Follies under Vincente Minnelli was initially performed in December 1935 , before making its Broadway debut on January 30 , 1936 . It was performed in Boston and Philadelphia until the production was postponed after Brice collapsed on stage with exhaustion . When it reopened on Broadway in September 1936 , five months after the release of the film , it was retitled The New Ziegfeld Follies of 1936 – 1937 , and was revamped considerably , with changes to the show 's humor . 
 In 1941 , Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer produced a sequel entitled Ziegfeld Girl , starring James Stewart , Judy Garland , Hedy Lamarr , and Lana Turner , which recycled some film from The Great Ziegfeld . In 1946 , MGM made another sequel , Ziegfeld Follies , directed by Vincente Minnelli , director of the stage show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 According to MGM records , the film earned a then @-@ massive $ 3 @,@ 089 @,@ 000 in the US and Canada and $ 1 @,@ 584 @,@ 000 elsewhere resulting in a profit of $ 822 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Critical response at the time of release = = = 
 The film , which premiered in Los Angeles at the Carthay Circle Theatre , was the first musical film in history for which one of its cast members won an Academy Award . Luise Rainer received the Best Actress Oscar for her portrayal of Ziegfeld 's first wife , Anna Held . The film , the pride of MGM at a time when Warner Brothers and RKO Pictures were the leading studios in Hollywood for musical production , was a major commercial and critical success and one of the most successful films of the 1930s , grossing US $ 4 @,@ 673 @,@ 000 ( US $ 79 @,@ 687 @,@ 537 in 2016 dollars ) worldwide at the box office . It was acclaimed upon release as the greatest musical biography to be made in Hollywood and still remains a standard in musical film making . At just short of three hours , The Great Ziegfeld was also the longest talking film of the time . ( D. W. Griffith 's The Birth of a Nation and Intolerance , both silent films , had each run over three hours . ) TCM has acclaimed the " A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody " sequence as one of " the most famous musical numbers ever filmed " . Thomas S. Hischak has said that the film has rarely been topped for pure showmanship and glamor , and Variety considered it an " outstanding picture " , a " symbol of a tradition of show business " . Variety praised the performances of the cast , remarking that as Ziegfeld , William Powell " endows the impersonation with all the qualities of a great entrepreneur and sentimentalist without sacrificing the shades and moods called for " and noting that Luise Rainer is " tops of the femmes with her vivacious Anna Held " . Stanley Green cited the The Great Ziegfeld as " the first of a number of elaborate show @-@ business screen biographies " . Otis Ferguson , writing for New Republic magazine , remarked that the " musical numbers seem as irresistible as Ziegfeld himself " . The New York American said that the film is " pretty nearly everything such an extravaganza should be " , with " romance and reality , song and dance , gaiety and beauty , pathos and bathos " . Time magazine qualified it as " <unk> , packed with hokum and as richly sentimental as an Irving Berlin lyric , it is , as such , top @-@ notch entertainment . " A reviewer for the Spokane Chronicle praised the film for its superb acting , writing that " [ even ] the great producer [ Ziegfeld ] would have been unable to produce scenes of magnitude and splendor that are given as part of the picture telling his life . " Frank S. Nugent of The New York Times was also highly praising of the film , noting that it had " more stars than there are in the heavens " and remarking that " the picture achieves its best moments in the larger sequences devoted to the Girls — ballet , chorus and show . At least one of these spectacular numbers , filmed to the music of Irving Berlin 's " A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody " , with overtones of " Rhapsody in Blue " , never has been equaled on the musical comedy stage or screen . " John Mosher of The New Yorker called it " the most lavish display the screen has had to offer " with chorus numbers that were " gigantic and effective " , though he found the romance to be " peculiarly average screen @-@ story stuff . " Both The New York Times and Film Daily rated the film in the " Ten Best " of the year . 
 However , not all critics were as enthusiastic about the film ; Graham Greene of the British Spectator called it a " huge inflated gas @-@ blown object " and criticized its length , comparing it to the feat of a flagpole sitter . A number of critics , although praising the film in general , felt that Myrna Loy , who appears rather late on in the film , gave a lackluster performance as Billie Burke . Nugent said that " Miss Loy is a stately Bille Burke , and somewhat lacking , we fear , in Miss Burke 's effervescence and gaiety " , and Cecilia <unk> thought she came across as " stilted , like her rigidly waxed and set blonde wig " . Harrison Carroll of the Los Angeles Herald @-@ Express , however , sympathized with the difficulty of her role in portraying a prominent living actress , confessing that he was pleased that Loy did not attempt to imitate Burke 's mannerisms . Emily W. Leider believes that any of her character flaws were due to a " mushy " script , rather than her performance as an actress . 
 = = = Critical re @-@ evaluation = = = 
 Although the film is still viewed as a symbol of glamor and excess during the Golden Age of Hollywood , today the film has more of a mixed reception , with many critics believing that the film relies on its ( now @-@ dated ) extravagance and is too long ; Christopher Null stated that The Great Ziegfeld is a " textbook case of how a film can lose its appeal over the years " . Since its release the film has been criticized in particular for being unnecessarily lengthy and its overacting ( particularly by Rainer ) , and is occasionally cited as a " prime example of the Academy 's fallibility " in a year when other critically acclaimed pictures such as Mr. Deeds Goes to Town were released , which some argue was more deserving of Best Picture . The consensus today on the review site Rotten Tomatoes is that although the " biopic is undeniably stylish " , it " loses points for excessive length , an overreliance on clichés , and historical inaccuracies " , and has a 61 % fresh rating . Emily W. Leider claims the film to be " more remarkable for its " legs and tinsel " extravagance than for its excellence . " David Parkinson of Empire magazine gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and concluded that it " <unk> in places and doesn 't even try for a true @-@ to @-@ life portrait of the great theatre entrepreneur but it 's shiny and big spectacle with impressive choreography . " Dave Kehr of the Chicago Reader called it " amazingly dull , even with William Powell in the lead and guest appearances by the likes of Ray Bolger and Fanny Brice . " Emanuel Levy gave it a C grade and stated that it was " overlong and overblown but ultimately mediocre as a musical movie and as a biopic of the legendary showman . " James Berardinelli awarded it 2 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars and stated that " although some of the production 's technical aspects remain impressive , the dramatic elements come across as trite and many of the musical numbers are dated " , but said that it was a " reasonably competent – albeit " airbrushed " – presentation of the main character 's life . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The seven Academy Award nominations were announced on February 7 , 1937 , and on March 4 , 1937 , The Great Ziegfeld won three Oscars at the 9th Academy Awards for 1936 : 
 Although he was not nominated for an Academy Award for his performance , Powell did receive the Screen Actor 's Guild award for Best Actor in a tie with C. Aubrey Smith who was in Little Lord Fauntleroy . In addition the Guild 's Best Actress was given to Luise Rainer . 
 = Battle of Ciudad Juárez ( 1911 ) = 
 The First Battle of Ciudad Juárez took place in April and May 1911 between federal forces loyal to President Porfirio Díaz and rebel forces of Francisco Madero , during the Mexican Revolution . Pascual Orozco and Pancho Villa commanded Madero 's army , which besieged Ciudad Juárez , Chihuahua . After two days of fighting the city 's garrison surrendered and Orozco and Villa took control of the town . The fall of Ciudad Juárez to Madero , combined with Emiliano Zapata 's taking of Cuautla in Morelos , convinced Díaz that he could not hope to defeat the rebels . As a result , he agreed to the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez , resigned and went into exile in France , thus ending the initial stage of the Mexican Revolution . 
 = = Background = = 
 Diaz 's 34 @-@ year dictatorial rule met with much opposition , which finally coalesced around the leadership of Francisco Madero . Madero had escaped from prison and , while in exile in the US in November 1910 , called for an uprising against Díaz . In the northern state of Chihuahua the call was answered by trader , miner and arms smuggler Pascual Orozco and the " social bandit " Pancho Villa , both of whom began guerrilla operations against Díaz 's troops . 
 Encouraged by Villa 's and Orozco 's actions , as well as the outbreak of the Zapatista rebellion in Morelos , Madero crossed back into Mexico in February 1911 . After a few minor engagements with units of Diaz 's army , Madero , Orozco and Villa decided to attack the federal garrison at Ciudad Juárez . If they could take the city , they would control traffic between Mexico and the US . Furthermore , such a major success by the revolutionaries could very well be the final push that would knock over the <unk> . 
 At the same time the attack on the city would mark the first time that the revolutionary army would confront federal forces in a regular battle rather than relying on guerrilla tactics . While the fusion of Madero 's , Villa 's and Orozco 's men did result in a number of troops sufficient to form a force capable of fighting professional soldiers in pitched encounters , the federal troops still had the advantage in terms of training and discipline . The government , in fact , had a good chance of squashing the rebels by moving troops down from the state capital of Ciudad Chihuahua and capturing Madero in a pincer movement . However , the Díaz @-@ appointed governor of the state , Miguel Ahumada , was worried that if the soldiers abandoned the capital unrest would break out and the insurrection would spread . As a further sign of the apparent demoralization of federal rank @-@ and @-@ file soldiers ( many of whom had been forcibly conscripted and actually sympathized with the revolutionaries ) , the troops in Ciudad Chihuahua decided to stay put . 
 = = The battle = = 
 = = = Run @-@ up engagements = = = 
 Madero sent some of his forces to make a diversionary attack on Agua Prieta , which proved successful ; the resulting First Battle of Agua Prieta was significant in that it was the first time railroads were used by the rebels to gain surprise and that US forces were involved in the fighting . The town was recaptured by federal troops two weeks later once additional reinforcements arrived . 
 The main rebel offensive occurred on April 7 , when Madero led 1 @,@ 500 men to Ciudad Juárez , preceded by Villa and Orozco with 500 men each . Along the way the insurrectionists captured <unk> and <unk> , which greatly raised their morale . 
 Ciudad Juárez , defended by 700 troops , was surrounded on three sides , with the only possible exit route for the besieged <unk> being the northern path into El Paso and the US . Despite the fact that the revolutionaries had cut off the water supplies into town and the garrison was low on ammunition , its commander , Gen. Juan N. Navarro , refused to surrender , convinced that the inexperience of the rebels in laying sieges would allow him to hold out . 
 = = = Villa and Orozco disobey Madero = = = 
 At this point Díaz tried to come to terms with Madero , particularly after the capture of Cuautla by the Zapatistas in south @-@ central Mexico . Together with his finance minister and main advisor , José Yves Limantour , Díaz planned to make concessions to the fairly moderate Madero and , once Madero was pacified , crack down hard on the more radical elements among the rebels . A truce was agreed to on April 23 . 
 While Madero was ready to negotiate with Díaz and hold off from attacking , Villa and Orozco would have none of it . On May 8 the two generals launched an assault on the city without consulting Madero and blamed it on a " spontaneous " outbreak in fighting . The incident that served as an excuse for the offensive occurred when a federal officer insulted a female rebel on a bridge between Ciudad Juárez and El Paso . Madero attempted to halt the violence but Orozco and Villa pressed on . Both of them went to great lengths to avoid Madero so they wouldn 't have to disobey a direct order . Even when Villa was eventually confronted by <unk> Herrera with explicit instructions to stop fighting , he simply ignored him . Likewise , when Madero finally managed to see Orozco in person , he was simply told that the battle was already raging and it was too late to stop it . 
 Navarro , for his part , pressured by Madero , tried to keep the ceasefire for as long as he could . This proved to be quite costly to the defenders . The rebel forces captured the outer defenses of the city unopposed , as no federal officer was willing to countermand the orders to hold fire . Instead , the troops withdrew deeper into the city . 
 Orozco attacked in the north and Villa in the south . Both of them led their troops parallel to the US border so that neither their shots , nor those of the town 's garrison were likely to cross on to the American side . In fact , several thousand American civilians had gathered in El Paso in order to watch the struggle as spectators . 
 = = = Unconventional attack = = = 
 The rebels took control of the bridges connecting the city to the US , cut off electricity and telegraph , captured the bullring and reached the outskirts of the city center ( where the second line of defenses had been constructed ) on the first day of fighting . Navarro , influenced by the advice of the impetuous Col. <unk> , turned down an offer of safe passage made by the rebels . 
 The town was well defended and fortified , as Navarro had prepared a defense in depth with several concentric rings of trenches , barricades and fortifications . However , unknown to the defenders , the insurrectionists had with them significant supplies of dynamite and foreign experts from other guerrilla wars , including Boer Gen. Ben Viljoen and the grandson of the famous Italian revolutionary Giuseppe Garibaldi II ( news dispatches from the battle also mention the participation of the future star of many Hollywood Westerns , Tom Mix ) . In order to counteract the formidable defenses , the rebels developed an effective strategy that managed to circumvent Navarro 's well @-@ placed machine @-@ gun nests and street barricades . Rather than attacking through the streets , the rebels used the dynamite to blow the walls of the adobe houses that were huddled up next to each other , which allowed them to proceed through the city house by house . 
 Another novel aspect of the offensive used by the attackers , which was extensively commented upon by American journalist Timothy Turner who was observing the battle from El Paso , was the rotation of troops that the rebels employed . Rather than attacking en masse with the whole army , Villa and Orozco had their soldiers engage the enemy for a few hours , then go back to secure positions to sleep , while other rebels took their place . As a consequence the rebel troops were always rested while the less numerous defending federal troops were forced to remain sleepless and ever vigilant . 
 The city 's defenders ran out of water on May 8 ( according to a report later submitted by Madero himself ) and were confined to only a few buildings in the center of the city . Most of the fighting at this point was at close quarters ; as a result , the advantage in machine guns and artillery that the federals enjoyed earlier was no longer a factor . According to some accounts , Gen. Navarro 's troops were on the verge of mutiny and he was worried that they would turn on his officers . To forestall that possibility , Navarro began negotiations with the rebel forces . He surrendered the town two days later , at 2 : 30 p.m. on May 10 , 1911 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After capturing the town , Madero and his revolutionary movement achieved a new kind of credibility , both within Mexico and in the US . Some American journalists crossed the border in order to congratulate Madero personally , and reported back to American readers on the quick and efficient way that order within the city had been reestablished . 
 = = = Fall of Díaz = = = 
 The outcome of the battle changed the perception of the rebel movement in Mexico . Before Madero 's victory many believed that the rebel forces would scatter as soon as they were confronted by federal troops . The fall of Juárez proved that notion wrong and revealed the real strength of the rebel forces . 
 The immediate effect of the rebels ' success helped convince Porfirio Díaz to agree to the revolutionaries ' demand for his resignation . Prompted by Limantour , two days after the end of the battle Díaz signed the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez with Madero , and ten days after the battle he resigned and went into exile in France . This ended the first stage of the Mexican Revolution , and at the same time made it clear that even well @-@ garrisoned troops were not invulnerable to guerrilla armies . 
 = = = Dissension among the victors = = = 
 A more indirect consequence arose from the disagreements that occurred between Madero and his generals Villa and Orozco . The tensions began during the battle and continued afterward . In addition to the insubordination that the two leaders showed Madero while the fighting was still ongoing , they also clashed with him afterwards over payments to their soldiers and over the appointment of Venustiano Carranza as Madero 's defence minister . Carranza was a civilian who had joined the revolution at the last minute , and for these reasons was despised by Orozco . 
 However , the immediate cause for the outbreak of the conflict among the rebels was the fate of federal Gen. Juan N. Navarro who had defended Ciudad Juárez . Both Villa and Orozco wanted him executed for his earlier killing of rebel prisoners taken by his forces . Madero opposed it , despite the fact that a court @-@ martial of federal officers who committed war crimes was one of the main points of his manifesto . Orozco and Villa went to confront Madero , a tense situation arose and ( according to Villa and other witnesses ) Orozco drew his pistol on Madero . Eventually Madero escaped the predicament by appealing directly to Villa 's and Orozco 's troops and the two generals had to relent . Madero escorted Navarro personally across the US border to El Paso . Likewise , Carranza kept his post while Orozco in particular nursed a grudge . However , Madero did withdraw gold from the local bank and distributed it to the troops in accordance with the generals ' wishes . 
 The motivations of the three in the infighting are not completely clear . According to Friedrich Katz , Madero , in refusing to let Navarro be killed , was motivated not only by his personal humanism but also by a need to assert his civilian authority over military leaders . It also seems that Villa was mostly concerned with taking care of his soldiers and his personal hatred for Navarro , since it was his soldiers — known as Villistas — who Navarro had earlier ordered to be bayoneted . Years later , after he fell out with Orozco , Villa wrote in his memoirs that the whole episode was a set @-@ up by Orozco , who had been paid 50 @,@ 000 pesos by Díaz 's agents to get him to kill Madero . While Katz and other scholars consider this assessment extreme , it is possible that Orozco , who believed he should be the rightful leader of the revolution , was trying to provoke Villa into killing Madero . That way Madero would be out of the way , Villa would be discredited among the intellectual revolutionary circles as a common bandit and Orozco could claim the mantle of leadership . In the end , however , Villa kept his cool , Madero convinced common soldiers to support him and Orozco did not have the nerve to go through with it . 
 = = = Later developments resulting from the battle = = = 
 Orozco remained unsatisfied with the political positions he was offered in the Madero government . He became even more angry when Madero asked him to fight Zapata in central Mexico . As a result , in March <unk> than a year after the battle of Ciudad <unk> formally declared himself in rebellion against Madero . He subsequently supported Victoriano Huerta in his coup d 'état against Madero . After Huerta 's fall Orozco went into exile in the US and was eventually killed by Texas Rangers while trying to make his way back into Mexico to start another revolt . 
 Villa remained loyal to Madero ( and even fought for him against Orozco ) and contributed greatly to the fall of Huerta . However , he broke with Carranza and lost the struggle for the control of the revolution to Carranza 's Gen. Álvaro Obregón . 
 = 1907 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1907 Atlantic hurricane season was at one point the only Atlantic hurricane season that did not feature a hurricane . With only five tropical storms having formed , it was a relatively inactive season ; of those that did , three made landfall , of which all occurred on the shoreline of the Gulf Coast of the United States . The first storm of the season formed on June 24 , while the final dissipated on November 12 . Damage from the storms were minimal , and no deaths were reported . Due to the lack of modern technology , including satellite imagery , information is often sparse , and four additional systems could have formed during the season . A documentation for four possible storms during the season exists , although it has not been proven that these systems were fully tropical . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the advent of modern tropical cyclone tracking technology , notably satellite imagery , many hurricanes that did not affect land directly went unnoticed , and storms that did affect land were not recognized until their onslaught . As a result , information on older hurricane seasons was often incomplete . Modern @-@ day efforts have been made and are still ongoing to reconstruct the tracks of known hurricanes and to identify initially undetected storms . In many cases , the only evidence that a hurricane existed was reports from ships in its path , and judging by the direction of winds experienced by ships , and their location in relation to the storm , it is possible to roughly pinpoint the storm 's center of circulation for a given point in time . This is the manner in which all of the five known storms in the 1907 season were identified by hurricane expert José Fernández @-@ Partagás 's reanalysis of hurricane seasons between 1851 and 1910 . Partagás also extended the known tracks of three other hurricanes previously identified by scholars . The information Partagás and his colleague uncovered was largely adopted by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's Atlantic hurricane reanalysis in their updates to the Atlantic hurricane database ( HURDAT ) , with some slight adjustments . HURDAT is the official source for such hurricane data as track and intensity , although due to a sparsity of available records at the time the storms existed , listings on some storms are incomplete . 
 The season was one of only two Atlantic seasons without a storm of hurricane intensity ( winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) or higher ) , the other being the 1914 season . In addition , the maximum winds recorded from the first tropical storm were also the highest of the season ; it also broke the record for the weakest " most intense " storm on record for an Atlantic hurricane season . Reanalysis also indicated that four additional systems could have developed during the season . No deaths occurred during the season and damage was minimal . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 The first identified tropical storm of the season is listed in the Atlantic hurricane database as having formed on June 24 , positioned in the western Caribbean Sea ; the estimate for this location was based on ship reports , although the information was insufficient to guarantee an accurate position . It initially meandered west @-@ northwestward , though began to turn northwest during the latter half of following day . Late on June 26 , it passed between the Yucatán Peninsula and Cuba , and subsequently entered the Gulf of Mexico shortly thereafter . The tropical storm continued to slowly intensify , and started to make sharp curve towards the northeast on June 28 . 
 The storm traveled east @-@ northeastward paralleling the Gulf Coast of the United States , and eventually made landfall on the Florida panhandle early on June 29 . It weakened slightly as it traversed inland , and entered the Atlantic Ocean just offshore Georgia during the morning . At this point , the storm attained its peak intensity of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) , though it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone within the six hours that followed . Late during the day , the extratropical storm reached New Jersey , and entered Maine on June 30 . The 2003 reanalysis made only minor adjustments to the storm 's intensity and track created by Partagás and Diaz , which included moving the point of landfall westward and increasing windspeeds on June 29 based on readings received in Jacksonville , Florida . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 Based on information from historical weather maps , it appeared that eastward @-@ moving lower @-@ atmospheric flow was present between September 16 and 17 , though a closed circulation did not appear to be present . On September 18 , the system developed into tropical depression between the Bahamas and Florida while it moved west @-@ northwestward . After swiftly crossing the southern portion of the state , it strengthened into a tropical storm on September 19 over the southeastern Gulf of Mexico , and attained its peak intensity of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) early during September 20 . It began turning north on September 21 , and made landfall on the Mississippi coast on September 22 . The storm weakened as it moved inland , and curved east @-@ northeast later during that day , only to transition into an extratropical cyclone shortly thereafter . The storm lost extratropical characteristics over Virginia on September 23 . As there were no reports of strong winds near the point of landfall , Partagás had doubt as to whether or not this storm was a tropical storm , as the most intense winds were recorded when the system was classified as extratropical . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 The system that would eventually develop into a tropical storm was first noted by a ship north @-@ northwest of Veracruz on September 23 . It was recognized as a tropical storm on September 27 while was located above the Bay of Campeche , and moved northeastward , and slowly accelerated as it intensified . By September 28 , it was moving east @-@ northeastward at 24 mph ( 38 km / h ) , and simultaneously attained its peak intensity of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . At this point , it remained just offshore the Florida panhandle , and moved inland shortly thereafter on September 29 . It plowed through northern Florida and southeastern Georgia while maintaining its intensity and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone off the coast of North Carolina on September 29 . The remnants of the storm merged with a cold front the following day while situated south of New York . 
 Storm warnings were issued on September 28 for the shorelines of Louisiana and Mississippi , but the states did not receive strong winds . The maximum gust from the storm was 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) , which was recorded at Pensacola , Florida . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Four = = = 
 The fourth tropical storm of the season was first detected by a ship on October 17 southwest of Bermuda ; in the HURDAT database , this date was considered to be the formation date , although the entire lifespan of the storm is unknown due to a lack of data on the system itself . It initially moved east @-@ northeastward , though later began to turn northeastward on October 18 . The storm curved slightly towards the east @-@ northeast on October 19 , and became extratropical later that day before its dissipation on October 20 . The storm maintained its peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) for most of its lifetime . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 The final tropical storm of the season was previously unidentified until reanalysis by Partagás . It formed on November 6 while moving south @-@ southwestward , though took a sharp turn towards the west @-@ southwestward on November 7 . The following day , it took another sharp turn , this time towards the north @-@ northwest , while it had winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) , which were the maximum estimated winds for the storm . It continued on this path until November 11 , when it turned once more , this time towards the north @-@ northeast . It evolved into an extratropical cyclone the following day . The storm was considered to be a tropical storm based on reports of unusually warm waters near 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) which were accompanied by strong winds . 
 = Briarcliff College = 
 Briarcliff College was a women 's college in Briarcliff Manor , New York . The school was founded in 1903 at the Briarcliff Lodge . After Walter W. Law donated land for the college , it ran at its location on Elm Road in Briarcliff until 1977 , closing due to low enrollment and financial problems . In the same year , its campus was purchased by Pace University , which now operates it as part of its Pleasantville campus . 
 = = History = = 
 Mrs. Dow 's School for Girls was founded in 1903 at the Briarcliff Lodge ; two years later , Walter W. Law gave Mary Elizabeth Dow 35 acres ( 14 ha ) and built the Châteauesque Dow Hall ( Harold Van Buren <unk> was its architect ) . Dow retired in 1919 and Edith Cooper Hartmann began running the school with a two @-@ year postgraduate course ; the school became a junior college in 1933 . Briarcliff remained a junior college until 1957 , shortly before the presidency of Charles E. Adkins and when it began awarding four @-@ year bachelor 's degrees . The school library , which had 5 @,@ 500 volumes in 1942 , expanded to about 20 @,@ 000 in 1960 . By the time of its closing , it had about 300 students . 
 The school prospered from 1942 to 1961 under President Clara Tead , who had a number of accomplished trustees , including Carl Carmer , Norman Cousins , Barrett Clark , Thomas K. Finletter , William Zorach , and Lyman Bryson . Tead 's husband Ordway Tead served as chairman of the board of trustees . The school gradually improved its academic scope and standing , and was registered with the State Education Department and accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools in 1944 . In 1951 , the Board of Regents authorized the college to grant Associate of Arts and Associate of Applied Science degrees . The following year , the Army Map Service selected the college as the only one in the country for professional training in cartography . 
 In 1944 , Shelton House , a building across Elm Road , was purchased as a dormitory , and a classroom and office wing was dedicated in 1951 . In 1955 , after Howard Deering Johnson joined the board of trustees , the dormitory Howard Johnson Hall was built . From 1963 , Briarcliff College rapidly expanded , constructing two dormitories , the fine arts and humanities building , the Woodward Science Building , and a 600 @-@ seat dining hall . In 1964 , the college began offering the Bachelor of Arts and of Sciences degrees . The Center for Hudson Valley Archaeology was opened in 1964 . Enrollment at the college jumped from around 300 to over 500 from 1960 to 1964 ; by 1967 , enrollment was at 623 , with 240 freshmen . During the Vietnam War , students protested US involvement , and Adkins and trustees resigned ; James E. Stewart became president . In 1969 , twelve students , led by student president Edie Cullen , stole the college mimeograph machines and gave nine demands to the college . The next day , around 50 students participated in a 48 @-@ hour sit @-@ in at Dow Hall . Josiah Bunting III became president in 1973 and Pace University and New York Medical College of Valhalla began leasing campus buildings . The college had 350 students in 1977 , and students enjoyed half @-@ empty dormitory buildings . 
 With the growing popularity of coeducation in the 1970s , Briarcliff found itself struggling to survive . President Josiah Bunting III leaving for Hampden @-@ Sydney College in spring 1977 contributed to the problems the college was having . Rather than continue to struggle , the college 's trustees voted to sell the campus to Pace University , a New York City @-@ based institution . Rather than merge Briarcliff with Pace , the trustees attempted to reach a collaboration agreement with Bennett College , a junior women 's college in nearby Millbrook which was also struggling with low enrollment . The plan did not work , however , and Briarcliff College was sold to Pace in April 1977 for $ 5 @.@ 2 million ( $ 20 @.@ 3 million in 2015 ) after both Briarcliff and Bennett entered bankruptcy . 
 In 1988 , the Hastings Center moved to Tead Hall , the school 's library ; the organization later moved to the town of Garrison . 
 The original Mrs. Dow 's School building remains as the co @-@ ed residence hall Dow Hall at Pace University . Residents of Briarcliff Manor were initially pleased to have another educational institution at the site , although Pace illegally turned its 188 @-@ spot parking lot into an 800 @-@ spot one , and allowed an extensive number of cars to be parked on the neighboring streets . The village and school eventually reached a compromise . 
 Pace operates the site as part of its Pleasantville campus , centered on Choate House . The site currently has nine buildings with a combined 330 @,@ 308 square feet ( 30 @,@ 686 @.@ 6 m2 ) , with sizes from 13 @,@ 041 to 111 @,@ 915 square feet . The buildings are used for offices , student housing , dining , recreation and education . The campus ' 37 acres ( 0 @.@ 1 km2 ) also includes tennis courts and ball fields . The Pleasantville site is about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) away from the Briarcliff College site . In an effort to consolidate Pace University 's Westchester campuses into a single location , Pace University put the site up for sale in 2015 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = = Presidents = = = 
 = = = Students = = = 
 = = = Teachers = = = 
 = No. 73 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 73 Wing was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) wing of World War II . It was formed in February 1943 at Port Moresby , Papua New Guinea , as part of No. 9 Operational Group . The wing initially comprised three attack squadrons flying CAC Wirraways , Douglas Bostons , and Bristol Beaufighters , with which it took part in the New Guinea campaign until mid @-@ year . It was then reorganised with three fighter squadrons operating P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks and Supermarine Spitfires ; in this form it saw action in the New Britain and Admiralty Islands campaigns through 1943 – 44 . The wing was disbanded at Los Negros in August 1944 , and by the beginning of 1945 its squadrons had been absorbed into other RAAF wings under No. 10 Operational Group ( later the Australian First Tactical Air Force ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = New Guinea campaign = = = 
 Formed in February 1943 , No. 73 Wing consisted of No. 4 Squadron ( flying CAC Wirraways ) , No. 22 Squadron ( Douglas Bostons ) and No. 30 Squadron ( Bristol Beaufighters ) . Based at Port Moresby , Papua New Guinea , the wing was under the control of No. 9 Operational Group , the RAAF 's " premier fighting unit " in the South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , whose purpose was to act as a mobile strike force in support of advancing Allied troops . 
 In March 1943 , No. 73 Wing 's units participated in the Battle of the Bismarck Sea , " the decisive aerial engagement " in the SWPA according to General Douglas MacArthur , that resulted in twelve ships from a Japanese convoy being sunk . During this engagement , some of No. 22 Squadron 's Bostons struck Lae airfield to prevent Japanese fighters taking off to intercept Allied bombers , while others took part in the actual assault on the convoy ; No. 30 Squadron 's Beaufighters launched " withering " low @-@ level cannon and machine @-@ gun attacks on the Japanese ships to suppress anti @-@ aircraft fire prior to bombing runs by USAAF B @-@ 25 Mitchells . Flight Lieutenant Bill Newton , one of the Boston pilots who attacked Lae , was awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross for pressing home bombing missions against Salamaua later that month , in spite of severe damage to his aircraft . 
 Having earlier been led by Wing Commander Blake Pelly , by June 1943 No. 73 Wing was under the command of Group Captain Ian McLachlan . That month , McLachlan established his headquarters at Goodenough Island , where the wing was reorganised as a fighter formation consisting of No. 76 Squadron ( flying P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks ) , No. 77 Squadron ( Kittyhawks ) and No. 79 Squadron ( Supermarine Spitfires ) . As well as providing local air defence , and fighter escort for Australian bombers , the Kittyhawks were themselves armed with incendiary and general @-@ purpose bombs so that they could engage in ground @-@ attack missions , a practice that had already been employed by Commonwealth forces in the Mediterranean and Middle East Theatre . 
 In August 1943 , the wing transferred to Kiriwina , while No. 9 Group 's other combat formation , No. 71 Wing , took over responsibility for Goodenough . Transport delays meant that No. 77 Squadron remained at Goodenough , however , and its place in No. 73 Wing at Kiriwina was taken by No. 78 Squadron , which arrived from Australia in November , also equipped with Kittyhawks . 
 = = = New Britain and Admiralty Islands campaigns = = = 
 Wing Commander Gordon Steege assumed command of No. 73 Wing in October 1943 . Minimal offensive air activity by the Japanese meant that No. 79 Squadron 's Spitfires saw relatively little action , while in contrast the wing 's P @-@ 40s with their ground attack capability were " fully engaged " . As part of the build @-@ up to the Battle of Arawe in December , the Kittyhawks launched a series of attacks on the Gasmata airfield and fuel dumps ; on the day of the Allied landings , as No. 76 Squadron Kittyhawks patrolled above the beaches , the Spitfires remained at Kiriwina in case of strikes by Japanese raiders , though none came . In January 1944 , the wing 's Spitfires and Kittyhawks accompanied Beauforts on the two largest raids mounted by the RAAF to that time , each involving over 70 aircraft attacking enemy camps and depots at Lindenhafen , New Britain . 
 As part of No. 9 Group 's contribution to the Admiralty Islands campaign , No. 73 Wing took up garrison duties at Los Negros commencing in March 1944 . Its complement of combat squadrons was again Nos. 76 , 77 and 79 Squadrons , supported by No. 49 Operational Base Unit , No. 114 Mobile Fighter Sector , No. 27 Air Stores Park and No. 26 Medical Clearing Station , among other ancillaries , with total ground staff numbering approximately 900 . The fighters ' primary duty was providing air cover for Allied shipping ; they also carried out bomber escort , ground attack and anti @-@ shipping missions in the region . In mid @-@ April , the wing escorted the largest Allied convoy in the South @-@ West Pacific to that date , 80 ships carrying 30 @,@ 000 personnel , from Finschhafen to Aitape . Completing its garrison work in the Admiralties that June , No. 73 Wing was disbanded at Los Negros on 29 August 1944 . Its combat units were all eventually transferred to other formations under No. 10 Operational Group ( later renamed the Australian First Tactical Air Force ) . Nos. 76 and 77 Squadrons joined another Kittyhawk unit , No. 82 Squadron , at No. 81 Wing on Noemfoor under Steege 's command , while No. 79 Squadron was withdrawn to Darwin in November to re @-@ equip with new Spitfires before joining No. 80 Wing and returning to the Pacific at Morotai in March 1945 . 
 = Alicia Sacramone = 
 Alicia Marie Quinn ( née Sacramone ) ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born December 3 , 1987 ) is a retired American artistic gymnast . 
 Sacramone began gymnastics at the age of eight , started competing in the elite ranks in 2002 and joined the U.S. national team in 2003 . At US National Championships from 2004 to 2008 , she won twelve medals , including four golds on vault and two golds on floor exercise . At World Championships from 2005 to 2007 , she won seven medals , including a floor exercise gold in 2005 and a team gold in 2007 . At the 2008 Beijing Olympics , she won a team silver medal . In 2010 , Sacramone made a comeback by winning the National Championship on Vault . Later in 2010 at the World Championships in Rotterdam , Netherlands , she won the World Title on Vault as well . Her gold gave her a total of nine medals overall , joining Shannon Miller and Nastia Liukin as the U.S. athletes with the most medals at the gymnastics world championships until the US team won gold in the team finals at the 2011 World Championships . Though she was injured and could not compete , she still received a medal as an official member of the U.S. team , earning her tenth World medal , making her the second most decorated U.S. gymnast in the history of the World Championships and second to Simone Biles , who won 14 World medals . 
 Sacramone has become noteworthy for supportive leadership of her teammates as well as outspoken remarks in interviews . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sacramone was born on December 3 , 1987 in Boston , Massachusetts to parents Fred , an orthodontist , and Gail Sacramone , a hairstylist and salon owner . She is of Italian descent . Sacramone has an older brother , Jonathan . She graduated from Winchester High School in 2006 . She announced her engagement to NFL quarterback Brady Quinn in August 2013 and they married in March 2014 . On February 10 , 2016 , Sacramone announced she and her husband are expecting their first child together , due in August . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Sacramone began studying dance at the age of five and started training gymnastics three years later , at age eight , in 1996 . She began her gymnastics career with Romanian coaches Mihai and Silvia <unk> at Gymnastics and More club and continued to train with them after they opened their own training facility in Ashland . The <unk> continue to serve as Sacramone 's coaches for the rest of her career . 
 = = Senior career = = 
 = = = 2003 – 04 = = = 
 Sacramone 's results improved immensely in 2003 , when she placed 14th in the all @-@ around and won a bronze medal on the Floor and place 4th on Vault at the 2003 U.S. Nationals , earning a spot on the U.S. National gymnastics team . She also participated in her first international competition in 2003 , the Cup in France , where she placed fourth on the floor exercise and ninth on vault . 
 In 2004 , Sacramone earned a spot on the US team for the Pacific Alliance Championships in Hawaii . She contributed several scores to help the team to a gold medal finish and won the individual vault title . Her strong performances caught the attention of the media , who began to consider her a legitimate contender for the American team at the 2004 Olympics in Athens . 
 However , at the 2004 U.S. Nationals , an error @-@ filled performance dashed Sacramone 's hopes of an Olympic berth . Although she tied with Mohini Bhardwaj for the silver medal on the vault , she finished in 19th place overall and did not qualify to the Olympic Trials . She also suffered an injury to her back and required time off to recover . Sacramone continued competing in late 2004 as a member of the U.S. national team , and was assigned to several international meets , including the Pan American Individual Event Championships , where she won the vault and floor exercise titles . At the World Cup Finals in Birmingham , England , Sacramone attracted media attention again when she upset reigning Olympic vault champion Monica <unk> to take first place on the event . 
 = = = 2005 – 2006 = = = 
 At the 2005 U.S. National Championships , Sacramone won the individual titles on floor and vault , scoring a 9 @.@ 9 on the latter event , and placed third on the balance beam and fourth in the all @-@ around . She was named to the American team with Nastia Liukin and Chellsie Memmel for the 2005 World Championships in Melbourne , Australia , where she won a gold medal on floor and placed third on the vault . She also defended her World Cup vault title successfully in 2005 , winning the event at both the World Cup qualifier in Ghent and the finals in Paris . 
 Sacramone continued to compete for the U.S. team in 2006 , participating in the 2006 World Championships in Aarhus , where she won a silver medal with the American squad and an individual silver on the vault . She defended her vault and floor titles at that year 's U.S. Nationals . 
 In September 2006 , Sacramone enrolled in Brown University and joined the school 's gymnastics team . During the 2006 – 2007 season , she juggled a full NCAA competition schedule with her elite training at <unk> 's . She was the first female American gymnast since Kelly Garrison in the late 1980s to combine full @-@ time university studies and NCAA competition with elite gymnastics . 
 During Sacramone 's first year with the Brown Bears , she broke the school 's records for the highest scores in the all @-@ around , vault and floor exercise . She was named ECAC Rookie of the Year and swept the Ivy League Classic , becoming the first gymnast to win all five events and posting the highest all @-@ around total ever recorded at the competition . She qualified as an individual on the floor exercise for the NCAA National Championships , the second Brown gymnast ever to do so , but did not advance beyond the preliminary round . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 At the 2007 U.S. National Championships , Sacramone competed on three events , choosing to skip the uneven bars . She defended her title on the vault , placed second on the floor exercise and third on the balance beam . Following Nationals , Sacramone was named to the American team for the World Championships in Stuttgart , Germany . 
 During the qualifying round at the World Championships , Sacramone performed well , qualifying for event finals in floor and vault and contributing to the top qualifying position of the American team . Sacramone also posted a score on beam that would have been high enough to qualify her to the beam event final . However , due to the FIG rule only allowing two athletes per country to participate in each event final , and due to the fact that team mates Nastia Liukin and Shawn Johnson qualified ahead of her with higher scores , Sacramone was unable to compete for a beam medal . For the team final , Sacramone competed on vault , beam , and floor , earning 15 @.@ 750 , 15 @.@ 600 and 15 @.@ 325 respectively . When the American team faltered after a difficult beam rotation , in which two gymnasts made major errors , Sacramone gathered the team for a pep talk to refocus them for floor . The American team earned 184 @.@ 400 points overall which was good enough to secure the gold medal ahead of the Chinese and Romanians . 
 In event finals , Sacramone received a bronze medal for her vault performance and a silver on floor behind teammate Shawn Johnson . She was visibly upset by her performances , and fought back tears after floor and during the flower and medal ceremonies . 
 Both the <unk> and the U.S. National Team Coordinator , Marta Karolyi , suggested that Sacramone forgo NCAA competition during the 2007 – 2008 season to concentrate on her preparations for the 2008 Beijing Olympics . In September 2007 , Sacramone announced that she was " turning pro " and signed with an agent , forfeiting her remaining NCAA eligibility . 
 = = = 2008 pre @-@ Olympics = = = 
 In the 2007 – 2008 academic year , Sacramone continued to work with the Brown Bears gymnastics team as a volunteer assistant coach . She remained a student at Brown , concentrated in sociology , but took the spring 2008 semester off to prepare for the Olympics . 
 Sacramone competed well at the 2008 U.S. National Championships in Boston and the Olympic Trials in Philadelphia . On July 19 , she was named to the 2008 Olympic Team for Beijing . 
 = = = 2008 Summer Olympics = = = 
 At the Olympics , Sacramone performed on three events in both the qualifying and team final rounds of competition . In the team final , Sacramone posted a 15 @.@ 675 score on vault but fell on both floor ( 14 @.@ 125 ) and beam ( 15 @.@ 1 ) , incurring 1 @.@ 70 points in deductions . 
 In the day following the Olympic team finals , Sacramone was largely blamed for the American team 's silver medal placement , and was the subject of negative commentary in media reports . Sacramone herself took responsibility for the results , noting , " It 's kinda hard not to blame myself . " However , analysts in the gymnastics community , including University of Georgia head coach Suzanne <unk> , former Olympian John Roethlisberger and International Gymnast editor Paul <unk> , noted that the American team started the competition at a difficult point deficit to the Chinese and that mathematically , Sacramone could not have been personally or exclusively responsible for the U.S. team 's results . Sacramone also received support from the American team . In one interview , teammate Bridget Sloan stated , " We 've all made mistakes . It 's just really hard to see her go and leave these Olympics knowing that she thinks it 's her fault . It is definitely not and we 've all been encouraging her very much . " 
 Individually , Sacramone placed third overall on vault in the preliminary round of competition and qualified to the individual event final on that event . In the vault final , Sacramone placed fourth behind Hong Un Jong , Oksana <unk> and Cheng Fei ( somewhat controversially , since Cheng fell on her second vault ) . She also placed fourth overall on beam in preliminaries behind Li Shanshan of China and teammates Nastia Liukin and Shawn Johnson , but did not advance to the eight @-@ person event finals due to the " two per country " rule . 
 = = = 2008 temporary retirement = = = 
 In interviews , Sacramone alluded to retiring after the 2008 Beijing Olympics . She confirmed her retirement in February 2009 during an interview at a Boston Bruins game . 
 = = = 2009 – 2010 return to training and competition = = = 
 On August 6 , 2009 , Sacramone announced her return to training for elite competition . Her return was slowed , however , after having shoulder surgery earlier that year . 
 On July 24 , 2010 , Sacramone competed in the CoverGirl Classic . She placed first in both beam and vault , not competing on floor or bars . Her return to competitive form was judged dramatically successful by meet commentators and she was named USA Today 's " Athlete of the Week " . 
 Sacramone competed in the U.S. National Championships in August , performing only vault and balance beam . She placed first on vault ( her fifth national title on that apparatus ) and second on balance beam . She was also named Sportsperson of the Year . 
 At the World Championships in October , Sacramone won a gold medal on the vault and a silver medal in the team competition . That gave her nine world medals , and tied her with Shannon Miller and Nastia Liukin for the most world medals by an American female gymnast at that time . 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
