 Early in 2011 , she signed a deal with Under Armour to supply her with competitive apparel for domestic competitions . 
 In July 2011 , Sacramone added floor exercise to her competitive repertoire at the CoverGirl Classic in Chicago , Illinois . Competing on three events , Sacramone won gold on vault , tied for gold on beam with Jordyn Wieber of Michigan , and won the bronze on floor ( 13 @.@ 9 ) . 
 At August 's 2011 Nationals in St. Paul , Minnesota , Sacramone won the balance beam title with a two @-@ night score of 30 @.@ 1 . She placed second to <unk> Maroney on vault ( 30 @.@ 6 ) , and she tied with Hallie <unk> for eighth place on floor exercise ( 27 @.@ 35 ) . 
 After participating in two selection camps at the Karolyi Ranch in New Waverly , Texas , Quinn was named to the 2011 U.S. women 's world championships gymnastics team . 
 While training at the World Championships in Tokyo , Sacramone sustained a tear of her Achilles tendon . She returned to the U.S. immediately for surgery on the tear . However , the U.S. team retained her name on the roster , and she was given a gold medal , in spite have not having competed . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 Sacramone qualified for the 2012 Visa National Championships . She placed first on vault and third on balance beam . At the Olympic Trials , Sacramone placed second on both vault and balance beam , but was not named to the Olympic team . “ I leave this sport with no regrets " posted Sacramone on her Twitter feed shortly after the Olympic Team was selected , suggesting that she is likely to retire . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 In June 2008 , Sacramone and her team mates Shawn Johnson and Nastia Liukin became the first female athletes ever to be signed as CoverGirl spokesmodels . Sacramone is also a member of Team 24 Fitness and serves as a spokeswoman for the fitness company . In 2009 , she also appeared in a Gatorade commercial that spoofed Monty Python and the Holy Grail as " Alicia , The Girl Who Made Horse Trotting Noises . " 
 During the summer of 2009 , Sacramone briefly stayed in Los Angeles , California and she designed for Tank Farm , a men 's fashion company . She has discussed her intent to return to college in the media , but announced in August 2009 that she was not intending to return to Brown University . In an interview with Inside Gymnastics Magazine , she stated , " I plan to continue school [ but ] I ’ m looking into transferring somewhere in Boston , ” she explains . “ Brown is a great school and I loved it , but it was just not the best atmosphere for me ; maybe a little too liberal . It was a great two years and I learned a lot about myself and from the professors and coaches there . I ’ m looking at Boston University , Boston College and Harvard . I want to weigh my options before I make an ultimate decision , but I would love to transfer to Harvard . I think that would be pretty much ideal . " 
 Quinn appeared nude in ESPN 's 2011 " Body Issue " and talked about how her body had evolved throughout her elite career and the changes in her self @-@ perception . 
 On December 15 , 2015 , it was announced that Sacramone had been inducted as a 2016 class of the USA Gymnastics Hall of Fame . 
 = = Competitive history = = 
 = = Floor music = = 
 2002 : " Jazz Machine " – Black Machine 
 2003 – 2004 : " Explosive " by Bond ( band ) 
 2005 : " Que <unk> " by Christian Reyes 
 2006 – 2008 : " Santa Maria ( Del Buen Ayre ) " by the <unk> Project 
 2011 : 300 Violin Orchestra by Jorge Quintero and " Heart of Courage " by Two Steps from Hell 
 = Heinrich Himmler = 
 Heinrich Luitpold Himmler ( German : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 7 October 1900 – 23 May 1945 ) was Reichsführer of the Schutzstaffel ( Protection Squadron ; SS ) , and a leading member of the Nazi Party ( NSDAP ) of Nazi Germany . Nazi leader Adolf Hitler briefly appointed him a military commander and later Commander of the Replacement ( Home ) Army and General Plenipotentiary for the administration of the entire Third Reich ( <unk> für die Verwaltung ) . Himmler was one of the most powerful men in Nazi Germany and one of the people most directly responsible for the Holocaust . 
 As a member of a reserve battalion during World War I , Himmler did not see active service . He studied agronomy in college , and joined the Nazi Party in 1923 and the SS in 1925 . In 1929 , he was appointed Reichsführer @-@ SS by Hitler . Over the next 16 years , he developed the SS from a mere 290 @-@ man battalion into a million @-@ strong paramilitary group , and , following Hitler 's orders , set up and controlled the Nazi concentration camps . He was known to have good organisational skills and for selecting highly competent subordinates , such as Reinhard Heydrich in 1931 . From 1943 onwards , he was both Chief of German Police and Minister of the Interior , overseeing all internal and external police and security forces , including the Gestapo ( Secret State Police ) . Himmler had a lifelong interest in occultism , interpreting Germanic neopagan and Völkisch beliefs to promote the racial policy of Nazi Germany , and incorporating esoteric symbolism and rituals into the SS . 
 On Hitler 's behalf , Himmler formed the Einsatzgruppen and built extermination camps . As facilitator and overseer of the concentration camps , Himmler directed the killing of some six million Jews , between 200 @,@ 000 and 500 @,@ 000 Romani people , and other victims ; the total number of civilians killed by the regime is estimated at eleven to fourteen million people . Most of them were Polish and Soviet citizens . 
 Late in World War II , Hitler charged Himmler with the command of the Army Group Upper Rhine and the Army Group Vistula ; he failed to achieve his assigned objectives and Hitler replaced him in these posts . Realising that the war was lost , he attempted to open peace talks with the western Allies without Hitler 's knowledge shortly before the war ended . Hearing of this , Hitler dismissed him from all his posts in April 1945 and ordered his arrest . Himmler attempted to go into hiding , but was detained and then arrested by British forces once his identity became known . While in British custody , he committed suicide on 23 May 1945 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Heinrich Luitpold Himmler was born in Munich on 7 October 1900 into a conservative middle @-@ class Roman Catholic family . His father was Gebhard Himmler ( 17 May 1865 – 29 October 1936 ) , a teacher , and his mother was Anna Maria Himmler ( née <unk> ; 16 January 1866 – 10 September 1941 ) , a devout Roman Catholic . Heinrich had two brothers , Gebhard Ludwig ( 29 July 1898 – 1982 ) and Ernst Hermann ( 23 December 1905 – 2 May 1945 ) . 
 Himmler 's first name , Heinrich , was that of his godfather , Prince Heinrich of Bavaria , a member of the royal family of Bavaria , who had been tutored by Gebhard Himmler . He attended a grammar school in Landshut , where his father was deputy principal . While he did well in his schoolwork , he struggled in athletics . He had poor health , suffering from lifelong stomach complaints and other ailments . In his youth he trained daily with weights and exercised to become stronger . Other boys at the school later remembered him as studious and awkward in social situations . 
 Himmler 's diary , which he kept intermittently from the age of ten , shows that he took a keen interest in current events , dueling , and " the serious discussion of religion and sex " . In 1915 , he began training with the Landshut Cadet Corps . His father used his connections with the royal family to get Himmler accepted as an officer candidate , and he enlisted with the reserve battalion of the 11th Bavarian Regiment in December 1917 . His brother , Gebhard , served on the western front and saw combat , receiving the Iron Cross and eventually being promoted to lieutenant . In November 1918 , while Himmler was still in training , the war ended with Germany 's defeat , denying him the opportunity to become an officer or see combat . After his discharge on 18 December , he returned to Landshut . 
 After the war , Himmler completed his grammar @-@ school education . From 1919 to 1922 , he studied agronomy at the Munich Technische Hochschule ( now Technical University Munich ) following a brief apprenticeship on a farm and a subsequent illness . 
 Although many regulations that discriminated against non @-@ Christians — including Jews and other minority groups — had been eliminated during the unification of Germany in 1871 , antisemitism continued to exist and thrive in Germany and other parts of Europe . Himmler was antisemitic by the time he went to university , but not exceptionally so ; students at his school would avoid their Jewish classmates . He remained a devoted Catholic while a student , and spent most of his leisure time with members of his fencing fraternity , the " League of Apollo " , the president of which was Jewish . Himmler maintained a polite demeanor with him and with other Jewish members of the fraternity , in spite of his growing antisemitism . During his second year at university , Himmler redoubled his attempts to pursue a military career . Although he was not successful , he was able to extend his involvement in the paramilitary scene in Munich . It was at this time that he first met Ernst Röhm , an early member of the Nazi Party and co @-@ founder of the Sturmabteilung ( " Storm Battalion " ; SA ) . Himmler admired Röhm because he was a decorated combat soldier , and at his suggestion Himmler joined his antisemitic nationalist group , the Bund <unk> ( Imperial War Flag Society ) . 
 In 1922 , Himmler became more interested in the " Jewish question " , with his diary entries containing an increasing number of antisemitic remarks and recording a number of discussions about Jews with his classmates . His reading lists , as recorded in his diary , were dominated by antisemitic pamphlets , German myths , and occult tracts . After the murder of Foreign Minister Walther <unk> on 24 June , Himmler 's political views veered towards the radical right , and he took part in demonstrations against the Treaty of Versailles . Hyperinflation was raging , and his parents could no longer afford to educate all three sons . Disappointed by his failure to make a career in the military and his parents ' inability to finance his doctoral studies , he was forced to take a low @-@ paying office job after obtaining his agricultural diploma . He remained in this position until September 1923 . 
 = = = Nazi activist = = = 
 Himmler joined the Nazi Party ( NSDAP ) in August 1923 ; his Party number was 14 @,@ 303 . As a member of Röhm 's paramilitary unit , Himmler was involved in the Beer Hall Putsch — an unsuccessful attempt by Hitler and the NSDAP to seize power in Munich . This event would set Himmler on a life of politics . He was questioned by the police about his role in the putsch , but was not charged because of insufficient evidence . However , he lost his job , was unable to find employment as an agronomist , and had to move in with his parents in Munich . Frustrated by these failures , he became ever more irritable , aggressive , and opinionated , alienating both friends and family members . 
 In 1923 – 24 , Himmler , while searching for a world view , came to abandon Catholicism and focused on the occult and in antisemitism . Germanic mythology , reinforced by occult ideas , became a religion for him . Himmler found the NSDAP appealing because its political positions agreed with his own views . Initially , he was not swept up by Hitler 's charisma or the cult of Führer worship . As he learned more about Hitler through his reading , he began to regard him as a useful face of the party , and he later admired and even worshipped him . To consolidate and advance his own position in the NSDAP , Himmler took advantage of the disarray in the party following Hitler 's arrest in the wake of the Beer Hall Putsch . From mid @-@ 1924 he worked under Gregor Strasser as a party secretary and propaganda assistant . Travelling all over Bavaria agitating for the party , he gave speeches and distributed literature . Placed in charge of the party office in Lower Bavaria by Strasser from late 1924 , he was responsible for integrating the area 's membership with the NSDAP under Hitler when the party was re @-@ founded in February 1925 . 
 That same year , he joined the Schutzstaffel ( SS ) as an SS @-@ Führer ( SS @-@ Leader ) ; his SS number was 168 . The SS , initially part of the much larger SA , was formed in 1923 for Hitler 's personal protection , and was re @-@ formed in 1925 as an elite unit of the SA . Himmler 's first leadership position in the SS was that of SS @-@ <unk> ( district leader ) in Lower Bavaria from 1926 . Strasser appointed Himmler deputy propaganda chief in January 1927 . As was typical in the NSDAP , he had considerable freedom of action in his post , which increased over time . He began to collect statistics on the number of Jews , Freemasons , and enemies of the party , and following his strong need for control , he developed an elaborate bureaucracy . In September 1927 , Himmler told Hitler of his vision to transform the SS into a loyal , powerful , racially pure elite unit . Convinced that Himmler was the man for the job , Hitler appointed him Deputy Reichsführer @-@ SS , with the rank of SS @-@ Oberführer . 
 Around this time , Himmler joined the <unk> League , a Völkisch youth group . There he met Rudolf Höss , who was later commandant of Auschwitz concentration camp , and Walther Darré , whose book , The Peasantry as the Life Source of the Nordic Race , caught Hitler 's attention , leading to his later appointment as Reich Minister of Food and Agriculture . Darré was a firm believer in the superiority of the Nordic race , and his philosophy was a major influence on Himmler . 
 = = Rise in the SS = = 
 Upon the resignation of SS commander Erhard Heiden in January 1929 , Himmler assumed the position of Reichsführer @-@ SS with Hitler 's approval ; he still carried out his duties at propaganda headquarters . One of his first responsibilities was to organise SS participants at the Nuremberg Rally that September . Over the next year , Himmler grew the SS from a force of about 290 men to about 3 @,@ 000 . By 1930 Himmler had persuaded Hitler to run the SS as a separate organisation , although it was officially still subordinate to the SA . 
 To gain political power , the NSDAP took advantage of the economic downturn during the Great Depression . The coalition government of the Weimar Republic was unable to improve the economy , so many voters turned to the political extreme , which included the NSDAP . Hitler used populist rhetoric , including blaming scapegoats — particularly the Jews — for the economic hardships . In the 1932 election , the Nazis won 37 @.@ 3 percent of the vote and 230 seats in the Reichstag . Hitler was appointed Chancellor of Germany by President Paul von Hindenburg on 30 January 1933 , heading a short @-@ lived coalition of his Nazis and the German National People 's Party . The new cabinet initially included only three members of the NSDAP : Hitler , Hermann Göring as minister without portfolio and Minister of the Interior for Prussia , and Wilhelm Frick as Reich Interior Minister . Less than a month later , the Reichstag building was set on fire . Hitler took advantage of this event , forcing von Hindenburg to sign the Reichstag Fire Decree , which suspended basic rights and allowed detention without trial . The Enabling Act , passed by the Reichstag in 1933 , gave the Cabinet — in practice , Hitler — full legislative powers , and the country became a de facto dictatorship . On 1 August 1934 , Hitler 's cabinet passed a law which stipulated that upon von Hindenburg 's death , the office of president would be abolished and its powers merged with those of the chancellor . Von Hindenburg died the next morning , and Hitler became both head of state and head of government under the title Führer und Reichskanzler ( leader and chancellor ) . 
 The Nazi Party 's rise to power provided Himmler and the SS an unfettered opportunity to thrive . By 1933 , the SS numbered 52 @,@ 000 members . Strict membership requirements ensured that all members were of Hitler 's Aryan Herrenvolk ( " Aryan master race " ) . Applicants were vetted for Nordic qualities — in Himmler 's words , " like a nursery gardener trying to reproduce a good old strain which has been adulterated and debased ; we started from the principles of plant selection and then proceeded quite unashamedly to weed out the men whom we did not think we could use for the build @-@ up of the SS . " Few dared mention that by his own standards , Himmler did not meet his own ideals . 
 Himmler 's organised , bookish intellect served him well as he began setting up different SS departments . In 1931 he appointed Reinhard Heydrich chief of the new Ic Service ( intelligence service ) , which was renamed the Sicherheitsdienst ( SD : Security Service ) in 1932 . He later officially appointed Heydrich his deputy . The two men had a good working relationship and a mutual respect . In 1933 , they began to remove the SS from SA control . Along with Interior Minister Frick , they hoped to create a unified German police force . In March 1933 , Reich Governor of Bavaria Franz Ritter von Epp appointed Himmler chief of the Munich Police . Himmler appointed Heydrich commander of Department IV , the political police . That same year , Hitler promoted Himmler to the rank of SS @-@ Obergruppenführer , equal in rank to the senior SA commanders . Thereafter , Himmler and Heydrich took over the political police of state after state ; soon only Prussia was controlled by Göring . 
 Himmler further established the SS Race and Settlement Main Office ( Rasse- und Siedlungshauptamt or RuSHA ) . He appointed Darré as its first chief , with the rank of SS @-@ Gruppenführer . The department implemented racial policies and monitored the " racial integrity " of the SS membership . SS men were carefully vetted for their racial background . On 31 December 1931 , Himmler introduced the " marriage order " , which required SS men wishing to marry to produce family trees proving that both families were of Aryan descent to 1800 . If any non @-@ Aryan forebears were found in either family tree during the racial investigation , the person concerned was excluded from the SS . Each man was issued a <unk> , a genealogical record detailing his genetic history . Himmler expected that each SS marriage should produce at least four children , thus creating a pool of genetically superior prospective SS members . The programme had disappointing results ; less than 40 per cent of SS men married and each produced only about one child . 
 In March 1933 , less than three months after the Nazis seized power , Himmler set up the first official concentration camp at Dachau . Hitler had stated that he did not want it to be just another prison or detention camp . Himmler appointed Theodor Eicke , a convicted felon and ardent Nazi , to run the camp in June 1933 . Eicke devised a system that was used as a model for future camps throughout Germany . Its features included isolation of victims from the outside world , elaborate roll calls and work details , the use of force and executions to extract obedience , and a strict disciplinary code for the guards . Uniforms were issued for prisoners and guards alike ; the guards ' uniforms had a special Totenkopf ( death 's head ) insignia on their collars . By the end of 1934 , Himmler took control of the camps under the aegis of the SS , creating a separate division , the SS @-@ Totenkopfverbände . 
 Initially the camps housed political opponents ; over time , undesirable members of German society — criminals , vagrants , deviants — were placed in the camps as well . A Hitler decree issued in December 1937 allowed for the incarceration of anyone deemed by the regime to be an undesirable member of society . This included Jews , Gypsies , communists , and those persons of any other cultural , racial , political , or religious affiliation deemed by the Nazis to be <unk> ( sub @-@ human ) . Thus , the camps became a mechanism for social and racial engineering . By the outbreak of World War II in autumn 1939 , there were six camps housing some 27 @,@ 000 inmates . Death tolls were high . 
 = = = Consolidation of power = = = 
 In early 1934 , Hitler and other Nazi leaders became concerned that Röhm was planning a coup d 'état . Röhm had socialist and populist views , and believed that the real revolution had not yet begun . He felt that the SA — now numbering some three million men , far dwarfing the army — should become the sole arms @-@ bearing corps of the state , and that the army should be absorbed into the SA under his leadership . Röhm lobbied Hitler to appoint him Minister of Defence , a position held by conservative General Werner von Blomberg . 
 Göring had created a Prussian secret police force , the Geheime Staatspolizei or Gestapo in 1933 , and appointed Rudolf Diels as its head . Göring , concerned that Diels was not ruthless enough to use the Gestapo effectively to counteract the power of the SA , handed over its control to Himmler on 20 April 1934 . Also on that date , Hitler appointed Himmler chief of all German police outside Prussia . This was a radical departure from long @-@ standing German practice that law enforcement was a state and local matter . Heydrich , named chief of the Gestapo by Himmler on 22 April 1934 , also continued as head of the SD . 
 Hitler decided on 21 June that Röhm and the SA leadership had to be eliminated . He sent Göring to Berlin on 29 June , to meet with Himmler and Heydrich to plan the action . Hitler took charge in Munich , where Röhm was arrested ; he gave Röhm the choice to commit suicide or be shot . When Röhm refused to kill himself , he was shot dead by two SS officers . Between 85 and 200 members of the SA leadership and other political adversaries , including Gregor Strasser , were killed between 30 June and 2 July 1934 in these actions , known as the Night of the Long Knives . With the SA thus neutralised , the SS became an independent organisation answerable only to Hitler on 20 July 1934 . Himmler 's title of Reichsführer @-@ SS became the highest formal SS rank , equivalent to a field marshal in the army . The SA was converted into a sports and training organisation . 
 On 15 September 1935 , Hitler presented two laws — known as the Nuremberg Laws — to the Reichstag . The laws banned marriage between non @-@ Jewish and Jewish Germans and forbade the employment of non @-@ Jewish women under the age of 45 in Jewish households . The laws also deprived so @-@ called " non @-@ Aryans " of the benefits of German citizenship . These laws were among the first race @-@ based measures instituted by the Third Reich . 
 Himmler and Heydrich wanted to extend the power of the SS ; thus , they urged Hitler to form a national police force overseen by the SS , to guard Nazi Germany against its many enemies at the time — real and imagined . Interior Minister Frick also wanted a national police force , but one controlled by him , with Kurt Daluege as his police chief . Hitler left it to Himmler and Heydrich to work out the arrangements with Frick . Himmler and Heydrich had greater bargaining power , as they were allied with Frick 's old enemy , Göring . Heydrich drew up a set of proposals and Himmler sent him to meet with Frick . An angry Frick then consulted with Hitler , who told him to agree to the proposals . Frick acquiesced , and on 17 June 1936 Hitler decreed the unification of all police forces in the Reich , and named Himmler Chief of German Police . In this role , Himmler was still nominally subordinate to Frick . In practice , however , the police was now effectively a division of the SS , and hence independent of Frick 's control . This move gave Himmler operational control over Germany 's entire detective force . He also gained authority over all of Germany 's uniformed law enforcement agencies , which were amalgamated into the new Ordnungspolizei ( Orpo : " order police " ) , which became a branch of the SS under Daluege . 
 Shortly thereafter , Himmler created the Kriminalpolizei ( Kripo : criminal police ) as the umbrella organisation for all criminal investigation agencies in Germany . The Kripo was merged with the Gestapo into the Sicherheitspolizei ( SiPo : security police ) , under Heydrich 's command . In September 1939 , following the outbreak of World War II , Himmler formed the SS @-@ Reichssicherheitshauptamt ( RSHA : Reich Main Security Office ) to bring the SiPo ( which included the Gestapo and Kripo ) and the SD together under one umbrella . He again placed Heydrich in command . 
 Under Himmler 's leadership , the SS developed its own military branch , the SS @-@ Verfügungstruppe ( SS @-@ VT ) , which later evolved into the Waffen @-@ SS . Nominally under the authority of Himmler , the Waffen @-@ SS developed a fully militarised structure of command and operations . It grew from three regiments to over 38 divisions during World War II , serving alongside the Heer ( army ) , but never being formally part of it . 
 In addition to his military ambitions , Himmler established the beginnings of a parallel economy under the umbrella of the SS . To this end , administrator Oswald Pohl set up the Deutsche <unk> ( German Economic Enterprise ) in 1940 . Under the auspices of the SS Economy and Administration Head Office , this holding company owned housing corporations , factories , and publishing houses . Pohl was unscrupulous and quickly exploited the companies for personal gain . In contrast , Himmler was honest in matters of money and business . 
 In 1938 , as part of his preparations for war , Hitler ended the German alliance with China , and entered into an agreement with the more modern Japan . That same year , Austria was unified with Nazi Germany in the Anschluss , and the Munich Agreement gave Nazi Germany control over the Sudetenland , part of Czechoslovakia . Hitler 's primary motivations for war included obtaining additional Lebensraum ( " living space " ) for the Germanic peoples , who were considered racially superior according to Nazi ideology . A second goal was the elimination of those considered racially inferior , particularly the Jews and Slavs , from territories controlled by the Reich . From 1933 to 1938 , hundreds of thousands of Jews emigrated to the United States , Palestine , Great Britain , and other countries . Some converted to Christianity . 
 = = = Anti @-@ church struggle = = = 
 Himmler saw a main task of the SS to be that of " acting as the vanguard in overcoming Christianity and restoring a ' Germanic ' way of living " as part of preparations for the coming conflict between " humans and subhumans " . Himmler biographer Peter Longerich wrote that , while the Nazi movement as a whole launched itself against Jews and Communists , " by linking de @-@ Christianisation with re @-@ Germanization , Himmler had provided the SS with a goal and purpose all of its own . " Himmler was vehemently opposed to Christian sexual morality and the " principle of Christian mercy " , both of which he saw as dangerous obstacles to his planned battle with " subhumans " . In 1937 , Himmler declared : 
 We live in an era of the ultimate conflict with Christianity . It is part of the mission of the SS to give the German people in the next half century the non @-@ Christian ideological foundations on which to lead and shape their lives . This task does not consist solely in overcoming an ideological opponent but must be accompanied at every step by a positive impetus : in this case that means the reconstruction of the German heritage in the widest and most comprehensive sense . 
 = = World War II = = 
 When Hitler and his army chiefs asked for a pretext for the invasion of Poland in 1939 , Himmler , Heydrich , and Heinrich Müller masterminded and carried out a false flag project code @-@ named Operation Himmler . German soldiers dressed in Polish uniforms undertook border skirmishes that deceptively suggested Polish aggression against Germany . The incidents were then used in Nazi propaganda to justify the invasion of Poland , the opening event of World War II . At the beginning of the war against Poland , Hitler authorised the killing of Polish civilians , including Jews and ethnic Poles . The Einsatzgruppen ( SS task forces ) had been originally formed by Heydrich to secure government papers and offices in areas taken over by Germany before World War II . Authorised by Hitler and under the direction of Himmler and Heydrich , the Einsatzgruppen units — now repurposed as death squads — followed the Heer ( army ) into Poland , and by the end of 1939 they had murdered some 65 @,@ 000 intellectuals and other civilians . Militias and Heer units also took part in these killings . Under Himmler 's orders via the RSHA , these squads were also tasked with rounding up Jews and others for placement in ghettos and concentration camps . 
 Germany subsequently invaded Denmark and Norway , the Netherlands , and France , and began bombing Great Britain in preparation for an invasion . On 21 June 1941 , the day before invasion of the Soviet Union , Himmler commissioned the preparation of the Generalplan Ost ( General Plan for the East ) ; the plan was finalised in July 1942 . It called for the Baltic States , Poland , western Ukraine , and Byelorussia to be conquered and resettled by ten million German citizens . The current residents — some 31 million people — would be expelled further east , starved , or used for forced labour . The plan would have extended the border of Germany a thousand kilometres to the east ( 620 miles ) . Himmler expected that it would take twenty to thirty years to complete the plan , at a cost of 67 billion Reichsmarks . Himmler stated openly : " It is a question of existence , thus it will be a racial struggle of pitiless severity , in the course of which 20 to 30 million Slavs and Jews will perish through military actions and crises of food supply . " 
 Himmler declared that the war in the east was a pan @-@ European crusade to defend the traditional values of old Europe from the " Godless Bolshevik hordes " . Constantly struggling with the Wehrmacht for recruits , Himmler solved this problem through the creation of Waffen @-@ SS units composed of Germanic folk groups taken from the Balkans and eastern Europe . Equally vital were recruits from among the Germanic considered peoples from northern and western Europe in the Netherlands , Norway , Belgium , Denmark and Finland . Spain and Italy also provided men for Waffen @-@ SS units . Among western countries , the number of volunteers varied from a high of 25 @,@ 000 from the Netherlands to 300 each from Sweden and Switzerland . From the east , the highest number of men came from Lithuania ( 50 @,@ 000 ) and the lowest from Bulgaria ( 600 ) . After 1943 most men from the east were conscripts . The performance of the eastern Waffen @-@ SS units was , as a whole , sub @-@ standard . 
 In late 1941 , Hitler named Heydrich as Deputy Reich Protector of the newly established Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia . Heydrich began to racially classify the Czechs , deporting many to concentration camps . Members of a swelling resistance were shot , earning Heydrich the nickname " the Butcher of Prague " . This appointment strengthened the collaboration between Himmler and Heydrich , and Himmler was proud to have SS control over a state . Despite having direct access to Hitler , Heydrich 's loyalty to Himmler remained firm . 
 With Hitler 's approval , Himmler re @-@ established the Einsatzgruppen in the lead @-@ up to the planned invasion of the Soviet Union . In March 1941 , Hitler addressed his army leaders , detailing his intention to smash the Soviet Empire and destroy the Bolshevik intelligentsia and leadership . His special directive , the " Guidelines in Special Spheres re Directive No. 21 ( Operation Barbarossa ) " , read : " In the operations area of the army , the Reichsführer @-@ SS has been given special tasks on the orders of the Führer , in order to prepare the political administration . These tasks arise from the forthcoming final struggle of two opposing political systems . Within the framework of these tasks , the Reichsführer @-@ SS acts independently and on his own responsibility . " Hitler thus intended to prevent internal friction like that occurring earlier in Poland in 1939 , when several German Army generals had attempted to bring Einsatzgruppen leaders to trial for the murders they had committed . 
 Following the army into the Soviet Union , the Einsatzgruppen rounded up and killed Jews and others deemed undesirable by the Nazi state . Hitler was sent frequent reports . In addition , 2 @.@ 8 million Soviet prisoners of war died of starvation , mistreatment or executions in just eight months of 1941 – 42 . As many as 500 @,@ 000 Soviet prisoners of war died or were executed in Nazi concentration camps over the course of the war ; most of them were shot or gassed . By early 1941 , following Himmler 's orders , ten concentration camps had been constructed in which inmates were subjected to forced labour . Jews from all over Germany and the occupied territories were deported to the camps or confined to ghettos . As the Germans were pushed back from Moscow in December 1941 , signalling that the invasion of the Soviet Union had failed , Hitler and other Nazi officials realised that mass deportations to the east would no longer be possible . As a result , instead of deportation , many Jews in Europe were destined for death . 
 = = The Holocaust = = 
 Nazi racial policies , including the notion that people who were racially inferior had no right to live , date back to the earliest days of the party ; Hitler discusses this in Mein Kampf . Somewhere around the time of the German declaration of war on the United States in December 1941 , Hitler finally resolved that the Jews of Europe were to be " exterminated " . Heydrich arranged a meeting , held on 20 January 1942 at Wannsee , a suburb of Berlin . Attended by top Nazi officials , it was used to outline the plans for the " final solution to the Jewish question " . Heydrich detailed how those Jews able to work would be worked to death ; those unable to work would be killed outright . Heydrich calculated the number of Jews to be killed at 11 million , and told the attendees that Hitler had placed Himmler in charge of the plan . 
 In June 1942 , Heydrich was assassinated in Prague in an operation led by Jozef Gabčík and Jan Kubiš , members of Czechoslovakia 's army @-@ in @-@ exile who had been trained by the British Special Operations Executive . During the two funeral services , Himmler — the chief mourner — took charge of Heydrich 's two young sons , and he gave the eulogy in Berlin . On 9 June , after discussions with Himmler and Karl Hermann Frank , Hitler ordered brutal reprisals for Heydrich 's death . Over 13 @,@ 000 people were arrested , and the village of Lidice was razed to the ground ; its male inhabitants and all adults in the village of Ležáky were murdered . At least 1 @,@ 300 people were executed by firing squads . Himmler took over leadership of the RSHA and stepped up the pace of the killing of Jews in Aktion Reinhard ( Operation Reinhard ) , named in Heydrich 's honour . He ordered the Aktion Reinhard camps — the first extermination camps — to be constructed at Bełżec , Sobibór , and Treblinka . 
 Initially the victims were killed with gas vans or by firing squad , but these methods proved impracticable for an operation of this scale . In August 1941 , Himmler attended the shooting of 100 Jews at Minsk . <unk> and shaken by the experience , he was concerned about the impact such actions would have on the mental health of his SS men . He decided that alternate methods of killing should be found . On his orders , by early 1942 the camp at Auschwitz had been greatly expanded , including the addition of gas chambers , where victims were killed using the pesticide Zyklon B. By the end of the war , at least 5 @.@ 5 million Jews had been killed by the Nazi regime ; most estimates range closer to six million . Himmler visited the camp at Sobibór in early 1943 , by which time 250 @,@ 000 people had been killed at that location alone . After witnessing a gassing , he gave 28 people promotions , and ordered the operation of the camp to be wound down . In a revolt that October , prisoners killed most of the guards and SS personnel , and 300 prisoners escaped . Two hundred managed to get away ; some joined partisan units operating in the area . The remainder were killed . The camp was dismantled by December 1943 . 
 Himmler was a main architect of the Holocaust , using his deep belief in the racist Nazi ideology to justify the murder of millions of victims . The Nazis planned to kill Polish intellectuals and restrict non @-@ Germans in the General Government and conquered territories to a fourth @-@ grade education . The Nazis wanted to breed a master race of racially pure Nordic Aryans in Germany . As an agronomist and farmer Himmler was acquainted with the principles of selective breeding , which he proposed to apply to humans . He believed that he could engineer the German populace , for example , through eugenics , to be Nordic in appearance within several decades of the end of the war . 
 = = = Posen speech = = = 
 On 4 October 1943 , during a secret meeting with top SS officials in the city of Poznań ( Posen ) , and on 6 October 1943 , in a speech to the party elite — the Gau and Reich leaders — Himmler referred explicitly to the " extermination " ( German : Ausrottung ) of the Jewish people . A translated excerpt from the speech of 4 October reads : 
 I also want to refer here very frankly to a very difficult matter . We can now very openly talk about this among ourselves , and yet we will never discuss this publicly . Just as we did not hesitate on 30 June 1934 , to perform our duty as ordered and put comrades who had failed up against the wall and execute them , we also never spoke about it , nor will we ever speak about it . Let us thank God that we had within us enough self @-@ evident fortitude never to discuss it among us , and we never talked about it . Every one of us was horrified , and yet every one clearly understood that we would do it next time , when the order is given and when it becomes necessary . 
 I am now referring to the evacuation of the Jews , to the extermination of the Jewish People . This is something that is easily said : ' The Jewish People will be exterminated ' , says every party member , ' this is very obvious , it is in our program — elimination of the Jews , extermination , a small matter . ' And then they turn up , the upstanding 80 million Germans , and each one has his decent Jew . They say the others are all <unk> , but this particular one is a splendid Jew . But none has observed it , endured it . Most of you here know what it means when 100 corpses lie next to each other , when there are 500 or when there are 1 @,@ 000 . To have endured this and at the same time to have remained a decent person — with exceptions due to human weaknesses — has made us tough , and is a glorious chapter that has not and will not be spoken of . Because we know how difficult it would be for us if we still had Jews as secret saboteurs , agitators and rabble @-@ rousers in every city , what with the bombings , with the burden and with the hardships of the war . If the Jews were still part of the German nation , we would most likely arrive now at the state we were at in 1916 and ' 17 ... 
 Hitler 's motivation for authorising Himmler 's speeches was to ensure that all party leaders were made aware of these plans and actions . Thus , it would be impossible for them to later deny knowledge of the killings . Because the Allies had indicated that they were going to pursue criminal charges for German war crimes , Hitler tried to gain the loyalty and silence of his subordinates by making them all parties to the planned genocide . 
 = = = Germanization = = = 
 As Reich Commissioner for the Consolidation of German Nationhood ( <unk> ) with the incorporated VoMi Himmler was deeply involved in the Germanization program for the East , particularly Poland . As laid out in the General Plan for the East , the aim was to enslave , expel or exterminate the native population and to make Lebensraum ( " living space " ) for Volksdeutsche ( ethnic Germans ) . He continued his plans to colonise the east , even when many Germans were reluctant to relocate there , and despite negative effects on the war effort . 
 Himmler 's racial groupings began with the Volksliste , the classification of people deemed of German blood . These included Germans who had collaborated with Germany before the war , but also those who considered themselves German but had been neutral ; those who were partially " Polonized " but " <unk> " ; and Germans who were of Polish nationality . Himmler ordered that those who refused to be classified as ethnic Germans should be deported to concentration camps , have their children taken away , or be assigned to forced labour . Himmler 's belief that " it is in the nature of German blood to resist " led to his conclusion that Balts or Slavs who resisted Germanization were racially superior to more compliant ones . He declared that no drop of German blood would be lost or left behind to mingle with an " alien race " . 
 The plan also included the kidnapping of Eastern European children by Nazi Germany . Himmler urged : 
 Obviously in such a mixture of peoples , there will always be some racially good types . Therefore , I think that it is our duty to take their children with us , to remove them from their environment , if necessary by robbing , or stealing them . Either we win over any good blood that we can use for ourselves and give it a place in our people , ... or we destroy that blood . 
 The " racially valuable " children were to be removed from all contact with Poles , and raised as Germans , with German names . Himmler declared , " We have faith above all in this our own blood , which has flowed into a foreign nationality through the vicissitudes of German history . We are convinced that our own philosophy and ideals will reverberate in the spirit of these children who racially belong to us . " The children were to be adopted by German families . Children who passed muster at first but were later rejected were taken to a ghetto in Łódź , where most of them eventually died . 
 By January 1943 , Himmler reported that 629 @,@ 000 ethnic Germans had been resettled ; however , most resettled Germans did not live in the envisioned small farms , but in temporary camps or quarters in towns . Half a million residents of the annexed Polish territories , as well as from Slovenia , Alsace , Lorraine , and Luxembourg were deported to the General Government or sent to Germany as slave labour . Himmler instructed that the German nation should view all foreign workers brought to Germany as a danger to their German blood . In accordance with German racial laws , sexual relations between Germans and foreigners were forbidden as Rassenschande ( race defilement ) . 
 = = 20 July plot = = 
 On 20 July 1944 , a group of German army officers led by Claus von Stauffenberg and including some of the highest @-@ ranked members of the German armed forces attempted to assassinate Hitler , but failed to do so . The next day , Himmler formed a special commission that arrested over 5 @,@ 000 suspected and known opponents of the regime . Hitler ordered brutal reprisals that resulted in the execution of more than 4 @,@ 900 people . Though Himmler was embarrassed by his failure to uncover the plot , it led to an increase in his powers and authority . 
 General Friedrich Fromm , commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Reserve ( or Replacement ) Army ( Ersatzheer ) and Stauffenberg 's immediate superior , was one of those implicated in the conspiracy . Hitler removed Fromm from his post and named Himmler as his successor . Since the Reserve Army consisted of two million men , Himmler hoped to draw on these reserves to fill posts within the Waffen @-@ SS . He appointed Hans Jüttner , director of the SS Leadership Main Office , as his deputy , and began to fill top Reserve Army posts with SS men . By November 1944 Himmler had merged the army officer recruitment department with that of the Waffen @-@ SS and had successfully lobbied for an increase in the quotas for recruits to the SS . 
 By this time , Hitler had appointed Himmler as Minister of the Interior and Plenipotentiary General for Administration ( <unk> für die Verwaltung ) . In August 1944 Hitler authorised him to restructure the organisation and administration of the Waffen @-@ SS , the army , and the police services . As head of the Reserve Army , Himmler was now responsible for prisoners of war . He was also in charge of the Wehrmacht penal system , and controlled the development of Wehrmacht armaments until January 1945 . 
 = = Military commander = = 
 On 6 June 1944 the Western Allied armies landed in northern France during Operation Overlord . In response , Army Group Upper Rhine ( Heeresgruppe <unk> ) group was formed to engage the advancing US 7th Army ( under command of General Alexander Patch ) and French 1st Army ( led by General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny ) in the Alsace region along the west bank of the Rhine . In late 1944 , Hitler appointed Himmler commander @-@ in @-@ chief of Army Group Upper Rhine . 
 On 26 September 1944 Hitler ordered Himmler to create special army units , the Volkssturm ( " People 's Storm " or " People 's Army " ) . All males aged sixteen to sixty were eligible for conscription into this militia , over the protests of Armaments Minister Albert Speer , who noted that irreplaceable skilled workers were being removed from armaments production . Hitler confidently believed six million men could be raised , and the new units would " initiate a people 's war against the invader " . These hopes were wildly optimistic . In October 1944 , children as young as fourteen were being enlisted . Because of severe shortages in weapons and equipment and lack of training , members of the Volkssturm were poorly prepared for combat , and about 175 @,@ 000 of them lost their lives in the final months of the war . 
 On 1 January 1945 Hitler and his generals launched Operation North Wind ( Unternehmen Nordwind ) . The goal was to break through the lines of the US 7th Army and French 1st Army to support the southern thrust in the Ardennes offensive , the final major German offensive of the war . After limited initial gains by the Germans , the Americans halted the offensive . By 25 January , Operation North Wind had officially ended . 
 On 25 January 1945 , in spite of Himmler 's lack of military experience , Hitler appointed him as commander of the hastily formed Army Group Vistula ( Heeresgruppe Weichsel ) to halt the Soviet Red Army 's Vistula – Oder Offensive into Pomerania . Panzer general Heinz Guderian considered Himmler 's appointment " idiocy " and regarded the officers Himmler chose to organize the defense as " uniformly incapable of performing their allotted tasks " . Knowing that Himmler would need all the help he could get , Guderian appointed General Walther Wenck , an experienced staff officer , as his chief of staff . Himmler established his command centre at Schneidemühl , using his special train , <unk> Steiermark , as his headquarters . The train had only one telephone line , inadequate maps , and no signal detachment or radios with which to establish communication and relay military orders . Himmler seldom left the train , only worked about four hours per day , and insisted on a daily massage before commencing work and a lengthy nap after lunch . Operation Solstice , an attack from Pomerania against the northern flank of Marshal Georgy Zhukov 's 1st Belarusian Front , was launched on 16 February 1945 , but could make little headway against Pavel Alexeyevich Belov 's 61st Army and Semyon Bogdanov 's 2nd Guards Tank Army . Zhukov responded by redirecting two Soviet tank armies against the German forces . Within five days , tanks of the Red Army had reached the Baltic , trapping the German forces , who sought to escape by sea . Himmler was unable to devise any viable plans for completion of his military objectives . Under pressure from Hitler over the worsening military situation , Himmler became anxious and unable to give him coherent reports . 
 Hitler was unwilling to admit that his choice of commander had been inadequate . After an intense argument with Guderian , who insisted on a change of command of the Army Group Vistula , Hitler assigned Wenck to Himmler 's headquarters to take over command of a limited counter @-@ offensive ; Hitler then observed that it was not possible for him to move the troops needed for Guderian 's planned double pincer attack from neighbouring regions . When the counter @-@ attack failed to stop the Soviet advance , Hitler held Himmler personally liable and accused him of not following orders . Himmler 's tenure as a military commander ended on 20 March , when Hitler replaced him with General Gotthard Heinrici as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Army Group Vistula . By this time Himmler , who had been under the care of his doctor since 18 February , had fled to a sanatorium at <unk> . Hitler sent Guderian on a forced medical leave of absence , and he reassigned his post as chief of staff to Hans Krebs on 29 March . Himmler 's failure and Hitler 's response marked a serious deterioration in the relationship between the two men . By that time , the inner circle of people which Hitler trusted was rapidly shrinking . 
 = = = Peace negotiations = = = 
 In early 1945 , the German war effort was on the verge of collapse and Himmler 's relationship with Hitler had deteriorated . Himmler considered independently negotiating a peace settlement . His masseur , Felix Kersten , who had moved to Sweden , acted as an intermediary in negotiations with Count Folke Bernadotte , head of the Swedish Red Cross . Letters were exchanged between the two men , and direct meetings were arranged by Walter Schellenberg of the RSHA . 
 Himmler and Hitler met for the last time on 20 April 1945 — Hitler 's birthday — in Berlin , and Himmler swore total loyalty to Hitler . At a military briefing on that day , Hitler stated that he would not be leaving Berlin , in spite of Soviet advances . Along with Göring , Himmler quickly left the city after the briefing . On 21 April , Himmler met with Norbert Masur , a Swedish representative of the World Jewish Congress , to discuss the release of Jewish concentration camp inmates . As a result of these negotiations , about 20 @,@ 000 people were released in the White Buses operation . During the negotiations , Himmler falsely claimed that the crematoria had been built to deal with the dead from a typhus epidemic . He also claimed very high survival rates for the camps at Auschwitz and Bergen @-@ Belsen , even as these sites were liberated and it became obvious that his figures were false . 
 Two days later , Himmler met directly with Bernadotte at the Swedish consulate in Lübeck . Representing himself as the provisional leader of Germany , he claimed that Hitler would be dead within the next few days . Hoping that the British and Americans would fight the Soviets alongside the remains of the Wehrmacht , Himmler asked Bernadotte to inform General Dwight Eisenhower that Germany wished to surrender to the West . Bernadotte asked Himmler to put his proposal in writing , and Himmler obliged . 
 However , Göring sent a telegram a few hours earlier , asking permission to take over the leadership of the Reich — an act that Hitler , under the prodding of Martin Bormann , interpreted as a demand to step down or face a coup . On 27 April Himmler 's SS representative at Hitler 's HQ in Berlin , Hermann Fegelein , was caught in civilian clothes preparing to desert ; he was arrested and brought back to the Führerbunker . On the evening of 28 April , the BBC broadcast a Reuters news report about Himmler 's attempted negotiations with the western Allies . Hitler , who had long believed Himmler was second only to Joseph Goebbels in loyalty — calling Himmler " der <unk> Heinrich " ( the loyal Heinrich ) — flew into a rage about this apparent betrayal . Hitler told those who were still with him in the bunker complex that Himmler 's act was the worst treachery he had ever known and ordered his arrest . Fegelein was court @-@ martialed and shot . 
 By this time , the Soviets had advanced to the <unk> , only 300 m ( 330 yd ) from the Reich Chancellery , and were preparing to storm the Chancellery . This report , combined with Himmler 's treachery , prompted Hitler to write his last will and testament . In the testament , completed on 29 April — one day prior to his suicide — Hitler declared both Himmler and Göring to be traitors . He stripped Himmler of all of his party and state offices and expelled him from the Nazi Party . 
 Hitler named Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz as his successor . Himmler met Dönitz in Flensburg and offered himself as second @-@ in @-@ command . He maintained that he was entitled to a position in Dönitz ' interim government as Reichsführer @-@ SS , believing the SS would be in a good position to restore and maintain order after the war . Dönitz repeatedly rejected Himmler 's overtures , and initiated peace negotiations with the Allies . He wrote a letter on 6 May — two days before the German Instrument of Surrender — formally dismissing Himmler from all his posts . 
 = = Capture and suicide = = 
 Rejected by his former comrades and hunted by the Allies , Himmler attempted to go into hiding . He had not made extensive preparations for this , but he had equipped himself with a forged paybook under the name of Sergeant Heinrich <unk> . With a small band of companions , he headed south on 11 May to <unk> , without a final destination in mind . They continued on to <unk> , where the group split up . On May 21 , Himmler and two aides were stopped and detained at a checkpoint set up by former Soviet POWs . Over the following two days , he was moved around to several camps and was brought to the British 31st Civilian Interrogation Camp near Lüneburg , on 23 May . 
 The duty officer , Captain Thomas Selvester , began a routine interrogation . Himmler admitted who he was , and Selvester had the prisoner searched . Himmler was taken to the headquarters of the Second British Army in Lüneburg , where Doctor Wells conducted a medical exam on him . The doctor attempted to examine the inside of Himmler 's mouth , but the prisoner was reluctant to open it and jerked his head away . Himmler then bit into a hidden cyanide pill and collapsed onto the floor . He was dead within 15 minutes . Shortly afterward , Himmler 's body was buried in an unmarked grave near Lüneburg . The grave 's location remains unknown . 
 = = Mysticism and symbolism = = 
 Himmler was interested in mysticism and the occult from an early age . He tied this interest into his racist philosophy , looking for proof of Aryan and Nordic racial superiority from ancient times . He promoted a cult of ancestor worship , particularly among members of the SS , as a way to keep the race pure and provide immortality to the nation . 
 Viewing the SS as an " order " along the lines of the Teutonic Knights , he had them take over the Church of the Teutonic Order in Vienna in 1939 . He began the process of replacing Christianity with a new moral code that rejected humanitarianism and challenged the Christian concept of marriage . The Ahnenerbe , a research society founded by Himmler in 1935 , conducted research all over the globe to look for proof of the superiority and ancient origins of the Germanic race . 
 All regalia and uniforms of Nazi Germany , particularly those of the SS , used symbolism in their design . The stylized lightning bolt logo of the SS was chosen in 1932 . The logo is a pair of runes from a set of 18 Armanen runes created by Guido von List in 1906 . The ancient <unk> rune originally symbolized the sun , but was renamed as " Sig " ( victory ) in List 's iconography . Himmler modified a variety of existing customs to emphasise the elitism and central role of the SS ; an SS naming ceremony was to replace baptism , marriage ceremonies were to be altered , a separate SS funeral ceremony was to be held in addition to Christian ceremonies , and SS @-@ centric celebrations of the summer and winter solstice were instituted . The Totenkopf ( death 's head ) symbol , used by German military units for hundreds of years , had been chosen for the SS by Schreck . Himmler placed particular importance on the death 's @-@ head rings ; they were never to be sold , and were to be returned to him upon the death of the owner . He interpreted the deaths @-@ head symbol to mean solidarity to the cause and a commitment unto death . 
 = = Relationship with Hitler = = 
 As second in command of the SS and then Reichsführer @-@ SS , Himmler was in regular contact with Hitler to arrange for SS men as bodyguards ; Himmler was not involved with Nazi Party policy @-@ making decisions in the years leading up to the seizure of power . From the late 1930s , the SS was independent of the control of other state agencies or government departments , and he reported only to Hitler . 
 Hitler 's leadership style was to give contradictory orders to subordinates and to place them into positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped with those of others . In this way , Hitler fostered distrust , competition , and infighting among his subordinates to consolidate and maximise his own power . His cabinet never met after 1938 , and he discouraged his ministers from meeting independently . Hitler typically did not issue written orders , but gave them orally at meetings or in phone conversations ; he also had Bormann convey orders . Bormann used his position to control the flow of information and access to Hitler , earning him enemies , including Himmler . 
 Hitler promoted and practised the Führerprinzip . The principle required absolute obedience of all subordinates to their superiors ; thus Hitler viewed the government structure as a pyramid , with himself — the infallible leader — at the apex . Accordingly , Himmler placed himself in a position of subservience to Hitler , and was unconditionally obedient to him . However , he — like other top Nazi officials — had aspirations to one day succeed Hitler as leader of the Reich . Himmler considered Speer to be an especially dangerous rival , both in the Reich administration and as a potential successor to Hitler . Speer refused to accept Himmler 's offer of the high rank of SS @-@ Oberst @-@ Gruppenführer , as he felt to do so would put him in Himmler 's debt and obligate him to allow Himmler a say in armaments production . 
 Hitler called Himmler 's mystical and <unk> interests " nonsense " . Himmler was not a member of Hitler 's inner circle ; the two men were not very close , and rarely saw each other socially . Himmler socialised almost exclusively with other members of the SS . His unconditional loyalty and efforts to please Hitler earned him the nickname of der <unk> Heinrich ( " the faithful Heinrich " ) . In the last days of the war , when it became clear that Hitler planned to die in Berlin , Himmler left his long @-@ time superior to try to save himself . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 Himmler met his future wife , Margarete Boden , in 1927 . Seven years his senior , she was a nurse who shared his interest in herbal medicine and <unk> , and was part owner of a small private clinic . They were married in July 1928 , and their only child , Gudrun , was born on 8 August 1929 . The couple were also foster parents to a boy named Gerhard von Ahe , son of an SS officer who had died before the war . Margarete sold her share of the clinic and used the proceeds to buy a plot of land in <unk> , near Munich , where they erected a prefabricated house . Himmler was constantly away on party business , so his wife took charge of their efforts — mostly unsuccessful — to raise livestock for sale . They also owned a dog , <unk> . After the Nazis seized power the family moved first to <unk> in Munich , and in 1934 to Lake <unk> , where they bought a house . Himmler also later obtained a large house in the Berlin suburb of Dahlem , free of charge , as an official residence . The couple saw little of each other as Himmler became totally absorbed by work . The relationship was strained . The couple did unite for social functions ; they were frequent guests at the Heydrich home . Margarete saw it as her duty to invite the wives of the senior SS leaders over for afternoon coffee and tea on Wednesday afternoons . 
 Hedwig Potthast , Himmler 's young secretary starting in 1936 , became his mistress by 1939 . She left her job in 1941 . He arranged accommodations for her , first in Mecklenburg and later at Berchtesgaden . He fathered two children with her : a son , Helge ( born 15 February 1942 ) and a daughter , Nanette Dorothea ( born 20 July 1944 at Berchtesgaden ) . Margarete , by then living in <unk> with her daughter , learned of the relationship sometime in 1941 ; she and Himmler were already separated , and she decided to tolerate the relationship for the sake of her daughter . Working as a nurse for the German Red Cross during the war , Margarete was appointed supervisor in Military District III ( Berlin @-@ Brandenburg ) . Himmler was close to his first daughter , Gudrun , whom he nicknamed <unk> ( " dolly " ) ; he phoned her every few days and visited as often as he could . 
 Margarete 's diaries reveal that Gerhard had to leave the National Political Educational Institute in Berlin because of poor results . At the age of 16 he joined the SS in Brno and shortly afterwards went " into battle " , He was captured by the Russians but later returned to Germany and lived in North Germany . 
 Hedwig and Margarete both remained loyal to Himmler . Writing to Gebhard in February 1945 , Margarete said , " How wonderful that he has been called to great tasks and is equal to them . The whole of Germany is looking to him . " Hedwig expressed similar sentiments in a letter to Himmler in January . Margarete and Gudrun left <unk> as Allied troops advanced into the area . They were arrested by American troops in Bolzano , Italy , and held in various internment camps in Italy , France , and Germany . They were brought to Nuremberg to testify at the trials and were released in November 1946 . Gudrun emerged from the experience embittered by her alleged mistreatment and has remained devoted to her father 's memory . 
 = = Historical assessment = = 
 Albert Speer said that though Himmler seemed pedantic and insignificant on the surface , he was a good decision maker , had a talent for selecting highly competent staff , and successfully inserted the SS into every aspect of daily life . Historian Peter Longerich observes that Himmler 's ability to consolidate his ever @-@ increasing powers and responsibilities into a coherent system under the auspices of the SS led him to become one of the most powerful men in the Third Reich . 
 Historian Wolfgang Sauer says that " although he was pedantic , dogmatic , and dull , Himmler emerged under Hitler as second in actual power . His strength lay in a combination of unusual shrewdness , burning ambition , and servile loyalty to Hitler . " Historian Peter Padfield opined that " Himmler ... appeared the most powerful man under Hitler . It is impossible to say whether he was in practice , and meaningless to ask , since he was never prepared to use his power directly to change the course of events ... " 
 Historian John Toland relates a story by Günter Syrup , a subordinate of Heydrich . Heydrich showed him a picture of Himmler and said , " The top half is the teacher but the lower half is the sadist . " Historian Adrian Weale comments that Himmler and the SS followed Hitler 's policies , without question or ethical considerations . Himmler accepted Hitler and Nazi ideology , and saw the SS as a chivalric Teutonic order of new Germans . Himmler adopted the doctrine of Auftragstaktik ( " mission command " ) , whereby orders were given as broad directives , with authority delegated downward to the appropriate level to carry them out in a timely and efficient manner . Weale states that the SS ideology gave the men a doctrinal framework , and the mission command tactics allowed the junior officers leeway to act on their own initiative to obtain the desired results . 
 According to British war cabinet minutes released in 2006 , Winston Churchill advocated Himmler 's assassination . In response to Himmler 's attempts to open peace overtures with the Allies in 1945 through Count Bernadotte , Churchill enquired if they should negotiate with Himmler and " bump him off later " . " Quite entitled to do so " , said Churchill . This suggestion met with some support from the British Home Office . 
 In 2008 the German news magazine Der Spiegel described Himmler as one of the most brutal mass murderers in history , and the architect of the Holocaust . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = = = = Printed = = = = 
 = Battle of Sant Esteve d 'en Bas = 
 The Battle of Sant Esteve d 'en Bas took place on 10 March 1695 in the Catalan front of the War of the Grand Alliance . It was fought between a column of French regular infantry under Brigadier Urbain Le Clerc de Juigné , governor of the nearby French @-@ occupied Castellfollit de la Roca , and 16 companies of Catalan miquelets and several armed peasants at the orders of Ramon de Sala i Saçala , the <unk> of the town of Vic . Juigné 's force was in a punitive expedition to burn the village of Sant Esteve d 'en Bas , whose inhabitants had refused to pay war contributions to the French army , when it was attacked by the Catalan militia and nearly destroyed in two separate engagements . 
 The first and more bloody fight took place at the wood of <unk> and the bridge of Sant Roc , where the French lost 500 men killed or wounded . Defeated , Juigné and his remaining troops fled to Olot , where they entrenched themselves in a convent . The Catalans forced the French to surrender by setting the building on fire . At the slight cost of 7 men killed and 5 wounded , the miquelets and peasants under Sala i Saçala killed 260 French soldiers and took 826 prisoners . Juigné was among the first . This French defeat was followed , just a month later , by the blockade by Spanish troops , miquelets and armed peasants , of the French garrisons of Castellfollit and Hostalric , which the French command decided to demolish and evacuate on July under the impossibility of keeping both positions . 
 = = Background = = 
 Catalonia was one of the main fronts of the Nine Years ' War . However , lack of means and poor relations with the peasantry due to the Revolt of the <unk> marked for the Spanish Viceroy of Catalonia , the Duke of Villahermosa , the early stage of the conflict . In 1689 the Admiral of Castile , Juan Gaspar Enríquez de Cabrera , said to the Spanish Council of State that " the best relief that Catalonia can have are the outer capabilities , what would be done from Flanders , from Milan and from Navarre " . The French army under the Duke of Noailles , however , was also short of resources , and attrition warfare prevailed on the first four years of the war . In 1694 , Louis XIV committed more resources to his army in Catalonia , and Noailles managed to break the Spanish defenses , defeating the Spanish army at the battle of <unk> , on the banks of the Ter river , and seizing the ports of Roses , <unk> and <unk> , and the important city of Girona . 
 In 1695 the French command found that the inhabitants of the areas occupied by the French army were reluctant to pay war contributions and started to oppose an organized and <unk> successful resistance . During the winter of 1694 @-@ 1695 , the inhabitants of Calella repelled a punishment force of 800 or 1 @,@ 000 French soldiers from the Blanes garrison and killed between 60 or 100 of them . French troops were also harassed by Catalan militia forces , the miquelets , who laid ambushes to Noailles ' forces from woods and heights . One of the most effective leaders of the miquelets was Captain Ramon de Sala i Saçala , the <unk> of Vic , who achieved two victories over the French during the winter : on late December he overran a convoy on way to Hostalric , killing 25 French soldiers and taking 25 prisoners , and on 24 February he defeated a company of French dragoons at <unk> , killing 7 of them and taking 28 prisoners and 32 horses . 
 One of the villages that refused to pay the French was Sant Esteve d 'en Bas . Despite a French party looted the place in punishment , the villagers still refused to obey . A force of 700 soldiers was dispatched on 28 December to arrest the aldermen , but they found the village abandoned and sacked it again , taking with them two priests as hostages . In March 1695 , as the locals were still rebellious , Monsieur de Saint @-@ Sylvestre , the French governor of Girona , ordered Brigadier Juigné , commander of the garrison of Castellfollit , to punish the village for the third time in command of 1 @,@ 300 chosen men from his own garrison and those of Figueres , <unk> and <unk> . These troops were taken from the German Alsace regiment , the Swiss Manuel and Schellenberg regiments , and the French Royal @-@ Artillery regiment . Philippe de <unk> , a famous French diarist , labeled them as " of the best troops of that country " . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The French force left Castellfollit 9 March on the evening , passed at some distance from Olot and spent the night at the <unk> de <unk> , a ford on the Fluvià river . At dawn , some peasants and miquelets discovered them and sent a warning to Sant Esteve d 'en Bas . Women and children sought shelter in the surrounding mountains , while the men prepared to fight off the French column . They also called for help Ramon de Sala i Saçala , who was at the nearby village of Sant Feliu de <unk> , with Captains Josep Mas de Roda and Pere Baliart i <unk> , recruiting men to raise three new companies of miquelets . In the meantime , Juigné reached la <unk> d 'en Bas – the Bas valley – , leaving a rearguard at El <unk> , and took positions on the hill of <unk> . From there , he dispatched a third of his force to burn Sant Esteve . The French troops had burned 16 buildings when Ramon de Sala ahead 8 companies of miquelets and Pere Baliart leading 8 others arrived to the village and forced them to flee to Juigné 's position . 
 At the hill of <unk> , Juigné was being already harassed by 80 armed peasants of the local <unk> – a type of militia – , when the arrival of Sala 's , Mas ' and Baliart 's miquelets convinced him to withdraw . When they tried to cross back the Fluvià , however , they found the way blocked . Juigné decided then attempting to escape to Olot across the wood of <unk> and through the bridge of Sant Roc , but the Catalans anticipated him . Sala divided his miquelets in two groups of 300 men each one , and while Josep Mas de Roda , leading the first one , pursued and attacked the French troops across the wood , he blocked the bridge of Sant Roc ahead the second group . During the running fight under the trees Juigné 's force lost 25 men and abandoned part of its ammunitions . 
 The French column , despite the harassment , managed to take control of the bridge and started to cross to the opposite bank of the Fluvià . The miquelets and armed peasants , however , fired on them from the south and killed up to 70 French soldiers . According to Charles <unk> , marquis de Quincy , a contemporary French artillery general and military historian of Louis XIV 's reign , Juigné 's corps was able to retreat to Olot in good order . On the other hand , the local 19th @-@ century Catalan historian Esteve <unk> i <unk> claimed that the French troops fled in disarray , leaving 150 prisoners to the Catalans , which they carried to Sant Esteve d 'en Bas under a heavy escort . 
 Arriving to Olot , most of Juigné 's force took positions inside the convent of El Carme , while 90 Swiss soldiers of the rear entrenched themselves inside the hospital of the village . While the Swiss troops promptly surrendered , the bulk of the French column , with Juigné himself , still held for two hours . The miquelets and peasants encircled the building and managed to open a gap in its walls , only to be repelled in the hand @-@ to @-@ hand fight , losing two men killed and one wounded . Sala 's men then breached the wall of a chapel and stormed the convent again , but as the French were well clustered within , the assault was as well repelled . Sala ordered to set on fire the gates of the building , but the French walled the gap using stones and bricks . The Catalans managed to enter the building by setting on fire large amounts of pitch and sulfur on the two breaches they had opened . The fire and the smoke blinded and choked the French soldiers , which retreated to the convent 's cloister . After that , Juigné , seriously wounded during the fight , requested terms and surrendered . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The French column <unk> on the promise that the officers would not be stripped , but they all remained as prisoners of war and surrendered their weapons and money to the Catalans . Juigné , with 136 other wounded soldiers and a German captain , remained in Olot to receive medical treatment , but he died shortly after . French losses amounted to 251 or 260 men killed – 32 of them officers – and 826 prisoners , as opposed to 7 men killed and 5 wounded on the miquelets side . The figures are well known , as the French intendant of Girona , René <unk> , wrote a letter to Olot 's aldermen asking for the number and rank of the prisoners to exchange them when possible . In this letter , <unk> noted that Monsieur Juigné was lucky to be dead , as the defeat would probably have cost him dearly . The 690 unscathed French prisoners were brought first to Vic and later to Barcelona , where they arrived on 15 March . Their entrance was seen by a large crowd and the Spanish Viceroy , the Marquis of <unk> . 
 In the weeks that followed the battle , the Spanish troops and local militia increased their pressure on Castellfollit 's garrison . On 5 April , the Catalan miquelets , supported by five companies of dragoons and several peasants , defeated a party of French troops from Berga and Castellfollit , killing 60 soldiers and taking 200 prisoners . Noailles , then ill of rheumatism , ordered Lieutenant @-@ general Saint @-@ Sylvestre to assemble a supply convoy to relieve Castellfollit , which he put under an escort of 2 @,@ 000 infantry and 600 cavalry . A corps of miquelets , Spanish dragoons and peasants led by <unk> de <unk> attacked and defeated the convoy on 15 April . After that , the French garrisons of Castellfollit and Hostalric fell under an effective blockade . On 19 May , Saint @-@ Sylvestre assembled an army of 8 @,@ 000 infantry and 3 @,@ 000 cavalry and relieved Hostalric , but Castellfollit remained blockaded . Noailles and his second in command were not in good terms : if Saint @-@ Sylvestre advocated for demolishing and abandoning both Hostalric and Castellfollit , Noailles was not willing to give ground . 
 On late June , Louis XIV replaced Noailles for Louis Joseph , Duke of Vendôme . Noailles charged Saint @-@ Sylvestre of incompetence and , as did with other high officers , of looting the country on his own benefit , which had put on arms the peasantry against the French army . On 8 July Vendôme led his troops before Castellfollit . Having expelled its population and eaten horses and mules , the French garrison , diminished by desertions , was in an unsustainable position , and Vendôme came to evacuate and demolish the fortress . After that , the French army took the way to Hostalric and demolished its defenses , returning to Girona on 28 July . 
 = Saturn V Dynamic Test Vehicle = 
 Saturn V Dynamic Test Vehicle , designated SA @-@ 500D , is a prototype Saturn V rocket used by NASA to test the performance of the rocket when vibrated to simulate the shaking which subsequent rockets would experience during launch . It was the first full @-@ scale Saturn V completed by the Marshall Space Flight Center ( MSFC ) . Though SA @-@ 500D never flew , it was instrumental in the development of the Saturn V rocket which propelled the first men to the Moon as part of the Apollo program . Built under the direction of Dr. Wernher von Braun , it served as the test vehicle for all of the Saturn support facilities at MSFC . 
 SA @-@ 500D is the only Saturn V on display that was used for its intended purpose , and the only one to have been assembled prior to museum display . It is on permanent display at the U.S. Space & Rocket Center , Huntsville , Alabama . 
 = = Pre @-@ flight configurations = = 
 Before a Saturn V could launch , engineers needed to verify that their design had accounted for everything the rocket would encounter on its journey , from assembly to the launchpad and from Earth to the Moon . To validate the Saturn V design and procedures , they created five pre @-@ flight configurations for testing . These configurations were subjected to tests simulating all aspects of flight preparations and flight itself , and all the tests needed to demonstrate satisfactory results before MSFC would certify the Saturn V to fly . 
 SA @-@ 500D was one of the five pre @-@ flight configurations of the Saturn V. This configuration showed the Saturn V 's " bending and vibration characteristics " and verified " the adequacy of guidance and control systems ' design . " The rocket 's 7 @,@ 610 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 33 @.@ 9 MN ) of thrust would generate vigorous shaking and it was important to see that the rocket would not shake apart or vibrate itself off @-@ course . 
 Other pre @-@ flight configurations were : 
 Battleship Test model , used for initial engine firing and design improvements 
 Structural Test model , to certify the structure for loads during launch at the anticipated temperatures , and to assess the stiffness of each stage 
 SA @-@ 500F , the facilities checkout model , verify launch facilities , train launch crews , and develop test and checkout procedures . 
 SA @-@ 500T , All Systems Test model , for static firing of engines in the flight configuration 
 The vehicle designated SA @-@ 500D did not include an Apollo spacecraft , but boilerplate parts were used during testing to verify the entire system . 
 = = Development of the test article = = 
 The Saturn V consisted of three stages and an Instrument Unit ( IU ) . The first stage , S @-@ IC , delivered 7 @,@ 610 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 33 @.@ 9 MN ) thrust and delivered the other stages to 200 @,@ 000 feet ( 61 km ) . Afterwards , it was jettisoned to fall into the Atlantic Ocean and the second stage continued acceleration . The second stage , S @-@ II , was responsible for lifting the remaining parts nearly to Earth orbit . The third stage , S @-@ IVB provided the final push to orbit and the trans @-@ lunar injection burn to set the Apollo spacecraft on a course to the Moon . The IU was the guidance and control computer . SA @-@ 500D was the assembly of these components for dynamic testing . 
 The Saturn V Dynamic Test Stand with " electrodynamic shakers " provided a table capable not only of holding the Saturn V fully assembled and fueled , but also able to simulate the vibrations that would be generated by rocket engines . 
 The components used for testing were developed from 1964 – 66 , and the tests conducted in 1966 @-@ 67 . Because the Saturn V shared some components with the Saturn IB , some of the components for SA @-@ 500D were initially used for dynamic testing with the Saturn IB stack . 
 In naming the individual stages , MSFC used the stage designation with a suffix indicating its purpose . For example , S @-@ IC @-@ D was the first stage , S @-@ IC , for dynamic testing , and S @-@ IC @-@ 1 was the first flight model of the first stage . Suffixes used were S , for structural , F for facilities , T for all @-@ systems test , and D for dynamic testing . 
 Following is a history of each component of the dynamic test article in order of appearance . 
 = = = Apollo boilerplate = = = 
 Development of the test article started from the top . A boilerplate Apollo spacecraft , BP @-@ 27 together with LTA @-@ 2 , was used for all configurations of dynamic testing . The boilerplate took the place of actual flight hardware . <unk> size , shape , mass and center of gravity were the same , but it was not necessary for the entire Apollo spacecraft to be complete to commence dynamic testing . The boilerplate was outfitted with instrumentation to record data for engineering study and evaluation . 
 BP @-@ 27 consisted of hardware specifically built for that configuration and some hardware reassigned from other designations . The Command Module and Launch Escape System were unique to BP @-@ 27 . The Service Module SM @-@ 010 ( formerly SM @-@ 006 ) and the Spacecraft Lunar Module <unk> SLA # 1 were also assigned to BP @-@ 27 . 
 BP @-@ 27 was accepted at the Marshall Space Flight Center ( MSFC ) in late September , 1964 . 
 Shortly thereafter , MSFC took delivery of the boilerplate Lunar Module , called a Lunar Test Article and designated LTA @-@ 2 . LTA @-@ 2 is the only part of SA @-@ 500D to fly in space . It was refurbished , designated LTA @-@ 2R , and flew on Apollo 6 . 
 BP @-@ 27 was used for Saturn IB dynamic testing , shipped to Kennedy Space Center to be a component of SA @-@ 500F , and shipped back to MSFC for full @-@ stack testing with SA @-@ 500D . 
 = = = Third stage = = = 
 The third stage , S @-@ IVB @-@ D arrived at MSFC before any other Saturn V stages because it was destined for dynamic testing in the Saturn IB first . It was assembled by Douglas near Los Angeles . With ceremony and dignitaries for the first Douglas @-@ built S @-@ IVB stage , it set out by barge December 8 , 1964 , and made its way to New Orleans via the Panama Canal , the Mississippi , Ohio , and Tennessee Rivers to MSFC , where it arrived on January 4 , 1965 . The same day , MSFC took delivery of the first stage of the Saturn IB for dynamic and facilities checkout testing , S @-@ IB @-@ D / F. The parts were assembled together with the instrument unit designated S @-@ IU @-@ 200D / 500D ( see below ) and BP @-@ 27 for dynamic testing in the Saturn IB configuration from February to September 1965 before it was allocated to the Saturn V configuration . 
 = = = Instrument Unit = = = 
 The Saturn V Instrument Unit served as the electronics hub for the first three stages of the rocket , controlling engine firing , guidance , stage separation , and climate for the three stages below . It consisted of two main parts , a rigid ring for structure , and within that , electronics . 
 Instrument units had a slightly different numbering scheme than the other parts . S @-@ IU @-@ 200D / 500D was for use with the SA @-@ 200D dynamic test article - a Saturn IB , and also for use with SA @-@ 500D , the Saturn V. 
 IBM won the contract to build electronics for the IU , and so , by 1964 , constructed a $ 14 million four @-@ building complex including a manufacturing facility with clean room in Huntsville . 
 The IU 's structural ring had two responsibilities : provide a mounting location for IBM 's electronics and hold everything on top of it . It needed to be structurally sound enough to hold the weight of the Lunar Module , Service Module , Command Module and the three astronauts during the acceleration provided by three mighty stages of rocket beneath . The rings were all fabricated at MSFC . 
 The IU for SA @-@ 500D was not the first built . MSFC built S @-@ IU @-@ <unk> / <unk> for vibration testing from September to November 1964 . Wyle Labs tested it as part of the Saturn I @-@ B program . 
 S @-@ IU @-@ 200D / 500D was the second IU to be built , with the ring completed in January 1965 and electronic components from IBM installed by February 1 . It was the last piece necessary for dynamic testing in the Saturn IB program . It was stacked together with S @-@ IVB @-@ D , S @-@ IB @-@ D , and BP @-@ 27 for Saturn IB testing through much of 1965 . On October 8 , 1965 , it began dynamic testing for the Saturn V program as part of SA @-@ 500D . 
 = = = First stage = = = 
 MSFC built the first three S @-@ IC test first stages for the Saturn V : S @-@ IC @-@ T , the S @-@ IC @-@ S , and the S @-@ IC @-@ F. They also built the first two flight stages , S @-@ IC @-@ 1 and S @-@ IC @-@ 2 . S @-@ IC @-@ D was the first to be built by Boeing at the Michoud Assembly Facility , New Orleans using the tooling that that had been developed in Huntsville . 
 S @-@ IC @-@ D , was under construction on September 9 , 1965 when Hurricane Betsy struck the Michoud Assembly Facility . The building housing the stage sustained severe damage , but the stage itself was repaired promptly . 
 S @-@ IC @-@ D set out on the maiden voyage of NASA barge Poseidon to Marshall Space Flight Center on October 6 , 1965 and arrived at MSFC October 13 . The first stage was lifted into place in the Dynamic Test Stand January 13 , 1966 in the picture top right . Said one observer , " Fog and clouds hovered around the top of the 360 foot ( 110 m ) tall test stand most of the day while the 300 @,@ 000 pounds ( 140 @,@ 000 kg ) stage was being lifted from its transporter into place inside the stand , said to be the tallest building in Alabama . " 
 = = = Second stage = = = 
 The second stage of SA @-@ 500D had a complex history . The second stage , S @-@ II @-@ D had been on order , but that part was cancelled February 19 , 1965 . The plan was to use another test article for dynamic testing as well as its other purpose . Two such test articles were destroyed during testing after having been designated for the dynamic test phase . The actual article used in SA @-@ 500D was named in the third re @-@ allocation , when S @-@ II @-@ F , the facilities checkout article , was designated S @-@ II @-@ F / D. 
 S @-@ II @-@ S , which North American Aviation 's Space and Information Systems Division ( S & ID ) at Seal Beach had completed by January 31 , was re @-@ designated as S @-@ II @-@ S / D to be used for dynamic testing . S @-@ II @-@ S / D would not survive its final structural test on September 29 , 1965 , but the test was exercising considerable margin above the structural integrity required for flight . 
 In January 1966 , the all @-@ systems test S @-@ II @-@ T was re @-@ designated S @-@ II @-@ T / D , so that it might be used for dynamic testing as well as engine firing . S @-@ II @-@ T / D completed integrated checkout of ground support facilities at MTF on February 3 , 1966 . S @-@ II @-@ T / D 's engines were fired five times at MTF from April to May , including a full @-@ duration test . On May 28 , 1966 , S @-@ II @-@ T / D was undergoing a pressure test to find a hydrogen leak , but the hydrogen pressure sensors and switches had been disconnected unbeknownst to the second @-@ shift crew when they tried to pressurize the tank . Five technicians sustained minor injuries . MSFC convened an investigation that night , and the team completed the report in two days . 
 After the S @-@ II @-@ T / D destruction , a third article was assigned to dynamic test duties . Facilities checkout article S @-@ II @-@ F became the dynamic test article designated S @-@ II @-@ F / D. S @-@ II @-@ F was shipped from S & ID , Seal Beach , California on February 20 , 1966 , to Kennedy Space Center where it arrived March 4 . It filled in the final part of SA @-@ 500F to check out facilities for processing the Saturn V , replacing a dumbbell @-@ shaped temporary stage of the same length and weight as an S @-@ II stage . SA @-@ 500F was assembled in the Vehicle Assembly Building where it was mated to S @-@ IC @-@ F on March 28 and S @-@ IVB @-@ F the next day . 
 SA @-@ 500F was completed in the VAB , tested for stability against swaying in the wind , and rolled out to the launch pad May 25 , 1966 , on Mobile Launcher 1 . 
 Hurricane Alma interrupted exercises as SA @-@ 500F was rolled back to the VAB on June 8 , though the ground crew supposed the rollback was more of an exercise than necessity because winds remained below critical for the entire storm . It was returned to pad 39 @-@ A two days later and finally returned to the VAB October 14 , 1966 for disassembly . 
 After facilities checkout at KSC was completed , the remaining components of SA @-@ 500F were then transferred to MSFC for inclusion in SA @-@ 500D : the Apollo boilerplate BP @-@ 27 and S @-@ II @-@ F / D. The second stage was modified for dynamic testing , and shipped by <unk> from KSC on October 29 to arrive at MSFC November 10 , 1966 . 
 = = Dynamic testing = = 
 Engineers needed a detailed knowledge of the space vehicle 's dynamic flight characteristics to design structural , guidance , and flight control systems . They initially used analytical data that had not been substantiated by test for design criteria . The Dynamic Test Vehicle test project determined the dynamic characteristics of the space vehicle and verified earlier analyses . 
 The objectives of the dynamic tests were to : 
 Determine the space vehicle structural dynamic characteristics under conditions simulating flight configuration and environment insofar as practicable . 
 Determine the optimum location for flight sensors and obtain experimental transfer functions for the control system . 
 Determine the physical mating capability of stages and modules . 
 Compare dynamic test results with subsequent flight test results for continuous development of dynamic test techniques and facilities to assure the highest possible degree of accuracy in the development of future vehicle structures prior to flight . 
 Determine the space vehicle dynamic characteristics under conditions simulating transport from the Vehicle Assembly Building to the launch pad insofar as practicable . 
 Dynamic tests came in three configurations , one for each phase of Saturn V @-@ powered flight . Configuration I focused on testing the entire stack , as if the vehicle had just launched . Configuration II exercised the stack as if the first stage had jettisoned and the second stage were firing , and configuration III tested just the third stage and Apollo spacecraft . Tests began with Configuration III in the Saturn IB Dynamic Test Facility , while the Saturn V Dynamic Test Stand , first , and second stages were still under construction . Configuration I testing followed in the Saturn V Dynamic Test Stand , then Configuration II in the same place . 
 Configuration III testing took place in late 1965 . 
 Configuration I dynamic tests required the first stage of the Saturn V , which was loaded into the test stand January 13 , 1966 . Testing would have to wait for the last piece , the second stage , to arrive . 
 With all the components at MSFC as of November 10 , 1966 , the second stage was stacked atop the first inside the Dynamic Test Stand on November 23 . The third stage was added to the stack November 30 , and the Instrument Unit and boilerplate Apollo were installed in December . The rocket was stacked and ready for " Configuration One " testing . 
 Configuration One Testing ran from January through March . Testing produced " several minor irregularities indicating the need for possible engineering changes " which were addressed during March , 1967 . 
 Configuration Two testing followed , in which the first stage was removed from the stack to simulate conditions after the first stage had jettisoned . 
 Dynamic testing examined " the vehicle 's response to lateral , longitudinal , and torsional excitation , simulating those that would be experienced in flight . The vehicle was " mounted on a hydrodynamic support system made up of four hydraulic / pneumatic pedestals to permit a simulated unrestrained reaction . " Engineers tested vibrations in one plane at a time with different amounts of ballast simulating " fuel load at critical time points in the flight trajectory . " 
 NASA historian Mike Wright summarizes the testing : 
 On August 3 , 1967 , MSFC announced the successful completion of the dynamic test program , thereby declaring dynamics and structures of the Saturn V ready for its first launch later in the year . The dynamic testing resulted in " several slight modifications " to the final flight vehicle . 
 The first Saturn V launch came three months later , with Apollo 4 . The dynamic test article LTA @-@ 2 was refurbished and flown on the next Saturn V launch , Apollo 6 . 
 After dynamic testing , the second stage returned to KSC for a time for launchpad B checkout . 
 = = Public display = = 
 After all tests were complete , the SA @-@ 500D was reassembled in Huntsville , this time for public exhibition at the Alabama Space Science Center , on land carved out of the north edge of Marshall Space Flight Center . Transport of the rocket , along with the Saturn I which would be erected vertically , to the museum , took place June 28 , 1969 . The rocket would be displayed lying down on the southern edge of a rocket park with its predecessor rockets , near a Saturn 1 standing erect and a moonscape complete with model Lunar Module and a flag . SA @-@ 500D was installed in 1969 , and the ( renamed ) Alabama Space and Rocket Center opened in 1970 showcasing articles that could otherwise only be seen by NASA and Army workers at Redstone Arsenal . The first stage sat on a low @-@ boy trailer and the others in cradles . The instrument unit was put on display inside the museum , and connector rings were given roofs and converted to educational rides for the museum . 
 SA @-@ 500D was added to the List of Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in 1980 and declared a National Historic Landmark by the National Park Service in 1987 . 
 In 1989 , the museum assumed its current name , U.S. Space & Rocket Center . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 After decades of the vehicle resting unprotected outdoors , the U.S. Space & Rocket Center commissioned the restoration of the vehicle in 2005 . Analysis by Conservation Solutions , Incorporated determined significant damage from both weather and pest infestations . Various materials comprising the vehicle , including metal alloys and non @-@ metal materials such as polyurethane foam and fiberglass , exhibited significant deterioration . After conducting the analysis , full restoration of the Saturn V vehicle began in June 2005 . 
 Restoration culminated in July 2007 when the Saturn V was moved into a building designed as protection for the artifact and to provide additional museum facilities . The move took place from July 10 to approximately the 17th , starting with the first stage . The Davidson Center for Space Exploration opened in January 2008 . 
 On May 3 , 2012 , an unknown person shot three .308 caliber bullets from Interstate 565 at the Davidson Center , breaking three windows . Two bullets struck SA @-@ 500D 's third stage marring paint and leaving dents . No people were harmed . The damage was repaired within two months . 
 = = = Components on display = = = 
 This display consists of S @-@ IC @-@ D , S @-@ II @-@ F / D , and S @-@ IVB @-@ D , S @-@ IU @-@ 200D / 500D , CSM @-@ 010 , an SLA , and BP @-@ 23A . 
 BP @-@ 23 launched for A @-@ 002 to test the Launch Escape System and recovery parachutes on December 8 , 1964 . It was refurbished , designated BP @-@ 23A , and exercised the Launch Escape System again in Launch Pad Abort Test 2 , June 29 , 1965 . 
 BP @-@ 27 , the dynamic test boilerplate article , is on display at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center atop the vertical Saturn I. 
 Other Apollo and Saturn artifacts on display include the Apollo 16 Command Module , the Apollo 12 Mobile Quarantine Facility , a Lunar Lander with a test article landing stage ( MSFC <unk> ) and a replica ascent stage , and another Instrument Unit . 
 = Eastbourne = 
 Eastbourne ( pronunciation ) is a large town , seaside resort , and borough in the non @-@ metropolitan county of East Sussex on the south coast of England , 19 miles ( 31 km ) east of Brighton . Eastbourne is immediately to the east of Beachy Head , the highest chalk sea cliff in Great Britain . With a seafront consisting largely of Victorian hotels , a pier , and a Napoleonic era fort and military museum , Eastbourne was developed by the Duke of Devonshire from 1859 from four separate hamlets . It has a growing population , a broad economic base , and is home to companies in a wide range of industries . 
 Though Eastbourne is a relatively new town , there is evidence of human occupation in the area from the Stone Age . The town grew as a fashionable tourist resort largely thanks to prominent landowner , William Cavendish , later to become the Duke of Devonshire . Cavendish appointed architect Henry Currey to design a street plan for the town , but not before sending him to Europe to draw inspiration . The resulting mix of architecture is typically Victorian and remains a key feature of Eastbourne . 
 As a seaside resort , Eastbourne derives a large and increasing income from tourism , with revenue from traditional seaside attractions augmented by conferences , public events and cultural sightseeing . The other main industries in Eastbourne include trade and retail , healthcare , education , construction , manufacturing , professional scientific and the technical sector . 
 Eastbourne 's population is growing ; between 2001 and 2011 it increased from 89 @,@ 800 to 99 @,@ 412 . The 2011 census shows that the average age of residents has decreased as the town has attracted students , families and those commuting to London and Brighton . 
 = = History = = 
 Flint <unk> and Stone Age artefacts have been found in the surrounding countryside , and there are Roman remains buried beneath the town , such as a Roman bath and section of pavement between the present pier and the redoubt fortress , and a Roman villa near the entrance to the pier and the present Queens Hotel . An Anglo @-@ Saxon charter , circa 963 AD , describes a landing stage and stream at Bourne . 
 In 2014 local metal @-@ detectorist Darrin Simpson found a coin minted during the reign of Æthelberht II of East Anglia ( died 794 ) , in a field near the town . It is believed that the coin may have led to Æthelberht 's beheading by Offa of Mercia , as it had been struck as a sign of independence . Describing the coin , Christopher Webb , head of coins at auctioneers Dix Noonan Webb , said , " This new discovery is an important and unexpected addition to the numismatic history of 8th Century England . " It sold at auction on 11 June for £ 78 @,@ 000 ( estimate £ 15 @,@ 000 to £ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 Following the Norman Conquest , the Hundred of what is now Eastbourne , was held by Robert , Count of Mortain , William the Conqueror 's half brother . The Domesday Book lists 28 ploughlands , a church , a watermill , fisheries and salt pans . 
 A charter for a weekly market was granted to Bartholomew de Badlesmere in 1315 – 16 ; this increased his status as Lord of the Manor and improved local industry . During the Middle Ages the town was visited by King Henry I and in 1324 by Edward II . Evidence of Eastbourne 's medieval past can seen in the twelfth century Church of St Mary , and the manor house called Bourne Place . In the mid @-@ sixteenth century the house was home to the Burton family , who acquired much of the land on which the present town stands . This manor house is owned by the Duke of Devonshire and was extensively remodelled in the early Georgian era when it was renamed Compton Place . It is one of the two Grade I listed buildings in the town . 
 Eastbourne 's earliest claim as a seaside resort came about following a summer holiday visit by four of King George III 's children in 1780 ( Princes Edward and Octavius , and Princesses Elizabeth and Sophia ) . In 1793 , following a survey of coastal defences in the southeast , approval was given for the positioning of infantry and artillery to defend the bay between Beachy Head and Hastings from attack by the French . Fourteen Martello Towers were constructed along the western shore of Pevensey Bay , continuing as far as Tower 73 , the Wish Tower at Eastbourne . Several of these towers survive : the Wish Tower is an important feature of the town 's seafront and was the subject of a painting by James Sant RA , and part of Tower 68 forms the basement of a house on St. Antony 's Hill . Between 1805 and 1807 , the construction took place of a fortress known as the Eastbourne Redoubt , which was built as a barracks and storage depot , and armed with 10 cannons . 
 Eastbourne remained an area of small rural settlements until the 19th century . Four villages or hamlets occupied the site of the modern town : Bourne ( or , to distinguish it from others of the same name , East Bourne ) , is now known as Old Town , and this surrounded the bourne ( stream ) which rises in the present Motcombe Park ; Meads , where the Downs meet the coast ; South Bourne ( near the town hall ) ; and the fishing settlement known simply as Sea Houses , which was situated to the east of the present pier . By the mid @-@ 19th century most of the area had fallen into the hands of two landowners : John Davies Gilbert ( the Davies @-@ Gilbert family still own much of the land in Eastbourne and East Dean ) and William Cavendish , Earl of Burlington . The Gilbert family 's holdings date to the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries when barrister Nicholas Gilbert married an <unk> and Gildredge heiress . ( The <unk> owned much of Eastbourne by 1554 . The Gilberts eventually made the Gildredge Manor House their own . Today the Gildredge name lives on in the eponymous park . ) In 1752 , a dissertation by Doctor Richard Russell extolled the medicinal benefits of the seaside . His views were of considerable benefit to the south coast and , in due course , Eastbourne became known as " the Empress of Watering Places " . 
 An early plan , for a town named Burlington , was abandoned , but on 14 May 1849 the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway arrived to scenes of great jubilation . With the arrival of the railway , the town 's growth accelerated . Cavendish , now the 7th Duke of Devonshire , hired Henry Currey in 1859 to lay out a plan for what was essentially an entire new town – a resort built " for gentlemen by gentlemen " . The town grew rapidly from a population of less than 4 @,@ 000 in 1851 to nearly 35 @,@ 000 by 1891 . In 1883 , it was incorporated as a municipal borough ; a purpose @-@ built town hall was opened in 1886 . This period of growth and elegant development continued for several decades . A royal visit by George V and Queen Mary in March 1935 is commemorated by a plaque on chalet number 2 at Holywell . 
 The Second World War saw a change in fortunes . Initially , children were evacuated to Eastbourne on the assumption that they would be safe from German bombs , but soon they had to be evacuated again because after the fall of France in June 1940 it was anticipated that the town would lie in an invasion zone . Part of Operation Sea Lion , the German invasion plan , envisaged landings at Eastbourne . Many people sought safety away from the coast and shut up their houses . Restrictions on visitors forced the closure of most hotels , and private boarding schools moved away . Many of these empty buildings were later taken over by the services . The Royal Navy set up an underwater weapons school , and the Royal Air Force operated radar stations at Beachy Head and on the marshes near Pevensey . Thousands of Canadian soldiers were billeted in and around Eastbourne from July 1941 to the run @-@ up to D @-@ Day . The town suffered badly during the war , with many Victorian and Edwardian buildings damaged or destroyed by air raids . Indeed , by the end of the conflict it was designated by the Home Office to have been ‘ the most raided town in the South East region ’ . The situation was especially bad between May 1942 and June 1943 with hit – and – run raids from fighter – bombers based in northern France . 
 In the summer of 1956 the town came to national and worldwide attention , when Dr John Bodkin Adams , a general practitioner serving the town 's wealthier patients , was arrested for the murder of an elderly widow . Rumours had been circulating since 1935 regarding the frequency of his being named in patients ' wills ( 132 times between 1946 and 1956 ) and the gifts he was given ( including two Rolls Royces ) . Figures of up to 400 murders were reported in British and foreign newspapers , but after a controversial trial at the Old Bailey which gripped the nation for 17 days in March 1957 , Adams was found not guilty . He was struck off for 4 years but resumed his practice in Eastbourne in 1961 . According to Scotland Yard 's archives , he is thought to have killed up to 163 patients in the Eastbourne area . 
 After the war , development continued , including the growth of Old Town up the hillside ( Green Street Farm Estate ) and the housing estates of Hampden Park , Willingdon Trees and Langney . During the latter half of the 20th century , there were controversies over the demolition of <unk> , a 15th @-@ century manor house on what is now the <unk> housing estate , and the granting of planning permission for a 19 @-@ storey block at the western end of the seafront . The latter project ( South Cliff Tower ) was realised in 1965 despite a storm of protest led by the newly formed Eastbourne and District Preservation Committee , which later became Eastbourne Civic Society , and was renamed The Eastbourne Society in 1999 . Local conservationists also failed to prevent the construction of the glass @-@ plated <unk> conference and holiday centre , but were successful in purchasing Polegate Windmill , thus saving it from demolition and redevelopment . Most of the expansion took place on the northern and eastern margins of the town , gradually swallowing surrounding villages . However , the richer western part was constrained by the Downs and has remained largely unchanged . In 1981 , a large section of the town centre was replaced by the indoor shops of the Arndale Centre . 
 In the 1990s , both growth and controversy accelerated rapidly as a new plan was launched to develop the area known as the Crumbles , a shingle bank on the coast to the east of the town centre . This area , now known as Sovereign Harbour , containing a marina , shops , and several thousand houses , along with luxury flats and apartments , was formerly home to many rare plants . Continued growth in other parts of the town , and the taming of the central marshland into farmland and nature reserves , has turned Eastbourne into the centre of a conurbation , with the appearance from above of a hollow ring . Currently under review is the demolition of some of the town centre , to extend the existing Arndale shopping centre , and the adaptation of several existing roads to form an inner ring road . In 2009 the new Towner Arts centre was opened abutting the listed Congress Theatre built in 1963 . 
 = = Eastbourne Local History Society = = 
 The Eastbourne Local History Society was founded in 1970 . It is a charitable , not @-@ for @-@ profit organisation in the United Kingdom whose objective is the pursuit and encouragement of an active interest in the study of the history of Eastbourne and its immediate environs and the dissemination of the outcome of such studies . As the major landowner , the Cavendish family has had strong connections with Eastbourne since the 18th century . The current President of the Society is William Cavendish , Earl of Burlington . 
 Containing over 1500 articles about the history of Eastbourne , the Society 's indexed journal , The Eastbourne Local Historian , is the major historical resource for the town and has been published quarterly since its inception in 1970 . Over the years , the Society has published various books about the history of Eastbourne , seven of which are currently in print . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The South Downs dominate Eastbourne and can be seen from most of the town . These were originally chalk deposits laid down under the sea during the Late Cretaceous , and were later lifted by the same tectonic plate movements that formed the European Alps , during the middle Tertiary period . The chalk can be clearly seen along the eroded coastline to the west of the town , in the area known as Beachy Head and the Seven Sisters , where continuous erosion keeps the cliff edge vertical and white . The chalk contains many fossils such as ammonites and nautilus . The town area is built on geologically recent alluvial drift , the result of the silting up of a bay . This changes to Weald clay around the Langney estate . 
 A part of the South Downs , Willingdon Down is a designated Site of Special Scientific Interest . This is of archaeological interest due to a Neolithic camp and burial grounds . The area is also a nationally uncommon tract of chalk grassland rich in species . Another SSSI which partially falls with the Eastbourne district is Seaford to Beachy Head . This site , of biological and geological interest , covers the coastline between Eastbourne and Seaford , plus the Seven Sisters country park and the <unk> valley . Several nature trails lead across the Downs to areas such as the nearby villages of East Dean and <unk> Gap , and landmarks like the Seven Sisters , Belle Tout lighthouse and Beachy Head . 
 = = = Districts = = = 
 Eastbourne 's greater area comprises the town of Polegate , and the civil parishes of Willingdon and <unk> , Stone Cross , Pevensey , Westham , and Pevensey Bay village . All are part of the Wealden District . Within Eastbourne 's limits are : 
 Langney : Langney Rise , <unk> , <unk> , Langney Village , The Marina , Langney Point 
 Hampden Park : Hampden Park Village , Willingdon Trees , <unk> Farm , <unk> 
 Inner areas : <unk> , <unk> , Seaside , <unk> , <unk> , Downside 
 Town centre : Town centre , Little Chelsea , Meads , Holywell , Old Town , Upperton 
 Sovereign Harbour : North Harbour , South Harbour 
 There was a community known as Norway , Eastbourne in the triangle now bounded by <unk> Road , Seaside and <unk> Drove . The name being a corruption of North Way , as this was the route to the North . The area is now a housing estate and the only evidence there was a Norway are a Norway Road and the local church whose sign reads " St Andrew 's Church , Norway " . 
 The former fishing hamlet of Holywell ( local pronunciation ‘ holly well ’ ) was situated by the cliff on a ledge some 400 yards to the southwest of the public garden known as the Holywell Retreat . It was approached from what is now Holywell Road via the lane between the present Helen Gardens and St Bede ’ s School which leads to the chalk pinnacle formerly known locally as ‘ Gibraltar ’ or ' The Sugar Loaf ' . The ground around the pinnacle was the site of lime kilns also worked by the fishermen . The fishing hamlet at Holywell was taken over by the local water board in 1896 to exploit the springs in the cliffs . The water board 's successors still own the site , and there is a pumping station but little evidence of the hamlet itself , as by now even most of the foundations of the cottages have gone over the cliff . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 As with the rest of the British Isles and South Coast , Eastbourne experiences a maritime climate with cool summers and mild winters . The local climate is notable for its high sunshine levels , at least relative to much of the rest of England - Eastbourne holds the record for the highest recorded amount of sunshine in a month , 383 @.@ 9 hours in July 1911 . Temperature extremes recorded at Eastbourne since 1960 range from 31 @.@ 6 ° C ( 88 @.@ 9 ° F ) during July 1976 , down to − 9 @.@ 7 ° C ( 14 @.@ 5 ° F ) In January 1987 . Eastbourne 's coastal location also means it tends to be milder than most areas , particularly during night . A whole six months of the year have never recorded an air frost , and in July the temperature has never fallen below 8 @.@ 3 ° C ( 46 @.@ 9 ° F ) . All temperature figures relate to the period 1960 onwards . The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is " Cfb " ( Marine West Coast Climate / Oceanic climate ) . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Eastbourne Borough Council is responsible for local governance , with representation provided by twenty seven councillors from nine wards , with elections to the council being held every four years . The 2015 election resulted in a council made up of 18 Liberal Democrat and 9 Conservative councillors . The council operates out of a Victorian town hall designed by W. Tadman Foulkes , and built between 1884 and 1886 under supervision of Henry Currey , the Duke of Devonshire 's architect . East Sussex County Council has responsibility for education , libraries , social services , civil registration , trading standards and transport . Out of the 49 seats , nine are filled by the Eastbourne wards . The 2009 East Sussex County Council election resulted in 29 Conservatives , 13 Liberal Democrats , 4 Labour and 3 Independent , of which Eastbourne provided 6 Liberal Democrats and 3 Conservatives . 
 The Parliament Constituency of Eastbourne covers a greater area than the nine local wards , extending to the north and the east . Eastbourne is a marginal seat contested between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats . Until 2015 , the Member of Parliament for Eastbourne was the Liberal Democrat Stephen Lloyd , who took the seat from the sitting Conservative MP Nigel Waterson with a 3 @.@ 8 % swing on a turnout of 67 % in the 2010 General Election . At the 2015 general election , Lloyd lost his seat to the Conservative Caroline Ansell , who gained the constituency with a majority of 733 votes . At European level , Eastbourne is represented by the South @-@ East region , which holds ten seats in the European Parliament . The 2009 election returned 4 Conservatives , 2 Liberal Democrats , 2 UK Independence , 1 Labour and 1 Green . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Whilst the overall population of Eastbourne is growing ( between 2001 and 2008 the population grew from 89 @,@ 800 to 94 @,@ 800 ) , the age profile is dropping as younger people move into the town . Ethnically , the town is 93 @.@ 7 % white , with small minority groups including Chinese , and white minority groups from other countries in Europe . The 2001 census indicated that the largest non @-@ white ethnic group were Chinese ; studies conducted by the local council in 2008 indicated that there has been a growth in people arriving from Eastern Europe , particularly Poland . Unemployment in Eastbourne is below the national average 4 @.@ 1 % compared to 4 @.@ 4 % for England and Wales . The percentage of economically active people increased between 2001 and 2011 . There has also been an upward trend in the number of people with qualifications with an increase of 5 @.@ 19 % 
 = = Economy = = 
 With a population of 100 @,@ 000 people , Eastbourne is the second fastest @-@ growing seaside town in the UK , and is the economic driver of one of the fastest @-@ growing counties in the country . Eastbourne has a broad economic base and is home to companies in a wide range of industries . The town is home to the largest book distributor in the UK , as well as to a number of specialist advanced manufacturing and engineering companies , many of which are based on industrial estates in and around the town . It is also the base for a growing number of successful e @-@ commerce companies who distribute goods across the UK and throughout Europe . There is a high availability of affordable commercial property in Eastbourne and nearby Polegate , where a planned 700 new homes promise continued economic growth . 
 Development around Sovereign Harbour Marina , Britain 's largest composite marina , has created more than 3000 new luxury homes over the past 10 years and future plans include the construction of an innovation mall for small businesses and start @-@ ups . The Eastbourne business community is well connected and mutually supportive . The Chamber of Commerce is strong with around 600 members and holds many networking events to facilitate local <unk> links . There are many business events for local entrepreneurs to promote their goods and services and a healthy ' buy local ' ethic . Large revenues are generated through tourism and conference tourism with reports showing a £ 365 million revenue from visitors in 2010 , 3 @.@ 1 % greater than 2009 and estimated to support 7 @,@ 160 jobs . The council 's blueprint for future development in the town centre maps out a strategy for further boosting these numbers by attracting even more residents , shoppers and visitors to the town . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 The seafront at Eastbourne consists almost entirely of Victorian hotels . Along with its pier and bandstand , this serves to preserve the front in a somewhat timeless manner . The Duke of Devonshire , retains the rights to the seafront buildings and does not allow them to be developed into shops . A stretch of 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of shingle beach stretches from Sovereign Harbour in the east to Beachy Head in the west . In a 1998 survey 56 % of visitors said that the beach and seafront was one of Eastbourne best features , although 10 % listed the pebbled beach as a dislike . Other recreation facilities include two swimming pools , three fitness centres and other smaller sports clubs including scuba diving . 
 A children 's adventure park is sited at the eastern end of the seafront . There are various other establishments scattered around the town such as crazy golf , go – karting and Laser Quest . The pier is an obvious place to visit and is sometimes used to hold events , such as the international birdman competition held annually , although cancelled in 2005 due to lack of competitors . An annual raft competition takes place where competitors , usually local businesses , circumnavigate the pier in a raft made by themselves , while being attacked by a water @-@ cannon . A major event in the tourist calendar of Eastbourne , now the world 's biggest seafront air show , is the annually held 4 day , international air show , ' Airbourne ' . Started in 1993 , based around a long relationship with the Red Arrows display team , the event features Battle of Britain memorial flights and aircraft from the RAF , USAF and many others . 
 One of the museums in Eastbourne is How We Lived Then , a museum of shops and local history , with exhibits representing complete scenarios such as shops and houses with life sized dummies . The museum contains more than 100 @,@ 000 exhibits , covering the period from the 1800s to the Second World War . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Eastbourne has four council @-@ owned theatres ; the Grade II * listed Congress Theatre , the Grade II listed Devonshire Park Theatre , the Grade II listed Winter Garden and the Grade II listed Royal Hippodrome Theatre . The Devonshire Park Theatre is a fine example of a Victorian theatre with ornate interior decorations , and the Royal Hippodrome has the longest running summer show in Britain . Other theatre venues in the town include the volunteer @-@ run Underground Theatre , in the basement of the town 's Central Library , and The Lamb Theatre , based at the Lamb Inn in Old Town , and launched in August 2009 . In 2009 , Eastbourne gained a new cultural centre , replacing the Manor House ( which has now been sold ) as home of the Towner Art Gallery ; it is located in the cultural district next to the Congress Theatre and Devonshire Park . Eastbourne has two cinemas — the Curzon Cinema and Cineworld . The Curzon Cinema is a small , family @-@ run , independent cinema in Langney Road , in the town centre . Cineworld is a large Multiplex cinema with six screens , located in The Crumbles Retail Park , near Sovereign Harbour . 
 The London Philharmonic Orchestra makes regular appearances and has an annual season at the Congress Theatre . Eastbourne Bandstand lies between the Wish Tower and the pier . It stages the 1812 Firework Concerts , Rock N Roll nights , Big Band concerts , Promenade concerts and Tribute Nights with tributes to artists such as ABBA , Elvis Presley and Queen . There was once a second similar bandstand ( also built in 1935 ) in the " music gardens " near the redoubt fortress . The bandstand was removed to make way for the Pavilion Tearooms but the colonnades built around it are still there ( behind the tea rooms ) . Before 1935 each of these sites had a smaller " birdcage " bandstand ; the one in the music gardens having been moved from a rather precarious position opposite the Albion Hotel . The kiosk in the music gardens was originally one of the toll kiosks at the entrance to the pier . Local radio station Sovereign FM broadcasts to Eastbourne from nearby Hailsham . There are two other regional radio stations , Heart Sussex , ( previously Southern FM ) which broadcasts across Sussex from <unk> and BBC Sussex which broadcasts from Brighton . 
 Eastbourne has Cornish connections , most notably visible in the Cornish high cross in the churchyard of St Mary 's Church which was brought from an unspecified location in Cornwall . Trevithick , the inventor of the steam locomotive ( a claim disputed on the grave of one Vyvyan in the churchyard at Camborne ) , is reported to have spent some time here . A connection with India comes in the shape of the 18th @-@ century Lushington monument , also at St Mary 's , which commemorates a survivor of the Black Hole of Calcutta atrocity which led to the British conquest of Bengal . Proximity to London has led to Eastbourne being the home of actors and television personalities , including the comedian Tommy Cooper . A metal silhouette of the latter can be seen on the wall of a house opposite Motcombe Gardens . 
 The seafront and the iconic cliff at Beachy Head has been used for many scenes in feature films , and the local council has set up a film liaison unit to encourage and facilitate the shooting of film sequences in and around the town . The 2006 Academy Award @-@ nominated film Notes on a Scandal includes scenes filmed at Beachy Head , Cavendish Hotel and 117 Royal Parade . Beachy Head and the Seven Sisters were used as backdrops for scenes from the Quidditch World Cup in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire . Scenes from Half a Sixpence ( 1969 ) were filmed on the pier and near to the bandstand . The seafront area was also used for the film Angus , Thongs and Perfect <unk> directed by Gurinder Chadha . The Langham Hotel was a filming location for Made in Dagenham , which also featured the seafront and pier . A sequence of a rainy day at the seaside for the Doel family has as its backdrop the Wish Tower , the bandstand , the Cavendish Hotel and the pier in the 1987 British / American drama film 84 Charing Cross Road directed by David Jones . 
 Television too has used Eastbourne as a backdrop . The series Little Britain had the character Emily Howard strolling along the promenade . Other brief appearances were made in the television series Agatha Christie 's Marple , French and Saunders and Foyle 's War . One scene in Bang , Bang , It 's Reeves and Mortimer , was shot in and based around what is now known as " <unk> " on Seaside Road . 
 BBC South East Today and ITV Meridian are the two regional news channels . 
 = = Parks and gardens = = 
 Eastbourne has numerous parks and gardens , although there are several smaller open spaces including Upperton Gardens , the Carpet Gardens and the Western Lawns . The first public park in Eastbourne was Hampden Park , originally owned by Lord Willingdon and opened on 12 August 1902 . Facilities include : football pitches , rugby club , indoor bowls , a large lake ( formerly a Decoy pond ) , lakeside cafe , children 's recreation area , tennis courts , BMX and skate facility , disc golf course ( target ) and woodland . The largest and newest park is <unk> Park , located on the west side of Langney and opened in 2002 . There is a large fishing lake , basketball , football pitches , a BMX and skate park and children 's playground . 
 Gildredge Park is a large open park located between the town centre and Old Town ; it is very popular with families and has a children 's playground , cafe , tennis courts , disc golf course ( target ) and bowls lawns . The smaller , adjoining , Manor Gardens combines both lawns and shady areas as well as a rose garden . Until 2005 , Manor Gardens was the home of the Towner Gallery . This gallery incorporated a permanent exhibition of local art and historical items , plus temporary art exhibitions of regional and national significance . It was relocated to a new , £ 8 @.@ 6 million purpose @-@ built facility adjacent to the Congress Theatre , Devonshire Park which opened on 4 April 2009 . 
 Princes Park obtained its name during a visit by the Duke of Windsor as Prince of Wales in 1931 . Located at the eastern end of the seafront , it has a children 's playground with paddling pool , cafe , bowls and a large lake , noted for its swans . The lake is used by a nearby water @-@ sports centre , which offers kayak and windsurfing training . Princes Park lake is also home to Eastbourne Model Powerboat Club and Eastbourne Model Yacht Club . Close by are tennis and basketball courts and a football pitch . At the north of the park is Eastbourne United F.C .. Devonshire Park , home to the pre @-@ Wimbledon ladies tennis championships , is located just off the seafront in the towns cultural district . Other parks include : Helen Gardens and the Italian Gardens at the western end of the seafront , Sovereign Park between the main seafront and the marina and Motcombe Gardens in Old Town . 
 One feature that has always been heavily promoted is Eastbourne 's floral displays , most notably the Carpet Gardens along the coastal road near the pier . These displays , and the town as a whole , frequently win awards – such as the ' Coastal Resort B ' category in the 2003 Britain in Bloom competition . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Eastbourne 's Devonshire Park is the venue for the Eastbourne International , a tennis tournament held in the town since 1974 and serving as a warm @-@ up to Wimbledon . Previously a women only tournament , in 2009 the Lawn Tennis Association merged it with the men only event the Nottingham Open . 
 Eastbourne has four senior football clubs : Eastbourne Borough F.C. play in the Conference South . Eastbourne Town F.C. and Eastbourne United Association F.C. both play in the Southern Combination League Premier , while Langney Wanderers F.C. play in the Southern Combination League Division One . 
 The Eastbourne Eagles are a speedway club located at Arlington Stadium , just outside the town . Between 1997 @-@ 2014 they competed in the Elite League , the highest level of speedway in the UK . They were champions in 2000 . They now compete in the National League . Arlington stadium also sees stock @-@ car racing on Wednesday evenings in the summer months . 
 Other local sports clubs include cricket , hockey , rugby , lacrosse and golf . Among Eastbourne 's golf courses are the Royal Eastbourne , Eastbourne Downs , Willingdon and the Eastbourne Golfing Park . There is an annual extreme sports festival held at the eastern end of the seafront . Eastbourne Sovereign Sailing Club , on the seafront towards the eastern end , organises dinghy sailing for its members and visitors from Easter to Boxing Day and usually holds a National Championship Series for a popular UK class in the summer months . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Beachy Head = = = 
 Beachy Head cliff , to the west of the town , is an infamous suicide spot . Statistics are not officially published to reduce suicidal mimicry , but unofficial statistics show it to be the third most common suicide spot . 
 The lighthouse at the foot of the cliff came into operation in October 1902 . Although originally manned by two keepers , it has been remotely monitored by Trinity House via a landline since June 1983 . Prior to its construction , shipping had been warned by the Belle Tout lighthouse on the cliff top some 1 @,@ 500 metres to the west . Belle Tout lighthouse was operational from 1834 to 1902 , and closed because its light was not visible in mist and low cloud . It became a private residence , but was severely damaged in the Second World War II by Canadian artillery . In 1956 , it was rebuilt as a house and remains a dwelling to this day . In March 1999 , the structure was moved 55 feet ( 17 m ) back from the cliff edge to save it from plunging into the <unk> structure may need to be moved again to safeguard it from cliff erosion . 
 = = = Eastbourne Pier = = = 
 Eastbourne Pier was built between 1866 and 1872 at the junction of Grand and Marine Parades . The pier interrupts what would otherwise have been a ribbon development of buildings – to the west , high @-@ class hotels , with modest family hotels and boarding houses to the east . The Eastbourne Pier Company was registered in April 1865 with a capital of £ 15 @,@ 000 and on 18 April 1866 work began . It was opened by Lord Edward Cavendish on 13 June 1870 , although it was not actually completed until two years later . On New Year 's Day 1877 the landward half was swept away in a storm . It was rebuilt at a higher level , creating a drop towards the end of the pier . The pier is effectively built on stilts that rest in cups on the sea @-@ bed allowing the whole structure to move during rough weather . It is roughly 300 metres ( 1000 ft ) long . A domed 400 @-@ seater pavilion was constructed at a cost of £ 250 at the seaward end in 1888 . A 1000 @-@ seater theatre , bar , camera obscura and office suite replaced this in 1899 / 1901 . At the same time , two saloons were built midway along the pier . Access to the camera obscura was destroyed by an arson attack in 1970 , but was restored in 2003 with a new stairway built . 
 = = = = Eastbourne Pier Fire = = = = 
 On 30 July 2014 , a fire broke out in the middle building of the pier . BBC News reported that 80 firefighters attended the scene . One third of the pier was badly damaged . 
 On 19 August 2014 , a worker from Cumbria died after falling through the decking of the damaged pier . 
 The government promised £ 2m support for lost trade caused by the pier fire and in lost tourism revenue . 
 = = = Eastbourne Redoubt = = = 
 Eastbourne Redoubt on Royal Parade is one of three examples of a type of fortress built to withstand potential invasion from Napoleon 's forces in the early nineteenth century . It houses collections from The Royal Sussex Regiment , The Queen 's Royal Irish Hussars , and the Sussex Combined Services Collection ; including four Victoria Crosses and General Hans @-@ Jürgen von Arnim 's Steyr Automobile <unk> Afrika Korps Staff Car . 
 = = Education = = 
 Eastbourne ’ s reputation for health , enhanced by bracing air and sea breezes contributed to the establishment of many independent schools in the 19th century and in 1871 , the year which saw the arrival of Queenwood Ladies College , the town was just beginning a period of growth and prosperity . By 1896 , Gowland ’ s Eastbourne Directory listed 76 private schools for boys and girls . However , economic difficulties during the inter @-@ war years saw a gradual decline in the number of independent schools . 
 In 1930 , the headmistress of Clovelly @-@ <unk> , a well @-@ established boarding school for girls , referred to " heavy financial losses experienced by schools in the past few years " . In 1930 , this school was forced to merge its junior and senior departments ; in 1931 , one of its buildings was sold off , and in 1934 the school closed altogether . Finally , indicative of the changes that would later befall many of the larger buildings in the town , the school was demolished to make way for a block of flats , which was completed in 1939 . 
 The Eastbourne ( Blue Book ) Directory for 1938 lists 39 independent schools in the town . With the fall of France in June 1940 , and the risk of invasion , most left – the majority never to return . By 2007 , the number had reduced to just four : St. Andrew 's School , Eastbourne College , St. Bede ’ s Preparatory School and Moira House Girls ' School . 
 Eastbourne has 6 state secondary schools , 17 state primary schools , 1 primary special school , and 2 secondary special schools . Parts of the University of Brighton are based in the Meads area of the town . There are several language colleges and schools , with students coming mainly from Europe . 
 Sussex Downs College is a large further education college with a campus in Eastbourne . This state @-@ funded college provides a range of GCSE , GCE A Level , BTEC and vocational programmes for students aged 16 – 19 years of age , plus a full range of adult FE programmes . It gained its current structure in 2003 from a merger of Park College ( the old Eastbourne sixth form college ) , Lewes Tertiary College and Eastbourne College of Arts and Technology ( ECAT ) . 
 = = Health and emergency services = = 
 The town is served by Eastbourne District General Hospital , part of East Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust . As of 2014 , the maternity unit of the hospital has been permanently transferred to The Conquest Hospital , Hastings after years of campaigning to save the unit . An earlier hospital , St Mary 's , opened on Vicarage Road in 1877 as the infirmary to the local workhouse ; it was demolished in 1990 . Eastbourne Fire Station is in Whitley Road , and the town 's police station is in Grove Road . Eastbourne has an RNLI lifeboat station . A new boat named Diamond Jubilee was launched in 2012 by the Earl and Countess of Wessex . 
 Eastbourne Blind Society was founded in 1923 to support eight war @-@ blinded veterans . In 1963 a centre in <unk> Road was opened and today the society has almost 800 members . 
 = = Religious life = = 
 As well as the medieval parish church of St Mary in Old Town , another remarkable church building in Eastbourne is the redbrick St Saviour 's and St Peter 's . Originally consecrated under the former name in 1872 , it was designed by George Edmund Street but merged with St Peter ’ s in 1971 when the latter was made redundant and demolished . The Catholic Church of Our Lady of Ransom is a generously proportioned building with a tall Gothic interior . One of the windows commemorates the exiled Polish @-@ Lithuanian nobleman , Prince Lev Sapieha , who lived in the town , and there is much other artwork in the building . The recently formed Personal <unk> of Anglicans reconciled to the Catholic Church meets at St Agnes , another Victorian Gothic building . 
 The tall flint tower of St Michael 's at <unk> is one of Eastbourne 's landmarks . The church was consecrated in 1902 and built on the site of the mission hall where the nonsense writer Lewis Carroll ( the clergyman CL Dodgson ) is known to have preached during his holidays in the town . All Souls , in Italian style , is a finely proportioned building with an Evangelical church tradition . Holy Trinity also has a strong history of Evangelism , particularly during the early 20th century when Canon Stephen Warner was the vicar for 28 years . There is a Greek Orthodox Church converted from a 19th @-@ century Calvinistic chapel . The Strict Baptist Chapel in Grove Road is an interesting building , despite its rather grim street frontage . The United Reformed Church in Upperton Road has tall rogue Gothic windows set in red brick walls . Several other denominations have similarly interesting church buildings , including some of 20th century design , such as the Baptist Church in Eldon Road . The copyrights of many well @-@ known hymns used in the English @-@ speaking world are handled by <unk> 's <unk> Music of Eastbourne . There is a tradition of Judaism in Eastbourne , and a Jewish rest home . The Islamic community uses a small mosque that was formerly the <unk> social club . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Eastbourne is connected by road to London by the <unk> , and to Brighton and Hove and Hastings by the nearby A27 . The car is the most used form of transport in the town , with only 6 % of journeys taken by bus ; the local council transport plan aims to reduce the amount of car usage . Bus services within Eastbourne have been provided by Stagecoach Group under the name Stagecoach in Eastbourne since November 2008 , when the company acquired Eastbourne Buses , a service run by the local council , and subsequently the independent company Cavendish Motor Services . Eastbourne Buses had been formed in 1903 by the County Borough of Eastbourne , who were the first local authority in the world authorised to run motor buses . As well as local journeys within the town , Stagecoach also runs routes to Polegate , Hailsham , Tunbridge Wells , Uckfield and East Grinstead at various frequencies , while the two routes to Hastings via Bexhill are run by Stagecoach South East from Hastings . The other main operator into Eastbourne is Brighton & Hove , owned by the Go @-@ Ahead Group , which runs frequent services seven days a week from Brighton via Seaford and Newhaven . Limited numbers of additional buses are run by the <unk> Buses , and a regular National Express coach service operates daily from London 's Victoria Coach Station . 
 The main railway station is situated in the town centre and is served by Southern . The present station ( the town 's third ) , designed by F.D. Bannister , dates from 1886 . It was originally on what was termed the Eastbourne Branch from Polegate . There was a rarely used triangular junction between Polegate and the now @-@ closed Stone Cross which allowed trains to bypass the Branch ; the track has now been lifted . Also on the erstwhile Branch is Hampden Park railway station to the north of the town . Regular services along the coast have invariably served Eastbourne . All trains , because of the layout , have to pass through Hampden Park once in each direction . This has the effect of making the Hampden Park level crossing very busy . Indeed , it is thought to be the busiest in the country . Regular services are to London Victoria , Gatwick Airport , Hastings and Ashford International and a commuter service to Brighton . Trains leave from London Victoria to Eastbourne with a journey time of <unk> <unk> . A miniature tramway once ran a mile across " the Crumbles " ( then undeveloped ) from near Princes Park / <unk> Road towards Langney Point . It opened in 1954 but ceased operation in 1970 , relocating to Seaton in Devon after the owners had fallen out with the council ; it is now the Seaton Tramway . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Eastbourne can claim some notable regular visitors . Karl Marx and Frederick Engels were often in the area ; the latter 's ashes were scattered from Beachy Head at his request . Claude Debussy finished composing La mer at the Grand Hotel in 1905 . " Darwin 's Bulldog " Thomas Henry Huxley spent the last few years of his life in Eastbourne . Notable residents include Charles Webb , writer of The Graduate , who moved to Eastbourne with his wife in 2006 , where they are housed by social services . The pianist Russ Conway was a resident for many years as was Henry Allingham , briefly the world 's oldest man when he died in 2009 aged 113 . Percy Sillitoe , director of MI5 , also lived in the town in the 1950s . The novelist and children 's writer Annie <unk> died in the town in 1879 . The leading evangelist Canon Stephen Warner was the vicar of Holy Trinity between 1919 and 1947 . Novelist Angela Carter was born in Eastbourne in 1940 before relocating to South Yorkshire as a child . 
 Several bands have formed in Eastbourne , including <unk> , <unk> , The Divided , <unk> and The Mobiles . Musician Robin <unk> is a resident of Eastbourne , and has written a song named after the Town . 
 Various notable scholars have passed through the Eastbourne education system . Frederick Soddy , radiochemist and economist , was born in Eastbourne and studied at Eastbourne College . Aleister Crowley , occultist and mystic attended Eastbourne College and later edited a chess column for the Eastbourne Gazette . Polar explorer Lawrence Oates attended South Lynn School in Mill Gap Road . George Mallory , the noted mountaineer , attended <unk> Preparatory School in Chesterfield Road between 1896 and 1900 . Count László <unk> , the basis of the lead character of The English Patient , was educated by a private tutor at Berrow , and was a member of the pioneering Eastbourne Flying Club . Douglas Bader , who became a successful Second World War fighter pilot despite having lost both legs in a flying accident , attended Temple Grove Preparatory School in Compton Place Road . 
 The philosopher A. J. Ayer was a pupil at Ascham St Vincent 's School in Carlisle Road . The artist Eric <unk> grew up , was educated and taught in Eastbourne . In addition to Orwell , Connolly , Beaton , Maxwell and Longhurst listed on the St Cyprian 's School blue plaque , the writers Alaric Jacob , E. H. W. <unk> and Alan Hyman also attended that school . The biographer and historian Philip Ziegler was a pupil as was the music historian Dyneley Hussey and politician , historian and diarist Alan Clark . Other politicians were Richard Wood who had lost both legs in the war , and David Ormsby @-@ Gore later ambassador to the USA . Artists Cedric Morris and David Kindersley also attended the school as did military figures such as General Sir <unk> Whistler and Major General Henry Foot VC . Pupils with sporting connections include the amateur jockey Anthony Mildmay and Seymour de <unk> Director of Outside Broadcasts at the BBC . <unk> Narayan was a reigning Maharaja of Cooch Behar while at the school . Other former pupils include the war @-@ blinded life peer Lord Fraser and the submarine commander Rupert Lonsdale . NASA aerospace engineer Bruce Woodgate , who attended Eastbourne Grammar School , was the principal investigator and designer of the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph , which was installed on the Hubble Space Telescope in 1997 . Modern celebrities who studied in the town include Prunella Scales and Eddie Izzard . 
 In 1993 , following a suggestion to Eastbourne Borough Council by Eastbourne Civic Society ( now Eastbourne Society ) , a joint project was set up to erect blue plaques on buildings associated with famous people . The principles for selection are broadly those already established by English Heritage for such plaques in London . The first was erected in November 1994 in Milnthorpe Road at the former home of Sir Ernest Shackleton , the Antarctic explorer . 
 = = In Popular Culture = = 
 In Season 4 , Episode 4 of Red Dwarf entitled " White Hole " , Rimmer jokes about a way he claims the Eskimo people deal with their elderly , leaving them to freeze to death . When Kryten asks if that is really the case , Rimmer responds " Absolutely . That 's why there 's no Eskimo word for Eastbourne . " Presumably referring to the climate and demographics of Eastbourne at the time the episode premiered . 
 = Minute to Win It ( U.S. game show ) = 
 Minute to Win It is an American television game show which features contestants playing simple games with common household items in an attempt to win a cash prize . The series originally ran on NBC with host Guy Fieri and was revived in 2013 on Game Show Network ( GSN ) with Apolo Ohno presenting the show . 
 The series premiered on NBC on March 14 , 2010 , airing the first two episodes back @-@ to @-@ back . A second season began on December 7 , 2010 . On May 13 , 2012 , NBC announced that the show would not be renewed for a third season . On February 4 , 2013 , GSN green @-@ lit a revival of the series , and the first season began airing in June 25 , 2013 . A second season of the GSN version premiered in February 2014 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Contestants are presented with a blueprint for the first challenge ( level ) and must successfully complete a game within 60 seconds to move past the first level and advance to the next level . The challenges are games that require contestants to perform tasks with various household items ( such as releasing a balloon 's air to blow a certain number of plastic cups off of a table , or rolling marbles at an upright @-@ standing pencil in order to knock it over ) . Contestants who can complete all ten challenges win the show 's top prize ( $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in the NBC version , $ 250 @,@ 000 in the GSN version ) . 
 The difficulty of the games progressively increases throughout the show . If time expires or the conditions of the game cannot be fulfilled ( such as exhausting any allotted attempts or breaking a rule within a challenge ) , the contestant loses a " life " , three of which are provided throughout the game . Contestants who lose all three of their lives have their game end and their winnings drop to the previous milestone they passed . After successfully completing a game , contestants can leave with the amount of money already won before seeing the blueprint for their next level . If they elect to play the game , however , they cannot walk away until that level is complete or they have exhausted all three of their lives . 
 Episodes featuring celebrity contestants competing for charities and teams of two contestants tweak these rules slightly . In celebrity episodes , all levels are milestones , while in episodes featuring teams of two contestants , some games are played by both , while others are played solo . A contestant can only make three consecutive attempts at solo games ( including re @-@ attempts following losing a life ; an intervening team game does not reset this count ) . After a contestant makes three attempts , the other contestant is forced to attempt the next solo game . 
 = = = Special editions = = = 
 Besides celebrity specials and editions featuring teams , other special editions have been conducted by the NBC version of the series . To begin the show 's second season , three special Christmas @-@ themed episodes were produced and aired in December 2010 . For these specials , two extra games were added , with the 11th game worth $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and the 12th game worth $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . In addition , some games contained a " Holiday Bonus , " in which a contestant won a gift if the level is passed . A visual representation of the gift was placed inside of a box , which was opened if and when the level was successfully completed . The gifts included an extra life , an extra ten seconds to be used during a challenge , and a bonus prize . 
 The series also featured other episodes that featured twists to the format . In " Head to head " matches , two teams of two players compete against each other in a best @-@ of @-@ seven match . Winning a challenge earns the team a point ; the first team to four points wins a guaranteed $ 50 @,@ 000 and a chance to play for the million starting from Level 6 with three lives remaining . In " Last Man Standing " episodes , 10 contestants play against each other ; the one with the worst result at the end of the challenge is eliminated . This continues until there is one contestant left . The winner wins $ 100 @,@ 000 and plays a million @-@ dollar game for a chance to win the top prize . In addition , during a few summer episodes , one member of the audience would be selected to play a million @-@ dollar game at the end of the episode . 
 = = = Payout structure = = = 
 Successfully completing a stunt is worth a specific cash prize at each level . Contestants who successfully complete stunts on milestone levels ( prize amounts in bold ) are guaranteed to leave with no less than the cash award at that level should they fail any later stunts . 
 = = Production = = 
 About two years before the series premiered on NBC , Guy Fieri 's agent , who had attended a meeting in France , contacted him , pitching to him the idea of hosting the show . Fieri was eventually chosen to host the series , and the show premiered with two back @-@ to @-@ back episodes on March 14 , 2010 , airing 27 new episodes through September of that year . The second season , which consisted of 41 episodes , began on December 7 , 2010 with a Christmas special . Executive producers for the NBC versions included Craig <unk> , Tim <unk> , Mattias Olsson , Jock <unk> and Estelle <unk> . On May 13 , 2012 , NBC canceled the series , electing not to renew it for a third season . 
 Shortly after the NBC version 's cancelation , reruns of Minute to Win It began airing on GSN July 24 , 2012 . Citing the NBC version 's ratings success in reruns , the network announced plans to produce a revival of the series on February 4 , 2013 . The GSN version was hosted by American speed skating champion Apolo Ohno , with Michael <unk> serving as executive producer . The first season premiered on June 25 , 2013 , although a full episode sneak preview was shown on May 23 . The series then went on a short hiatus , returning to air new episodes ( advertised as a second season ) February 25 , 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a pre @-@ broadcast review , Cinema Blend 's Kelly West praised Fieri 's " enthusiastic " performance and his ability to interact well with contestants . West also noted that the show could do well with families and viewers who have a preference to non @-@ intellectual game shows ; however , West criticized the challenges for needing " little to no skill " to accomplish . In October 2010 , Minute to Win It was awarded the C21 / <unk> Award for best " studio based game show " format at the <unk> Television Festival in France . 
 Alyssa Davis of Hollywood <unk> called the GSN version of the series " decent ; " however , she also provided some slight criticism of Ohno 's hosting , arguing that while " he is likable , " his " personality is not strong enough to host a game show . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The NBC version 's ratings were generally average , with episodes toward both the beginning and end of the series ' run generally earning between five and six million viewers . Ratings for the GSN version were slightly better than average for the network 's standards . The first two new episodes debuted to a combined total of 875 @,@ 000 viewers , with 525 @,@ 000 at 8 : 00 and 350 @,@ 000 at 9 : 00 . The GSN version would later climb to a series high of 596 @,@ 000 viewers on August 6 , 2013 while serving as a lead @-@ in to the series premiere of The Chase . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 In May 2011 , NBCUniversal agreed to a deal with Wendy 's allowing the restaurant to release kid 's meal toys based on five challenges seen on the actual show . Several home versions based on the series ' format have also been released since the show 's premiere . Mattel released a board game and card game format of the show in 2011 and 2012 respectively , while <unk> released an " Ultimate Party Pack " with games featured on the show . In addition , Zoo Entertainment released video game versions for the Wii , Kinect for Xbox 360 , Nintendo DS and iOS devices on November 2 , 2010 . 
 = Uttanka = 
 In Hindu mythology , Uttanka , also spelled <unk> , is a rishi ( sage ) who resided in the Maru desert . The primary source of this account is found in the Hindu epic Mahabharata . 
 In the earliest version , Uttanka is described as the disciple of the sage Veda . In the second version , his guru is Gautama . In both legends , he is a learned sage who goes through many hurdles in procuring the earrings demanded by his guru 's wife as the fee for the teacher ( gurudakshina ) . The Nagas ( serpents ) steal the earrings , and the gods Indra and Agni help Uttanka to retrieve them from the realm of the serpents . Uttanka is said to have advised King Janamejaya to take revenge against Takshaka , the king of the Nagas , as the latter was responsible for his father <unk> 's death by snake bite . 
 Uttanka is one of the few persons described to have seen the Vishvarupa ( Universal form ) of the god Krishna . Krishna blessed Uttanka with a boon that would quench his thirst whenever he remembered him . From then on , the rare clouds that bring showers in the desert have been called " Uttanka 's clouds " . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Uttanka 's legend is narrated in the Hindu epic Mahabharata in two versions . The first is the original narrated in the <unk> Parva chapter of the first Book , Adi Parva . The other version is in the <unk> ( named after Uttanka ) in the Ashvamedhika Parva , the 14th Book of the epic . A work in Malayalam , also called <unk> , is another recounting of the story from the 14th book , but uses the name <unk> , not Uttanka . The Ashvamedhika Parva version is believed to be a later retelling of the original account in the Adi Parva . 
 = = = Adi Parva = = = 
 According to the Adi Parva , Uttanka was one of three chief disciples of the sage Veda , who in turn was a student of <unk> . 
 Once , Veda left his ashram ( hermitage ) , entrusting all of the administrative duties to Uttanka . Veda 's wife was then in her menstrual period . The women of the ashram urged Uttanka to cohabit with her so that her fertility period would not be wasted , but Uttanka refused to oblige as he was duty bound to his guru and he considered the act immoral . When this episode was conveyed to Veda upon his return to the ashram , he was pleased with his disciple and blessed Uttanka . 
 After Uttanka completed his education , he asked his guru Veda about gurudakshina ( fee to the teacher ) . Veda suggested that he should ask his wife and give him the gift that she desired . The guru 's wife harboured a grudge against Uttanka , as he had refused to fulfil her desire in her fertility period . She asked Uttanka to get the earrings of King Pushya ’ s queen in three days so that she could wear them during a religious fast on the fourth day . Uttanka set out to accomplish the task . On the way , he encountered a giant who was riding a huge bullock and sought his blessings . The giant asked Uttanka to eat the dung and drink the urine of the animal . Uttanka hesitated but ultimately complied after being informed that his guru , Veda , had acted likewise . Uttanka then went to King Pushya and conveyed to him the wish of his guru ’ s wife for the earrings of his queen so that he could pay his gurudakshina . The king asked Uttanka to meet his wife in her chambers . However , he could not find the queen there . Pushya informed Uttanka that his queen does not appear before any impure person who has not performed the ritual ablutions . After performing the ablutions , Uttanka met the queen and asked her for the earrings , which she granted . She warned Uttanka that Takshaka , the king of Nagas ( serpents ) , was after the divine earrings and he should therefore take guard against him . 
 After Uttanka had met the queen , he was invited to dine with the king . The food was cold and had a hair in it . Enraged , the sage cursed the king that he would lose his sight . In turn , the king cursed Uttanka that he would not have any children . However , they reconciled and withdrew their curses . 
 As Uttanka was returning to Veda 's ashram , he decided to take a bath in a water tank . He left his things on the bank of the river and went to take a bath . At that time , Takshaka came there in the disguise of a naked mendicant and stole the earrings . Uttanka tried to pursue the mendicant , but Takshaka had reverted to his original form of a serpent and slithered away into a hole in the ground , reaching Naga @-@ loka , the abode of the Nagas . Uttanka then tried to dig through the hole . Indra , the king of the gods , saw Uttanka in the process of digging and sent his weapon Vajra ( thunder @-@ bolt ) to help him carve a tunnel to the realm of the Nagas . When Uttanka entered the snake world , he started praising the virtues of the snake king Takshaka and his clan , but to no avail as Takshaka was not moved to give up the earrings . 
 Uttanka then saw two beautiful women weaving with white and black threads on a wheel fixed on the wall . The wheel had twelve spokes and was being turned by six young people . A horse with a rider stood near the wheel . Uttanka praised the functioning of the weaving process , the rider and the horse , and equated the rider to Indra . Pleased with this praise , the rider asked Uttanka to state in what way he could help him . Uttanka requested that he be given the power to bring the snakes under his control . The rider then instructed Uttanka to blow at the back of the horse . Uttanka did as suggested . Then flames emerged from all parts of the horse 's body and filled the realm of the serpents with fire and smoke . The terrified Takshaka came out of hiding and gave up the earrings to Uttanka . 
 Uttanka then wondered whether he could reach his guru Veda 's ashram to hand over the earrings to the guru 's wife before the prescribed time . The rider , noting Uttanka 's concern , gave Uttanka his horse , which took Uttanka to the ashram . He reached the ashram just before sunset as the guru 's wife was in the process of casting a curse on Uttanka for not arriving in time . When Uttanka narrated his experience in procuring the earrings , the guru and his wife blessed him . Veda then explained to Uttanka the significance of the sights he had seen in Nagaloka . The two women engaged in weaving were <unk> and <unk> ; they were creating the world and all its creatures . The threads were day and night . The wheel with twelve spokes was the year with 360 days . The six boys were the seasons . The giant and bullock were Indra and his elephant Airavata . Its dung was amrita ( elixir of life ) , which kept Uttanka alive in Nagaloka . The rider and horse in Nagaloka were Indra and the fire @-@ god Agni . Veda also explained to Uttanka that his friend , Indra , had helped him during his journey . 
 After handing over the earrings and taking leave of his guru , Uttanka went to Hastinapur , the kingdom of King Janamejaya . He resolved to teach a lesson to Takshaka who had caused him trouble . He informed Janamejaya that it was Takshaka who had killed his father <unk> and advised Janamejaya to perform a snake sacrifice to exterminate the serpents . Uttanka was one of the rishis who participated in the Sarpa Satra yagna initiated by the king . Sarpa Satra was meant to draw all serpents to the sacrificial fire to certain death by the chanting of mantras . After the serpents started falling into the sacrificial fire , Takshaka was not to be found anywhere . Uttanka then recited the mantras with great vigour to draw Takshaka to the fire . In mortal fear , <unk> took shelter with Indra and got himself tied to the throne of Indra for protection . Uttanka , who realised that Takshaka had taken refuge with Indra , intensified his mantras to ensure that not only Takshaka but also Indra along with his throne were drawn to the fire . Indra freed the snake from the throne and escaped . However , when Takshaka was about to drop to death into the sacrificial fire , Astika , a young boy well versed in scriptures , son of the sage Jaratkaru intervened with Janamejaya . Astika ensured that the Sarpa Satra was stopped and the life of Takshaka was saved . 
 = = = Ashvamedhika Parva = = = 
 In the Ashvamedhika Parva the tale is narrated with some variation . Uttanka is described as a brahmin who belonged to the Bhrigu race that lived in a hermitage in the Maru desert . Uttanka was the disciple of the sage Gautama , whom he served for a hundred years . Uttanka was very dear to Gautama , who did not let him go even after Uttanka had completed his education . Uttanka grew old over time . One day Uttanka collapsed while carrying a huge bundle of firewood . Gautama 's daughter cried looking at the sight . When called by his guru , Uttanka accosted Gautama , and with tears in his eyes asked him why he alone had been retained in the hermitage when thousands of other disciples had been discharged after training . Gautama restored Uttanka 's youth , gave his daughter in marriage to Uttanka and then permitted him to leave . 
 Uttanka wanted to give the sage his gurudakshina . The guru told him to meet his wife Ahalya and inquire as to her wish . Ahalya suggested that he bring her the divine earrings of Madayanti , King Mitrasaha Saudasa 's wife , as gurudakshina . The king had turned into a cannibalistic rakshasa by a curse and was known as Kalmashapada . Uttanka met Kalmashapada , who approached Uttanka to eat him , but Uttanka stopped him and explained that he was duty @-@ bound to get Madayanti 's earrings as gurudakshina and that he , Uttanka , would return to Kalmashapada after fulfilling his obligation . Kalmashapada agreed and directed him to his wife , who refused to part with her earrings until Uttanka brought some token from Kalmashapada as proof of his consent . Upon returning from Kalmashapada with a token , Madayanti gave him the earrings . The queen warned Uttanka that her earrings were coveted by Nagas , Yakshas , rakshasas and the gods , who would try to steal them . Uttanka was therefore advised not to allow the earrings to touch the ground to prevent the snakes from taking possession of them . 
 On the way back to the ashram , Uttanka had tied the earrings in a deerskin . While travelling , he stopped and climbed a tree to pluck some fruit for his refreshment . He tied the deerskin to a branch , but the deerskin became untied and the earrings fell on the ground . A snake immediately got hold of the earrings and vanished into an ant @-@ hill . In grief , Uttanka fell from the tree . For 35 days , he dug the ant @-@ hill with a stick to get the snake out and retrieve the earrings . The earth began to shake due to the repeated strikes . At that time , Indra – riding his chariot – saw Uttanka 's futile efforts . As in the Adi Parva , Indra used his Vajra to enable Uttanka to enter the beautiful Nagaloka . There , Uttanka saw a horse with the " tail which had black and white hair , a copper @-@ coloured muzzle , and eye of the same colour that seemed to flame forth in splendor " . The horse told Uttanka to blow from behind , as in the Adi Parva version . The horse was the fire god Agni who was the guru of Gautama , who had offered his help to retrieve the earrings . When Uttanka followed the directive of the horse , flames and smoke emerged from every pore of the horse and choked the dwellings of the snakes . Thus choked , the serpents , headed by Vasuki came out , worshipped Uttanka and surrendered the earrings and asked that they be pardoned . When Uttanka returned to the hermitage of Gautama to give the earrings to Ahalya , he narrated the sequence of events that occurred in procuring the earrings . 
 = = Meeting Krishna = = 
 The Ashvamedhika Parva narrates Uttanka 's meeting with the god Krishna . As Krishna was returning to his kingdom Dwarka , he noticed the wandering ascetic Uttanka . Uttanka met Krishna and asked for news . Krishna told about the devastation in the Kurukshetra War . Uttanka was agitated and was about to curse Krishna for not bringing about a compromise between the warring cousins Pandavas and Kauravas . Krishna explained the necessity of war for restoration of dharma and revealed his Vishvarupa form to Uttanka . The sage bowed to Krishna . Krishna told Uttanka to ask for a boon . Uttanka asked Krishna to grant him the boon of finding water whenever he was thirsty . Krishna granted the boon to Uttanka . Uttanka was the only other person other than Arjuna and Bhishma to get a divine vision of Krishna . 
 Wandering in the desert , the sage became thirsty and , hoping to get water , thought of Krishna , but instead , he found a naked Chandala ( an outcaste untouchable ) urinating and asking him to drink the urine . The Chandala was covered in mud and surrounded by filthy dogs . The Chandala repeatedly requested Uttanka to drink his urine . But when Uttanka refused , the Chandala disappeared . Then when Krishna appeared on the scene Uttanka complained that it was improper of him to send a Chandala to quench the thirst of a Brahmin . Krishna explained that he had requested Indra to give him amrita , but Indra was not willing to give it to mortals . Finally , Indra had relented and had told Krishna that he would offer Uttanka the amrita as a Chandala , provided the sage did not refuse it . Krishna had agreed to Indra 's condition . Krishna then informed Uttanka that his refusal to accept amrita from the Chandala was improper . However , Krishna promised to keep his boon of providing water to the sage . He then blessed Uttanka that rain clouds would appear at his bidding and bring rain showers in the desert . These clouds appear rarely , and in the desert rain clouds are still known as Uttanka ’ s clouds ( Uttanka Megha ) . 
 In another version of this event , it is said that , to test Uttanka , Krishna once appeared before him disguised as an untouchable hunter and offered him water which was polluted with urine . Uttanka rejected the offer as it was being offered by the hunter , an untouchable . This displeased Krishna who then appeared before Uttanka in his true form . 
 = = Other legends = = 
 The Vana Parva book of the Mahabharata narrates that an asura ( demon ) named <unk> lived under the sands of the desert of Ujjalaka , in <unk> . <unk> terrorized the whole world . Upset by <unk> 's action , Uttanka – whose ashram was in Ujjalaka – performed tapas ( austerities ) dedicated to Vishnu . Pleased , Vishnu told Uttanka that the Ikshvaku king <unk> would slay the demon . The sage went to the king 's palace and recounted Vishnu 's prophecy . <unk> and his sons went to the forest and killed the demon . As a result , <unk> became known as <unk> , the slayer of <unk> . 
 The <unk> Purana narrates that Uttanka lived in an ashram in Ujjalaka . In his old age , he left for a pilgrimage and travelled to various temples . Once , the sage saw a hunter named Gulika stealing the golden plates of the temple of Vishnu at <unk> . Gulika tried to kill the sage . Then Uttanka informed Gulika that the sin of murder would be to live through many births to expiate his sin . Hearing this the hunter was penitent and fell dead . Uttanka then sprinkled water from the holy Ganges on the hunter 's corpse , which restored Gulika who then attained Vaikuntha , the abode of Vishnu . As advised by Vishnu , Uttanka went to Badari , performed tapas and attained Vaikuntha himself . 
 = Nilsson Sings Newman = 
 Nilsson Sings Newman is an album of Randy Newman compositions sung by Harry Nilsson , with Newman on piano . The record was not a great commercial success , but it was critically praised , and helped Newman gain notice . It won a 1970 " Record of the Year " award from Stereo Review magazine , and remains a fan favorite . 
 Recorded over six weeks in 1969 , the album showcases Nilsson 's voice multi @-@ tracked in layers of tone and harmony . Its arrangements are otherwise spare and graceful . The LP record cover art is by Dean Torrence . 
 Re @-@ released on compact disc in 1995 , followed by a 30th anniversary CD in 2000 , the album has been called a studio masterpiece , and " the best exposition of the ballad in rock . " 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1969 , Nilsson 's album Harry ended with one of Newman 's songs : " Simon Smith and the Amazing Dancing Bear " . Years later , Nilsson told Paul Zollo that he was in awe of Newman writing so many songs , ones he thought were better than his own . 
 In 1968 , Ricky Nelson released his concept album Perspective , a move to expand his musical horizons . The album included songs by Newman , Nilsson and others woven together to tell the story of the interactions of a famous family ; author Kevin Courrier writes that this album may have been part of the inspiration for Nilsson Sings Newman . 
 = = Recording = = 
 On August 20 , 1969 , Nilsson and Newman began to record the album . After basic tracks were laid down , Nilsson spent six weeks overdubbing his voice to create layers and harmonies , line by line . As many as 118 overdubs were laid down for a single song . 
 Nilsson often reminds the listener that he is listening to the recording of a studio album . Nilsson 's voice in the control room is heard on several songs , instructing the recording engineer to add more echo or remove a voice . On the album 's final song " So Long Dad " , amid a multi @-@ Nilsson chorus of voices , Nilsson softly asks for " more first voice . " Louder , he counters himself by saying " actually I need more current voice . Forget the one that 's saying ' more first voice . ' " 
 Besides piano , other instruments were sometimes used in the studio , including bass drum , tambourine and various electronic keyboards . On the song " Cowboy " , Nilsson used electronic harpsichord to bring in a different concluding theme , quoting John Barry 's theme from the film Midnight Cowboy , an inside joke that referenced Fred Neil 's " Everybody 's Talkin ' " from the same film , a major success for Nilsson earlier that year . 
 Newman was , according to Nilsson , " tired of the album when we were finished making it . " " For him it was just doing piano and voice ... over and over . " Nilsson explained " once I got the take down , I knew what I was going to do with it later . He didn 't . " Newman said of his experience that he " was honored that a writer with Harry 's talent would choose to do an album of someone else 's songs . " Newman continued , " he was such a great singer , a virtuoso singer , really , and he could do so many things as a vocalist that I couldn 't do — like hold a note . " 
 A number of alternate takes and songs were recorded but left off the 1970 album . Two such songs were " Snow " and " Linda " . Newman wrote one song specifically for the album : " Caroline " , a straightforward love song . 
 = = Release and response = = 
 In February 1970 , the album was released by RCA Records . The cover art was completed by Dean Torrence , known for his teaming with Jan Berry to create the rock and roll duo Jan and Dean . Since Berry 's near @-@ fatal auto accident in 1966 , Torrence had become a graphic artist ; his sepia tone scene depicted Nilsson driving an old American car through the countryside with Newman in the back seat . The car is a 1938 Graham @-@ Paige four @-@ door sedan , rusty but working . 
 The audio equipment and record review magazine Stereo Review named Nilsson Sings Newman their album of the year . Even so , the album did not sell well , possibly because of the " idiosyncratic quality " of its ballads and the paucity of reviews . Newman said in an interview how he personally went to assess the sales of the album at a record store in Los Angeles . He asked a clerk ( who did not recognize him ) " do you have any Nilsson albums ? " and the clerk guided him through each one , describing its sales and whether he recommended it . He came to Nilsson Sings Newman and said , " this is the one that nearly finished him off . " In one of the few reviews , the weekly magazine Cue in New York praised the artistry saying that " Nilsson was dealing with material as powerful as his own , but was free to concentrate entirely on his gifts as a performer . " Cue said that this album was free of the " overwhelmingly complex " personal expressions that came earlier from " Nilsson singing Nilsson , and Newman singing Newman " . 
 In April 1970 , Newman released his second album , 12 Songs , a collection featuring spare arrangements with simple instrumental parts underneath Newman 's vocals , Ry Cooder providing an economical backdrop of slide guitar . The song " Mama Told Me Not to Come " , written four years earlier for Eric Burdon , was delivered in stripped @-@ down form , and helped Newman establish himself as a composer of note . Newman appeared in solo engagements beginning in June 1970 on an NBC TV special hosted by Liza Minnelli . " Mama Told Me Not to Come " yielded a # 1 chart topper for Three Dog Night in July 1970 . Newman 's career was in high gear . 
 Nilsson 's next recording project was the soundtrack for a children 's fantasy film he conceived , titled The Point ! , finished in 1971 . His next popular release was Nilsson <unk> with its hit single " Without You " composed earlier by Badfinger . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1993 , Newman prepared to record an entire album of Nilsson songs , a returning of the favor 25 years later . Newman had never before recorded a Nilsson song . After Nilsson 's death in January 1994 , the intended homage became a memorial , titled For The Love of Harry : Everybody Sings Nilsson . To leave room for participation by other artists , Newman sang only one song , " Remember ( Christmas ) " , a sad and dreamy tune which opened the album . Newman said , " I just hope Harry knew how great he was . He was always putting himself down , making fun of himself . " 
 Nilsson Sings Newman was re @-@ released as a CD in 1995 . In 2000 , the 30th anniversary release was padded with five additional tracks . One was " Snow " , unreleased in 1970 for lack of room on the LP , and four were alternate versions of songs that were on the original album . In 2000 , Ben Wener of The Orange County Register wrote that " Newman 's sly , dramatically structured impressionistic pop was ideally suited for Nilsson 's theatrical tone ... It 's not so much that Nilsson 's takes are better than Newman 's ... just refreshingly different — less wicked and vicious , more melancholy . " 
 Artists who have expressed a fondness for the album include Rufus Wainwright , Ron Sexsmith , Jellyfish , Adrian Belew and Shane <unk> . The exhaustive All Music Guide says of Nilsson Sings Newman that it is " a subtle , graceful masterpiece where the pleasure is in the grace notes , small gestures , and in @-@ jokes . " Once a listener has acquired a taste for Newman 's idiosyncratic songs , " this is as sweet as honey . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music and lyrics by Randy Newman . 
 " Vine St. " – 2 : 50 
 " Love Story " – 3 : 39 
 " Yellow Man " – 2 : 16 
 " Caroline " – 2 : 05 
 " Cowboy " – 2 : 48 
 " The Beehive State " – 2 : 04 
 " I 'll Be Home " – 2 : 35 
 " Living Without You " – 2 : 35 
 " Dayton , Ohio 1903 " – 1 : 50 
 " So Long Dad " – 2 : 35 
 BMG 's 2000 CD re @-@ issue contains the following bonus tracks : 
 " Snow " – 2 : 29 
 " Love Story " ( alternate take ) – 3 : 24 
 " Cowboy " ( alternate take ) – 2 : 22 
 " I 'll Be Home " ( alternate take ) – 2 : 41 
 " Living Without You " ( alternate take ) – 2 : 40 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Harry Nilsson – vocals , additional instruments 
 Randy Newman – piano , electronic keyboards 
 = 1947 Sydney hailstorm = 
 The 1947 Sydney hailstorm was a natural disaster which struck Sydney , Australia , on 1 January 1947 . The storm cell developed on the morning of New Year 's Day , a public holiday in Australia , over the Blue Mountains , hitting the city and dissipating east of Bondi in the mid @-@ afternoon . At the time , it was the most severe storm to strike the city since recorded observations began in 1792 . 
 The high humidity , temperatures and weather patterns of Sydney increased the strength of the storm . The cost of damages from the storm were , at the time , approximately GB £ 750 @,@ 000 ( US $ 3 million ) ; this is the equivalent of around A $ 45 million in modern figures . The supercell dropped hailstones larger than 8 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter , with the most significant damage occurring in the central business district and eastern suburbs of Sydney . 
 The event caused around 1000 injuries , with between 200 and 350 people requiring hospitalisation or other medical attention , predominantly caused by broken glass shards . The majority of severe injuries reported were suffered by people on Sydney 's beaches , where many were without shelter . The size of the hailstones were the largest seen in Sydney for 52 years , until the 1999 Sydney hailstorm caused A $ 1 @.@ 7 billion in insured damage in becoming the costliest natural disaster in Australian history . 
 = = Conditions and climatology = = 
 During the spring and summer , conditions along the east coast of Australia are highly conducive for the formation of hailstorms . The variation of air temperature in the atmosphere ; with warm and humid air close to the ground and colder air above it causes instability , and the cold upper atmosphere temperatures allow the precipitation to fall in solid form as hailstones . Since records began in 1791 , hailstorms in the month of January form approximately 13 % of the total number of hailstorms in the Sydney metropolitan area , and over 15 % of all events with ' large hail ' . 
 Hailstorms have a history of significant damage in Australia . Since records on insured losses began in 1967 , four hailstorms — Sydney in 1986 , 1990 and 1999 , as well as Brisbane in 1985 — have featured on the top ten list of most insured damages caused by a single Australian natural disaster . Hailstorms caused more than 30 % of all insured damages inflicted as a result of natural disasters in Australia during this period , and around three quarters of all hailstorm damage has occurred in New South Wales . 
 The conditions on New Year 's Day , 1947 were meteorologically sound for the formation of a storm . The day was hot and humid , with the maximum temperature recorded during the day being 32 @.@ 7 ° C ( 90 @.@ 9 ° F ) and humidity reaching 73 % . Many <unk> travelled to the beaches along the coastline to benefit from the afternoon sea breeze . The general weather pattern for Sydney in summer is movement from the west to the east — from over the Blue Mountains to across the city and into the Tasman Sea . 
 = = Progression of the storm = = 
 Developing from the Blue Mountains to the south @-@ west of Sydney in the morning of 1 January 1947 , the storm cell was first identified at 10 : 00 am by weather observers at Mascot . The formation of storms in this region is not unusual , especially given the hot and humid conditions at ground level which causes atmospheric instability . However , the Bureau of Meteorology reported that the formation of the storm was different from most others , describing how " the <unk> of the cloud was mottled and serrated or curtained , rather than <unk> , and looked angry black , while false cirrus tufts were discernible at the top " . 
 The storm cell dropped hailstones the size of billiard balls across the south @-@ western suburbs of Sydney . It moved directly over Liverpool at 2 : 25 pm , heading in a north @-@ east direction before slowly bending its path and travelling almost due east as it passed over the southern part of the central business district . " Large explosion @-@ like sounds " , presumed to be thunder by the Bureau , were heard around the Sydney Harbour Bridge . The sounds were described by the Bureau — who were based at Observatory Hill , next to the southwest pylon of the Bridge , in 1947 — as a " terrific noise " akin to " several trains ... passing over [ the Bridge ] " . 
 The storm intensified as it cut through the suburbs , and eventually unleashed its full power across the eastern suburbs of Sydney . The suburbs most seriously affected were Surry Hills , south of the central district , as well as Bondi and Rose Bay in the Waverley region which were struck at around 2 : 40 pm . The hailstorm pelted beach @-@ goers , particularly at Bondi Beach , and the situation was described by a Second World War veteran as " though [ he ] was back in the firing line overseas " . The hail in the coastal regions was described as being of similar size to a cricket ball . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The most damage was caused when the storm was its most intense , over the eastern suburbs of the city . According to the Bureau of Meteorology , over 5000 roofs were damaged in Waverley by the lumps of hail which weighed up to 1 @.@ 8 kg ( 4 @.@ 0 lb ) . No official cost total exists for the amount of damage caused by the 1947 hailstorm , however a Reuters article published in New York Times on 2 January estimated preliminary damage to be worth around US $ 3 million , equivalent to GB £ 750 @,@ 000 . This is approximately equal to A $ 45 million in modern figures , placing it well below the costliest natural disasters in Australian history ; this , given the severity of the storm cell , is attributable mainly to the relative <unk> of buildings and other items of the era . More definite historical accounts exist for damage caused to certain buildings . The historic skylight which runs through the centre of the main Central railway station building was smashed , and the shards reportedly fell in sizes up to 26 cm2 ( 4 sq in ) on around 100 waiting passengers . 
 <unk> cars , in fashion at the time of the storm , also sustained severe damage , mainly punctures to the soft @-@ top roofs , and trams that ran through the eastern suburbs at the time also suffered damage . According to veteran meteorologist Richard Whitaker , " Sydney was staggered by the enormity of the incident , as there had not been even a remotely similar storm in living memory " . The problems were exacerbated due to a lack of building materials available for use in repair work , a result of the Second World War which had concluded only 18 months prior . This contributed to the delays which resulted in houses still covered with only temporary tarpaulins several years later . 
 Most of the approximately 1000 injuries were caused by the hailstones directly striking people or from flying debris , with the latter mainly from shattered windows . Of these , between 200 and 350 people required hospitalisation or other medical attention , however figures vary between different sources . The storm struck during the afternoon of a public holiday — New Year 's Day — which produced hot and humid conditions , and the beaches in the eastern suburbs were significantly populated . The beach @-@ goers were exposed to the large hail when the storm cell reached the coastline , and according to the front page report in The Sydney Morning Herald the following day , " [ f ] or nearly three hours , ambulance wagons travelled from the eastern suburbs beaches with the injured " . The 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) hailstones which fell during the 1947 event were not matched in Sydney for 52 years , until the 1999 hailstorm , which caused A $ 1 @.@ 7 billion in insured damage — the costliest natural disaster in Australian history . 
 = Little Butte Creek = 
 Little Butte Creek is a 17 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 27 km ) tributary of the Rogue River in the U.S. state of Oregon . Its drainage basin consists of approximately 354 square miles ( 917 km2 ) of Jackson County and another 19 square miles ( 49 km2 ) of Klamath County . Its two forks , the North Fork and the South Fork , both begin high in the Cascade Range near Mount McLoughlin and Brown Mountain . They both flow generally west until they meet near Lake Creek . The main stem continues west , flowing through the communities of <unk> , Eagle Point , and White City , before finally emptying into the Rogue River about 3 miles ( 5 km ) southwest of Eagle Point . 
 Little Butte Creek 's watershed was originally settled by the Takelma , and possibly the Shasta tribes of Native Americans . In the Rogue River Wars of the 1850s , most of the Native Americans were either killed or forced onto Indian reservations . Early settlers named Little Butte Creek and nearby Big Butte Creek after their proximity to Mount McLoughlin , which was known as Snowy Butte . In the late 19th century , the watershed was primarily used for agriculture and lumber production . The city of Eagle Point was incorporated in 1911 , and remains the only incorporated town within the watershed 's boundaries . 
 Large amounts of water are diverted from Little Butte Creek for irrigation , water storage , and power generation . Canal systems deliver the water to nearby Howard Prairie Lake and the Klamath River watershed , Agate Lake , and the Rogue Valley . 
 Despite being moderately polluted , the creek is one of the best salmon @-@ producing tributaries of the Rogue River . Coho and Chinook salmon migrate upstream each year ; however , several dams hinder their progress . A fish ladder was built in 2005 to help fish swim past a dam constructed in Eagle Point in the 1880s , but was destroyed by flooding just three months later . It was rebuilt in 2008 . Restoration of a 1 @.@ 3 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 1 km ) artificially straightened section of the creek in the Denman Wildlife Area was completed in 2011 . 
 = = Course = = 
 Little Butte Creek begins in the Cascade Range near Mount McLoughlin and Brown Mountain . It flows generally west over approximately 17 miles ( 27 km ) to its confluence with the Rogue River . There are two main forks of Little Butte Creek : the North Fork and the South Fork . The South Fork 's headwaters are at 5 @,@ 713 feet ( 1 @,@ 741 m ) above sea level , while the North Fork 's headwaters are considerably lower at 4 @,@ 638 feet ( 1 @,@ 414 m ) . They meet each other at 1 @,@ 647 feet ( 502 @.@ 0 m ) , creating the main stem itself . Little Butte Creek 's mouth is at 1 @,@ 204 feet ( 367 @.@ 0 m ) above sea level , giving the creek an overall gradient of approximately 25 feet per mile ( 4 @.@ 7 m / km ) . 
 The north fork begins at Fish Lake , near Mount McLoughlin . It flows west , collecting only minor tributaries , before merging with the south fork . The south fork 's headwaters are just south of the 7 @,@ 311 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 2 @,@ 228 m ) Brown Mountain . The Pacific Crest Trail passes through this area . It flows west , receiving Beaver Dam Creek and Dead Indian Creek on the left bank . Beaver Dam Creek drains approximately 28 square miles ( 73 km2 ) , and Dead Indian Creek has a watershed of about 22 square miles ( 57 km2 ) . The Dead Indian Soda Springs are on Dead Indian Creek , about a mile south of its confluence with the south fork . The south fork then turns northwest , collecting water from Lost Creek on the left , near the Lost Creek Bridge , built in 1919 . Lost Creek drains about 17 square miles ( 44 km2 ) . 
 Just after the two forks merge about 15 miles ( 24 km ) northeast of Medford , Little Butte Creek receives Lake Creek on the left bank , flowing through the community of the same name at river mile ( RM ) 17 or river kilometer ( RK ) 27 . Lake Creek drains 15 square miles ( 39 km2 ) . The main stem is crossed by South Fork Little Butte Creek Road in Lake Creek . Water is diverted here into the Joint System Canal for storage in Agate Lake and to provide irrigation for the Medford region . A few miles west , the creek receives Salt Creek and Lick Creek on the right bank , which have watersheds of 17 and 16 square miles ( 44 and 41 km2 ) , respectively . Oregon Route 140 crosses the creek at RM 10 ( RK 16 ) . 
 The creek turns southwest , flowing through Eagle Point . Four bridges span the stream in Eagle Point : East Main Street , Loto Street , and the Antelope Creek Bridge near RM 5 ( RK 8 ) , and Oregon Route 62 at RM 4 ( RK 6 ) . Near RM 3 ( RK 5 ) , Little Butte Creek receives Antelope Creek on the left . Antelope Creek is its largest tributary , draining 58 square miles ( 150 km2 ) . Agate Lake on Dry Creek is in the Antelope Creek watershed . At RM 1 @.@ 5 ( RK 2 @.@ 4 ) the creek is crossed by Agate Road . It then flows into the Rogue River 132 miles ( 212 km ) from its mouth at the Pacific Ocean . Little Butte Creek 's mouth is in the Denman Wildlife Area , approximately 3 miles ( 5 km ) southwest of Eagle Point , and about a mile southeast of Upper Table Rock . 
 = = = Discharge = = = 
 The United States Geological Survey monitored the flow of Little Butte Creek at seven different stream gauges : two on the south fork , three on the north fork , and two on the main stem . The first opened in 1908 at the newly constructed Fish Lake Dam on the north fork , while the last opened in 1927 near the Big Elk Ranger Station on the south fork . By 1989 , all seven were closed . The data recorded by the lowermost gauges of both forks and the main stem are listed below . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 Little Butte Creek drains approximately 373 square miles ( 966 km2 ) of southern Oregon . Elevations range from 1 @,@ 204 feet ( 367 @.@ 0 m ) at the mouth of the creek to 9 @,@ 495 feet ( 2 @,@ 894 m ) at the summit of Mount McLoughlin , with an average of 3 @,@ 496 feet ( 1 @,@ 066 m ) . Forest accounts for about 65 percent of the total area of the watershed , while 32 percent is farmland . The remaining three percent is within the Eagle Point city limits . Forty @-@ eight percent of the watershed is federally owned , 50 percent is privately owned , and Eagle Point accounts for the remaining two percent . Over 10 @,@ 000 people live within the watershed 's boundaries . 
 The region experiences a Mediterranean climate . Temperatures average from 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) in the summer to 20 ° F ( − 6 @.@ 7 ° C ) in the winter . The average precipitation in the area ranges from 19 inches ( 480 mm ) in the lower regions to over 50 inches ( 1 @,@ 300 mm ) in the upper reaches . July through October are the driest months , while December through April are the wettest . Thirty @-@ four percent of the surface runoff in the watershed is collected from rain , 31 percent from rain on snow , and 35 percent from snowmelt . 
 The two main geologic regions in the Little Butte Creek watershed are the High Cascades and the western Cascades . The western Cascades make up the western two thirds of the watershed , generally below 4 @,@ 800 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) in elevation . Steep , rugged canyons are common in this region . The lower stretches of the watershed contain soils such as decomposed lavas , clay , and gravel . The High Cascades compose the eastern third of the watershed , including volcanoes such as Brown Mountain and Mount McLoughlin , and lava plateaus . In some places , streams descend over 300 feet per mile ( 60 m / km ) . Nearby watersheds include two Rogue River tributaries — Big Butte Creek to the north and Bear Creek to the south — and small Klamath River tributaries to the east . 
 As of 2003 , there were 581 water rights recorded in the watershed , with 394 of them related to irrigation . Four hundred sixty @-@ six water diversions were also recorded . In the summer , many streams are over @-@ appropriated , leading to frequent water shortages along the lower portion of the creek . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 The flora in the Little Butte Creek watershed is predominately temperate coniferous forest , which makes up approximately 65 percent of the total area . The lower regions are covered with chaparral , and the upper regions by fir forests . The chaparral region is inhabited by oaks such as <unk> oak and California black oak , with an understory of buckbrush and manzanita . Coast douglas @-@ fir , sugar pine , ponderosa pine , California incense @-@ cedar , and white fir are the most common trees found in the mixed coniferous forest . Shasta red fir , white fir , and the noble fir grow in the higher elevations of the watershed . Mountain hemlock , lodgepole pine , Sitka mountain @-@ ash , and <unk> also grow in this region . Chinquapin can be found around Fish Lake . The most common species of plants above 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) near the tree line on Mount McLoughlin and Brown Mountain include whitebark pine , mountain hemlock , Coast Range subalpine fir , heather , and mountain heather . 
 Many species of birds have been spotted in the Little Butte Creek region . Twenty @-@ two species are known to breed in the chaparral region , including several species of wrens , blackbirds , and sparrows . The mixed coniferous forest is home to white @-@ headed woodpeckers , pygmy nuthatches , green @-@ tailed towhees , northern pygmy @-@ owls , Vaux 's swifts , winter wrens , and MacGillivray 's warblers . The American coot has also been spotted in several places along the creek . Williamson 's <unk> , black @-@ backed woodpeckers , gray jays , and hermit warblers frequent the higher elevations . The near @-@ threatened olive @-@ sided flycatcher and Cassin 's finch also live in this area . Eurasian three @-@ toed woodpeckers and Clark 's nutcrackers have been spotted near the tree line . The endangered Townsend 's big @-@ eared bat is known to live in the watershed . 
 Little Butte Creek is known to be one of the best salmon producing tributaries of the Rogue River , and is also one of only a few streams in the Upper Rogue watershed to support salmon populations . The most common anadromous fish inhabiting the creek include chinook and coho salmon , and sea @-@ run cutthroat trout . The Southern Oregon / Northern California Coast Coho Salmon Evolutionary Significant Unit is listed as threatened ( 2011 ) . Coho salmon are known to spawn in 46 miles ( 74 km ) of streams in the Little Butte Creek watershed . An estimated 35 @,@ 131 Coho salmon lived in the creek in 2002 . Resident fish include coastal cutthroat trout , sculpins , rainbow trout , and brook trout . 
 = = History = = 
 The Little Butte Creek area was originally settled by the Takelma , and possibly the Shasta tribe of Native Americans . The first non @-@ indigenous settlers arrived in the Eagle Point region in 1852 . Little Butte Creek was named by the early settlers for its close proximity to Mount McLoughlin ( also known as Snowy Butte ) , as was nearby Big Butte Creek . Due to conflicts with the Rogue River Indians , Major J. A. Lupton gathered 35 men from Jacksonville on October 8 , 1855 , and attacked the Native Americans near the mouth of Little Butte Creek , killing about 30 of them . Lupton was also killed , and eleven of his men were injured . On December 24 of the same year , Captain Miles Alcorn discovered and attacked a Native American camp on the north fork , killing eight . On Christmas the following day , another band of Native Americans were attacked near Little Butte Creek 's mouth ; some fled , while the rest were either captured or killed . 
 By the late 1850s , the land was primarily used for agriculture and lumber in the upper regions . A sawmill was constructed on the north fork in the 1870s . In 1901 , the Sunnyside Hotel was built by Alfred Howlett on the banks of the creek in Eagle Point . Eagle Point was later incorporated in 1911 , and remains the only incorporated town in the watershed . In 1917 , manganese ore was discovered near the confluence of South Fork Little Butte Creek and its tributary , Lost Creek . Mined nodules consisted of approximately 55 percent manganese and weighed up to 50 pounds ( 23 kg ) . Cinnabar was also discovered in the area . In 1922 , the 58 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 18 m ) Antelope Creek Covered Bridge was constructed on Antelope Creek . It was moved to Little Butte Creek in Eagle Point in 1987 . 
 = = = Diversions and dams = = = 
 Some of the water in the Little Butte Creek watershed is diverted to irrigate the Rogue Valley and to supplement Bear Creek , both roughly 15 miles ( 24 km ) to the southwest . In the late 19th century , a large number of orchards were planted near Ashland . They were initially irrigated by Bear Creek ; however , there was not enough water to satisfy the orchards ' needs . In 1898 , the Fish Lake Water Company was established to solve the problem . The company proposed the enlargement of Fourmile and Fish lakes by impounding Fourmile Creek and North Fork Little Butte Creek , respectively , and connecting them via the Cascade Canal . Construction of the temporary Fish Lake Dam began in 1902 . Around this time , construction of the Joint System Canal to the west also began . Construction of Fourmile Lake Dam started in 1906 , along with the Cascade Canal . A network of other small canals , such as Hopkins Canal and the Medford Canal , were also built in the Rogue Valley around this time . Fish Lake Dam was completed in 1908 , creating the 7 @,@ 836 @-@ acre @-@ foot ( 9 @,@ 666 @,@ 000 m3 ) reservoir . 
 The Cascade Canal was completed in 1915 , delivering about 5 @,@ 462 acre feet ( 6 @,@ 737 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water from Fourmile Lake in the Klamath River watershed 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) southwest to Fish Lake in the Rogue River watershed . The temporary Fish Lake Dam was also replaced by a permanent earthfill dam . It was later modified in 1922 and 1955 . In 1996 an auxiliary spillway was added . The dam stands 50 feet ( 15 m ) high and has a length of 960 feet ( 293 m ) . 
 In 1956 , the United States Bureau of Reclamation awarded a contract to Portland , Oregon @-@ based Lord Brothers to build the Deadwood Tunnel . The tunnel was finished in 1957 . Howard Prairie Lake was completed in 1958 , and is about 18 miles ( 29 km ) east of Ashland . Excess water is diverted from the South Fork , Beaver Dam Creek , and two of its tributaries 8 @.@ 6 miles ( 14 km ) south into the Deadwood Tunnel to supplement the lake and the surrounding regions . Dead Indian Creek is also diverted into Howard Prairie Lake . About 21 @.@ 4 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 606 m3 / s ) annually , or about 16 @,@ 500 acre feet ( 20 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 m3 ) , was diverted into the Klamath River watershed between 1962 and 1999 . 
 The Howard Prairie Delivery Canal was completed in 1959 , along with Keene Creek Reservoir , Cascade Tunnel , and Greensprings Tunnel . Water from Howard Prairie Lake is diverted into the canal west to Keene Creek Reservoir , about 16 miles ( 26 km ) east of Ashland . Nearby Hyatt Reservoir also provides water . It is then piped through the mile long Cascade Tunnel to the Greensprings Power Plant , which generates about 18 megawatts of power . Afterward , the water is conveyed from the power plant 2 miles ( 3 km ) through the Greensprings Tunnel into Emigrant Creek , a tributary of Bear Creek . An average of approximately 38 @,@ 620 acre feet ( 47 @,@ 640 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water flows through the tunnel . The water eventually ends up in Emigrant Lake , about 8 miles ( 10 km ) southeast of Ashland , where it either continues along Bear Creek , or is diverted for irrigation . 
 = = = Butte Creek Mill = = = 
 The Butte Creek Mill , originally named Snowy Butte Mill , was built in 1872 on the banks of Little Butte Creek about 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) from its mouth . A diversion dam was built in the 1880s to provide water for the turbine that powers the mill . The dam was a damaging fish barrier in the watershed . In 2005 , the Rogue Basin Fish Access Team built a $ 250 @,@ 000 concrete fish ladder to allow fish to swim past the dam . A small weir made of boulders was built at the base of the ladder , creating a 9 @-@ inch ( 20 cm ) jump between the creek and the ladder ; however , the boulders were washed away in a severe storm just three months later , making the distance between them over 24 inches ( 61 cm ) . The weir was rebuilt in 2008 for about $ 122 @,@ 500 , with concrete instead of boulders . 
 The mill is now included on the National Register of Historic Places , and is the only gristmill in Oregon to still grind flour . It is also the oldest water @-@ powered gristmill west of the Mississippi River . 
 On Christmas morning , 25 Dec 2015 , the store had a fire and was considered a total loss . There are plans to rebuild . To assist in helping with the rebuild visit their website : <unk> 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 Intense flooding occurred throughout the Rogue Valley in 1955 , and Little Butte Creek 's meanders in the Denman Wildlife Area between Eagle Point and the Rogue River were blamed for severe erosion . The 1 @.@ 3 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 1 km ) section of the creek was subsequently bulldozed and straightened in the late 1950s and early 1960s . The straightness forced water downward instead of outward like a typical creek , scouring the stream bed down to bedrock and creating an unsuitable habitat for wild salmon . In 2007 , a plan to divert the creek back into its old meanders was proposed . The $ 700 @,@ 000 project involved building engineered riffles and log jams and adding boulders , extending the creek by approximately 3 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) . It was completed in September 2011 . 
 = = Pollution = = 
 The Oregon Department of Environmental Quality ( DEQ ) has monitored Little Butte Creek for eight different parameters that affect water quality : temperature , oxygen saturation , pH , nutrients , bacteria , chemical contaminants such as pesticides and metals , turbidity , and alkalinity . Streams that exceed the standard level are then placed on the DEQ 303d list in accordance with the Clean Water Act . About 40 percent of the streams in the Little Butte Creek watershed were listed on the 2002 DEQ 303d list . The entire main stem exceeded the standard level for temperature , oxygen saturation , fecal coliforms ( bacteria ) , and turbidity . The lower 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 km ) of the North Fork were listed for high temperature and elevated levels of E. coli , while the upper region was affected by chlorophyll a and pH levels . The South Fork was listed for turbidity and temperature . 
 Overall , high temperature is the most common problem in the Little Butte Creek watershed . This is most likely caused by water diversion and depleted riparian zones . Approximately 53 percent of riparian zones in the watershed are damaged due to agriculture or deforestation , while 43 percent are classified as healthy . Another threat to healthy riparian zones are invasive blackberries , which crowd out native vegetation and provide little shade . The resulting higher water temperatures can be very harmful to anadromous fish . High concentration of bacteria is also an issue . 
 In 2003 , the Little Butte Creek Watershed Council rated the health of the Little Butte Creek watershed on a scale of 1 ( slightly degraded ) to 5 ( severely degraded ) . Overall , the watershed received 2 @.@ 95 , or moderately degraded . On the Oregon Water Quality Index ( OWQI ) used by DEQ , water quality scores can vary from 10 ( worst ) to 100 ( ideal ) . The average for Little Butte Creek at RM 1 @.@ 4 ( RK 2 @.@ 3 ) between 1998 and 2007 was 72 ( poor ) in the summer and 82 ( fair ) in the fall , winter , and spring . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 The Little Butte Creek watershed contains several points of interest . Popular activities in and around Fish Lake include fishing , swimming , and boating . Two campgrounds are on the banks of the lake : Doe Point and the Fish Lake Resort . Several trails in the area lead to the much larger Pacific Crest Trail . Two <unk> are on Oregon Route 140 . 
 The Eagle Point Golf Course is in the watershed , built in 1995 by the world @-@ renowned golf course architect Robert Trent Jones , Jr . Another course , Stone Ridge Golf Course , is near Agate Lake . The Butte Creek Mill and the Antelope and Lost Creek covered bridges are also popular attractions . Several historic structures can be found in Eagle Point , including the Eagle Point Museum , built in 1925 as the Long Mountain School , and the Walter Wood House , constructed in 1879 . The Denman Wildlife Area is at the mouth of Little Butte Creek , as is nearby <unk> State Park . 
 = 1950s American automobile culture = 
 1950s American automobile culture has had an enduring influence on the culture of the United States , as reflected in popular music , major trends from the 1950s and mainstream acceptance of the " hot rod " culture . The American manufacturing economy switched from producing war @-@ related items to consumer goods at the end of World War II , and by the end of the 1950s , one in six working Americans were employed either directly or indirectly in the automotive industry . The United States became the world 's largest manufacturer of automobiles , and Henry Ford 's goal of 40 years earlier — that any man with a good job should be able to afford an automobile — was achieved . A new generation of service businesses focusing on customers with their automobiles sprang up during the decade , including drive @-@ through or drive @-@ in restaurants and more drive @-@ in theaters ( cinemas ) . 
 The decade began with 25 million registered automobiles on the road , most of which predated World War II and were in poor condition ; no automobiles or parts were produced during the war owing to rationing and restrictions . By 1950 , most factories had made the transition to a consumer @-@ based economy , and more than 8 million cars were produced that year alone . By 1958 , there were more than 67 million cars registered in the United States , more than twice the number at the start of the decade . 
 As part of the U.S. national defenses , to support military transport , the National Highway System was expanded with Interstate highways , beginning in 1955 , across many parts of the United States . The wider , multi @-@ lane highways allowed traffic to move at faster speeds , with few or no stoplights on the way . The wide @-@ open spaces along the highways became a basis for numerous billboards showing advertisements . 
 The dawning of the Space Age and Space Race were reflected in contemporary American automotive styling . Large tailfins , flowing designs reminiscent of rockets , and radio antennas that imitated Sputnik 1 were common , owing to the efforts of design pioneers such as Harley Earl . 
 = = Interstate Highway System = = 
 The Dwight D. Eisenhower National System of Interstate and Defense Highways ( commonly called the Interstate system or simply the Interstate ) is a network of freeways that forms a part of the National Highway System of the United States . While serving as Supreme Commander of the Allied forces in Europe during World War II , Eisenhower had gained an appreciation of the German Autobahn network as an essential component of a national defense system , providing transport routes for military supplies and troop deployments . Construction was authorized by the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 , and the original portion was completed 35 years later . The system has contributed in shaping the United States into a world economic superpower and a highly industrialized nation . 
 The Interstate grew quickly , along with the automobile industry , allowing a new @-@ found mobility that permeated ways of American life and culture . The automobile and the Interstate became the American symbol of individuality and freedom , and , for the first time , automobile buyers accepted that the automobile they drove indicated their social standing and level of affluence . It became a statement of their personality and an extension of their self @-@ concepts . 
 = = Suburbanization = = 
 The United States ' investment in infrastructure such as highways and bridges coincided with the increasing availability of cars more suited to the higher speeds that better roads made possible , allowing people to live beyond the confines of major cities , and instead commute to and from work . 
 After World War II , land developers began to buy land just outside the city limits of larger cities to build mass quantities of inexpensive tract houses . One of the first examples of planned suburbanization is Levittown , Pennsylvania , which was developed by William Levitt beginning in 1951 as a suburb of Philadelphia . The promise of their own single @-@ family home on their own land , together with a free college education and low @-@ interest loans given to returning soldiers to purchase homes under the G.I. Bill , drove demand for new homes to an unprecedented level . Additionally , 4 million babies were born every year during the 1950s . By the end of the baby boom era in 1964 , almost 77 million " baby boomers " had been born , fueling the need for more suburban housing , and automobiles to commute them to and from the city centers for work and shopping . 
 By the end of the 1950s , one @-@ third of Americans lived in the suburbs . Eleven of the United States 's twelve largest cities recorded a declining population during the decade , with a consequent loss in tax revenues and city culture . Only Los Angeles , a center for the car culture , gained population . Economist Richard Porter commented that " The automobile made suburbia possible , and the suburbs made the automobile essential . " 
 = = = Decline of the inner city = = = 
 More people joined the middle class in the 1950s , with more money to spend , and the availability of consumer goods expanded along with the economy , including the automobile . Americans were spending more time in their automobiles and viewing them as an extension of their identity , which helped to fuel a boom in automobile sales . Most businesses directly or indirectly related to the auto industry saw tremendous growth during the decade . New designs and innovations appealed to a generation tuned into fashion and glamour , and the new @-@ found freedom and way of life in the suburbs had several unforeseen consequences for the inner cities . The 1950s saw the beginning of white flight and urban sprawl , driven by increasing automobile ownership . Many local and national transportation laws encouraged suburbanization , which in time ended up damaging the cities economically . 
 As more middle @-@ class and affluent people fled the city to the relative quiet and open spaces of the suburbs , the urban centers deteriorated and lost population . At the same time that cities were experiencing a lower tax base due to the flight of higher income earners , pressures from The New Deal forced them to offer pensions and other benefits , increasing the average cost of benefits per employee by 1 @,@ 629 percent . This was in addition to hiring an average of 20 percent more employees to serve the ever shrinking cities . More Americans were driving cars and fewer were using public transportation , and it was not practical to extend to the suburbs . At the same time , the number of surface roads exploded to serve the ever increasing numbers of individually owned cars , further burdening city and country resources . During this time , the perception of using public transportation turned more negative . In what is arguably the most extreme example , Detroit , the fifth largest city in the United States in 1950 with 1 @,@ 849 @,@ 568 residents , had shrunk to 706 @,@ 585 by 2010 , a reduction of 62 percent . 
 In some instances , the automotive industry and others were directly responsible for the decline of public transportation . The Great American streetcar scandal saw GM , Firestone Tire , Standard Oil of California , Phillips Petroleum , Mack Trucks and other companies purchase a number of streetcars and electric trains in the 1930s and 1940s , such that 90 percent of city trolleys had been dismantled by 1950 . It was argued that this was a deliberate destruction of streetcars as part of a larger strategy to push the United States into automobile dependency . In United States v. National City Lines , Inc . , many were found guilty of antitrust violations . The story has been explored several times in print , film and other media , for example in Who Framed Roger Rabbit , Taken for a Ride and The End of Suburbia . 
 = = Women 's rights = = 
 The automobile unions played a leading role in advancing the cause of women 's rights . In 1955 , the United Auto Workers Union ( UAW ) organized the UAW Women 's Department to strengthen women 's role in the union and encourage participation in the union 's elected bodies . In a move that was met with some hostility by Teamsters leaders , the U.S. Division of Transport Personnel had in 1943 instructed Teamsters Union officials that women should be allowed full employment as truck drivers . That proved to be only a temporary wartime measure , but a change of heart among Teamsters leadership by the mid @-@ 1950s led to the Equal Pay Act of 1963 . Women in the auto industry were considered leaders in the movement for women 's rights . 
 = = Motorsports = = 
 = = = Hot rodding = = = 
 The increasing popularity of hot rodding cars ( modifying them to increase performance ) is reflected in part by the creation of special @-@ interest magazines catering to this culture . Hot Rod is the oldest such magazine , with first editor Wally Parks , and founded by Robert E. Petersen in 1948 , with original publication by his Petersen Publishing Company . Hot Rod has licensed affiliation with Universal Technical Institute . 
 The relative abundance and inexpensive nature of the Ford Model T and other cars from the 1920s to 1940s helped fuel the hot rod culture that developed , which was focused on getting the most linear speed out of these older automobiles . The origin of the term " hot rod " is unclear , but the culture blossomed in the post @-@ war culture of the 1950s . 
 Hot Rod magazine 's November 1950 cover announced the first hot rod to exceed 200 mph . The hand @-@ crafted car used an Edelbrock @-@ built Mercury flathead V8 and set the record at the Bonneville Salt Flats . This 30 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 47 sq mi ) region has been called the " Holy Grail of American Hot <unk> " , and is often used for land speed racing , a tradition that grew rapidly in the 1950s and continues today . 
 Hot rodding was about more than raw power . Kustom Kulture started in the 1950s , when artists such as Von Dutch transformed automobile pin striping from a seldom @-@ used accent that followed the lines of the car into a freestyle art form . Von Dutch was as famous for his " flying eyeball " as he was for his intricate spider @-@ web designs . As the decade began , hand @-@ drawn pin striping was almost unheard of , but by 1958 it had become a popular method of customizing the looks of the hot rod . As the decade progressed , hot rodding became a popular hobby for a growing number of teenagers as the sport literally came to Main Street . 
 = = = Drag racing = = = 
 Drag racing has existed since the first cars , but it was not until the 1950s that it started to become mainstream , beginning with Santa Ana <unk> , the first drag strip in the United States . The strip was founded by C. J. " Pappy " Hart , Creighton Hunter and Frank Stillwell at the Orange County Airport auxiliary runway in southern California , and was operational from 1950 until June 21 , 1959 . 
 Hot Rod editor Wally Parks created the National Hot Rod Association in 1951 , and it is still the largest governing body in the popular sport . As of October 2012 , there are at least 139 professional drag strips operational in the United States . One of the most powerful racing fuels ever developed is nitromethane , which dramatically debuted as a racing fuel in 1950 , and continues as the primary component used in Top Fuel drag racing today . 
 = = = NASCAR = = = 
 The National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing ( NASCAR ) is the second most popular spectator sports in the United States behind the National Football League ( NFL ) . It was incorporated on February 21 , 1948 by Bill France , Sr. and built its roots in the 1950s . Two years later in 1950 the first asphalt " superspeedway " , Darlington Speedway , was opened in South Carolina , and the sport saw dramatic growth during the 1950s . Because of the tremendous success of Darlington , construction began of a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile , high @-@ banked superspeedway near Daytona Beach , which is still in use . 
 The Cup Series was started in 1949 , with Jim Roper winning the first series . By 2008 , the most prestigious race in the series , the Daytona 500 had attracted more than 17 million television viewers . Dynasties were born in the 1950s with racers like Lee Petty ( father of Richard Petty , grandfather of Kyle Petty ) and Buck Baker ( father of Buddy Baker ) . 
 NASCAR , and stock car racing in general , has its roots in bootlegging during Prohibition . Junior Johnson was one of many bootleggers who took part in the sport during the 1950s , equally well known for his arrest in 1955 for operating his father 's moonshine still as he is for his racing success . He ended up spending a year in an Ohio prison , but soon returned to the sport before retiring as a driver in 1966 . 
 = = New business models = = 
 = = = Faster food = = = 
 As more Americans began driving cars , entirely new categories of businesses came into being to allow them to enjoy their products and services without having to leave their cars . This includes the drive @-@ in restaurant , and later the drive @-@ through window . Even into the 2010s , the Sonic Drive @-@ In restaurant chain has provided primarily drive @-@ in service by <unk> in 3 @,@ 561 restaurants within 43 U.S. states , serving approximately 3 million customers per day . Known for its use of carhops on roller skates , the company annually hosts a competition to determine the top skating <unk> in its system . 
 A number of other successful " drive up " businesses have their roots in the 1950s , including McDonald 's ( expanded c . 1955 ) , which had no dine @-@ in facilities , requiring customers to park and walk up to the window , taking their order " to go " . Automation and the lack of dining facilities allowed McDonald 's to sell burgers for 15 cents each , instead of the typical 35 cents , and people were buying them by the <unk> . By 1948 , they had fired their carhops , installed larger grills , reduced their menu and radically changed the industry by introducing assembly @-@ line methods of food production , similar to the auto industry , dubbing it the " <unk> Service System " . They redesigned their sign specifically to make it easier to see from the road , creating the now familiar yellow double @-@ arch structure . Businessman Ray Kroc joined McDonald 's as a franchise agent in 1955 . He subsequently purchased the chain from the McDonald brothers and oversaw its worldwide growth . 
 Other chains were created to serve the increasingly mobile patron . Carl Karcher opened his first Carl 's Jr. in 1956 , and rapidly expanded , locating his restaurants near California 's new freeway off @-@ ramps . These restaurant models initially relied on the new and ubiquitous ownership of automobiles , and the willingness of patrons to dine in their automobiles . As of 2013 , drive @-@ through service account for 65 percent of their profits . 
 = = = Drive @-@ in movies = = = 
 The drive @-@ in theater is a form of cinema structure consisting of a large outdoor movie screen , a projection booth , a concession stand and a large parking area for automobiles , where patrons view the movie from the comfort of their cars and listen via an electric speaker placed at each parking spot . 
 Although drive @-@ in movies first appeared in 1933 , it was not until well after the post @-@ war era that they became popular , enjoying their greatest success in the 1950s , reaching a peak of more than 4 @,@ 000 theaters in the United States alone . Drive @-@ in theaters have been romanticized in popular culture with the movie American Graffiti and Grease and the television series Happy Days . They developed a reputation for showing B movies , typically monster or horror films , and as " passion pits " , a place for teenagers to make out . While drive @-@ in theaters are rarer today with only 366 remaining and no longer unique to America , they are still associated as part of the 1950s ' American car culture . Drive @-@ in movies have seen somewhat of a resurgence in popularity in the 21st century , due in part to baby boomer nostalgia . 
 Robert Schuller started the nation 's first drive @-@ in church in 1955 in Garden Grove , California . After his regular 9 : 30 am service in the chapel four miles away , he would travel to the drive @-@ in for a second Sunday service . Worshipers listened to his sermon from the comfort of their cars , using the movie theater 's speaker boxes . 
 = = = Malls = = = 
 The first modern shopping malls were built in the 1950s , such as Bergen Mall , which was the first to use the term " mall " to describe the business model . Other early malls moved retailing away from the dense , commercial downtowns into the largely residential suburbs . Northgate in Seattle is credited as being the first modern mall design , with two rows of businesses facing each other and a walkway separating them . It opened in 1950 . Shopper 's World in Framingham , Massachusetts was the two @-@ story mall , and opened a year later . The design was modified again in 1954 when Northland Center in Detroit , Michigan , used a centralized design with an anchor store in the middle of the mall , ringed by other stores . This was the first mall to have the parking lot completely surrounding the shopping center , and to provide central heat and air @-@ conditioning . 
 In 1956 , Southdale Center opened in Edina , Minnesota , just outside Minneapolis . It was the first to combine all these modern elements , being enclosed with a two @-@ story design , central heat and air @-@ conditioning plus a comfortable common area . It also featured two large department stores as anchors . Most industry professionals consider Southdale Center to be the first modern regional mall . 
 This formula ( enclosed space with stores attached , away from downtown and accessible only by automobile ) became a popular way to build retail across the world . Victor Gruen , one of the pioneers in mall design , came to abhor this effect of his new design ; he decried the creation of enormous " land wasting seas of parking " and the spread of suburban sprawl . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The 1950s jump started an industry of aftermarket add @-@ ons for cars that continues today . The oldest aftermarket wheel company , American Racing , started in 1956 and still builds " mag wheels " ( alloy wheels ) for almost every car made . Holley introduced the first modular four @-@ barrel carburetor , which Ford offered in the 1957 Ford Thunderbird , and versions are still used by performance enthusiasts . Edelbrock started during the Great Depression and expanded after the war . They provided a variety of high performance parts for the new hot rodders , which was popular equipment for setting speed records at Bonneville Salt Flats . Owners were no longer restricted to the original equipment provided by manufacturers , helping not only create the hot rod culture but also the foundation for cosmetic modifications . The creation and rapid expansion of the aftermarket made it possible for enthusiasts to personalize their automobiles . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Most new cars were sold through automobile dealerships in the 1950s , but Crosley automobiles were still on sale at any number of appliance or department stores , and Allstate ( a rebadged Henry J ) could be ordered at any Sears and Roebuck in 1952 and 1953 . By mid @-@ decade , these outlets had vanished and the automobile dealer became the sole source of new automobiles . 
 Starting in the mid @-@ 1950s , new car introductions in the fall once again became an anticipated event , as all dealers would reveal the models for the upcoming year each October . In this era before the popularization of computerization , the primary source of information on new models was the dealer . The idea was originally suggested in the 1930s by President Franklin D. Roosevelt during the Great Depression , as a way of stimulating the economy by creating demand . The idea was reintroduced by President Dwight Eisenhower for the same reasons , and this method of introducing next year 's models in the preceding autumn lasted well into the 1990s . 
 During the decade , many smaller manufacturers could not compete with the Big Three and either went out of business or merged . In 1954 , American Motors was formed when Hudson merged with Nash @-@ Kelvinator Corporation in a deal worth almost $ 200 million , the largest corporate merger in United States history at that time . 
 = = = Muscle cars = = = 
 The muscle @-@ car era is deeply rooted in the 1950s , although there is some debate as to the exact beginning . Old Cars Weekly claims it started with the introduction of the original Chrysler " Firepower " hemi V8 engine in 1951 , while others such as Hot Rod magazine consider the first overhead valve engine by Chevrolet , the 265 <unk> V8 , as the " heir apparent to Ford flathead 's position as the staple of racing " , in 1955 . The " small block Chevy " itself developed its own subculture that exists today . Other contenders include the 1949 Oldsmobile V8 engine , the first in a long line of such powerful V8 engines , as well as the Cadillac V8 of the same year . 
 Regardless how it is credited , the horsepower race centered around the V8 engine and the muscle @-@ car era lasted until new smog regulations forced dramatic changes in OEM engine design in the early 1970s . This in turn opened up new opportunities for aftermarket manufacturers like Edelbrock . Each year brought larger engines and / or increases in horsepower , providing a catalyst for customers to upgrade to newer models . Automobile executives also deliberately updated the body designs yearly , in the name of " planned obsolescence " and added newly developed or improved features such as automatic transmissions , power steering , power brakes and cruise control , in an effort to make the previous models seem outdated and facilitate the long drive from the suburbs . Record sales made the decade arguably the " golden era " of automobile manufacturing . 
 Harley Earl and Bill France Sr. popularized the saying " Race on Sunday , sell on Monday " , a mantra still heard today in motorsports , particularly within NASCAR . During the muscle @-@ car era , manufacturers not only sponsored the drivers , but designed stock cars specifically to compete in the fast @-@ growing and highly popular sport . 
 = = Songs celebrating the automobile = = 
 As the automobile became more and more an extension of the individual , it was natural for this to be reflected in popular culture . America 's love affair with the automobile was most evident in the music of the era . 
 " Rocket 88 " was first recorded in 1951 and originally credited to Jackie <unk> and his Delta Cats , although it was later discovered to be the work of Ike Turner 's Kings of Rhythm . It is often credited as the first rock and roll song ever produced and has been covered by other artists . 
 " Hot Rod Lincoln " was first recorded in 1955 by Charlie Ryan , and has since been recorded by Roger Miller and others . The 1960 Johnny Bond version charted at number 26 on Billboard Hot 100 . Comedian Jim Varney produced a version with Ricky Skaggs for the motion picture The Beverly Hillbillies . The song is still a popular live song for artists such as Asleep at the Wheel and Junior Brown . 
 " Maybellene " , released by Chuck Berry in 1955 , is an uptempo rocker describing a hot rod race between a jilted lover and his unfaithful girlfriend . It was a # 5 hit and was described by Rolling Stone as the starting point of rock and roll guitar . 
 " Wake Up Little Susie " recorded by The Everly Brothers , reached number one on the Billboard Pop chart , despite having been banned from Boston radio stations for lyrics about elaborating " our reputation is shot " because the narrator and his date slept through a drive @-@ through movie date and missed their curfew by six hours . 
 " Teen Angel " was released in 1959 and initially met with resistance by radio stations because of its dark message about a young girl who dies in an automobile / train accident . 
 Other songs recorded during the decade also reflect the automobile 's place in American culture , such as " Brand New Cadillac " , Sonny Burgess 's " Thunderbird " and Bo Diddley 's " Cadillac " . A 1955 Oldsmobile was celebrated in the nostalgic " Ol ' ' 55 " by Tom Waits ( 1973 ) . 
 = Saints Row : The Third downloadable content = 
 Downloadable content for Saints Row : The Third was announced before the game 's November 2011 release along with a commitment from publisher THQ to support 40 weeks of content . Among smaller upgrades , three main content packs were released : Genkibowl VII , Gangstas in Space , and The Trouble with Clones . Reviewers found all three packs short — around an hour in length — and considered The Trouble with Clones the best of the bunch . 
 Genkibowl VII , released in January 2012 , brought four new activity types to Steelport around a Professor Genki @-@ themed competition . Sad Panda Skyblazing , the only one of the four activities to not modify an existing activity type , was the reviewers ' favorite . Gangstas in Space , released in February , is a three @-@ mission story about a Saints @-@ themed film production starring the player and fighting aliens . The Trouble with Clones , released in March , has the player tracking down and quelling a rampant clone of Saints leader Johnny Gat . Reviewers highly praised its " Saints Flow " superpower sequences , and questioned why they could not have been unlocked in the main game afterwards . All download packs offered unlocks upon their completion . 
 The Full Package , a version containing all of the game 's downloadable content on disc alongside the main game , was released in November . Some of the smaller content items include costume , vehicle , and ability unlocks . THQ planned a standalone expansion of the game called Enter the Dominatrix . It was originally announced as an April Fool 's joke , but was confirmed and later spun into Saints Row IV 's downloadable content . 
 = = The Full Package = = 
 Downloadable content for Saints Row : The Third was announced before the game 's release , and has included additional story missions , weapons , and characters . The game 's publisher , THQ , pledged " 40 weeks " of downloadable content following the game 's launch on November 15 , 2011 . A season pass offered a discount on the total cost of three downloadable content packs — Genkibowl VII , Gangstas in Space , and The Trouble with Clones — all scheduled for release by Q2 2012 , and added the <unk> Blade vampire hunter content as a bonus . 
 A full release containing all downloadable content with the original game , Saints Row : The Third – The Full Package , was announced in September 2012 for release two months later on PC , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 . The package included all three mission packs ( " Genkibowl VII " , " Gangstas in Space " , and " The Trouble with Clones " ) as well as the add @-@ on clothes , vehicles , and weapons . It was released on November 6 , 2012 in North America , and ten days later internationally . 
 THQ announced an Enter the Dominatrix standalone expansion to the game as an April Fool 's joke in 2012 . It was confirmed as in development the next month . In Enter the Dominatrix , the alien commander Zinyak imprisons the Saints ' leader in a simulation of Steelport called The Dominatrix so as to prevent interference when he takes over the planet . The expansion also added superpowers for the player @-@ character . In June , THQ said the expansion would be wrapped into a full sequel , tentatively titled " The Next Great Sequel in the Saints Row Franchise " and scheduled for a 2013 release . Parts of Enter the Dominatrix that weren 't incorporated into the sequel , Saints Row IV , were later released as Enter the Dominatrix downloadable content for the new title . 
 = = Genkibowl VII = = 
 Genkibowl VII was the first downloadable mission pack of three to be released for Saints Row : The Third . The pack is structured around a contest with four different activities structured around a Professor Genki theme . Genki is a " homicidal man @-@ cat " whose Super Ethical Reality Climax competitions are popular in Steelport , and the leader of the Saints is invited to participate in his annual Genkibowl . Zach and Bobby , the commentators associated with Professor Genki 's shows , return to cover the competition with Tammy Tolliver . 
 Three of the four activities are " revamped versions " of other activities from the main game . Genki Apocalypse is a shooting minigame similar to the main game 's Super Ethical Reality Climax , where the player travels through rooms shooting enemies and targets ( such as Ethical and Money Shot targets ) to earn money . Accidentally shooting the Sad Panda targets reduces the player 's earnings . Unlike Super Ethical Reality Climax , Genki Apocalypse has a jungle theme , including shark @-@ infested waters . The second activity , Super Ethical PR Opportunity , is based on the main game 's Escort minigames , but the player instead escorts Professor Genki himself . The Genki Mobile car features flamethrowers around its periphery , for when Genki demands carnage en route . The car is unlocked upon finishing the activity . The third activity , Sexy Kitten <unk> , is a cross between the main game 's Tank Mayhem activity and the Katamari series where the player rolls a destructive ball of yarn around the streets . The player must destroy a certain amount of property within a time limit . Upon completing the activity , the player unlocks <unk> ( the ball of yarn ) as a vehicle . In the last activity , the new Sad Panda Skyblazing , the player dons a Sad Panda costume and jumps from a helicopter , falling through fire rings into Ethical balloons and onto rooftops to kill costumed mascots with a chainsaw . There are two instances of each activity on the map , and finishing each activity unlocks new costumes , support characters , and vehicles . The pack was released three months following the game , on January 17 , 2012 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Genkibowl VII received " generally unfavorable " and " mixed " reviews for its Xbox 360 and PlayStation versions , respectively , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers complained that the pack was too short , with GameZone 's David Sanchez and GameSpot 's Carolyn Petit finishing it in under an hour . Official Xbox Magazine 's Francesca Reyes called it " crazy short " . Reviewers thought the new activity , Sad Panda Skyblazing , was the highlight of the pack , though Game Informer 's Dan Ryckert thought it was " the most annoying of them all " . Critics were dissatisfied by the amount of recycled content . 
 GameZone 's Sanchez thought that the activities were " crazy " and " fun " . He considered Super Ethical Reality Climax among the best activities in the main game , and was not surprised that Genki Apocalypse was " the most enjoyable " in the pack . Sanchez was frustrated by the charging enemies in Super Ethical PR Opportunity , and thought Sad Panda Skyblazing was the " craziest " and " most unique " of the four activities , fitting in with Saints Row : The Third 's " insane nature " . He did not feel that the game needed to be included in the original release , but thought there should have been at least five different opportunities to do each new activity . Similarly , Petit of GameSpot also thought only Sad Panda Skyblazing matched the main game in " zaniness " , and said the pack felt " mundane " overall . She said that the story is more minor in the pack and that it was less funny than the main game . Petit was frustrated by the labyrinth @-@ like design of some of the Genki Apocalypse levels , and was uninterested in Super Ethical PR Opportunity by the time the activity ended . Rock Paper Shotgun 's John Walker wanted something more expansive for the first pack , and expected something more original and strange along the lines of Saints Row 2 's " shit spraying " activity . UGO 's Paul <unk> wrote that the lack of content is less disappointing if the player thinks of Genkibowl as " a small booster pack " . 
 = = Gangstas in Space = = 
 A month later , Gangstas in Space was released . In three missions , players continue the Saints Row : The Third story in a new arc about the Gangstas in Space film referenced in the main story . In the game , the film about the Saints is being directed by the self @-@ interested Hollywood director Andy Zhen and the player is acting the final scenes of the film alongside a female co @-@ star making her debut . In the first level , the player fights the military to save a female alien and controls the turret on the getaway vehicle . In the second , the player is in a shootout in a linear map . The last mission has the player in an aircraft fighting other aircraft while the co @-@ star uploads viruses to transmitters . At the time of review , the player could not revisit the old missions to earn missed achievements , but was later patched . Costumes and vehicles are unlocked upon completing the pack . The pack was released in North American on February 21 , 2014 , and in Europe the next day . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Gangstas in Space received " mixed or average " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers found the pack similar in length to its predecessor . 
 GameZone 's David Sanchez thought the quality was much better than the previous pack and that the missions were " lengthy " , but still felt the game was still too short — an hour in duration . Official Xbox Magazine 's Josh Abrams wrote that the pack had the " foul language , cool set @-@ pieces , and satirical worldview " of the main game and a grindhouse feel , which he appreciated . Dan Ryckert of Game Informer called the story minimal and said that the pack 's only difference from the game was the alien skins atop the main game 's weapons and vehicles . He added that if they did not have the skins , the missions would " easily be some of the most uneventful in the game " . Overall , Ryckert was disappointed with the first two content packs . Andrew Smee of Rock , Paper , Shotgun thought Gangstas in Space was the better of the final two packs , and praised the game 's humorous voice acting as " the best since ... Psychonauts " . He also found the cutscenes " fantastic " in comparison to BioWare 's Mass Effect 3 scenes . 
 = = The Trouble with Clones = = 
 When Saints leader Johnny Gat died , Saints fan and stereotypical nerd Jimmy Torbitson cloned him , beginning a three @-@ mission series on capturing and quelling the superpowered clone , who acts like the " brute " enemy type in the main game . Torbitson narrates the missions like a superhero film . The first mission has the player fighting off enemy gangs and police , and the second involves a ploy to calm Gat with music while Torbitson dancing to distract Saints fans and the player tranquilizes the fans with a bee gun . In the final mission , the player drinks Torbitson 's Saints Flow , granting superpowers such as speed , strength , and fireballs , and the player protects the clone Johnny Tag on a bridge from a military onslaught . Upon completion , the player unlocks two computer @-@ controlled homies for support and a vehicle . The missions can be replayed . The pack was released March 20 , 2012 , halfway through THQ 's promised 40 weeks of additional content . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Similar to the other packs , The Trouble with Clones contained about an hour of gameplay . Reviewers thought the pack was the best of the set , and praised the Saints Flow superpowers sequence . Multiple reviewers questioned why the bee gun and superpowers were not unlocked in the main game . 
 Game Informer 's Dan Ryckert said he found sprinting with Saints Flow to be preferable to driving , and that portion to be " a lot of fun " . He was disappointed when the powers and " bee gun " did not unlock in the main game . Official Xbox Magazine 's Josh Abrams compared the pack to a 1980s film with Torbitson 's narration and praised both the part where a female brute attracts Gat , and the Saints Flow superpower sequence . He lamented not being able to export the powers back into the main game . GameZone 's David Sanchez called the bee gun " a great deal of fun " , but praised the final mission " freaking awesome " as " bleeding the madness that made so many gamers fall in love with Saints Row : The Third in the first place . " 
 = = Other content = = 
 The <unk> Blade pack includes a vampire hunter @-@ themed sports car and motorcycle , and altar boy and " bloody canoness " costumes . 
 The Explosive Combat pack adds a " future soldier " costume and M2 grenade launcher , while the Z Style pack adds a " Z @-@ style " suit and bling shotgun . 
 The Warrior pack adds four Kabuki costumes . The <unk> pack adds an ability to regenerate health by sucking the blood of non @-@ playable characters , as well other ability upgrades . 
 The free <unk> Homie pack adds computer @-@ controlled support with a character modeled on <unk> of Cheap Ass Gamer . He felt honored to be included , even if he " bought [ his ] way in " . 
 A Penthouse pack includes support characters modeled on pornographic actresses Nikki Benz , Justine <unk> , Ryan Keely , and Heather <unk> . 
 = John Baskeyfield = 
 John " Jack " Daniel Baskeyfield VC ( 18 November 1922 – 20 September 1944 ) was an English recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . 
 Born in 1922 , Baskeyfield initially became a butcher but was called up to the army in 1942 . He served with the 2nd Battalion , South Staffordshire Regiment , an airlanding unit of the 1st Airborne Division , in Sicily and Italy in 1943 before returning to the United Kingdom . The division was next deployed in Operation Market Garden and fought in the subsequent Battle of Arnhem . 
 While defending the Oosterbeek perimeter three days into the battle , Baskeyfield commanded a pair of anti tank guns that destroyed several enemy tanks before the crews were killed . Baskeyfield subsequently fired the guns alone before he too was killed . His body was not identified after the war and he has no known grave . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Baskeyfield was born on 18 November 1922 in Burslem , Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent , England , the son of Daniel and Minnie Baskeyfield . He trained and worked as a butcher during the early years of the Second World War , until he received his call up papers in February 1942 at the age of 19 . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Baskeyfield joined the South Staffordshire Regiment and served with the 2nd Battalion 's anti @-@ tank platoon . The 2nd Battalion was part of 1st Airlanding Brigade , itself part of the 1st Airborne Division and Baskeyfield accompanied them to North Africa , from where they took part in Operation Ladbroke , the glider borne element of the Invasion of Sicily in 1943 . The division then landed in Italy as part of Operation Slapstick and spent some weeks fighting their way through the country before sailing back to England . 
 = = = Battle of Arnhem = = = 
 The Battle of Arnhem was part of Operation Market Garden , an attempt to secure a string of bridges through the Netherlands . At Arnhem the British 1st Airborne Division and Polish 1st Independent Parachute Brigade were tasked with securing bridges across the Lower Rhine , the final objectives of the operation . However , the airborne forces that dropped on 17 September were not aware that the 9th SS and 10th SS Panzer divisions were also near Arnhem for rest and refit . Their presence added a substantial number of Panzergrenadiers , tanks and self @-@ propelled guns to the German defenses and the Allies suffered heavily in the ensuing battle . Only a small force managed to hold one end of the Arnhem road bridge before being overrun on 21 September . The rest of the division became trapped in a small pocket west of the bridge and had to be evacuated on 25 September in Operation Berlin . The Allies failed to cross the Rhine , which remained under German control until Allied offensives in March 1945 . 
 = = = = South Staffordshire 's advance to Arnhem = = = = 
 Owing to a shortage of aircraft , the Allies planned to fly the entire division to Arnhem over three days . The South Staffordshire Battalion was split between the lifts on day one and day two ; most of the unit arrived on day one , with the remaining balance arriving with the second lift . The battalion 's anti @-@ tank guns were flown from RAF Manston on day one . 
 Major General Roy Urquhart 's original plan envisaged the 1st Airlanding Brigade securing the drop zones for subsequent lifts , but by the end of day one the allied advance into Arnhem had stalled . Only a small group of the 1st Parachute Brigade , mainly elements of Lieutenant Colonel John Frost 's 2nd Battalion , were able to reach the bridge . The 1st and 3rd Battalions were unable to penetrate the outer suburbs of the city and their advance stalled , so in order to support them the first lift of the South Stafford 's were sent forward on the morning of 18 September . When the second lift arrived later that day they too were sent forward and arrived at the outskirts of Arnhem that night . The South Staffordshire 's anti @-@ tank platoon was kept in the divisional area . 
 In the early hours of the morning of 19 September , an attack was launched on a narrow front between the river and the railway line , in order to force a passage through to the bridge . Most of the support weapons were left in the rear , as they were unable to suitably deploy in the dark and in the narrow confines of the urban surroundings . However , in the face of strong enemy positions and armour , the attack faltered and the British routed . 
 = = = = Withdrawal to Oosterbeek = = = = 
 The remnants of the four battalions fell back in disarray to the main divisional positions at Oosterbeek . Here they were gathered into defensive units by Lieutenant Colonel Sheriff Thompson , Commanding Officer of the 1st Airlanding Light Artillery Regiment , who forcibly stopped many of the panicked troops and had Major Robert Cain form them into a defensive screen half a mile in front of his own 75 <unk> Howitzers positions . The sector was designated " Thompson Force " , but Thompson actually sent Major Richard Lonsdale forward to take command of these outlying troops later in the day . 
 The German forces made determined attacks against Lonsdale 's force on 20 September , starting soon after dawn . Baskeyfield was in charge of two 6 pounder anti – tank guns defending a T junction on the Benedendorpsweg , the southernmost road between Arnhem and Oosterbeek . Baskeyfield 's guns faced up the Acacialaan , which joined the Benedendorpsweg from the north , and covered the likely enemy approach along this road and from open ground to the north east . His right flank – to the east – was covered by another anti tank gun commanded by Lance @-@ Sergeant Mansell . 
 In an initial German assault , Baskeyfield and his gun crews destroyed two tanks and a self @-@ propelled gun as they advanced down the Acacialaan . Baskeyfield allowed the armour to come within 100 yards of his positions before ordering his crews to fire , while paratroopers of the 11th Battalion in nearby houses dealt with attacking infantry . In the course of this action , Baskeyfield 's crew was killed or wounded and Baskeyfield himself was badly injured . However he refused to be evacuated and in a later German attack he worked his gun alone , loading , laying and firing it himself . He fired round after round until enemy fire put his gun out of action , and crawled to the second gun , whose crew had similarly been disabled . From here he engaged another self @-@ propelled gun , dispatching it with two rounds , but was killed shortly afterwards by fire from another German tank . 
 Lonsdale 's men fell back to new positions later that day and " Thompson Force " was eventually renamed " Lonsdale Force " when Thompson was wounded on 21 September . The force continued to hold the Oosterbeek perimeter until the Allies withdrew in Operation Berlin on the night of 25 September . 
 = = Victoria Cross = = 
 The full citation for Baskeyfield 's Victoria Cross appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette on 23 November 1944 , reading : 
 War Office , 23rd November , 1944 . 
 The KING has been graciously pleased to approve the posthumous award of the VICTORIA CROSS to : – 
 No. <unk> Lance @-@ Sergeant John Daniel Baskeyfield , The South <unk> Regiment ( 1st Airborne Division ) ( Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent ) . 
 On 20 September 1944 , during the battle of Arnhem , Lance @-@ Sergeant Baskeyfield was the N.C.O. in charge of a 6 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank gun at Oosterbeek . The enemy developed a major attack on this sector with infantry , tanks and self @-@ propelled guns with the obvious intent to break into and overrun the Battalion position . During the early stage of the action the crew commanded by this N.C.O. was responsible for the destruction of two Tiger tanks and at least one self propelled gun , thanks to the coolness and daring of this N.C.O. , who , with complete disregard for his own safety , allowed each tank to come well within 100 yards of his gun before opening fire . 
 In the course of this preliminary engagement Lance @-@ Sergeant Baskeyfield was badly wounded in the leg and the remainder of his crew were either killed or badly wounded . During the brief respite after this engagement Lance @-@ Sergeant Baskeyfield refused to be carried to the Regimental Aid Post and spent his time attending to his gun and shouting encouragement to his comrades in neighbouring trenches . 
 After a short interval the enemy renewed the attack with even greater ferocity than before , under cover of intense mortar and shell fire . Manning his gun quite alone Lance @-@ Sergeant Baskeyfield continued to fire round after round at the enemy until his gun was put out of action . By this time his activity was the main factor in keeping the enemy tanks at bay . The fact that the surviving men in his vicinity were held together and kept in action was undoubtedly due to his magnificent example and outstanding courage . Time after time enemy attacks were launched and driven off . Finally , when his gun was knocked out , Lance @-@ Sergeant Baskeyfield crawled under intense enemy fire to another 6 @-@ pounder gun nearby , the crew of which had been killed , and proceeded to man it single @-@ handed . With this gun he engaged an enemy self propelled gun which was approaching to attack . Another soldier crawled across the open ground to assist him but was killed almost at once . Lance @-@ Sergeant Baskeyfield succeeded in firing two rounds at the self propelled gun , scoring one direct hit which rendered it ineffective . Whilst preparing to fire a third shot , however , he was killed by a shell from a supporting enemy tank . 
 The superb gallantry of this N.C.O. is beyond praise . During the remaining days at Arnhem stories of his valour were a constant inspiration to all ranks . He spurned danger , ignored pain and , by his supreme fighting spirit , infected all who witnessed his conduct with the same aggressiveness and dogged devotion to duty which characterised his actions throughout . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After Arnhem was liberated in April 1945 , Grave Registration Units of the British 2nd Army moved into the area and began to locate the Allied dead . Over 1700 men were buried in the Arnhem Oosterbeek War Cemetery , but Baskeyfield 's body was never identified . Although several hundred burials in the cemetery are unidentified , there are no records of any unidentified soldiers being exhumed from Acacialaan . Instead Baskeyfield 's name is inscribed on the Groesbeek Memorial which commemorates all those Allied servicemen killed between August 1944 and the end of the conflict who have no known grave . Four more VCs were awarded after the battle , including one for Major Robert Cain , commander of B Company , 2nd Battalion , South Staffordshire Regiment . The 2nd Battalion thus became the only British battalion to receive two VCs during one engagement in the Second World War . 
 His Victoria Cross is displayed at the Staffordshire Regiment Museum in Whittington , Staffordshire . A twice life size memorial statue of him was erected in 1990 at Festival Heights in Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent , by sculptors Steven Whyte and Michael Talbot , and the John Baskeyfield V.C. Church of England Primary School in Burslem was named after him until it changed its name on 1 March 2014 to Saint Nathaniel 's Academy , having come out of special measures . There is no local church of that name . The artist Terence Cuneo made a painting of Baskeyfield 's action , and in 1969 a Staffordshire filmmaker spent three years making a short film about his role in the battle , entitled Baskeyfield VC . A tree on the site of Baskeyfield 's second gun , on the corner of Benedendorpsweg and Acacialaan , has been named the Jack Baskeyfield Tree . 
 = 1949 Sun Bowl controversy = 
 The 1949 Sun Bowl controversy refers to the student protests at Lafayette College in Easton , Pennsylvania after a Sun Bowl invitation was extended to the Lafayette Leopards football team under the condition that the African American player , David Showell , would not play . 
 On November 19 , 1948 Lafayette College was invited by the Sun Bowl Committee to play against the Texas College of Mines , now The University of Texas at El Paso . Just four days later , on November 23 , the Lafayette faculty voted to turn down the bid because the Sun Bowl Committee would not allow Showell to play . This bid rejection led to a large student demonstration on the Lafayette campus and in the city of Easton against segregation . 
 West Virginia University later accepted the bid after Lafayette 's rejection . The Sun Bowl was played on January 1 , 1949 . West Virginia defeated the Texas College of Mines by a score of 21 – 12 . 
 = = Sun Bowl segregation history = = 
 The segregation policies of the Sun Bowl were in effect from the first Sun Bowl game played on January 1 , 1935 , in El Paso , Texas through the 1940s . In the case of the 1946 Orange Bowl , African American players Wallace Triplett and Dennis Hoggard could not participate due to the local police department 's rules and the " incidents " that were expected to occur if they were allowed to play . This reasoning was synonymous with the Sun Bowl and other major bowl games of the 1940s . It was not until the 1946 Orange Bowl game when people began to put forth the argument that " the ideals of democracy are more important than any football game . " 
 The Sun Bowl was established in the mid @-@ 1930s along with the Cotton Bowl in Dallas , the Orange Bowl in Miami , and the Sugar Bowl in New Orleans . While the Sun Bowl historically followed the southern racial segregation policies , the 1949 Sun Bowl made a major contribution to the future desegregation of college sports . 
 = = 1948 Lafayette football season = = 
 The 1948 season was one of the most successful years for the Lafayette College football team . Led by captain Danny Kovacs and standout running back David Showell , the team had a record of seven wins and two losses . After starting the year beating Fordham University by a score of 53 to 14 , Lafayette suffered a large loss in its following game at Army , losing 54 to 7 . The Leopards then won each of their next four games by an average scoring margin of 26 points , but they soon lost to Rutgers University by three touchdowns . After defeating Ohio Wesleyan , Lafayette set itself up for a crucial bout against its rival , Lehigh University . However , on November 19 , 1948 , a day before the game against Lehigh , Lafayette received a phone call from the Sun Bowl Committee inviting the team to participate in the bowl game . This invitation essentially rendered Lafayette 's season finale against Lehigh meaningless . Nevertheless , Lafayette went on to defeat Lehigh by a score of 23 to 13 , capping off the regular season . 
 = = David Showell = = 
 David Showell , an African American , was a prominent player for Lafayette during the 1948 football season . The Sun Bowl Committee 's decision to exclude Showell from the game due to his race led to Lafayette 's rejection of its Sun Bowl invitation and the subsequent student protests at the college . 
 = = Student demonstrations at Lafayette = = 
 On November 23 , 1948 the Lafayette College faculty held a meeting to vote upon whether or not to accept the football team 's invitation to the Sun Bowl . The faculty voted to turn down the bid as a result of the Sun Bowl Committee 's decision to exclude David Showell . The formal announcement of the rejection that was made by college officials did not contain a reason for vetoing the Sun Bowl bid . The Lafayette students , who were excited to see their football team go to the Sun Bowl , were disheartened by the announcement and made it their goal to discover the reason behind the school ’ s abrupt change in plans . 
 At approximately seven o ’ clock on the night of November 23 , the news began to spread around the Lafayette campus as a caravan of students traversed the school grounds to recruit more protesters . Soon after , a mass of nearly 1 @,@ 000 students holding flaming newspapers in hand made its way to the college 's central quadrangle , which housed the materials for a bonfire . This bonfire was previously constructed for a pep rally to be held before the football game against Lafayette 's rival , Lehigh University , but was never used due to a rain storm . Therefore , the student mob ignited the fire to continue its demonstration . 
 The students then visited the home of Ralph Cooper Hutchison , the president of Lafayette College . Upon their arrival , President Hutchison told the students that David Showell was not invited to play in the bowl game because he was an African American . Hutchison further explained that the Sun Bowl Committee 's decision to exclude Showell ultimately led to the faculty 's rejection of the bowl game <unk> student protestors asked that a conditional acceptance be made to the bid as long as they allowed David Showell to play . 
 Athletic Director Bill Anderson , who had arrived at Hutchison 's house , agreed to place a call to C. D. Belding , the chairman of the Sun Bowl Committee in El Paso , Texas . During the call the Athletic Director stated , " We want a waiver on Showell . He was a lieutenant in the Army and served in Texas . He wants the boys to go without him , but the College couldn 't take that responsibility . We are anxious to accept . If Showell can 't play , we wouldn 't be able to accept . So it can 't be done ? " Despite the call , Belding still would not let Showell play . 
 Upon hearing that the answer was still " No " over 1000 frustrated Lafayette students marched to the Centre Square in downtown Easton and held a protest rally against racial intolerance . A number of students rushed to the local Western Union office to wire the news of their protests to prominent individuals to denounce the Sun Bowl Committee 's refusal to include Showell . One of the recipients was President Truman . The telegram to Truman read : “ Denied Sun Bowl game because we have a Negro on our team . Is that democracy ? " , signed by the Lafayette College students . Other telegrams were sent to Walter Winchell to join the cause . 
 Following the telegram sent to President Truman , the Lafayette students broke up their rally and ended the protest in downtown Easton . On the following day , November 24 , at 9 : 30 in the morning , the students assembled once again at Lafayette College 's Pardee Hall . Approximately 1 @,@ 000 students congregated to pass a formal resolution stating their opposition to racial discrimination . The student 's resolution stated : " We protest the racial discrimination against one of our fellow students and declare without equivocation our firm resolve that all Americans have equal rights under the law . " Subsequently , they informed the media to cover their civil rights resolution . 
 = = Coverage in the press = = 
 Newspapers shed light on the controversy surrounding the 1949 Sun Bowl in November 1948 . The press conveyed conflicting accounts as to why Lafayette College turned down the invitation to play the 1949 Sun Bowl against the Texas Miners . Lafayette College officials maintained that their rejection of the invitation was due in large part to the discrimination against the team 's black football player , David Showell , saying that Texas law forbade the halfback 's participation in the New Year ’ s Day bowl game . An article in The New York Times quoted Dr. Ralph C. Hutchison , president of the college at the time , saying that " I must state emphatically that the acting president of the Texas College of Mines and C. D. Belding , chairman of the Sun Bowl Committee , each informed us repeatedly that Showell could not play in the proposed game . " 
 According to another newspaper article , Sun Bowl Committee chairman , C. D. Belding , offered another side of the story refuting President Hutchison 's claims and stating that Lafayette College jumped to a conclusion too soon . Belding explained that Texas law did not bar Showell from the field to play . Some papers went into great detail regarding the technicalities that Texas Miners officials claimed Lafayette College simply got wrong . An article by The Corsicana Daily Sun on November 24 , 1948 stated that the law in question only required Negro players to have a separate lodging . According to The Abilene Reporter , on the evening of November 26 , 1948 , " The [ El Paso ] Times believes the officials of Lafayette College injected the Negro question into the Sun Bowl picture unfairly , " going on to say that " Lafayette merely rejected the bid on the grounds that it was impractical to accept it . " 
 In other articles , more focus was placed on the fact that Sun Bowl officials reached out to other schools of interest upon receiving Lafayette College ’ s original rejection of the bid . As seen in the article by Amarillo Daily News on November 24 , 1948 , rather than calling out Lafayette 's claim as a fallacy , the paper focused on the fact that no further arrangements could be made with Lafayette College once Texas Miners officials had already reached out to the other schools . 
 = = Impact on college football = = 
 = = = Desegregation of the Sun Bowl = = = 
 The events at Lafayette College created a significant amount of media buzz on a national scale . Lafayette 's withdrawal from the Sun Bowl was enough to get the residents of El Paso to fight against racial exclusion in the bowl game . The Lafayette Leopards were not the only team to face racism in El Paso . In September 1950 , a regular season game between Loyola University ( Los Angeles ) ( now Loyola Marymount University ) and the Texas College of Mines was cancelled because of the policy that excluded black players from playing in El Paso . Finally on October 27 , 1950 , officials took a vote that allowed the Texas college to include black players in games at the El Paso location . A year after the grant was passed , the Sun Bowl hosted its first integrated football game between the College of the Pacific ( now University of the Pacific ) and Texas Tech University . 
 = = = Integration of college football = = = 
 The Sun Bowl was not the only bowl game to involve racial exclusion . Many football games during the twentieth century had an impact on the integration of collegiate football and sports in general : in addition to Lafayette , there were games played at The University of California , Los Angeles ( 1938 – 1941 ) , Drake University ( 1948 – 1952 ) , Georgia Tech ( 1954 – 1956 ) , and the University of Wyoming ( 1967 – 1970 ) that led to integrated football games . At the time , these schools conducted studies to monitor the treatment of African American players and how the schools reacted to certain situations involving segregation and prejudice . The teams that were in favor of African Americans participating in football gave players a chance to speak out against the racism that took place in the sport . As a result of protests and communities coming together to support black football players , college football slowly became integrated . 
 = Park Hall ( football ground ) = 
 Park Hall Stadium is a football stadium in Oswestry , Shropshire , England . It was opened by Shropshire County Council in 1993 , originally as the home of Oswestry Town F.C .. In 2003 , Oswestry Town merged with Total Network Solutions F.C. ( TNS ) to form current Welsh Premier League team The New Saints F.C .. The newly merged club moved away from Park Hall to Total Network Solutions ' Recreation Ground . 
 Following a short period of abandonment , Park Hall was purchased from the council by Mike Harris with a view to redevelopment and The New Saints moving back to the ground . The New Saints started to use Park Hall as their regular home ground again in 2007 and the ground was further improved so that it was able to host matches in the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Europa League . It has since been used to host youth international fixtures for both England and Wales while also hosting Non @-@ League football for community teams in Oswestry . 
 = = Oswestry Town and merger = = 
 The stadium was originally the site of an army ground . Park Hall was built as a stadium in 1993 by Shropshire County Council who owned the land and permitted Oswestry Town to use it as their home ground in the League of Wales after they had sold off their Victoria Road stadium . However due to the club 's financial problems , the ground fell into disrepair . In 2003 , Oswestry Town and Total Network Solutions voted to merge and entered into an agreement whereby the newly merged TNS would split matches between Park Hall and Total Network Solutions ' Recreation Ground in Llansantffraid @-@ ym @-@ <unk> with a view to moving to Park Hall . In the meantime , the majority of matches were played at the Recreation Ground with Park Hall being used only occasionally by TNS ' women 's , youth and reserve teams . 
 The move was initially blocked by UEFA because the two teams were in different countries . However Total Network Solutions appealed and UEFA reviewed Oswestry Town 's historic membership of the Football Association of Wales . Director <unk> Hann also argued the precedence of Derry City F.C. being based in County Londonderry , Northern Ireland but playing in the Republic of Ireland 's League of Ireland and being allowed to represent the Republic of Ireland in UEFA competitions . As a result , the decision was overturned and UEFA stated that they would regard The New Saints and Park Hall as Welsh for UEFA purposes if they moved to Park Hall . Park Hall was purchased from the council by Mike Harris with a view to renovating it . 
 = = The New Saints = = 
 Following the merger , plans were drawn up to rebuild Park Hall in a project referred to as " Oswald Park " . In 2005 , TNS started to rebuild Park Hall with a view to moving there in 2008 because they were unable to improve the Recreation Ground as it was a council @-@ owned recreation ground . Shortly afterwards Total Network Solutions renamed themselves The New Saints as their sponsorship deal lapsed due to the sponsoring company being bought out by British Telecom . During renovation , Park Hall 's pitch was replaced with artificial <unk> , as used at the home ground of Red Bull Salzburg . As a result of The New Saints moving to Park Hall and the decreasing number of the team 's players who were from Llansantffraid @-@ ym @-@ <unk> , some supporters broke away from The New Saints to form Llansantffraid Village F.C .. 
 In 2007 , The New Saints moved into Park Hall permanently . In 2010 , The New Saints applied for funding for a new stand however it was refused by Welsh Grounds Improvement and the team risked losing their licence to compete in the Welsh Premier League . As a result , The New Saints applied to play their home matches at Deva Stadium in Chester and move away from Park Hall . Following the move from the Recreation Ground , between November 2012 and July 2015 , The New Saints were unbeaten at Park Hall in all competitions . 
 Despite the renovations , the ground did not meet UEFA 's standards for hosting European football which meant that The New Saints were forced to play their home matches in UEFA competitions away from Park Hall . In 2008 , The New Saints hoped to be able to host their UEFA Cup match against FK Sūduva <unk> in their first European match at Park Hall , however they missed the UEFA deadline to increase capacity . In 2009 following construction of a new stand , Park Hall was able to be used by The New Saints in UEFA competition as it reached the 1 @,@ 000 seated capacity requirement . Despite Park Hall meeting UEFA standards , it has still been criticised in the media for being allowed to be used in UEFA competitions owing to its single stand and <unk> pitch . The pitch was referred to by the Daily Mail after The New Saints ' 2010 @-@ 11 UEFA Champions League match against Bohemian F.C. as a " hockey pitch " . The New Saints still sometimes move their home matches away from Park Hall because of capacity and financial reasons . 
 = = International football = = 
 Park Hall has hosted international matches following its renovation . In 2015 it hosted Group 3 of the 2016 UEFA Women 's Under @-@ 19 Championship qualification tournament , where Wales were designated as the host nation and chose Park Hall despite it being in England . Park Hall has also been used by England schoolboys football team as their home ground for a match in April 2016 against the Republic of Ireland . 
 = = Community = = 
 During redevelopment at a cost of more than £ 3 million , The New Saints were awarded a £ 445 @,@ 000 grant from the Football Foundation with the intention of Park Hall housing a leisure development with improved facilities including Ten @-@ Pin Bowling alley . Park Hall is also used as the home ground of Oswestry Boys Club and Oswestry Town Lions of the Shropshire Alliance . 
 = Western Chalukya architecture = 
 Western Chalukya architecture ( Kannada : <unk> ್ <unk> <unk> ್ <unk> <unk> ್ <unk> ್ <unk> ) , also known as Kalyani Chalukya or Later Chalukya architecture , is the distinctive style of ornamented architecture that evolved during the rule of the Western Chalukya Empire in the Tungabhadra region of modern central Karnataka , India , during the 11th and 12th centuries . Western Chalukyan political influence was at its peak in the Deccan Plateau during this period . The centre of cultural and temple @-@ building activity lay in the Tungabhadra region , where large medieval workshops built numerous monuments . These monuments , regional variants of pre @-@ existing dravida ( South Indian ) temples , defined the Karnata dravida tradition . Temples of all sizes built by the Chalukyan architects during this era remain today as examples of the architectural style . 
 Most notable of the many buildings dating from this period are the Mahadeva Temple at Itagi in the Koppal district , the Kasivisvesvara Temple at Lakkundi in the Gadag district , the Mallikarjuna Temple at Kuruvatti in the Bellary district and the Kallesvara Temple at Bagali in the Davangere district . Other monuments notable for their craftsmanship include the <unk> Temple in <unk> and <unk> Temple in Balligavi , both in the Shimoga district , the Siddhesvara Temple at Haveri in the Haveri district , the Amrtesvara Temple at Annigeri in the Dharwad district , the Sarasvati Temple in Gadag , and the Dodda Basappa Temple at Dambal , both in the Gadag district . 
 The surviving Western Chalukya monuments are temples built in the Shaiva , Vaishnava , and Jain religious traditions . None of the military , civil , or courtly architecture has survived ; being built of mud , brick and wood , such structures may not have withstood repeated invasions . The centre of these architectural developments was the region encompassing the present @-@ day Dharwad district ; it included areas of present @-@ day Haveri and Gadag districts . In these districts , about fifty monuments have survived as evidence of the widespread temple building of the Western Chalukyan workshops . The influence of this style extended beyond the Kalyani region in the northeast to the Bellary region in the east and to the Mysore region in the south . In the Bijapur – Belgaum region to the north , the style was mixed with that of the <unk> temples . Although a few Western Chalukyan temples can be found in the Konkan region , the presence of the Western Ghats probably prevented the style from spreading westwards . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Though the basic plan of the Western Chalukya style originated from the older dravida style , many of its features were unique and peculiar to it . One of these distinguishing features of the Western Chalukyan architectural style was an articulation that can still be found throughout modern Karnataka . The only exceptions to this motif can be found in the area around Kalyani , where the temples exhibit a nagara ( North Indian ) articulation which has its own unique character . 
 In contrast to the buildings of the early Badami Chalukyas , whose monuments were clustered around the <unk> of Pattadakal , Aihole , and Badami , these Western Chalukya temples are widely dispersed , reflecting a system of local government and decentralisation . The Western Chalukya temples were smaller than those of the early Chalukyas , a fact discernible in the reduced height of the superstructures which tower over the shrines . 
 The Western Chalukya art evolved in two phases , the first lasting approximately a quarter of a century and the second from the beginning of 11th century until the end of Western Chalukya rule in 1186 CE . During the first phase , temples were built in the Aihole @-@ <unk> @-@ Mahakuta region ( situated in the early Chalukya heartland ) and Ron in the Gadag district . A few provisional workshops built them in <unk> in the Gulbarga district and Gokak in the Belgaum district . The structures at Ron bear similarities to the Rashtrakuta temples in Kuknur in the Koppal district and <unk> in the Bijapur district , evidence that the same workshops continued their activity under the new Karnata dynasty . The mature and latter phase reached its peak at Lakkundi ( <unk> ) , a principal seat of the imperial court . From the mid @-@ 11th century , the artisans from the Lakkundi school moved south of the Tungabhadra River . Thus the influence of the Lakkundi school can be seen in some of the temples of the Davangere district , and in the temples at <unk> and <unk> in the Bellary district . 
 Influences of Western Chalukya architecture can be discerned in the geographically distant schools of architecture of the Hoysala Empire in southern Karnataka , and the Kakatiya dynasty in present @-@ day Andhra Pradesh . Sometimes called the Gadag style of architecture , Western Chalukya architecture is considered a precursor to the Hoysala architecture of southern Karnataka . This influence occurred because the early builders employed by the Hoysalas came from pronounced centres of medieval Chalukya art . Further monuments in this style were built not only by the Western Chalukya kings but , also by their feudal vassals . 
 = = Temple complexes = = 
 = = = Basic layout = = = 
 A typical Western Chalukya temple may be examined from three aspects – the basic floor plan , the architectural articulation , and the figure sculptures . 
 The basic floor plan is defined by the size of the shrine , the size of the sanctum , the distribution of the building mass , and by the pradakshina ( path for circumambulation ) , if there is one . 
 Architectural articulation refers to the ornamental components that give shape to the outer wall of the shrine . These include projections , recesses , and representations that can produce a variety of patterns and outlines , either stepped , stellate ( star @-@ shaped ) , or square . If stepped ( also called " stepped diamond of projecting corners " ) , these components form five or seven projections on each side of the shrine , where all but the central one are projecting corners ( projections with two full faces created by two recesses , left and right , that are at right angles with each other ) . If square ( also called " square with simple projections " ) , these components form three or five projections on a side , only two of which are projecting corners . <unk> patterns form star points which are normally 8- , 16- , or 32 @-@ pointed and are sub @-@ divided into interrupted and uninterrupted stellate components . In an ' interrupted ' stellate plan , the stellate outline is interrupted by orthogonal ( right @-@ angle ) projections in the cardinal directions , resulting in star points that have been skipped . Two basic kinds of architectural articulation are found in Indian architecture : the southern Indian dravida and the northern Indian nagara . 
 Figure sculptures are miniature representations that stand by themselves , including architectural components on pilasters , buildings , sculptures , and complete towers . They are generally categorised as " figure sculpture " or " other decorative features " . On occasion , rich figure sculpture can obscure the articulation of a shrine , when representations of gods , goddesses , and mythical figures are in abundance . 
 = = = Categories = = = 
 Chalukyan temples fall into two categories – the first being temples with a common mantapa ( a colonnaded hall ) and two shrines ( known as dvikuta ) , and the second being temples with one mantapa and a single shrine ( ekakuta ) . Both kinds of temples have two or more entrances giving access to the main hall . This format differs from both the designs of the northern Indian temples , which have a small closed mantapa leading to the shrine and the southern Indian temples which generally have a large , open , columned mantapa . 
 The Chalukyan architects retained features from both northern and southern styles . However , in the overall arrangement of the main temple and of the subsidiary shrines , they inclined towards the northern style and tended to build one main shrine with four minor shrines , making the structure a <unk> or five @-@ <unk> complex . Chalukyan temples were , almost always , built facing the east . 
 The Sanctum ( cella ) is connected by a vestibule ( <unk> mantapa or ante @-@ chamber ) to the closed mantapa ( also called the <unk> ) , which is connected to the open mantapa . Occasionally there can be two or more open mantapas . In Shaiva temples , directly opposite the sanctum and opposite the closed mantapa is the <unk> mantapa , which enshrines a large image of Nandi , the bull attendant of Shiva . The shrine usually has no pradakshina . 
 The pillars that support the roof of the mantapa are monolithic shafts from the base up to the neck of the capital . Therefore , the height of the mantapa and the overall size of the temple were limited by the length of the stone shafts that the architects were able to obtain from the quarries . The height of the temple was also constrained by the weight of the superstructure on the walls and , since Chalukyan architects did not use mortar , by the use of dry masonry and bonding stones without clamps or cementing material . 
 The absence of mortar allows some ventilation in the innermost parts of the temple through the porous masonry used in the walls and ceilings . The modest amount of light entering the temples comes into the open halls from all directions , while the very subdued illumination in the inner closed mantapa comes only through its open doorway . The vestibule receives even less light , making it necessary to have some form of artificial lighting ( usually , oil lamps ) even during the day . This artificial source of light perhaps adds " mystery " to the image of the deity worshipped in the sanctum . 
 = = = Early developments = = = 
 From the 11th century , newly incorporated features were either based on the traditional dravida plan of the Badami Chalukyas , as found in the Virupaksha and Mallikarjuna Temples at Pattadakal , or were further elaborations of this articulation . The new features produced a closer juxtaposition of architectural components , visible as a more crowded decoration , as can be seen in the Mallikarjuna Temple at Sudi in the Gadag district and the Amrtesvara Temple at Annigeri in the Dharwad district . 
 The architects in the Karnataka region seem to have been inspired by architectural developments in northern India . This is evidenced by the fact that they incorporated decorative miniature towers ( multi @-@ <unk> towers depicting superstructures ) of the <unk> and <unk> types , supported on pilasters , almost simultaneously with these developments in the temples in northern India . The miniature towers represented shrines , which in turn represented deities . Sculptural depictions of deities were generally discreet although not uncommon . Other northern ideas they incorporated were the pillar bodies that appeared as wall projections . Well @-@ known constructions incorporating these features are found at the Kasivisvesvara Temple and the <unk> Temple , both at Lakkundi . 
 In the 11th century , temple projects began employing soapstone , a form of greenish or blueish black stone , although temples such as the Mallikarjuna Temple at Sudi , the Kallesvara Temple at Kuknur , and the temples at Konnur and Savadi were built with the formerly traditional sandstone in the dravida articulation . 
 Soapstone is found in abundance in the regions of Haveri , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Hangal . The great archaic sandstone building blocks used by the Badami Chalukyas were superseded with smaller blocks of soapstone and with smaller masonry . The first temple to be built from this material was the Amrtesvara Temple in Annigeri in the Dharwad district in 1050 CE . This building was to be the prototype for later , more articulated structures such as the Mahadeva Temple at Itagi . 
 Soapstone was also used for carving , modelling and chiselling of components that could be described as " chubby " . However , the finish of the architectural components compared to the earlier sandstone temples is much finer , resulting in opulent shapes and creamy decorations . Stepped wells are another feature that some of the temples included . 
 = = = Later enhancements = = = 
 The 11 @-@ century temple @-@ building boom continued in the 12th century with the addition of new features . The Mahadeva Temple at Itagi and the Siddhesvara Temple in Haveri are standard constructions incorporating these developments . Based on the general plan of the Amrtesvara Temple at Annigeri , the Mahadeva Temple was built in 1112 CE and has the same architectural components as its predecessor . There are however differences in their articulation ; the sala roof ( roof under the finial of the superstructure ) and the miniature towers on pilasters are chiseled instead of moulded . The difference between the two temples , built fifty years apart , is the more rigid modelling and decoration found in many components of the Mahadeva Temple . The voluptuous carvings of the 11th century were replaced with a more severe chiselling . 
 As developments progressed , the Chalukyan builders modified the pure dravida tower by reducing the height of each stepped storey and multiplying their number . From base to top , the succeeding storeys get smaller in circumference and the topmost storey is capped with a crown holding the kalasa , a finial in the shape of a decorative water pot . Each storey is so richly decorated that the original dravida character becomes almost invisible . In the nagara tower the architects modified the central panels and niches on each storey , forming a more @-@ or @-@ less continuous vertical band and simulating the vertical bands up the centre of each face of the typical northern style tower . Old and new architectural components were juxtaposed but introduced separately . Some superstructures are essentially a combination of southern dravida and northern nagara structures and is termed " Vesara Shikhara " ( also called Kadamba Shikhara ) . 
 The characteristically northern stepped @-@ diamond plan of projecting corners was adopted in temples built with an entirely dravida articulation . Four 12th century structures constructed according to this plan are extant : the <unk> Temple at Basavana <unk> , the <unk> Temple at <unk> and the temples at <unk> and <unk> , all in the vicinity of the Kalyani region , where nagara temples were common . This plan came into existence in northern India only in the 11th century , a sign that architectural ideas traveled fast . 
 = = = <unk> plans = = = 
 A major development of this period was the appearance of stellate ( star @-@ shaped ) shrines in a few temples built of the traditional sandstone , such as the Trimurti Temple at Savadi , the <unk> Temple at Konnur and the <unk> Temple at Hire <unk> . In all three cases , the shrine is a 16 @-@ pointed uninterrupted star , a ground @-@ plan not found anywhere else in India and which entirely differentiates these temples from the 32 @-@ pointed interrupted star plans of bhumija shrines in northern India . 
 The stellate plan found popularity in the soapstone constructions such as the <unk> Temple at Dambal as well . Contemporary stellate plans in northern India were all 32 @-@ pointed interrupted types . No temples of the 6- , 12- , or 24 @-@ pointed stellate plans are known to exist anywhere in India , with the exception of the unique temple at Dambal , which can be described either as a 24 @-@ pointed uninterrupted plan , or a 48 @-@ pointed plan with large square points of 90 degrees alternating with small short points of 75 degrees . The upper tiers of the seven @-@ tiered superstructure look like cogged wheels with 48 dents . The <unk> Temple and the Someshvara Temple at <unk> are examples of extreme variants of a basic dravida articulation . These temples prove that the architects and craftsman were consciously creating new compositions of architectural components out of traditional methods . 
 In the early 13th century , 12th century characteristics remained prominent ; however , many parts that were formerly plain became decorated . This change is observed in the Muktesvara Temple at <unk> ( <unk> ) and the <unk> Temple at <unk> , both in the Haveri district . The Muktesvara Temple with its elegant vimana was renovated in the middle of the 13th century . In the <unk> Temple , all the architectural components are elongated , giving it an intended crowded look . Both temples are built with a dravida articulation . Apart from exotic dravida articulations , some temples of this period have nagara articulation , built in the stepped @-@ diamond and the square plan natural to a nagara superstructure . Notable among temples with a stepped @-@ diamond style are the Ganesha Temple at Hangal , the <unk> temple at <unk> ( which has one dravida shrine and one nagara shrine ) , and a small shrine that is a part of the ensemble at the Mahadeva Temple . At Hangal , the architects were able to provide a sekhari superstructure to the shrine , while the lower half received a nagara articulation and depictions of miniature sekhari towers . The style of workmanship with a square plan is found at <unk> and the Kamala Narayana Temple at <unk> . 
 = = = Kalyani region = = = 
 Temples built in and around the Kalyani region ( in the Bidar district ) were quite different from those built in other regions . Without exception , the articulation was nagara , and the temple plan as a rule was either stepped @-@ diamond or stellate . The elevations corresponding to these two plans were similar because star shapes were produced by rotating the corner projections of a standard stepped plan in increments of 11 @.@ 25 degrees , resulting in a 32 @-@ pointed interrupted plan in which three star points are skipped in the centre of each side of the shrine . Examples of stepped @-@ diamond plans surviving in Karnataka are the Dattatreya Temple at <unk> , the Someshvara Temple in <unk> , and the Mallikarjuna and Siddhesvara at <unk> in the Gulbarga district . The nagara shrine at <unk> is a stepped diamond of projecting corners with five projections per side . Because of the stepped @-@ diamond plan , the wall pillars have two fully exposed sides , with a high base block decorated with a mirrored stalk motif and two large wall images above . The shapes and decorations on the rest of the wall pillar have a striking resemblance to the actual pillars supporting the ceiling . 
 The other type is the square plan with simple projections and recesses but with a possibility of both sekhari and bhumija superstructures . The plan does not have any additional elements save those that derive from the ground plan . The recesses are simple and have just one large wall image . The important characteristic of these nagara temples in the Kalyani region is that they not only differ from the dravida temples in the north Karnataka region but from the nagara temples north of the Kalyani region as well . These differences are manifest in the articulation and in the shapes and ornamentation of individual architectural components , giving them a unique place in Chalukyan architecture . Temples that fall in this category are the Mahadeva Temple at <unk> and the Suryanarayana Temple at <unk> in the modern @-@ day Gulbarga district . The plan and the nagara articulation of these temples are the same as found to the north of the Kalyani region , but the details are different , producing a different look . 
 = = Architectural elements = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
